LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-SECOND REPORT

INDIAN PENAL CODE

JUNE, 1971

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF LAW


K. ५. K. Sunparam

New DELHI,
June 2, 1971.

Dear Law Minister,

4. have pleasure in sending herewith the Forty-second Report of the
Law Commission on the Indian Penal Code. This brings to a conclusion
the second major task of revision undertaken by the present Commission
since its constitution in March, 1968.

2. The Law Commission in 1959 announced its intention to take up
for revision the Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code and invited
suggestions from the public. It was, however, only after the present Com-
mission completed the revision of the Criminal Procedure Code and sub-
mitted our Report to the Government at the end of September, 1969, that
we could get down to a detailed study of the Penal Code.

3. As we had done in our ast Report on the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, we also have in this Report added a draft Bill to implement all our
Fecommendations for the amendment of the Indian Penal Code, together
with a draft of the consequential amendments which will be found neces-
sary in the Criminal Procedure Code and other Central Acts;

4. Finally, we wish to xpress our appreciation of the assistance given
to us by our Secretary, Shri P. M. Bakshi, in collecting and analysing the
material for our discussions, Particularly from foreign Codes and text-
books,

Yours sincerely,
Sdj-
(K. V. K. SUNDARAM)

Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Dethi.


CHAPTER
No.

yen की छा हे 9 ०5

Introduction
Preliminary

General Explanations
Punishments . .

General Exceptions .

CONTENTS

Abetment, Conspiracy and Attempt

Offences against the State

Offences relating to the Army, Navy and Air Force

Offences against the public tranquillity
Offences by or relating to Public Servants .

. Election Offences . . . .
Contempts of the lawful authority of Public Servants .
Of False Evidence and Offences against Public Justice
Offences relating to Currency Notes, Coins and Stamps

Offences relating to Weights and Measures

Offences affecting Public Health, Safety, Convenience, Decency

and Morals

Offences relating to Religion

Offences affecting the Human Body

Offences against Property .

Offences relating to Documents and to Property Marks

Criminal Breach of Contracts of Service.

Offences relating to Marriage.

Of Defamation पु

Criminal Intimidation, Insult and Annoyance

Violation of Personal Privacy -

Time Limits for Prosecutions

Summary of Recommendations
Note by Mrs. Anna Chandi .
Note by Shri R. L. Narasimham

@

Pace

Wt

152
159
172
178
186
195

220

222

310
319
320
330
333
336
341

353
362
368


Appendix 1.

Appendix 2.

Appendix 3.

6)

APPENDICES

Questionnaire—On Revision of the Indian Penal Code .
Note

The Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1971
Comparative Table

Tabular statement showing the number of sections in each
Chapier of the Code and the number of sections in that Chapter
after the proposed revision . . .
Consequential Amendments of the Code of Criminal Procedure
and other laws

407
4it

412
500

515

517


INTRODUCTION

Revision of the Indian Penal Code was undertaken by the Law Com-
mission. as part of its Function of revising Central Acts of general application
and importance. Though this project was announced, and the views and
suggestions of the public were invited, as long ago as March 1959, it was
not until the completion of the revision of the Code of Criminal Procedure
in 1969 that a detailed study of the Penal Code could be taken up.

In the mean-time, the Commission was asked to consider whether it
would be “desirable to add a new chapter in the Indian Penal Code bringing
together all the offences in such special enactments and supplementing
them with new provisions so that all social offences will find a prominent
place in the general criminal law of the country.”! After examining the
subject in great detail, the Commission came to the conclusion that it was
not feasible to include all such social and economic offences in the Penal
Code.? The Commission, however, recommended certain minor amend-
ments of the Code to deal with theft of public property and cheating of
public authorities in connection with contracts.

The Commission was then asked by the Government to examine the
question of the abolition or retention of capital punishment, and after an
exhaustive consideration of the subject it gave a Report? recommending
retention. We shall be referring to this subject later in this Report.

After the present Commission was constituted in March, 1968, we took
up for urgent consideration a question relating to the sentence of imprison-
ment for life under the Penal Code and submitted a Report.¢ To this also
we shall have occasion to refer later.

On a preliminary examination of the Code we thought it desirable to
elicit public opinion on certain broad questions, and, with this object, pre-
pared a questionnaires which was sent out to High Courts, various bar asso-
ciations and other legal bodies, and the State Governments. _ As it appear-
ed to us that their views on the wide range of questions could be obtained
more satisfactorily by personal discussion, Members of the Commission
visited all the High Courts and held informal meetings with the Judges,
Fepresentatives of the bar, academic lawyers and Government officials.
These discussions have been of much assistance to us in deciding upon.
the additions and alterations to be made in the Code. We are specially
indebted to the Judges of High Courts for readily sparing time for these
discussions and giving us the benefit of their individual views on the
questions raised.

1, The suggestion was made by the Santhanam Committee on the Prevention of Corruption
(1964) : See that Committee's Report, para 7.4.

2, 29th Report (February, 1966) on the Proposal to include certain social and economic
offences in the Indian Penal Code.

. 35th Report (December, 1967) on Capital Punishment.
39th Report (July, 1968) on Imprisonment for ऑट under the Indian Penal Code,
. The questionnaire is appended to this Report: Appendix I,

wae


CHaprer |

PRELIMINARY

1.1. The Law Commissioners who laboured in the middie
of the last century on the codification of the laws in force in
British India, decided to put the criminal law of the land in wwo
separate codes. The first to be placed on the statute book was
(he Indian Penal Code formulating the substantive law of crimes.
This was cnacted in October, 1860. but brought into force fifteen
months later on the Ist January, 1862. Then came the first
Code of Criminai Procedure enacted in 1861, which consolidated
the law refating to the set-up of criminal courts and the pro-
cedure to be followed in the investigation and trial of offences.
This division of the vast subject of criminal law for the purpose
of codification is obviously convenient and useful.

1.2. The title of “Indian Penal Code™ given by the Law
Commissioners to the basic criminal law aptly describes its con-
tenis, The word “penal no doubt. emphasises the aspect of
punishing those who transgress the law and commit offences.
but it could hardly be otherwise, so long as punishment and the
threat of it are the chief methods known to the State for
maintaining public order, peace and tranquillity.

1.3. As originally enacted, section | provided that the Code
shall have effect “throughout the whole of the territories which
are, or may become vesied in Her Majesty by Statute 2] and 22
Vict. c. 106 entitled ‘Act for the better Government of India’,
except the Settlements of Prince of Wales’ Island, Singapore
and Malacca”. By an amendment made in 1898, the references to
the three colonial settlements outside India were omitied, While
the Code itself was not in force in any of the Indian States, its
provisions were. in course of time. adopted with minor moditi-
cations in practically all of them. Upon the commencement of
the Constitution. the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. changed
the estent cliuse to “the whole of India, except Part B States”.

1.4. Fach of these States had its own version of the Penal
Code. not muatcriaily different from the Indian Penal Code.
Soon aterwards, the Part B States Laws Act, 1951 (3 of 1951)
amended section | of the Code. substituting “the State of Jammu
and Kashmir” for ‘Part B States” and repealed the Penal Codes
of the former Indian States except that of Jammu and Kashmir.

1.5. The Jammu and Kashmir Ranbir Penal Code, as it is
called, is a replica of the Indian Code with the addition of half
a dozen sections! relating to the dissemination of contents of

tie

preseribad documents, wiengiad vusiauction 1७ पर use of |

1. Seetions 1204 and 291A 10 2910.
3M of [4७.7

Criminal
Jaw in
two Codes.

Title of
Penal
Code”.

Territovial
extent of
Code.

Extension
to Jammu
and Kashmir
recom-
mended.


>

tanks and walls, and slaughter of cattle, and three sections*
relating to whipping. It appears anomalous to have the punish-
ment of whipping continued in only one State of India when it
has been abolished in the rest of the country long ago. In
our Report? on the Code of Criminal Procedure we have point-
ed out the anomalies and difficulties arising out of two different
Codes operating in Jama and Kashmir and in the other States
and recommended that these should be removed, by first suit-
ably amending the Constitution (Application to Jammu and
Kashmir) Order, 1950 under article 370 of the Constitution, and
then by extending the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal
Procedure Code to this State.

1.6. With reference to section 2, the Law Commissioners?
stated

explained. “We do not advise the general repeal of the penal laws
now existing in the territories for which we have recom-
mended the enactment of the Code. We think it will be more
expedient to provide only that no man shall be tried or
punished (except by a Court Martial) for any of the acts which
constitute any offence defined in the Code, otherwise than
according to its provisions.”

In other words, in so far as the provisions of the Code were
applicable, they were to prevail in supersession of the penal laws
previously in force. The Madras High Court observed4 in a
case of 1866 :--

“It must be borne in mind that, up to the date of the
enactment of Act XVII of 1862, the Legislature took no steps
towards expressly repealing the old criminal law. Possibly
it may have been thought hazardous to repeal it wholesale
and without such a carefu) scrutiny as would ensure the rescis-
sion of such parts alone of the old Jaw as the Penal Code
rendered superfluous. Whatever may have been the reason,
the oid law was left in the Staiute Book, and but for the
provisions of section 2, the great body of acts and omissions
punishable under the Pena! Code might have been stil!
prosecuted under the old law.”

“As the Penal Code «as intended to be general, it was
necessary, while the old Jaw was retained in the Statute Book,
to provide against its continuing in operation in the very
large number of cases in which the acts and omissions cons-
tituting offences under it were also violations of the provi-
sions of the Penal Code. The old law was therefore render-
ed inoperative to this extent by section 2, except in so far as

1. Sections 513, 514 and 515.

2, 4188 Report, paragraphs 1.8 and 1.9.
3. Law Commissioners’ 2nd Report on the Penal Cede, sections 536--538.
4, (1866) 3 M.H.C.R. Appendix xi, xsii-



3

section 5 (which was perhaps too long to be introduced into
section 2, parenthetically, and was on that account, and also
perhaps for greater clearness, placed by itself) qualifies it
and acts 05 a saving clause.”

Relying on this section, the Calcutta High Court held! that
the English common law cannot be followed in order to modify
the offence of criminal defamation. It observed: —

“The Penal Code certainly declares the law in respect
of defamation. 1६ contains a definition of defamation and
seis oul a number of exceptions. Ft appears to us that
“at must be regarded as exhaustive on the point. Section 2
enacts that every person shall be liable to punishment under
this Code, and not otherwise, for their acts. If there are a
number of exceptions to the offence of defamation; other than
those contained in section 499, it appears to us that an offend-
er must be liable to punishment for defamation otherwise
than under the Code. 09 principle, therefore, it would seem
to us that section 498 is exhaustive, and that if a defamatory
statement docs not come within the specified exceptions, it
is not privileged.”

1.7, Section 2, however, is not needed at the present day,
and may be deleted. The old regulations or laws in force when
the Code was enacted have mostly been specifically repealed.
There can be no question as to the exclusive applicability of
the provisions of the Code, subject to what is stated in section

1.8. Section 3 provides that ‘‘any person liable, by any Indian
law, to be tried for an oflence committed beyond India shail be
dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act
committed beyond India in the same manner as if such act had
been committed within India”, Two conditions have to be ful-
filled before this section is pressed into service for the purposes
of a criminal case: first, there should be an allegation that a ps
son (whether a citizen of India or not) has committed outside
fndia an act which, if committed in India, would be punishable
under the Code, and secondly, that person is liable under some
{ndian law? to be tried in India for that offence. When both
these conditions are satisfied, the accused person is required to
be dealt with according to the provisions of the Code in the
same manner as if the culpable act had been committed in India.
The practical utility of the section would seem to lie in the fact
that aif the general and ancillary provisions of the Code, like
complicity in crime, general exceptions, abetment and attempts
are expressly made applicable in relation to the ex-territorial,
culpable act for which the accused person is liabic to be tried and
punished in Mdia.

Deletion
Fecom-
mended.

Section 3.

1. Kari Singh v. Emperar, (1912) LL.R. 40 Cal. 433, 439.

2, See definition in section 3(29) of the Geacral Clauses Act, 1897, which by virtue of

section 4A applies also to the Penal Code.


History of
section 4.

4

1.9. While section 3 merely clarifies one aspect of the ex-
territorial application of the Code, it is in the next section as
expanded from time to lime that this application is fully express-
ed. The history of section 4 is interesting from the constitutional
angle. From 1860 to 1898, it stood as follows :--

“4. Every servant of the Queen shail be subject to punish-
ment under this Code for every act or omission contrary to
the provisions thereof, of which, whilst in such service. he
shall be guilly on or after the said Ist day of May 1861, with-
in the dominions of any Prince or State in alliance with the
Queen, by virtue of any trealy or engagement heretofore
entered into with the East India Company. or which may
have been or may hereafter be made in the name of the Queen
by any Government of India.”

The cx-territorial application of the Code was limited to persons
in the service 01 the Government and to offences committed by
them. whilst in such service, in the territories of Indian States.
This was in consonance with section 22 of the Indian Councils
Act, 1861, which enabled the Governor-General in Council
to make laws and regulations for all persons within British India
“and forall servants of the Government of India within the
dominions of Princes and States in alliance with Her Majesty”.
In 1898. section 4 of the Code was replaced by the following
which gave it a much wider scope: —

4. The provisions of this Code apply also to any offence
committed by—-

(1) any Native Indian subject of Her Majesty in
any place without and beyond British India:

(2) any other British subject within the territories
of any Native Prince or Chief in India:

(3) any servant of the Queen, whether a British sub-
ject or not, within the territories of any Native Prince or
Chief in India.

xplanation. --In this section, the word “offence” includes
every act committed outside British India which, if committed
in British India, would be punishable under this Code."?

The Indian Legislature had by then been empowered by the
British Parliament to legislate extra-territorially in respect of
these three categories of persons.? | pursuance of section 99(2)
of the Government of India Act. 1935, which enlarged that

trations were given at the end of the section.
ion Sof the Forsiza J iction and Eatvadition Act, 1879.

ae


5

power, seclion 4 of the Code was amended in 1940,? by inserting,
afler clause (3), the following clause:—

“(4) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in
British India, wherever it may be.” ee

After the coming into force of the Constitution, the Adaptation
of Laws Order, 1950, replaced the first three clauses of section 4
by one clause reading “any citizen of india in any place without
and beyond India’, and omitted the word “British” occurring
in the fourth clause and in the explanation. 7

1.10. The extra-territoriai operation of the Code at present
is thus limited to offences committed by Indian citizens outside
India and to offences committed on board Indian ships or air-
craft. We have considered whether the field of such Operation
of the Code should be enlarged in any way. While common law
countries consider the territorial Principle basic for assuming
jurisdiction in crimina} legislation and admit the application of
the personal principle very sparingly, civil-law countries empha-
sise the persona! principle and also accept the territorial princi-
pie, International law, however, recognises several bases of
jurisdiction for criminal legislation in the sense that the fact
of legislation on any such basis or the prosecution of an alien
under such legislation gives no right to another nation to enter
a valid objection. The territorial principle which is universally

accepted and acied upon by ail States is, as Lauterpacht puts it, .

“a rule of convenience in the sphere of evidence, and not a
requirement of justice or even a necessary postulate of the sove-
teignty of the State.

1.11, Before considering the adoption of other principles
in order to enlarge the ficld of operation of the Code outside
India, we think it necessary to refer to the question what is
within India for the purposes of the Code. Section 18 defines
India as meaning the territory of India, excluding the State of
Jammu & Kashmir. Does the territory of India include the
territorial waters of India, which according to a Presidential
proclamation announced on the 30th September, 1967, extend
into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured
from the appropriate base line? The question may, for instance,
arise in a concrete form if men in a foreign fishing boat wilfully
altack men in an Indian fishing boat and cause hurt to them, or
vice versa, when the boats are say 10 miles from the shore on the
high seas. According to the International Convention on tke
Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, 1958, “the sovercignty
of a State extends beyond its land territory and its internal
waters to a bell of sea adjacent to its coast, described as the
territorial sea”, but does the “territory of India’ mentioned in
section 18 of the Code comprise also the “territorial. waters of

“$. The Offences on Ships and Aircraft Act, 1940 (4 of 1940),

Enlarge-
ment of
exterritos
riat
operation
considered.

Territory
of India
includes
territorial
waters.


6

India® mentioned in the Presidential Proclamation? This doubt
arises because of the importation of the common law theory
accepted in Britain that the territory of the Realm includes the
shore down to low water mark and internal waters only, but not
the territorial waters forming past of the high seas. Indian
legistation has not always been drafted on the footing that
the territory of India necessarily includes its territorial waters.
We recommend that, for the avoidance of any doubt in the
matter, it should be made clear in section 18 of the Code that the
territory of India includes the territorial waters of India.

Principles 1,12. Clause (1) of section 4 of the Code, which makes all

on which provisions of the Code applicable to offences committed by

section 4 citizens of India in any place without and beyond India, is based

isbased, on the internationally accepted principle that every sovereign
State can regulate the conduct of its own citizens wherever they
may be. Clause (2) of the same section is based on what is
commonly, but not very correctly, referred to as the “floating
territory” principle!, viz. a ship or aircraft under the flag of a
State is under the protection of that State so that all persons on
board such ship or aircraft, whatever their national status may
be, are subject to the laws of that State.

Other 1.13. Other principles on which some States have assumed
rinciples jurisdiction in their criminal laws may be briefly noted. Under
for extra- ‘the “protected interest principle”, it is asserted that a State can
Pet tee punish actions committed beyond its limits if they impair an
है + interest which it desires to protect. It has been noted? that the
claim that a “State may exercise extra-territorial jurisdiction
over crimes of aliens directed against its security, credit, political
independence or territorial integrity—it is variously defined—
has, though traditionally suspect in Anglo-American jurispru-
dence, a firm place in the practice of a number of States.” It
has, however, been observed that such exercise of the protective
principle ‘in the modern world, which recognises the equality
of States, is incompatible with the existence of a world society
fundamentally grounded on the conception of the independence

of the States.’’3

Passive 1,14. Some States assert jurisdiction because the victim of a

personality criminal act committed outside State territory is one of its citi-

principle. zens. ‘This is sometimes described as the “passive personality”
principle. This notion according to which a State claims the
right to punish aliens for offences committed abroad to the in-
jury of its own nationals has found no place in Anglo-American
jurisprudence.4

1. $5 Supplement to the American Journal of International Law, Vol. 29 (1935), pages.
, 510.

2. 8. हैं, Jennings, Extra-territorial Jurisdiction and the United States Anti-trust Laws,
(1957) 33 British Year Book on International Law, 146, 155.

3. Garcia Moran, Criminal Jurisdiction over Foreigners, (1958-59) Pittsburgh Law Re-
view, 567, 568.

4, See R. Y. Jennings, op. cir.


7

_ LIS, States can, and do. assume jurisdiction in rejation to
international crimes committed abroad e.g., pitacy jure gentium,
slave trade, Geneva conventions relating to prisoners of war,
suppression of immoral traffic in women, dangerous drugs etc.
The basis of this jurisdiction is not territorial sovereignty or
anything connected with it but the principle of universality.
A great number of nations having agreed to treat such crimes as
crimes against mankind, any State representing mankind is justi-
fied in assuming jurisdiction under its own laws to try the offend-
er even if there be no other nexus between the crime (or the offend-
der} and the State.

1.16. Reference should be made in this connection to the
Draft Convention on Jurisdiction with respect to crime proposed
in 1935 by the Harvard Research in International Law.' Ut
indicates the limits to which a State may go in assuming and exer-
cising jurisdiction with respect to crimes committed outside its
territory. (incidentally, the Draft Convention defines a State's
territory as comprising its Jand and territorial waters and the air
above its land and territorial waters). The Draft Convention
proposed for international recognition that a state has jurisdic-
tion with respect to any crimes committed outside its territory—

(a) by an alien in connection with the discharge of a
public function which he was engaged to perform for that
State ;?

(b) by an alien while engaged as one of the personnel
of a ship or aircraft having the national character of that
State;

(c) by an alicn against the security, territorial integrity
ot political independence of that State, provided the act or
commission which constitutes the crime was not committed
in exercise of a 19९19 guaranteed the alien by the law of the
place where it was committed;

(d) by an alien which consists of a falsification or coun-
terfeiting or an uttering of falsified copies or counterfeits,
of the seals, currency, instruments of credit, stamps, passports
or public documents, issued by that State or under its
authority ;4

(e) by an alien, which constitutes piracy by international
law.5

The
Harvard
Research
Draft
Convention.

435—638.
2. Article 6 of the Draft Convention.
3. Article 7 ibid.
4. Article 8 ibid.
5. Article 9 ibid.

1. See Supplement to the American Journal of International Law, Vol. 29 (1935), pages


8

Extension 1.17. We consider it desirable io extend the extra-territortal
a aliens application of the Cade to aliens in the service of the Goxern-
service of — Ment (Central as well as State}. but not in respect of all offences
+ Govern- punishable under the Code. Where an alien in Government scr-
ment, vice commits an offence outside India, the provisions of the Code
Inended do not apply to him, nor is he liable to be tried for the offences

in India, even if he comes to India whilst in such service. If the
offence committed abroad is connected with his service under
the Government, such as bribery. criminal breach of trust,
theft of Government property aad the like, it is obviously desir-
able, even if not absolutely esscnt.al, that the provisions of the
Code should be applicable and that the offender should be liable
to be tried in India for the तार and when he is brought back
to, or is found in, India. While the foreign State in which the
offence is commitied is competent to prosecute and punish him
for it, it may not have the same interest in such prosecution as
it would have if its own governmental interests were aifected.
Assumption of cri: iral jurisdiction by the State employing the
public servant “sray be said to rest on the principle that each
State has an u.estricted capacity to organize and control its
own governme-ital agencies”.

While it is not necessary, nor even desirable, that the Indian
ply as a whole to an alien in Government
2 where the offence is committed in his individual or private
, we think it would be quite justifiable and proper to
ras the offences punishable under Chapter VI
(Olferces against the State), Chapter VII (Offences relating to the
Army, Navy and Air Force) or Chapter 1X (Contempt of the
lawful authority of public servants) of the Code are concerned.
Even though it might not be possible to say that the alien public
servant committed such offences in connection with his service,
ieir commission by a public servant could pot be tolerated.

es 9!

1.18. We accordingly recommend that section 4 of the Code
be revised as follows and placed immediately after section 1, as
section 2 2;

“2,
apply also—

(a) to any offence committed outside India by a
citizen of India;

(0) to any offence committed by an alien on any
ship or aircraft registered in India, wherever it may be;
and

(c) to any offence committed outside india by an
alien whilst in the service of the Government, when such
offence is committed in connection with such service
or is punishable under Chapter VI, Vil or 1X of this
Code.

territorial application of the Code. This Code shall

{Supplement to the American Journal of International Law, Vol. 29, (935), page 540.
2 The existing section 2 is proposed to be omitted: see paragraph 1.7. above.


9

“Explanation.—In this section, the word ‘offence’ in-
cludes every act committed outside India which if committed
in India would be punishable under this Code.”

1.19... When this amendment is made in the Indian Penal
Code, it will be necessary to amend section 188 of the Criminal
Procedure Code so as to cover the case of aliens in the service
of the Government who commit outside India offences punish-
able under the Indian Penal Code. We have, in our Report on
the Code of Criminal Procedure, recommended? that sub-section
(1) of section 188 of that Code should be revised as follows:—

“(1) When an offence is committed outside India—
(व) by a citizen of India whether on the high seas
or clsewhere, or
(0) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship
or aircraft registered in India,
he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had
been committed at “any place within India at which he may be
found :
Provided etc....”.

We think, however, that instead of amending the sub-section on
exactly the same lines as section 4 of the Penal Code. it would
be desirable to generalise the provision and make it applicable
to all offences committed outside when they are punishable in
India under the Penal Code or any special law. The sub-section
may be amended to read:—

“188. (1) When an offence committed by any person out-
side India is punishable under the Indian Pena! Code or any
special law such person may be dealt with in respect of the
offence as if it had been committed at any place within India
at which he may be found :

Provided etc....”.

1.20. Section 5 expressly provides that nothing in the Code
shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny or
desertion of officers, sailors, soldiers or airmen in the service
of the Government of india or the provisions of any special or
local law. The expressions “special law” and “jocal law” are
definied in section 41 and 42 of the Code. Since the Acts providing
for the discipline of the officers and men of the armed forces of
the Union like the Army Act, 1950, the Air Force Act, 1950,
and the Navy Act, 1957, are undoubtedly special laws within the
definition, section 5 may be simplified to read:—

“5. Nothing in this Code shall affect the provisions of
any special or local law.”

Since section 4 is to be revised and placed as section 2, the
revised section 5 may be numbered section 4,

Corres-
ponding
amendment
in section
188, Cr.
PC.

Section 5,

1, 4151 Report, paragraph 15.70.


Section 6—
omission
recom-
mended.

Applica-
tion of
General
Clauses
Act to the
Code.

Section 7.

Sections 8
and 9—
omission
recom-
mended.

CHAPTER 2
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS

2.4. Chapter II begins witha provision to the effect that
every definition of an offence, penal provision and illustration
shall be understood subject to the general exceptions contained
in Chapter 1५. Such a provision is hardly necessary as every
relevant section in Chapter IV begins with the words “Nothing
is an offence” which are sufficient to indicate that every provision
of the Code relating to offences has to be read together with and
subject to ail relevant exceptions contained in that Chapter.
Section 6 may therefore be omitted.

2.2. Neither the definitions nor the general rules of construc-
tion contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897, are applicable
10 the Indian Penal Code except to a very limited extent. The
result is that there is an appreciable amount of overlapping bet-
ween those rules and definitions and the definitions and general
explanations contained in Chapter II of the Code. It is desirable
to remove this duplication as far as possible by providing expres-
sly that the General Clauses Act shall apply for the interpretation
of the Code. If this is done, a number of sections in Chapter II of
the Code can be omitted. We propose that in lieu of section 6 the
following section may be inserted as the first section in Chapter
I

“6. General Clauses Act to apply for interpretation—The
General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply for the interpretation of
this Code as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of Parlia-
ment.”

2.3. Section 7 states that “every expression which is explain-
ed in any part of this Code, is used in every part of this Code
in conformity with the explanation.” This explanation itself
may, at first sight, seem to be unnecessary in view of the well-
known principle of interpretation that words and phrases! should
be given the same meaning throughout an Act. But is useful
in a few instances. For example, the definition of “election”
given in section 21, Explanation 3, would, by its own force,
apply only in deciding whether a person is a public servant or not,
yet by virtue of section 7 itis applicable to the whole of Chapter
IX-A dealing with election offences. It appears desirable there-
fore to retain section 7.

2.4. Section 8 and 9 contain rules of construction as to
gender and number which are the same as those found in section
13 of the General Clauses Act, 1897. Those two sections may
accordingly be omitted.

1. Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes 962), 9 31... 9. 311.

10


Mi

2.5. The definitions of “man” and “woman” in section 10
as denoting a male/female human being of any age appear to
be useful for removing any doubts as to the applicability of pro-
visions of the Code in relation to children and infants of either
sex. Thus with reference to the offence of assaulting a woman
with intent to outrage her modesty (section 354), this definition
of “woman” has been held by the Supreme Court! to be applica-
ble in a case where the criminal force was used to a female infant
of 7) months. The Court by a majority considered it unnecessary
that the woman must be of such an age as to feel the outrage
to her modesty. Though a child may not have developed any
sense of shame and has no awareness of sex, nevertheless from
her very birth she possesses the modesty which is the attribute
of her sex. Sarkar C.J. did not agree with this view. While we
shall advert to this point Jater? in the Report, the definitions in
section 10 do not require any change.

2.6. Section 11 defines the word “person” as including any
company or association or body of persons, whether incorpora-
ted or not. As an almost identical definition is to be found in
the General Clauses Act3, this section may be omitted.

2.7. Section 12 defining the word “‘public” as including any
class of the public or any community does not require any change.

2.8. Section 14 defines “servant of the Government” as
any officer or servant, continued, appointed or employed in
India by or under the authority of Government, but this expres-
sion does not now occur in any other section of the Code. (Before
1950, the expression “servant of the Queen™ occurred in section
4 and the definition in section 14 was of use.). The section may,
therefore. be omitted.

2.9. As the word “Government” is defined in section 3(23)
of the General Clauses Act, another definition in the Penal Code
is unnecessary, and section 17 may be omitted.

2.10. Section 18 defines “India” as meaning the territory of
India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. We have
indicated in the previous Chapter the need to amend this defini-
tion to make it clear that the Code “extends” to the territorial
waters of India is exactly the same manner as it extends to the
land territory and internal waters of India. We recommend that
section 18 may be amended to read:—

“18. ‘India’ means the territory of India including terri-
torial waters, but does not include the territory of Jammu
and Kashmir.”

Section 10.

Section 11--
omission
recommend-
ed.

Section 12.

Section 14-
omission
recom-
mended.

Section 17
—omission
recom-
mended.

Section 18,

1. State of Punjab v. Major Singh, (1966) Supp. S.C.R. 286, A.L.R. 1967 5.0. 63; an appeal
from A.LR. 1963 Pb. 443 (Mudhotkar and Bachawat JJ. with Sarkar C.J. dissenting).

2. See paras 16.85 and 16.86.
3. See section 3(42).


Section 19.

Meaning of
“legal pro-
ceeding”,

peas

also.

Pa

ie

2.11. According to section 19, every person “who is empo-
wered by Jaw to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal,
a definitive judgment” is a judge. Both the expressions “legal
proceeding” and “definitive judgement” have presented some
difficulty in interpretation and require to be considered.

2.12. In Madras case, the question arose whether the Presi-
dent of a Union Board, while accepting or rejecting nomination
papers at elections to Taluk and Union Boards, was a judge
within the meaning of section 19 of the Indian Penal Code. so
that sanction under scction 197, Criminal Procedure Code,? was
necessary for his prosecution for defamatory statements made
in connection with those procecdings. It was contended that
“legal proceeding” in section 19, Indian Penal Code, is the same
as a “judicial proceeding” as defined in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, and, therefore, sanction was not required. The high
Court held—

“....as ‘judicial proceeding’ is an expression “used in
other parts of the Indian Penal Code, we are not at liberty-to
say, unless absolutely driven to it, that ‘legal proceeding’
is exactly equivalent to ‘judicial proceeding’ and that the
legistature carelessly used two different expressions to convey
exactly the same idea; nor is the definition of ‘judicial pro-
ceeding’ in the Criminal Procedure Code necessarily appli-
cable to that expression when used in the Penal Code. If
we confine ourselves to section 19, Indian Penal Code, ‘legal
proceeding’ therein is obviously a proceeding in which a
judgment may or must be given, a judgment being not an
arbitrary decision but a decision arrived at judicially. In my
opinion, ‘legal proceeding’ in section 19 , Indian Penal Code,
means a proceeding regulated or prescribed by law in which
judicial decision may or must be given.3”

The Court accordingly decided that the president of a Union
Board, when accepting or rejecting a nomination, is giving a
definitive judicial decision in a legal proceeding, and is therefore
a “Judge” within the meaning of section 19.

What constitutes a “legal proceeding” has been considered
in other judicial decisions, though they do not relate to the
Code. Thus, the meaning of this term appearing in scction 171
of the Companies Act, 1913 (which barred “suits or other legal
proceeding” against a company in liquidation without leave of
the Court) was discussed bet fore the Federal Court4, the question

. Abboy Naidu v. Kanniappa, हरि, 1929 Mad. 175,
. The definitions in the Indian Penal Code apply to the Code of Criminal Procedure

. Sarvothama Rao v. Chairman, A.LR. 1923 Mad. 475 was cited.

4. Governor-General in Council v. Shiromani Sugar Mills, ALR. 1946 F.C. 16, 21; (1946)
F.CR. 40.


13

being whether it included proceedings for the recovery of tax.
The Federa} Court observed—

“Clearly it is nota proceeding in an ordinary court of
law. But we see no reason why in British India no ‘legal pro-
ceeding” can be taken otherwise than in an ordinary court
of law. or why at proceeding taken clsewhere than in an
ordinary court “of law. provided that it be taken in a manner
prescribed by law and in pursuance of Jaw or iegal enact-
iment. ......cannot properly be described as a ‘legal proceed-
ing’. IW it be considered that the effect of the income-tax autho-
rittes putting the machinery of section 46, Income-tax Act.
in motion for the collection of arrears of incume-tax is to bring
inte eperation all the appropriate legal enactments relating
to the collection of land revenue in the province concerned,
iC is. in our judgment. very difficult to say that they are not

taking a “legal proceediag’.

in an Allahabad case, the question what constitites a “legal
proceeding. withia the meaning of section 24 of the Trade
Mark Act, 19402, was considered. Under section 46(2) of the Act,
any person aggrieved by an entry made in the register without
sufficient cause could appeal to the High Court. The High Court
stated

“A proceeding cannot be held to be ‘legal proceeding’
simply because it 5 taken in a High Court. because there is
no ban on a High Court being invested with jurisdiction over
proceedings which are not ‘legal proceedings’.

fn the view of the High Court, proceedings for cancellation
ov alteration of the registration of a registered trade mark are of
the same nature as proceedings for registration, which are
depasimental proceedings. and not “legal proceedings”. On
the other hand, proceedings for enforcement of the right confer-
red by the registration of the trade mark, or to prevent its in-
fringement. or for punishment for the falsification of the register
or for falsely representing the trade mark as registered, were held
to be proceedings which are invariably to be taken in a court of
Jaw. and are undoubtedly “legal proceedings’. in that they ure
proceedings to enforce the law in one way or the other.

In a Bombay cases, the question arose whether the expression
“legal proceedings in section 48(2)(8) of the Bombay Sales
Tax Act. 1953 (which. while repeating the Bombay Sales Tax
Ordinance. 1982. saved “legal proceedings” under the Ordinance,
was confined to proceedings in a court or covered assessment

1. Ram Rukhpat १५ Amvit Dhara Pharmacy, AAR. 1987 All. 683, 701, paragraph 38.

2, The refevant portion reads—
in all tegal proceedings relating to a registered trade mark, the original regis-
tration ot tke trade mark afier the expiration of seven years etc., be taken 10 be
valid... .wnless such registration was obtained by fraud etc.”

v. State of Bombay, AAR. 1958 Bom. 279.


Meaning of
“definitive
judgment”.

1. Kappuswami Rao, ४. The King, ALR. 1949 F.C. 1, 5.

14

proceedings also. It was held that “legal proceeding”, in its
normal connotation, can only mean a proceeding in accordance
with law, and there can be no doubt that an assessment proceed-
ing under the Sales Tax Act is such a proceeding.

According to these decisions, “legal proceeding” is one which
is authorised or prescribed by law, or which is taken in pursuance
of a Jaw or a legal enactment. It is not synonymous with a “judi-
cial proceeding”, or with a proceeding in a Court. Though in
this view the scope of the expression may seem to be very wide,
when read with the additional requirement in section 19 regarding
the power to give a “definitive judgment”, it gets restricted and
the expression comes very near a judicial proceeding or a proceed-
ing in which a jural relation is determined.

2.13. In considering the true scope and content of the ex-
pression “definitive judgment”, judicial decisions on the inter-
pretation of the word “judgment” will be helpful. The question
whether the order of a Magistrate rejecting an objection to the
initiation of a criminal proceeding against a public servant on
the ground of want of sanction under section 197, Criminal
Procedure Code. was a “judgment” for the purposes of section
205 of the Government of india Act, 1935, came up before the
Federal Court!, and that Court observed: —

“In India, in the Code of Criminal Procedure. the word
‘judgment’ is used to indicate the termination of the case
by an order of conviction or acquittal of the accused. The word
is not defined in the Criminal Procedure Code, but that in-
terpretation was put on the word in Emperor v. Maheshwara
Kondayva.? The view appears to have been approved by Sulai-
man J. in Hari Ram Singh’s case.3....Tn our opinion, the term
‘judgment’ itself indicates a judicial decision given on the
merits of the dispute brought before the Court. fa a criminal
case, it cannot cover a preliminary or inter-locutory order.”

In a Bombay case4, the High Court opined that a “definitive
judgement” meant a final judgement.

The Supreme Court, while decidings that a Commissioner
holding an inquity under the Public Servants (In iries) Act,
1860, was not a “court” for the purposes of the Contempt of

2. Emp. v. Meheshwara, ¥.L.R. 31 Mad. 543

3. Hari Ram Singh, ALR. 1939 F.C. 43; (1939) F.C.R. 159.

4. Emperor ९. Shankar Sayaji, A.LR. 1938 Bom. 489.

5. Brajnandan Sinha v. Jyoti Narain, AAR. 1956 S.C. 66, 70, paragraph 14: (1955) 2S.CR.
955.


15

Courts Act, 1952, referred to section 3 of the Evidence Act and
sections 19 and 20 of the Indian Penal Code and observed:—

"The pronouncement of a definitive judgment is thus
considered the essential sine qua non of a court, and unless
and until a binding and authoritative judgment can be pro-
nounced by a person or body of persons, itcannot be pre-
dicated chat he or they constitute a court.”

Referring to the tests of finality and authoritativeness, the
Supreme Court reiterated its view expressed in an earlier case !:

“ft is clear.....hat. in order to constitute a court in the
strict sense of the term, an essential condition is that the court
should have, apart from having some of the trappings of a
judicial tribunal, power to give a decision or a definitive jud-
gment which has finality and authoritativeness which are the
essential tests of a judicial pronouncement.”

{t would thus appear that while deciding the question whether
a body of judges is a court, the emphasis is upon the require-
ment of definitive judgement and t Principle would apply also
in construing the word ‘judge’.

2.14. Recently, in connection with the interpretation of the
expression “Court”, another test has come into prominence,
namely, whether the body about which the question has arisen
is or is not entrusted with the “judicial power” of the State.
Thus, in an appeal before the Supreme Court?, the question for
consideration was whether the nominee of the Registrar of Co-
Operative Societies was a court within the meaning of section
195, Criminal Procedure Code. Holding this section to be inappli-
cable, the Supreme Court observed :—

+ After carefully considering the powers conferred and the
source of authority of the nominee, we have no doubt that the
Nominee exercising power to make an award under section 96
of the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, derives
his authority, not from the statute. but from investment by the
Registrar in his individuat discretion. The power so invested is
liable to be suspended and may be withdrawn. He is therefore
not entrusted with the judicial power of the State; he is merely
an arbitrator authorised within the limits of the power conferred
to adjudicate upon the dispute referred to him.”

2.15. The various judicial pronouncements summarised
above show that the terms “judge” and “Court of Justice” as
defined at present in the Indian Penal Code are somewhat elastic.

1. 3.4. Venkataraman, (1954) SCR. 1150; ALR. 1954 S.C. 375,
2. Ramarao ४. Narayan, (1969) 1 S,C.J. 945, 953, (Reviews cases).

Judicial |
power of the
State.

Suggestion
fora
different
definition
of “Judge”
considered,


Omission of
first part of

definition
recom:
mended.

THustrations

to section
19.

Committing

Magistrates

not
“Judges”
within

section 19,

16

We considered whether the amendment proposed by the Com-
mission! in section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should
be taken as a guide und section 19 of the Penal Code recast as
follows :—

“The word ‘Judge’ denotes every person who is offici
designaicd as a Judge or Magistrate. every presiding 01:
of a revenue Court. and every person acting under a Central,
Provincial or Slate Act if declared by that Act to be a Judge
for the purposes of this Code.”

This would. no doubt. bring uniformity between the Penal
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. But if the definition
of “Judge” is thus narrowed down. the immunity conferred by
section 77 of the Penal Code will not be available to some public
servanis who may now be regarded as giving “definitive judg-
ments”. In cur opinion, the protection under section 77 should
continue to be wide as at present and no amendment that may be
proposed in section 19 should affect that position. ॥( is for this
reason that we would prefer not to alier the tests laid down in
section 19. thor they might appear to be somewhat unprecise.

2.16. As a part of the definition. the reference to “every
person who is officially designated as a “Judge” hardiy serves
any purpose and should be omitted. Any such person would
certainly satisfy the test of having power to give definitive judg-
ments in legal proceedings.

2.17. The four illustrations appended to section 19 appear
to narrow down the scope of the section to some extent. Thus
according to a Patna decision,? a Magistrate is not a “Judge”
when he has not scisin of a case, and this is emphasised by
illustration (b). If the Patna view is correct, then it is cer-
tainly desirable to widen section 19, so as to expressly include
Magistrates. here is no justification for making a distinction
between Judges and Magistrates in this respect.

2.18. Some difficulty is created illustration (9) according
to which *ब Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a
charge on which he has power only io commit for trial to an-
other Court, is not a Judge’. A committing Magistrate, as
such, is not eligible for the immunity conferred by section 77
of the Code, and it would be possible for any person, who suffers
any injury as a result of what a Magistrate does in the course of

1. See 4is1 Report. paragraphs 15.99 and 15.100. Section 19502) is -proposed to be re-

vised

(2) In clauses (a) and (७) of sub-section (१), the term Court” means 3 civil, revenue

or criminal cour
‘or State Act if

and inches a iribunal constituted by or uader a Central, Provincial
eclared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section.”

2, See Remehandre ६. KE. 1925) LER. 5 Pat. 110, 115; ALR. 1926 Pat. 214.


7

conimitment proceedings, to launch a prosecution for such ia-
jury. Doubtiess, in respect of some acts he may obtain im-
munity from other provisions of the Code. For example, a
censure passed in good faith on the conduct of an accused or a
witness by a committing Magistrate may fall under the seventh
Exception to section $99, Indian Panel Code, and he may be
immune from a charge of defamation. But he runs the risk
of prosecution for other offences, if the ingredients of those
offences are made out.

2.19. ॥६ would appear that in Civil Law, committing Magis-
trates are as much entitled to immunity from suits for damages
as trying Magistrates. The Judicial Officers’ Protection Act?
provides that “no Judge, Magistrate, Justice of the Peace, Col-
lector or other person acting judicially shali be liable to be
sued in any Civil Court for any act done or ordered to be done
by him in the discharge of his judicial duty, whether or not
within the limits of his jurisdiction, provided that he at the
time, in good faith, believed himself to have jurisdiction to do
or order the act complained of.”

2.20. According to the English law? on the subject, immu-
nity in civil cases would apply in regard to any proceeding
before any court or tribunal recognised by law, the essential
object being that Judges might exercise their functions free
from any danger that they might be called to account for any
words spoken in their official capacity. This has recently
been ensured by the Administration of Justice Act, 1964.5
which makes elaborate provisions for the indemnification of
justices of the peace. They are entitled to be indemnified out
of local funds in respect of costs, damages etc. “if in respect
of the matters giving rise to the civil proceedings or claim they
acted reasonably and in good faith.”

2.21. Thus, both in England and in India, committing Ma-
gistrates enjoy adequate protection so far as civil liability is
concerned. {t appears to be unreasonable and illogical to deny
them protection from criminal prosecutions in respect of those
proceedings where ihey do not have to pass definitive judg-
ments.4 We, therefore, recommend that all Magistrates should
be brought within the definition of “Judge” in Section 19. None
of the illustrations is necessary, and they should all be omitted.
Section 19 may be re-drafted as follows :—

“19. Judge-—‘Judge’ means any person who is em-
powered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or
Section 1 of the Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, 1850 (18 of 1850).
Sce Stephen, History of Criminal Law, Vol. 1, pages 225, 227.

See section 27(1).

1,
2.
3.
4

Position in
civil law
in India.

English law
as to civit
liability of
Justices.

Amendment
of section
19,

When committal proceedings are abolished as recommended by the Law Commission

in its 4151 Report, Judiciat Magistrates will be functioning as “Judges”? almost all the

time.
3M of Law.71-—3


Section 20-
“court of
justice’.

Section 21
“public
servant’’—
importance
of defini-
tion.

18

criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment, which, if
not appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment
which, if confirmed by some other authority would be
definitive, or who is one of a body of persons, which body of
persons is empowered by law to give such a judgment and
includes a Magistrate’’.

2.22. Section 20 defines a court of justice as meaning a judge
or body of judges empowered by law to act judicially when
such judge or body of judges is acting judicially. It has been
suggested that the wider definition of court given in section 3
of the Evidence Act should be adopted in the Penal Code. For
the purposes of the Evidence Act, “court” includes ail judges
and magistrates, and all persons, except arbitrators, legally
authorised to take evidence. The emphasis in the Penal Code
is on the power to give definitive judgments, whereas in the
Evidence Act, it is on the authority to take evidence. Although
some quasi-judicial tribunals having legal authority to take
evidence may not be courts of justice under the Indian Penal
Code, we do not think it is necessary that they should be brought
within the definition of that expression.

The definition is, however, unnecessarily lengthy. The
word “judge” having been clearly and comprehensively defined
in section 19, there seems to be no point in repeating in section
20 the idea that the judge or body of judges should have been
empowered by law to act judicially, alone or as a body, as the
case may be. It is sufficient to indicate in the definition that
it is only when a judge or body of judges is acting judicially that
he or it is to be regarded as a court of justice for the purposes
of the Code. Thus an Executive Magistrate, while functioning
judicially under the Code of Criminal Procedure, will be a court
of justice but not when he is performing an executive or adminis-
trative function under that Code or some other Jaw. We
propose that the definition of “court of Justice’ may be simpli-
fied to read, “the words ‘court of justice’ denote a judge or
body of judges when acting judicially”.

2.23, The definition of public servant in section 21 is im-
portant because there are numerous offences under the Code
where the distinction between public servants and other be-
comes material. These offences may be broadly classified as
follows :—

(i) offences which can be committed only by a public
servant;

Gi) offences which are aggravated when committed by
a public servant;

(iii) offences which can be committed only against a
public servant;

_{iv) offences which are aggravated when committed
against a public servant; and


19

(२) offences committed in relation to public servants
or their authority or connected with them in one way or
another.

The Civil Procedure Code contains a definition of “public
officer” which is similar to, but not exactly the same as, the
definition of “public servant” in the Penal Code. We note
that no material changes have been proposed in the former
definition by the Commission in its Report on that Code.!
When section 80 of the Civil Procedure Code is repealed as
recommended by the Commission, the definition of public
officer will lose most of its significance. For purposes of the
Penal Code, however, the distinction between public servants
and others will.continue to be of practical importance.

2.24. The claborate cnumeration of various categories of
public servants in section 21 is primarily based on the functions
discharged by the public servant concerned. There is, how-
ever, considerable overlapping, particularly after the recasting
of clause twelfth by the amending Acts of 1958 and 1964, and
some of the clauses require drastic revision. Each of the clauses
will now be considered separately.

2.25. Clause second, which relates to commissioned officers
in the Military, Naval or Air Force of India, may be omitted,
as these officers are included in the twelfth clause.

2.26. Clause third relates to Judges, including persons em-
powered to perform adjudicatory functions. The word “Judge”
gives colour to the added words referring to adjudicatory func-
tions. A doubt may arise as to whether an arbitrator is a
“judge” but in view of the express mention of an arbitrator
in clause sixth, this clause may not include an arbitrator. No
change necd be made in this clause.

Any doubt as to whether a “tribunal” is included in this
cjause has been clarified by the judgments of the Supreme Court
in the cases cited below? while construing the expression
“tribunal” occurring in articles 136 and 227 of the Constitu-
tion. Hence no amendment to this clause is necessary.

2.27. Clause fourth relates to officers of a Court of Justice
performing the specified functions. In part, it overlaps clause
twelfth. In our view, it should be restricted to “every person
specially authorised by the Court to perform any duties in

Ree
arrange-
ment of

clauses and
shortening
suggested.

Clause
second
omitted.

Clause
third.

Clause
fourth.

“1. 2%th Report,

Cf. Bharat Bank ४, Employees of Bharat Bank, 2. 1.7, 1950 S.C. 188, 189, 190, 196;
(1950) S.C.R. 459 ; Durgashankar v. Roghuraj, A.1.R. 1954 S.C. $20; (1965) S.C.R. 267;
Harinagar Sugar Mills v. Shyam Sunder, AAR. 1961 S.C. 1669, 1676, paragraph 16;
(1962) 2S.C.R. 339; Associated Cement Co. ५. P. N. Sharma, A.LR. 1965 S.C, 1595.


Clause
fifth.

Clause
sixth,

Clause
seventh,
eigth,
ninth and
then
combined
and sim-
plified

Clause
eleventh.

20

connection with the administration of justice?, including a
liquidator, receiver or commissioner.”

Full-time officers of a Court of Justice are included in clause
twelfth.

2.28. Clause fifth may be omitied. Jurors and assessors no
longer exist in the criminal procedure after the abolition of
trial by jury and with the aid of assessors.

2.29, No change is needed in clause sixth.

2.30. Clause seventh may be useful for convict-warders etc.,
who are not Government servants. We, therefore, propose
to retain its substance, but in a different form in more general
language.

Clause eighth relates to officers “of the Government whose
duty is to prevent offences, to give information of offences,
to bring offenders to justice or to protect the public health,
safety or convenience.” Case-law? relating to prosecutors,
police patels, officers of the Society for Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals. etc., shows its utility. We propose to retain it in
substance, but in a different form. We may add that the words
“of Government” ase unduly restrictive in this clause. The
test should be the nature of the duty, and not whether the
office is under Government.

We also propose to retain clauses ninth and tenth (which
relate to persons looking after pecuniary and proprietary in-
terests of the State) in substance.

It seems to us, that, to cover the matters mentioned in clauses
seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth, a new clause as follows should
be substituted :

“any person who holds an office by virtue of which
he is authorised or required by law to perform any public
duty.”

It may be specially mentioned with reference to the above
clause that the “public duty” must be one imposed by law.
Such a requirement will prevent undue widening of the scope
of the expression “public servant’.

2.31, Clause cleventh needs no change of substance.

1. Other akternatives suggested were—
(i) “functions of the Court”,
(ii) “any matter pending before the Court”.
2, (a) Butto Krishno Das, (1878) LL.R. 3 Cal. 497.
(७) Appaji, (1896) L.L.R. 21 Bom. 517.
(0). Nataraja, (1922) LL.R. 46 Mad. 90.


21

2.32. Clause twelfih is a residuary clause. The ninth clause Clause
(before the relevant portion was transferred from the ninth twelfth
clause to the twelfth clause in 1964), emphasised the perform-
ance of a “public duty”. The relevant words in the ninth
clause (before 1964) were “and every officer in the service or
pay of the Governments or remunerated by fees or commission
for the performance of any ‘public duty”. The words “public
duty” seem 10. have been readin some cases as governing the
whole of this residuary provision,’ i.e. as also applicable to
those in the “service or pay” of Government.

Sometimes, emphasis was placed on the word “officer”. In
a Bombay case,? it was observed—

“There is a difference between an office and an employ-
ment, every office being an employment; but there are em-
ployments which do not come under the denomination of
offices; such as, an agreement to make hay, herd a flock
etc., which differ widely from that of steward of a manor.
The first of these paragraphs implies that an officer is one to
whom is delegated, by the Supreme authority, some portion
of its regulating and coercive powers, or who is appointed
to represent the State in its relations to individual subjects.
This is the “central 10९3" and applying it to the clause which
we have to construc, we think that the word “officer" there
means some person employed to exercise, to some extent,
and in certain circumstances, a delegated function of Govern-
ment. He is either himself armed with some authority or
representative character, or his duties are immediately auxi-
liary to those of some one who is so armed.”

In a Calcutta ८४५४३, a peon attached to the Superintendent
of the Salt Department was found to have taken a bribe. When
he was tried for an offence under section 161, it was contended
that he was not an “officer” within the meaning of clause niath
of section 21 (as it stood then). Since he was not an
“officer”, he was not a public servant; this was the basis of
the argument. The contention was rejected by the High Court,
stating that even though the peon did not exercise any deie-
gated function of the Government, yet his duties were im-
mediately auxiliary to those of the Superintendent, who was
performing such delegated functions. The Court added, that
an “officer in the service or pay of Government”, within sec-
tion 2109), is one appointed for the performance of some public

uty

1. Cf. Nazanud Din v. Q.E., (1900) LR. 28 Cal. 344; 4 CW.N. 798...
2. Reg. ५. Ramuji Rao, (1875) 12 Bom. H.C.R. 1, 5 (West J.)
3. Nazamud Din v. Q.£., (1900) LL.R. 28 Cal. 344; 4 C.W.N. 798.

4. The test of “delegated functions of the Government” had been employed in the Bombay
case, Reg. v. Ramajirao, (1875) 12 Bom. High Court Report 1. See also Emperor v.
Karam Chand, A..R. 1943 Lah. 255.


hwy

Ch
Civil

22

But a different view was also prevalent. In one case, it
was stated that in the case! of persons in the pay etc. of Go-
vernment, it had been presumed that they are performing a
public duty. In another case, it was clearly stated that the
words “for the performance of any public duty” {in section
21, clause ninth, as it stood before 1964), governed only the
words “remunerated by fee or commission”.2

Two judgments of the Supreme Court seem to indicate
that the requirements of pay and public duty are cumulative.
In one cases, the applicant was a class SEH servant, employed
as a metal examiner in the Railway Carriage Workshop at
Ajmer. He was convicted by the Special Judge, State of Ajmer,
of the offences under section 161, Indian Penal Code for having
accepted from one Nanak Singh the sum of Rs. 156/- as illegal
gratification as a motive for securing a job for someone. He
was also convicted of an offence under section 5(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, for abusing his position
as a public servant and obtaining for himself by corrupt or
illegal means pecuniary advantages in the shape of Rs. 150/-
from the said Nanak Singh. The case was taken up to the Sup-
reme Court on appeal and the main question for consideration
by that Court was whether a class If] railway servant was an
“officer” within the meaning of clause ninth as it stood prior
10 1964,

The Court laid down two tests, namely, whether he is in the
service or pay of the Government and whether he is entrusted
with the performance of a public duty, and held that “if both
these requirements are satisfied, it matters not the least what is
the nature of his office, whether the duties he is performing are
of an patted character or very humble indeed”. It further
observed :--

“If, therefore, on the facts of a Ppacticular case, the
Court comes to the. conclusion that a person is not only
in the service or pay of the Government but is also performing
a public duty, he has delegated to him the functions of the
Government or is in any event performing duties immediately
auxiliary to those of someone who is an officer of the Go-
yernment and is therefore an officer of the Government with-
in the meaning of section 21(9), Indian Penal Code.”

In another case, the appellant was a teacher in a railway
school and the main question before the Supreme Court was
whether he was a “public servant” within the meaning of section
21. The Supreme Court reiterated the test Jaid down by it in

utsi_Lal v. Mohammad Hafiz, A.LR. 1939 Pat. 77, 79 (Case under the Code of
Procedure)

. Jugal Singh \. Kimperor, ALR. 1943 Pat. 315, 316.
+ GA. Manterio v. The State of Ajmer, (1956) S.C.
. The State of Aimer v. Shivaji Lal, (1959) $.C.R. 912, 913.

. 682.


23

C. A. Montorio v. The State of Ajmer‘, and held that the appel-
lant was in the service of Government and was being paid by
Government. The Court observed :—

“It cannot, in our opinion, be doubted that he was
entrusted with the performance of a public duty inasmuch
as he was a teacher in a school maintained by Government
and it was a part of his public duty to teach boys.”

In clause 12(a), after the amendment of 1964, any person
in the service or pay of the Government is a public servant and
it is not necessary to consider whether he performs any public
duty or not. But as regards those persons who are remunera-
ted by fees or commissions, such as paet-time public prose-
cutors, the performance of public duty is material.

2.33. The expression “public duty” cannot be easily defined
and no Court has attempted any such definition. A Sind case?
contains an insiructive discussion as to the import of the words
“public duty”. There, the Court was required to decide whe-
ther the Courts of Wards under section 4, Bombay Court of
Wards Act, 1905, was a “public officer” or not. The Court
referred to an old Bombay case} where the Bombay High Court
had referred to the definition of the word “‘officium” or duty
given in the Bacons’ Abridgement at Vol. Vi, page 2, and ob-
served that an “officer” was one to whom was delegated, by the
supreme authority, some portion of its regulating or coercive
powers or who was appointed to represent the State in its re-
Jation to individual subjects, and that an “officer” in section
21, clause (9) Indian Panel Code, meant some person employed
to exercise, to some extent and in certain circumstances, a dele-
gated function of Government. The Sind Court then cited
with approval a more comprehensive American definition’ run-
ning as follows :—

“It has been defined as the right, authority and duty
created and conferred by law by which, for a given period,
either fixed by law or ending at the pleasure of the creating
power, an individual is invested with some portion of the
sovereign functions of the Government, either executive,
legislative or judicial, to be exercised for the benefit of the
public.”

Tn a Rajasthan case,5 the question was whether a Super-
intending Engineer and an Assistant Engineer, both officers of
the State of Rajasthan and functioning on deputation with the
Rajasthan State Electricity Board, a statutory corporation, were

A. Montorio ५. The State of Ajmer, (1956) S.C.R. 682 (supra).
Vishnomal v. Couyt of Wards, ALR. 1928 Sind. 76.
. Reg. ५. Ramajivav, (१875), 12 B.H.C.R. 1 (West 3.).

pepe!

Editorial staff of the American National Reporting System.
5. Nand Lal 5. Prithvi Singh, 1.L.R. (1965) 15 Raj. 1184; (1966) Cr. UF. 868.

Meaning of
“public
duty”.

. Vol. I of Judicial and Statutory definitions of Words and Phrases, compiled by the


24

“public officers” within the meaning of section 56(2) of the
indian Electricity Act of 1910. (This Act does not define the
words “public officer’). While not professing to lay down
any precise test for ascertaining the “public nature of an office
or duty”, the High Court observed :—

“The expression ‘public officers’ appear to refer to an
officer who discharges functions or duties in relation to the
public, and not in relation to private individuals. This
may be accepted as a rough and general test for determining
as to who should be treated as 8 public officer. All the
same, it must be recognised that the expression ‘public officer”
cannot be held to have a precise meaning”.

Referring to the definition of “public officer’ in section
2(17), Code of Civi! Procedure, and that of “public servant”
jn section 21, Indian Penal Code, the Court observed :—

“The definitions of both terms are quite comprehensive
and wide, and include all Government servants and other
officers concerned in the performance of duties of a public
nature. _... They certainly discharge functions and
duties in relation to the public and not in relation to private
individuals.”

A Patna case! illustrates the tendency of judicial decisions in
interpreting the words “public duty’. An issue in this case was
whether an advocate engaged by the Provincial Government
to conduct a civil suit for the recovery of public moncy was a
‘public officer’ within clause (h) of section 2(17) of the Code
of Civil Procedure. The Court said :--

“In the second category are those who are in the pay
of the Government. Here the Legistature has not. specified
the work which these persons are to perform, that is to say,
it has becn presumed that when an officer is in the pay of the
Government, he must have been performing a public duty.
In the third category are those who are remunerated by
fees or commission, and in order that they may be held to be
public officers, it is necessary that the payment should be
for the performance of any public duty. Conduct of a suit
on behalf of the Government for the recovery of the public
money is performing public duty which an advocate under-
takes.”

Under English law also, no neral definition of what is and
what is not ‘public duty’ has been attempted by the Courts.
The question has been decided in specific instances and in the
particular context in which the word ‘public’ occurred. One
of the tests laid down by the English Courts. is that the duty
must be legally enforceable. Thus the “public duty” referred to
jn section 1(3) of the Public Authorities Protection Act, 1893,

यू Bans Lat v. Mohammed Hafiz, A.LR. 1939 Pat, 77, 79.


25

was held by Avory J. to mean? “a duty which can be legally
enforced, having regard particularly to the succeeding words
relating to neglect or default of the duty.” Enforceabi-
lity, however, may not be the only test. The position in England
seems to be that Courts tend to visualise ‘public duty’ as
a duty relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government
in which the public are directly interested or which is for the
benefit of the public; and one of the criteria for deciding this
point is that the duty is enforceable by any member of the public,
in his right as such member, in a Court of law, but this is not the
only criterion.

2.34. Apars from the twelve clauses, in some of the special

and local acts, it is expressly declared in the statute itself that |

specified persons are “public servants” for the purposes of sec-
tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. This avoids unnecessary
controversy and may be conveniently adopted in other statutes
also. {t is unnecessary to refer to such a provision in section
21 of the Code.

2.35. It was suggested that members of Parliament, State
Legislatures and local authorities should be regarded as ‘public
servants’. Though the new test which we propose, namely,
“any persons holding any office by virtue of which he is autho-
tised or required by law to perform a public duty” should cover
them, we think that it would be better to mention them
specifically.

2.36. Explanation 1 to section 21 is unnecessary. The
substantive clauses of the section do not themselves require that
the person concerned should be appointed by the Government.
The Explanation should, therefore, be omitted.

2.37. Explanation 2 needs no change of substance. The
word ‘situation’ is, however, not expressive, and we propose
to add the word ‘office’, to indicate the meaning more cleatly.

2.38. The definition of ‘election’ in Explanation 3 is not
very happily worded. It speaks of “any legislative, municipal
or other public authority”. Though the residual item is wide
enough to cover local bodies other than municipal corporations,
the definition could more aptly and usefully refer to ‘local autho-
rity.” The words “the method of selection to which is, by or
under any Jaw, prescribed as by election” seem rather tauto-
logous, and the word “selection” is not very appropriate, when
speaking of an election. It should be replaced by the word
“choosing”. The definition may be re-drafted as follows:—

“The word ‘election’ denotes an election, by whatever
system, held under any law for the purpose of choosing mem-
bers of any legislature, local authority or other public autho-
rity.”

Suggestion
to add
clause
referring
to other
laws con-
sidered.

Members of
Parliament,
State
Legistature
and focal
authorities.

Explanation
1—deletion
recom-
mended,

Explana-
tion 2--
amendment
Tecom-
mended.

Explana-
tion 3—
amend-
ments
Fecom-
mended.

“Words and Phrases Judicially Defined”, (1944 Ed.), Vol. 4, page 424.

3. Martin v. London Court Council, (1929), 141 L. 1. 120. Cited in Roland Burrows



26

The definition could be appropriately placed in a separate
section, as it is not confined in its application to section 21 but
applies also to other sections of the Code?.

Section 21-- 2.39. We have considered various suggestions for extend-
‘various ing the definition in section 21 and making it more comprehen-

सहित sive, e.g. so as to include—

(i) heads and executive authorities of public institutions
and non-official bodies;

(ii) presidents of co-operative societies;

(iii) office-bearers, officers or servanis of any society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or of
any public or charitable institutions;

(२) persons licensed to sell controlled commodities;
and

(v) pleaders, advocates and attorneys.

In our view, it will be inadvisable to include these persons in
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. it must be left to the Legis-
lature to expressly declare in the special or local laws dealing
with the aforesaid persons, that they are “public servants” for
the purpose of section 21, Indian Penal Code.

Redrafi of 2.40. We recommend in the light of the above discussion

section 21. that section 21 may be replaced by the following two sections:—
Tecom-

10९0. प्‌
mende “2t. Public Servant—The words ‘public servant’ de-

note—

(a) any person who is a member of Parliament
or of a State Legislature;

(b) any person who is in the service or pay of the
Government, or who is remunerated by the Govern-
ment by fees or commission for the performance of any
public duty;

(c) any person who is a member, or is in the ser-
vice or pay, of a local authority;

(d) any person in the service or pay of a corpora-
tion established by or under a Central, Provincial or
State Act, or of a Government company as defined in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956;

(e) any Judge, including any person empowered
by law to discharge, whether by himself or as a member
or a body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;

1. eg. Chapter 9A (sections 171A to 171 J).


27

(0) any person specially authorised by a Court of
Justice to perform any duty in connection with the ad-
ministration of justice, including a liquidator, receiver
Of commissioner appointed by such Court;

(g} any arbitrator or other person to whom any
cause or matter has been referred for decision or report
by any Court of Justice or by any other competent pub-
lic authority:

{h) any person who holds an office in virtue of which
he is empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or re-
vise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part
of an election; or

{i) any person who holds an office in virtue of which
he is authorised or required by law to perform any public
duty,

Explanation.—A person falling under any of the above
clauses by virtue of any office or situation he is actually hold-
ing is a public servant, whatever legal defect, there may be
in his right to hold that office or situation.

21A. Election—The word “election” denotes an elec-
tion, by whatever system held, under any law for the pur-
pose of choosing members of any legislature, local autho-
rity or other public authority”.

2.41. Section 22 defines ‘movable property” as “intended
to include corporeal property of every description except land
and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to
anything which is attached to the earth.” This expression is
important where any offence, involving theft is to be considered,
as theft! can only be of movable property. The General Clau-
ses Act? defines movable property as “property of every des-
ctiption except immovable property”, and then says? “immo-
vable property” includes “land, benefits to arise out of land and
things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything
attached to the earth.” In terms, this definition in the General
Clauses Act is wider than the explanation in the Code, but, for
practical purposes, it seems to us that the General Clauses Act
definition is adequate for the Code, and does not unduly widen
the concept of “theft”, as it has been all along understood. For
other offences involving “movable property” also, that defini-
tion seems sufficient, and since we think that when the General
Clauses Act contains a good definition of a particular expres-
sion, another definition in the Code should not be attempted,
we propose to delete the provision in section 22 of the Code.

Section 22-—
“movable
Property ".

71 Section 378
2. Section 3036), General Clauses Act, 1897.
3. Section 427), General Clauses Act, 1897. मं


28

Sections 23 2.42. Section 23 explains the terms “wrongful gain” and
and “ a पु ha

24. wrongful loss”, and section 24 says that a person does a thing
“Wrongful “dishonestly” if he does it with the intention of causing wrong-
gain” ful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another. There has

शिवा been no difficulty in understanding or applying these definitions.

“dis:

honestly”.

Section 25— 2.43. The same cannot be said of the definition of “fraudu-

कि Jently” in the next section. Section 25 states that ‘‘a person is

न said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent
to defraud but not otherwise”. As early as 1897 this definition
came in for criticism by the Calcutta High Court. Maclean
C.5., delivering the unanimous judgment of five Judges of that
Court, observed? :—

“As a definition this provision is obviously imperfect,
and perhaps introduces an element of doubt which did not
previously exist; for it leaves it to be determined whether
the word ‘defraud’ as used in section 25 implies the depri-
vation or intended deprivation of property as a part or
result of the fraud. The word ‘defraud’ is of double mean-
ing, in the sense that it either may or a may not imply de-
privation, and as it is not defined in the Code, and is not,
so far as we are aware, to be found in the Code, except in
section 25, its meaning must be sought by a consideration
of the context in which the word ‘fraudulently’ is found.

The word ‘fraudulently’ is uscd in sections 471 and
464 together with the word ‘dishonestly’ and presumably
in a sense not covered by the latter word?. If, however, it
be held that ‘fraudulently’ implies deprivation, either actual
or intended, then apparently that word would perform no
function which would not have been fully discharged by the
word ‘dishonestly’, and its use would be mere surplus age.
So far as such considerations carry any weight, it obviously
inclines in favour of the view that the word ‘fraudulently’
should not be confined to a transaction of which the
deprivation of property forms a part.”

Calcutta 2.44. Jn another Calcutta case,? it was held that the word
view. “fraud” involves two conceptions, namely, deceit and injury
to the person deceived, that is, an infringement of some egal
tight possessed by him, but not necessarily deprivation of pro-

perty.

J. Q.E. ५. Abbas Ali, (1897) LL.R. 25 Cal. 512 (F.B.).

2. The word “fraudulently” is used together with the word “‘dishonestly” in sections 209,
246, 247, 415, 421, 422, 423, 424, 464, 471 474, and 477. 1६ is used by itself or in varia-
tions like “with fraudulent intent” or “with intent to defraud™ in sections 206. 208,
210, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 477A, 482, 487, 488 and 486. It is used together with the
exoression “or with intent that fraud may be committed” in sections 239, 240, 242, 243,
250, 251, 252, 253, 261 and 463.

3. Surendra Nath Ghose ४. Emp., UL.R. 38 Cal. 75.



29

2.45. In an equally old Allahabad case,!’ where the chatac- Allahabad
ter roll of a police head constable was tampered with, by substi- view.
tuting a page containing favourable remarks, in order to increase
his chances of promotion, the question was whether forgery
had been committed. Bannerjee J. held that “where there is
an intention to deceive and by means of that deceit to obtain
an advantage, there is fraud, and if a document is fabricated
with such intent it is forgery”. _It was further held that an offence
is committed under section 471 whenever a document known
or believed by the accused to have been forged is used as genuine
with the intention that some Person should be deceived thereby,
and by means of that deception either an advantage should accrue
to the person so using the document or injury should befall some
other person or persons.

2.46. Ina later Bombay case?, it was obsetved that, although Bombay
there were conflicting rulings on the definition of “fraudutent- view.
ly”, the consensus of opinion in the Bombay High Court was
that there must be some advantage on the one side with a corres-
ponding loss on the other.

View

2.47. In England also, the Precise legal meaning to be attach- take
ed to the word “defraud”, particularly in distinguishing between England:
“intent to deceive” and “intent to defraud”, has been a matter °
of controversy. Buckley J.’s dictam3 which became classic
was :--

“To defraud is to deprive by deceit; it is by deceit to
induce a man to act to his injury. More tersely it may be

pul. that to deceive is by falsehood to induce a state of mind;

to defraud is by deceit to induce a course of action.”

There has been much dispute in recent years as to what is
meant by the words “deprive by deceit”. The question whether
these words meant the causing of an economic loss to some
person by means of deceit, or merely the inducing of a person
to act against his own interest, has becn strongly debated. In
a recent case, 4 the House of Lords decided that it is not neces-
sary that there should be an intent to cause an economic loss.
After reviewing judicial pronouncements up to and including
this decision of the House of Lords, a learned writer suggested 5
that the intent to defraud which was necessary in English law
to constitute forgery of private documents could be stated as
“an intent by deceit the cause prejudice to any other either by
causing damage to his person, property or reputation, or by
affecting his rights whether by deprivation or concealment there-
of, or by inducing him to act contrary to what would have been
his duty had he not becn deceived.”

1. QE. ५. Muhammad Saeed Khan, 4898) LL.R. 21 All. 113, 115, 116.

2. Sanjeev v. Emp., #.3.1२. (1932) Bom. 545.

3. In re: London and Glove Finance Corporation, (1903) All. E.R. 891, 893.
4. Welham v. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1960), 1 All. E.R. 805.
3.

- R.N. Gooderson, “Prejudice as a test of intent to defraud”, (1960) Cambridge Law
Journal 199, 213.



Exposition
of the
Supreme
Court.

Essential
elements of
“intent to
defraud”.

Definivon
of “Srau-
dulenuy”
recom-
mended.

Tbe Vimla से Dethi Administration, (963) Supp. 2 SCR. 585.

30

2.48. The Supreme Court? has, after considering relevant
decisions on the subject, stated the legal position as follows:—

“The expression ‘defraud’ involves two elements, name-
ly, deceit and injury to the person deceived. Injury is some-
thing other than economic loss, that is, deprivation of property,
whether movable or immovable, or of money, and it will
include any harm whatever caused to any person in body,
mind, reputation or such others. In short, it isa non-
economic or non-pecuniary loss. A benefit or advantage to
the deceiver will almost always cause loss or detriment to the
deceived. Even in those rare cases, where there is a benefit
or advantage to the deceiver, but no corresponding loss to
the deceived, the second condition is satisfied.”

Yn a later case, however, the Supreme Court observed? :—

“The words ‘with intent to defraud’ in the section indi-
cate not a bare intent to deceive, but an intent to cause a
person to act or omit to act, as a result of deception played
upon him, to his disadvantage. This is the most extensive
meaning that may be given to the expression ‘with intent
to defraud’ in our penal Code, and the words ‘but not other-
wise’ clearly show that the words ‘intent to defraud’ are not
synonymous with ‘intent to deceive’, and require some action
resulting in some disadvantage which, but for the deception,
the person deceived would have avoided.”

2.49, It would thus appear that the essential elements to cons-
titute an intent to defraud are (i) an intent to deceive another,
and (ii) an intent to cause, by that deception, injury to some
person (ordinarily, but not necessarily, the person deceived).
The injury intended need not necessarily be pecuniary or
even economic, amounting to a deprivation of property, but
may be any harm whatsoever to any person in body, mind or
reputation. It goes without saying that the intention and
object of the person accused of fraudulent conduct is to obtain
a benefit or advantage to himself which he would not otherwise
have got. Difficulty arises only in those cases where while this
benefit or advantage to the deceiver is obvious, the injury or risk
of injury to the person deceived, or indeed to any person, is
not apparent.

2.50. We consider it desirable to replace the very unsatis-
factory definition of “fraudulently” if it can be called a defi
tion at all, by one which will at least state the essential require-
ments as indicated by the Supreme Court and furnish a guideline
in doubtful cases. In such a definition, it would obviously be
not sufficient to relate the second element to the deceiver's
intention to obtain an undue benefit or advantage to himself by

2. Dr. 5. Dutt v. State of U.P., (1966) 1 S.C.R. 493, 502.


31

means of the deceit. To constitute culpable fraud there should
either be an intention to cause by the deception injury in the
wide sense to someone or, at any rate, an intention to induce
the person deceived to act to his disadvantage. We recommend
the following definitions:—

“A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does
that thing with intent to deceive another and, by such deceit,
either to cause injury to any person or to induce any person
to act to his disadvantage.”

2.51. Section 26 explains the meaning of the words “reason
to believe”, and emphasises that only if a person has sufficient
cause to believe a thing can be said to have reason to believe it.
The Code thus accepts only “rational belief” as something worth
taking notice of; and that is how in law it should be, in order
that needicss controversy about the mere existence of a belief
does not arise in courts. In actual working, the explanation
has been found satisfactory, and we sce no reason te disturb it.

2.52. Section 27 says:—

“When property is in the possession of a person's wife,
clerk or servant, on account of that person, it is in that
Person’s possession within the meaning of this Code.”

This explanation is particularly useful in relation to the offence
of theft, and two illustrations under section 378 (which de-
fines “theft”) bring out the point of the explanations:— gy

"(d) A being Z's servant and entrusted by Z with the
care of 25 plate, dishonestly runs away with the plate, with-
out Z's consent. A has committed theft.

(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the
keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall return, A carries the
plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not
in Z’s possession. It would not therefore be taken out of
Z’s possession and A has not committed theft, though he
may have committed criminal breach of trust.”

Section 27 is confined to a wife, clerk or servant, because
of the close proximity of such persons to the person on whose
behalf they could be holding property. The explanation is in-
tended to do away with any argument based on any nice distinc-
tion between possession and custody, without, of course, obli-
terating that distinction. We think the explanation is helpful,
and should be retained, although we do not suggest any exten-
sion of this principle to cover other persons, such as trustees,
agents or bailees.

Section 26-
“reason to.
believe”

Section 27—
“possession
of
property”’.


Section 28--
“counter-
seit”.

Section 29—
“document”

32

2.53. Section 28 explains the word “counterfeit”, used most-
ly in relation to offences governing coins, currency notes and
revenue stamps. To counterfeit is “to make one thing to re-
semble another thing intending by means of that resemblance
to practise deception or knowing it to be likely that deception
would thereby be practised.”

There are two explanations to the section, of these, the
second explanation is important. It says, “when a person
causes one thing to resembie another thing, and the resemblance
is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it should be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so caus-
ing the one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means
of that resemblance to practise deception or know it to be likely
that deception would thereby be practised.”

Counterfeiting has, thus, two ingredients:
(1) actual imitation of something, and

(2) intention to induce a belief in others that the imita~
tion is the genuine article.

The explanation directs that the fact of close resemblance suffi-
cient to deceive another would be presumptive evidence that
deception was intended. Jt was suggested that the presump-
tion should not be obligatory, but left to the discretion of the
court; but we think that there is Jittle room for discretion here,
in view of the terms of the explanation, and the presumption
would arise only if the court in fact thought the resemblance
close enough to deceive.

It may of course happen that an imitation prepared innocent-
ly has a close resemblance to the original. Such innocent imi-
tations, however, are not “counterfeits”, as there is no intention
to deceive anyone, and that can be readily shown by disclosing
the purpose of the imitation. We do not think that any inno-
cent imitation can be brought within the meaning of “‘counter-
feit” because of the explanation, although. of course, the inno-
cent intention, in such circumstances, will have to be disclosed
and the court persuaded that was so. In certain circumstances,
proof of innocent imitation may be onerous, but that does not
persuade us to water down the second explanation. We there-
fore propose to leave the section as it is.

2.54. Section 29 defines a “document” thus:—

“The word ‘document’ denotes any matter expressed
or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures,
or marks or by more than one of those means intended to
be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter.”


33

This is followed by two explanations, the first of which states
that “it is immaterial by what means or upon what substance
the letters, figures or marks are formed or whether the evidence
is intended for, or may be used in, a Court of Justice or not.”
The second provides that letters, figures or marks which have
a special significance according to usage should be understood
to have that meaning, “although the same may not be actually
expressed.”” Haif a dozen illustrations are attached.

2.55. The Evidence Act has a definition of “document” which
reads १:--

“Document” means any matter expressed or described
upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks,
or by more than one of these means, intended to be used, or
which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.

Five illustrations are given of which two are practically the same
as those given in the Code and the others are different.

The General Clauses Act also has a definition which is practi-
cally the same as the one in the Evidence Act. It reads?:—

“Document” shall include any matter written, expressed
or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures
or marks, or by more than one of those means, which is in-
tended to be used or which may be used for the purpose of
recording that matter.”

No illustrations are appended.

2.56. The main idea in all the three Acts is the samer
and the emphasis is on the “matter” which is re-
corded, and not on the substance on which the matter is record-
ed. We feel, on the whole, that the Penal Code should contain
a definition of “document” for its own purpose, and that section
29 should be retained.

The two Explanations attached to section 29 are, we think,
helpful. The first Explanation helps to clear ambiguity about
the import of the word “evidence” used in the section, and is in
accord with the view of the Courts.3

Two other
definitions
of

“docu-
ment”.

Definition
Code to be
retained

1. Section 3, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

2. Section 3(18), General Clauses Act, 1897.

3. (a) Dhormindra v. Rex, 8. 1. 8, 1949, All, 353.
(0) M. 5. Iyengar v. Queen 1. L. R. 4 Mad. 393.

3M of Law/71—4.


Amendment
proposed.

34

2.57. The definition is wide enough to cover every kind of
document. Some doubt has, however, been expressed whether
it includes mechanical records of sound or image. We are an-
xious that it should, as such mechanical devices like “tape records”
are now in frequent use. The Supreme Court has held?
that a conversation recorded on a tape is good evidence,
and obviously, if a person forges a tape record, he ought to be
punishable the same way as a person preparing a faise document.
We intend to make this clear by adding an illustration to section
29. We propose, in fact, to delete some of the more obvious
illustrations under section 29, and insert some more useful ones
taken from the Evidence Act. Also we suggest a slight altcra-
tion in the language of the main section to make its intention
clearer, The section should, we think, read as follows :—

“29. Document.—The word ‘document’ denotes any
matter recorded upon any substance by means of letters,
figures, or marks, or by more than one of those means, in-
tended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that
matter.

Explanation 1.—%t is immaterial by what means or
upon what substance the letters, figures or marks are formed,
or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be used in,
a Court of Justice or not.

Hlustrations

The following are documents—
(a) a map or plan;
(6) a caricature;
(०) a writing on a metal plate,? stone or tree;

(d) a film, tape or other device on which sounds or
images are recorded.

Explanation 2,—Whatever is expressed by means of
letters, figures or marks as understood by mercantile or other
usage, shall be deemed to be recorded by such letters, figures
or marks within the meaning of this section, although the
same may not be actually expressed.

wpe

Pratap Singh Kairon (1964) 4 S.C.R. 733; ALR. 1964 S.C. 72, 86, paragraph 15.

. See section 3, Evidence Act. a
As to trees, sce Emp. v. Krishnappa, A.LR. 1925 Bom. 327 (Letters imprinted on troes).


35

Illustration

A writes his name on the back of a billof exchange
payable to his order. The meaning of the endorse-
ment as understood by mercantile usage, is that the bill is to
be paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document,
and must be construed in the same manner as if the words
“pay to the holder” or words 100 that effect had been written
over the signature.”

2.58. A “valuable security”, mentioned in section 30, is one
kind of document, the test being that it creates or deals with a
“legal right”. No difficulty has arisen about the meaning of
this expression, although, of course, the question whether a docu-
ment does or does not create a legal right has to be determined in
each case according to the nature of the document. We do not
Suggest any change in section 30.

2.59. Section 31 defines a “will”. So does the General
Clauses Act!. The term is now so well understood that a separate
definition in the Code seems unnecessary, and the General
Clauses Act definition ought to be enough. We would, therefore,
delete section 31.

2.60. Section 32 merely says that “act” includes illegal
omissions. The General Clauses Act? says the same thing, so
that section 32 is now unnecessary. The same considerations
apply to section 33, which explains that an act includes a series of
acts, and an omission, a series of omissions,—exactly as the
General Clauses Act does?, Both these sections can, therefore,
be omitted.

2.61. A good deal of serious crime is the result of concerted
action by several persons. Criminal law has, therefore, to deal
with the problem of individual liability, where several persons are
concerned in the commission of an offence. Sections 34 to 38
of the Code are designed for that purpose, but it is section 34
which is the most important and most frequently in use. The
Principle it enacts is quite simple. To borrow the words of a
High Court Judge, the section “embodies the ordinary common
sense principle that if two or more persons intentionally do
a thing jointly it is just the same as if each of them had done it
individually”,

Section 30—
“valuable
security”,

Section 31—
“will”,

Sections 32
and 33--
“act”
“omission”.

Section 34.

1. Section 3(64), General Clauses Act, 1897.
2, Section 3(2), Generat Clauses Act, 1897.
3. Waryam Singh, 1.L.R. 1941 Lah. 423.


Re-draft

36

2.62. The wording of section 34, however, is such that it

suggested tO has at times been misunderstood; and until the decision of the

remove
ambiguity.

Suggestion

Privy Council in Barendra Kumar Ghose! cleared the whole
ground, there was considerable difference of opinion regarding
its meaning. The Privy Council view has been accepted by the
Supreme Court so that about the meaning of section 34, there is
now no doubt. It is, however, desirable that the ambiguity felt
in the language of the section should be removed. At present,
the section runs thus:—

“34. When a criminal act is done by several persons
furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such
persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were
done by him alone.”

Stephen J. of the Calcutta High Court, in Emperor v. Nirmal
Kanti Roy?, found difficulty in regard to the true meaning of the
phrase “criminal act done by several persons”; and although,
in that case, two men, obviously acting in concert, had fired on
a policeman, one hitting and killing him, and the other failing to
hit him at all, the learned Judge directed the acquittal of the latter,
holding that the criminal act, i.c., murder, was done by one man
alone, and not by several persons. This view was overruled by
the Privy Council?, In order to make the meaning easier to
understand, we suggest the following re-draft of the section:—

“34, Acts done by several persons in furtherance of
common intention —Where two or more persons, with a com-
mon intention to commit a criminal act, do any acts in fur-
therance of such common intention, each of them is liable for
the criminal act done as if it were done by him alone.”

2.63. One other suggestion in this connection needs to be
considered. It will be noticed that section 34 is attracted only
if several persons are acting in furtherance of a common intention.
The suggestion is that such common intention is not easy to
prove, and that the law regarding vicarious liability should be
further tightened to make it correspond to section 149, which
applies in case of an unlawful assembly and makes the prosecution
of a common object the test of vicarious liability. We do not,
however, think it wise to extend the rule applicable to the mem-
bers of an unlawful assembly, to every person. A “shared
inteation” to commit a crime should, we think, remain the basis
of liability in ordinary cases. There is, we feel, considerable
difference between the furtherance of a “common intention”
mentioned in section 34 and the pursuit of a “common object”
mentioned in section 149, and a possible difficulty in proving one
or the other need not demolish the distinction.

1, Barendra Kumar Ghose, AR. 1925 ९.८. 1.
2. Emperor ४, Nifmal Kanti Roy, \.L.R. 41 Cal. 1072.
3. Barendra Kumar Ghose, ALR. 1925 ९.८. 1.


37

2.64. Section 35 deals with a situation where an offence
requires a particular criminal intention or knowledge and is
committed by several persons. Each of them who joins the act
with such knowledge or intention is liable in the same way as
if it were done by him alone with that intention or knowledge.
This is complementary to the main rule in section 34, and the
two have to be read together. There is no need to clarify the
position further, and we are suggesting only a smail verbal altera-
tion in the section’, namely, for the words “‘several persons”
the words “two or more persons” may be substituted.

2.65. Section 36, again, says what is plain common sense:
if the causing of any effect by an act or an omission is an offence,
the causing of the same effect partly by an act and partly by an
omission would also be an offence. It was, perhaps, unnecessary
to put such a proposition in the Code itself; but, since it is there,
we do not think we should now delete it.

2.66. Section 37 provides that when several acts are done so
as to result together in the commission of an offence, the doing
of any one of them with an intention to co-operate in the offence
(which may not be the same as an intention common to ail),
makes the actor liable to be punished for the commission of the
offence, while section 38 provides “that where several persons
are concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may
be guilty of different offences”. These provisions have presented
no difficulty in actual working, and need not be disturbed.

2.67. No amendment is required in section 39 which defines
the expression “voluntarily”.

2.68. The three clauses of section 40 give three different
definitions of the expression “offence”. The first clause provides
that except in the chapters and sections mentioned in clauses 2
and 3 the word offence denotes “a thing made punishable by
the Code”. According to clause 2, in chapters TV and VA and
also in some 34 sections enumerated therein, the word offence
denotes “a thing punishable under the Code or any special or
local law”. Clause 3 lays down that, in the eight sections men-
tioned therein, the word “offence” has “the same meaning when
the thing punishable under the special or local law is punishable
under such Jaw with imprisonment for a term of six months or
upwards whether with or without fine.”

It appears to us that the present definition is rather awkward
and is not conducive to either clarity or convenience. When-
ever a question arises as to the meaning of the word “offence”
appearing in a particular section of the Code, one has to go back
to section 40 and wade through the clauses to find out where the

Section 35

Section 36.

Sections 37
and 38.

Section 39-—
“Volunta-
rily”,,

Section 40-—~
“offence”.

1. Cf. section 34 as proposed to be amended in paragraph 2.62 above.


38

section in question is mentioned. We feel that the simple defini-
tion of the word “offence” in the General Clauses Act* should
be sufficient for the Code. If the word “offence” occuring in a
particular section of the Code is intended to have a different
meaning, the matter may be dealt with suitably in that particular

section.*
“Capital 2.69. The Code refers in several places? to “offences punish-
offence”. able with death or imprisonment for life”, the obvious intention
being to cover only those offences for which death is either the
only punishment prescribed or at least one of the punishments
permissible under the law. Though the expression is not in-
tended to cover an offence for which one of the alternative punish-
ments provided is imprisonment for life (e.g., the offence of
sedition under section 124A), it is possible to argue that it does.
Such an interpretation has been accepted by the Court in regard
to section 497(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure where this
expression occurs. We therefore propose to add in the Penal
Code a definition of “capital offence” as meaning any offence
for which death is the only punishment, or one of the punishments,
provided by law and use this expression instead of the longer and
ambiguous phrase “offences punishable with death or imprison-
ment for life” in the relevant sections.
Sections al 2.70. Section 41 and 42, which define the expressions “special
and की Jaw” and “local law”, respectively, do not require any modi-
tae ‘and fication,
regal
alan Be 2.71. Section 43 defines the expressions “illegal” and “legally
“itegal” bound” as follows :-—
and legally
bound. “The word ‘illegal’ is applicable to everything which is
an offence, or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes
ground for a civil action: and a person is said to be ‘legally
bound to do’ whatever it is illegal in him to omit”.
According to the section a person is legally bound to do only what
is “illegal” in him to omit and what is “illegal” is by definition
what is an offence, or what is prohibited or what is actionable
under civil law. The definitions are, as it were, in a circle and
have led to difficulties.
Privy 2.72, In a case* which went up to the Privy Council, the
Council question whether a person failing to furnish information required

by a Wakf Committee under section 3 of the Mussalman Wakf

व, Genera Clauses Act, 1897, section 3(38):— |
offence’ shall mean any act or omission made punishable by any law for the
time being in force.

2. See, for instance, sections 73 and 90.
3. See, for instance, sections 115, 118, 1208, 388, 389, 506.
4, Ali Mohtemed v. Emp. ALR. 1945 B.C. 147.


39

Act, 1923, (as amended in Bombay) could be proceeded against
in the High Court for contempt under the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1926. The objection taken was that, under section 2(3)
of the latter Act, the High Court couid not take cognizance of the
contempt of a subordinate court, where such contempt is an
offence punishable under the Indian Penal Code. It was argued,
that the failure to furnish the information in question was an
offence under section 176, Indian Penal Code. This argument
was rejected by the Privy Council on the following chain of
reasoning :-—

(i) section 176 applies only where a person is “legaily
bound” to furnish information;

(i) 8 person is “legally bound” to do only what is
“Illegal” for him to omit;

Gii) it is “iflegal” for a person to omit that which is an
“offence”; and

(iv) an “offence” in section 43 is only that which is
punishable under the Indian Penal Code.

It was therefore held that section 176 applied only to a failure
which is an offence under some section of the Indian Penal Code
and not an offence under the Wakf Act.

“If no other section of the Penal Code dealt with the matter,
then, one must conclude that the particular crime, though punish-
able under some other enactment, is not punishable under the
Code, and would not fall under section 176. Therefore, the High
Court was not prohibited from dealing with it under the Con-
tempt of Courts Act.”

Jn other words the Privy Council was of the view, that, in
order to take action under the Penal Code against a person
for not having done something he is “legally bound to do”, it
is necessary to show that the omission to do that thing amounts
to an offence and further such “offence” should come within the
definition of that expression in the Penal Code.

2.73. Our recommendation to omit the definition of the
expression “offence” in the Penal Code, whereby the wider
definition of the word in the General Clauses Act will come into
operation, will obviate the difficulty pointed out by the Privy
Council in taking action under the Code for “offences” under
other Acts. However, difficulties would still arise if the omis-
sion to do what is enjoined by law is not made an offence under
the particular Act in question. In other words, under the pre-
sent definition of the term “legaliy bound”, unless a law which
enjoins a person to do a particular thing also lays down, in so
many words, that the person shall not omit to do that thing,
then the person cannot be considered “legally bound” to do
that thing.

Amend-
ment
Tecom-
mended.


Sections
44 to 47.

Sections 48
10 50
omitted.

Section 51--
“oath”.

epee

40

The Law Commission had occasion to consider the matter
in connection with the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952, and a
provision by way of clarification was recommended to be added
to section 5 of that Act.1 The matter, however, is of wider
importance as similar difficulties may arise in respect of provisions
in other laws.

We therefore recommend that the definition of the expres-
sion “legally bound” be widened so that it covers its primary
significance of being bound by law to do a thing. Section 43
may be revised as follows :—

“43, (1) A thing is illegal if it is an offence, or is prohi-
bited by law, or furnishes ground for a civil action.

(2) A person is legally bound to do a thing, when
he is bound by law to do that thing, or when it is illegal in
him to omit to do that thing”.

2.74. No change is needed in sections 44 to 47 which define
the expressions “injury”, “life”, “death” and “animal”.

2.75. The words “‘vessel”, “year”, “month” and “section”
are defined in the General Clauses Act? and the definitions can
well apply where the words are used in the Code. Sections
48, 49 and 50 are accordingly unnecessary and may be omitted.

2.76. Section $1 defines “‘oath” as including ‘‘a solemn
affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration
required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant
‘or to be used for the purpose of proof whether before a Court
of Justice or not”. So far as solemn affirmations are concerned,
the definition? in the General Clauses Act is sufficient to cover
them. The second part of section 51 relating to various decla-
rations does not seem to be appropriate or necessary. Most
of the sections of the Code (sections 21, 178 and 181) where the
expression “‘oath” occurs, use it in the context of the adminis-
tration of the oath by a Court or public servant, and this part of
the definition is hardly applicable to those sections. Even as
regards section 191 which punishes false statements made on

- “oath”, this part of the definition relating to declarations is not
needed, as there are, in various special laws* provisions for
punishing false statement in declarations. Further, there is a
provision in section 199 of the Code which specifically covers

"ath Report, pp. 18, 24, 28.
General Clauses Act, 1897, section 3, clauses (63), (66), (35) and (54) respectively.
"Section 3(37), Generat Clauses Act, 1897, is quoted below :—

“(37) oath shall inctude affirmation and declaration in the case of persons by

Taw allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing;”

4. See, for instance, section 45 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, section 277 of the Income+
tax Act, 1961 and section 1261) of the Passport Act, 1967.


41

false statements in statutory declarations. We consider that
this definition of “oath” in the General Clauses Act is sufficient
and that section 51 may, therefore, be omitted.

2.77. Section 52 defines the expression “good faith” as fol-
lows :-—

“Nothing is said to be done or believed in ‘good faith’
which is done or believed without due care and attention”.

The definition of “good faith” in the General Clauses Act is
very different. For purposes of laws other than the Indian
Penal Code, ‘ta thing shall be deemed to be done in ‘good faith’
where it is in fact done honestly, whether it is done negligently
or not’. When the two definitions are viewed in juxtaposition,
it may appear that just as honesty of purpose alone is sufficient
to make an act bona fide under other laws, due care and attention
are necessary and sufficient under the Penal Code. The two
definitions seem to approach the question from two different
standpoints and to have nothing in common between them.
As one writer has expressed it “while the general definition con-
dones negligence and carelessness, if only there was honesty,
the Code regards honesty as immaterial, and the presence of care
and attention as all in all”!

2.78. There is also an observation by the Supreme Court
which may appear to support this view. In a case of defama-
tion, the High Court of Punjab, rejecting the plea of good faith
put forward by the accused, held? :—

“Good faith therefore implies, not only an upright mental
attitude and clear conscience of a person, but also the doing
of an act showing that ordinary prudence has been exercised
according to the standards of a reasonable person. ‘Good
faith’ contemplates an honest effort to ‘ascertain the facts
upon which exercise of the power must rest. It must, there-
fore, be summed as an honest determination from ascertained
facts. ‘Good faith’ preciudes pretence or deceit and also
negligence and recklessness. A lack of diligence, which an
honest man of ordinary prudence is accustomed to exercise,
is, in law, a want of good faith.”

On appeal, the Supreme Court took a different view on the
facts, and set aside the conviction. Though the judgment did
not turn onthe presence or absence of honesty of purpose, it
contains the observation that “the element of honesty which is
introduced by the definition prescribed by the General Clauses
Act is not introduced by the definition of the Code and we are

Section $2—
“good faith”
—definition
in the
General
Clauses
Act.

Is honesty
of purpose
immaterial?

1. Gour, Penal Code (1961) Vol. 1, page 193.
2. Harbajan Singh v, State of Punjab, ALR. 1961 Punjab 215.


View taken
by the Privy
Council.

Amendment
proposed.

Section
52:

“harbour”.

42

governed by the definition prescribed by section 52 of the Code”.
By this observation, the Supreme Court did not, we feel sure,
intend to lay down a tule different from what was enunciated in
the High Court as to the meaning of “good faith”. it only
wished to point out that the Code does not express the require-
ment of honesty. .

It appears to us that the definition in the Code is merely
emphasising the need for care and attention while not excluding
the need for honesty of purpose, since honesty is implicit in the
concept of good faith. | It is difficult to imagine how a dishonest
act can be said to be done in “good faith”. The Code stresses
the aspect of care and attention, because under the Code the
fact that an act was done in good faith constitutes a defence either
generally as regards criminal liability or specifically as regards
particular offences. Even an act done with an honest purpose
will, if done rashty and negligently, amount to an offence.

2.79. The view that honesty is implicit in the idea of good
faith receives support from a number of reported decisions.
In a case where section 499, ninth exception, was at issue, the
Privy Council observed :—

setae it was accordingly this question, and this ques-
tion only, which the jury charged by Sir Charles Fox had to
try, namely, whether in publishing the libels admitted to
be false, Mr. Arnold did so in good faith because he believed
them to be truc, having given due care and attention to seeing
that they were so. If the jury were satisfied that he did give
that due care and attention and that he acted in good faith,
then the exception formed a good defence, and the accused
would be found not guilty.”

2.80. It is therefore quite clear that the definition in the Code
does not intend to exclude hortesty. However, in view of the
possibility of the observation by the Supreme Court noted earlier
being taken as an expression of a different view of the matter, we
feel that it would be better to make the definition more explicit.

We therefore recommend that section 52 may be revised
as below :—

“$2. Good faith.—‘‘A thing is said to be done or believ-
ed in good faith when it is done or believed honestly and with
due care and attention”.

2.81. Section 52A defines the expression “harbour”, as
fotlows:—

“Except in section 157, and in section 130 in the case in
which the harbour is given by the wife or husband of the per-
son harboured, the word ‘harbour’, includes the supplying a

“1 Harbajan Singh ५. State of Punjab (A965) S.CR. 235, 243.


43

Person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammuni-
tion or means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any
means, whether of the same kind, as those enumerated in this
section or not, to evade apprehension.”

Though the expression occurs only in six sections of the Code
(sections 130, 136, 157, 212, 216and 216A), the definition does
not apply to all of them. As is indicated by the opening por-
tion, it does not apply to section 157, and in regard to section
130, it is inapplicable in certain cases. In these two contexts,
the meaning to be assigned to the expression “harbour” would
apparently be the dictionary meaning, ie. “to provide for, to
shelter, to lodge, to entertain.”

Now, if the meaning to be assigned to the expression in sec-
tions 130 and 157 is its dictionary or non-statutory meanings,
then, it would be better to provide for it in those two sections
rather than make a clumsy exception in the general definition.
Section 52A may be revised as foilows:—~

“524. Harbouring.—-The expression ‘harbouring’ means
giving shelter to a person, and includes supplying a person
with food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means of conveyance, or assisting a person in any manner te
evade apprehension.”

2.82. It will be noticed that this chapter of general explana- Revision
tions is lacking in systematic arrangement. Simple definitions Snel
of words like “animal”, “injury”, “life”, “‘man” etc., are inter- recom.
spersed between elaborate explanations of basic concepts of the mended.
criminal law. There does not seemto be any logical, or even
alphabetical, order in setting them down. With the applica-
tion of the Generat Clauses Act for the interpretation of the
Code and the consequent omission of a number of sections, ,
the chapter will have even more gaps and less orderliness than it
has at present. We, therefore, recommend a revised and re-
arranged Chapter 2 in which the amendments proposed by us
in particular sections have been incorporated and other formal
or verbal changes, not affecting the substance, have also been
made,}

1, See the proposed draft of the Indian Penat Code (Amendment) Bill, clause 5.


Existing
punish-
ments
under the
Code.

Certain
additional
punish-
ments
consi-
dered.

CHAPTER 3
PUNISHMENT

3.1. The punishments to which an offender is liable under
the Code, as enumerated in section 53, affect his life, liberty or
property. The corporal punishment of whipping, which was
first added and regulated by the Whipping Act of 1864 (repealed
and replaced by the Whipping Act of 1909), was abolished in
1955. Apart from the extreme sentence of death which is per-
missible under very few sections, the punishments provided’ in
the Code either deprive the offender of his liberty or of his property
or both. Loss of liberty may take the form of imprisonment for
life or for a specified term; and the latter may be either rigorous,
that is, with hard labour, or simple, that is, without compulsory
labour of any sort. Loss of property may be caused either by
directing forfeiture to the State of specific property of the offender
or by ordering him to pay a specified sum as fine.

3.2. These punishments have been in vogue everywhere from
ancient times and have come to be recognised as the normal
methods available for dealing with criminals. While legal
systems based on, or deriving from, English common law
and jurisprudence have not adopted any other forms of punish-
ments, we found that the penal codes of some European coun-
tries, particularly that of Russia, provided for certain additional
punishments which appeared to be worth considering. We
accordingly included in our Questionnaire a question in the
following terms :—

“The punishments provided in the Code are death,
imprisonment for life, rigorous and simple imprisonment,
forfeiture of property and fine. Do you consider it necessary
or desirable to add any other punishments, e.g.,

banishment for a term to a specified locality
thin India;

5) cxternment for a term from a specified locality;
(०) corrective labour; .

(४) imposition of a duty to make amends to the vic-
tim by repairing the damage done by the offence;
(e) publication of name of the offender and details
of the offence and sentence;
(f) confiscation,
“In respect of what offence or types of offences would
such punishments be appropriate?”
44



45

As was to be expected, interesting, but widely differing, views
ate expressed by the Judges, lawyers and others consulted by
us.

3.3, Banishment or exile from the king’s realm was a recog:
nised punishment in ancient and mediaeval times, mainly for the
king’s enemies and political offenders of a certain status. In
modern conditions, however, it can hardiy be contemplated as
@ judicial sentence following conviction for a crime, however
serious that crime may be. It might indeed be regarded as a
serious violation of a human right to provide by law for the
banishment of a citizen from the country even as a punishment
for a serious crime. The question was therefore limited to the
desirability of punishing an offender with banishment for a
certain term to a specified locality within India.

3.4. Such a punishment is provided for in the U.S.S.R.
under the name of exile. According to article 25 of the Russian
Penal Code, ‘exile shall consist in the removal of a convicted
person from the place of his residence, with obligatory settlement
in a certain locality. It may be assigned as a supplementary
punishment for a term of two to five years, only in instances
specially indicated in the Penal Code. The organisation of work
of exiles shall be the responsibility of executive committees of
jJocal Soviets of working people’s deputies. The procedure,
places and conditions for serving exile shall be established by
legislation of the U.S.S.R.

3.5. The suggestion did not find favour in any quarter. From
the practical point of view, it almost necessarily involves the
establishment of a penal settlement in each State, somewhat
similar to the settlement in the Andaman Islands where convicts
sentenced to transportation for life used to be sent. The running
of such settlements and keeping effective control over the convict
banished thereto will give tise to difficult problems of adminis-
tration. If the control were to be strict, the settlements would
degenerate into concentration camps. As an alternative to
long-term imprisonment, banishment does not appear to have
any appreciable advantage and cannot be recommended.

3.6. Another possible punishment which we considered was
externment of the offender for a term from a specified locality.
The underlying idea was that, if the offender was dissociated
from his surrounding, his capacity for committing crimes of a
particular type would be reduced. For instance, where the crime
1s one which is facilitated by the bad influence which the crimi-
nal exercises over the community in an area, it might be useful
to keep him out of that area for a specified period. Again, for
offences under section 188 of the Code constituted by a violation
of an order under section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
and similar offences against the public tranquility, an order
of externment might be a more suitable and effective punishment
than a sentence of imprisonment for a short period.

Banish-
ment.

The
Russian.
scheme.

Banish-
ment
not
recom:
mended,

Extern-
ment.


Divided
opinion.

Objections
to the
suggestion.

Corrective
labour.

System in
force in
USSR.

46

3.7, We found opinion on the subject more or less equally
divided. Executive authorities were generally inclined in favour
of such a punishment. The Bombay Act empowers the Com-
missioner of Police in the City of Bombay to pass externment
orders against criminals as an executive measure, subject to review
by the courts. While the State Government authorities thought
this was a uscful piece of legislation for keeping the goonda

elements of the city under control, other expressed a contrary”

view doubting it efficiency and stressing the scope it affords
for harassment and corruption.

3.8. We think there are serious and basic objections to
prescribing externment as a form of judicial punishment, whether
in addition to, or in lieu of, imprisonment for a term. If extern-
ment is effectively enforced, it is bound to be harsh on the offen-
der as weil as his dependants. On being driven away from his
normal environment, he will naturally find it difficult to rehabi-
litate himself and find honest means of livelihood. If, as is
likely, it results in his living apart from his family, the psycho-
logical effect on him will hardly be towards reformation and
turning over a new leaf. As regards the non-criminal, agitational
type of offender who is bent on breaking lawfully promulgated
order is for an ulterior object, the exterament order is more likely
to be flouted than obeyed. On the whole, we think that the dis-
advantages and objections to this form of punishment are serious,
and are unable to recommend its inclusion in the Penal Code.?

3.9. A current development in penology is the emphasis on
reformation and rehabilitation of the offender instead of retri-
bution. This has led to an increasing use of non-custodial
measures of punishment as contrasted with imprisonment of
the traditional pattern. One form is known as corrective labour,
the main object being to make the convict work at his own
place or at a work-centre outside the ordinary prison and thereby
avoid the necessary evils of a prison life.

3.10. This mode of punishment has been in force in the
US.S.R. for a long time. !deologically, it is traceable to the
teachings of Lenin. According to Conrad’s Crime and its
Correction,? Lenin’s “Summary of the Essence of the Section
Concerning Punishments of the Party Programme of 1919
formulated four basic points :—

(i) The administration of criminal justice should rely
on the principle of the conditional discharge of the offender,

(ii) Courts should express the attitude of society towards
crime and the criminal through the exercise of social repri-
mand,

1. This is the view of the majority. Shri R. L. Narasimham has given a separate note

on the subject.
2, Conrad, Crime and its Correction, (1965) page 157.


47

(मा) Punishment should be without deprivation of liberty,
as, for example, corrective labour on special public projects.

{iv) Prisons should be transformed into educational
institutions in which offenders are educated rather than
isolated.

These are impeccable ideals which can hardly be improved
upon by any penal law reformer. The working of a corrective
Jabour system in U.S.S.R. has been described? thus :—

“Corrective labour is claimed to be one of the most
typical penalties in Soviet law. Its essential feature is that
the offender is not deprived of his liberty. A corrective labour
sentence is served cither at the place of the offender's ordinary
work, or in a special corrective labour institution in the locality
where the offender is domiciled. The court decides which
of these two alternatives will be applied. In both cases, a part
ranging from five to twenty per cent is withheld from the
“offender's salary.” It is stressed, however, by Soviet authors
that corrective labour should not be equated with a fine.
The essential punishment is the work that has to be done;
further, a fine is a fixed sum, while the amount of money
withheld from one’s salary alters according to his salary.

“Corrective labour is the standard penalty in most cases
where the seriousness of the offence does not require the
offender to be isolated from society. One year is the
longest period for which it can be imposed; one month is the
minimum.

“The lighter form of corrective labour is that under which
the offender continues working at the same place as at the
time of his sentence. The other form of corrective labour
consists in assigning work to him in the locality where he lives;
this will usually mean heavy physical work; the place where
the offender is put to work must be within reach of his living
quarters, because....the essential feature of corrective
labour is that the offender is not deprived of his liberty and
can go home after he has done his day’s work. When the
court bas sentenced a person to corrective labour in a special
corrective “Jabour institution, the selection of the institution
rests with the corrective labour inspectorate, a branch of
the Ministry of Internal Affairs.”

To compiete the picture from the legislative angle, we repro-
duce here articles 27 and 28 of the Criminal Code of the
R.S. F.S.R. 1960 :-—

“Article 27—Correctional tasks without deprivation of
Sreedom.

1. 54 mai (Ed.), Law in Eastern Europe, (1964), pages 211, 212.


Outline of
separate
legislation
recommen-
ded.

48

Correctional tasks without deprivation of freedom
shall be assigned for a term of one month to one year and
shail be served, in accordance with the judgment of the court,
either at the place of work of the convicted Person or in any
other piace determined by the agencies in charge of appl-
cation of correctional tasks, but in the convicted person’s
district of residence.

Deductions from the wages of a person condemned
to correctional tasks without deprivation of freedom shall
be made at a rate established by the judgment of the court
within the limits of five to twenty per cent of the wages,
and shall be transferred to the State.

“For persons deemed incapable of working, a court
may replace correctional tasks by a fine, social censure, or
imposition of the duty to make amends for the harm caused.

The time of serving correctional tasks, including time
served at the place of work of the convicted person, shall
not be counted in job seniority.

If a convicted person serves correctional tasks under
conditions of conscientious work and exemplary conduct,
the court may, after the convicted person has served such
punishment, upon petition of a social organisation or collective
working people, include the time of serving correctional
tasks in his job seniority.

Article 28—Consequences of evasion of correctiona!
tasks.

In the event that a person evades serving correctional
tasks at the place of work, the court may replace the sentence
by correctional tasks at places determined by agencies in
charge of application of such punishment. In the event of
evasion of correctional tasks in the places determined by
the designated agencies, the court may “replace the sentence
by deprivation of freedom, with every three days of the un-
served term of correctional tasks to be replaced by one day
of deprivation of freedom.”

3.11. While we consider that this system with the necessary
modifications should be adopted and tried, we do not suggest
any textual amendment of the Code for implementing it straight-
away, as we are conscious that it cannot be worked without
a host of provisions dealing with various administrative matters.
Here we indicate, very broadly, the features of the punishment
which we have in mind, and recommend that appropriate legis-

lation should be undertaken separately on the subject :-—

(1) Corrective labour, without deprivation of freedom,
is intended to be a substitute for short term imprisonment,
so that the defects of jail administration, like contamination
by association with hardened criminals, may be avoided,


49

{2) The essence of the punishment will be working on
reduced wages at a public work centre.

(3) The punishment will be awarded by the court, and
not by the executive government or by prison authorities.

(4) This will be different from “work-release” (as
employed in the U.S.A.) or “semi-liberte” {as in force in
France or Belgium), under which the prisoner is released
from confinement during specified hours of the day, usually
for the purpose of private employment.’ He returns to
confinement during non-working hours. It is ६ mode ef
punishment for persons convicted of minor offences and
sentenced to short-term imprisonment. Used as a sentencing
procedure, work-release occupies a position somewhere
between probation and full-time incarceration. The correc-
tive labour system, however, involves no deprivation of free-
dom, whether total or partial.

(5) The punishment of corrective labour will be primarily
suitable for persons belonging to the labouring classes.

(6) Offences punishable with death, imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding 7 years should be
excluded from this punishment.

(7) The maximum period of corrective labour will be
one year and the minimum one month.

(8) There will be no deprivation of freedom. Work
shall be assigned in accordance with the judgment of
the court, either at the place of work of the convicted person,
or in any place determined by the agencies in charge of
administration of the 18७, but, as far as possible, in the
convicted person’s district of residence.

(9) Deductions from the wages of the person sentenced
to corrective labour will be made at a rate laid down by the
judgment of the court and credited to the State. The rate
may be between 5% and 20% of the wages.

(10) If the convicted person evades correctional labour
at the assigned place of work, then the court may direct him
to undergo corrective labour at places determined by the
agencies in charge of administration of this punishment,
and if he evades this also, then the court may punish him with
imprisonment in default.

"Stanley Group. “Work Release for short-term Offenders in France and the United
States” (July, 1968) 10 Canadian Journal of Corrections, No. 3, page 490.

3M of Law;71—S.


50

(li) The period of imprisonment in default will be so
calculated that for every three days of the unserved term of
corrective 8900, there shall be not more than one day of
imprisonment in default. The actual period will be fixed
by the court on an application made to it after disobedience
by the convict.?

Compen- 3.12. Reparation to the victim of an offence has been receiving
sation _ increased attention in recent times. {n part, this is due to
for injury a realisation that mere punishment of the offender, though

it may exhaust the primary function of the criminal law,
is not total fulfilment of the role of the law. It has been
observed? :—

“The injured party is not always adequately served by
civil courts, and in the criminal law he often takes a back
seat, Having given his evidence, he stands aside and watches
the offended majesty of public justice being satisfied by
conviction and sentence. He himself is fortunate if he gets
compensation, or even his expenses. Often, he must have
recourse to the civil courts to reclaim his property, and, not
infrequently, may have suffered a loss or injury for which he
cannot be recompensed.”

At one time in the evolution of criminal jurisprudence, the
idea of reparation of the victim of the wrong occupied a major
place in most legal systems. The punitive or criminal aspect
of the wrong gradually claimed recognition and, for some
time, the two were mixed or combined in the same proceedings.
Later, the civil or reparation aspect became subordinate, and the
criminal courts concerned themselves almost wholly with the
punitive aspect. In recent times, however, the compensation
aspect is regaining its importance, not of course as the principal
aim of criminal proceedings, but as a recognised ancillary thereto.

Three 3.13. Three patterns of compensating the victim of a crime

patterns can be noted. The State may take upon itself this responsibility

compen- in defined classes of cases. Secondly, the offender can be

sation. sentenced to pay a fine by way of punishment for the offence and,
out of that fine, compensation can be awarded to the victim.
Thirdly, the court trying the offender can, in addition to punish-
ing him according to law, direct him to pay compensation to the
victim of the crime, or otherwise make amends by repairing
the damage done by the offence.

1. Legislation on the lines indicated above could be undertaken either by the Centre under
entry 1 (Criminal Law) of the Concurrent List or by the States under entry 4, (Prisons,
seformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a like nature and persons
detained therein) on the State List.

2. Note “Crim: and Punishment—Reparation to the Victim”, (1959) 227 Law Times
117.


SE

3.14. The question whether this direct method of compen- Opiaion
sating the victim of a crime should be adopted and provided for है? favour
in the Penal Code was included in the questionnaire. Objection 4, PPP”
to this suggestion was voiced by a number of persons consulted, .
principally on the apprehension that it might convert the criminal
trial into a protracted inquiry into matters of a civit nature.

There was however a large body of opinion in favour of the pro-
posal.

3.15. We notice that in some European countries provision Provision
is made for payment of compensation to the victim of the crime or
in the course of the criminal proceedings. In France, they पक्का
can be combined with the criminal prosecution, a claim— in other
actione civile—by the injured party—partie civile—for compen- legal
sation!. The guiding principle of the actione civile is that, as systems,
far as possible, the injured party should be put back into the
position which he occupied before the offence took place.
Damages are awarded to cover not only the loss actually sustained,
but also potential loss or loss of profit consequential upon the
injury. The damages must not, however, exceed the loss which
they are designed to repair. Remedies other than the award
of damages are also envisaged, such as the restitution of stolen
property, closing of the premises where 2 trade has been carried
on illegally, advertising the findings of the Court in suitable
newspapers at the expense of the accused, and payment of the
costs of the prosecution. While the actione civile can be brought
only by the injured party, other persons concerned besides the
accused, may be joined as defendants. 11 has been stated that
a certain measure of immediate personal interest in setting the
machinery of criminal law in motion can supplement the in-
adequacy of public action, that civil proceedings are costly com-
pared with the criminal prosecution, and that to allow the victim
to intervene is an expedient procedure?.

Under the German Code of Criminal Procedure}, the injured
person or his heir may, in the criminal proceedings, assert against
the accused a claim ‘involving property rights arising out of the
offence’. To facilitate the filing of such claim, the law provides
that the injured party should be notified of the filing of the crimi-
nal proceedings. The claim can be made by oral or written
motion and has the same effect as bringing an action in civil
litigation. The injured party-or his representative is entitled
to participate in the main trial.

In Russia, one of the punishments prescribed in the Criminal
Code is ‘imposition of the duty to make amends for the harm

1. French Code of Criminal Procedure, articles 2, 3, 85 to 91, 114 to 121, 371 to 375.

2. Views of French Commentator Vabres, Traite de troit, Criminal et de Legislation, Penal
Comparee, 3rd ed. paras. 1091, 1128, referred to by Howard in (1958) 21 Modern Law
Review 387.

3, Sections 403 to 406a, German Code of Criminal Procedure.


Not
suitable
for our
courts.

Payments
of com-
pensation
out of -
fine.

52

caused?’ Execution of this duty consists in (i) direct elimination,
by one’sown resources, of the harm caused, or (ii)) compensation,
with one’s own means, for material loss, or (iii) a public apology
before the victim or before members of the collective in a‘form
prescribed by the court. Punishment in the first form may be
assigned when the court considers that the offender is capable
of making amends in the indicated manner. Punishment
in the second form may be assigned if the loss cansed does not
exceed one hundred rubles. Punishment in the third form may
be assigned: if there has been an infringement of personal inte~
tity or dignity or a violation of the rules of socialist communal
life not causing material loss. If the convicted person fails to
carry out the court's order within the specified period, the court
may replace this punishment by correctional tasks, or a fine,
or dismissal from office, or social censure?.

3.16. We do not think that any such elaborate procedure as
is provided in France or Germany would be suitable for our
criminal courts. It would be unwise to create a legal right in
the person or persons injured by the offence to join in the criminal
proceedings from the beginning as a regular third party. This
would only lead to a mixing up of civil and criminal procedures
which, in our legal system, ate kept separate, a confusion of
issues and a prolongation of the trial. The Russian modef
might be workable, but its field of application is obviously
mited to minor offences where the harm done, or damage caused,
is small. Further, it is not essentially different from compen-
sating the victim of the offence out of the fine to which the offen-
der could be sentenced under our Jaw.

3.17, We have a fairly comp rehensive provision for payment
of compensation to the injured party under section 545 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. {t is regrettable that our courts
do not exercise their salutary powers under this section as freely
and liberally as could be desired. The section has, no doubt,
its limitations. Its application depends, in the first instance,
on whether the court considers a substantial fine proper punish-
ment for the offence. In the more serious cases, the court may
think that a heavy fine in addition to imprisonment for a long
term is not justifiable, especially when the public prosecutor
ignores the plight of the victim of the offence and does not press
for compensation on his behalf. Another limitation stems from
the fact that the magistrate’s power to impose a fine is itself
limited. At present, a magistrate of the first class cannot impose
a fine exceeding two thousand rupees and a Magistrate of the
second class cannot impose a fine exceeding five hundred rupees.
Farther, under section 545(1)(b), the court has to be satisfied that
substantial compensation is recoverable in a civil court by the
person to whom loss or injury has been caused by the offence.
In our last Report on the Criminal Procedure Code, we have

1. RSFSR Criminal Code (1980), article 21.

2. Ibid., article 32.



53

fecommended? that the word substantial” should he omitted
ftom this section, and also that the maximum fine imposable
by magistrates of the first class should be increased to five
thousand rupees and the maximum fine imposable by magistrates
of the second class should be increased to one thousand rupees,?
When the law is amended as suggested by the Commission and
a liberal use of section 545 of the Criminal Procedure Code is
made by the courts, it would, in our opinion, go a long ‘way to
meet the complaint that the victim of the offence is ignored by
the criminal courts and, if he wishes to recover damages, he has
necessarily to resort to a protracted and costly civil Htigation.

3.18. We do not see any great advantage in providing an
additional punishment on the Russian model. Whether it is
called “duty to make amends for the harm caused”, or “payment
of compensation to the victim of the offence”, the object of the
punishment is much the same as is now achieved (or can be
achieved) under section 545 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
It is doubtful whether an order of the sentencing court to make
amends in kind (“directly eliminate, by one’s own resources, the
harm caused”, as the Russian Code puts it) will be easy to enforce
or otherwise satisfactory from the point of view of the victim
of the offence. There is no material difference between the court
sentencing the offender to pay a certain sum as compensation
for loss or injury caused. and the court sentencing him to a fine
and simultaneously ordering that the whole or a specified part
of the fine shall be paid to the victim of the offence by way of
such compensation. It may be true that the latter often finds the
Procedure for obtaining this amount from the court, after the
fine has been realised, long drawn, expensive and harassing, but
he will probably find an order of the court directing the offender
to pay up compensation equally difficult to execute. We are,
therefore. unable to recommend this additional Punishment for
specific mention and inclusion in the Penal Code.3

3.19. We think, however, that the Penal Code should give
Prominence to this aspect of compensating the victim of the
offence out of the fine imposed on the offender. At present the
legal provision in this regard is tucked away in the last. mis-
cellaneous chapter of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It seems
to us that, as a substantive power of the trial court, it deserves
to be mentioned specifically in the Penal Code chapter on punish-
ments along with the provisions relating to fines. We recom-
mend the insertion of the following section immediately before
section 63 of the Penal Code :—

: “62. Order to pay compensation out of fine to victim
of offence —Whenever a person is convicted of an offence

Additional
punish-
ment of
“duty to
make
amends””
not re-
commen-
ded.

Substan-
tive
provision
for pay-
ment of
compen:
sation out
of fine
Fecom-
mended.’

“1. dist Report, Vol. I, paragraph 46.12 and paragraph 3.12.

2. These recommendations have been accepted vide clauses 31 and 365 of the Code of

Criminal Procedure Bill, 1970 introduced im the Rajya Sabha.

3. This is the view of the majority. Shri R.L. Narasimham has given a separate note

on the subject.


54

punishable under Chapier 16, Chapter 17 “or Chapter 21
of this Code or of an abetment of such offence or of a criminal
conspiracy to commit such offence and is sentenced to a fine,
whether with or without imprisonment,

and the Court is of opinion that compensation is re-
coverable by civil Suit by any person for loss or injury caused
to him by that offence,

it shali be competent to the Court to direct by the sen-
tence that the whole or any part of the fine realised from the
offender shall be paid by way of compensation to such person
for the said loss or injury.

Explanation.—Expenses properly incurred by such per-
son in the prosecution of the case shail be deemed part of the
1055 caused to him by the offence.”

‘When this provision is made in the Penal Code. it will be necessary
suitably to modify section 545 of the ‘Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, to bring it into line with this provision. It may be pro-
vided in the modified section 545 that, in every case where the new
section 62 of the Penal Code is attracted, but the Court decides
not to make an order for payment of compensation out of the
fine, it should record its reasons.

3.20. We have mentianed above! that one of the patterns of
compensating the victim of a crime noticeable in other legal
systems is the State undertaking this responsibility in defined
classes of cases. According to traditional legal notions, the
court’s adjudication in a criminal trial is directed towards the
sanction to be applied to the offender, and except in a few isolated
cases when the law allowed the criminal courts to grant restitution,
the victim of a crime could not seek compensation in the criminal
court. The responsibility of the State ended with the prosecu~
tion and it was not to be regarded as under any legal obligation
to protect the lives and property of its citizens from criminal
depradations. Consequently, there could be no legal claim
against the State for compensation.

With the emergence of the social welfare State. these tradi-
tional notions of State immunity are undergoing rapid change.
‘The idea that the victim of the crime deserves as Touch attention

1, Paragraph 3.13, supra.


55

from the State as the criminal and that, if the State fails to pro-
tect its citizens against violence, it can legitimately be called upon
to compensate the victim, is gaining ground in western countries.?

जा England, for instance, the position was changed in 1964
when a non-statutory scheme of ex gratia payments by the State
for compensating victims of violence took effect and the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board commenced its work.

The injured victim could apply to the Board for compen-
sation in respect of personal injury if it was directly attributable
to a criminal offence, or to an arrest or attempted arrest of an
offender or suspected person, or to the prevention or intended
prevention of an offence, or to the giving of assistance to a cons-
table arresting an offender, or attempting to prevent an offence.
Thus, not only the intended victim of the offence, but also any
third party who becomes involved by being public spirited, can
claim compensation. The payment of compensation by the
Board is ex gratia, but the Board is “instructed and compelled
to make payments to all who come within the ambit of the scheme.”

Similar programmes for compensating victims of crime have
been established by law ‘in recent years in New Zealand,? and
Northern Ireiand3, and in a few States of the US.A., e.g.
California, MassachussetsS and New York®,

3.21. Another punishment, which we included in our ques- Public
tionnaire, and considered in the light of opinions expressed, was censure _
publication of the name of the offender and details of the offence pppropriate
and sentence, or briefly, public censure. There are certain antisocial
anti-social offences committed by persons belonging to the richer offences.
and more sophisticated sections of society in regard to which
this punishment would appear to be particularly appropriate.

While these offences affect a large number of people, the offen-

ders are not readily brought to book. In such cases public

censure is likely to act as a greater deterrent than fine or even

3. Reference may be made to the following articles: —

Rupert Cross, “Compensation for Victims of Violence” (1963) 49 The Listener 815;
£. L. Johnson, “Compensation for Victims of Criminal Offences”, (1964) Current
Legal Problems 144;

“Criminal Law Reform—Great Britain approves compensation programme™ (1965),
78 Harvard Law Review 1683;

Yahuda, “Criminal Injuries Compensation” (1966) 116 New Law Journal 292;
Hugh P. Price, “Compensation for victims of Crime of Violence” (Washington)
Legislative Reference Service, Library of Congress (May, 1966).

. New Zealand Public Act No, 134 of 1963.

. (Northern Ireland) Criminal Injuries to Person (Compensation) Act, 1968 (16 & 17
Eliz. 2 ०.9. :

4. Cal. Pen. Code. Art. 13.600 (1966), Cal. Welf. & Insnt’s Code art. 11211 (1966).

5. Massachussets General Laws (1968), Ch. 258A.

6. New York Executive Laws, sections 620--635, 1967 Suppl.

ey


56

imprisonment. The fear of infamy resulting from the publicity
given to their misdeeds and consequent loss of business should
deter the offenders more effectively than the usual punishments
under the Code.

Ancient 3.22. In ancient India, publi¢ censure with degradation in
Indian some form was laid dowa as a suitable punishment for certain
precedent — classes of offenders. Thus, the Narada Smriti, believed to
Saute have been composed in the sixth century A.D., prescribes for
. a Brahmin guilty of a violent crime (sahasa) that “shaving his
head, banishing him from the town, branding him on the fore-
head with a mark of the crime of which he has been convicted,
and parading him on an ass, shall be his punishment.”! Apart
from the degrading form given to the punishment which may
not be acceptable to modern notions, the underlying idea of
publicly administering social censure to the offender is worth

noting.

Modern 3.23. Quite a few penal codes of the present day provide

precedents, for the giving of publicity to the fact of conviction and sen-
tence. Thus, the Columbian Penal Code provides for “special
publication of the sentence as an accessory to penal servitude
or imprisonment”. The publication is made'in an unofficial
periodical of the township in which the offence was committed
‘or the convicted person resides. It is made at the expense of
the convicted or injured person; and if he fails to pay the cost,
it is done by proclamation.?

Social censure is one of the prescribed punishments in the
U.SS.R. According to the Russian Penal Code, “social cen-
sure shall consists in a public expression by the court of censure
of the guilty person and, if necessary, in bringing this to the
notice of the public through the press or other means.3

Indian 3.24. In India, this form of punishment has been recognised

precedents. by Parliament in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
Under section 16(2), “if any person convicted of an offence-under
this Act commits a like offence afterwards, it shall be lawful
for the court before which the second or subsequent conviction
takes place to cause the offender’s name and place of residence,
the ‘offence and the penalty imposed to be published at the offen-
der's expense in such newspapers oF In such other manner as
the court may direct”. A similar provision for publishing the
name of a defaulting assessee is made in section 287 of the In-
come Tax Act, 1961.

1 Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 33, Ch. 14, Stoka 10.

2. Columbian Penal Code, Articles 42, 52 and 54.
3. RSESR Penal Code, Artictes 219) and (33).



37

3.25. We consider that this additionat punishment will be
useful in the case of persons convicted for the second time of
any of the following offences punishable under the Penal Code:—~—

(i) offences relating to currency notes, coin and stamps
(chapter 12);

(ii) offences relating to weights and measures (chapter
(ii) adulteration of food and drugs (sections 272 to
5

(iv) extortion (sections 383 to 399);

{v) criminal misappropriation and breach of trust
(sections 403 10 409);

(vi) cheating (sections 415 to 420);

(vii offences relating to documents (chapter 18).

We recommend the addition of a new section 76A as
follows:—-

“16A, Public censure for certain offences after previous
conviction :

(1) When any person, having been convicted by a
Court in India of an offence specified in sub-section (3),
is convicted of a like offence, it shall be competent to the
Court before which the conviction takes place, “‘to cause
the offender’s name and place of residence, the offence
and the punishment imposed to be published at the
offender's expense in such newspapers or in such other
manner as the Court may direct.”

(2) The expenses of such publication shall be re-
coverable from the offender in the same manner as a fine.

(3) The offences to which subsection (1) applies are
any offences punishable under chapter 12, chapter 13,
sections 272 to 276, sections 383 to 389, sections 403
to 409, sections 415 to 420 or chapter 18 of this Code.”

3.26 Confiscation, in the sense of forfeiture to the state of
all property belonging to the criminal, was provided for in the
Indian Penal Code for a few offences. Thus, under section 124,
as originally enacted, “whoever wages war against the Queen
*** shail be punished with death or imprisonment for life, and
shall forfeit all his property’. It was further provided in sec--
tion 61 that, in such a case, “the offender shall be incapable of
acquiring any property, except for the benefit of government,
until he shall have undergone the punishment awarded or the
punishment to which it shall have been commuted, or until he
shall have been pardoned.” Then, under section 62, “whenever

New
section
TSA
recom-
mended,

Confiscation


Minimum
sentence.

Present
position
in Indian

segistation.

58

any person is convicted of an offence punishable with death,
the Court may adjudge that ali his property, movable and immo-
vable, shall be fotfeited to government.” These draconian
punishments were repealed in 1921 and, since then, forfeiture
as a punishment is limited to specific property — usually property
connected with, or acquited by means of, the crime —- and re-
tained only for three offences under the Code.?

It is of interest to find that the Code of Manu prescribed con-
fiscation (sarva-haranam) for those traders who out of cupidity
took away for export goods and animals of which the king had
a monopoly, or of which the export was prohibited. The com-
mentator Kullooka Bhatta gives elephants and horses as exam-
ples of the first category and grain during a famine as an example
of the second.?

Of the opinions expressed on the question whether this punish-
ment should be reintroduced in the code, there were not many
in favour. We are also of the view that this harsh punishment,
which will fall not only on the criminal but also on his dependent
family, is not to be commended.

3.27. We included in our questionnaire the following question: ,

“The Code lays down only the maximum punishment
for offences, and no minimum punishment except in very
few cases. Are you in favour of laying down a minimum
term of imprisonment for any offences ? If so, for what
offences?”

3.28. There are only five sections in the Penal Code which
prescribe a minimum penalty. Waging war against the state
(section 121) and murder (section 302) are punished with death
or imprisonment for life. _ Under section 303, a person commit-
ting murder while undergoing a life sentence has to be sentenced
to death. A minimum sentence of seven years imprisonment
is provided in section 397 for a dacoit or robber using a deadly
weapon, or causing or attempting to cause grievous hurd, and in
section 398 for a dacoit or robber being armed with a deadly
weapon.

But, as noticed by the Law Commission in a previous Report,
“during recent years, several enactments have been passed by the
State Legislatures or Parliament providing for minimum sen-
tences. it is true that in some of these enactments the discre-
tion of the court has not been completely fettered. Though the
section provides for a minimum sentence, the court has been
given the liberty, for sufficient reasons to be recorded, to award

1. See sections 126, 127 and 169.

2. Manu Smritih, Ch. 8, St. 399 :-

rajnah prakhyata-bhandani pratishiddhani yani chatani nirharatio lobhat sarvaharam
haten-nripah.


59

a lower sentence.! Instances of such legislation are section
5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (as amended
in 1958), the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, the
Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956,
and the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949. The principal reason
for such provisions “appears to be a feeling that courts seldom
award sentences which would have a deterrent effect, particula r-
ly in certain types of offences which are necessary to be dealt
with sternly in the interests of society.”’?

3.29. While in the Anglo-Saxon legal system, minimum
punishment is seldom prescribed by statute, the pénal codes of
many European countries lay down upper and lower limits for
punishments in many cases. The usual formula in these codes
is to say that the offence is punishable with confinement in a peni-
tentiary (or jailing) for a term of x to y years. These codes,
however, usually contain provisions enabling the court to pass
sentences lower than the prescribed minimum in extraordinary
cases or for special reasons.

3.30. Most of the opinions expressed on the question were
strongly opposed to laying down any ‘minimum punishment.
In particular, members of the judiciary at ail levels regard any
such amendment as totally unnecessary. Some of them are not
happy about the working of the provisions made in special taws
for imposing a minimum sentence.

The Law Commission in a previous Report observed:3—

“The determination of what should be the proper sen-
tence in a particular case has always been left to t the court
for the very weighty reason that no two cases would ever be
alike and ‘the circumstances under which the offence was
committed and the moral turpitude attaching to it would be
matters within the special knowledge of the court which has
tried the case. There can be no rule of general application
laying down a specific quantum of punishment that should
be inflicted in the case of a particular offence. A sound judi-
cial discretion on the part of the trial judge in awarding puni-
shment can alone distinguish between case and case and
fit the punishment to the cri+ ¢ in each individual case.

ta ee ae Peed

However, the placing of restrictions on judicial discretion
in the matter of the award of a sentence is, on principle, to be
deprecated as a general practice. * * * Instances might have
occurred occasionally where judges have failed to award sentences
proportionate to the gravity of the offences. This cannot, how-
ever, warrant the assumption that the judiciary as a whole has
failed to award adequate sentences or overlooked the need for
passing deterrent sentences in appropriate cases.”

Position
in other
legal

systems.

Minimum
sentence
not
desirable
save in
exceptional
cases.

ये, 14th Report, Vol. Ul, page 840.
2. 14th Report, Vol. HI, page 838.
3. Ibid., pages 838, 841.


Section 53

Death
sentence.

Minimum
age for
death
sentence
to be 18.

New
provision
Fecommens
ded.

60

We agree with the above view and consider that, save in excep-
tional cases, there should not be any provision for minimum
sentences in the Penal Code.

3.31. We now proceed with the consideration of the provi-
sions of chapter 3 section by section.

3.32. The question whether the death sentence should be
retained in the Code and various cognate matters have been
considered in great detail in the previous Law Commission's
Report on Capital punishment.? It is regrettable that although
this report was made to the Government more than three years
ago, it has not been placed before Parliament or otherwise pub-
lished for the information of the public. That Commission has
recommended that, in the conditions existing at present in India,
the death penalty should not be abolished. We agree with this
recommendation,

3.33. The previous Commission has also fully considered
whether the Code should specify the minimum age of the offender
who can be sentenced to death. After examining the position
under the Children’s Acts of various States, it has stated?:-—

“We feel that, having regard to the need for uniformity,
to the views expressed on the subject, and to the considera-
tion that a person under 18 can be regarded as intellectually
immature, there is a fairly strong case for adopting the age
of 18 as the minimum for death sentence. We are aware
that cases will occasionally arise where a person under 18
is found guilty of a reprehensible killing, or, conversely, a
person above 18 is found to be immature and not deserving
of the highest punishment. A line has, however, to be drawn
somewhere and we think that 18 can be adopted without
undue risk.

We, therefore, recommend that a person who is under the
age of 18 years at the time of the commission of the offence should
not be sentenced to death. A provision to that effect can be
conveniently inserted in the Indian Penal Code as section 55B.”

3.34, We agree with this recommendation. There is, how-
ever, one section, namely section 303, in the Code under which
the only sentence which can be passed on conviction is the sen-
tence of death. It would be an extremely rare case where a

yen

35th Report.
| Tbid., paragraphs 886, 887.
In this connection, reference may also be invited to the International Covenant on Civil

and Political Rights (1963), Part ill, Article 6, paragraph 5, which is as follows:

“5. Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons
below eighteen years of age and shall not be cartied out on pregnant women.”


61

juvenile under the age of 18, being under sentence of imprison-
ment for life, committed murder or other capital offence. If
ever such a case did occur, there would be a conflict between
section 303 which makes the death sentence obligatory and the
proposed exception in the case of any juvenile under the age of
18. We consider that the proposed exception should not apply
where the offender is convicted under section 303. If at all
there are any extenuating circurnstances in his favour, the Presi-
dent and the Governor may be trusted to exercise their power
of commuting the sentence to one of imprisonment for life. The
new provision may accordingly be as follows:—

“The sentence of death shall not be passed on a person
convicted of a capital offence if at the time of committing the
offence he was under eighteen years of age and death is not
the only punishment provided by law for the offence.”

3.35. Ina previous Report, we considered various aspects
of the punishment of life imprisonment and recommended that
in view of the prevailing uncertainty on the point it should be
expressly provided in the Penal Code that such imprisonment
shall be rigorous. At the end of that Report we observed? :—

“Finally, while our present proposal is limited to the
immediate problem of resolving the doubts that have arisen
as regards the nature of this punishment, we have noted for
future consideration the question whether it is at all neces-
sary even in regard to capital offences and whether it should
be retained without modification in regard to the numerous
other offences now so punishable. It strikes one as extre-
mely anomalous that an offence like sedition should be
punishable with either imprisonment for life or with rigorous
or simple imprisonment which may extend to three years,
but not more. These questions will have to be considered
whea the Indian Penal Code is taken up for revision.”

. 3.36, Accordingly, one of the questions put forward in our
questionnaire on the Code was whether imprisonment for life
as the punishment prescribed for some offences should be re-
placed by imprisonment for a specified long term, e.g., 20 years,
Various comments and suggestions were received indicating no
clear preponderance of opinion one way or the other. While
there were a considerable number who thought life imprisonment
should remain and desired no change, there were others who
considered this punishment wrong in principle. Some desired
substitution of a fixed period on the ground that the existing
practice in almost all States of granting remissions on a liberal

Imprison-

ment
life,

Shoutd

for

life sen-
tence be
replaced
80५ speci-
fied Tong

term?

3. 390 Report (Imprisonment for life under the Indian Peaal Code).

2. 39th Report (Imprisonment for life under the Indian Penal Code), paragraph 29.


62

scale reduced the period actually undergone by a lifer to some-
thing like 8 or 10 years. In their view, there should be a mini-
mum period below which life imprisonment should not be re-
duced by the Government. Others favoured substitution of
a fixed long period but saw nothing wrong in remissions being
granted liberally by the Government at their discretion and were
averse to any minimum period being fixed by law or otherwise.
Opinions also differed as to what term of imprisonment would
be suitable instead of imprisonment for life. Some other in-
teresting suggestions were that the relevant sections should be
made more elastic by providing for life imprisonment or a spe-
cified long term, in the alternative, that instead of life sentences
in one continuous stretch, there should be imprisonment for
broken periods, and that a long term of imprisonment followed
by a period of surveillance would be a good substitute for a life

sentence, -
Existing 3.37. It is of course true to say that a sentence of imprison-
practice ment for life is never carried out literally, though it may occa-

in States. sionally happen that a prisoner so sentenced dies in jail before
his case comes up before the State Government for release. The
actual period spent in jail by life sentence prisoners naturally
varies a good deal and may be as short as7 or 8 years. While
the prison rules and practice obtaining in the States are not abso-
Jutely uniform, a life sentence is generally equated to imprison-
ment for 20 years and remission of different types are given
in accordance with rules. The case of every life sentence pri-
soner is taken up with the State Government on his completing
10 to 24 years inclusive of remissions earned by him by then and
the State Government decides whether he should be released,
unconditionally or subject to conditions, A favourable deci-
sion is implemented by the State Government formally remit-
ting the unexpired portion of the prisoner’s sentence under sec-
tion 401 of the Criminal Procedure Code and ordering his re-
Tease. Since remission of sentence is entirely within the dis-
cretion of the Government under the Constitution as well as
the Criminal Procedure Code, the court’s power to detain dan-
gerous criminals for Jonger periods remains unaffected.

Imprison- 3.38. It is possible that, owing to the increasingly generous
ment for application of the remission system in recent years to life sen-
Mie to है be tence prisoners, the sentence has lost some of its deterrent effect,
. and criminals are not frightened by the possibility of a sentence

of imprisonment for life to anything like the extent to which

they were in the past by a sentence of transportation for life.

We have, however, come to the conclusion that the punishment

of imprisonment for life should be retained and should not be

replaced by imprisonment for a specified long term like 20 years.


63

3.39. In this connection we noticed that, when the death
penalty for murder was abolished in England in 1965, the court
sentencing any person convicted of murder to imprisonment
for life was given the power to declare the period which it re-
commended to the Secretary of State as the minimum period
which in its view should elapse before the Secretary of State
ordered the release of that person on ficence.t The same act

further provided that no person convicted of murder should be’

released by the Secertary of State on licence unless the Secretary
of State had prior to such release, consulted the Lord Chief
Justice of England together with the trial judge, if availabie.?
We considered whether it would be desirabie to have some such
provisions in the Indian Penal Code or the Criminal Procedure,
but felt that, in view of articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution
which confer full powers on the President and the Governors
to grant remissions, provisions in the law fettering those powers
might not be valid or proper.>

3.40. Besides the four capital offences for which the Penal
Code prescribes imprisonment for life as an alternative to the
death sentence, there are more than 40 offences for which the
punishment may be either imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to 14, 10 or 7 years. In one
instance (sedition under section 124A), while the offender may
be punished with imprisonment for life, he may not be sentenced
40 more than 3 years’ imprisonment. We have, after a careful
scrutiny of these sections, come to the conclusion that the life
sentence is only necessary in 16 of them. In the other sections,
the life sentence can be safely omitted, the maximum term of
imprisonment provided therein being suitably increased.

3.41. While section 53 indicates that imprisonment for a
specified term may be either rigorous or simple and that the
former involves hard labour, nothing is said about the nature
of simple imprisonment. This is left to be regulated by the
Prisons Act, 1894. Section 36 of this Act requires that “provi-
sion shall be made by the Superintendent for the employment
(as long as they so desire) of all criminal prisoners sentenced to
simple imprisonment; but no prisoner not sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment shall be punished for neglect of work except by
such alteration in the scale of diet as may be established by the
tules of the prisoner in the case of negkect of work by such a
prisoner”. Under section , 59, the State Government makes
tules for classifying and prescribing the forms of labour and re-
gulating the period of rest from labour, and presumably, the
voluntary labour to which a prisoner sentenced to simple impri-
sonment may submit “as long as he so desires”, is regulated in
accordance with those rules.

Restriction
of Govern-
ment’s
Powers to
order pre-
mature rel-
ease.

Reduction
ja number
of offences
punishable
with tife
imprison-
ment.

Simple
imprison-
ment.

1, Section 1(2), Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act, 1965.
2. Section 2, ibid.
3. See also 41st Report, Vol. 2, paragraph 29.4.


Compulsory
light lab-
Our Recess-
aly

Two kinds
of imprison-
ment to
serain.

64 -

3.42. It has been suggested from time to time that simple
imprisonment should be abolished. The Madras Jail Reforms.
Committee reporting in 1951 pointed out that this class of pri-
soners cannot be compelled to work, idleness does no good to
the prisoners themselves and it is also not conducive to jail dis-
cipline. An All-India seminar on Correctional Services held
in 1969 in Delhi recommended that, as it was desirable to deve-
lop the work habit in a prisoner, simple imprisonment as a form
of punishment should be abolished.

A life of complete idleness even for a short period would
hardly be welcomed by a normal individual. The ideology of
compelling prisoners to work in prison has undergone a radical
change since the last century. Hard labour was extracted from
Prisoners mainly with the object of making them feel the punish-
ment imposed on them by the courts. This idea gave place to
some extent to making prison labour productive by introducing
less harsh and more sophisticated forms of work. Later still,
deliberate emphasis was laid on training the prisoner to a craft
by disciplined labour. Work in prison is no longer designed
principally as an instrument of punishment of the offender or
as a direct source of profit to the State but as a method of refor-
ming the prisoner and rehabilitating him on release.

Even where the offence does not carry with it a moral stigma
and, either on what ground or some other, the offender is sen-
tenced to simple imprisonment, there need not be any serious
objection to his being required to do some work in prison as
part of the punishment imposed on him. No doubi there may
be 5 pecial cases where, while the sentence of imprisonment is
justifiable, the prisoner's antecedents, character and mental
equipment and the nature of the offence committed by him are
such that imprisonment coupled with hard labour would be
100 severe a punishment. We feel that in such cases, some form
of light Jabour should be a part of the punishment of imprison-
ment to which the offender is sentenced.

3.43. We also considered a suggestion that the present dis-
tinction between simple and ngorous imprisonment should be
done away with and all offenders deserving a jail sentence should
be simply sentenced to imprisonment for a specified term, leaving
it to the jail authorities and the prisons rules to regulate the kind

‘ of work to be taken from particular classes of prisoners. The

penal systems of most countries provide for two or three different
modes of keeping offenders under restraint and require the
courts to decide which of them should be awarded in the parti-
cular circumstances of a case. Under the Indian Penal Code;
the great majority of offences are punishable with “imprison-
ment of either description”’ and only a few with simple imprison-
ment. We think that the legislative policy underlying this classi-
fication is sound and should be maintained.


65

3.44. We accordingly recommend that it should be made
clear in section 53 of the Code that simple imprisonment means
imprisonment with light labour. Section 36 of the Prisoners
Act, 1894, should be suitably amended so that convicted persons
sentenced to simple imprisonment could be compelled to per-
form light tasks regularly throughout the period of their incar-
ceration, and not only “fas long as they so desire.”

3.45. In the light of the foregoing discussion we propos:
that section 53 may be revised as follows:—

“53. Punishments.—The punishments which offenders
are liable under the provisions of this Code are—

(i) death;

(ii) imprisonment for life;

(iii) imprisonment for a term, which may be-
(a) rigorous, that is, with hard labour, or
{b) simple, that is, with light labour;

(iv) forfeiture of property;
(५) fine.”

3.46. Section 53A was inserted in the Penal Code by Act
26 of 1955 which formally abolished the sentence of transporta-
tion, whether for life or for a specific term. The new section
laid down rules of construction for the expressions “transporta-
tion for life” and “transportation for a term” wherever these
occurred in laws other than the Penal Code and the Criminal
Procedure Code and in statutory instruments and orders in force
on 31-12-1955. The section does not require any change.

3.47. In our last Report! on the Code of Criminal Proc2-
dure, 1898, we pointed out that the provisions contained in sec-
tions 54, 55 and 558 of the Penal Code relating to commu-
tation of death sentences and sentences of imprisonment for life
are repeated in section 402 of the Procedure Code but with some
slight differences, and recommended that this duplication should
be removed and the law stated at one place in the Criminal Proce-
dure Code.? Sections 54, 55 and 55A and may accordingly
be omitted.

1. 4tst Report, Vol. 1, paragraphs 29.10 and 29.11.

Amend-
ment reco-
mmended.

Section 53
revised.

Sectior
53 A.

Sections
54, 55

and 55%
omitted.

2. This has been done in the Code of Criminal Procedure, Bill, 1970, vide clauses 442

and 443
३ M of Law'7i—6.


New
sections 54
and 55.

Section
37

Section
60,

Section

63.

Section

4 (०
67 revised
in one
section.

66

3.48. As indicated above in paragraphs 3.34 and 3.35, the
following new sections may be inserted at this place:—

“34. Minors not to be sentenced to death—-The sentence
of death shall not be passed on a person convicted of a capital
offence, if at the time of “committing the offence, he was
under eighteen years of age and death is not the only punish-
ment provided by law for the offence.

55. Imprisonment for life to be rigorous.—imprisonment
for life shall be rigorous.”

3.49. Section 57 provides a rule for catculating fractions of
the punishment of hfe imprisonment whenever necessary under
the Code, e.g., with reference to the punishment for abetment
or attempt. Since we are expressly making life imprisonment
rigorous, its term equivalent should be rigorous imprisonment
for twenty years. The word “tigorous” should be inserted after
the words “equivalent to” in section 57.

3.50. Though section 60 which enables a court to direct
imprisonment in certain cases to be partly rigorous and partly
simple is seldom availed of an practice, we see no harm in re-
taining it in the statute book.

3.51. Section 63 needs no change.

3,52. Sections 64 to 67 provide for the imposition of a sen-
tence of imprisonment in default of payment of any fine that an
offender has been ordered to pay, and regulate the nature
and period of such imprisonment. The arrangement and draft-
ing of these four sections are rather cumbrous and difficult to
follow. Jn a petty case! under the Madras Town Nuisances
Act, 1889, that went up before the High Court in revision, the
offender was sentenced to pay a fine of Rs. 8 and in default of
payment to undergo simple imprisonment for a week. The
punishment awardable under the Act was a fine not exceeding
Rs. 50/- or’ imprisonment of either description not exceeding 8
days. The judges, after a not very convincing analysis of sec-
tions 64, 65 and 67, came to the conclusion that the case was
covered by section 65 and not by section 67, and accordingly
reduced the sentence of imprisonment in default of payment
of fine from 7 days to 2 days’. The reference in section 65 to
offences “punish able with imprisonment as well as fine’’ is liable
to be understood as excluding offences which may be punished
either with imprisonment or with fine but not with both. We
therefore propose that the four sections should be combined
and put in one section as follows:—

“64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.—
(1) In ever y case in which an offender is sentenced to a fine.
it shall be competent to the Court to direct by the sentence

‘ahib, (1898) LL.R. 22 Mad. 238.


67

that, in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall
undergo imprisonment for a certain term.

(2) If the offence be punishable with fine only, such
imprisonment shall be simple, and the term thereof shall not
exceed—

(3) two months, when the fine does not exceed} one
hundred rupees,

(0) four months, when the fine does not exceed
two hundred rupees, and

(ले six months, in any other case.

(3) If the offence be punishable with imprisonment
or fine, or with imprisonment and fine.—

(a) the imprisonment in default of payment of the
fine may be of any description to which the offender
might have been sentenced for the offence;

(b) the term of such imprisonment shall not exceed
one-fourth of the maximum term of imprisonment pro-
vided for the offence; and

'(c) such imprisonment shall be in addition to the
imprisonment, if any, to which he may have been sen-
tenced for the offence, or to which he may be liable under
a commutation of a sentence.”

It will be noticed that in sub-section (2) above, which corres-
ponds to the present section 66, we have recommended a doubl-
ing of the amounts now mentioned therein.

3.53, Under section 68, imprisonment in default of payment
of fine terminates when the fine is “either paid or levied by pro-
cess of law’. In the context it is clear that the word “levied”
means realisation of the fine in full by process of law, and not
merely taking the necessary steps authorised by law to enforce
payment. These two different meanings that the word “levied”
bears in legal usage! raise difficulties in interpreting section 70
which are discussed below. In regard to section 68, however,
we suggest that the word “levied” should be replaced by the word
“realised”’, and that the words “‘in full" should be added at the
end for the sake of clarity.

3.54. Section 69, to which a lengthy illustration is append-
ed, lays down the rule for termination of imprisonment in de-
fault when only a part of the fine is paid or levied. The underly-
ing ideas which are simple enough are elliptically, and none
too clearly, expressed in an attempt to make the section short,
but the long-winded illustration more than counteracts the ter-
seness of the section.

Section
68.

Section
69.

1. Sce Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1952) Vol. II, page 1630.



Sections
68 and 69
combined
and
revised

im one
section,

Section
70.

Meaning
(1

ae
“levied 7.

68

3.55. We suggest thai sections 68 and 69 may be combined
and revised as follows in one section, and the illustration to
section 69 omitted :—

“68. Termination of imprisonment on payment or re-
alisation of fine.—

(1) Imprisonment imposed in default of payment
of a fine shall terminate whenever that fine is either paid,
or realised by process of law. in full.

(2) Whenever a part of the fine is paid or is realis-
ed by process of 18७, the term of imprisonment fixed
in default of payment shail be deemed to be reduced
by such number of days as bears to the “total number
of days in that term the same proportion as the amount
of fine paid or realised bears to the amount of fine
imposed ; and if, at that time, imprisonment in default
of payment is being suffered, it shall terminate on the
expiration of the reduced term or, if the reduced term
has previously expired, it shall terminate forthwith.’

(3) In calculating the reduction required under
sub-section (2), any fraction of a day less than one-
half shall be left out of account and any other fraction
shall be counted as one day.”

3.56. Under section 70, the fine or any part thereof which
remains unpaid may be “levied” at any time within six years
after the passing of the sentence. It is well-settled that this
period of six years is to be counted from the date of conviction
and sentence in the Court of first instance, unless the opera-
tion of the sentence has been suspended.?

3.57. But the word “levied” in this section is capable of two
different interpretations. As observed by the Bombay High
Court? in another context, the word has many connotations,
and what particular connotation should be given to that word
would depend upon the context. In a Peshawar case,4 the
the Judicial Commissioner took the view that the word means
the actual realisation of the fine, so that, even if the application
for process is made within six years but the fine is not realised
within that period, further proceedings cannot be taken.

A different view has been taken in a Bombay case,5 where
it has been held that the section does not prescribe any limit

wee!

. See section 67(2), (U-K.) Magistrates Courts Act, 1952.
. Palakdhari Singh ५. U.P., (1962) Suppl. 2 S.C.R. 650; A.LR. 1962 s.c. 1145 .
. Dialdas v.
Mic Ahmed y. Collector, ALR. 1943 Pesh. 56.
Gopalan v. Union of India, ALR. 1963 Bom. 21, 24, 25, paragraph 8.

Talwatkar, AAR. 1957 Bom. 71, 76.


69

of time for completing the proceedings taken for realising the
fine through Court process. The High Court noted that, in
sections 68 and 69, the term ‘levied’ is used in the sense of ‘realis-
ed’, but point out that the subject-matter of sections 68 and 69
was entirely different from that of section 70. Sections 68 and
69 dealt with termination of imprisonment which was being
undergone in default, and necessarily it would terminate only
when the fine is realised. But section 200 stood on a different
footiig. Once a party sets out to recover money through pro-
cess of Court, it is not within his volition to bring the proce-
edings to an end. Where, for example, claims or objections
are made in respect of the attachment, the proceedings might
be protracted for a tong time. “It is difficult to accept the view
that the legislature prescribed an outside limit within which the
entire process, commencing from atiachment of the property
and ending with conversion thereof in cash by sale, has to bz
completed. To hold so may result in tempting convicts to
Tesort to questionable methods for preventing sale of their attach-
ed property by protracting the Proceedings.”

The same view is taken by the Allahabad High Court! which
held :—

“itis not necessary that the Proceedings for 1९४५ of fine
should terminate within six years of the Passing of the sen-
tence. On the other hand, what section 70 of the Indian
Penal Code contemplates is that the proceedings for levy of
fine should commence within that period.”

3.58, We have no doubt that this is the right view to take.
In order to make the position clear and avoid argument, we
consider it desirable that the word “levied” should be replaced
by a reference to commencement of Proceedings for realising
the fine. We further consider that since the object is to lay
down a rule of limitation, the Present permissive form—“may
be levied at any time within’—is not appropriate and should
be changed. Section 70 may be revised as follows :—

“70. Limitation for levy of fine—No proceedings for
realisation of the fine or of any part thereof which remains
unpaid, shall be commenced—

{a) at any time after the expiry of six years from
the passing of the sentence, or

(0) if, under the sentence, the offender is liable
to imprisonment for a longer period than six years, at
any time after the expiry of that period.

70-A. Death not to discharge property from liability. —
The death of the offender does not discharge from the fiabi-
jity for recovery of fine any property which would after his
death be legally liable for his debts.”

1. Keshav Datta v. The State, ALR. 1967 Ail, 276, 278, paragraph है.

Amend-
ment of,
section 70
proposed.


70

Section 3.59. Section 71 contains three propositions each of which

व. limits the punishment for an offence when it is made up, in one
way or another, of several offences. It should be noticed that
the section confines itself to the punishment aspect, leaving pro-
cedural aspects like prosecuting the offender, framing charges
against him and convicting him of those charges, to be dealt
with in the Criminal Procedure Code.

First 3.60. As enacted in 1860, the section contained only the

paragraph first proposition, namely that “where anything which is an

made pp Offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence,

of parts. the offender shall not be punished with the punishment of more
than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provid-
ed”. Two illustrations are appended to this section but they
hardly afford an adequate explanation of the major premise
of the section, which is that the offence in question is “made
up of parts”. The first illustration assumes, without expressly
saying it, that the fifty strokes are given to Z one after the other
at what may be called one beating, and it proceeds to state
that, although the offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z may
be analysed into fifty offences (of the same nature), A is fiable
only to one punishment. If, however, A gives Z twenty strok-
es in the morning, fifteen strokes in the evening and another
fifteen strokes the next morning, A can, despite the illustration,
be held to have committed the offence on three different occa~
sions and be punished separately for each such offence. The
procedural counterpart for such a case is in section 2341) of
the Criminal Procedure Code.

To take another type of case, if A, a_pick-pocket, first takes
a silk handkerchief, then a purse, and lastly a cigarette case, from
Z’s pocket by three separate acts, it would be an interesting exer-
cise in semantics with reference to section 71 whether A should
regarded as committing one offence of theft made up of three
parts each of which parts is itself an offence of theft or as com-
mitting three offences of theft “in one series of acts so connect-
ed together as to form one transaction” within the meaning
of section 235(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code. It is, how~
ever, hardly conceivable that in such a case three charges of
pick-pocketing would be brought against A and the Court asked
to convict him on those three charges separately.

Different 3.61. Courts have taken different views as to when exactly
views of it can be said that an offence is “made up of parts” and as to

High the precise effect of the words “shall not be punished with the
है punishment of more than one of such his offences". In parti-
cular, the question of punishment in cases of rioting and caus-

ing hurt has given rise to much controversy.
6) Cal- 3.62. In an old case,! the Calcutta High Court held that
ae “the offence of voluntarily causing hurt under section 324, coup!-

ed with section 149, of the Indian Penal Code, of which these

Towitmony Poddar v. Queen-Express, (1889) LLR. 16 Cal. 442, 446 (F.B.).


7i

appellants have been found guilty, is primarily made up of two
parts viz. : (1) of their being members of an untawful assembly, by
which force and violence was used in Prosecution of its common
object, and the members of which were armed with deadly
weapons ; and (2) of the offence of voluntarily causing
hurt being committed by two other members of the
unlawful assembly in prosecution of its common object. The
first of the two parts is itself an offence, viz., rioting armed with
deadly weapons, under section 148 of the Indian Penal Code.
1 is nowhere expressly povided in Jaw that, under the circum-
stances set forth above, the offender may be punished separately
for the two offences constituted by the whole and the part res-
pectively. Therefore, we find that all the conditions laid down
in paragraph 1 of section 71 of the Indian Penal Code are pre-
sent here. Consequently the infliction of Separate punishments
for the two offences is illegal under it.”

3,63. The Bombay High Court took a different view of the
matter and held' that where a Person is convicted of rioting
and causing hurt, the conviction for causing hurt depending
on the application of section 149, it is legal to pass two sentence-
es provided the total punistiment does not exceed the limit which
the Court might pass for any one of the offences. But where
the person has himself caused the hurt, the total punishment
for the two offences can legally exceed that limit. Independently
of the question whether the case fell under section 71, the pro-
per course in a case where a person is convicted of two distinct
offences, is to pass a separate sentence for each offence.

3.64. This view again was dissented from by the Madras
High Court in a later case.2 It held that “‘the view taken in
Bombay is that section 71 is not one that gives directions about
mere sentence, but that it only deals with punishments, and that
therefore as long as the sentences. passed on a conviction for
tioting and some form of constructive hurt do not exceed the
term that can be awarded for one of those offences, the provisions
of sections 71 are complied with, in that the offender is not
in the aggregate punished with more than the punishment which
can be given to him for one of his offences. With respect हैं
do not think the words ‘the offender shail not be punished with
the punishment of more than one of such offences’ should
be so interpreted, but 1 think rather that the correct view is that
taken in Calcutta. Taking it that in the constructive offences
with reference to section 149 the offence of rioting is included,
as in my opinion it is, then a person who is sentenced for riot-
ing receives by that sentence his punishment for that offence.
Any further punishment that is given for a constructive offence
under section 149 will again be a punishment for the rioting
in that the rioting is included in the latter offence.

(00) Bom-
bay view.

(iii) Madras
view.

“1. OE. ९. Bana Punja, (1893) TLR. 17 Bom. 26 B), .
2. P+ niah Tope v. Emp., AA.R. 1934 Mad. 388.


72

“I do not think that section 71 is intended to refer to the aggre-
gate punishment, even though the section does not contain the
word ‘sentence’ but only speaks of punishments.”

fis) Sind _ 3.65. A fourth view may also be noted. According to a

view. Sind case,! section 149 creates a separate offence and, there-
fore, in a case of rioting and causing hart, “where section 149
is applied, section 71, Penal Code must apply”, afd “though
separate convictions may be recorded for these separate offences
for which a man may be charged and tried at the same trial accord-
ing to the provisions of section 235, Code of Criminal Proce-
dure separate sentences should nor be passed”. The judge-
ment, however, adds that each case depends on its particular
facts. “It cannot be Jaid down as a universal rule that where
an accused is convicted of offences under sections 147 and 149
read with other appropriate section, section 149 must always
include the punishment for the offence under section M7. It
might be proved that before a member of the unlawful assembly
committed hurt, some members had already committed mis-
chief or “otherwise used force or violence ; if before commiltt-
ing hurt, members of the assembly had broken the glass of shop
windows or used force or violence, then they could be properly’
convicted and sentenced for rioting under section 147, Penal
Code, and if thereafter they committed grievous hurt, then it
appears to us they could further be convicted of an offence under
section 325 read with section 149, Penal Code, and sentenced to
separate, and even consecutive sentences, the aggregate length
Of the sentences not being in such a case a material question,
except so far as section 35, Criminal Procedure Code lays down
a limit of 14 years.”

Amend- 3.66. This seems to us a needless controversy arising out
ment of the wide wording of the first paragraph of section 71. We
proposed. consider that this provision should be limited to those cases in
which offences of the same kind are repeated in a series of acts
which practically form one transaction, as indicated in the first
illustration. In such a case, there should be no question of
punishing the offender for each of the repeated culpable acts
and he should be liable to be punished only for the total offence.
We propose that the first paragraph should be revised as fotlows:—

“Where anything which is an_ offence is made up of
parts, any of which parts is itself an offence of the same
kind, the offender shali not, unless expressly so provided,
be punished separately for such parts.”

After this amendment. the paragraph will not be applicable
to cases falling under section 149 and will not operate as a bar
to passing separate sentences on a person convicted of rioting
and causing hurt, whether constructively or directly.

यो Haji v. Emperor, ALR. (1943) Si

212.


73

3.67. The second proposition in section 71 is that “whether
anything is an offence falling within two or more separate de-
finitions of any law in force for the time being by which offences
are defined or punished, the offender shali not be punished
with a more severe punishment than the court which tries him
could award for any one of such offences”.

3.68. 1६ seems clear from the language that separate sentence
es are justified. In a case where the accused had been convict-
ed and sentenced separately for transporting opium and possess-
ing opium, the Supreme Court observed! :-—

“As to the sentence which can be imposed, reference to sec-
lion 35, Criminal Procedure Code and section 71, Penal Code,
is necessary. Section 35, Criminal Procedure Code provides
that where a person is convicted at one trial of two or more
offences, the court may, subject to the provisions of section 7h,
Penal Code sentence him, for such offences, to the several
punishments prescribed therefor which such Court is competent
to inflict; such punishments, when consisting of imprisonment,
to commence the one after the expiration of the other in such
order as the Court may direct, unless the Court directs that such

punishments shall run concurrently. Section 35, therefore, .

permits the passing of separate sentences for different offences
and for them to run consecutively. unless the Court directs that
they shall run concurrently. This, however, is subject to the
Provisions of section 71, Penal Code.

It is clear from these provisions that where anything is an
offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any
Jaw in force for the time being by which offences are defined
or punished, the offender shall not be punished with a more severe
punishment than the Court which tries him could award for any
one of such offences. The maximum sentence which could
have been imposed upon the appellant for ariy one of the offences
of which he had been convicted was one year’s imprisonment.

“tn other words, even if separate sentences were passed
under section 9, sub-sections (9) and (७), the sum total of
these sentences should not exceed one year’s imprisonment.
In the present case, the sentence imposed upon the appellant
has been in all 6 months, 3 months’ imprisonment under
each count. it would appear, therefore, that the sentence
passed upon the appellant did not contravene the provi-
sions of section 71, Penal Code. ॥ our opinion, the appell-
ant was rightly convicted under section 9 (a) and (0) of the
Opium Act, and there has been no illegality in the sentence
imposed upon him.”

Section
71, second
Paragraph.

Supreme
Court
decision
that sepa-
Tate senten-
ces are
permissible

‘I. Puranmal v. State of Orissa, (1958) SCR. 1162; A.LR. 1958 SC, 935.


Difficulty
created by
section

26, Gene-
ral

Clauses
Act.

A Bombay
decision.

4

3.69. Section 235(2), Criminal Procedure Code, provides
that, “if the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two
or more separate definitions of any law in force for the time
being by which offences are defined or punished, the person
accused of them may be charged with, and tried at one trial
for, each of such offences”. It therefore seems clear that se-
parate convictions for the separate charges and separate punish-
ments for the samc are permissible, but it becomes less clear when
we bring into the picture the similar provision made in section
26 of the General Clauses Act. This section reads—

“Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under
two or more enactments, then the offender shail be liable
to be prosecuted and punished wider either or any of those
enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for
the same offence.”

The wording of this section. particularly the italicised phrase.
has led to difficulties in interpretation.

3.70. In a Bombay case,! the accused were found travell-
ing in a horse’ carriage which was also carrying two boxes
containing salt and marked with the words “Gujarat Prantik
Samiti”. The Samiti had been declared an unlawful association
under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908. The accused
were found guilty under section 47 (c) of the Bombay Salt Act,
1890. for being in possession of contraband salt and also for
assisting the operations of an unlawful association and sen-
tenced to a fine of Rs. 100/ on each charge. The court of Ses-
sion, relying on section 26 of the General Clauses Act, was of
the view that no one could be punished twice for the same offence.
and made a reference to the High Court. Beaumont C. J. de-
ciding the case said :—

“The first point to determine is whether there were
really two acts constituting two offences, or one single act
constituting two offences.*** It seems to me that in this case
there was only one act, that act consisting of being in posses-
sion of contraband salt. It may well be that the case might
have been framed so as to constitute two acts. The evidence
might have shown. first of all, that the accused were in posses-
sion of contraband salt, and, secondly, that they were taking,
that salt to the headquarters of an unlawful association with
a view to enabling that association to dispose of the salt,
in which case L think they would clearly have been guilty
ofthe second offence of assisting the operations of an
unlawful association. But here, as far as J can see, the only
offence proved was that of being in possession of contraband
salt, which happened to be in boxes with the name of the
unlawful association upon it. { do not think that the last
fact is enough to constitute a second act. That being so,
the case falls precisely within the words of section 26, General
Clauses Act.***

1, Emp. v. Bhogilal, ALR. 1931 Bom. 409.


75

“The word ‘offence’ at the end of that section read
with the definition in section 3, sub-section (37), means.
T think, an act or omission. In the present case you
have got an act alleged to constitute an offence under two
enactments, and section 26, General Clauses Act, ex-
pressly provides that the accused shall not be punished
twice for the same act. I think therefore that the accus-
ed were only liable to be fined once, and that the second
sentence of fine must be set aside.”

3.71. In-a recent case! where section 71 of the Code did Supreme
not fall to be considered, the Supreme Court has held that sec- Court
tion 26, General Clauses Act, is conditioned by the identity of 4¢!sio"-
the two offences which form the subject of the prosecution or
prosecutions. Though in its opening words this section referes
to the act or omission constituting an offence under two or more
enactments, the emphasis is not on the facts alleged in the two
complaints, but rather on the ingredients which constitute the
two offences with which a person is charged, as is made clear
by the concluding portion of the section, which contains the words
“punished twice for the same offence”. Therefore, the Court
said, the ban imposed by section 26 could not be invoked where
the offences are not the same, but are distinct.?

3.72. It is necessary to consider the applicability of section Two diffe-
26 of the General Clauses Act and section 71 of the Penal Code rent —
to two different situations. First, where an act made penal situations |
by two or more statutory provisions (“‘enactments” as the General @ where
Clauses Act calls them) really constitutes the “same offence”— ingredients
that is to say, though the legal labels are different, the ingredients of thetwo
are identical. It is by reason of the accidents of legislation that offences
the act happens to fall under twoenactments. Suchcases, though identical
infrequent, can arise because of the fact that one aspect of the .
act is dealt with more prominently in one enactment, while
another enactment gives prominence to another. Essentially,
there is only one culpable act, and though different legal labels
1280 to two different “offences”, the offender should not receive
punishment for more than one of them. In this situation, the
latter half of section 26, General Clauses Act, should over-
ride section 71, Indian Penal Code. Though charges may be
framed for each such offence under section 235(2), Criminal
Procedure Code—such a course would facilitate consideration
of legal aspects separately*— punishment should be for one
offence only.

“|. State of Bombay ९. S.L. Apte, (1961) 3 S.C.R. 107; AER. 1961 S.C. 578, 581, para
graphs 13, 583, paragraph 16 (on appeal from I.L.R. 1956 Bom. 685).

2. See also Manipur Administration v, Bira Singh, A..R. 1965 S.C. 87, 90, paragraph 6;
(1964) 7 S.C.R. 123.

3. Cf. section 221, Criminal Procedure Code.


(४) where
offences
are not the
same.

Section
21, fast
‘paragraph.

Re-dratt
of section
W

Suggested.

76

3.73. The second situation is where acts made penal by two
OF more statutory provisions constitute distinct offences. The
nearness of the ingredients is there. but they are not identi-
cal. The offences being not the same. it is logical to permit
Separate punishments, as the existing law also does. At the
same time, to avoid oppressiveness, the aggregate of such punish-
ments should not exceed the maximum prescribed for any of the
offences of which he is convicted.

3.74. While this is in fact the effect of the last paragraph
of section 7}, the wording is not unambiguous. It provides
that “the offender shall not be punished with a more severe
punishment than the Court which tries him could award for
any one of such offences”. {t implies, without expressly say-
ing it, that separate punishments can be awarded for each of
the offences. We think it is desirable to bring out this idea
clearly. Secondly, it is not appropriate to refer to the punish-
ing power of the particular Court which tries the offender since
section 7] is concerned with the general limitation on punish-
ment in two classes of cases.

3.75. In the light of the above discussion, we propose that
section 71 may be split into two and revised as follows :--

“71. Punishment of offence made up of parts.—Where
anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any
of which parts is itself an offence of the same kind, the offender
shail not, unless expressly so Provided, be punished separately
Sor such parts.

Ailustrations

{a) A beats Z twenty times with a stick. His offence
of voluntarily causing hurt to Z is made up of the twenty
strokes given, each of which is itself an offence of voluntarily
causing hurt. A is tiable only to one punishment for the
whole beating.

“(b) While A is beating Z, Y intervenes, and A intens
tionally strikes Y. As this is no part of the acts whereby
A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, Avis liable to one punish-
ment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z and to another for
voluntarily causing hurt to Y.

71 A. Punishment of offence made up of several offenc-
es.—(1) Where an act constitutes an offence under two or
more enactments but the offences are the same, the offender
shall not be punished for more than one of such offenc-
es,

(2) Where an act constitutes an offence under two or
more enactments and the offences are not the same, or



Tq

where several acts, of which one or more than one would
by itself or themselves constitute an offence. constitute, when
combined, a different offence,

the offender may be punished separately for each of such
offences. but shall not be punished in the aggregate with
@ more severe punishment shan could be awarded for any one
of such offences.”

3.76. Section 72 relates to “cases in which judgement is given Section
that a person is guilty of one of several offences specified in the 72.
judgement but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he

is guilty.” If in such a case, the same punishment is not provid-

ed for ail the offences. the offender has to be punished for the

offence for which the punishment provided is the lowest. The
corresponding procedural provisions are to be found in sections

236 and 367 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

3.77. lt appears that the framers of the Draft Penal Code Con-
intended to deal in section 72 with doubts of fact!, but in sonance
most of the reported cases?, the section has been interpreted with
as dealing with doubts about application of the law. We con- 3613),
sidered a suggestion that, in conformity with the original in- Criminal
tention, section 72 might expressly refer to the cases where “the Procedure
evidence does not enable the Court to pronounce with certainty (०१९:
of which of these offences the offender is guilty” but came to
the conclusion that it would be better to relate the wording of
section 72 more cleatly with the situation referred to in section
367(3) of the Criminal Procedure (१005, namely, where the Court
passes judgement in the alternative. At the stage of punish-
ment to which section 72 relates, the aspect of doubt loses its
imporiance. Once the Judgement in the alternative is passed
under section 367(3), Criminal Procedure Code, the only matter
that requires to be provided for in section 72 is the limitation
on punishment.

3.78. According to the definition in section 40, “offence” Applica-
in section 72 is now confined to offences under the Code. If bility to
thz definition is omitted as suggested by us, the wider definition offences
of “offence” as given in the General Clauses Act will become under
applicable. We see no objection, and indeed consider it desit- jaws.
able, that the principle underlying section 72 should apply,
not only to Penal Code offences, but also to other offences.

1. Draft Penal Code, (1837) Note A, Pages 13, 14.

2. Queen ९. Jamurha, (1875) 7 N.W.P.H.C.R. 137; Khan Muhammad ५. Empress, (1887)
Punj. Rec. No. 11 (Cr.) page 19;

Purtap v. Emperor, AAR. 1914 Jahore 549, 550.
Maktar Ali v. Emp., AAR. 1945 Cal, 421 is a case to the contrary.


Amend-
ment
proposed.

Omission
of sections
73 and 74
relating to
solitary
confi-
nement
recom
mended.

Conse-
quentiat
amend-
ment of
section 32,
Criminal
Procedure
Code.

Section

75 and
the
problem of
habitual
offenders.

78

3.79. In the light of the above discussion, we propose that
section 72 may be simplified as follows :—

“72. Punishment where judgement in alternative—in
all cases in which judgement is given in the alternative that a
person is guilty of one of several offences “specified in the judg-
ment*** and if the same punishment is not provided for all of
them, the offender shall be punished for the offence for which
the lowest punishment is provided.”

Section 367(3) of the Criminal Procedufe Code which is
now limited to offences under the Penal Code will require to
be amended as follows:—

_ “When a person is convicted and it is doubtful under
which of two or more enactments the offence falls, the Court

shall distinctly express the same, and pass judgement in the
alternative.”

3.80. Sections 73 and 74 provide for solitary confinement.
We are of the view that this punishment is out of tune with
modern thinking and should not find a place in the Penal Code
as a punishment to be ordered by any Criminal Court. It may
be necessary as a measure of jail discipline which is an entirely
different matter, not governed by the same considerations that
apply to punishments in the Code. We recommend that sec-
tions 73 and 74 may be omitted.

3.81, It will be necessary, as a consequential amendment,
to omit the words “including such solitary confinement as is
authorised by Jaw”, occurring in clauses (a) and (9) of section
32(1), Criminal Procedure Code.

3.82. Section 75 provides enhanced punishment for persons
who commit offences against property or offences relating to
coin and government stamps more than once. It is an attempt
to deal with the problem of habitual offenders and recidivism.
Other penal systems also have tried to grapple with this complex
problem, but nowhere have the attempts met with marked
success, perhaps because the causes of crime are themselves
complex. Because the previous sentence has failed both in its
object of reforming the offender and in its object of deterring
him from crime, the law, as a measure of Jast resort, concent-
rates on protecting society from the offender by sending him
to jail for a longer term than before. The protection of society
against the offender comes in the forefront “by reason of his
previous conduct and of the likelihood of his committing fur-
ther offences,” as the latest English provision! on the subject

1. Section 37(2), Criminal Justice Act, 1967. The section is considered at tength

by the House of Lords in D.P.P. v. Ortewell, (1968) 3 All E.R. 153.


79

puts it. Based on this policy of protecting the public, section
73 enhances the powers of the Court regarding the sentence
to be imposed on the second or subsequent conviction for cer-
tain specified categories of offences. The necessity for such
a provision in the Penal Code can hardly be disputed.

3.83. We, however, see no reason why the section should
be limited in its application to offences relating to coin and
stamps and offences against property. Since protection of
society is the primary object in authorising the court to pass
Jong sentences, all serious offences under the Code, e.g. those
punishable with imprisonment for 3 years or more, should logi-
cally fall within the purview of the section. Offences under
other laws are governed by special considerations and,
where necessary, provisions similar to section 75 have
been made by the Legislature in those faws!. But, so far as
offences under the Code are concerned, section 75 is the only
place where a provision for enhanced sentence could be made.
Not only in the case of offences against the person (Chapter
16), but in the case of many other offences, there is need for
special protection against persistent offenders, and there is no
basis for making a distinction in this respect as between offences
under the various Chapters. Even the present section does
not require that the previous conviction should have been under
the same Chapter; this shows, that it is not the policy of the law
to place an emphasis on the repetition of the particular offence;
rather, the policy is to have regard to the criminal tendency
established by previous convictions.

We, therefore, recommend that section 75 should be extend-
ed to cover all offences under the Code which are punishable
with imprisonment upto 3 years or more. We note in this con-
nection that the corresponding provision in England? is not
confined to offences of a particular character, but applies to
every offender convicted on indictment of an offence punish-
able with imprisonment for two years or more.

3.84, There is another point on which the section requires
to be widened. The maximum punishment that can be awarded
on a second or subsequent conviction under the section is im-
prisonment for life or for ten years. The period of ten years
is, in our view, inadequate, since the longest period of imprison-
ment under the scheme of the Code is not ten years, but four-
teen years. Even where the offender is convicted at the same
trial of two offences, the Court is permitted to combine the*
imprisonment for the two offences, subject to a maximum of
fourteen years.> We, therefore, recommend that in place of
“ten years”, “fourteen years”, should be substituted.

* Offences

to which
section

is appli-
cable.

Maximum
punish
ment

on subse-
quent
convic-
tion.

3. Eg., sections 3 to 9, Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act, 1956.
2. Section 3702), Criminal Justice Act, 1967.
3. Section 35(2), Criminat Procedure Code.



Maximum
interval
between
previous
conviction
and second
offence
desirable.

imprison-
ment on
last’ con-
viction
necessary.

Conviction
in forcign
countries
for certain
offences.

80

3.85. While the section requires to be widened on the above
points, it is also in need of being narrowed down on others.
Even where the offender has, after his first conviction, led a
blameless life for a long period but commits an offence there-
after, the relapse into crime entails liability to enhanced punish-
ment. it is clearly desirable that the section itself should take
notice of the interval between the previous conviction and the
subsequent offence, and should not leave it entirely to the dis-
cretion of the Courts. It may be that in practice the Courts
do take the length of this interval into account and moderate
the punishment for the subsequent offence under section 75.
Nevertheless, there is room for giving some indication of the
legislative policy in this respect. We think that, between the
release from the imprisonment for the previous conviction (or
the release from imprisonment for the last conviction, if there
be more than one conviction) and the commission of the pre-
sent offence, the interval should not exceed three years', and
recommend an amendment of the section to that effect.

3.86. At present it is not necessary that, at the previous
conviction, the offender should have been sentenced to any term
of imprisonment. All that is required is that the previous
offence must have been punishable with imprisonment for
three years or upwards, and the subsequent offence must also
have been so punishable. We regard this as insufficient. If,
on the previous conviction, the offender was not sentenced to
imprisonment, (for example, if he was sentenced to fine or
released on probation), then, exhypothesi, the offender was,
on that occasion, regarded as not suitable for the punishment
of imprisonment because of the circumstances of the offender
or of the offence. The commission of another offence may,
no doubt, show the desirability of prison treatment, but does
not by itself demonstrate the need for an enhanced term of
imprisonment. The maximum imprisonment provided in the
particular section relating to the second offence should be more
than sufficient, We. recommend that section 75 should be
amended requiting that, on the last occasion, the offender
should, not only have been convicted, but also sentenced to
imprisonment.

3.87. We considered the question whether, in: view of the
Convention relating to the Suppression of Traffic in Person
(1950), previous convictions in foreign countries for offences
of the type dealt with in that Convention should be taken into
account. Such offences are punishable under sections 366A,
3668, 367, 370, 371, 372 and 373 of the Code, besides the Sup-
pression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956.
Since Article 7(1) of the Convention only provides that “‘pre-
vious convictions pronounced in foreign States for offences
referred to in the present Convention shall, to the extent per-
mitted by domestic law, be taken into account for the purpose

1. Cf. section 2७) (a), Criminal Justice Act, 1967.


81

of establishing recidivism”, we do not consider it necessary to
make any such special provision in section 75 of the Code.

3.88. 6) It was suggested that the enhanced punishment Other
of imprisonment for life provided whder section 75 is rather points
harsh. Another point made was that the additional punish-  Consi-
ment should be relatable to the gravity of the second or sub- dered.
sequent offence. We think, however, that this part of section

_ 75 has not created any difficulty, and ‘the Courts should be
left to exercise their discretion in the matter. of sentence.

Gi) At present the section does not cover the case where
the first conviction is for the abetment of or an attempt to com-
mit, an offence punishable under Chapter 12 or 17 of the Code,
and the offender is convicted of such an offeace. Since we
are proposing the extension of section 75 to cover all offences
under the Code, including abetments and attempts, punishable
with imprisonment for three years or more, this lacuna will
disappear.

Gii) Under the section, the previous conviction must have
been before a Court in ‘Indi; Since the Code does not extend
to Jammu & Kashmir and ‘India’ excludes that State, a previous
conviction in Jammu & Kashmir is not relevant for the purposes
of section 75. This anomaly, which arises not out of section ,
75 but out of the extent clause, illustrates the need for extend-
ing the Code to Jammu & Kashmir!.

3.89. We recommend that section 75 may be revised as Recom-
follows :— mended
it of
section 75,
“75, Enhanced punishment for certain offences after pre-
vious convictions——Whoever, having been convicted by 8
Court in India of an offence punishable under ***
this Code with imprisonment of either description for a
term of three years or upwards and sentenced to imprisonment
on such conviction, commits, within three years from the date
of his final release from prison after serving that sentence,
any offence punishable under this Code with like imprison-
ment for the like term, shall be subject for every such sub-
sequent offence to imprisonment for life, or to imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to
fourteen yeats.”?

3.90. In view of the numerous amendments proposed in
this chapter it will be desirable to replace it by a completely
revised chapter in which the sections also are re-numbered in
continuation of the sections in the revised chapter 2. The
necessary draft? has been included in the Amendment Bill
appended to this Report.

1. See paragraphs 1.4 and 1.5 above.

2. A corresponding amendment will be necessary in section 348(1) of the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure, 1898.

3. See the proposed draft of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, clause 6.
3M. of Law/71—7.


Tatrodu-
ctory.

Section
76.

Tilustra-
tion (a)
ommission
recom:
mended.

Section 79.

Sections
76 and 79
formally
revised.

- CHAPTER 4
4.1. Chapter 4 with the title. “general exceptions”, contains
a set of rules which limit and override the verbai definition of
every offence. The object of putting them together at one place,
is, in the words. of the Law Commissioners, “to obviate the

necessity of repeating in every penal clause a considerable num-
ber of limitations”.

4.2. Section 76 says that if a person is bound by law to do
something and does it, he commits no offence, and similarly
if a person believes in good faith, owing to a mistake of fact,
but not of law, that be is bound to do something and does it,
he commits no offence either. The principle governing the
two propositions is sound and we do not propose to disturb
it, Difficulties may, of course, arise when deciding whether a
particular act was done in good faith or done because of a mis-
fake of fact; but those difficulties do not affect the principle.

4.3, Two illustrations are given below the section. The

first, intended to illustrate the first proposition, runs thus :
“A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of bis superior

officer, in conformity with the commands of thelaw. A

has committed no offence.”
The illustration is not well-expressed. It is not clear whether
it is the order of the superior officer that has to be ‘in conformity
with the commands of the law’, or it is the soldier's firing on the
mob that has to be in such conformity. Further, the situation
imagined by this illustration raises controversial questions con-
cerning the duty of a soldier. The proposition sought to be
illustrated is self-evident and does not really need any illustra-
tion, We think, therefore, that this illustration should be
deleted.

4,4, Section 79 which is complementary to section 76, is
also in two parts. It says first.that an act which a person is
justified by law in doing is not an offence, and secondly, that
‘an act that the person doing it believes in good faith, and by
reason of a mistake of fact, to be justified in doing, is not offence.

4,5, While neither section 76 not section 79 requires any
modification of substance, the four propositions contained in
the two sections should, we think, be paired differently. The
first parts of the two sections naturally go together, and may be
combined in section 76 as follows :--

“16. Act done by a person bound or justified by law.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is
bound by law to do it or is justified by law in doing it.”

82


83

Similarly, the second parts of the two sections which have the
common elements of migtake of fact and bona fide belief may
be combined in section 79 as follows :—

“79, Act done by a person by mistake of fact believing
himself bound or justified by law—Nothing is an offence
which is done by a person who, by reason of a mistake of
fact and not by reason of a mistake of law, in good faith
believes himself to be bound by law to do it or justified by
law in doing it.

“Uustrations”

{a) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered
by that Court to arrest Y, and, after due enquiry, be-
lieving Z to be Y, arrests Z. A has committed no
offence.

(b) A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a
murder. A in the exercise, to the best of his judgement
exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives
to all persons of apprehending murderers in the fact,
seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper autho-
rities. A has committed no offence, though it may
turn out that Z was acting in self-defence.”

4.6. Basing itself on the age-old maxim ignorantia legis non
excusat, the Code does not recognise any immunity from cri-
minal liability on the ground of a mistake of law. This is made
clear by the express wording of sections 76 and 79 which, while
allowing an exception for certain acts done under a- mistake
of fact, exclude acts done by a person who, by reason of a mis-
take of law, believes himself to be bound by law to do the act
or to be justified by law in doing it.

4.7. We have considered the question whether this position
should be modified in any way, but have come to the conclu-
sion that notwithstanding its rigidity, it would not be desirable
to change the rule.

One of us, however, is of a different opinion which he has
expressed in a separate note.! Broadly, his suggestion is that
where the mistake of law relates to a provision of a rule, bye-
law, order or notification made under an Act of the legislature,
and the accused person’s mistake is of such a nature that he
could not have avoided it by due diligence, then the mistake
should be a defence, but the burden of proving it should be
on the accused person.

Mistake of
Taw under
the Code.

Question
of —modi-
fying
present
Tule consi-
dered.

. See separate Note by Shri R.L. Narasimham,


Justifi-
cation for
the rule.

Practical
difficulties
absence of
the rule.

Due

diligence:
test not
practical.

84

4.8, Various justifications for the rule have been advanced
in the past by jurists. One is that the law is definite and as-
certainable and everyone may therefore be presumed to know
the law. If this is the basis of the present position, it is clearly
imadequate, The vastness and complexity of penal legislation
in the modern State is not to be denied and the presumption
about everyone knowing the law cannot stand scrutiny for a
moment.

If one could assert that every rule of criminal law represents
what is morally right, it would naturally follow that a person
violating the rule should not be allowed to plead ignorance,
but such an assertion cannot be accepted as valid in regard to.
many injunctions of the criminal law. While, of course, many
of them are based on undisputed moral principles, there are,
on the other hand, a large number which one could only des-
cribe as a moral because they do not claim to be based on ideas
of what is morally right and morally wrong.

The real justification for not allowing mistake of law as a
defence seems to be that the operation of a provision of the law
is intended to be independent of its being known to everybody
and it ought to be so. If it were not so, great uncertainty will
be introduced in the enforcement of the law and may well lead
to injustice.

49. But for the rule, many investigations into offences
would have to branch off into collateral inquires because it would
be obviously unfair to send up the person charged for trial
when there is something in his plea of ignorance of the legal
provision. Difficulties would be still greater when the accused
is prosecuted, True, the Court has even now to inquire into
the state of mind of the accused for various other purposes;
but there. are materials on which the court draws- inferences
as to mental states like fraud, dishonesty, malice and absence
of due care. Subjective’ though these elements may be, they
are investigated on the basis of objective facts. The position
will be very different when the court has to determirte whether
the accused knew or correctly interpreted the content of a sta-
tutory provision or a provision of subordinate legislation. The
accused has merely to assert in the witness-box that he did not
know of it and the prosecution will immediately be faced with
the task of disproving his assertion by cogent evidence.

4.10. Would the case be materially different if, instead of
allowing the plea of ignorance of law in all cases, it is allowed
only when the accused could not have known the provision of
law even with due diligence ? We are afraid that the diff-
culties of the trying court would not be substantially reduced.
Unless every statutory rule, order, bye-law or notification has
been translated into the language of the accused and widely
published (and where the accused is an illiterate or semi-literate
person, was also explained to him), he could say that even with
due diligence he could not have known the law in question,


85

4.11. It is unavoidable in modern regulatory legislation
that a great many details of the law have to be left to be pres-
cribed by means of rules and orders. Enforcement of such
statutory rules and orders is the very basis for the enforcement
of the parent Act. To introduce the concept of “invincible
ignorance” as a legitimate defence in relation to. the former
but not in relation to the latter might well result in tendering
the latter largely ineffective. As a learned writer puts it, “such
Statutes are not meant to punish the vicious will but to put pres-
sure on the thoughtless and inefficient to do their whole duty
in the interest of public health safety or morals!” We do
not, therefore, share the view that a Possible area for allowing
ignorance of law as a defence may include “misdemeanours
punishable only by small fine, various ordinances and_ technical
regulations of administrative boards”, and in these cases “actual
Knowledge of the law should be required?.”. We think that
the present rule of ignorance of such Tegulations affording no
justification for contravening them has to remain.

4.12. It has been urged that even a conviction for a contra-
vention of a statutory rule or order carries a stigma, and it is
unfair that such stigma should attach to a person when he knew
nothing about it and when he could not, with due diligence, have
known sufficiently about it. We think this is somewhat exag-
gerated. The stigma arising out of a conviction for an offence
like not fencing a machine in the prescribed manner, or not
constructing a bath room in accordance with the municipal
bye-law, or failing to file a tax return by the prescribed date, is
negligible.

4.13, We should mention here that a majority of the judges
of High Courts and of the members of the higher judiciary who
gave an opinion on the question were against recognising mis-
take of law as a defence or even as a mitigating circumstance to
be expressly provided in the Penal Code.

4.14. We find that the penal codes of some countries provide
for recognising ignorance of law as a Proper defence. We
feel, however, that the attitude of the courts towards such pro-
visions in the code is of more importance than the Provisions
themselves. The magnitude of the Population, the number of
Prosecutions involving such issues, the literacy of the citizens
and other similar factors, which vary from country to country,
will also have to be taken into account. What may have worked
well elsewhere may not necessarily be suitable for India.

4.15. One of us considered that to prevent hardship in ex-
treme cases, there should be an express power given to the
Court to award a punishment different in nature from the
punishment prescribed in the Jaw, or lower in degree than the
minimum punishment. We think however that, even under

Subordi-
rale
legislation
Rot to be
excluded
from scope
of rule,

Argument
of stigma
attaching
to cone
viction
consi-
dered.

Majority
of

Judges
against
modify

ing present
nule,
Foreign
precedents
may not
be

suitable,

Modi-
fication
of pre-
sent

rule not
recom:
eee mented |

1. Roscoe Pound, the Spirit of the Common Law, p. 52.
2. JeromegHall, General Principles of criminal Law, 1960, p. 404.


Section
71.

Section
78.

Section
80.

Section
31

revised.

1. See para. 4.

86

the existing provisions. where the Court is satisfied about the
genuineness of the plea of ignorance, it takes that fact into
account while passing sentence. We do not therefore recom-
mend any change in the existing position.

4.16. Section 77, which protects a Judge while acting judi-
cially, needs no change.

4.17. Section 78 protects acts done in pursuance of a judg-
ment or order of a Court of Justice, although the Court may
not have had jurisdiction to pass such judgement or order, so
long as the person acting under it believes in good faith that
the Court had such jurisdiction. This protection is obviously
necessary if decisions of the Courts are to be promptly enforced.
We feel, in fact, that there ought to be no right of private de-
fence against the enforcement of a Court’s decision—a matter
we deal with latert. Section A should, therefore, stand as
at is.

4.18. Section 80 says that a person is not liable for the
unintended and unknown consequences of his ‘lawful act, done
in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and
caution’. The illustration to the section brings out the mean-
ing clearly, and no change is required.

4,19. Section 81 states that nothing is an offence merely
by reason of its being done with the knowledge that. it is likely
to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to
cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of preventing or
avoiding other harm to person or property. Then follows
an explanation that it is a question of fact in such a case whether
the harm to be prevented or avoided was of such a nature and
so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act
with the knowledge that it was likely to cause harm.

The intention of this provision is clear enough. The main
ideas being (i) the act which the law excuses is done in order
to avoid other harm, (ii) the harm to be avoided must, in its
nature and imminence, be such as to justify the risk of doing
an act likely to cause harm, and (iii) the act is done in good
faith without any intention of causing harm. One of these
ideas is put in the Explanation, while the other two are in the
main section. This splitting up does not seem to be necessary.
‘The general exception will be easier to understand if it is stated
as follows :--

“81. Nothing is an offence which, though done with
the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, is done in
good faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other
harm to person or property, provided the latter harm is
of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the
risk of doing the act with such knowledge.”



87

The illustrations help in understanding the meaning and should
be retained,

4.20. Section 82 completely exempts children under 7 years
of age from criminal liability in respect of any act done by
them. The basis of this total exemption is the assumption that
a child below that age does not realise, and consequently does
not intend, the consequences of his act and the necessary culp-
able state of mind must be deemed to be absent. In recent
years there has been an increased weight of informed opinion
in favour of changes in our methods of dealing with delinquet
children. This changed attitude is mainly due to the aware-
ness that their deliquency stems largely from parental neglect,
parental conflict, association with evil elements, poverty and
similar factors which operate more intensively on children
than on adults. Special legislation in the form of Children
Acts provides for a variety of measures designed to correct,
rather than punish, the erring child. The two main objectives
of such measures arc to take children as far as possible outside
the ambit of criminal liability and the jurisdiction of the ordi-
nary criminal Courts, and to make such arrangements for their
correction, education and welfare as are appropriate.

4.21. Noticing that in many countries the minimum age
of criminal liability is fixed higher than in the Indian Penal
Code, we included in our questionniare, a question, “Do you
consider that any increase is necessary in the minimum 386
of criminal responsibility which is 7 years at present. If so,
what should it be ?”

Among those who expressed an opinion on this question,
a small majority were against an increase in the age mentioned
in section 82. But there were a considerable number who
would have it raised to 10, and some who even favoured 12
years as the minimum age.

Judges of High Courts were mostly against any change in
the minimum age. According to some of them, there was no
scientific basis for associating culpability with a particular age
in the development of a child. Some thought that raising the
minimum age might lead to increase in juvenile crime. It was
also said that this was not a very great problem and sections
82 and 83 could be left as they were.

A Sessions Judge stated that “in view of the fact that child-
ren are now being sent to educational institutions at compara-
tively early ages, it is not necessary to increase the age from 7
years in order to fasten criminal liability. Besides, the sooner
the criminal habit of a boy is curbed, the better it would be.
The curb may be enforced by sending the boy to a_reformatory
school or some such institution.”

Section
82.

Views

on
increasing
minimum
age of
criminal
responsi-
bility.


Law
in other
countries.

88

Per contra, another Sessions Judge stated that in his opinion
a child upto the age of 10 years was not capable of understanding
the gravity of an offence committed by him and therefore the
miniraum age of criminal responsibility should be 10 years.

4.22. The law in this respect varies considerably in other
countries. In England the minimum age was raised to 10
quite recently in 1963. Under the Children and Young Persons
Act, 1969, while the age of criminal responsibility remains
unchanged, a child under 14 years cannot be charged and pro-
secuted for any criminal offence except homicide. A new con-
cept of unenforceable criminal responsibility has been intro-
duced in the case of children between 10 years and 14 years of
age. The commission of an offence is, however, a possible
pre-condition for a care or supervision order.

In Argentina, when a minor under 16 years of age commits
a crime classified in law as a felony, a competent Judge pro-
ceeds to verify the crime and to obtain other information through
the National Council of Minors, and if be considers it advis-
able, he may order the internment of the minor in an institu-
tion under the Council.

In Australia, the minimum age is 7 years in Queensland,
Western Australia and Tasmania, and 8 years in New South
Wales, Victoria and South Australia.

In Canada, the law is similar to ours. A child under 7 years
is completely exempt, and a child between the ages of 7 and
14 is exempt unless he is competent to know the nature and
consequence of his conduct and to appreciate that it was wrong.

In France, it would appear that a child below 13 years of
age is not punishable. If from the circumstances and the per-
sonality of the offender, it has been decided to impose a penal
sentence upon a minor above the age of 13, elaborate rules are
Jaid down requiring the substitution of a lesser sentence for the
normal sentence.

While the minimum age is 14 in the Federal Republic of
Germany and in Norway, it is 15 in Denmark.

In the United States the age of absolute incapacity varies
from State to State between 8 years and 12 years. In one State,
New Jersey, it is as high as 16 years.

As regards Asian countries, the minimum age is 7 years in
Thailand, Ceylon, fraq, Syria and Lebanon; 9 years in the
Philippines; 11 years in Turkey and Iran; and 14 years in Japan.


89

4.23. In view of this wide variation, we carefully considered
the question whether any increase in the minimum age is neces-
sary or desirable. The age at which a child can understand the
nature of his act and its consequences is not necessatily 7 years
it could be 8 or 9 or 10, or even more. The age of 7 mentioned
in section 82 is in a sense arbitrary, but then any other age
would be equally arbitrary.

With the establishment of juvenile courts and other agencies
exclusively concerned with juvenile crime, the need for the
application of the penal law in the ordinary sense decreases in
the case of children. Society could well regard delinquent
children, not as criminals in the sense in which adult offenders
are regarded, but as persons requiring treatment. An amend-
ment of section 82 could with some justification, be suggested
on the ground that the stigma of a criminal conviction should
not attach to any child below, say, the age of ten. The act of
the child should not amount to an offence, the child committing
the act should not be liable to arrest or prosecution, and the
ordinary machinery of the criminal courts should not be appli-
cable to him even in theory.

What higher age should be substituted from this point of
view can be a matter of controversy. Having regard to condi-
tions generally existing in Indian families, we are inclined to
suggest 10 years as the minimum age. Upto that age parents,
by and large, are still able to control the conduct of the child
and no serious harm is likely to be caused if criminal liability
is not attached to the child’s act.

4.24, At the same time, it seems to us very necessary that
legislation for the care and protection of children should be
enacted in all those States! where it has not so far been enacted,
and it should be properly enforced in the States where it has
already been enacted. On the assumption that this will be done,
we recommend that section 82 may be amended by substituting
“ten years” for ‘‘seven years’.

4,25. With the above amendment of section 82, section 83
will practically lose its utility. We do not think it is worthwhile
retaining it for offending children between the ages of 10 and
12, and propose its omission.

4.26. Section 84 exempts the act of a person of unsound
mind from criminal liability in the following terms:—

“Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who,
at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind,
is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is
doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.”

Increase
of
minimum
age to
ten
recom-
mended,

Amend-
ment of
section

Section
83

omitted.

Section
84 based

on
M'Naghten
Rules.

1. Bihar, Orissa and Rajasthan.


Rule cri-
ticised as
based on
miscon-
ception
of nature
of

insanity,

> 90

In his Draft Penat Code, Macaulay had Suggested two sections
{66 and 67), one stating that “nothing is an offence which is
done by a person in a state of idiocy” and the other Stating that
“nothing is an offence which a person does in consequence of
being mad or delirious at the time of doing it.” The Law
Commissioners, in replacing these two sections of the Draft Penal
Code by section 84, appear to have adopted in a brief and suc-
sinet form the test laid down in England by the so-called
“M’Naghten Rules”! The essence of these Rules is contained
in the following Passage which is constantly quoted or referred
to by judges:—

. “The jury ought to be told in all cases that every man
is presumed to be sane, and to possess a sufficient degree
of reason to be tesponsible for his crimes, until the contrary
be proved to their satisfaction; and that to establish a de-
fence on the ground of insanity, it must be clearly proved
that, at the time of the committing of the act, the party
accused was labouring under such a defect of reason, from
disease of the mind, as not to know the nature and quality
of the act he was doing, or if he did know it, that he did
not know he was doing what was wrong.”

4.27. The British Royal Commission on Capital Punishment,
which made its Report in 1953, noted that this test “was
strongly attacked almost as soon as it was formulated. mainly
by members of the medical Profession. but also by lawyers,
notable by Fitzjames Stephen. and it has been subjected to
constant criticism ever since”?. Doctors with experience of
mental disease “have contended that the M’Naghten tes is
based on the “entirely obsolate and misleading conception of
the nature of insanity, since insanity does not only, or primarily,
affect the cognitive or intellectual faculties, but affects the whole
personality of the patient, including both the will and the emo-
tions. An insane person may therefore often know the nature
and quality of his act and that it is wrong and forbidden by jaw
but yet commit it as a result of the mental disease. He may,
for example, be overwhelmed by a sudden irresistible
impulse; or he may regard his motives as standing higher than
the sanctions of the law; or it may be that, in the distorted world
in which he lives, normal considerations have little meaning
or little vatue."5 However, “the Court of Criminal Appeal
has consistently uphald (16 validity of the Rules and refused
10 approve their extension to cover the ‘irresistible’ or ‘un-
controllable’ impulse. The Court has also declined to enlarge
their interpretation in other tespects. Thus it has held that the
words ‘the nature and quality of the act’ must be taken

1. These are the replies of the judges to the five questions put to them in 1843 by the
House of Lords in the case of Daniel M‘Naghten. The Passage quoted is from the
answer 10 questions If and TH.

2, Report, para. 227.
3, Report, para, 227.


91

to refer only to the physical character of the act and not to
distinguish between its physical and moral aspects and that
‘wrong’ means in effect ‘punishable by law’.!”

4.28. After a deep and extensive study of the laws of other
countries as well, the Royal Commission came to the conclu-
sion that the test_ of responsibility laid down by the M’Naghten
Rules was so defective that the law ought to be changed. They
suggested that, if the alteration were to be made by extending
the scope of those Rules, the formula might be:-—

“The jury must be satisfied that at the time of commit-
ting the act the accused, as a result of disease of the mind
or mental deficiency, (a) did not know the nature and
quality of the act, or (b) did not know that it was wrong,
or (c) was incapable of preventing himself from committ-
ing it.”

They, however, considered that it would be preferable to abro-
gate the M’Naghten Rules and leave the jury to determine whe-
ther, at the time of the act, the accused was suffering from di-
sease of the mind or mental deficiency to such a degree that he
ought not to be held responsible. Neither recommendation
was accepted in Britain.

4.29, We find that the criminal codes of some of the Pro-
vinces of Australia provide for the plea of “irresistible impulse”’,
Thus, the Tasmanian Criminal Code enacts in section 16:

“(L) A person is ‘Rot-criminally responsible for an act
done, or for an omission made, by him—

(a) when afflicted with mental disease to such an
extent as to render him incapable of-
{i) understanding the physical character of such
act or omission; or

(ii) Knowing that such act or omission was
one which he ought not to do or make; or

(b) When such act or omission was done or made
under an impulse which, by reason of mental
disease, he was in substance deprived of any power
140 resist.

(2) The fact that a person was, at the time at which
he is alleged to have done an act or made an omission, in-
capable of controlling his conduct generally, is relevant
to the question whether he did such “tact or made such
omission under an impulse which by reason of mental
disease he was in substance deprived of any power to resist.”

Tests
Tecom-
mended
by a Royal
Commi-
sion in
1953.

Provision
in some
Criminal
Codes.

1, Report, para. 229.
2, Report, para. 317.


92

Similar provisions are to be found in the Criminal Codes of
Queensland and of West Australia.

The American Law Institute has suggested? the followiag
test:—

“(1) A person is not responsible, for criminal conduct
if at the time of such conduct as a result of mental disease
or defect he lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate
the criminality? (wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform
his conduct to the requirements of law.

(2) As used in this Article, the term “mental disease
or defect” does not include an abnormality manifested only
by repeated criminal or otherwise anti-social conduct.’*

In France, article 64 of the Penal Code provides that “there
is no crime or offence when the accused was in a state of mad-
ness at the time of the act or in the event of his having been
compelled by a force which he was unable to resist.”

Article 10 of the Swiss Penal Code is to the effect that “any
person suffering from a mental disease, idiocy or serious im-
pairment of his mental faculties who, at the time of committing
the act, is incapable of appreciating the unlawful nature of his
act or of acting in accordance with this appreciation cannot
be punished.”

We may also refer to “the Durham Rule’, followed in the
District of Columbia (U.S.A.). The rule is simply that an ac-
cused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was
the product of mental disease or mental defect. We use ‘disease’
in the sense of a condition which is considered capable of either
improving or deteriorating. We use ‘defect’ in the sense of
a condition not considered capable of either improving or
deteriorating and which may be either congenital, or the result
of injury, or the residual effect of a physical or mental disease.

Questions 4.30. In view of the strong criticism to which the M‘Nagh-
on the ten Rules have been subjected in Britain and in view of the
subject recognition given’ to the plea of “irresistible impulse” in the

‘opinions penal laws of several countries we included in our Questionnaire
thereon, the following question:—

“12. (a) Should the existing provision (section 8&4)
relating to the defence of insanity be modified or expanded
in any way ?

. 1, A.L.L Model Penal Code, proposed Official Draft 1962—Section 4.01.
2. The choice between the words “criminality” and “wrongfuiness” is left open by the
Institute,
३, The law on the subject in some other countries is given in Appendix a of the Royal
Commission s Report, op. vit. pp. 407 to 413.
4. Durham v, United States. (1954) 94 U.S. App. D.C, 228; 14 P. 2d. 862,


93

.. (09) Should the test be related to the offender's incapa-
city to know that the act is wrong oF to his incapacity to
know that it is punishable ?

(०0 Should the defeace of insanity be available in cases
where the offender, although aware of the wrongful, or even
criminal, nature of his act, is unable to desist from doing
it because of his mental condition?”

The majority of the views expressed on part (a) of the ques-
tion were strongly opposed to any change in the existing section.
Most of these replies seemed to assume that, even theoretically,
the present provision is adequate. They pointed out a number of
practical difficulties which were likely to arise, if the provisions
of the section were made more liberal. The decision would
then have to depend on medical opinion to a greater degree than
at present. Serious doubts were expressed as to whether
medical experts of the requisite quality would be available all
over India particularly in the districts. These opinions also
stressed that the present provision caused no practical difficulty;
and if in a particular case not falling strictly within the terms of
section 84, the mental condition of the accused was suchas
to deserve special consideration, it could be left to the proroga-
tive powers of commutation and remission vested in the Pre-
sident and the Governor.

As regards part (b) of the question also, the majority of the
Teplies suggested no change. Some expressed the view that
the test should’ be knowledge of what is “wrong”, and others
that it should be knowledge of what is punishable by law.

As regards part (c), there was little support for Specifically in-
cluding “irresistible impulse” in section 84. Some of the opinions
considered that this was not strictly insanity. The main objection
was that any such provision would make the trial of the issue
more difficult for the judges than the present provision.

4.31. A few questions arising directly out of the wording of
section 84 were considered by us. It will be noticed that while
the  M’Naghten Rules refer to “disease of the mind” the
Penal Code uses the expression “‘unsoundness of mind”, This
appears to cover not only any form of insanity or mental disease,
but also any form of mental deficiency, like idiocy, imbecility
and even feeble-mindedness. A temporary delusion may
also be regarded as unsoundness of mind. ‘ft might be more
in accord with medical terminology to use both the expressions
“disease of the mind” and “mental deficiency” instead of the
somewhat vague and unprecise expression ,‘unsoundness of
mind”. Since, however, no difficulty appears to have been
felt in understanding the sense in which this is used in the Penal
Code, we do not think it is worthwhile changing it.

“Une
soundness
of mind”
covers
mental
disease and
mental
deficiency.


Meaning
of
“Wrong”
क्र
Naghten
Rules.

Ambiguity
to “either
wrong

or
contrary
to law”

in section
84.

94

4.32. The crucial test under section 84 is whether the
accused, at the time of committing the offence, is incapable of
knowing “that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary
to law.” The M’Naghten Rules only refer to the accused not
knowing that he is doing what is wrong!. The question whether
the word ‘wrong’ these Rules means legal wrong or moral
wrong has been debated at jength in Australia and in England.
In A ustratia?, the following direction to the jury given by Dixon
J. is considered to be a correct statement of the law:—

“The question is whether he was able to appreciate the
wrongness of the particular act he was doing at the particular
time. Could this man be said to know in this sense whether his
act was wrong if, through a disease or defect or disorder of the
mind he could not think rationally of the reasons which to
ordinary peopie make that act right or wrong? If through
the disordered condition of the mind, he could not reason
about the matter with a moderate degree of sense and
composure, | may be said that he could not know that what
he was doing was wrong.

In England,3 however, it has been emphatically held by the Court
of Criminal Appeal that “courts of law can only distinguish
between that which is in accordance with the law and that
which is contrary to law”, and “there is no doubt that in the

M’Naghten Rules ‘wrong’ means contrary to law and not ‘wrong’

according to the opinion of one manor of a number of people
on the question whether a particular act might or might not
be justified.”

4.33. Indian case law on the subject seems to leave the
position obscure. In a Calcutta case*, it was observed:—

“We are satisfied that the appellant knew the nature of
his act. What we have to see is whether he knew that
what he was doing was either wrong or contrary to law. If
he knew that what he was doing was wrong, then he
will not be protected even if he did not know that it was
contrary to Jaw. If he knew that what he was doing was
contrary to law, then also he could not be protected even
though he did not kAow that what he was doing is wrong.”

According to this view, it would be necessary for the accus-
ed io show that, by reason of unsoundness of mind he did not
know that his act was wrong and also that he did not know that
it was contrary to law.

1, See para. 4.26. above.

2. Porter, (1933) 55 C.L.R. 192, 189; approved in Stapleton, (1952) 86 C.L.R. 358, 367.
3. R. ४. Windfe, (1952) 2 Ail E.R. 1 (Lord Goddard, C.J.).
4. Ceron Ali v. Emp., ALR. 1941 Cal. 129, 130 (Sen and Roxburgh, 3J.).

r


95

In a later case,! however, the same High Court observed:—

“Of the three elements necessary to be established under
section 84, any of which must be established by an accused
to obtain the benefit of the provisions, it appears that, first,
the nature of the act was clearly known to the accused; se-
condly, that he knew that the act was contrary to Jaw, ot
we have said this was probably known to him; but (the)
third element on which the case really turned is, whether the
accuscd knew that the act was wrong.”

Curiously, no reference is made to the earlier judgment.

Inasmuch as it is for the accused to show that he comes
within the general exception, or in other words he did not
know either the wrongfulness or the criminality of his act, it
appears to us that the earlier judgment states the position cor-
rectly. The view taken in the later Calcutta case was dissented
from by the Allahabad High Court.?

4.34. Although the M’Naghten Rules still hold the field “Dimi-
in England despite the recommendations of the Royal Commis. _ nished res-
sion, a new defence to murder, known as “diminished responsi- Pai.
bility”, was introduced by the Homicide Act of 1957. If esta. PY”:
blished, it entitles the accused to be found guilty of man
slaughter instead of murder. Section 2 of that Act enacts :

“(1) Where a person kills or is a party to the killing of
another, he shall not be convicted of murder if he was suffer-
ing from such abnormality of mind (whether arising from
a condition of arrested or retarded development of mind
or any inherent -causes or induced by disease or injury)
as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his पु
acts and omissions in doing or being a party to the killing.

(2) ord aoe ee

(3) A person who but for this section would be liable,
whether as principal or as accessory, to be convicted oF
murder shall be liable instead to be convicted of man
slaughter,”

We considered whether it would be desirable to have some
such provision in the Code, either restricted to culpable homi-
cide or, more generally applicable to all offences, as a supple-
ment to section 84, but decided against it, mainly because of the
complicated medico-legal issues it would introduce in the trial.
So far as murder cases are concerned, the Code already gives
discretion to the Courts in the matter of sentences, the death
sentence not being obligatory.3 As regards other offences also,

जे, Ashivaddin Ahmed v. The King, ALR. 1949 Cal. 182, 183 (Roxburgh and Blank,
ii.

2. Lakshmi ४. State, ALR. 1954 All. 534, 536.
3. See also 35th Repert of Capital Punishment, paragraph 9.24.


Section 84
to remain
as it is.

Sections
85 and 86.

96

there is no need to provide specially that, if the “diminished
responsibility” is established, the offender will receive lesser
punishment. The mental abnormality of the offender will
naturally be taken into account by the court like any other ex-
tenuating circumstance while deciding upon the sentence to be
awarded.

4.35, In the result, our view is that, in spite of its short-
comings, section 84 need not be altered in any way.

4,36. Section 85 equates involuntary intoxication with
uasoundness of mind and lays down the same rule for excusing
a person. The next section dealing with voluntary intoxi-
cation provides that “where an act done is not an offence unless
done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person who does
the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt
with as if he had the same ‘‘knowledge as he would have had
if he had not been intoxicated”. The effect is that voluntary
intoxication cannot be pleaded as a defence on the ground that
the intoxicated person did not have:the particular kind of know-
ledge or intent mentioned in the definition of the offence with
which he is charged.

4.37. While the Code makes it clear that voluntary or self-
induced intoxication does not constitute an excuse for committing
an offence, it is silent on the point whether it should be treated
as a mitigating or extenuating circumstance for the purpose
of sentence. We included in our questionnaire the question:—

“When a person commits an offence in a state of intoxi-
cation (self-induced), should that be made a ground for
enhanced punishment ?”

Only a few were in favour of the suggestion as a general
proposition applicable to all cases where a person commits an
‘offence when in a state of intoxication. One or two were in
favour of providing enhanced punishment in the case of offen-
ces based on rashness or negligence, since intoxication would
probably have contributed to that mental state. Another sug-
gestion was that enhanced punishment ought to be provided in
those cases where the offender has deliberately intoxicated
himself for committing the offence.

‘The majority, however, were not in favour of the suggestion.
‘They were of the view that no special provision was necessary
in the Code, that depending on the circumstances of the case,
intoxication could be regarded as enhancing culpability (¢.g.,
where, the offender put himself in that condition in order to
commit the crime ruthlessly) or it could be regarded as extenua-
ting the offence, and that these were matters of detail which
should be left to the judge to take into account when deciding the
appropriate sentence.


97

Agreeing with this view. we have come to the conclusion
that a provision for enhanced punishment is not desirable
and that the matter may be left to the discretion of the courts
as at present.

4.38. The language of section 86 has caused some confusion.
As mentioned by the Supreme Court, “while the first part of the
section speaks of, intent or knowledge, the latter part deals
only with knowledge, and a certain element of doubt in inter-
pretation may possibly be felt by reason of this omission.
If ia voluntary drunkenness knowledge is to be presumed in the
same manner as if there was no drunkenness, what about this
excuse where mens rea is required ? Are we at liberty to ‘place
intent on the same footing and. if so, why has the section
omitted intent in its latter part ?" To this question the Supreme
Court's answer is, “So far as knowledge is concerned, we must
attribute to the intoxicated man the same knowledge as if he
was quite sober, but so far as intention is concerned, we must
gather it from the attending circumstances of the case, paying
due regard to the degree of intoxication.”! We consider that
it would be desirable to rectify this anomalous position by omit-
ting the reference to intention altogether.

4.39. We recommend that sections 85 and 86 which deal with
the same subject may be combined in one section and revised as
follows:

“5. Act of a person who is intoxicated —(1) Nothing
js an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of
doing it, is. by reason of intoxication. incapable of knowing
the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong
or contrary to law:

Provided that such intoxication was not self-induced.”

(2) Where an act done by a person in a state of intoxi-
cation which is self-induced will be an offence if done with
a particular knowledge. he shall be liable to be dealt with
as if he did the act with the knowledge he would have
had if he had not been intoxicated.

(3) Intoxication is self-induted in a person when he
voluntarily causes the state of intoxication In himself.

4.40. Sections 87, 88 and 89 deal elaborately with different
situations where bodily harm is caused, but with consent given
by or on behalf of the person to whom it is caused. After a
close scrutiny of the sections we do not find any need to alter
them.

1. Basdev v. The State of PEPSU, (1956) S.C.R. 363, 365.

3 Mof Law 71-8

Know-
ledge and
intention
under
section
86.

Sections
85 and 86
combined
and
revised.

Sections

and 89.


Section
90,

Scetion
oR.

Section
92.

Section

Section
94

revised,

Section 121.

98

4.41. Section 90 defines the situations in which the consent
apparently to be given by a person is not sufficient for purposes
of the Code. It was suggested that consent obtained from a
Person by putting him under hypnotic or other occult influence
should be specifically mentioned in the section. We have
little doubt that if ever a concrete case of this sort came up,
the couris would have no difficulty in holding such consent to
be insufficient even under the existing provision. The intlu-
ence on the mind could be regarded as hav ing produced either
a misconception of fact or an inability to understand the nautre
and consequence of that to which the Person gives his consent.
It does not appear necessary to amplify section 90 to cover
such cases which in any event are not of practical importance.

4.42. No change is required in section 91.

4.43. Section 92 provides for a situation of emergency
where there is no time to obtain the consent either of the person
affected or of his guardian, and the law therefore says that,
if the act causing harm or likely to cause harm is done for the
benefit of the person concerned and done in good faith, it is
no offence. The same safeguards as occur in section 89 are
provided in this situation also, and the Explanation attached
to the section says that pecuniary benefit is not “benefit” within
the meaning of the section.

The type of case envisaged by the section is that of a surgeon
who suddenly finds it necessary to perform an operation and has
no time to obtain anybody's consent. He is protected, subject to
the safeguards mentioned, if he acts in good faith for the
patient's benefit. A suggestion was made that the power of a
Surgeon in such circumstances should be further widened,
so as to do away with the requirement of consent altogether
even if there be time to obtain consent. We feel no justification
for such a change, since, under the 189 as it is, a surgeon has
sufficient protection in suitable cases, and to widen that pro-
tection would be somewhat risky, apart from placing too heavy
a burden on a surgeon. We are, therefore, not Proposing any
change in section 92,

4.44, Nor is any change needed in section 93, which protects
a communication made in good faith for the benefit of the
Person to whom it is made.

4.45, Section 94 embodies . the principle that a person
compelled by force or threat of force to do any act should
not be punished for that act. To this there ate two
exceptions, namely, murder and waging war against the
Government of India! (which is the only offence against the
State punishable with death), Further, the threat must be of
instant death to the person made to commit the offence.



99

Another condition is that the person so threatened should
not have placed himself in that situation of his own accord.
1६ is only right that the law should in no circumstance excuse
murder or waging war against the State and. to that extent, the
stringent rule contained im section 94 should remain as it is.

There are, however, two directions in which we feel that
the defence of duress can be usefully extended. First, we think
that for practical purposes threat of serious bodily injury can
be, and usually is, as compelling as the threat of death. It may
be mentioned here that in England in answering the
question what is a sufficiently serious threat to amount to duress,
“Blackstone refers to death or other bodily harm, Stephen to
death or grievous bodily harm and Lord Goddard, C.J., in
Sieane* to violence or imprisonment.2” According to Russell,
the view “is freely held that threats of immediate and serious
physical suffering, such as death or grievous bodily harm,
should excuse from liability a person who may have committed
a lesser offence, though certainly not a grave offence such as
murder3”. A person threatened with grievous bodily harm
should, therefore, be permitted to plead duress as an excuse
in the same way as a person threatened with death.

Secondly, we think—and even more firmly—that threat of
death or serious bodily injury to someone very near and dear
to a person, can be even more compelling than threat of injury
to a person himself. It has been said, and we agree, that
“many a man who regards his own person safety as of little
significance will be subjected to the most extreme stress of mind

if confronted with a threat to kill or seriously injure his wife
or child.4”

We propose, therefore, to include such a threat in the rule
in section 94, limiting, however, the list of near relatives to the
children, the parents and the spouse of the person threatened.
The two Explanations should Be put as illustrations, as they

deal with special situations and do not contain a clarificatory
provision.

In the light of the above, section 94 should be redrafted as
follows :—~

“94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.—Except
murder and offences against the State punishable with death,
nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled
to do it by threats which, at the time of doing it, reasonably

. (1947) 1 All E.R. at page 816.
. Smith and Hogan, Criminal law (२00 Edn.) page 144.
. Russell on Crime, (12th Edn,) Vot. J, page 90.

. Edwards, “Compulsion, Coercion and Criminal Responsibility.” (1951) 14 Modern
Law Review 296, 301.

Penne:


See
95.

Section

100

cause the apprehension that instant death or grievous bodily harm.
either to that person or to any near relative of that person present
when the threats are made, will otherwise be the consequence :

Provided the person doing the act did not, of his own accord,
or from a reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of
instant death or grievous bodily harm," place himself in the situa-
tion by which he became subject to such constraint.

“Explanation —tn this section, —

{a) ‘grievous bodily harm, means permanent pri-
vation or impairment of the sight of either eye or the
hearing of either ear. or privation of any organ, member
or joint of the body? ;

(b}‘near relative’ means parent, spouse, son or
daughter.

Ailustrations

(3) A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat
of being beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their character,
is not entitled to the benefit of this exception.

“(b) A smith seized by a gang of dacoits and forced,
by threats of instant death or grievous bodily harm, to take
his tools and to force the door of a house for the dacoits to
enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this
exception.”

4.46. Section 95 is an application of the maxim de mininums
non curat lax to the field of criminal law. If the harm caused
by an act is so small that no man of ordinary sense and temper
would complaint of it. the act does not amount to an offence.
The object of this provision is “to exclude from the operation
of the Penal Code those cases which, from the imperfection of
the language. may fall within the letter of the Jaw but are not
within its spirit. No charge is needed in the section.

4.47. Sections 96 to 106 which analyse and delimit the right

96 w 190 - of private defence come up before the courts for interpretation
re-arvanze- and application more frequently than the other sections in this

ment res
commen:
ded

3, The expression

101६.

chapter. After stating the general exception in section 96 that
nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of this right,
the right is analysed in the subsequent sections from two aspects,
namely, defence of the body and defence of property. Sec-
tion 97 defines these two aspects. While sections 98 and 99 are

ricvous bodily harm’ has been preferred to the expression ‘grievous
which, as defined in section 320, is very wide.

2. See the revised definition of “grievous hurt’ proposed in chapter 16 below. Only

the first 1७० clauses of that

ion are included in “grievous bodily harm’’.

see paragraph 16.55, below.

3. Veeda

Menezes v. Yusuf Khan, (1968) S.C.R. Supp. 123, ALR, 966 S.C. 1773, 1774.


101

applicable in relation to both aspects, sections 100, 101, 102
and 106 are concerned with defence of the body and sections 103,
104 and 105 are concerned with defence of Property. We pro-
pose below a re-arrangement of the provisions, bringing together
those relating to the right to defend the body in one section and
those relating to the right to defend property in another section.
This wouid, it seems to us, make for an easier understanding

of the provisions and facilitate their application in relevant cas-
es.

4.48. In defining the right to defend property, section 97
uses the phrase “offence falling under the definition of theft,
robbery, mischief or criminal trespass”. The intention and
effect of this formula is obviously to cover all aggravated forms
of the offences named. There appears to be no particular point
in using the words “any act which is an offence” in the second
clause of section 97, since section 98 adequately covers all cases
where the act is not an offence on the part of the doer but the
right to defend still exists. The tight to defend property may
accordingly be defined as follows :—

“Every person has a right to defend the Property, whe-
ther moveable or immoveable, of himself or of any other
person against any offence which is or includes robbery, theft,
mischief or criminal trespass and any attempt to commit
any such offence.”

4.49. Section 98 does not require any change.

4.50. Section 99 has four paragraphs and two explanations.
The first two paragraphs preclude the exercise of the right of
private defence against acts done by, or under the direction
of public servants, in certain circumstances, but this is subject
to the two explanations, the first being relevant to the first
paragraph and the second to the second paragraph.

The third paragraph altogether debars the right of private
defence in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the
public authorities. We consider this Provision later at length
as it is controversial and raises a question of policy.

The fourth paragraph contains the basic Provision that the
right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of
more harm than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.

4.51. The first paragraph refers to an act done by a public
servant “though that act may not be strictly justifiable by law".
These words have been uniformly construed by the High Courts
to be applicable only to those acts which are irregular and not
to those which are wholly illegal. For instance, if a sub-ins-
pector of police armed with a search warrant from a magis-
trate attempts to search the house of a person and is resisted by

Section
97.

Section
98.

Section
99.

Right.

of defence
against
irregular
acts of
public
servants.


Public
servants

102

force. and it is subsequenily found that the warrant was with-
out jurisdiction, the sub-inspector cannot successfully raise
the plea that there was no tight of private defence against his
action, even though he may have acted in good faith. The
house-owner would be justified in using such force as may be
necessary to turn him out of the house. This uniform judicial
view has led to certain anomalies, and has also put public ser-
vants executing orders of courts of justice to unreasonable jeo~
pardy in the execution of their duties. Under section 78 of the
Code. an act done by a public servant in pursuance of the judg-
ment or order of a court of justice gives him complete immunity
from prosecution, even though the court may have had no juris-
diction to pass such judgment or order, provided he. in good
faith, believes that the court had such jurisdiction. Though he
is thus immune from prosecution for any offence, (if it is event-
ually found that the order of the court of justice is without
jurisdiction), nevertheless. in view of the somewhat restrictive
language used in section 99, he runs the risk of being injured
as a result of the exercise of the right of private defence by the
party against whom he attempts to execute the judgment or
order of the court.

4.52, A study of the case-law under the first paragraph of
section 99 shows how, in a large number of instances, public
servants acting in execution of the court's orders have been badly
injured. and the courts have acquitted their assailants on the
sole ground that the court’s order was without jurisdiction.
Whether an order of a court is within its jurisdiction or out-
side its jurisdiction, is extremely difficult to decide, and, in
many instances. there can be no final view in this matter un-
til the dispute is taken up to the highest court. But a subordi-
nate public servant executing that order should not be put in
jeopardy of bodily injury so long as his action is in good faith.
Public policy also requires that such protection should be given
to facilitate the prompt exccution of the court's orders. The
orders of a court ought to be implicitly obeyed. We therefore
recommend the insertion of a new provision in section 99 so
as to make the immunity from prosecution conferred by section
78 co-extensive with the deprivation of the right of private defence
against such action in the first paragraph of section 99.

We. however. consider that this extra-ordinary ‘protection
should be given only when a public servant acts in pursuance
of an order of a court of justice. Where he acts in exercise
of what he considers to be the power conferred on him by law.
the existing provision will suffice. that is to say, if his action is
irregular, there will be no right of private defence. but if his
action is illegal. either owing to absence of jurisdiction or any
other ground, there will be a right of private defence.



103

4.53. The same view will have to be taken in regard to the
right of defence against an act done by the direction of a public
servant when that direction is not strictly justifiable by law. The
second paragraph of section 99 does not require any change
of substance.

4.54. With reference to the third paragraph of section 99,
we considered it desireable to include in our questionnaire the
following question :—

“There is. at present no right of private defence in cases
im which there is time to have recourse to the protection
of public authorities “(section 99). Do you think that
this restriction is necessary or that it should be removed
or that it should be modified?”

The views received by us on this question indicated that
those in favour of retaining the present restriction were almost
the same in number as those in favour of removing it. A much
smaller number of persons favoured some modification in the
existing provision.

The present restriction on the exercise of the right of private
defence is considered necessary by some in view, it is said. of the
growing tendency among the public to resort to self-help even
where the protection of public authorities is available. It is
also said that as at present there is increasing evidence of di
respect for law and order. the deletion of this restriction wil
only increase the number of crimes and will result in tawless-
ness.

On the other hand, some take the view that present conditions
demand (hat an individual ought to have the right of private
defence without waiting for the help of public authorities. tt
is said that experience shows that nobody can be sure of gel-
tingeffective protection of the public authorities when sought
for and the restriciion tends to take away the right itself, and the
very purpose of the section is defeated,

In the third category are those who suggest. not too clearly.
some modifications in section 99. They point out the possibility
of conflict between the third paragraph of section 99 and the
second paragraph of section 105 and suggest that if the object
of the former is different from that of the latter, the position
should be made clear by suitably amending the sections. They
also suggest that these iwo provisions may be combined. An-
other suggestion is that the condition of there being time for
recourse to the protection of public authorities should apply
only when the party gets information sufficiently carly about
the impending attack

Acts done
by di-
rection of
a public
servant.

Right of
defence
and re-
course (0
public
autho:
rities.


Deletion
of third
paragraph

recommen:

ded.

Section 99
revised.

104

4.55. As diverse views have been expressed, the choice bet-
ween retention and deletion of the restriction is not casy to make.
We, however, think that from the practical point of view, the
balance lies in favour of deleting the third paragraph. The law
may not encourage self-help for doubtful ends, but self-defence
stands on a different footing. Experience shows that in many
cases it is debatable whether there was sufficient time for seck-
ing the protection of public authorities. Recognition of self-
defence as a justification for committing an offensive act is the
assumption that “detached reflection cannot be expected in
face of the uplifted knife’. [f so, the law should not expect
a person to consider carefully whether there is or is not suffi-
cient time to seek the protection of public authorities. We have
not been able to discover any such stringent restriction on the
right of self-defence in the criminal codes of any other country.
We recommend that the third paragraph should be deleled.

4.56. In the light of the above discussion section 99 may be
revised as follows :—

99. Restrictions on the right of private defence —(1) There
is no right of private defence against an act which does not
reasonably cause an apprehension of death or of grievous
hurt, if the act is done or attempted to be done—

(a) by a public servant acting in good faith in
pursuance of the judgment or order of a court of justice,
though the court may have had no jurisdiction to pass
such judgment or order, provided the public servant
believes in good faith that the court had such jurisdic-
on :

“(b) by a public servant acting in good faith under
colour of his office, though that act may not be strictly
justifiable by law ; or

(०) by the direction of a public servant acting in
good faith under colour of his office, though that direc-
tion may not be strictly justifiable by law.

(2) A person is not deprived of the right of private
defence by virtue of sub-section (1), —

(i) in a case falling under clause (a) thereof unless
he knows or has reason to believe that the person doing
the act is a public servant and is acting in pursuance
of the judgment or order of a court of justice or unless
that person produces, if demanded, the authority in
writing under which he is acting ;

«<(ii) In a case falling under clause (b) thereof, un-
less, he knows or has reason to believe that the person
doing the act is a public servant ; or


105

(iii) in a case falling under clause (c) thereof, un-
less he knows or has reason to believe that the person
doing the act is acting by the direction of a public ser-
vant, or unless such person states the authority under
which he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless
he produces that authority, if demanded.

(3) The right of private defence in no case extends to
the causing of more harm than it is necessary to cause for the
purpose of defence.”

4.57. Section 100 lists the offences against which the right
of private defence of the body extends even to the causing of
death of the assailant. It is noticeable that while the first,
second and sixth items refer to a reasonable apprehension as
to the consequence of the assault, the other three items refer
to “assaults with a particular intention.! We do not, how-
ever, consider it necessary to make any amendment in this res-
pect in the third, fourth and fifth items of section 100, since sec-
tion 102 makes it quite clear that the right of private defence
of the body commences as soon as there is a reasonable apprehen-
sion of danger to the body from an attempt or threat to commit
any of the offences described in section 100.

4.58, The fifth item covers “‘an assault with the intention of
abducting.” {t has been held that any assault with the inten-
tion to abduct a person as defined in section 362 is enough
to attract the right of private defence under section 100 and it
is not necessary that the abduction must itself be punishable.
‘Thus, if a wife is assaulted in her father's house by the husband
with the intention of taking her away by force to the husband’s
house, the fifth paragraph of section 100 applies.”

An anomaly arises from the fact that, while kidnapping
is an offence punishable under section 363, abduction is
an auxiliary act not punishable by itself. It is an offence only
when committed with one or other of the intents specified in
sections 364 to 369. Hence, assault with the intention of ab-
ducting may, in some instances, be punishable only under sec-
tion 352, and it looks anomalous that, for such a simple offence,
the assailant may even be killed. While it may be said that
the precious right of personal fiberty is involved in any abduc-
tion, we do not think it proper that an assauli with the intent of
committing an act which is not an offence should justify defensive
action to the extent of causing death to the assailant. We pro-
pose to limit the fifth paragraph of section 100 to cases where
the abduction is punishable under the Code.

Section
100.

Fifth
paragraph
amend-
ment
proposed.

2. Vishwanath v. State of U.P., (1960) 1 S.C.R. 646; ALR. 1960 S.C. 67.

ispenses with the re

gains, an assault: see section 3.01.

asonable-


Section
101

Section
102.

Section
103, clause
first.

Section
403, clause
thirdly
aunplitied.

Section
103, clause
fourthly

106

4.59. Section 101 imposes a restriction as to the voluntary
causing of death to the assailant, but permits the voluitary caus-
ing of any other harm. It is silent as to the involuntary causing of
death, ८. g.. death by a rash and negligent act. We think it pro-
per to include. within the scope of this section, those cases where
death is caused, but not voluntarily.

4.60. Section 102 which defines when the right of defence
of the body commences and how long it may continue requires
no change.

4.61. Section 103 enumerates the cases in which the right
of defence of property may extend to the causing of death. The
first is robbery.

4.62. Clause secondly of the section mentions house-break-
ing by night, but not Jurking house-trespass by night which is
as severely punishable as house-breaking by night. It is often
difficult to decide whether the offender has committed lurking
house-trespass or house-breaking. This point, however, becomes
unimportant, as we are recommending certain amendments in
Chapter 17 where under house-breaking by night will cease to
be a separate offence. For that reason, we propose to omit clause
secondly. All aggravated forms of criminal trespass will be
governed by the general provision in clause fourthly. under which
the test broadly speaking, is whether death or grievous hurt is
a fikely consequence.

4.63. We consider that in clause thirdly, (1) mischief by ex-
plosive substance should be added as it is just as dangerous
as mischiet’ by fire; (ii) mischief by fire or explosive substance
committed on any vehicle should be added ; and (iii) places of
worship should also be included along with dwellings.

We considered a suggestion to add mischief in respect of
public property the object being to cover mischief to property
used or intended to be used for the purposes of the Government.
a local authority or a corporation established by or under a
Central. Provincial or State Act, or a Government company as
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, where such
mischief is committed by intentional destruction of, or damage
to, to the property and is likely to result in general danger, loss
of human life or other grave consequences. We. think, how-
ever, that clause thirdly is adequate for ihe purpose, and do
not recommend any such addition.

4.64, Clause fourthly of section 103 raises no controversy
We propose to substitute ‘criminal trespass’ for “house-trespass”
in this clause, as we think that there is no need to confine it to
house-trespass.



107

4.65. As proposed above in section 101,! section 104 should
be suitably modified to bring within its scope those cases where
death is caused but not voluntarily.

4.66. The first paragraph of section 105 provides that the
right of private defence of property commences as soon as a
reasonable apprehension of danger to Property commences.
Unlike section 102. section 105 does not state that the appre-
hension of danger may rise from an attempt or threat to commit
the offence. We considered a suggestion to bring section 105
in line with section 102. We do not, however, see any need to
amend the first clause of section 105 in the absenc: of any prac-
tical difficulty.

4.67 The second paragraph of section 105 provides that the
right of private defence against theft continues (0) till the offender
has effected his retreat with the Property of (ii) e/ther the pro-
perty has been recovered or the assistance of public authorities
has been obtained. The first alternative denotes the primary
and usual point of termination of the right of defence. But if
before that point is reached, one of the two events mentioned in
the second alternative takes place. then that event (recovery of
the property or obtaining the assistance of public authorities)
terminates the right. Thus, of the two alternative situations,
the carlizr one becomes the point of termination. The present
wording does not bring out this idea with sufficient clarity, and
we therefore, propose a slight verbal change to make it clear.

(ncideniaily, we note that the view expressed by Mayne?
that the right of private defence is revived after retreat (in the
sense that ifthe property is Found in the possession of the
wrong-doer, then the right of defence would revive for the pus-
pose of its recovery has not appeated to the Courts.

We also note that the words “effected his retreat” are vague
and courts have occasionally found it necessary to point out that
ihey are not easy of application. It is however not easy 10 devise
8 better form of words to express the idea.

Our avention was also drawn to the right of recapture of
chattels which is recognised} in England in the law of torts a<
@ permissible species of self-help, though recent authority4 on
the subject is scanty. We do not, however, consider it wise to
insert in the Code any provision on the subject. Such a provi-
sion may, if abused. create more problems than it would solve.

1. See peragraph 44.59, 3901
2. Mayee, Penal Code, (1867), page 75,
. Winficid, Torts (1967), page 511,

4+. Kor ak ical su
ZAP ७.8, 262

Section
105.

paragranh

Sectivst
105,
second
parageah,

wy. see Bransion “Forcible re-capture of chattels” (1912)


Section
105, third
paragraph.

Section
105, fourth
paragraph.

Section
105, fifth
paragraph.

Section
106.

1966 recommendation 1

108

10 No change is needed in the third paragraph of section

4.69. As to the fourth paragraph of section 105. we noticed
that it does nol provide for cases where the offence is yet in the
stage of attempt. If a reasonable apprehension of danger to
property arises from an attempt to ‘commit the offence, the right
to defend the property commences, but how long does it continue?
We do not, however, think it necessary to make any amendment
to clarify this point. In the first place, the first paragraph.of
section 105, which deals with commencement of the right, is
sitent about attempt, and it would not be appropriate to refer
to attempt in a pointed way in the fourth paragraph. Apart
from that, we think that, in practice, cases of attempt will hardly
present any difficulty.

An alternative suggestion was to add a provision in the first
paragraph to the effect that the right continues so long as the
apprehension of danger to the property continues. But such
an amendment, which will then govern all the remaining para-
graphs of section 105, where the point of termination is defined
‘on lines different from continvance of apprehension of danger.

4.70. It is proposed to omit the fifth paragraph of section
105 as it deals with house breaking by night which is net pro-
posed to be retained as a separate offence.

4.71. Section 106 saves from liability harm caused to an inno-
cent person. It permits @ person acting in self-defence 10
Spun the risk” of causing such harm, where the self-defence is
against an assault causing @ reasonable apprehension of death.
We considered a suggestion that the provision of the section
should be extended to assaults causing a reasonable apprehen-
sion of grievous hurt. And in support of the suggestion, it was
pointed out. that we have reommended! the enlargement of
section 94 to include serious bodily harm. It was urged, that
section 94 related to compulsion by human agency. whereas
section 106 related to compulsion by circumstances, and that
the same principle should apply to both the sections.

Vt appears to us, however, that the legislature has, as a_ matter
of policy. expected that where the harm apprehended is less than
death, then the person exercising the right of self-defence should
take reasonable care to avoid serious harm to an innocent per-
son. Moreover, there is sufficient protection even now, because
if the person acting in the circumstances mentioned in section
106 uses due care and caution, then he would also be able to
take the aid of section 80 also.

No change is. therefore, recommended,

relating to section of.


109

4.72. In the light of the above discussion we propose that
section 97 be omitted and sections 100 to 106 be replaced by
four sections as follows :—

100. Right of private defence of the body.—{t) Every person
has a right to defend his own body and the body of any other
person against any offence affecting the human body.

(2) If the offence which occasions the exercise of the said
right is—

(a) such an assualt as may reasonably cause an
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will other-
wise be the consequence of the assault, or

(b) an assault with the intention of committing
rape or carnal “intercourse against the order of
nature, or

(c) an assault with the intention of kidnapping.
or

(d) an assault in such circumstances as may reason-
ably cause an apprehension that an offence punishable
under any of the sections 364 to 369 of this Code is
being committed. or

(e) an assault with the intention of wrongfully confin-
ing 8 person in such circumstances as may reasonably
cause him an apprehension that it will not be possible
io have recourse to the public authorities for his re-
lease,

the right of private defence of the body extends, under the res-
tticlions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing of
death or of any other harm to the assailant,

and, in any other case, it extends, under the same restrictions,
to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than
death.

(3) If in the exercise of the right of private defence against
an ult which reasonably causes the apprehension of death,
the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise
that right without risk of harm to an innocent person, his right
of private defence extends to the running of that risk.

101. Commencement and continuance of right of private
defence of body.--The right of private defence of body commenc-
€s as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body
arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence, though the
oflence may not have been committed; and it continues as long.
as such apprehensions of danger to the body continues.

Sections
97 and
100 to
106
consi-
dered and
revised.


110

102. Right of private defence of properiy.—{i) Every person
has a right to defend the Property, whether movable or immov-
able. of himself or of any other person against any offence which
is or includes robbery, theft, mischief or criminal trespass and
any atiempt to commit any such offence.

(2) Hf the offence the committing of which, or attempting
to conmmit which, occasions the exercise of the said right is or
includes—

(a) robbery, or

(b) theft, mischief or criminat trespass in such circum-
stances as may reasonably cause an apprehension that
death or grievous hurt will be the consequence if the right
of private defence is not exercised, or

(०) mischief by fire or explosive substance committed
on any building, tent or vessel, which building, tert or vessel
is used as a human dwelling or as a place of worship or as
a place for the custody of property, or on any vehicle,

the right of private defence of property extends, under the res-
trictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing of
death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer,

and in any other case, it extends. under the same restrictions,
to the voluniary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other
than death.

103. Commencement and continuance of right of private
defence of property.—The right of private defence of property
commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the
Property commences,

and it continues—

(3) against robbery, as long as the offender causes or
attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful
restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant
hurt or of instant wrongful restraint continues ;

(0) against theft,—till the offender has effected this re-
treat with the property, or, if the property has been recover-
ed earlier or the assistance of the public authorities has been
obtained earlier, till such recovery of the property or the
obtaining of such assistance ; and

(०) against mischief or criminal trespass, as long as the
offender continues in the commission of mischief or crimi-
nal trespass.


CHAPTER 5
ABETMENT, CONSPIRACY AND ATTEMPT
A. Abet ment

5.1. In devising a comparatively simple scheme of abet-
ment, the first Law Commissioners made a radical departure
from the complicated provisions of English Penal Law, which
distinguished between principals in the first degree, principals
in the second degree and accessories before the fact, and then
again between incitement to felonies and incitement to misde-
meanours. Section 107 classifies abetment under three heads,
namely. abetment by instigation, abetment by conspiracy and
abetment by intentional aid. The concepts underlying the
first and third forms of abetment as explained in Sections 107
and 108, have not given rise to any difficulty in practice, and they
seen to us to be clearly and adequately stated.

5.2. The second paragraph of section 107 defines abetment
by conspiracy by stating that “a person abets the doing ofa thing
who engages with one or more other person or persons in any
conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act. or illegal omis-
sion takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy and in order to
the doing of that thing”. Under Section 120A, when two per-
SONS agree 10 committing an offence or to cause an offence to
be commitied, they are guilty of acriminal conspiracy to commit
that offence, whether or not any of the parties thereto does any
act besides the agreement in pursuance thereof. Thus the per-
sons who are initially guilty of conspiracy to commit an offence
become guilty of abetting the offence as soon as an act or iMegal
omission takes place in pursuance of the conspiracy. After the
enactment {in 1913) of Sections 120A and 120B making con-
spiracy itself an offence punishable in the same manner as abet-
ment, abetment of an offence by conspiracy has lost its raison
d'etre and could well have been taken out of Chapter 5 altogether.
In fact, the co-existence of the two ideas in the Penal Code only
leads to some confusion in applying them. Anglo-American
legal systems which admit the idea of criminal conspiracy as
such and make it punishable, do not contemplate abetment
of an offence by mere agreement to commit it. We Propose that
the second paragraph of Section107 and all subsequent references
in Chapter 5 to abetment by conspiracy should be omitted.

5.3. Under the third paragraph of Section 107, a person
abets the doing of a thing who intentionally aids the doing of
that thing. The language appears to indicate that, to constitute
abetment of a offence, there must be aid in the commission of
that particular offence. Knowledge that some offence is going

111

Scheme of
abetment
under

three heads.

Abetment
ry

conspi-
racy.

Abetment
by

aiding.


Section
107

amended

Position
of abetior
with-
drawing
from
complicity
in. the
offence.

1. Sew asticle by 1९.1. Buxton,
Views Vol, 8३ at pages, 258
Tullock, (1955) LAILELR. t

112

to be committed and aid given in that knowledge is not enough.
At the same time it is not necessary that the person who gives
the aid should know beforehand all details pertaining to the
offence or the exact manner in which it is going to be committ-
ed.!- We do not think, however, that the wording of the clause
requires any modification.

5.4. We accordingly propose that the main part of section
107 may be simplified to read—

“A person abets the doing of a thing. who instigates
any person to do that thing, or intentionally aids, by any
act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing”.

The two explanations and the illustration do not require
any change.

5.5. We considered the question whether a countermanding
of abetment in time should relieve the abettor of criminal liability.
The case law in India on the subject appears to be inconclusive.
According to an old Bombay case,? if the abettor, before the
accomplishment of his criminal purpose, abandons his object
and withdraws from the further prosecution thereof, and the
person abetted proceeds with the design on his own account,
the abettor may not be held guilty under Section 114. But in
a Calcutta case, a person who, after consenting to form one of
a party which committed theft, resiled from the agreement but was
present at the theft, was regarded as guilty of abetment under
Section 107, clause thirdly, read with Section 109, as having in-
tentionally aided the commission of the theft.

It appears that, in England. in order that a person may be
guilty as an accessory before the fact, the procurement must be
Continuing. If the procurer of a felony repents and, before the
felony is committed, countermands his order, but despite that
fact, the principal commits the felony. the original contriver
will not be liable as an accessory.4 The Court of Criminal Appeal
has hetds that, in order to escape from liability as an accessory.
there must be an express and actual countermand or revocation
of the order previously given.

‘omplicity in the Criminal Code” in Law Quarterly Re-
+R. v. Bainbridge, (1959) 3 All E.R. 200; and R. v.

2. Rex v, Auwita Govind, (4873) 10 Bom. H.C.R. 497, 500 (West and Nanabhai Haridas 33)
3. Quer y. Budhan, (1867) 8 Weekly Reports, Criminal 78, 79 (Grover J.).

A. Hale, 618. referred to in Archbold, (1966), para. 4144.
5 R. ६. Croft, (1944) 2 All E.R. 483. 485; 170 1..1. 312 (C.C.A.).


113

We find that, in the Model Penai Code! prepared by the Ame-
rican Law Institute, the following provision is suggested as being
suitable :--

“Unless otherwise provided by the Code or by the law
delining the offence a person is not an accomplice in an offence
commitied by another person if he terminates his complicity
prior to the commission of the offence and--

{7} wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the com-
mission of the offence; or

(ii} gives timely warning to the Law enforcement
authorities or otherwise makes “proper effort to prevent
the commission of the offence.”

We considered whether a provision on these lines should he
made in the Code conferring complete immunity on an abettor,
who, prior to the actual commission of the crime, sincerely
repents. dissociates himself from the participants and gives reason-
help to the authorities with a view to preventing the com-
n of the crime. But there are two objections to such a
principie being recognised. First, it may be pleaded in every
case by an instigator who, at the last moment, pretends to with-
draw his association with the crime for fear or detection. Se-
condly, under the scheme of the Code, the offence of abetment
is complete with the instigation or other act of the abetior: and
the question whether or not the principal offence has been com-
mitted is immaterial except as regards the quantum of punish-
ment under Scction 109, 115 and 116. Countermanding or
withdrawal is, therefore, out of the question, because what is
complete cannot be withdrawn.

One of us was of the view that. though these difficulties show
the need for some safeguards, they ought not to come in the way
of accepting the basic principle, and if penitence was to be en-
couraged, there should be a provision giving legal recognition
to it. Countermanding should be permitted only if the person
countermanding makes his best efforts to prevent the crime from
being committed. Such a provision would be beneficial, as it
would offer an inducement to a prospective offender to desist
from completing the offence, and may help in preventing the
commission of the main offence.

The rest of us, however. were of the view that cases of sincere
repentance were very rare. that it should be left to the discretion
of the Court to deal leniently with such a repentant sinner. and
that no special prov n need be made in the Code.

1. Section 2.06, sub-section (6}, clause (८), Model Penal Code.
3M. of Law 71 -9.


Seetion
108, main
paragraph
amend-
ment
proposed.

Section
10;

tal
half and
negligence.

Section
8,

Expfa-

nation 1.

Section
108,

Explana-
nations
Dand 3.

il4

5.6. In defining an abettor as a person who abets “the com-
mission of an offence’, Section 108 employs language which
js not strict in conformity with that of Section 107 which defines
abetment of “the doing of a thing” ie., of an act. The main
paragraph in Section 108 may be reworded as follows :--

“A person abets an offence who abets the doing of an
act which is that offence, or which would be that offence if
committed by a person capable by law of committing an
offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the
abettor.””

5.7. The Jatter part of the above definition deals with a case
where a person may be guilty of abetting an offence though the
person abetted may be incapable of committing that offence
for any reason whatsoever. It says that the abettor in such
circumstances should be held to be guilty of abetment of an
offence as if it had been committed by the person abetted,
with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor. This
does not dea} with a case where the person abetted has commit-
ted an act which amounts to criminal rashness or negligence. but
does not amount to criminal intention or knowledge. Thus,
if a driver of a motor car allows the car to be used by a lunatic
or by a person who is made drunk against his will, and that per-
son by his rashness and negligence causes the death of another
person, can it be held that the abettor abetted the commission
of an offence under Section 304A, LP.C.? The question seems
to be largely academic, because instances where a person abets
the commission of a rash and negligent act and the person who
commits that act is incapable in law of committing any offence,
will be very rare indeed. We do not think it necessary to make
any amendment in Section 108 to meet such cases.!

5.8. The idea underlying the first explanation will, we think,
be brought out better by rewording it as follows :—

“To constitute abetment of an offence that consist of an
illegal omission of an act, it is not necessary that the abettor
should himself be bound (० do that act.”

5.9. \t is curious that explanation 2 refers to “the offence of
abetment”, while explaining what constitutes abetment of an
offence. This is neither apt nor necessary. Explanations 2and
3 may be combined and revised as follows :—

“To constitute abetment of an offence, it is not necessary—
(a) that the act abetted should be committed; or

(0) that the effect requisite to constitute the offence
should be caused; or

1. The eases reported in A.LR. 1947 Nag. 113 and ALR. 1951 Punj. 418 deat with some-
what different circumstances. See also Thorton v. Mithchell, (1940) 1 Ail E.R, 339.


115

(0) that the person abetted should be capable by
law of committing an offence, er should have any guilly
intention or knowledge. or should commit an offence.”

5.10. Explanation + is somewhat ambiguously worded. ft
states, “The abciment of an offence being an offence, the abetment
of such an offence is an offence”. Does the opening part
reler to a legal proposition in the sense of smuch as whe
abetment of an offence is an offence’, or does it imply a condi-
tion precedent “if or when the abetment of an offence is an
offence Further, the statement that the abetment of such an
abetment is an offence gives no guidance as to the punisiment to
which the second degree abcttor is liable in different circum-
stances. If, for instance, A instigates B to instigate C to commit
murder, and B accordingly instigates C, but the murder is not
committed.! then is the abetment by A punishable under section
109, or is it punishable under section 115? The answer to this
question depends on whether the word “offence” in section 169
means the main offence ultimately committed or clse whether it
will include the intermediate offence of abetment of the main
offence. The discussion in Khuhro’s case? shows that A is tiable
to be regarded as abetting murder where B does not instigate
C, and also where C does not commit the murder. The judgment
emphasises that abetment of abetment of an offence is no more,
and no less, than abetment of that offence. This appears
io us to be right. and in order to bring out the idea clearly. the
Explanation may be reworded as follows :

“A person who abets the abetment of an offence abets
that offence”.

5.1). Explanation 5 and the Wustration thereto may be omit-
(ed as they selate to abetment by conspiracy which is proposed
to be omitted.

5.12. Section 108A is in substance another explanation of
what constitutes abetment of an offence, and may accordingly
be combined with section 108. Although according to section
40, section 1084 applies only in relation to offences made punish-
able under the Code, there can be no objection to extending its
application to offences punishable under any special or local
aw.

Section

108, Fx-

planation
4.

Section

108, 68५5

planation

3 omitted.

Section
1084.

nation 4, illustration.
2. Muhammad Khuhro, LLR. 1945 Ker, 275 (O'Sullivan J.).

1 This hypothetical example is based on व variation of the facts in section 198, Expla-


Sections
408 and
108A
combined
and
revised.
“Abetting

an offence’.

116

5.13. In the light of the above discussion, sections 108 and
108A may be combined and revised as below :--

108. (1) A person abets an offence, who abets the doing
of a thing which is that offence or which would be an offence
if done by a person capable by law of committing that offence
with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor.

(2) A person abets an offence. who, in India, abets the
doing of any act outside India which. if done in india, would
constitute that offence.

(3) A person who abets the abetment of an offence abets
that offence.

(4) To constitute abetment of an offence, it is not neces
sary—

(a) that the act abetted should be committed; or

{b) that the effect requisite to constitute the offence
should be caused; or

(c) that the person abetted should be capable by
law of committing an offence, or should have any guilty
intention or knowledge, or should commit an offence.

(5) To constitute abetment of an offence that consists
of an illegal omission of an act, it is not necessary that the
abettor should himself be bound to do that act.

Mlustration to sub-section (2)

(a) A. in India, instigates 8, a foreigner in Nepal. to
commit a murder in Nepal. A is guilty of abetting murder.

Mlustrations to sub-section (3)

(6) A instigates 8 to instigate C to murder Z. B
accordingly instigates C and C murders Z in consequence of
B's instigation. B has committed the offence of abetting
murder and is liable to be punished with the punishment provi-
ded for murder; and as A_ instigated B to commit the
offence, A is also liable to the same punishment.

(c) If, in the foregoing illustration, C refuses to murder
Z. 8 has committed the offence of abetting murder, and is
liable to be punished with imprisonment which may extend
to seven years and with fine;! and as A instigated 8 to commit
the offence. A is also liable to the same punishment.

4, See seetion 15.


7
Hllustrations to sub-section (4)

_ (व) A instigates B to murder Z. B refuses to do so.
A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder.

(e) A instigates B to murder 27... B in pursuance of the ~

instigation stabs Z. _Z recovers from the wound. A is guilty
of abetting B to commit murder.

(f) A, intending to kill. Z, instigates B, a child under
ten years of age!, to do an act which A knows will cause Z's
death. B, in consequence of the instigation, does the act and
thereby causes Z’s death. Here B was not capable by law
of committing an offence, but since his act would be murder
if it had been committed by a person of full age with the same
intention and knowledge as that of A, A is guilty of abetting
murder.

(g) A, intending to take dishonesty an article belonging
to C out of his possession, induces B to believe that the
article belongs (o A and instigates him to take it from C's
possession. B does so in good faith believing it to be A’s
property. Though B has no guilty intention or knowledge,
A is guilty of abetting theft.”

5.14. The words “by this Code” in section 109 appear to be
unnecessarily restrictive and should be omitted. There is no
reason why in a case where express provision for punishing the
abetment of an offence is made in a special or local law, that
provision should not prevail.

In the explanation, the words “or in pursuance of the cons-
piracy” should be omitted.

Tilustration (a) is out of date, since abetment of bribery is
now specifically dealt with in section 165A of the Code, The
other illustrations also do not appear to be of any valuc. All
illustrations (o the section may be omitted.

Section 109 may accordingly be revised as follows :--

“109. Whoever abets any offence shall, if “the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, and no
express provision is made for the punishment of such abet-
ment,” be punished with the punishment provided for the
offence. :

Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed
in consequence of abctment when it is committed in conse-
quence of the instigation, or with the aid, which constitutes
the abetment.”

1. As to age, 5९९ a section 82, as

Section
109

revised.

proposed to be amended, paragraph 4.24 above.


Section
110.

Sect

Wt
“probable
conse
quence”.

“Liability
of abettor
when one
actabetted
and
different
act done.

Sections
312 and
313.
Section
14.

E18

5.15. Section 110 needs no change.

5.16. When exactly can it be said that an act done was a
“probable consequence” of the abetmeni? In deciding this
important question, courts have generally adopted the test of
“the reasonable man”. We considered whether an amendment
should be made to the effect that the abetior should have known
that the different act was likely to result in the circumstances.
The reasonable man’s foresight is, al present, attributed even in
cases where the abettor, in fact, did not foresce the particular
consequence —even though objectively il was a probable con-
sequence. {n our view. however. the present position gives a just
and workable test, and need not be disturbed

We also noticed that where the act done was nota “probable
consequence” of the abetment, then neither section 110 nor sec-
tion 31] would apply. though sections 115 and 116 could be
invoked in such a case. We ihink that this position is satisfactory,
and no amendment is required.

Though the second paragraph of section 111 appears as a
proviso and is called one in the margin, it is not exactly a proviso
in the usual sense. It expresses two essential conditions for
the application of the main provision. Section 113 also ends
with a clause reading “provided he knew that the act abetted was
likely to cause that effect”, although this is not printed separately
as a proviso. The word “provided™ here has the same meaning
as “but only if”. The meaning will be clearer by re-printing
the section in the following form :—

111, When an act is abetted and a different act is done,
the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner
and to the same extent as if he had directly abetted it, pro-
vided the act done—

(a) was a probable consequence of the abetment,
and

(b) was committed under the influence of the insti-
gation, or with the aid. which constituted the abetment.””

Although illustrations (a) and (c) are not particularly
Uluminating in regard to the meaning of “probable con-
sequence”, there is no harm in retaining them for what they
are worth,

5.17. No change is needed in section 112 or 113.

5.18, The need for section 144 which sets outa deeming
provision is not very clear. Since the section postulates the
actual commission of the act or offence abetted, the abettor is


119

liable under section 119 to be punished with the punishment
provided for the offence. What more is gained by laying down
that the abettor, if present, shalt be deemed to have committed
such act or offence?

॥६ is possible that section 114 was of some significance vis-
avis section 30 of the Evidence Act as it stood before the amend-
ment made in (891. Under that section, the confession of an
accused person could, under certain conditions, be taken into
consideration againt a co-accused if both were accused of “the
same offence”. As observed by Gour',—

“Though an abettor may be legally tried jointly with the
principal offender, it was formerly held, that as the abettor
was not tried jointly with him for the same offence, a con-
fession made by him was not “admissible in evidence againt
his co-accused”2. This view was perfectly logicat on section
30 of the Indian Evidence Act as it then stood, though even
then the tendency was to strain the point in favour of their
admissibility, for the Courts could not afford to lose so
good a piece of evidence. It was consequently laid down in
some cases, that a present abettor, tried conjointly with
another, was really being tried for the same offence so that
the confession of one was admissible against the other.3
The amendment of the section in 18914 has now legalised this
view, as the word ‘offence’, as used in that section, is enacted
to include the abetment of or attempt to commit the offence.”

Even assuming that section 114 of the Code could have been
used to remove the doubt under section 30 of the Evidence Act,
it is obvious that, after the amendment of the atter section in
1891, section 114 is not needed for this purpose.

in an old Bombay ०४५९5, a curiously narrow view has been
taken of the deeming provision in section 114 in the matter of
liability to enhanced punishment under section 75. According
to this decision, since section 114 does not say that the abettor
“shall have committed such offence”, it does not equate the abet-
ment with the offence for the purposes of section 75 of the Code.
This reasoning was, however, dissented from in a Rangoon case®,
and does not appear to have been followed in any subsequent
decision. We do not think that any amendment of section 114
is required on this point.

पी Gour, Penal Law, (1961) Vol. 1, page 549.
2. Nur Ahmed, (1874) PR. (Ct) No. 8; Anirita Govinda, 10 BH.C.R. 497,

3. Bag Shah, (1879) P.R. (Ct.) No. 3; Thakur Singh, (4882) PR. (Cr) No, 32; Tejo,
(1865 PR. (Cr.) 1२०. 39.

4. Act 3 of 1891.
5, Emp. v. Kashia Antoo, (1908) 10 Bom. L.R. 26, 7 Cr. LI. 32.
6. Finp. v. Maung Ln Kai, ALR. 1929 Rang. 203, 206.



Omission
of “if
absent”
from
section
॥14 re~
coremen-
ded,

Section
115

revised.

120

Te is possible that if. under a special law, abetment of an
offence is punishable jess severely than the main offence even
when it is committed in consequence of the dbetment, section
114 may be useful as it provides that the abettor, if present when
the offence is committed, shall be deemed to have committed that
offence, But so far as we could ascertain, there are no provisions
in special laws punishing abetment with lesser punishment than the
main offence. Either there is no express provision at all in the
special law as to abetment, or, if there is a provision, then it lays
down the same punishment for abetment as for the principal
offence. The utility of section 114 at the present day is, thus,
not apparent. .

5.19. We notice that the section distinguishes between prior
abetment and abetment by participation in the offence. Only
the former falls within the section. Whether this reqirement of
prior abetment is necessary, and why abetment at the time of the
commission of the offence should not suffice for the purpose of
section 114, is not at all clear. In fact, we see no justification
for the distinction made in section 114 between prior abetment
and abetment at the time of the offence. No doubt, mere pre-
sence at the time of the offence should not bring the section into
play. There must be other evidence of abetment. But, in
emphasising that aspect, the section has gone to the other extreme.
The words “who, if absent, would be 18016 to be punished as an
abettor”, rule out any aid rendered at the time of the offence by
an abettor, however, vital the contribution of the abettor may
be. A minor instigation prior to the offence, followed by pre-
sence, is sufficient, while substantial assistance at the time of the
offence does not suffice. (No doubt, in the latter case, section
34 will often come into play; but that is true even of the cases
now falling within section 114). The emphasis, in our opinion,
ought to be on presence coupled with abetment, and not on a
particular type of abetment' selected only with reference to its
chronological order. We, therefore, recommend the deletion of
the words ‘if absent”. .

5.20. Section 115 deals with the punishment for unsuccessful
abetment of offences punishable with “death or imprisonment
for life’. The words “death or imprisonment for life” are
ambiguous and if the interpretation placed on similar words in
section 497 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is any guide.
these words may cover even “sedition”, for which one of the
alternative punishment is only three years. As the section pres-
cribes a fairly severe punishment, we think it proper to limit it
to capital offences, i.e., offences for which death is the only
punishment or one of the punishment provided by law.

Imprisonment under section 115 should, in our view, be rigo-
rous, and not “of either description”, as at present. Since only
rigorous imprisonment is possible for the main offence, the
punishment for abetment also should be rigorous only.


121

The marginal note to section 115, second paragraph,
mentions ‘harm’, but the section speaks only of ‘hurt’. This
discrepancy should be corrected.

Where punishment for abetment is provided by any other
Jaw, section 115 should not apply. Hence the words “by this
Code” should be omitted from the section!.

Accordingly, section 115 may be revised as follows :~-

115. Whoever abeis the commission of ६ capital offence
shall, if that offence be not commitied in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made * * * for the
punishment of such abetment, be punished with rigorous
imprisoninent for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine;

and if any act for which the abettor is liable in conse-
quence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person,
is done, the abettor shall be liable to rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall
also be liable to fine.”

5.21. Section 116 prescribes the punishment of offences
punishable with imprisonment when the offence is not committed.
tm order to avoid any overlap between this section and section
115, it is desirable expressly to exclude capital offences. This
may be done by inserting the words, “not being a capital offence”.
after the words, “an offence punishable with imprisonment’.

It will be noticed that the abetment of an offence punishable
only with fine is not punishable under section 116 or any other
section in this Chapter. We consider that it is unnecessary to
punish such abetment and the present position does not require
any change in this respect.

Under the first paragraph of section 116, the maximum punish-
ment for abetment, if the offence be not committed in consequence,
is only one-fourth of the longest term of imprisonment provided
for the offence. We consider that this is too low and propose
that it should be increased to one-half of the maximum term
provided for the offence.

The second paragraph of section 116 deals with two classes
of cases, (i) where the abettor is a public servant whose duty it is
to prevent the commission of an offence and the person abetted
is a private individual, and (ii) where the abettor is a private
individual and the person abetted is a public servant whose duty
it is to prevent the commission of an offence. In both cases,
the abettor is liable to heavier punishment than is provided in the
first paragraph of section 166. We consider that in the first

1. See paragraph 5.14 above.

“Abet-
ment of
capital
offences

if offence
not
committed.

if act
causing
hart be
done in
conse-
quence.

Section
116

revised.



“Abet-
ment of
offence
punish-
able with
imprison-
ment—
if offence
be not
committed.

if abettor
be a pub-
lic servant
whose
duty it is
10 prevent
the
offence.

122

category of cases, viz.. where the abettor is a public servant. he
should be liable to be punished with the full period of imprison-
ment provided for the offence instead of only one-half of the term.
Thus. where a police constable, instead of preventing a dacoity
of which he has information, aids and abets a gang of dacoits,
but somehow the dacoity is not committed, he should be liabic
to be punished as if the dacoity had been committed. The act
of the public servant being reprehensible in the extreme, there is
ne hardship if the law is fully applied for checking it.

in the other category of cases, viz., where the abettor is a
privale person. the mere fact that he abetted a public servant
whose duty it is to prevent the commission of an offence, the
abettor need not, in our opinion, be dealt with more severely
than in a case where the person abetted is also a private individual.

We accordingly propose that section 116 may be revised as
follows :—

116. Whoever abets an offence punishable with impri-
sonment, not being 2 capital offence, shall, if that offence
be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no
express provision is made, for the punishment of such abet-
ment, be punished with imprisonment of any description
provided for that offence for a term which may extend to
one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with
such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both;

and if the abettor * * * is a public servant whose duty
it is to prevent the commission of such offence, the abettor
shail be punished with the punishment provided for the offence.”

Of the four illustrations which are appended to the
section, the first is obsolete inasmuch as abetment of bribery
is now a substantive offence under section 165A. The
last illustration also has to be omitted in view of the amend-
ment in the second paragraph of the section. Accordingly.
the illustrations to the revised section may be as follows :—

“Gllustrations .

(a) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B
does not give false evidence, A has nevertheless committed
the offence defined in this section, and is punishable accor-
dingly.

(0) A.a police officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery.
abets the commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery
pe not committed. A is liable to the punishment provided for
robbery.”


123

5.22. Section 117 applies to abetment of the commission of
an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of
persons exceeding ten. The section is not intended to bar the
application of other provisions relating to punishment for abet-
ment. (na Lahore case,! a doubt was expressed whether, where
section 117 applies, the offence could fall under section 115.
in Uhat case, the accused had made a violent speech at a religious
assembly of Sikks. in which he incited the audience to murder
Englishmen and Government servanis. The Magistrate con-
victed him under section 302 read with section 115 as well as
section 117, and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for
five years. The High Court had doubts as to whether section 115
applied, the doubt being based on the fact that section 115
applies only when the abetment is not punishable under any
other provision of the Code, and, if section 117 applies, then the
offence would not fall under section 115.

in a Calcutta case,? however, it was pointed out, that the
words “express provision” in section 115 do not refer to provi
sions like section 117, but to sections 121, 131 and the like which
deal with abetment of offences punishable with death or impri-
sonment for life, ic. the particular offences to which section
115 applies.

The question was considered at length in a Bombay case.4
where the High Court agreed with the Calcutta view, and dis-
sented from the doubt expressed in the Lahore case.

We agree with the Calcutta and Bombay view, and. after the
elaborate discussion found in the Bombay judgment, we do not
think that the doubt expressed in the Lahore case would survive,
Hence no clarification is necessary in this section.

5.23. In the course of our preliminary consideration of the
Code, a suggestion was made that there should be a higher punish-
ment for abetting the commission of offences by minors. It
is a notorious fact that in every large urban centre, a number of
persons can be found who train juveniles and children in criminal
activities like pick-pocketing, pilfering and burglary and even
live upon their earnings, keeping themselves in the background
and escaping detection. We included in our questionnaire the
question, “Where a person abets an offence by instigating a
minor to commit it, should the abettor be punishable with a
punishment higher than that prescribed for abetment in general?”
A majority of the opinions received by us. particularly from
State Government officers and members of the bas, was in favour

Section

Abeiting
commis-
sion of
offences

by
children.

“4. Sanra Singh v. Emp., AYR. 1933 Lah. 660 (Bhide J).

2. Apparently, powers under section 30, Cr. P.C. were exercised by the Magistrate.

3. Emp, ४. Dwarka Nath, ALR. 1933 Cal. 47, 48.
4. Emp. ४. Lavji Mandan, ALR. 1939 Bom. 452, 453.


New
section
7A
recom-
mended
“Abetting
commise
sion of
offences by
a child.

Section
Us
formally
amended.

Section
419.
amended.

!, Paragraph $.20 above.

124

of the proposal. The opinions given by the Judges seemed to
be evenly balanced. After a careful consideration in the light of
these opinions, we are of the view that abetting the commission
of any offence by a minor should be regarded as an aggravated
form of the offence of abetment and punished more severely. As
observed by the Judges of a City Civil Court in a collective opi-
nion sent to the Commission,—

“By instigating a minor, the abettor contaminates the
mind of the child, and takes advantage of his immature
understanding and diverts him to a wrong path, thus marring
his future. The society has, in such cases, to shoulder the
additional burden of reforming the minor. 1६ is, therefore,
necessary to provide higher punishment for such an offence,
to deter anti-social elements from making use of such
innocent children for their unlawful objects.”

5.24. We recommend the following new section for the
purpose :—~

117A. Whoever abets the commission of an offence
punishable with imprisonment by a child under fifteen years
of age, whether or not the offence is committed in consequence
of the abetment, shall be punished with imprisonment of
any description provided for that offence for a term which
may extend to twice the longest term of imprisonment pro-
vided for that offence. and shall also be Jiable to fine.”

5.25. Voluntary concealment of a design to commit an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life is punish-
able under section 118, if the concealment is done by an act or
illegal omission with the intention of facilitating the commission
of the offence or with the knowledge that such commission is
likely to be facilitated by such concealment. It is not necessary
that the concealment must actually facilitate the commission
of the offence. No change of substance is required in this sec-
tion, but the reference to ‘an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for life’ may be replaced by ‘a capital
offence’, for the reasons mentioned above! under section 115.

5.26. In the fourth paragraph of section 119 also, the words
“punishable with death or imprisonment for life” should be
replaced by the words “a capital offence”. It is, however, not
clear whether this paragraph applies only when the offence
sought to be concealed is committed or also when it is not com-
mitted. The last paragraph would seem to cover all cases where
the offence is not committed, including a capital offence, but
before 1955, it could not be applicable to the offence of murder
then punishable with death or transportation for life. The
legislative intention was perhaps to make the fourth paragraph


125

applicable in relation to a capital offence, whether or not that
offence was committed. After 1955. however, it is possible
to do without the fourth paragraph: if a capital offence be com-,
mitted, the public servant concealing the existence of a design to
commit the offence will be punishable under the third paragraph
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years (one-half of the ‘longest term’), and if the capital offence
concealed be not committed, he will be punishable under the last
paragraph with rigorous imprisonment upto five years (one-
fourth of the ‘longest term’). ft does not seem necessary that in
the latter case also the public servant should be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for ten years. We accordingly recom-
mend that section 119 be simplified and made clearer by omitting
the fourth paragraph. (Incidentally we notice that prosecutions
under sections 118, 119 and 120 are very rare).

5.27. No change of substance is required in section 120.
But it is desirable expressly to exclude cases covered by section
118, and for this purpose after the words ‘offence punishable with

imprisonment’, the words ‘not being a capital offence’ should
be inserted.

8. Criminal conspiracy

5.28. For more than half a century, the Penal Code only
recognised abelment by conspiracy as defined in clause secondly
of section 107, and not the offence of criminal conspiracy as such.
The latter notion was introduced in the Penal Code by the Crimi-
nal Law Amendment Act of 1913, which inserted a separate.
Chapter 5A consisting of two sections 120A and 120B. Despite
the obvious and considerable overlap between the provisions
of these two sections and the provisions governing abetment of
an offence by conspiracy contained in Chapter 5, the legislature
did not think it necessary to amend the earlier Chapter in any way.
Thus, if a person is engaged with another or others in a conspiracy
to commit an offence and if some act or illegal omission takes
place in pursuance of that conspiracy and in order to the doing of
the criminal act, he is liable to be punished as an abettor
+s... directly under the relevant section in Chapter 5. But
whether or not such act or illegal omission takes place, he is
guilty of a criminal conspiracy as soon as he becomes a party
to the agreement to commit the offence and is punishable under
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 1208, as the case
may be. So far as conspiracies to commit serious offences are
concerned, section 120B(1) puts a party to the conspiracy in
exactly the same position as an abettor of the offence for the
purpose of punishment. Although it is theoretically possible 10
charge 8 person with conspiring to commit an offence even where
NO overt act in pursuance of the conspiracy has been done, it
seldom. if ever, happens that two or more persons are prosecuted
for a criminal conspiracy merely on the strength of evidence
proving the agreement and nothing more.

Section
120
formatly
amended.

Overlap
between
abetment
by cons-
Piracy and
criminal
conspiracy.


Abetment
by conspi-
racy Onsite
ted from
Chapter 5 of
the Code.

Wide
sweep of
“eriminal

Conspi-
sacy on
inchoate
crime.

Classi-
fication
under
section
1208.

126

5.29. However that may be, there is no doubt that, after the
enactment of Chapter VA, abetment by conspiracy is of little
practical use, and is redundant as a criminal law concept. It
may be noted, that in England there is no separate mention of
conspiracy as a species of abetment. In English law, if a cons-
Pirator is to be regarded as an accessory before the fact, he
should be one who counsels, procures, of commands the com-
mission of the offence. If he is to be regarded as a principal
in the same degree because of “aiding and abetting’, the em-
phasis is on his presence, assistance or encouragement at the
commission of the crime. We have accordingly at the beginning
of this chapter recommended the omission of the second para-
graph of section 107 and all subsequent references in Chapter V
of the Code to abetment by conspiracy.

5.30. One is struck by the wide sweep of the definition of
criminal conspiracy in section 120A. It covers not only (i)
an agreement to commit an offence but also (ii) an agreement
to commit an illegal but not criminal act, and (iii) an agreement
to cqmmit a legal act by illegal means. This distinction between
Gi) and (iii) is obscure and may be without any real difference:
achievement of any object by illegal means must involve the doing
of something illegal, fe. the committing of an illegal act. The
act which is an offence punishable under sub-section (i) or sub-
section (2) of section 1208 is being a party to a criminal cons-
piracy as defined in section 120A. In other words, criminal
conspiracy is not an offence ancillary to another offence, but an
independent and substantive offence by itself.

5.31. The stage at which a person becomes liable to be
punished for a criminal conspiracy is much earlier than the
stage when an attempt to commit an offence becomes punishable
under the Code. A mere agreement to commit an offence
is enough. No physical act need take place. No consumma-
tion of the crime need be achicved or even attempted. In fact,
even preparation, in the sense of devising and arranging means
for the commission of the offence, is not required. Tn this
sense, conspiracy is an incomplete or inchoate crime. And
when one considers a conspiracy to commit an illegal act which
is not a crime, it is not even classifiable as aa inchoate crime.
The question arises whether it is proper for the law to intervence
and use criminal sanctions at such an early stage.

5.32. It will be noticed that, for purposes of punishment,
section 120B divides criminal conspiracies into two classes.
Where the conspiracy is to commit a serious offence, (i.e. an
offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or with a
more severe punishment), 3 party to the conspiracy is punished in
the same manner as if he had abetted the offence. In the second
category there are included conspiracies to commit any other
offence (including offences punishable only with fine) and con-
spiracies to commit Blegal acts other than offences; and for


127

these. sub-section (2) provides a uniform punishment. viz. im-
prisonment of either description upto six months or fine or
both. Reccgnising that it would be dangerous to leave these
petty conspiracies to be alleged before courts by any person so
minded, provision is made in the Criminal Procedure Code,
section 196A, that no court shall take cognizance of them
except upon complaint made by order or under authority from
the State Government or some officer empowered in this behalf.

5.33. We note that in England the law of conspiracy is not
so widely drawn as in India. Conspiracy is a common Jaw

misdemeanour punishable with fine or imprisonment at the Encl
discretion of the court, except in the case of murder where jae

by statute there is a maximum punishment of ten years. it
consists in the agreement between (४०0 more persons to effect
some “unlawful” purpose. While the commission of a crime,
even a non-indicatable crime, is naturally recognised as an un-
lawful purpose, there are no precise or clear rules in regard to
non-criminal unlawful purposes of an indictable conspiracy.
Conspiracies to defraud, to commit a tort involving malice,
or to commit a public mischief. are, broadly speaking, indict-
able. A conspiracy to commit or induce breach of contract
is probably not indictable at the present day.

5.34. In his Law of Criminal Conspiracies and Agreements Justice
published in 1873, Mr. Justice R. S. Weight! distinguishes betwce 1 Wright's
(i) agreements for the commission of crimes, (ii) agreements की
for minor offences, and (iii) agreements for acts which उत्पात.
not be crimes or offences. He treats the first class of agreements .
as being merely auxiliary to the law which creates the crime.

As to agreements for minor offences, he says:

“It is next to be considered in what manner agreements
ought to be treated when they are for offences punishable
only on summary prosecution and by minor penalties.
There is great difficulty in discovering the principles which
arehere applicable; but the difficulty will be diminished by
dismissing at the outset all offences which ought in a good
penal system to be treated as crimes, but which happen
10 be treated only as minor offences in any particular . penal
system. These being climinated, the remaining offences
consist in the production of results which, ex Aypothesi, are
not in themselves of grave enough consequence to be matters
for indictment; and if so, it must in general be immaterial
whether the results are produced by one person or by two
or more persons. To permit two persons to be indicted
for a conspiracy to make a slide in the street of a town,
or to catch hedge-sparrows in April. would be to destroy that
distinction between crimes and minor offences which in
every country it is held important to preserve.”

1. Extract from Lord Tucker
414, 415 (HLL).

opinion in Bowl of Trade v. Owen, (1957) 1 Ali E.R.


U.S,
Supreme
Court's
view,

128

५. Indealing with the third class, i.e. agreements for acts which
in the absence of agreement would not be crimes or offences,
after referring to two peculiar classes he proceeds:

“Apart from cases failing within one or other of these
two classes, there appear to be great theoretical objections
to any general rule that agreement may make punishable
that which ought not to be punished in the absence of agree-
ment; for, if the act is one which can be done by a person
acting alone. and when so done ought not to be punished.
it. is difficult to see at what point and on what ground cri-
minality can be generally introduced by the fact that two
or more persons concur in the act.”

5.35. We consider the above criticism fully applicable to the
agreements which are made criminal and punishable under
sub-section (2) of section 1258. i.e. agreements to commit
comparatively minor or petty offences and agreements to
commit illegal acts which are not offences. Agreements to
commit serious offences, however, stand on a different footing
and may, with justification, be punished even when no other
act is done by any of the parties in pursuance of the agreement,
on the ground that ‘to unite, back of a criminal purpose, the
strength. opportunities and resources of many is obviously
more dangerous and more difficult to police than the efforts
of a lone wrongdoer.”*

5.36. In the United States. also, where the law of criminal
conspiracy is the same as in England, it has come in for strong,
criticism from the viewpoint discussed above. Justice Jackson
of the Supreme Curt said:?—

“Conspiracy in federal law aggravates the degree of
crime over that of unconcerted offending. The act of
confederating to commit a misdemeanour, followed by
even an innocent overt act in its execution, is a felony and
punishable as such even if the misdemeanour is never con-
summated. The more radical proposition also is well
established, that at common law and under some statutes 8
combination may be a criminal conspiracy even if it con-
templates only acts which are not crimes at all when per-
petrated by an individual or by many acting severally.

“Thus. the conspiracy doctrine will incriminate per-
sons on the fringe of offending who would not be guilty of
aiding and abetting or of becoming an accessory. for those
charges only lie when an act which is a crime has actually
been committed.

1, Krutewitch v. US. (1949) 93, L td . 790; 336 U.S. 440 (Concursing judgment of Jackson
jo

2. Krulewitch ६. U.S., (1949) 93 1... Ed 790; 336 U.S. 440.


129

“Attribution of criminality to a confederation which contem-
plates no act that would be criminal if carried out by
any one of the conspirators is a practice peculiar to Anglo-
American law. ‘There can be little doubt that this wide defi-
nition of the crime of conspiracy originates in the criminal
equity administered in the star Chamber.’ In fact, we are ad-
vised that ‘the modern crime of conspiracy is almost entirely the
result of the manner in which a conspiracy was treated by the
Court of the Star Chamber.” The docirine does not commend it-
self 10 jurists of civil law countries, despite universal recognition
that an organised society must have legal weapons for combet-
ting organised criminality. Most other countries have devised
what they consider more discriminating principles upon which
to prosecute criminal gangs, secret associations, and subver-
sive syndicates.” .

5.37. We are strongly of the view that there is neither theore-
tical jurisdiction nor practical need for punishing agreements
lo commit petty offences or non-criminal illegal acts, In prac-
tice, few private prosecutions of such petty conspiracies are
sanctioned by the State government or its officers under section
196A of the Criminal Procedure Code. We, therefore, recom-
mend that section 120A which defines criminal conspiracy
should be revised as follows:—

120A. When two or more persons agree to commit
an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment of either description for a term of two years
or upwards or to cause such an offence to be committed,
the agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy.

Explanation |.—It is immaterial whether the commission
of the offence is the ulitmate object of such agreement or
is merely incidental to that object.

Explanation 2.—To constitute a criminal conspiracy,
it is not necessary that any act or illegal omission shall take
place in pursuance of the agreement.”

Though the present sub-section (1) of section 1208 only
refers to offences punishable with rigorous imprisonment for
a term of two years or upwards, we think that offences which
are punishable with imprisonment of either description for
aterm of two years or upwards should be brought within the
definition of criminal conspiracies. The second explanation is
on the same lines as the explanation to section 121A; though
not strictly necessary, it seems desirable to have it in this
section also.

5.38. We considered the question whether a person who
pretends to join a criminal conspiracy, but does not in fact
share the object of the other conspirators, is liable to be punished
as ‘being a party to the conspiracy’ under section 120B. In
3M of Law/71—10

Revised
definition
of criminal
conspi-
racy.

“Defini-
tion of cri-
minal con-
spiracy.

Is person

pretending
to conspire
guilty ?


130

an old English case,! where a police spy pretended to aid the
designs of conspirators for the purpuse of betraying them,
it was held that his evidence did not require corroboration as
an accomplice since the complicity of such a person extend
only to the actus reus, and not to the mens rea, and therefore
he was not an accomplice. In a recent English judgment,?
the point was made thatif a person had never entertained any
intention of going through with the projet, then he cannot
be convicted of a conspiracy to commit the crime. An
agreement required an intention to carry out the unlawful pur-
pose, and this element of mens rea would be missing so far as
he was concerned. We think the same view should be taken
in similar cases under section 1208.

Section 5.39. Under sub-section (1) of scction 1208 a party to a
1208 criminal conspiracy is liable to be punished in the same manner
revised. as if he had abetted the intended offence. This means that,

in every case of conspiracy, the apropriate provision contained
in Chapter 5 will have to be hunted out and applied. It would
obviously be preferable to make the section self-contained.
We recommend that section 120B should be revised as follows:

“Punish. 1208. Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy shall,
ment of where no express provision is made for the punishment of
cnminal / such a conspiracy,—

conspiracy.

(a) if the offence which it is the object of the conspi-
racy to commit or cause to be committed is comm-
ited in pursuance of the conspiracy, be punished
with the punishment provided for that offence;
and

(0) if the offence is not committed in pursuance of the
conspiracy, be punished with imprisonment of
any description provided for that offence for a
term which may extend to one-half} of the longest
term provided for that offence, or wiih such fine
as is provided for that offence, or with both.”

Conse- wo. ce i

Guential 5.40, When criminal conspiracies are Jimited to agreements
amend~ to commit serious offences as recommended above, there will
पा be no need for 5९८०५०७ 196A in the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1898. This section will require to be repealed.

old, (1966), paragraph 1294

2. Rag. v. Thompson, (1966) 50 Cr. App. Rep. 1 (Nottinghamshire Assizes-Lawton J.),
nowed in (1966), Current Law, item 2182.

3, See paragraph 5.21 above and section 116, as proposed 10 be amended.



31
C. Attempt

5.41. Though the subject of attempt has been relegated in
the Code to the very last chapter and section and dealt with as
a residuary provision in an unsatisfactory manner, we propose
to discuss it here in view of the importance of the concept and
its close connection with abetment and conspiracy. | Numerous
sections in the Code, while defining the acts which constitute
particular offences, put attempts to do those acts on a par with
doing the acts themselves and make them punishable to the
same extent. Thus, under section 121, with which the next
chapter begins, waging war against the Government of India
and any attempts to wage such war are both capital offences.
Under section 130, one who attempis to rescue a prisoner of
war is punished to the same extent as one who actually rescues
a prisoner of war. If one were to construe section 511 strictly
as a residuary provision, none of the ideas contained therein
would be applicable for interpreting what constitutes an attempt
to wage war under section 12) or an attempt to rescue a priso-
ner of war under section 130. These sections themselves do
not furnish any guidance for this purpose.

5.42, Then we have two seemingly more specific and com-
prehensive definitions of attempt, namely, section 307 which,
without using the word attempt except in the margin, defines
attempt to murder, and section 308 which similarly defines at-
tempt to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
In both sections, the attempt consists in doing any act with
such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances,
that if the actor by that act caused death, he would be guilty of
murder or, as the case may be, culpable homicide not amounting
to murder. The hypothetical condition if he by that act
caused death” is not easy to apply in cases where the act done
was physically incapable of causing any one’s death. The
question whether there could be an attempt to murder not falling
within section 307, or an attempt to commit culpable homicide
not falling within section 308, but punishable as such under
section 511, the residuary section, is not entirely theoretical as
it has been raised before the courts fairly often.

5.43, Finally, there is section 511 which provides that “who-
ever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Code
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause such
an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express
provision is made by this Code for the punhiment of such
attempt, be punished etc.”. The language used in this section
is very confusing. (It may also be noticed that section 309
defines attempt to commit suicide in the same way—‘*Whoever
attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards the com-
mission of such offence”). To constitute a criminal attempt
two requirements are apparently to be satisfied. The offender

Lack of
definition
in the
Code.

Definitions
in sections
307 and
308.

Attempts
punish-
able under
section
511.


Should it
be left to
common-
sense ?

Tests for
determin
ing what
is attempt.

Test of
proximity,

132

must first attempt to commit an offence, which presumably
he can only by doing some act, but that apparently is not sufh-
cient. He must, in doing that act which is the attempt, also
do something else towards the commission of the offence. Does
it mean that the first act need not be towards the commission
of the offence or that, even if it has to be followed by
another act towards the commission .of the act? Beyond indi-
cating that there has to be some act done towards the commission
of the offence, an idea that is hardly worth expressing, the sec~
tion is of little assistance as a definition. It certainly cannot
be the intention, as the wording would seem [to
suggest, that each and every act towards the commission of the
offence is punishable as an attempt. Any such interpre-
tation of section 511 or section 309 would obliterate the well
established distinction between preparation and attempt.

5.44. In a recent English case,? the Judge is reported to have
observed, “There are some branches of the criminal law in
which it is permitted for justices and juries to use their common-
sense. I am glad to find that [am not constrained by the autho-
rities to say that he law of attempt is excluded from those bran-
ches.” It appears that the framers of the Indian Penal Code
were inclined to leave the law of attempt to be regulated by
basic concepts aided by commonsense, rather than by a precise
definition.

5.45. The crux of the problem of defining attempt seems
to lie in stating with precision a test as to when the act
has travelled beyond the preparatory stage. As Rowlatt J. put
it,2 “people in the street, before they begin to think about it,
think it is a very easy thing to say what amounts to an attempt.
but when you come to analyse it, it becomes a little difficult.”
As analysed by jurists, three or four tests emerge from judicial
decisions to help determine at what stage an act or series of acts
done towards the commission of the intended offence becomes
an attempt.

546. There is first the test of proximity. The much-quoted
dictum in an English case,> — that “acts remotley
leading towards the commission of an offence are not to be
considered as attempts to commit it, but acts immediately con-
nected with it are”, states the proximity rule. There arc
other English cases* emphasising the proposition that to consti+
tute an attempt, the act done must be immediately, and not
merely remotely, connected with the commission of the offence,

प्‌ Davey v. Lee, (1967) 2 All E.R. 423, 425 (per Diplock L.J.).

2. Rex ¥. Osborn, (1919) 84 3.९. 63.
3. Eagleton, (1885) 6 cox 559, 571; 169 E.R. 766.
4. See Archbold, (1966), paragraph 4104.


133

5.47. The view taken in the United States will appear from

the following observations of Chief Justice Holmes in Common-
wealth v. Peasie?:—

“The question on the evidence, more Precisely stated,
is whether the defendant’s acts come near enough to the
accomplishment of the substantive offence to be punishable,
The statute does not punish every act done towards the
commission of a crime, but only such acts done in an attempt
to commit it. The most common types of an attempt are
either an act which is intended to bring about the substan-
tive crime, and which “sets in motion natural forces that
would bring it about in the expected course of events, but
for the unforeseen interruption, as, in this case, if the candle
had been put out by the police, or an act which is intended
to bring about the substantive crime, and would bring it
about but for a mistake of judgment in a matter of nice esti-
mate or e¢periment, as when a pistol is fired at a man,
but misses him, or when one tries to pick a pocket which
turns out to be empty. In cither case, the would-be crimi-
nal has done last act.

“ Obviously, new considerations come in when further
acts on the part of the person who has taken the first steps
ate necessary before the substantive crime can come to pass,
Tn_ this class of cases, there is still a chance that the would-be
criminal may change his mind. In strictness, such first
steps cannot be described as an attempt, because that word
Suggests an act seemingly sufficient to accomplish the
end, and has been supposed to have no other meaning.
That an overt act, although coupled with an intent to com-
mit the crime, commonly is “not punishable if further
acts are contemplated 45 needful, is expressed in the familiar
rule that preparation is not an attempt. But some prepa-
rations may amount toan attempt. It is a question of degree.
If the preparation comes very near to the accomplishment
of the act, the intent to complete it renders the crime so
probable that the act will be a misedmeanour, although there
1s still a locus paenitentiae, in the need of a further exertion
of the will to complete the crime.”

5.48. Another test adopted is known as the test of last act.

In Eagletion’s case?, to which reference has already been made3
Baron Parke said—

“Acts remotely leading towards the commission of the
offence are not to be considered as attempts to commit
it, but acts immediately connected with it are; and if. in this
case, after the credit with the relieving officer for the frau-
dulent overcharge, any further step on the part of the
defendant had been necessary to obtain payment, as the
making out a further account or producing the vouchers

American

view.

Test of

last

act.

1. 177 Mass, 267, 59 N.E. 55.

2. (1855) 6 Cox 559, $71; 169 E.R. 766.
3. Para 5.46 above.


Test of

locus paent=

rentiae.

५ Williams, Crinv'naljLaw, (
. Queen ९. Dinundi, (1886) L.L.R. 8 Ali. 304.

. Lakshmi: Prashad y. Emp. | ALR. 1923 Pat 307, 308, 309.
. Hardly necessary,

134

to the Board, we should have thought that the obtaining
credit in_account with the relieving officer would not have
been sufficiently proximate to the obtaining of the money.
But, on the statement in this case, no other act on the part
of the depfendant would have been required. it was the last
act, depending on himself, towards the payment of the money,
and therefore it ought to be considered as an attempt.”
This test of last act has, however, obvious flaws. It cannot
be applied to a situation where the accused intends to accomp-
lish his object by degrees, such as, murder by slow poisoning.
Moreover, as has been poinied out,! the act which remains to
be done by the offender may be done by the victim, e.g. the
offender puts poison in a glass and also intends to pour wine
in it, but the wine is actually poured by the victim. Here
the “last act” which the offender wished to do was not, in

fact, done by him, but that need not prevent the act from be-
ing an attempt.

5.49. A test which emphasises one aspect of ‘last act’ is that
of the possibility of ‘locus  paenitentiae’. An Allahabad
case? illustrates this test. The accused had made a false statment
in order to obtain a certificate which would have enabled. him
to obtain a refund of octroi duty. but the certificate was not
granted. The trial court convicted him of attempting to cheat.
The Sessions Judges in his reference to the High Court said:

“Even supposing that Dhundi (the accused) by false
representation had succeeded in getting the refund certi-
ficate, yet he had a /ocus paenitentiae. He had to get it
endorsed at the outpost, and had to present it on the following
Saturday for encashment, before he finally Jost all control
over it. and could no longer prevent the commission of
the offence. Before that time he might have altered his
mind even from prudence, if not from penitence, and torn

up the certificate and no cheating could then have
happened.”

The High Court accepted this view and acquitted the
accused. The same view was taken by the Patna High Court3:—

“We have to assume that better reasons would prevail
at any moment and the man would change his intention to
commit a {sin or]* crime before the actual consummation
thereof: and until he has done भी in his power to let his
action be out of his control, so that the commission of [the sin
or}* the crime would be a natural effect of the actions already
committed, there is still a mere preparation for the commis-
sion and not an attempt to commit the offence [or the sinj*.”

3), page 623.


135

5.50. We may also refer to another test known as the test
of unequivocal evidence. If the object of the criminal law is to
prevent not only consummated crimes, but also the completion
of a proposed crime, then there is justification for punishing
8. person when the evidence leaves no reasonable doubt that
his intention was to commit that crime. But unless the ac-
cused has come very close to accomplishing his object, the pro-
bative value of his conduct will be too slight to support con-
viction for an attempt. .

In a New Zealand case,! it was said that “in order to cons-
tilute an attempt, the acts of the accused must be such as to
clearly and unequivocally indicate of themscives, the intention
to commit the offence.” Salmond J., whose view is most fre-
quently quoted, observed,—

“An act done with intent to commit a crime is not at
criminal attempt unless it is of such a nature as to be in it-
self sufficient evidence of the criminal intent with which
it is done. A criminal attempt is an act “which shows cri-
minal intent on the face of it....An act....which is in
its own nature and on the face of it. innocent....can-
not be brought within the scope of criminal attempt by
evidence aliunde as to the criminal purposes with which it
is done.”

Dr. Turner, in his edition of Russell on Crime, after an
examination of the authorities, states? as follows:—

“It is therefore suggested that a practical test for the
aclus reus in attempt is that the prosecution must prove that
the steps taken by the accused must have reached the point
when they themselves clearly indicate what was the end
towards which they were directed. In other words, the
steps taken must themselves be sufficient to show,
prima facie, the offender's intention to commit the crime
which he is charged with attempting.”

A similar test was mentioned in the eartier editions? of Arch:
bold. But in a later edition,# he states the rule thus:—

“jt is submitted that the actus reus necessary to constitute
an attempt is complete if the prisoner does an act which
is a step towards the commission of the specific crime, which
is immediately and not merely remotely connected with the
commission of it, and the doing of which cannot reasonably
be regarded as having any other purpose than the commis-
sion of the specific crime.”

Test of un-
equivocal
evidence.

Vol. 1, page 138).

Russell on Crime, (1964), Vol. 1, 9. 184 (edited by Dr. Turner).
E.g. 33rd Edition (1954), 9. 1489.

34th Edition (1966), paragraph 4104

Bw

Rov, Barker 1924) N.Z.L.R. 865 (Quotations are taken from ‘Words and Phrases


136

The last twenty words in this passage achieve a happy synihe-

sis between the test of ‘proximity’ and the test of ‘uncquivocal

evidence’.

View of the
Supreme
Court.

In a Rajasthan case?, it was held:—

“When a person intends to commit a particular offence,
and then he conducts himself in such a manner which clearly
indicates his desire to translate that intention into action,
and in pursuance of such an intention if he does something
which may help him to accomplish that desire, then it
can safely be held that he committed an offence of attempt
to commit a particular offence. It is not necessary that
the act which falls under the definition of an attempt should
in all circumstances be a penultimate act towards the com-
mission of that offence. That act may fall at any stage
during the series of acts which go to constitute an offence
under section 512 of the Indian Penal Code.”

5.51. In Abhayanand’s case,? the Supreme Court summarised

its views about the construction of section 511 of the Code
thus:—

“& person commits the offence of attempt to commit a
particular offence when 6) he intends to commit that parti-
cular offence; and (ii) he, having made preparations and
with the intention to commit the offence, docs an act towards
its commission: such an act need not be the penultimate
act towards the commission of that offence but must be an
act during the course of committing that offence.”

Jn a later case,3 where a truck carrying paddy was stopped 14

miles away from the Punjab-Delhi boundary on the ground that
jt was in violation of the Punjab Paddy (Export Control) Order,

1959, and the driver was prosecuted for an attempt to contravene

the Order, the Supreme Court held:-

“On the facts found, there was no attempt on the part of
the appellants to commit the offence of export. It was merely
a preparation on the part of the appellants and as a matter
of law a preparation for committing an offence is different
from attempt to commit it. The preparation consists
jn devising or arranging the means or measures
necessary for the commission of the offence. On the other
hand, an attempt to commit the offence is a “direct movement
towards the commission after preparations are made. In
order that a person may be convicted of an attempt to commit
a crime, he must be shown first to have had an intention to
commit the offence. and secondly to have done an act which

1. Srare v. Parasmal and others, AIR. 1969 Raj. 65 (V.P. Tyagi J.).

2. Abhayanan

nd ४. State of Bihar, (1962) 2 S.C.R. 241; A.LR. 1961 S.C. 1698, 1703.

3. Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab, (1969) 1 S.C.R, 157 (Ramaswami 3.2.


137

constitutes the actus reus of a criminal attempt. The suffi-
ciency of the actus reus is a question of law which had led to
difficulty because of the necessity of distinguishing between
acts which are merely preparatory to the commission of a crime,
and those which are sufficiently proximate to it to amount
to an attempt to commit it. If 2 man buys a box of matches,
he cannot be convicted of attempted arson, however clearly
it may be proved that he intended to set fire to a haystack at
the time of the purchase. Nor can he be convicted of this
offence if he approaches the stack with the matches in his
pocket, but, if he bends down near the stack and lights a match
which he extinguishes on perceiving that he is being
watched, he may be guilty of an attempt to burn it. Sir James
Stephen, in his Digest of Criminal Law, article 50, defines
an attempt as follows:—~

‘an act done with intent to commit that crime, and
forming part of a series of acts which would constitute
its actual commission if it were not interrupted. The
point at which such a series of acts begins cannot be defi-

ned, but depends upon the circumstances of each parti-
cular case.’

The test for determining whether the act of the appellants
constituted an attempt or preparation is whether the overt
acts already done are such that if the offender changes his
mind and does not proceed further in its progress, the acts
already done would be completely harmless. In the present
case, it is quite possible that the appellants may have been
warned that they had no licence to carry the paddy and they
may have changed their mind at any place between Samalkha
Barrier and the Delhi-Punjab boundary and not have procee-
ded further in their journey.”

5.52. In some cases where the accused's objective is for one
reason or another impossible of achievement, the question arises
whether his act would amount to a punishable attempt. Two
illustrations of such cases are appended to section 511. In both
of them, it is stated, the person during the futile act is guilty of
attempting to commit theft. [t is interesting to note that in an
English case! of 1864, it was held that where A had put his hand
in another's pocket but found nothing, A could not be convicted.
of attempted larceny. This was apparently on the notion that
an attempt was established only where, if no interruption had
taken place, the attempt could have been carried out successfully
but the decision was overruled in 1892.2

There are, however, other types of impossibility where the
question presents difficulties. Thus if A who sees an umbrella
kept in a stand resolves to steal it and takes it home only to find
that it is his own umbrella, is he guilty of an attempt to steal?

Attempt
and impo-
ssibitity of
achievement,

1. Collins, (1864), 9 Cox C.C. 497.
2. Ring, Atkins and Jacksons, (1892), 61 L.J.M.C. 116.


Definition
of attempt
in foreign
codes.

Recom-

mendation.

1. See Omprakash v.

138

If A with the intention of poisoning 2, buys what he thinks
is arsenic and puts it in Z’s food, but as the druggist suspecting
A’s design sold him sugar, Z is unharmed. {s A guilty of attempt
to murder?

Again, if A, with the intention of poisoning Z, gets the poison
but not knowing the lethal dose, uses a dose which is far too weak
to kill anyone, is A guilty of an attempt to murder?

if A administers to W, a woman, who tells him she is pregnant
but is not so in fact, a drug which is likely to cause abortion in
a pregnant woman, is A guilty of an attempt to cause miscarriage?

Such cases, both reat and hypothetical can be multiplied ad
8.

5.53 We have had a close look at some foreign criminal
codes which contain a delinition of attempt. A few of these
definitions which appear to us to be instructive have been extrac-
ted and given in the Annexure to this chapter for reference and
comparison. A study of these precedents has persuaded us to
think it is desirable and practicable to set out in our Penal Code
the essential elements of attempts in the form of a definition in-
stead of leaving the idea cntirely in the air.

5.54 We recommend that the last chapter of the Code Con-
taining section 511 be omitted and, instead, a new chapter VB
entitled “Attempt” consisting of two sections 120C and 1200 be
inserted after chapter VA as follows:—

“CHAPTER VB
ATTEMPT
120C. Definition of attempt-—A person attempts to commit

an offence punishable by this Code, when:—
(a) he, with the intention or knowledge Fequisite for
committing it, does any act towards its commission;
(b) the act so done is closely connected with, and proxi-
mate to, the commission of the offence;

and

(०) the act fails in its object because of facts not knowa
to him or because of circumstances beyond his control.

Hlustrations
(४) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it.
A is not yet guilty of an attempt to commit murder. A
fires the gun at Z, he is guilty of an attempt to commit mur-
der.

(0) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poi-
son and mixes the same with food which remains in A’s
keeping; A is not yet guilty of an attempt Lo commit murder.

State of Punjab, ALR. 1961 S.C. 1782.


139

A places the food on Z's table, or delivers it to Z's servant to
place it on Z’s table. A is guilty of an attempt to commit
murder,

(०) A, with intent to steal another person’s box, while
travelling in a train, takes a box and gets down. He finds the
box to be his own. As he has not done any act towards the
commission of the offence intended by him, he is not guilty
of an attempt to commit theft.

(9) A, with intent to steal jewels, breaks open Z’s box,
and finds that there is no jewel in it. As his act failed in its
object because of facts not known to him, he is guilty of an
attempt to commit theft.

120D. Punishment for attempt:—Whoever is guilty of an
attempt to commit an offence punishable by this Code with
imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for a specified
term, shall, where no express provision is made by this Code
for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with impri-
sonment of any description provided for the offence, for a
term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment for
life. or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such fine
as is provided for the offence, or with both.”

5.55 In view of this definition of attempt, which we feel
could be applied in relation to murder and culpable homicide
not amounting to murder without any serious difficulty, we do
not consider it necessary to have a different formula to define
attempt to commit either of these offences. Sections 307 and
308 may be revised as follows:

“307, Attempt to murder:—Whoever attempts to commit mur-
der shail be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and
if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender may-

(a) if under sentence of imprisonment for life, be punish-
ed with death; and

{b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment
for life.

308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide:—Whoever attempts
to commit culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and if hurt
is caused to any person by such act, shail be punished with impri-
sonment of either description for a term which may extend to
sever years, or with fine. or with both.

Hilustration

A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under
such circumstances that if he thereby caused death he would be
guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has
committed the offence defined in this section.”

Amendment
of sections
307 and
308.


Introduc-
tory.

Analysis of
offences in-
cluded.

Other Acts
dealing
with 3०८७५
rity and
integrity of
India.

CHAPTER 6
OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE

6.1- With this chapter begins the definition of particular
offences which the makers of the Code thought fit to include in
it. Despite the farge number—about 400—of such offences for
which the punishment is prescribed in the Code, the compila-
tion cannot in the nature of things be exhaustive. We have,
and doubtless shall continue to have, other types of wrongful,
injurious or antisocial conduct made punishable under other
laws. While an enlargement of the scope of the Penal Code by
including therein some of the offences now punishable under a
special or local Jaw may be desirable, it is neither necessary nor
practicable to attempt to make the Code an absolutely complete
law of crimes.

6.2. The title of this chapter—Offences against the State—does
not appear to be a particularly apt description of the dozen offen-
ces brought together within its compass. The first five sections
deal with what may be called acts of high treason—waging war
against the Government of India, conspiring to wage war, pre-
paration to wage war, misprison of such activities and over-
aweing the Government or the Head of State by force. Next we
have a section punishing one aspect of sedition. Then three
sections aim at preserving friendly relations with foreign States
by punishing those who attempt to prejudice those relations by
unwarranted aggressive action. The last three sections of the
chapter, which relate to prisoners of war and state prisoners,
are not of much practical importance during peace time, especi-
ally since the category referred to as “State prisoners” during the
British regime no longer exists, having given place to the less
dignified appellation of “persons under preventive detention”,

6.3. This chapter is thus by no means a comprehensive. or
even adequate, codification of treason, sedition and other kin-
dred offences against the security and integrity of the Union of
India and of the States comprising the Union. This wide field,
however, is covered to some extent by a number of other Central
Acts of which we may briefty notice the following:—

(i) The Foreign Recruitment Act, 1874. This Act
empowers the Central Government to prohibit or control
the recruitment in India of persons for the service of any
foreign State in any capacity, whether civil or military. The
British statute entitled the Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870,
which was a law in force in the Dominion of India _immedia-
tely before the commencement of the Constitution, is perhaps
more relevant from this point of view. It prohibits British

140


141

subjects from enlisting in the military or naval service of any
foreign State at war with a foreign State at peace with Britain.
A law on these lines applying in relation to India and
Indian citizens is an obvious desideratum.

(ii) The Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908,
as enacted. provided in one part for the more speedy trial of
persons committing violent crimes, and in another part, for
the suppression of associations dangerous to the public peace.
The first part of the Act was repealed in 1922. Under the
second part, which is still in force, such persons as are mem-
bers of, or in any way assist, an association which encourages
or aids the commission of acts of violence or intimidation,
or of which the members habitually commit such acts, are
made liable to punishment. A severe punishment is provi-
ded for persons managing or promoting such associations,
Where the State Government declares such an association to
be unlawful, persons maintaining their connection with the
association are liable to punishment.

(iii) The Official Secrets Act, 1923. Based on the Eng-
lish Acts of 1911 and 1923 on the same subject, this Act consti-
tutes the chief legal weapon for fighting espionage in this
country. It is, however, not confined to espionage in the
strict sense; it prohibits a number of other acts prejudicial
to public safety which could be broadly described as
sobotage,

(iv) The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1938, punishes
a person who, with intent to affect adversely the recruitment
of persons to serve in the armed forces of the Union, wilfully
dissuades persons from entering any such force, or intigates
persons to enter an armed force and then commit acts of mutiny
and insubordination from within. Prima facie, this straight-
forward penal provision would appear suitable for inclusion
in chapter 7 of the Code as an offence relating to the armed
forces of the Union.

(v) The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961, makes it
an offence for any one to question by speech or writing the
territorial integrity or frontiers of India in a manner which is,
or is likely to be, prejudicial to the safety and security of the
country.

(vi) The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967,
is an important piece of legislation dealing with treasonable
acts affecting the territorial integrity and inviolability of the
country. Any acitvity which is intended to disrupt the terri-
torial integrity of India, as to bring about the cession of a part
of the territory of India or the secession of a part from the
Union is declared by the Act to be “unlawful”, and punish-
ments are provided for individuals and associations who
indulge in such activities.


142

Lonsider. 6.4. We notice that treason, sedition and cognate offences.

law of trea. Bich may be classified as offences against the security of the
son, etc. to State, are dealt with in foreign codes in much greater detail than
betakenup in our Penal Code. In particular, it is noticeable that treason
separately, and treasonable activities are spelt out elaborately. and not limi-
ted to waging war against the Government and assaulting the
head of state. Ona preliminary study of the problem, we have
come to the conclusion that the strengthening, consolidation and
revision of this important branch of the criminal 199 should be
taken up as a separate project and studied in depth. We shali
accordingly confine ourselves, in the present revision of the Penal

Code, to an examination of the provisions of Chapter 6 as they
now stand,

Treason in 6.5. In their History of English Law, Pollock and Maitland!

English law. observe that “treason is a crime which has a vague circumference
and more than one centre”. This is itlustrated by the first attempt
to its definition in the Statute of Treason? which was enacted in
1352 to remove doubts about the meaning of the term, but which
merely listed seven different activities as treason, namely :—

(1) to compass or imagine the death of the King, his
Queen or eldest son;

(2) to violate the King’s wife, or his eldest unmarried
daughter, or his eldest son's wife;

(3) to levy war against the King in his realm;
(4) to be adherent to the King’s enemies in his realm,
giving them aid and comfort in the realm or elsewhere;

(5) to counterfeit the King’s great or privy seal, or his
money;

(6) to bring false money into the reaim; and

.__ _ (7) to slay the chancellor or treasurer or justices, being
in their places, doing their offices.

To us, at the present day, there would not seem to be much
inter-connection between these items, and apart from items 3
and 4,—levying war against the King in his realm and adhering
to the King’s encmies—the other items would hardly be regarded
as (reasonable acts. Pollock and Maitland refer to the two main
items as constituting “the development of a new political idea.
Treason has been becoming a crime against the state; the supreme
crime against the state is the Jevying of war against it. A right,
or duty, of rising against the King and compelling him to do jus-
tice can no longer be preached in the name of law; and this is
well”.> This was written in 1895, but it continues to be valid
today, substituting ‘government’ for ‘King’ in regard to demo-
cratic regimes.

1. Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law (1968) Vol. 2, page 502.
25 Edw. Hi, State. 5, Cap. 2.
3. Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law (1968) Vol. 2, page 503.



143

6.6. Section 121 prescribes the same punishment, namely
death or imprisonment for life, for the principat offence of waging
war against the Government of India and for abetting that offence
of altempting to commit that offence. The section does not re-
quire any change.

6.7. It is curious that while waging war against India is
तत्व with in ail aspects in sections 121 to 123, no mention is
made of the other important aspect of treason, viz., “adhering
to the King’s enemies, giving them aid and comfort”. Abetment
of waging war which is punishable under section 121 may not
cover all cases of such adherence. In the United States, the
otience of treason is defined in the following terms:—

“Whoever, owing allegiance to the United States, levies
war against them, or adheres to their enemies giving them

aid and comfort within the United States or cisewhere, is
gulity of treason की

Although this enactment (or re-enactment) is quite recent,? it
reproduces the rather archaic words of the English Statute of
Treason, The Canadian Criminal Code‘ gives expression to the
same idea in more precise and modern terms which we could
well adopt. We propose that a new section may be added after
section 123 reading as follows:—

“123A. Assisting India’s enemies:—Whoever assists in
any manner an enemy at war with India, or the armed forces
of any country against whom the armed forces of India are
engaged in hostilities, whether or not a state of war exists
between that country and India, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

6.8. Section 121A punishes two different kinds of conspiracy.
The first is a conspiracy to wage war against the Government
of India, and the second is a conspiracy to overawe by force the
Central Government or any State Government. In view of sec-
tion 1208, as proposed to be revised by ७५5, there is hardly any
necd for a separate section to deal with the first kind of conspi-
racy. If any such conspiracy actually results in the waging of
war against the Government of India, or even an attempt to wage *
such war, the conspirators will be punishable with death or impri-
sonment for life under section 121 read with section 1208; and
if the conspiracy is infructuous, they will be punishable with half
the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, that
is, ten years, which should be sufficient.

1 US. Code (as amended upto 1966), Title 18, section 2381.
2. June 25, 1948.
3

Section 121

“Adhere-
nee” to
India’s
enemies to
be punish
able.

Section
1214--
revision re
commend+
ed.

. Articles 102(1)(6) and 191(1)00) of the Constitution refer to “allegiance or adherence

109 forcign state”.
Sce section 46(1), clause (०).
5, Sce paragraph 5.39 above.

£


144

Ii is difficult to see what purpose is served at present by the
words “within or without India’ which appear at the beginning
of the section. When it was enacted in 1870, the exierritorial
application of the Code was limited to offences committed by
Government servants in the territory of any Indian State!, By
referring to conspiracies entered into “without British India”
the section was apparently intended to cover British sub-
Jects and not foreigners. “Even where a statute creating a crimi-
nal offence is clearly expressed so as to cover acts committed
outside the jurisdiction, it will in the absence of further clear
provision only be regarded as covering such acts when committed
by British subjects."2 In view of sections 1 and 4 of the Code
as they stand at present, it is fairly clear that section 1214 can-
not apply to the acts of foreigners committed outside India. We
consider the words “within or without India" are of no practical
consequence or significance and should be omitted.

As regards the second kind of conspiracy, we think it desi-
table to extend the idea to overawe by criminal force or by show
of criminal force, the Parliament of India or the legislature of
any State in addition to overaweing the Central Government or
any State Government. At present, the award of simple impri-
sonment is permissible under the section, which in view of the
gravity of the offence is not appropriate. It should be Tigorous
imprisonment in all cases.

We accordingly propose that section 121A may be revised as
follows :—

“121A. Conspiracy to overawe the Parliament or Govern-
ment of India or the Legislature or Governinent of any State :—
Whoever conspires to overawe, by means of force or show of
force, the Parliament or Government of India, or the Legis-
lature or Government of any State, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprisonment for a
terra which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine,

Explanation:—To constitute a conspiracy under this sec-
tion, it is not necessary that any act or illegal omission shail
take place in pursuance thereof.” .

Since this offence is akin to the one described in section 124,
it would be logical to bring it after the three sections dealing with
waging war and the proposed new section about assisting India’s
enemies, and to number it 1238.

1. See paragraph } 9 above for the text of section 4 as originally enacted.
2, Per Lord Morris in Treacy ४. D.P.P., (1971) 1 AN E.R. 110 at 114.



145

6.9. It has been suggested by a public prosecutor that a
specific reference to nuclear weapons, besides arms and ammuni-
tion, should be made in section 122, and also that transport of
men, arms, etc., should be mentioned, besides collecting them.
We have, however, no doubt that the words ‘otherwise prepares
to wage war” are wide enough to cover both ideas, and there is
no need to amplify the section as suggested or in any other way.

The only change we propose in sections 122 and 123 is to
replace “imprisonment of either description” by “rigorous impri-
sonment”. Here again, for a grave offence affecting the security
of the state, simple imprisonment is hardly an appropriate punish-
ment.

6.10. We considered a suggestion that the scope of section
124, now applicable only in relation to the President of India and
the Governors of States, should be widened to cover certain other
high dignitaries like presiding officers of legislative bodies and
Chief Justices. We agree that, as symbolic heads of the trinity
of state power. the use of force against them with the intention
of compelling them to act, or not to act, in a particular way should
be regarded as a treasonable act, and should be punished equally
severely.

In regard to the substance of the offence, it does not seem
necessary to cover expressly attempts to restrain wrongfully and
attempts to overawe by force. These may be left to be governed
by the general provision for attempts.! The section may accor-
dingly be revised as follows:—

“124. Assaulting President, etc., with intent to compe!
or restrain the exercise of any lawful power :—(1) Whoever, with
the intention of inducing or compelling any office-holder to
whom this section applies, to exercise or restrain from exerci -
ing in any manner any of his lawful powers, assaults. or
wrongfully restrains, or _overawes by means of force or the
show of force, such office-holder, ‘shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) The office-holders to whom this section applies are:—
{i) the President of India;
(ii) the Vice-President of India;
(iii) the Chief Justice of India;
{iv) the Speaker of the House of the People;

(v) the Governor of any State;
(vi) the Chief Justice of any High Court;

(vii) the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of any
State; and

“1. See new section 1200 proposed in para. 5.54 above.
3M of Law.7t—-IL.

Sections
{22 andi23.

Scetien 124
to cover also
heads of
legislatures
and of the
judiciary.


146

(viii) the Chairman of the Legislative Council of any
State.”

Sedition. 6.11. Section 124A defines the offence of sedition. Despite
the umbra of repression which a mention of this section is likely
to evoke in one’s mind, it is a provision which has to finda place
in the Penal Code. As observed by Sinha C.J., in Kedar Nath’s
case,! “every State, whatever its form of Government, has to be
armed with the power to punish those who by their conduct.
jeopardise the safety and stability of the State, or disseminate
such feelings of disloyalty as have the tendency to lead to the
disruption of the State or to public disorder”.

English law. 6.12. In England, the crime was described by Fitzerald 3.
in the following terms:-?

“Sedition is a crime against society nearly allied to that
of treason, and it frequently precedes treason by a short inter-
val....The objects of sedition generally are to induce discon-
tent and insurrection and stir up opposition to the Govern-
ment, and bring the administration of justice into con-
tempt; and the very tendency of sedition is to incite the people
to insurrection and rebellion. Sedition has been described
as disloyalty in action and the law considers as sedition all
those practices which have for their object to excite discontent
or dissatisfaction, to create public disturbances, or to lead to
civil war; to bring into hatred or contempt the Sovereign or
the Government, the laws or constitution of the realm, and
generally all endeavours to promote public disorder.

Stephen defined the offence more closely as fotows}:—

“Sedition may be defined as conduct which has, either
as its object or as its natural consequence, the unlawful dis-
play of dissatisfaction with the Government or with the exis-
ting order of society. The seditious conduct may be by words,
by deed. or by writing. Five specific heads of sedition may be
enumerated according to the object of the accused. This
may be either:—

(1) to excite disaffection against the King, Govern-
ment or Constitution, or against Parliament or the
administration of justice;

(2) to promote, by unlawful means, any alteration
in Church or State;

(3) to incite a disturbance of the peace;
(4) to raise discontent among the King’s subjects;
(5) to excite class hatred.

1. Kedar Nath Singh vy. State of Bihar, (1962) Suppl. 2 “SCR. 769, 792; ALR. 1962
S.C. 955

2. Address to the Jury in Reg. v. A.M. Sullivan, (1868) 14 Cox's Criminal cases, 44,
45

ले, Stephen, Commentaries on the Laws of Engtaad, (1950), Vol, 1५, pp. 141, 142,


147

it must be observed that criticism on political mat-
ters is not of itself seditious. The test is the manner in
which it is made. Candid and honest discussion is
permitted. The law only interferes when the discussion
passes the bounds of fair criticism. More especially
will this be the case when the natural consequence of the
prisoner's conduct is to promote public disorder.”

6.13. ॥६ will be noticed that the definition of sedition in sec-
tion 124A is much narrower than Stephen’s definition. 1६ is
limited to exciting disaifection towards the Government establis-
hed by law, which is only a part of the first item in Stephen's
analysis. Exciting disaffection towards the Constitution or
Parliament or the administration of justice is not considered a
seditious activity in India. On the other hand, while promotion
of public disorder in some form or other is considered an essential
ingredient of seditious conduct in England, this idea is not brought
out in the wording of section 124A.

6.14, In the celebrated case of Bal Gangadhar Tilak* Strachey
3. of the Bombay High Court said:—

“Lam aware that some distinguished persons have thought
that there can be no offence against the section. unless the acc-
used either counsels or suggests rebellion or forcible resistance
to Government. !n my opinion, this view is absolutely
opposed to the express words of the section itself which, as
plainly us possible, makes exciting or attempting to excite
certain feelings, and not the inducing or attempting to induce
to any course of action such as rebellion or forcible resistance,
the test of guilt.”

But in Mharenda 9107 Gwyer, C.J., of the Federal Court, re-
Iying mainty oa English authorities, took the view that “public
disorder or the reasonable anticipation or likelihood of public
disorder is the gist of the offence. The act or words complained
of must cither incite to disorder or must be such as to satisfy
reasonable men that it is their intention or tendency”. This
interpretation, however, did not hold the field for long. In
Sadastivy Narayan? the Privy Council expressly overruled it oy
saying that “it is sufficient for their Lordships to say that they
adopt the tunguage of Strachey J. as exactly expressing their
own view on the point.’
1. (1897) LL.B. 22 Bom. 112.

. Niharendee Dutt ६५ (1942) F-C.R. 38.

Indian defi-
nitions
narrower
than the
English,

Different
interpreta-
tions of
section 124A,
before the
Constitus
tion,

5
3. KEL ९. Sadashis Navan Bhalerao, (1947) LR. 94 1.8. 89: ALR, 1947 7.0. 82.


148

Validity | 6.15. After the Constitution came into operation. the more
eee fundamental question, viz, the constitutionality of section 124A
Shine Cons. Yis-a-vis article 19, was raised in a few cases leading to a con-
titution. flict of decisions in the High Courts. It was finally resolved

by the Supreme Court in Kedar Nath Singh? in the following

mannerem

“In view of the conflicting decisions of the Federal Court
and of the Privy Council, referred to above, we have to deter-
mine whether and how far the provisions of s2ctions 124A
and 505 of the Indian Penal Code have to be struck down
as unconstitutional. If we accept the interpretation of the
Federal Court as to the gist of criminality, in an alleged crime
of sedition, namely. incitement to disorder or tendency or
likelihood of public disorder or reasonable apprehension,
thereof, the section may he within the ambit of permissible
legislative restrictions on the fundamental right of freedom
of speech and expression. If, on the other hand, w2 were
to hold that even without any tendency to disorder or inten-
tion to create disturbance of law and order, by the use of words
written or spoken which merely create disaffection or feelings
of enmity against the Government. the offence of sedition
is compicte. then such an interpretation of the sections
would make them unconstitutional in view of Articly 191)
{a) read with clause (2), It is well settled that if certain pro-
visions of Jaw construed in one way would make them consis+
tent with the Constitution, and ano-her interpretation would
render them unconstitutional, the Court would lean in favour
of the former construction. The provisions of the sections
read as a whole, along with the explanations, make it rea-
sonably clear that the sections aim at rendering penal only
such activities as would be intended, or have a tendency,
to create disorder or disturbance of public peace by resort
to violence. xxx Tt is only when the words. written or
spoken, etc. which have the pernicious tendency or intention
of creating public disorder or disturbance of law and order
that the law steps in to prevent such activities in the interest
of public order. So construed, the section, in our opinion,
strikes the correct balance between individual fundamental
rights and the interest of public order.”

As regards section 505 of the Code the constitutionality of
which also was challenged, the Court held in the same judgment: —

“Itis manifest that each one of the constituent clements
of the offence under section 505 has reference to, and a direct
effect on. the security of the Statz or public order. Hence.
these provisions would not exceed the bounds of reasonable
restriclions on the right of freedom of speech and expression.”

. (1962) Suppl. p. 808.

1. Redur Nath Singh ४. State of Biher,


149

hk shoutd be mentioned kere that when this decision was
given. article 192) of the Constitution did not contain a reference
1७ “the sove and integrity of India“. a phrase which
was subsequently inserted by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amend-
men Act of 1963.

6.16. In view of the controversy which has raged round sec-
tien 124A for all this time. it is clearly necessary to revise tie
formutation of the offence so as (0 make it a patently reasonable
restriction under article 19(2). The elements mentioned in this
article which are relevant to the offence of sedition are integrity
of India. securtiy of the State and public order. The section
has been found to be defective because “the pernicious tendency
or iniention” underlying the seditious utterance has not been
expressly related 10 the interests of integrity or security of India
or of public order. We feel that this defect should be removed
by expressing the mens rea as “intending or knowing it to be
likely to endanger the integrity or security of India or of any
State or to cause pubic disorder.

6.17. Another defect we have already noticed in the defini-
ion of sedition is that it does not take into account disaffection
iowards (a) the Constitution, {b) the Legislatures, and (०) the
administration of justice. all of which would be as disastrous
to the security of the State as disaffection towards the executive
Government. These aspects are rightly emphasised in defining
sedition in other Codes and we feel that section 124A should be
revised 10 take them in.

6.18. The punishment provided for the offence is very odd.
Jt could be imprisonment of life, or else, imprisonment upto
three years only, but nothing in between. The Legislature
shouid. we think. give व firmer indication to the Courts of the
gravity of the offence by fixing the maximum punishment at
seven years’ rigorous imprisonment and fine.

6.19. We propose that the section be revised as follows:—

“Y24A. Sedition.—Whoever by words, either spoken
or written. or by signs, or by visible representation, or other-
wise,

excites, or atlempts to excite, disaffection towards the
Constitution, or the Government or Parliament of India,
or the Government or Legistature of any State, or the adminis-
tration of justice. as by law established,

intending or knowing it to be likely thereby to endanger
the integrity or security of India or of any State, or to cause
public disorder,

shall be ow d with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shail also be liable to
fine.

Mfens rea
of sedition

pressty
to arbeie
192).

Disaffec-
tion t0-
wards the
constitu-
tion,
Jegislatures
and Judie
siary to
be incla-
ded.

Punish-
meni to
be rationa-
fised.

Section
IMA ree
vised.


Insult_to
the Cons-
titution,
national
flag, em-
biem or
anthem to
be punis-
habie,

Section 125
to be
amended.

1. The (Madras) Prevention of Insult 10 National Honour Act, 19:

150

_ Explanation है: The expression “disaffection” includes feel-
ings of enmity, hatred or contempt.

Explanation 2: Comments expressing cisapprobation of the
provisions of the Constitution. or of the actions of the Govera-
ment, or of the measures of Parliament or a State Legislature,
or of the provisions for the administration of justice. with a view
to obtain their alteration by lawful means without exciting or
attempting to excite disaffection. do not constitute an offence
under this section.”

6.20. The Code should, we think, contain a provision for
punishing insults to the book of the Constitution. the national
flag. the national emblem and the national anthem. Burning
of the copies of the Constitution. desecration of the national
flag or national embicm and offering deliberate insults to the
nalional anthem, are not only unpatriotic acts but are also like~
ly to cause a disturbance of public order. As such. they are re-
prchensible enough to be made offences in the Penal Code.

Legislative competence of Parliament in the matters is deri-
vable from the entry relating to criminal law in the Concurrent
List and from the residuary entry in the Union List. It could
hardly be said that such a provision curtails the freedom of ९२०
ptession unreasonably, and the restriction would be clearly ia
the interests of public order.

After a study of the Madras Act! on the subject and the
case-law thereon. and of the laws of a few other countries, we
have come to the conclusion that a simple provision on the sub-
ject would suffice. Lt is not necessary that the offensive act
should be done in a public place. We recommend that a new
section be inserted after section 124A, as follows:

“124B. Insult to the book of the Constitution, national
flag, national emblem or national_anthem.—Whocvet deli-
berately insults the book of the Constitution, the national
flag. the national emblem or the national anthem, by burning,
desecration or otherwise, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend up
to three years, or with fine. or with both.”

6.21. Section 125 makes it an offence to wage war against
the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace
with the Government of India. The reference to ‘Asiatic Power”
is now meaningless, and the words “in alliance or” are unneces-
sary. It would be sufficient to refer to the Government of any
foreign State at peace with India.

The punishment of life imprisonment for ihe offence is _ur-
duly severe: on the other hand, if ever the offence is committed.
the offender ought not to be 1९६ off with a fine as now provided



151

in the section. We propose that the punishment should be
imprisonment of either description not exceeding ten years, and
also fine.

The section may accordingly be revised as follows:—

"125. Waging war against any foreign state at peace
with India.—Whocver wages war against the Government
of any foreign State at peace with India, or attempts to wage
such war, or abets the waging of such war, shali be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be tiable to fine.”

6.22. The only change required in section 126 is to substi-
tute for the words “any Power in alliance or at peace with the
Government of India” the words “any foreign state at peace
with India.”

6.23. Section 127 needs no change.

6.24. (४) The reference to “State prisoners” in section 128
and the (६४० succeeding sections is a relic of the past. Since the
State Prisoners Regulations of the three Presidencies made cariy
in the Jast century have been repealed in 1952, the reference
should be omitted from these sections.

(ii) As regards prisoners of war escaping from custody, the
punishment of imprisonment for life provided in sections 128
and 130 is unnecessary and may be deleted. Imprisonment up-
to ten years and fine is adequate for both these offences.

(iii) In section 130. the word “harbours” has to_ be read in
the tight of the explanation given in section S2A, with the result
that where the harbour is given by the wife or husband of the
person harboured. it will aot include the supplying that
person with she/ter, food, drink etc. It is difficult to sce what else
the harbouring in such a case will mean. If the wife of an
escaped prisoner of war may be punished under the section for
concealing him. there is no good reason why she need not be pu-
nished for “harbouring” him, in whatever sense we understand
that term. We do not, therefore, propose any special explana-
tion in section 130 for the word “harbours”. |

Section 126,

Section 127,

Sections
128 to 130.


Correlation
with, Army
Navy and
Air Force
Acts.

Chapter 10
apply 10
ali armed

forces of
the Union.

CHAPTER 7

OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND
AIR FORCE

7.1. This chapter deals with certain offences which mig
be committed by the civilian population in relation to the defence
service personnel. Since the same acts committed by the Jatter
are punishable severely by the Act to which they are subject.
it is provided in section 139 of the Code that they arc not puni-
shable under the Code for such acts. The provisions of this
chapter are thus in aid and support. from the civilian angle, of
the Army, Navy and Air Force Acts which are designed to main-
tain perfect discipline in the armed forces of the Union.

The correlation between the offences punishable under this
chapter and the offences punishable by court-martial under the
Army Act, 1950, is as follows:—

(i) Sections 331 and 132 of the Code punish abetment
of mutiny and attempt to seduce defence service personne!
from duty. Mutiny, including any endeavour to seduce
such personnel from duty, is a capital offence under section
37 of the Army Act.

(0) Sections 133 and 134 of the Code punish abetment
of assault by any de,ence service personnel on any superior
officer, Such assault is punishable under section 40 of the
Army Act with imprisonment up to 14 years.

(iii) Sections 135 and 136 of the Code punish abetment
of desertion and knowingly harbouring a deserter. Desert-
ing and aiding deserters are punishable in the case of army
personnel under section 38 of the Army Act with imprison-
ment up to 7 years.

{iv) Section 138 of the Code punishes abetment of an
act of insubordination by a defence service personnel. Such
insubordination is punishable under section 42 of the Army
Act with seven years’ imprisonment.

7.2. It will be noticed that chapter 7 of the Code is at present
applicable only in relation to Army, Navy and Air Force per-
sonnel. The explanation to section 131 expressly mentions
persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Indian Navy (Disci-
pline) Act, 1934, and the Air Force Act, 1950. (it also refers
10 the corresponding British Acts which are no longer relevant.)
As there are a few other armed forces of the Union regulaicd
by special Jaws, it is necessary that this chapter should apply
in relation to all armed forces of the Union. We therefore

152


153

propose that the heading of the chapter be changed to “Offences
relating to the Armed Forces” and that the expressions ~armed
forces”. “officer and member” be comprehensively defined in a
new section as follows:—

“130A. Definitions.---In this Chapter,—

_ (a) “armed forces” means the military, naval and
air forces and includes any other armed forces of the
Union;?

(b) “officer” means a person commissioned, gazet-
ted or in pay as an officer of any of the armed forces,
and includes a junior commissioned officer, a wariant
officer, a petty officer and a non-commissioned officer;

(०) “member” means a person in any of the armed
forces other than an officer.”

7.3. While section 131 makes abetment of mutiny punishable
with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either des-
cription upto ten years, section 132 makes such abetment. if
mutiny be committed in consequence of that abetment, punish-
able with death or with imprisonment for life or imprisonment
of either description up to ten years. It would therefore appear
that section 131 applies to cases where mutiny is not committed
in consequence of the abetment. Section 13} also makes any
attempt to seduce any defence service personnel from his
allegiance or duty punishable with imprisonment for life or im-
prisonment up to ten years. In cases where mutiny is not com-
mitted in consequence of the abetment or where it is only an
attempt to seduce defence service personnel, the punishment
of imprisonment for life appears to be unduly heavy. On the
other hand, we see no justification for a sentence of imprison-
ment under either section being simple. We propose that the
1wo sections may be revised as fotlows:—

“131. Abetment of nutiny.—Whoever abets the commit
ting of mutiny by an officer or member of any of the
armed forces shall—

{a) if mutiny be committed in consequence of such
abetment, be punished with death or imprisonment for
life or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to fourteen years, and shalt also be liable to fine:
and

(b) in any other case, be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.

1. Cfenuy 2 of the Union List

Sections 131
and 332
revised,


Sections
133. and
134 com-
bined and
evised,

Section 135
amended.

154

132. Artempting to seduce an officer or member of the
armed forces from his duty— Whoever attempts to seduce
any officer or member of any of the armed forces from his
allegiance or his duty shall be punished with rigorous impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall
also be liable to fine.”

7.4, Both sections 133 and 134 deal with abetment of assault
by defence service personne! on any superior officer being
in the execution of his office, the former section presumably pro-
viding lor cases where such assault is not committed in pursuance
of the abetment aad the latter for cases where the assault is so
committed. To make this point clear it seems desirable to
combine and revise the two sectrons as follows:—

“133. Abetment of assault on superior offiver.—Whoever
abets an assault by an officer or member of any of the armed
forces on any superior officer being in the execulion of his
office. shalt—-

(9) if such assault be committed in consequence
of that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven
years. and shall also be liable to fine; and

(b) in any other case. be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend
to three years. and shall aiso be liable to fine.”

7.5. Differing from the previous sections. section 135 does
not distinguish between cases where the abetment of desertion
is successful and where it is unsuccessful. In either case, the
maximum punishment prescribed in section 135 is imprisonment
of either description for two years. Under section 38 of the
Army Act and the corresponding sections of the Navy and Ait
Force Acts. desertion while on active service is punishable with
death, and in other cases, with seven years’ imprisonment. We
consider therefore that the punishment under section 135 of the
Code should be increased to five years in cases where desertion
takes place in consequence of the abetment. The section may
be revised as follows: —

“435. Abetment of desertion from the armed forces.—
Whoever abets the desertion of any officer or member of any
of the armed forces shall—

(a) if the desertion be committed in consequence
of such abetment. be punisbed with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to five
years, or with fine, or with both: and

(b) in any other case, be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend
to 1७० years, or with fine, or with both.”


155

7.6. Section 136 whick punishes the harbouring of a deserter
trom the armed forces, requires oniy a formal amendment. वी.
may bs amended to read as fotlows:—

“136. Harbouring deserter —Whoever. knowing or having

on Lo believe that an officer or member of any of the
armzd forces has deserted. harbours such officer or member
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

Exception.--This provision does not extend to the case
in which the harbour is given by a wife to her husband.”

7.7. Section 137 makes the master or person in charge or a
merchant vessel. on board of which any deserter is concealed.
liable to 8 “penalty” not exceeding five hundred rupees, even
when he is ignorant of such concealment, if he might have known
of such concealment but for some neglect of duty on his part.
it is curious that the section uses the word “penalty” instead of
the usual word “tine. The abject is presumably to debar the
court convicting the offender from imposing any sentence of
imprisonment in default of payment of the ‘“‘penalty”. How-
ever that may be, the section does not appear to be of any conse-
quence, and we suggest that it may be omitted.

7.8. Section 138 deals with abetment of an act of insubordi-
nation by an officer or member of the armed forces, but only
if the act of insubordination is committed in consequence of the
abetment. The section should also provide for cases where
the act of insubordination is not committed in consequence of
the abetment. Considering that an act of insubordination is
punishable with seven years’ imprisonment under section 42
of the Army Act (and if such insubordination consists in disobe-
dience of a superior officer, punishable with fourteen years’ im-
prisonment), the punishment provided in section 138 appears
to be low. 11 should, we think, be increased to two years wher
the abetment is successful and to six months when it is not. [t
may be revised as follows:-—

“138. Abetment of an act of insubordination —Whoever
abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by
an officer or member of any of the armed forces, shali—

{a) if such act of insubordination be committed
in consequence of that abetment, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; and

(0) in any other case, be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend
(0 six months. or with fine. or with both.”

Section 136
formally
amended.

Section 137
omitted.

Section 138
revised.


Dissuasion
from 1९-
crujument
to armed
forces.

156

7.9. We notice that का important offence relating to the
armed forces which could appropriatcly have been included
in this Chapter has been put along with certain other, not ver
closely connected. matiers in section 505(1}fa} of the Code.
Making, publishing or circulating a statement, rumour or report
With intent to cause the armed forces to mutiny or otherwise
fait in their duty is more germane to this Chapter than to Chapter
22 deating with miscetiancous things like criminal intimidation.
insull and annoyance. We. therefore, propose to add here a
new section 138A as follows:

“E38A. Uncitemen? to inutiny or other act of insubordi-
nation.—Whoever makes or publishes or circulates any
statement, rumour or report, with intent to cause, or which
is likely to cause. any officer or member of any of the armed
forces to mutiny or otherwise disrezard or fail in his duty
as such officer or member, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either desctiption for « term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation—A_ person making, publishing oF circu-
lating any such statement, rumour or report, who has re
sonable grounds for believing that such statement, rumou
oryepott is true and makes, publishes or circulates it in good
faith and without any such intent as aforesaid, does noi
commit an offence under this section.”

The offence should be cognizable.

7.10. In the previous chapter we have referred! to the Crimi-
nal Law Amendment Act, 1938, which punishes a person who.
with intent to affect adversely the recruitment of persons to
the armed forces, wilfully dissuades persons from entering such
forces, or instigates persons to enter an armed force and then
commit acts of mutiny and insubordination from within. Consi
dering that the offence is clearly one relating to the armed forces.
of the Union and of the type dealt with in Chapter 7 of the Penal
Code. it is difficult to understand why a separate Act was consi-
dered necessary for the purpose in 1938. We propcse. by way
of consolidation, that the following section may be added in the
Code:—

“138B.  Dissuasion from enlisting end instigation to
auitiny or insubordination after enlistment—Whoever—-

(a) with intent to affect adversely the recruitment
of persons to serve in the armed forces of the Union,
dissuades or attempts to dissuade the public or any
person from entering any such forces, or

“यू See para. 6 Min.



ब57

(8) without dissuading or attempting to dissuade

from entering such forces, instigates the public or any
person to do, after entering any such force, anything
which is punishable as mutiny or insubcrdination under
the Jaw relating to that armed force,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation. —The provisions of clause (a) do not extend
to comment on, or criticism of, the policy cf the Government
in connection with the armed forces, made in good faith without
any intention of dissuading from enlistment, or to advice given
in good faith for the benefit of the individual to whom it is given.
vr of any member of his family, or of any of his dependants.”

The offence is, in our opinion, serious enough to merit a subs-
tantial sentence of imprisonment up to three years, instead of
one year as at present provided in the Act. If is also desirable
to make the offence cognizable. The Act requires the previous
sanction of the State Government to any prosecution of the
offence under the Act. After the offence is included in the Penal
Code and made cognizable, we do not consider that any previous
sanction for prosecution is necessary.

7.11. Section 139 requires to be formally revised as follows:—

139, Persons subject to certain laws, no! to be punished
under the Chapter.—No person subject to the Army Act,
1930, the Navy Act, 1957, the Air Force Act. 1950. or any
other law relating to the armed forces of the Union is subject
10 punishment under this Code for any of the offences de-
fined in this Chapter.”

7.12, In regard to section 140, we considered a suggestion
that it is only when the person wearing a garb, or carrying a
token, resembling that used by a soldier etc., has a fraudulent
intention, he shoutd be punished under the section. As at pre-
sent worded, mere intention that it may be believed that he isa
soldier is sufficient to make him punishable, We do not think
it ts necessary to introduce the element of fraud in the mens reu
necessary for the offence.

The section does not apply to wearing an officer's uniform,
which appears to be an omission. There is no reason why a
Person who, not entiiled to wear such uniform, wears it with
the intention mentioned in section 140, should not be punishable,
The punishment may also be increased to six months and un-
Himited fine.

Section 139
revised
formally

Section 140
revised.


158

The section may accordingly be revised as fotlows:--

“140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by ofit

or member of the armed forces.—W hoever, not being an officer
ies

or member of the armed forces, wears any garb. or cal
any token, resembling any garb or token used by such an
officer or member, with the intention that it may be believed
that be is such an officer or member, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.”



Cuaeter §
OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY

8.1. This Chapter deals with what are commonly known
as “group offences ', i. e., offences committed by a large number
of persons which disturb the public tranquility or cause breach
of the peace. The minimum number required (except in sec-
tions 153A, 159 and 160) is five. In other chapters also are
included offences involving breach of the peace or disturbance
of the public tranquility. But the essence of most of the offences
under this Chapter is the combination of several persons united
in the purpose of committing a criminal offence, and that con-
sensus of purpose is itself an offence distinct from the criminal
offences which these persons agree and intend to commit. The
essential connecting link amongst the offenders is the existence
of a common object to do any of the acts described in section
141 which makes all of them members of an unlawful assembly,
Vicarious liability attaches to every one of the members of the
assembly, not only for any offence committed by any member
in prosecution of the common object of the assembly, but also
for any offence committed by one member which the others
knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of such common
object. Sections 153A, 159 and 160 are somewhat out of place
in this Chapter except for the fact. that they also involve breach
of peace or disturbance of public tranquility.

8.2. In order to constitute an unlawful assembly under
section 141, the first requirement is that there should be at
least five persons composing the assembly. The second
requirement is that its common object should fail
within one or the other of the types of activities
described in the five clauses of the section. Four of
these clauses envisage the use of criminal force or show
of criminal force as an essential part of the activity, but clause
third describes the unlawful object as committing “any mis-
chief or criminal trespass or other offence”, whether or not the
offence involves the use of force or violence. In both respects,
the concept of unlawful assembly under the Code differs from
the concept in England. There “an unlawful assembly is a
common law misdemeanour which arises where three or more
persons either (i) assemble to commit. or when assembled do
commit, a breach of the peace ; or (ii) assemble with intent
to commit a crime by open force ; or (iii) assemble for any
common purpose, whether lawful or unlawful, in such manner
as to give firm and courageous persons in the neighbourhood
reasonable cause to fear that a breach of the peace will occur!”

1. Hood Phillips, Constitutional Law (1967), page 492.
159

Introduc-
tory.

Section 141
— Scheme
analysed.


Clause
first.

Clause
Second

Clause
third.

160

We do not, however, think that any radical change is called
for in the Penal Code definition and there is no harm in keep-
ing it somewhat wider than in England.

8.3. The first clause of section 141 requires no comments.

8.4. The second clause applies where the common object
of the persons composing an assembly is “to resist the execu-
tion of any !aw or of any legal process”. There may be some
difficulty in appreciating the exact scope of the words “‘resist-
ing the execution of any law’. Where there is no officer to en-
force a provision of law, but the provision is contravened, it
is not clear whether such contravention would amount to “ree
sisting the execution of any law”. Apparently, though the act
may amount to “contravention” of law, it may not amount to
“resisting its execution’ ’, However, the point is not of practi-
cal importance because grave Cases of contraventions of the
jaw would fall under the third clause, as the contraventions
would also amount to offences.

8.5. Under the third clause, an assembly is unlawful if its
object is “to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other
offence”. The question arises whether the words “other offence”
should be construed ejusdem generis with the two offences of
‘mischief’ and ‘criminal tresp: ass’ expressly mentioned in the
clause. Reported decisions do not show that such a construc-
tion was adopted by any High Court. Since the definition of
‘offence’ in section 40 is applicable to this section, all offences
under the Code, irrespective of the extent of the punishment,
would come within the scope of this clause, whereas only those
offences under the special or local laws which are punishable with
imprisonment for six months and upwards would come within
its scope. This appears to be rather illogical. Jf petty offences
under special or local laws are to be excluded, there is no good
reason why petty offences under the Code should be included.
Logically, therefore, offences under the Code punishable with
fine or imprisonment for less than six months should be exclud-
ed. However, having regard to the fact that all of eaces under
the Code are at present included, we propose as a via media
that, in order to constitute an unlawful assembly, its object
should be to commit an offence punishable with imprisonment,
whether under the Code or under a special or local law. The
clause may be simplified to read—

“Third.—To commit any offence punishable with im-
prisonment ; of”.

As we are recommending! the omission of section 40,
“offence” here will cover offences under the Code and offences
under special or focal laws.

1. See paragraph 2.68 above.


161

8.6. With reference to the fourth clause, we considered whe-
ther the expression “to enforce any right or supposed right”
requires clarification, in view of the conflict of decisions on
the question whether any distinction! should be drawn bet-
ween enforcing a right and defending or maintaining a right.
This distinction is, however, not very material, because section
14! is subject to the law of private defence (section 96), and
where the right of private defence accrues, it is immaterial if
the exercise of that right is described as enforcing a right or as
defending or maintaining a right. Hence we do not recommend
any amendment to this clause.

8.7. No change is needed-in the fifth clause.

8.8. The existing Explanation, which provides that an
assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled may
subsequently become an unlawful assembly, is useful and does
not require any alteration.

8.9. The expression ‘criminal force’ which occurs in the
section half a dozen times is now construed in the light of the
detinition contained in section 350. As we are proposing?
to simplify the sections relating to criminal force and assauit
and, in particular, to omit sections 349 and 350, it will be
desirable to add an Explanation in section 141 as follows :--

“Explanation.—Force is criminal when it is applied
to any person with the intention of causing, or knowing
it to be likely to cause, injury, fear of annoyance to that
person, or in order to the committing of any offence.”

8.10, Sections 142 to 145 need no change.

8.11. Section 146 refers to “force or violence”. Judicial
decisions have construed force in the light of the definition in
section 349. as meaning the use of force on a human being, and
“violence” in a wider sense, as meaning the use of force on in-
animate objects also, —an interpretation which appears to be
right and need not be disturbed.

A suggestion was made that threat of force or violence should
be added. Such an amendment would practically equate sec-
tion 143 with section 146, because the threat of force or violence
is almost always evident in the formation of an unlawful assembly
and a necessary element of its common object. No such addi-
tion is. therefore, necessary in section 143.

Clause
fourth,

Fifth
Clause.

Existing
Explana-
tion.

Explana-
tion of
‘criminal
force’ _ to
be added.

Sections
142 to 145

Section 146

1. The distinction is rejected in Canowri Lal v. C.E., (1889) I.L.R. 16 Cal. 206; and Ghaya-
suddin, ALR. 1932 Pat. 215, but Difian v. The State A.I.R. 1958 Pat. 492, rests on the

distinction.

2, See paragraph 16 below
3M of Law.71-12.


Svetion 147
Prepara~
hon to
comonia

he
punisha-
ie

Section 148

Section 149

162

8 ‘The maximum punishment under section 147 for riot-
ing is imprisonment for (Wo years. This appears to be ade-
quate. We considered a suggestion thal a sentence of impri-
sonment should be mandatory for the offence but decided that
it would not be advisable to do so.

8.13. We think, however, that preparation to commit riot-
ing should be made punishable, as it is desirable that rioting
should be checked at the carliest slage. Preparatory acts, like
collecting sticks, knives and other weapons of offence.
bulbs, brickbats लाए, by anti-social elements bent on mischict
may come to the notice of the police. but they may not be able
to lake any effective action even when the object of such activity
is plain to them. We, therefore. recommend the insertion
of a section after section 147 as follows :-

“147A. Making preperation to commit rioting.--Who-
ever makes any preparation for committing rioting! shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for aterm
which may extend to one vear, or with fine. or with both

8.14. As regards section 148, the question whether the princi-
ple of section 149 should be applied to an offence under section
148 has been considered in several decisions. The majority of
the High Courts have been held that section $49 is inapplicable
10 an offence under section 148. We agree with that view. and
do not consider any amendment to be necessary, For this
offence also, we do not consider that imprisonment should be
made mandatory.

8.15. Section 149, which imposes vicarious liability on every
member of an assembly for certain offences commitied by any
member. consists of two parts. The first part deals with an
offence committed by a member in prosecution of the common
object of the assembly, while the second is concernéd with an
offence known to be likely to be committed in prosecution of
that object

In the first part. the offence is one which has already been
agreed upon and is necessarily involved in the common object.
The sccond part relates to offences not expressly agreed upon
but known to be fikely to be committed in accomplishing the
common object. This dichotomy is in line with the scheme of
the Code, which throughout mentions specifically cases of ine
tention. and then deals with knowledge, for example. see the
various clauses of section 299. This is also convenient in practice,
because those who have to administer the law could place the
case in the proper compartment. Therefore, though there may
be theorelical objections to the existing wording, we do not
consider an amendment to be necessary.

1. Cf. section 399 which defines the offence of making preparation to commit dacoity


163 .

bs one mem! ofan
oct ता the assembly ox
of ine

Where a major oficnce is comniit
unlawful assembly, but the common oj
tends only to a lesser offence. can the other membe
assembly be convicted of that lesser offence. by virtue ०
tion 119 7? Phe question usustily arises in rioting eases»
one member of the assembly causes death of the victin, while
its com Object was 0: w him grievous वी
used to be a controversy on the subject? but 10
rome Court? has held that a conviction for the fe:

sible. The principe of section 38 has be
He ७ 0 amendmeat is. therefore:
quired to clarify this poi

8.16. Section 150 consists ता ए७०त parts, The first) part
punishes the offender who hires, engages cts. persons to become
members of an untawiul assembly. This part apparently refers
to section [43 and is non-controversial. The hirer is punish-
able as a member even though. in fact. he was not a member.
In form. the liability is vicarious. but 1 is not objectios
principle. because hiring persons to become members vi
unlawful assembly ought to be punishable.

an

‘The latter part makes the hires punishable also for any ofience
commiticd in pursuance of the hiring in the same manner as
ibe had been a member of the assembly, or as if he had
commitied the offence himself. The interpretation of this part
of the section presents seme difficulty. ॥ a narrow view 35
taken. it may be urged that the hirer will be liable for the offen
actually committed by the hired person as # member of the ७
fawlal assembly in pursuance of such hiring, and var for an
offence which the hired person can be constructively held ६6
have committed under section 149 as a member of the unlewlul
assembly, If, however. a wider construction is given, the con-
structive lability of the hirer will attach itself, notonly tothe
actual offence committed by the hired person. but also to an offenc
for which the hired person may be constructively liable
ber of the assembly. We. however, do not consider it necessary
10 alier the language of this section with a_ view to clarilying
any doubt which may arise as to which of the aforesaid two
constructions is intended. The icity of decistons under this
section is presumably due tothe fact that very few cises of
operating through hired men are brought to light. The
hirer always takes care lo remain in the — background
without disclosing his identity. In any case, the words “in
pursuance of such biring” occurring in this section clarify the
position to some extent by narrowing the'liabitity of the hirer to
those offences of the hired person which can be said to be in
pursuance of such hiring.

For example, see Ram Charan Rei, AAR 1946 Pat. 242, 246.
hambhe Nath, AYR. 1960 ५.९



ction
WS) aad (52

Section

153 amend-
ment
suggested,

Section
IS3A,

Legislative
history of
the section.

164

8. 17. No change is needed in sections 151 and 152.

8.18. Section 153. in describing the mens rea, uses two ex+
pressions “malignanily’ and ‘wantonly’, neither of which is to
be found elsewhere in the Code. Further. these expressions
are imprecise. { particular, the adverb ‘wantonly’ is not a
term of ati ; the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary gives eight
different meanings to the word--lewdly. lasciviously, aportively,
lightheartedly, recklessly, unadvisedly. without regard for conse-
quences and wilfully. The fast is probably the only sense
in which the word can be understood in the context of
section 153.

Having regard to the further requirement under the section
that there must be an illegal act intended or known to be likely to
cause a riot, itdoes nol seem to be necessary to have the require-
ments indicated by the expressions “matignantly” and “want-
only”. In practice, these expressions do not add anything to
the other requirements of the section. [t may also be noted
that the punishment under the section is not severe,-—impri-
sonment upto one year or.six months, according as a riot is
or is not committed.

We, therefore. recommend that the words “malignantly
or wantonly” may be omitted from section 153.

8.19. Section 153A punishes (a) the act of promoting enmity
hetween different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language. caste, community or any other ground,
and (b) acts prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
diflerent groups or castes or communitics if the acts disturb
the public tranquillity.

8.20. The section has a long history. It started as a pro-
vision designed to punish acts promoting enmity or hatred bet-
ween “different classes of Her Majesty's subjects” which later
became “different classes of the citizens of India”. There
was also an Explanation below the section, the effect of which
was to save honest criticism without malicious intention.  Barr-
ing the verbal adaptations made from time to time, the section
retained this shape till 1961. The amendment of 19611 made
three changes in the original section. The term ‘classes’ was
replaced by religious, racial or language groups or castes or
communities. Secondly, the scope of the section wis enlarged,
by making it an offence also for anyone to do any act which
is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different
religious. racial or language groups. or castes or communitics
and which is likely to disturb public tranquillity. Thirdly. the
Explanation was omitted.

AL of (961,


165

In 1969,1 the section was expanded further, and the rea-
sons for the amendment were stated? as follows:—

“Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds
of religion, race, language, etc., is made an offence under
section 153A of the Indian Penal Code. It is proposed to
include therein promoting enmity between different groups
on grounds, such as, place of birth, or residence as well.
It 15 also proposed to widen the scope of the provision so
as to make promotion of disharmony or feelings of ill-will
an offence punishable thereunder. Clause (b) of the said
ction provides for the punishment for doing acts prejudi-
cial to the maintenance of harmony between different groups,
That provision is also proposed to be widened so as to include
acts prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
different regional groups as well. It is also proposed to
provide for enhanced punishment...for any such offence
committed in a pk.ce of worship.”

8.21. Since section 153A constitutes a restraint on the
(reedom of speech and expression, the question may be raised
with reference to clauses t (a) and (2) of Article 19 of the Con-
stitution whether it is @ reasonable restriction imposed in the
interests of the security of the State or in the interest of public
order. decency or morality. or in rekition to incitement to an
offence,

Though the constitutionuity of the section has not yet been
decided by the Supreme Court, two High Courts} have held
that it imposes a reasonable restriction ‘in the interest of public
order’, and is therefore. a valid Jaw.

After the decision of the Supreme Court in Kedarnath's
vase.4 interpreting section 124A and upholding — its
validity. it would appear that the validity of section 153 A could
also be supported provided one reads into the section the like-
lihood of disturbance of public tranquillity--2 requirement ex-
ptessly mentioned in clause (b) of section 153A though not in
clause (a). Reference may also be made to the Supreme Court
judgment in Ramjilal Modi’s case’ in which the validity of
section 2958 was upheld on the ground thatfthe section imposed

"Act 35 of 1969

wel

. (a) Debi Soren v. The State, AAR. 1954 Pat. 254,
aud Rai J3.).

Validity
under Arti-
cle 19 of
the Conse
titution,

. Gazette of india, 27th August, 1968, Part 2, sectiva 2. Uxtraordinary, page 1052.
|. 258, paragraphs 10 to 13 (Das

(b) Khan Gufran Zuhidia ६. State, (1964) AU. LJ. 545, 551; 1964 AIL WR. (14. 0.) 694.
(जे Wajil Uddin vy. The State. ALR. 1953 All. 335. 336, 337 (Jagdish Sahai and Rama-

bhadran 3J.).

(9) Sagdsem Indramani Singh v. State of Manipur, AAR. 1955 Manipur 9. 13,

C. 965; (1962) Suppt. 2 . 769.

. Kedar Nath, AAR. 1952 .
मै 60760 0 C. 620, 623; (1957) 5.९ 1२. 860.

Ranjilal Modi, AAR. 1957



Need tor
the original
Explana-
tion
considered,

2. The indian Pe:

Criminal a

The Indian Pena’

. Lok Sabha Debate
57, cel. 6220.

166

a reasonable restriction in the interest of public order. We
may, thevelore. assume the constitutional validity of this sec-
tion

है. ince Parliament has very recently! considered the
section का detail and revised 1. we do not think it necessary to
scrutinise the subslaace of the provision. There is. however.
ore point which requires carcfal consideration. Before its amend-
ment? i 2961. section 153A contained the following Explana-
tien -

‘xplanation 2 Ut does not amount to an offence with-
in the meaning of this section to point out, without mab-
cious intention and with an honest view to their removal,
matters which are producing or have a tendency to produce.
clings of eumity or hated between different classes of the
citizens of tadia.”

This Expkination was omitted? by the amending Act of
1961. U was stated+ by the Minister sponsoring the amend-
ment thar the intention in omitting the Explanation “was to cast
the responsibility on the offender to prove that his intentions
were not malafide or malicions”. Before 1961. the majority
of the High Courts had taken the view that, under section 1534.
i was necessary that the purpose, or part of the purpose, of the
accused was to promote teelings of enmity of the nature referr-
ed to in the section : and. if it was no part of his purpose, then
016 incre cireumstanee thar there may not be such a tendency
would aol sullice. ॥ छत observed by the Calcutta High Courts

“It in settled 18७ that section 153A. 1. P. C. does not
mean that any person who publishes words that have a tend-
eney to create class hatred can be convicied under that sec-
tion. The words ‘promotes or altempts to promote feel-
ings of enmity’ are to be read as connoting a successful or
unsuccessful attempt to promote feel of enmit 1६ mast
be the parpose or part of the par of the accused to
promote such feelings. ard if ॥ is no part of kis purpose.
ise mere civenmstance that there may be a tendency is not
suitigient.~

wction Laws Amendment Act (35 of 1969).
Code (Amendment) Act, 1951 (41 of 1961).
‘ade (Amendment) Act. 1961 (41 of 1961).
ond Series (2451 August, 1961 to Ist September, 1961). Vot.

POR, Chakravart’ 5. कक... AAR. 1926 Cal. 1433 (Rankin 3.).


167

in several subsequent decisions it was held thai intention
was a necessary ingredient of the offence under section 153A.?
Some of these cases laid stress on the Explanation as reinfore-
ing the view that intention was essential to constitute the offence.

On the contrary, the Allahabad High Court had taken a
different view. While the earlier Allahabad case? spoke merely of
a prestunption of intent, later cases3 totally ruled oul any ques-
tion of mens rea. The leading decision ia favour of this view
is that of Sulaiman, C. J.4 who observed.---

“dt is quite clear (० my mind that there are many offences
in the Indian Penal Code for which the proof of an express
intention on the part of the accused is not at all necessary.
Indeed, wherever it is necessary that intention should form
a necessary pare of the offence. the sections expressly say
50.

Contrasting the language of section 153A with that of sec-
tion 499 (where the word ‘intended’ appears twice), Sulaiman
€. 3. added :

“Yt seems to me that it would be interpolating the words
“with intent to’ in section 153A. if one were to hold that the
intention of the writer to promote hatred etc. must be es-
tablished

“tt would. therefore, scem to follow that the Legisla-
ture contemplates that the words spoken or written, which
do promote hatred cte. would create sufficient’ mischief
so as to fall within the scope of the section, and that it is
not necessary for the prosecution further to establish that
the writer had the intention to promote such hatred.”

The Allahabad decisions related to sections 99A and 99B
of the Code of Cri | Procedure. 1898. and the observations
made there regarding section 153A could be regarded as obiter.
Bui it is obvious that the view that section 153A does not re-
quire mens rea is. al present, firmly established in that High
Court,

1. (0 Devi कण Sharma ९. (09... AAR. 1927 Lah, $94, 598. (Case law reviewed at
188० 602);

(0) Eni. ©. Banomali Maharana, AAR. 1943 Pat. 382, 386;

(०) Raj Paul v, Emp., ALR, 1927 Lah. 39

(0) King Emperor v. Raj Pal, AJR. 1926 Lah. 193, 196:

(०) Ishwari Prasad v. King Emperor, AIR. 3927 Cal. 747 (Play), ‘Balidan’ about
the murder of .wami Shradhanand was the subject matter of the prosecution be-
cause. the writer had argued in favour of the Shuddhi movement. Accused was
acquitted, there being no intention to excite camity).

Kali Charan v. Emp.. AAR. 1927 All, 649, 652 (5.8.).
34a) ALEC. Gupta 5. Emp. AAR. 3936 All, 315, 316 (S.B.).

tb) Harman Das 5. State of U.P., ALR. 1957 All, 538, 540, paragraph 3 (5.8.).
4. MAC. Gupta v. Emp. KAR. 1936 Al 315, 316.



Mens rea
under sec-
tion 153A.

Noubis
likely in
the abe
sence of
Explana-
tion.

RG.

Zahidi v. State, (1964) 62 Allahabad Law Jot
not reported in other series).
Paragraph है
. Paragraph 8.

168

So far as could be ascertained. there is no later case of the
Allahabad High Court to the contrary. In one case decided
in 1964,1 the question was considered whether members of
a Hindu Mahasabha constituted a ‘class’ under section 153A.
Jn that case, the High Court held them to be a class, but
since the charge spoke of enmity between Hindus and Muslims.
the accused was acqnitted by the High Court. In the opening
part of the judgment, after quoting the unamended section 153A
(the case relates to a speech made before the amendment of
1961), the High Court observed, “The class or group can be
based not oniy on grounds of religion. race, Janguage, caste or
community, but also on political ar economic affiliation. How-
ever. the explanation to section 153A protects honest criticism
or any act of the person criticising a political party without a
malicious intention. In other words, therefore, even though
promotion of feelings of enmity and hatred between different
political partics would be punishable under section 1538, still
any honest criticism without any malicious intention would
be a good defence, as laid down in the Explanation thereto.”

The absence of the Explanation (omitted in 1961) may add
strength to the Allahabad view and weaken the majority view
because the majority relied, to some extent, on the Explana-
tion.

8.23. Three possible views can now be put forth as to the
requirement of mens rea under section 153A. _ First, intention
is still the gist of the offence, and has to be proved by the pro-
secution like any other fact, though it is open to the Court to
infer it as is usually done in other cases. (Majority view before
1961).2 Secondly, intention is still the gist. of the offence
but there is a rebuttable presumption about it. By virtue of
section $1 of the Code, read with section 106 of the Evidence
Act, however. the accused can rebut the presumption (view
expressed in Debates in Parliament in 1961)? Thirdly, intention
is not required and mere tendency to promote ill-will etc. is
enough. (Allahabad view before 1961).4

8.24. It is difficult to say what view the Courts will take in
the ubsence of the original Explanation. Reliance on section
81 of the Code may not suffice.

If mens rea is not considered necessary, then any writing of
a reasoned character, but containing a strong attack on a
religion or its founder, written by way of comment with a view

urna) 545, 547 (D.S. Mathur 1). (Case

4, Paragraph 8.22, supra.


169

to inducing persons to effect social or religious reforms, may
fall within the mischief of the section. It was precisely this
situation which was sought to be avoided by the original Ex-
planation.

“Intention” and “tendency” are entirely different concepts.
While the former has reference to the state of mind of the actor,
the latter has reference to the possible effect of the act. The
tendency of an act may be. in fact. exactly the reverse of the
result which the actor intended, should foilow from the measure
taken by him, Except for she offence of contempt of court,
the effect or tendency produced by an act is not ordinarily con-
sidered as sufficient to make it criminal, unless it is accompanied
by the necessary knowledge or intention.

We do not also think it fair to throw on the accused the bur-
den of proving the absence of mens rea. This is against the
general scheme of criminal law, and no strong reasons for de-
parture therefrom exist.

8.25. Hence we would support the first view, and recommend
that the word ‘intentionally’ should be inserted before the word
‘promotes’ in section 153A to make it clear that mens rea is
essential and has to be proved as in any other case.

8.26, Mention should be made here of section 305 (placed
in Chapter 22) which punishes the making, publishing or cir-
culating of any statement, rumour or report “conducing to
public mischiel We have already recommended that the
portion of this section which relates to statements made with
intent to cause mutiny, derctiction of duty, insubordination etc.
among the armed forces should find a place! in the Chapter
relating to offences against the armed forces. The rest of the
section really relates to public tranquillity. This section has
been recently amended by the addition of two sub-sections relat-
ing to statements creating or promoting enmity. aatred or ill-will
between classes. This part of the section is very similar to, if
not wholly covered by section 153A, and it would be logical
to include it in Chapter है immediately after this section. The
subject matter of the two sections is quite different from the sub-
ject of unlawful assemblies and riots dealt with in the group of
sections 147 to 158. lt would be more appropriate, therefore,
to renumber section 153A as section 158A, and to insert after
it the following new section :

“158B. Statements conducing 10 offences against public
tranquiltity—G) Whoever makes, publishes or circulates
any statement, rumour or repost—

(a) with intent to create or promote, or which is
likely to create or promote. on grounds of retigion,

Amend-
ment
proposed.

Section
505.

“J See pitragraph 7.9 above


Sections
154, 155
and 156—
punishment
enhanced.

Section 157
amended,

170

race. place of birth, residence, language. caste or commu-
nity or any other ground whatsoever. feelings of enmity.
hatred or ill-will between different religious. racial,
language or regional groups or castes or communities;
or

(b} with intent to incite, or which is likely io incile,
any ciass or community of persons to commit any offence
ugainst any other class or community; or

se. er Which is likely lo cause,
fear or alarm to the public or to any section of the
public. whereby any person may he induced to commit
an ofence against the public tranquility,

fc) with intent to ca

shail be punished with imprisonment of cither description
for a term which may extend to three years. or with fine,
or with both.

Excen
wire such stat

A person making, publishing or circulating
ent, rumour or 10001, who has reasonabic
ounds for believing that such statement, rumour er report
i and makes. publishes or ates 1६ in good faith
and without any such intent as aforesaid, does not commit an
ofignee under this section.

(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section
(६1) in any place of worship or in any aysembly engaged in
the performance of retigious worship or religious ceremonies,
shali be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to five years, and shal! also be
liable to fine.”

8.27. Offences under sections 154, 155 and 156 are seldom
brought to court. though, if these sections are strictly enforced
in appropriate cases, they may effectively che ting On account
of land disputes, which are widely prevalent in some parts of
Tudia. The sentences provided in these sections are tenient,
We recommend that a sentence of six months’ imprisonment of
either description or fine or both should be provided for each
of the three offences.

8.28. Amongst the acts punishable under section 157, one
iy that of ‘harbouring’ a person known to have been engaged to
become a member of an unlawful assembly. The expression
“harbour been. defined in an earlier section,! in a wide man-
ner. This definition is too wide for the purpose of section 157. In
fact. existing section 520, which defines ‘harbour’, excludes
section 157 from its scope, and this indicates that the dictionary
meaning of ‘harbour is intended for the purpose of section
157,

Sce discussion regarding section 524. paragraph 2.81 above.


HL

1 appears to us. thai the expressior
ean be Is avoided. We recommend th
the word ‘shelters’ be substitutcd.

harbours’ in section 157
t for the word ‘harbours’.

8.29. No change is needed in section 158.

Section 158.

8.30. Under section 159, two requirements are necessary in Se
order that lighting may amount to an affray. The first is that the
lighting must be in a public place. and the second is that it
should be of such a character as to disturb the public peace. In
a_vecent English case.! tt appears to have been held chat an
alfray can be commiticd in a private place. but we do not think
this would be h. for Indian conditions. The mention of
“public place’ should be retained in section 159. It was suggested
that the expression ‘public place” may be defined! as a place used
by the public, whether they have a right of access to it or not:
but, in our view, such 2 definition would not be of much practical
ulility, and would nol solve actual problems which arise in practice
as ta whether a particular place is or is nol a public lace.

jon 159.

8.31. ft appears to us that the punishment for affray under Section 160
section 169 (ir upto ene month or fine upto one amended.
hundred rupees) is grossly inadequate. Punishment under this
section should be increased to 6 months’ imprisonment; and,
as regards fine, there need be no limitation on the amount. Sec-
tion 160 may, therefore, be revised as under :—~

“160, Punishment for committing affray —Whoever com-
mits an affray. shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six month:
or with fine or with both”.

1 Button ४. PPP. 11965) 3 AN E.R. 587 abo.


Introduce
tory

Lion 16t
and the
Prevention
at Core
rapton
Act

Section
applicable
whether
ar not
public ser-
vant is
capable
of doing
oficial
act.

CHAPTER 9
OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS

9.1. Chapter 9 deals with offences which can be committed
by public servants alone and also those offences which relate
to public servants. though not committed by them. The offences
which are common between public servants and other members
ef the community are dealt with in the general provisions of the

‘ode.

Section 161 and the succeeding sections relating to bribery
were fully considered by us in the Jight of the decided cases and
the provisions in the Prevention of Corruption Act, [947 and
the relevant comments made in some of the judgments. On
a few matters, the law is inadequate, and we proceed lo discus.
them in the succeeding paragraphs.

9.2. There is considerable overlapping between sections 161
to 165 of the Cade and some of the provisions of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947. That Act, however, was mainly in-
tended to punish “habitual corruption” and it contains special
rules of procedure and evidence. The Indian Penal Code.
which constitu(es the general criminal law. should also continue
to retain provisions dealing with bribery. No change, is there-
fore, necessary in this respect.

9.3. The question whether section 161 applies wherg the
public servant concerned has no power to do the act promised
has now been settled by the Supreme Court. In Mahesh Prasad
y. State of U.P. the Court observed :—

“tis pointed out that the appellant though employed in
the Railway was not himself a person who was in a position
to give a job to the complainant nor is it shown that he had
any intimacy or influence with any particular official who
could give a job. It 1s urged therefore that the offence, if any,
committed by the appellant could only be one of cheating and
nat the receiving of a bribe. This argument is without any
substance. By the terms of section 16! of the Indian Penai
Code a person who is a public servant and accepts illegal
gratification as a motive for rendering service, with any public
servant as such, is guilty of the offence thereunder.

' (1955) TS.GR 965: ALR. 1955 S.C. 70, 71.

472


173

To constituie an offence under this section. iL is enough
ithe p-ublic servant who receives the money takes it by holding
out that he will render assistance to the giver with any such
public servant and the giver gives the money under (hat beli
it may be that the receiver of the money is in fact not in a
position to render such assistance, and is even re of at
He may not even have intended to do what he holds himself
out as capable of doing it. He may accordingly be guilty
of cheating. Nonetheless he is guilty of the offence under
section 161 of the Indian Penal Code. This 18 clear from the
fourth Explanation to section 161, P.-C. Hlustration (c)
to section [61 also clucidates this.

Thus, where.a pubtic servant who receives illegal grati-
fication as a motive for doing or procuring an official act.
whether or not he is capable of doing it or whether or not he
intends to do it. he is quite clearly within the ambit of section
tol 1.70...

9.4. An analogous question is, whether a public servant who.
ly किम officio can be guilty of accepting a bribe. This question
also arose in several cases before the High Courts, There are
obiter dicta of the Supreme Court on the subject.! The question
was not decided, but the following discussion in the judgment
of the Supreme Court is of interest: :—

“Dr. Ambedkar then submits that in this case no
offence had been committed. He points out that it was Sri
Gudi and not Sri Naik. who was authorised to seize the books.
Sri Gudi directed Sri Naik to examine the books and make
areport which the fatter did on 12-3-1949, Ex. 10-A. After
that date Sri Naik was functus officio, having fully performed
whatever duty he had to perform. and, therefore, he
Was not the public servant who could, in the exercise of his
official function, show any favour or render any service to
the appellants. Learned counsel relied on the cases of
Shamsul Huq ४. Emp.,* Inve P. Venkatia and Venkatarama
Naidu ४. Emp.4 A persuat of the cases relied on by learned
counsel will show that the question of law was not fully dis:
cussed, and the reasons in support of the conclusions arrived
al are not clear or convincing. On the other hand, the High
Courts of Allahabad, Lahore, Nagpur, Bombay and Orissa
have disapproved of the decisions relied on by Dr. Ambedkar.
See Ajudhia}Prasad v. Emp..§ Emp., v. Phul Singh.6 Ram Sewak

1, Mahadeo v. State of Boinbay, AAR. 1953 S.C. 179, 181
2, ALR. 1921 Cal. 344.

3. ALR. 1924 Mad. 851.

4, AAR. 1929 Mad. 756.

5. ALR. 1928 All. 752.

6, AR. 1947 Lah, 276.

Applica-
bility
section
where

of

public ser-

vant
functus

officio

is


i74
v. Emp." Gepeshwar Mandal v. Emp..2 \n re Varadadesika-
chariar® Indur Devaidas Advani v. State+. and State v. Sadie
charan PanigarahiS

The point of jaw appears to have been more fully dis-
cussed in these cases, and the reasonings set out therein appear
10 us, as ai present advised. to be more convincing than those
out the.cases relied on by Dr. Ambedkar. His. however,
A necessary for the purposes of this case. to express any
al opin on this question. for we are satisfied. cn the
Facts oF this case. that Sri Gudi and Sri Naik had it in thew
power, in the exercise of their official functions, to show
favour or render some service to the appellants... हा

9.5. We recommend that the conflict of decisions in the High
Courts should be resolved by amending the fourth Explanation
10 read as 01055 :

“A motive or reward for doing...” A person who receives:
a gratification as a motive or reward lor doing what he docs
not intend er is not ina position (0 do or has not done.
comes within these words.

9.6. Bribe giving is described as abetment and made punish-
able under section 165A. Strictly speaking, this is nol appro-
priate. The giver is as much guilty as the receiver and the oflence
of bribery should reaily cover both the giver and the receiver in
the section. Reference may be made, in this connection. wo
section 171 8 (bribery at elections), where the same section covers
both the giver and the receiver of the bribe.6 As the point is
not of practical importance and the punishment is the same for
the substantive offence as well as for the abetment, we recommend
no change in this respect

Saxtions— 9.7, No changes are required in sections 162 to 165A.
Section 166 9.8. Section 166 punishes a public servant disobeying a law
ea with intent to cause injury, As the offence is grave one, we consi-
increased, er that the punishment should be increased to “imprisonment
of cither description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both”.
1. ALLR. (948 AL 17.
2. ALR. 1948 Nag. 8:
3. ALR. 1950 Mad, 93.
4. ALR. 1952 Bom. 58.
8. ALLR. 1952 Orissa 73
6. See also Venkatarama Naida A.A.R. 1929 Mad. 757, where the need for amending

section 161 in various respects was suggested


175

9.9. The Code does not take account of those types of mis-
coaduct by public servants where the misconduct does not take
the shape of bribery or extortion or similar corrupt acts. There
are several types ef misconduct in the performance of off
Turetions which may cause serious harm to the interests of a citi-
zn. Inordinate deiay, malicious and revengeful action. deliberate
pari
readily 10 the mind. Such misconduct does not amount io a
direct demand for gratilication. though often the ultimate motive
is to obtain such gratification. Section 166 is noi adequate for
the purpose beeause it is restricted to misconduct amouniing
a violation of a specific direction of the law.

It is desirable to ensure that no public officer shail.
exercise of the duties of his office or while acting under
of his office. do any act which is wrongful in itself or do an other-
wise lawful act in a wrongful manner. We are fully aware of the
practical difficulties involved in enforcing a statutory provision
made to remedy this evil. For example. in public offices. it is
often difficult to fix responsibi on a particular person, and 1
may also be difficult to prove a specific act of misconduct in the
nature of oppression. ‘There would also be difficulties of collect-
ing the necessary evidence. Nevertheless. we consider that there
ought to be a penal provision to punish acts of gross misconduct.

9.10. We, accordingly. recommend the insertion of a new
yection as follows :--

“160A. Public servant acting with intent to cause injury
to any person.~-Whoever, being a public servant. wilfully
conducts himself in the performance of his functions ay such
public servant, intending to cause or knowing it to be likety that
he will by such conduct. cause injury to any person, shall
be punished with imprisonment of cither description for a
term which may extend [0 one year. or with fine. or with both.”

9.11, Section 167 punishes a public servant “charged with the
preparation or transtation of a document” who “frames or trons-
lates a document in an incorrect manner with the requisite in-
tent. There is some controversy as to whether the preparation of
false uncertified copies falls under section }67.! in our view,
there can hardly be any doubt that a copy. whether certified or
uncertified, is a document’ within the meaning of section 167.
If a copy is knowingly prepared incorrectly, then the act should
be punishable under section 166. It is desirable to make the
position clear.

The word ‘frames’ in section 167 should be replaced by the
word ‘prepares’. The earlier part speaks of a person charged
with the preparation of a document, and not with the framing
of a document.

The expression ‘preparation of a document’ is comprehensive
enough to cover preparation of the translation of a document.

1. Certified copies would be covered by section 197.

Willful
miscoa-
duct of
public ser-
vant
should be
habie,

New see
tion 166A
recommen
ded.

Section 167
amended,



176

We propose to put that idea in an Explanation instead of speci-
fically mentioning translation in the main section as at present.

Accordingly section 167 may be revised as follows:—

“167, Public servant preparing an incorrect document with
intent to cause injury.--Whoever, being a public servant and
being. as such public servant, charged with the preparation
of any document, prepares that document in a manner which
he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to
cause. or knowing it to be fikely that he will thereby cause,
injury to any person, shalt be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both,

Explanation.-—The expression ‘preparation of a document’
includes the preparation of a copy or translation of a docu-
ment.”

rapt

9.12. The Law Commission had in an carlier Report! consi-
dered how to tackle the problem of cheating of government on

servantsin मे large scale by dishonest contractors while supplying goods
regard or executing works. and recommended a specific provision
10. ए0- penalising it as an aggravated offence of cheating. Considering

vernment
contracts.

the wide range of state activity at present (and it is likely to grow
wider). there are, we think. sound reasons for enacting a special
provision expressly covering such fraudulent conduct. We
are also conscious that such conduct is facilitated and furthered
by official connivance. and we should take note, not only of
fraudulent contractors, but also of those public officials who
assist them. The maximum punishment for such conduct, we
think, could be more severe than that suggested in the 29th
Report. and we propose a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment.
While the proper place for the provision for punishment of govern-
ment contractors would be in Chapter [7 in the part relating to
cheating?. we propose the following section to punish the corrupt
public servant who assists them :—

“LO7A. Public servant knowingly authorising payment in
respect of contracts, when the goods supplied or work done is
not in accordance with the contract.-Whoever, being a public
servant competent to authorise payment on behalf of the
Government or other public authority in respect of any contract
for the supply of any goods, the construction of any building
or the execution of other work, authorises such payment,
knowing—

(७) in the case of a contract for the supply of goods,
that the confractor has supplied goods which are less
in quantity than, or inferior in quality to. those he con-
tracted to supply or which are, in any manner whatever,
not in accordance with the contract. or

1. 29th Report -proposal to include certain social and economic offences in the indian
Penal Code-- paragraphs 137 10 139.

See paragraph 17.50 below


177

(0) in the case of a contract for the construction of
a building or execution of other work. that the contractor
has used materials. which are less in quantity than, or
inferior in quality to. those he contracted to use. or which
are, ia any manner whatever, not in accordance with the
contract. shall, in the absence of lawful excuse, the burdea
of proving which shall be on him, be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.—-In this section, ‘public authority’ means.

(a) a corporation established by or under a Central,
Provinical or State Act;

(b) a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956; and

(०) a local authority.”

9.13. Section 168 deals with a public servant who unlawfully
engages in any trade, when Iegally bound not to engage in that
trade. The word ‘trade’ in this section was given a wide meaning
in a Bombay case!, as including any business carried on with a
view to profit. No contrary view has been taken by any
other High Court, and we do not consider it necessary to
make any amendment to this section.

9.14. No change is needed in section 169.

9.15. Section 170 punishes a person who pretends to hold
a particular office as a public servant, or falsely personates any
other person holding such office and, in such assumed character,
does any act under colour of such office. It is not necessary that
the act should bz done with a dishonest or corrupt motive. We
considered the question whether the word ‘dishonestly’ or ‘fraudu-
lently’ or ‘corruptly should be inserted to indicate the requisite
mens rea. 1६ was apprehended that, if construed without some
such words, the section might create hardship; for instance, even
a person who, in assisting law enforcement, has to pose as an
officer of a particular category, may be held guilty of this offence.
But we do not think that this point is of any practical importance.
It is not likely that an agent provocateur who entraps an accused
and makes him commit a crime by pretending to be a public
servant, will ever be prosecuted.

9.16. With reference to section 171 also, it was suggested
that expressions indicating the mens rea should be added; but we
regard this as unnecessary.

The punishment provided in this section appears to be in-
adequate. and we recommend that it should be increased to
“six months, ot with fine. or with both.”

1. Mulshankar v. Government of Bombay, AAR. 1951 Bom. 233.
2M of Law-71—13.

Section
168.

Section
169.

Section
170.

Section
punish.
ment
creased.

‘7h

ine


Inirodue-
lory.

Feuer

on prose-
cunions
under

s. 196, Cr,
PC.

Reeom-
mendation
in pres
vious Re-
port.

1. Ast Report, pages 113, 114.

CHAPTER 9A
ELECTION OFFENCES

9A.t. This chapter was inserted in the Penal Code in 1920
by the Indian Elections Offences and Inquiries Act. and for the
first time, various corrupt and illegal practices liable to occur at
elections were made punishable offences. The punishments
prescribed for them were, however, light. Only three of these
offences, viz., bribery, undue influence and personation, were
considered grave enough to deserve imprisonment and that too
upto only one year. The other three offences, viz., making false
statements about the persona! character or conduct of a candidate.
jilegal payments in connection with an election and failure 10
keep election accounts as required by law, were made punishable
with fine only. A wide definition of ‘election’ as denoting any
clection to a legislative, municipal or other public authority of
whatever character was inserted by the same Act of 1920 in sec-
tion 21 of the Code as Explanation 3. By virtue of section 6 of
the Code this definition applies to the whole chapter.

98.2. It appears that several local governments expressed
the fear that the new penal provisions were likely to be abused,
specially in rural areas, for putting one’s personal enemies into
trouble by foisting false cases on them after an clection. In
order to allay these apprehensions, section 196 of the Criminal
Procedure Code was simultaneously amended making private
prosecutions of election offences subject to executive control.
Courts were debarred from taking cognizance of an
election offence under Chapter 9A of the Penal Code except
“upon complaint made by order of, or under authority from,
the Governor-General in Council, the Local Government
or some officer empowered by the Governor-General in Council

in this behalf”.

98.3. As observed by us in our last Report! on the Code of
Criminal Procedure, “it was thought that this would give some
discretion to the Government to determine whether criminal
proceedings were warranted in the circumstances of each case,
so that vexatious proceedings instituted solely on the basis of
political animosity by private individuals could be avoided.
This secondary object was certainty achieved but it is doubtful
whether the al provisions ostentatiously put in the Penal
Code. but e! ectively blunted by section 196 of the Procedure
Code, helped to maintain the purity of elections to any
appreciable extent.

178


179
This difficulty was realised in some provinces in
regard to the offence of personation punishable under section
171F of the Penal Code. Even a person blatantly committing
this offence at the polling booth could not be arrested or otherwise
proceeded against on the spot since the offence was non-cognizabie
and the compiaint of an empowered officer. was required for
prosecuting the offender in court. The Criminal Procedure
Code was locally amended by four provinces excluding this
offence fromthe scope of section 196 and making it cognizable.
This lead was followed up in the Representation of the People
Act, 1951, and the amendment became applicable throughout
India

The experience of the last 20 years in the field of country-
wide democratic elections shows that, unless these impediments
(0 prosecution are removed. the mere fact that bribery, undue
influence, character assassination etc.. are punishable on convic-
tion by a criminal court makes Jitde difference and these corrupt
practices are indulged in with impunity. The number of com-
plaints lodged by the Government or empowered officers in re-
gard to election offences (apart from personation) is naturally
very small. Under the party system of government prevalent
throughout the country it will, no doubt, be embarrassing for the
State Government to decide in the first instance whether a com-
plaint ought to be lodged in a particular case. Whichever way it
decides this question it is most fikely that political motives and
prejudices will be attributed to it 115 possible that if the bar
containod in section 196 of the Code is removed there will be a
spate of private complaints, including quite a few vexaticus ones
for the sake of harassment. but we feel that this possibitity must
be faced in the interest of tree and fair clections. We recoremend
that all election offences should be excluded from the purview of
section 196.71

.

9A.4, Section 1716 defines “candidate” and “electoral right”. Section
While the first definition does not call for any comment, we notice eon
that the definition of “electoral right”? does not expressly refer Sf "gan
10 the right of a person wor to withdraw his candidature in an toral right’
election. This was considered to be a Jacuna in section 79(d) of — amended,
the Representation of the People Act, 1951, which originally
defined “electoral right” in the same way as section I71A(b)
of the Code. and in sub-clause (B)(a) of section 123(1) of that
Act which defined bribery. With reference to the latter definition,
as it stood before 1966, it was held that an inducement offer-
ed to a candidate aor to withdraw his candidature did not amount
to the corrupt practice of bribery. In order to bring such an
inducement within the definition, the aforesaid provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, were amended in 1966.

3, This recommendation has been accepted vide clause 197 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure 819, 1970. introduced in the Rajya Sabha.


Suggestion
to. inckrde
Fight to
nominate
in “electo-
ral right”
considered.

combined

an
amended.

180

For the same reason, we propose that clause (b) of section 1716
should be amended io read:—

“(b) ‘electroal right’ means the right of a person at an
election to stand or not to stand as a candidate. or to withdraw
OF not to withdraw his candidature, or to vote or to refrain
from voting”.

94.5. We considered an odd suggestion that the right of a
person to nominate anyone as a candidate at an election should
also be mentioned in the definition of “electoral riyht™". The object
is apparently to punish any attempt to bribe or exercise undue
influence over a person in relation to the act of nominating can-
didates at an election, but this is clearly far-fetched. It is un-
likely that any person entilled to nominate a person will demand,
or be given, an illegal gratification for this simple service: and
it is even less likely that a person who cannot get himself nomi-
nated as a candidate without a bribe to his proposer will be
optimistic enough to stand for the election.

9A.6. Section 1718 gives a comprehensive and satisfactory
definition of the offence of bribery. The punishment for this
offence, the punishment for the offence of bribery by treating and
a definition of “treating” are given in section 171E. ॥ will be
clearer to all concerned if these matters also are included in
मा 1718 itself as sub-section (4), making that section 6015
plete.

We have alrecdy remarked on the lightness of the punish-
ment provided for election offences in this chapter. Even after
allowing for the fact that the chapter is applicable to all kinds
of elections, from elections to Parliament down to elections
to a village panchayat, we feel that. if purity of elections
is to be maintained, we cannot affotd to take such a lenient
view of these corrupt practices. While in the last resort. the
efficacy of these penal provisions depends on public opinion,
the law should indicate to the courts and the public that these
rules of conduct are essential for democratic elections and thie
infringement will be severely dealt with. We recommend that
the offences of bribery (other than bribery by treating).
undue influence, personation and making false statements about
a candidate's personal character or conduct should all be punish-
able with imprisonment of either description which may extend
to two years or with fine, or with both.

Accordingly we propose that section 171E be omitted, and
the fotiowing sub-seclion be added to section 171B:—-

“(4) Whoever commits the offence of bribery shail be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to two years or with fine or with
both:


181

Provided that bribery by ireating shall be punishable
with iine only.

Explanation..— Treating” means that form of bribery
where the gratification consists in food, drink, entertain-
ment oF provision.”

94.7 The offence of undue influence at an election is defined
very widely in section 171C to cover any kind of voluntary inter-
ference with tie frec exercise of any electoral right. Two kinds
of such interference are specially mentioned in sub-section (2)
without prejudice to the wide scope of the general definition given
in sub-section {1}. These are. threatening any candidate or voter,
‘or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested, with
injury of any kind. and inducing a candidate or voter to believe
that he or any person in whom he ig interested will become
an object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure. There
is. of course. no doubt that when the interference takes the form
of using. or threatening (0 use. force or violence, it will be regar-
ded as a blatant form of the offence.

9A.8. The Supreme Court observed in Babu Rao v. Zakir
“itis dificult 10 lay down in general terms where
ng ends and interference or attempted intei ference
with the free exercise of any electoral right begins. That is ७
matter to be determined in each case; but there can be no doubt
that if what is done is merely canvassing, it would not be undue
influence.” After reviewing previous decisions of election
tribunals and courts on this subject, the Court observed “that it
has been consistently held in this country that it is open to Minis-
ters to canvass for candidates of their party standing for election.
Such canvassing does not‘amount to undue influence but itis pro-
per use of the Ministers" right to ask the public to support candi-
dites belonging to the Ministers’ party. It is only where a Minis-
ter abuses his position as such and goes beyond merely asking for
support for the candidates befonging to his party that a question
of undue influence may arise.”

9 A.9, 2In the more. recent case of Shiv Kirpal Singh
V.V. Giri, one of the questions related to the distribution of
an anonymous pamphlet which alleged gross immorality to a
candidate at the presidential election. The distribution of the
pamphle: clearly came within the mischief of section 171G of the
Cade, but the controversy before the Supreme Court was whether
it also came within the mischief of section 171C and anounted
10 undue influence. The Conrt, by a majority, held?:-

“From a reading of section 1716 it is clear that in pur-
suit of purity of elections the legislature frowned upon altem-
Pts to 85581 such purity by means of false statements relating

1. (196%) 2 $.0.7. 133, 146.
2. AAR. 1970 S.C. 2097, 2113.

Section
176 une
due ine
fluence at
an election.

Difficuky
of inter.
preting
“inter-
ference”
canvassing
by

y.
Ministers.

Pusblishing
false
statements
and undue
influence.


Definition
of “undue
influence *
in the
British
RP. Act.

182

to the personal chara and conduct ofa candidate and made
such acts punishable thereunder. But the fact chat making
of such a false statement is a distinct offence under section
171G does not aad cannot mean that it cannot take the graver
form of undue influence punishable under section 17] The
false statement may be of such virulent, vulgar or scurrilous
character that it would either deter or tend to deter voters
from supporting that candidate whom they would have sup-
ported in the free exercise of their electoral right but for their
being affected or attempted to be affected by the maker or the
publisher of such a statement. Therefore, it is the degree of
gravity of the allegation which will be the determining
factor in deciding whether it falls under section 171९ or
section 171G. If the allegalion, though false and relating to
acandidatc’s personal character or conduct. made with the
intent to affect the result of an election, does not amount to
interference or attzmpt at such interference, the offence would
be the lesser one. If.onthe other hand. it amounts to
interference or an atiempt to interfere. it would te the graver
offence under section 171F read with section 171C.

We think. with respect, that the line of demarcation indicated
in the last two sentences is very thin and does nol appear neces~
sarity or logically to follow from the wording of either section
170 or of section 171G. Whether the false statement is grossly
vulgar and scurrilous or only moderately so cannot, it seems to us,
make any difference to the question whether the person publi-
shing the false statement has or has not attempted to interfere
with the {ree exercise of the right to vore at the election. Bhar-
gava J. took the view that mere false propaganda as to the per-
sonal character of a candidate cannot amount to the corrupt
practice of undue influence; that false statements about the per-
sonal character or conduct of a candidate may. of course, be
scurrilous and foul but even then the offence committed would
fall under section 1716.

9A.10. On comparing the definitions of undue influence in
the Penal Code with the definitions in the British. Canadian
and Australian election laws, we find that our definition is unduly
wide and vague. giving rise to the difficulties of interpretation
referred to above. Under the British Representation of the
People Act. 1949,

“A person shall be guilty of undue influence—

(४) if he, directly or indirectly, by himself or by
any other person on his behalf, makes use of, or threa-
tens to make use of, any force. violence or resiraint,
or inflicts or threatens to inflict. by himself or by any
other person, any temporal or spiritual injury, damage.
harm or loss upon or against any person in order to in-
duce or compel that person to vote or refrain from vo-
ting: or


183

(b) if. by abduction, duress or any fraudulent device
or contrivance. he impedes or prevents the free exercise
of the franchise of an elector or proxy for an elector,
or thereby compels. induces or prevails upon an elector.
or proxy for an elector either to vote or to refrain from
soung.!~

The Gztinitions in the Australian and Canadian election laws
wre on the same lines.

98.11. We consider that, in the Indian Penal Code also,
the offence of undue influence should be more strictly defined.
Bevide:. the two types of undue influence mentioned in sub-section
(2} of section 171९. the definition should expressly mention,
muking use of, or threatening to make use of, any force, violence
or wrongful restraint on any person as the really important type
to be covered. Any such violent method of interfering with the
free exercise of an electoral right should be made punishable
more severely than the other two objeclionable methods. There
does not seem to be any need to cast the penal provision or,
for the matter of that, the definition of this corrupt practice. --
more widely so us to cover every interference and leave it to
the courts to find oul whether the interference in the particular
circumstances of a case was due or undue. proper or improper.

94.12. We accordingly propose that section 171९: be revised
as follows: --

1716. Undue influence at elections —(1) Whoever, with
intent to interfere with the free exercise of any electoral right
at an election.—

(a) makes use of, or threatens to make use of, any
force, violence or wrongful restraint on any person, of

(9) inflicts, or threatens to inflict. on any person,
injury of any kind (including social ostracism and expul-
sion or ex-communication from any caste or community).
or

(०) induces. or attempts to induce, any person to
believe that he will become object of divine displeasure
or of spiritual censure, commits the offence of undue
influence at an election:

Provided that 2 declaration of public policy or a
promise of public action shall not be an offence under
this section.

ction 101(2),

Narrower
definition
reconimen-
ded.

Undue
influence
at clec-
tions.


Section
17199

and sec-
von ॥7&
combined
and amen-
ded,

Section
३376
revised.

184

(2) Whoever commits the offence of undue infleence at
an election shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years or
with fine or with both; and if the offence is committed in the
manner specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1}, the imprison-
ment may extend to three years.”

9A.13. Section 1710 defines the offence of personation at
an election: and under section 177, the punishment for the
offence is imprisonment up to one year, or finc, or both. No
change of substance is needed in section 171D. But the maxi-
yum punishment for the offence should be increased to two years’
imprisonment, and, instead of having in a separate section, the
punishment provision should be put in section 1710 itself as
sub-section (2).

Accordingly, we propose that section 1717 be omitted, and the
following sub-section be added to sub-section 171D:—-

“(2) Whoever commits the offence of personation at an
clection shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip-
tion for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both.”

9A.14. Section 171G punishes the making or publishing of
false statements in relation to the personal character or conduct
of any candidate with intent to affect the result of the election.
The offence is, however, punishable with fine only which, as
already pointed out, is to take a very lenient view of the offence.
“Character assassination” at an election seems to us to be as re-
prehensible as exercising undue influence on clectors or bribing
them, and should be punished just as severely.

We notice that under section 123(4) of the Representation of
the People Act, 1951, it is a corrupt practice to make or publish
a false statement in relation to the candidature or withdrawal of
candidature of any candidate. Such false statements are likely
to cause irreparable damage to the candidate concerned and to
falsify the election as a whole. We think they should also be brou-
ght within the purview of section 1716.

This section may accordingly be revised as follows:

“171G. False statement in connection with an election:—
Whoever, with intent to affect the result of an election, makes
or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of
fact which is false and which he either knows or believes to
be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the per-
5019] character or conduct of any candidate or in reiation
to the candidature or withdrawal of candidature of any candi-
date, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descri
tion which may extend to two years, or with fine. or with both.



185

9A.15. Section I7IH penalises any person who. without
the written authority of the candidate. incurs any expense tor
the purpose of promoting or procuring the election of that candi-
date, The punishment provided under the sec:ion is fine not
exceeding five hundred rupees. While this provision has some
meaning in relation to an election for which the relevant election
law provides a limit on the permissible expense of candidates,
it is anomatous in relation to the much larger number of elections
for which there is no such limit. Even in regard to the parliamen-
tary and assembly elections this section is a dead letter. We
propose that it can safely be omitted from the Penal Code. It
should be left to the law governing a particular election to create
this offence if considered necessary or desirable.

—

For similar reasons we consider that any penal provision on
the lines of scction 171-1 should be made in the law which re-
quires candidates to keep accounts of election expenses, and it
need not find a place in the Penal Code.

Sections
1711 and
171-1
omitted.


Introduc-
tory,

Section
172 amen-
ded.

CHAPTER 10
Contempts of the lawful authority of Public Servants

10.1. This Chapter deals with contempts of the lawful autho-
rity of public servants and is meant to enforce obedience and res-
pect lo their fawful authority. The penal provisions in this
Chapter are in addition to, and not in derogation of, the powers
and methods of enforcing such obedience as provided for in the
laws conferring such powers, e.g., by attachment and sale of pro-
perty. cancellation of licences and permits etc. It will be noticed
that practically every section in this Chapter is linked with sub-
stanuive provisions to be found in other laws which confer the
relevant powers on public servants. This is indicated by the use
of expressions like “legally competent”. “legally bound”, “lawfully
empowered”. “lawful powers”, “lawful authority”. “exercise
of public functions’ tn any concrete case falling
under a particular section of this Chapter. it will be necessary to
read it with the provisions of the substantive law from which the
public servant derives his authority and power to act. Conse-
quently, many questions which arise in trials for offences under
this Chapter turn more on an interpretation of the provisions of
such substantive law than on an interpretation of the provisions
of this Chapter. Some controversies which have arisen under
the individual sections, however, require to be considered and will
be dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs. One general observa-
tion which we may make at the beginning is that the punishments
provided in the several sections err on the side of leniency and.
in our opinion. require to be increased.

10.2. Section 172 punishes any person who absconds in order
to avoid service of summons or other proceeding. The word
‘absconds’ in this section has been given a wide meaning by the
courts 50 as practically to cover cases of evasion. We regard
this to be satisfactory and do not consider that any clarificatory
amendment is required.

{is noticed that the second paragraph refers only to the pro-
duction of documents in court, not to the production of other
things. This omission should be rectified by inserting the words
“or other thing” after the word “document”.

The punishment provisions should be amended as follows:-

{i} In the first paragraph of this section for “one month.
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with
both”, substitute “three months, or with fine, or with both.”
{ii} In the second paragraph. for “six months. or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both",
subsiitute “one year. or with fine, or with both”.

186



187

11.2. We propose that the same amendments shonid also be
made in section 173.

10.4. In section 174 also. the punishment provisions should
be amended as in section 172. The illustrations appear to be
wholly unnecessary as they do not clarify any doubtful point and
may safely be omiticd.

The expression “intentionally omits” has beea given a some-
what narrow meaning by the courts and the plea of there having
been suflicient cause for the omission although intentional has
been pted as valid. We do not think, however, that an
amendment on this point is necessary.

10.8. In section 175, the same amendments are required to
be made as those proposed above in section 172. The ifustra-
tion alse is unnecessary and should be omitted.

19.6. The punishments provided in section 176 should be
increased to the same extent as in the preceding sections. Under
the first paragraph, the maximum punishment should be three
months’ impriyonment and unlimited fine; and under the second
and third paragraphs, it should be one year’s imprisonment and
unlimited fine.

10.7. The question as to what exactly is the “subject” on which
a village headman is “legally bound to furnish information” to
the officer in charge of a police station under section 45(1)(d) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure gave rise to a difference of opinion
when i came up before a Division Bench of the Allahabad High
Court. The headman who had in fact taken away a girl from the
village signed u panchayatnama in which it was stated that the
girl had died of drowning and sent it (0 the police station. On
the question whether section 177 of the Penal Code was appli-
cable, Sulaiman. ९... held:-4

“Taking this section (section 45 (i)(d), Cr. P.C.] as it
stands, it only enjoins upon him the duty of communicating
the information whicn he may possess respecting ‘the occur-
rence of any sudden or unnatural death or of any death under
suspicious circumstances’ etc... The section does not say
on the alleged occurrence of any death. The word ‘subject
used in section 177 of the Indian Penal Code means on (sic)
any matter. Section 45 of the Criminal Procedure Code does
not say that he is bound to supply information on the subject
of a death, which might perhaps have included both the cases
where a death took place and a case where no death, in fact,
took place; but it says merely on the occurrence of a death.
The word ‘occurrence’ in my opinion is not an equivalent of
the word ‘subject’; and necessarily implies that a death has

172; ALR. 1936 All. 788, 792.

Eur Lakhan, 1... (1937) All 1,

Section 173
amended,

Section 174
amended.

Section 175
amended.

Section 176
amended.

Section 177
meaning,
of “sub-
jer’.


188

actually occurred and not only that it is alleged to have occur-
ted. If it was to be held that it is his duty to supply infor-
mation on the ‘subject of an alleged death’. even though no
death has taken place, the position of a headman who is not
a paid servant, would become intolerable as he would be-
come guilty under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code where
he merely omits to expose all sorts of false rumours that may
be afloat about alleged deaths. even though he may know that
the persons named are fe. it seems that where a death
has taken place in suspicious circumstances, it is the duty
of the headman to supply the information he possesses, and
his failure to do so makes him liable under section 177, But
where no death has taken place at all, section 177 is inappli-
cable.

Bennet J., took a different view!:.

“The word ‘subject’ is much wider, and the subject here
is ‘sudden or unnatural death’. The duty of the mukhia
under section 45 is to report true facts in regard to this sub-
ject; if he omits to report an occurrence he is guilty of an omis~
sion under section 176 of the Indian Penal Code. and if he
falsely reports an occurrence where there was no occurrence.
or if he makes some false statement about an occurrence, hz
is guilty under section 177. I do not consider it is correct
to say that the subject under section 177 is the ‘occurrence’
because an occurrence is only a particular instance and the
word ‘subject’ jmplies something which is common to a
number of instances, all of which are classed under one sub-
ject. Here the mukhia is bound to ‘communicate forth-
with any information which he may possess respecting
an instance of the subject of ‘sudden or unnatural death’.

Rachpal Singh, J., to whom this difference of opinion was
referred held? “that as none of the events enumerated in clause
(9) of section 45 of Criminal Procedure Code had happened.
it cannot be said that the accused was legally bound to give
information to the police and that the false information which
he gave to the police does not bring his case within the four
corners of section 177 of the Indian Penal Code.” .

॥ appears to us, if we may say so with respect. that the
view taken by Sulaiman, C.J., and Rachpal Singh, J.. is very
narrow. We find ourselves in agreement with Bennet, J.'s
reasoning that the word “subject” in section $77 ought not to
be confined to the particular matter to be reported but should
be construed widely to cover the entire field within which that
maiter falls. Since, however, this question has not arisen in
any other High Court, we do not recommend any amendment
to clarify the position.

WEmmp. v. Lakhan, VLR, 1937 All, 162, 171; ALR, 1936 All. 788, 793.
2. Emp. v. Lakhun, \.L.R. 1937 AN, 162, 190; A.LR. 1936 Al. 788. 800.


189

10.8. The Explanation to section 177 mentions some, but
not all, of the offences mentioned in sections 44 (1) and 4561)
fe} of the Criminal Procedure Code. Sections 121 to 126.
130, 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 of the Penal Code men-
tioned in the former section and sections 231 to 238 and 489A
to 4890 mentioned in the latter section are left out of the
Explanation for no apparent reason. The resultant position
is unsatisfactory. Since sections 44(1) and 45(1)(e) of the
Criminal Procedure Code cast on persons in India a duty to
report certain offences committed out of {ndia, it is clear that
all those offences should be covered by the Explanation to
section 177 of the Penal Code. Enumeration of the sections
of this Code relating to those offences is, however, not necessary
since the duty to give information in respect of their commis-
sion arises from provisions (such as sections 44 and 45 of the
Criminal Procedure Code) which enumerate or otherwise
specify the offences in question.

The Explanation may accordingly be revised to 1880 :--

“Explanation.—In section 176 and in this section, the
word ‘offence’ includes any act committed at any place out
of India which, if committed in India, would be punishable
under this Code: and the word ‘offender’ includes any per-
son who is alleged to have been guilty of any such act.”

10.9, The two illustrations given in the section do not appear
lo be of any real help and may be omitted.

10.10. The punishment for an offence under the first para-
graph may be slightly enhanced by omitting the words “which
may extend to one thousand rupees”.

10.11, The next three sections do not call for any comments
except in regard to the maximum punishment provided therein.
In sections 178 and 179, the limit of one thousand rupees for the
fine may be removed by omitting the words “which may extend
to one thousand rupees”. In section 180, the punishment
provided may be enhanced to “simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.”

10.12. No change is needed in section 181.

10.13. There is some uncertainty as to whether information
given in answer to questions put by a public servant falls under
section {82. The majority of the High Courts have answered
the question in the affirmative and takena broad view about
the scope of the word ‘gives’. They disagree with the earlier
Lahore case! on the subject, which limited section 182 to ‘volun-
teered statements’. We also think that there is no justification
for construing the expression ‘gives information’ narrowly.

Section 177
Exptana-
tion Fe-
vised.

Section 177-
Wlustra-
tions un+
necessary,

Section 177-
Punish-
ment ens
hanced.

Sections
178 to 180
amended.

Section
181.

Section 182-
applica-
tion to
voluntecr-
ed state-
meats.

Emperor, AL.R. 1934 Lah, 360.

1, Mange v.


Overlap
between
Sections
182 शत 211

Punish-
ment pros
vision
amended.

Sections
483. diffe.
fence of
opinion on
mean-

ing of
Aawtul

authority’.

fevised.

“1, State of Kerala y. Markose, ALR. 1962 Ker, 133 (reviews cases).

190

A Kerala case.' however, illustrates the special position as re-
gards statements under section 161 of the Crimi Procedure
Code. Here also the position will be changed after the obli-
galion to answer ‘truly’ is added in that section as has been
tecommended in our Report on the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure.? Jn the circumstances, we do not suggest any amend-
ment of section 182 in this respect.

10.14. The overlapping between section 182 and_ section
खा! will be dealt with in the next Chapter.

10.15. The punishment provided in this section should be
increased to “imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine.. sees OF with
both.

10.16. Section 183 punishes resistance to the taking of any
Property by the lawful authority of a public servant. We find
that there is a conflict between the Madras High Court} and the
Bombay High Court,‘ regarding the construction of the words
“lawful authority”. The Madras High Court, relying on the
first and second paragraphs of section 99, has held that the
two sections 99 and 183 should be construed together. and that.
even if the act of the public servant is not stricty justified by law.
nevertheless, where he acts in good faith under colour of office.
he should be deemed to be acting in ‘lawful authority’, and
resistance to his action should be held to be an offence’under
section 183, The Bombay High Court has dissented from this
view and held that resistance to the action of a public officer
which is not strictly justifiable by Jaw, even though the action
may be done in good faith under colour of office, will not be
punishable under this section. We consider that the Bombay
view is the correct view, and since the question has not arisen
elsewhere, we recommend no amendment on the point. One
of us, however, favoured the Madras view and suggested an
amendment to give effect to it.

10.17, The mens rea for the purposes of this section is res-
tricted 10 intentional obstruction. We consider that know-
Jedge of likelihood of obstruction also should be covered as
in section 386, and recommend that the word ‘voluniarity”
should be substituted for the word ‘intentionally’.

The offence under this section is a petty one. and imprison-
ment is not necessary. It should be removed. The fine, however,

t

2. Alst Report, Vol. 7, para. 14.10.

3. Queens Empress v. Tiruchittanbala Pathan, (1898) VLR. 21 Mad. 78.
4, Sakharam Rawaji Pawar v. Emp. A.LR. 1935 Bom. 233.


191

should be increased from Rs. 500.00 to Rs. 1.600. Accordingly,
section 184 may be revised as below:-—..

“484. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale
by authority of public servant:-—

Whoever voluntarily obstructs any sale of property offered
for sale by the lawful authority of any public servant, as
such, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees.”

10.18. The punishment provided in section 185 may also
be the same as in the preceding section, i.e., fine upto Rs. 1,000
but no imprisonment.

10.19. Section 186 punishes 2 person who voluntarily ob-
structs a public servant in the discharge of his public functions.
There is a conftict of judicial opinion as regards the construction
of the words ‘in the discharge of his public functions’ occurring
in this section, a conflict ilar to that relating to the words
‘jawful authority” under section 183. Do these words include
only those acts which are strictly in accordance with law, or
do they include even those acts which though not strictly justified
in Jaw, are done by public servants in good faith under colour
of office ? It is unnecessary to cite here the various decisions
‘on the subject!. Even in the same High Court, the decisions
have not been unanimous.? This controversy has been referred
to in a judgement of the Supreme Court3, but not settled by that
judgement. There is no need to discuss the relative merits
of the two views. One of us was in favour of a liberal cons-
truction of ihe words, so as to include those acts of public ser-
vants against which there is no right of private defence as
mentioned in the first two paragraphs of section 99, and suggested
an amendment to section 183 by way of clarification. The
majority, however, were of the view that the only obstructions
of those actions of public servants which are strictly in accor-
dance with law should be punishable. In view of this differ-
ence of opinion amongst us, we do not recommend any amend-
ment to this section. tt may remain in the present form and
the law may be clarified if and when the matter is taken to the
Supreme Court.

10.20. There is a conflict of decisions as to the scope of the
word ‘obstruction’ in section 186. The same question has
also been discussed at length in several English cases. These
decisions, English as well as Indian, do not yield a precise test
as to what constitutes obstruction. We considered a sugges:
tion that it should be made clear. e.g., by an explanation, that

Section 185
amended.

Section 186-
apptica-
tion when
public ser
vant's
action not
strictly
justified

by law.

Section 186+
meaning,
of ‘obs-
traction’.

1. See Ratanlal, Law of Crimes, (1966), pages 469, 470. ~
2, See for instance, Bhawou Jivaji, LLR. 12, Bom. 377.
3. Santosh Kumar Jain, AAR. 195), S.C. 201; (1951), $.0. R. 303.


192

‘obstruction’ is not confined to physical obstruction, but the
majority of us were notin favour of it. if courts have due re-
gard to the dictionary meaning of the word ‘obstruction’ (which
meaning is fairly wide), then no difficulty should arise. English
cases relating to section 51(3), Police Act, 1964 (or earlier
provisions corresponding thereto) also leave the matter elastic!.
No amendment is, therefore, recommended on this point.

Section 10.21. The maximum punishment, now provided in section
186--amen- 186, three months’ imprisonment, or fine upto Rs 500, or both,

dment re: ९ mp A : >
garding re may be increased to ‘six months, or with fine, or with both’.
punish-

ment. . . .

Section 10.22. In connection with section 187, there is a suggestion?

187—Aiten- tO provide punishment for non-attendance by witnesses re-
dance at quired to attend a search by the police. We may note that sec-

search and tion 103 (5) of the Criminal Procedure Code (as amended in
by wit

1923) specifically covers non-attendance at searches. What
is not covered is failure to sign the memorandum of search.
Signature of the search memorandum has been held to be not
obligatory under the law as it now stands,? but that provision
need not be altered. An amendment providing that search
witnesses are bound to sign the list may create practical diffi-
cultiés. The law would then have to provide for a contingency
where the witnesses find or allege that the search record is
inaccurate. We do not consider that any amendment of section
186 is necessary on this point.

Section 10.23. The punishment provisions in section 187 may be
87-- amended as follows:—

Amend-

ment

regarding हे fi हे ;
punish- (i) in the first paragraph, it may read ‘punished with fine
ment. which may extend to one thousand rupees’; and

(ii) in the second paragraph, the words ‘which may extend
to five hundred’ may be omitted.

Section 10,24. Section 188 provides for punishment of disobedience

188. of orders promulgated by public servants. Prosecutions
under this section are generally launched for violation of orders
under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code. But this
section is so worded that mere disobedience of such an order is
not sufficient. The prosecution is required to show in addition
that such disobedience causes or tends to cause (a) obstruction,
annoyance or injury to any person lawfully employed, or (b)
danger to huinan life, health or safety or (c) tends to cause a riot
or affray. Thus, the effect of the disobedience of the order
is made an essential ingredient of the offence.

1. See Bustable v. Little, 4907) 1 1९.8. 59; Berts ५. Stevens. (1910) 1 K.B. 1, Hinchliffee v.
‘Sheldon, (1955) 3 AN E.R. 406; and the discussion in Sykes v.  D.P.P., (1961) 3 All
E.R. 33, 41 (per Lord Denning).

2. F. 309)56-L.C., 5. No. 108, page 294 (Shri K. Rajah Tyer's suggestion).
Ram Prasad v. Emp., AAR. 1938 Pat. 403, 407, 408, 412 (F.B.) (Majority view).



193

10.25. One of us was of the view, that in the penal section
mere disobedience of a duly promulgated order should be made
punishable, and that the effect of such disobedience need not
he included as a necessary ingredient of the offence. An order
under section 144, Criminal Procedure Code, will be a valid
order only if the Magistrate considers that such an order should
be promulgated for the purpose of preventing obstruction,
annoyance or injury or risk of obstruction, annoyance or
injury to any person lawfully employed or danger to human
life, health or safety or a disturbance of public tranquillity or
a riot or an affray. In order to prove the validity of the order,
it will always be necessary for the prosecution to show that
there was such risk on the date of the promulgation of the order.
But to require the prosecution to further prove, not only dis-
obedience of a valid order under section 144, but also the cffect
or tendency of such disobedience will be putting an enormous
burden on the prosecution, and may well result in the giving of
perjured evidence. Moreover, such a provision is outside the
scheme of the general provision dealing with disobedience of
orders of public servants in Chapter 10, where the mere act
of disobedience is made punishable. Hence, though an accused
prosecuted under section 188, LP.C., will always have the right
to show that the order was not validly made because the pre-
existing conditions required for the promulgation of the
order as specified in section 144, Cr. P.C., were not present when
the order was promulgated, nevertheless the prosecution should
not be required to further prove, after proving the disobedience
of the order, that such disobedience either caused or had a
tendency to cause the various risks mentioned above. He
further pointed out that the circumstances, present on the date
of the promulgation of an order under section 144, Cr. P.C..
should be the main consideration, and not the circumstances
present on the date on which the order was disobeyed. In
many instances, the mere promulgation of the order under
section 144, Cr. P.C., may have the salutary effect in prevent-
ing the various risks mentioned in that section. If a person,
therefore. disobeys such an order (which has proved to be
effective for the purpose for which it was promulgated), it will
be difficult for the prosecution to show that on the date of the
disobedience the act of disobedience had any such tendency as
is required in section 188. The person who deliberately flouts
a lawful order should not benefit from its effectiveness.

Majority of us were, however. not in favour of this view.
Section 188, though mainly referring to orders under section
144, Cr. P.C. is wide enough to include violations of some orders
under special laws, and mere disobedience of even a
valid order should not be made punishable unless it caused or
had a tendency to cause one of the harmful effects mentioned
in the section

In view of the absence of agreement, we do not propose any
amendment to the section of this point.

3M of law ,71--14.

Should
produc-
tion of
harm be
necessary
for offence?


194

Minor
amend-
meats
proposed.

10.26. The following minor amendments are recommend-
edi-—

{i) In the punishment provision, the limit of one thousand
rupees for the fine may be removed by omitting the
words “which may extend to one thousand rup.

(1) In the Explanation. the word ‘contemplate’ in the first
sentence is imprecise and not in accord with the usual
terminology. The second sentence is unnecessarily
expositary and also slightly misleading. The Expla-
nation may be shortened to read:

“Explanation: Wt is not necessary that the offend
should intend to produce harm, or Know that his dis-
obedience is likely to produce harm.”

(iii) The illustration dees not elucidate any doubtful poin
and in fact, the words “‘and thereby causes danger 0

ri are not particularly apt. The illustration should
be omitted.
Sections 10.27. No changes are required in sections 189 and 190.

189. and
190.


CTiAPTER 11

OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES
AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE

11.1. Perjury and other offences against public justice are
dealt with in considerable detail in this Chapter. The range
of these provisions is wide and nearly everything
catculated to obstruct the administration of justice has been
covered. It has. therefore, been unnecessary for us to make
many changes, except to remove working difiicultics.

11.2. Section 191 defines ‘giving faise evidence’, and section
192 defines ‘fabricating false evidence’, while the three punish-
ing sections that follow treat the two alike. Under section
191, when a person who is legally bound to state the truth or
to make a declaration, makes any statement which is false and
which he knows or believes to be fasle or does not believe to
be truc, he gives false evidence. Under section 192, if a person
causes any circumstance to exist, or makes any false entry in
any book or record, or makes any document containing a false
statement, intending that any of these may appear in evidence
and mislead the person dealing with the matter, he fabricates
false evidence.

11.3. Regarding these definitions, one suggestion noticed
by us was that an accused person, while defending himself
against a criminal charge, should be put outside the scope of
section 191 as well as section 192, the argument being that it
is 100 much to expect that a perso ised of a serious offence
would not be tempted to give or fabricate false evidence. We
are unable to accept this. It is quite true that an accused
making a statement under section 342 of the Criminal Proce-
dure Code cannot be prosecuted if any part of the statement
is false but that is because the accused is not Iegally bound to
state the truth. If, however, the law requires that he must
state the (ruth, e.g., when he gives evidence under section
342A, there is no reason why he should not be bound by that
requirement. We sce no justification gencrally for giving a
licence 10 any accused person to obstruct the course of justice,
by planting false or fabricated evidence in court.

11.4. Another suggestion put before us was that like section
192, section 191 should specifically provide that a faise state-
ment made by a person must be material to the matter under
investigation. We are not persuaded that it is either necessary
or advisable to do so. A prosecution for giving false evidence
can begin only if the authority before which false evidence is

195

Introduc-
tion.

Definitions
in sections
191 and
392.

Accused
persons
to be
equatly
bound,

Materiality
of — faise
statement
under sec+
tion 1913.


Fabricating
false evid-
ence which
35 inadmis~
sible—con-
flict of
views.

1, Section 476, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

196

given considers it expedient'; and, when the question of instit-
uling such a prosecution is raised, the question of materiality
can be properly considered. No harm has been caused by the
existing definition and we do not propose any change.

11.5. Regarding section 192, there seem to be some conflict
of decisions as to whether fabricated evidence which may not
be admissible is within the definition. While the Allahabad?
and Patna? High Courts have taken a narrow view, the Calcutta
view? is that, under section 192, it is the intention that creates
the criminal offence, and the question whether, under the terms
of the law the document is admissible in evidence or not is
immaterial. That Court observed:—

“The decisions of High Courts in (ndia, at any rate
some of them, would scem to show that section 192 15
limited to such cases as those in which the fabricated evi-
dence is, in fact, admissible under the terms of the law of
evidence. Speaking for myself, I have the gravest doubt
whether those decisions are correct. I think the words
of the section will show that it is the intention that creates
the criminal offence and not the fact as to whether, under
the terms of the law, the document is admissible in evi-
dence. The view expressed in the cases mentioned
might raise a considerable difficulty in cases where the judge
has improperly admitted in evidence a document not ad-
missible under the terms of the law.”

In a later Calcutta case,5 it was held that the mere fact that
a document would be ultimately inadmissible in evidence, does
not necessarily take it out of the mischief of section 193.

In an early Lahore case,® the Court stated the position as
follows:—

“The appellant did not produce Ex. P.C.2 in original
but a copy thereof, Ex. P.A. The weight of authority is in
favour of the view that there can be no fabrication of
false evidence within the meaning of section 192, LP.C.,
if the evidence is not admissible in itself.”

2, Emp. ५. Mulla, (1879) 1. 1... R. 2 All, 105;
Emp.v. Gaui Shankar, (1883) 1, L. R. 6 All. 42;
2. 5. ५. Nand Kishore, (1897) 1. L. R. 19 All. 305;
2. E. v. Zakir Hussain, (1898) 1. L. R. 21 At, 159; and
Emp. v. Mulai Singh, (1996) 1. L. R. 28 All. 402.

Mangal Singh v. The State, A. 1. R. 1956 Pat. 154, 156, 157.
(a) Barada Kanta Sarkar v. Emp. A. 1. R. 1916 Cal. $53, 554.

(0) No opinion was expressed on this point in Mohammed Kazim Ali v. Jorabali Nadar,
¢

1919)

1.1... R. 46 Cal. 986; A. 1. 8. 1919 Cal. 430. (Only a query raised).

Mahesh Chantra v. Emp. 1. U. R. (1940) 1 Cal. 465; A. 1. R. 1940 Cal. 449.
. Faz! Ahmed y. Emp. A. 1. R. 1914 Lah. 433, 435, 436.


197

A later Lahore case! however, holds that a person is guilty
of fabricating false evidence if he makes a false entry in a docu-
ment, intending that it shall appear in evidence and mislead
the Judge or Magistrate, and the mere fact that the entry is
not legally admissible in evidence cannot affect his guilt.

11.6. We would prefer the wider view. If evidence is fabric-
ated with the peculiar intent mentioned in section 192, we see
no reason why the fabrication should not be punished. To
allow the matter to be determined by the admissibility of the
evidence is to leave it to fluctuate with the decision of the presi-
ding officer as to the admissibility, and this is not a satisfactory
position. We propose to make the position clear by adding
a specific explanation in section 193.

11.7, The expression “judicial proceeding” which occurs
in section 192 and 193 has not been defined in the Code.
Though controversy often arises whether a particular proceed+
ing is or is not a judicial proceeding, Courts have refrained from
attempting a definition, choosing io decide each case on a con-
sideration of the nature of the proceedings, the body before
which they were held, the parent legislative provision and other
relevant circumstances. We also have come to the conclusion
that a precise and satisfactory definition is not possible. We
considered whether judicial proceedings should be confined
to proceedings in a court of justice, but felt that such a defi-
nition would be very narrow,

11.8. (i) Explanation 2 to section 193 becomes pointless if
commitment proceedings are abolished. It should, therefore,
be omitted, as also the illustration pertaining thereto.

(ii) For the reasons given in paragraph 11.6 above, we
purpose that, .in its place, the following Explanation be
inserted ;— :

“Explanation 2.—For the purpose of this section, it is
immaterial whether the fabricated evidence is or is not
legally admissible in the proceeding in which it is intend-
ed to be used.”

11.9. Gi) Sections 194 and 195 provide for aggravated forms
of giving or fabricating false evidence. It strikes us that pri-
marily, both these sections are intended for cases where false
evidence is given or fabricated for production in criminal courts,
We think that it will make for clarity if that is expressly put into
both these sections; and although, in the result some cases
now covered by sections 194 and 195 may fall outside them,
no great harm will occur, as these cases will remain covered
by section 193 which provides adequate punishment.

Wider view
preferred
and expla-
nation re-
commend-
cd,

Contr overs
sy about
“judicial
proceed-
ing”.

Section 193
amended,

Sections
194 and 195
amend-
ments prov
posed,

3, Amolak Ram. A 1, R. 1918 Lab. 192, disenting from A. TR. 1914 (80, 433,


198

(ii) The second puri of section 194 punishes only the person
who gave false evidence. and not the person who fabricated
it; but there is no reason why fabricating false evidence should
not be treated the same way as giving false evidence. We
propose to add the words “or fabricates after the word
“sives™.

A suggestion was made that the fabrication of false evidence
should be punishable under section 194 only if such fabricated
evidence is actually used in court. There seems to us no insti-
fication for thal and so long as evidence is fabricated with
intent to use it in court, it is immaterial whether the evidence
is actually used or not.

(iit) As regards the punishments prescribed in section 194,
we feel that life imprisonment as an alternative to ten years’
yigorous imprisonment in the first paragraph is hardly necessary
and may be omitted. The maximum sentence for the offence
may be rigorous imprisonment for fourteen years.

(४) As 8 consequential amendment in the second paragraph,
the words *‘or imprisonment for li will have to be added
afler the word “death”.

(४) With these amendments, sections 194 and 195 would
read as follows: -

$194, ing or fabricating false evidence with intent
fo procure conviction of capital offence.—Whoever gives
false evidence in any trial before a Court of Justice ov fabsi-
cates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any such
vial, intending, thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely
that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of
« capital offence, shall be punished with rigorous imprison-
ment for a period which may extend to fourteen years, and
shall also be liable to fine;

and if any innocent person shall be convicted and exe-
cuted in consequence of such false evidence. the person
who gives or fabricates such false evidence shall be punished
with death or imprisonment for life or the punishment
hereinbefore described.

195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to
procure conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment
Jor seven years or upwards.—Whoever gives false evidence
in any trial before a Court of Justice, or fabricates false evi-
dence for the purpose of being used in any such trial, intending
thereby 10 cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
cutise, any person to be convicted of an offence which is
not capital, but punishable with imprisonment for a term of
seven years or with a more severe sentence shail be punished
as a person convicted of that offence would be liable to be
punished.”

(1) The tlustration to section 195 is hardly necessary and
imay be omitted.


199

11.10 Sections 196 to 198 need no change.

11.11 One addition to the chapter scems lo us useful. It
concerns the use oi false medical certificates. It is common
knowledge that unscrupulous persons do not hesilate to use
stich certificates to gain advantage in the course of litigation, and
sometimes for purposes unconnected with the courts. It will
be noticed that sections 196 and 197 of the Code provide puni-
shments for using false certificates which are required by law to
be given or which state facts of which the certificates are good
evidence. Medical certificates do not fall within that description;
but, because of the regard in which the medical profession is
held. the courts and other public officials usually accept such
medical certificates at their face value. We think st proper that
the making of a false medical certificate and. correspondingly,
the use of such a certificate, should be punishable. We are making
this suggestion not because many doctors issue false certificates,
but because the courts almost invariably accept them as true,
and there should be a legal sanction to ensure that such certi-
ficates are, in fact. true.

11.12 We, therefore. recommend the insertion of two new
sections as follows: -

“IDSA. Issuing or signing false medical certificate.
Whoever. being a medical practilioner, issues or signs any
medical certificate or certificate of fitness. knowing that such
certificate is false in any material particular. shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a term wl ich
may extend to one year, or with fine. or with both: and,
if he knows that the certificate is intended to be used in any
stage af a judicial proceeding. he shail be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend lo three years. or with fine. or with both.

1988. Using as true a medical certificate known to be
false. Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any such
certificats as a true certificate, Knowing the same to be false
in any material point. shall be punishable with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one
year. or With fine, or with both; and, if he so uses or attempts
(७ use it in any stage of a judicial proceeding. he shall be
punishable with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine. or with
both.”

11.13 Section 199 deals with false declarations, and section
200 deals with the corrupt use of such false declarations. They
need no change.

Sections,
196 to 398.

Evil of fal-
se medical
cerlificates.

New sec-
tions re+
commend-
cd.

Sections
199 and
200.


200

Section 204, 11.14 Section 201 punishes any person who, knowing that
an offence has been committed, destroys the evidence of that
offence in order to screen the offender. The punishment varices
according to the nature of the offence, so that if the offender
sought to be hidden in this manner is punishable with death, the
offender is Jiable to imprisonment upto seven years, while if the
offence be punishable with imprisonment upto ten years. the
maximum imprisonment is three years. For some time, there was
a controversy whether a person who commits an offence and then
destroys evidence of the offence, could be punished under sec-
tion 201. The Supreme Court? has decided that he can be so
punished; and although this may, at first sight, seem somewhat
incongruous, the courts have, on the whole, found this view
useful for practical purposes. We do not think it is necessary lo
amend section 201 in the contrary sense.

Sections 11.15 Section 202 punishes the person who intentionally

302 and omits to give information concerning an offence which he is legally

203 to be bound to give, and section 203 punishes the person who gives

transposed. faise information concerning an offence. Logically the latter
section should come first. We propose that section 202 and the
main part of section 203 may be transposed. The Explanation
may continue to be a part of the revised section 203.

Section 204- 11.16 Section 204 punishes the destruction of any document

amendment which can be compelled to be produced as evidence in a Court

yroposed. or when it has been summoned or required to be produced. The
section mentions only a ‘document’, although anything other
than a document can easily be required to be produced ina Court,
and we do not see why the destruction of such a thing if it be
good evidence, should not be equally punishable. We, therefore,
recommend that in this section after the words “any document”
the words “or other thing” be inserted.

Ssutions 11.07 No change is needed in sections 205, 206 and 207.

a 0

207.

‘Interfere- 11.18 While sections 206 and 207 punish certain fraudulent

nee with acts designed to prevent the seizure of property under the orders

property of a Court, there is no direct provision in the Code against the

Bitached, removal of attached movable property. We consider that once

Onder to be any movable property has been lawfully attached by order of

punishable. a Court of Justice, any authorised removal of, or interference
with, that property should be punishable irrespective of the motive
or intention of the person concerned. We propose that the fol-
lowing section may be inserted after section 207:—

“207A. Removal of attached property.--Whoever, knowing
or having reason to believe that any movable property has
been lawfully attached by the order of a Court of Justice.
removes or interferes with such property otherwise than
in accordance with Jaw. shall, whether or not ke was a party

 tKatawari, A. 1. R. 1953 S.C. 131; 60959 S. CR. 546


201

to the proceedings in which the order was made, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to (wo years, or with fine, or with both.”

11.19. No change is needed in sections 208, 209 and 210. Sections
208 to 210,

11.20. Like section 182, section 21] is intended to prevent Section 211
false accusations being made against innocent persons, which छः
not only cause harassment to these persons but also result in tion 182

astage of public time. Section 182 is briefly described as ‘false considered.

information with intent to cause a public servant to use his
fawful power to the injury of another person’, while the heading
of section 211 runs ‘false chasge of offence made with intent to
injure’. These two provisions are complementary to cach other
and designed to operate in different situations. The courts have,
however, frequently found it difficult to determine which pro-
vision would be applicable in a given situation. Thus, if a person
gives false information to a police officer that another person
has committed an offence. does he give false information to a
public servant within the meaning of section 182, or does he
institute criminal proceedings within the meaning of section 211?
The High Courts are not agreed in the answer, and the conflict
has not yet been resolved by the Supreme Court.' The practical
importance of this conflict lies in the procedural rule?
which requires a complaint by a public servant for a prosecution
under section 182, and by a court for a prosecution under section
211 when the matter relates to a court proceeding. To remove
this fruitful source of dispute in courts over what is after all a
procedural detail, we propose to confine section 211 to proceedings
instituted, and charges made, in a court, while other cases of
faise information will fall under section 182

11.21. The wording of section 211 is not as clear and unambi- Ambiguous
guous as could be desired. For instance, does “intent to cause wording of
injury to any person” govern also the act of falsely charging Section
any person with an offence? Should those two persons be the
same, or would it also be an offence where the intent is to injure
X but Y is falsely charged with committing an offence? The
two limbs of the section viz., instituting criminal proceedings
and falsely charging with an offence, are somewhat confusingly
mixed up.

Incidentally, we also considered a suggestion that it would
be worthwhile adding an Explanation to section 211 to indicate
the scope of the expression ‘criminal proceeding’ with reference
to proceedings under sections 107 to 111, 133. 144, 145, 488 etc.

1. The judgement in State of Punjab v. Brijlal, A. 1. R. 1969 S. C. 355, 359, deals with a
diilerent question, namely, that dusing the pendency of a complaint on the same fact
as those givcn in the first information roport, the magistrate cannot take cognizance
without canolying with section 19501, Criminal Procedure Code.

2. Section 195, Criminal Procedure Code,



Punishment
to be
increased

Section 211
revised.

Section 212.

Sections
213 and
214- |
planations.
recommend+
ed.

202

of the Code of Criminal Procedure. We do not, however. consider
the matter as of sufficient importance to requise clarification.
The casc-law also does not reveal any serious difficulty in this
respect,

11.22. The maximum punishment provided in the first para-
graph of section 211 should be increased from iwo years to three
years.

(11.23. In the light of above discussion, section 241 may be
revised as follows:

“211, False charge of offence made with intent to injure.
Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person—-

(a} institutes or causes to be instituted in a Court of
Justice any criminal proceeding against thal person, knowing
tbat there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding
against that person: or,

(b) falsely charges that person in a Court of Justi
with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no
just or lawful ground for such charge against that person,

shal be punished with imprisonment of cither description for
a term which may extend to three years. or with fine, or with
both;

and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false
charge of an offence punishable with imprisonment for seven
years or a more severe sentence, he shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also. be liable to fine.”

11.24. Section 212 deals with harbouring aa_ offender.
The punishment varies with the gravity of the offence. No change
iy required in this section.

11.25. Sections 213 and 214 deal with unlawful compounding
of offences and make culpable the giving or taking of a gift for
such compounding; and again, the punishment varies with the
nature of the offence compounded. If the offence is legally com-
poundable. these provisions do not. of course. apply.

The language of the sections leaves tittle doubt that the 0३1०३
is complete once a person agrees lo give or take a gift for corceale
ing an offence or screening the offender. and iL is NOt necessary
that he must actually screen the offender. But. some down
has been expressed in this connection. we propose to add an
planation in each section to make this clear.

(i) To section 213, the folowing may be added: —

planation. —It is nol necessary to the commission
लीं an offence under this section that the offender should
have done. or desisted from doing, what he undertook
to do, or to desist from doing.



203

Exception. -The provisions of this section do not
exiend to any case in which the offence may lawfully
be compounded.”

(ii) In section 214, the existing exception may be omitted
and the following may be added: --

“Explanation.—lt is not necessary to the commission
of an offence under this section that the other person
should have done, or desisted from doing, what he
undertook to do, or to desist from doing.

Exception.—The provisions of this section do not
extend 10 any case in which the offence may lawfully be
compounded.”

11.26. Section 27'S punishes the taking of a gift to help in the — Sections 215
covery of stolen property without exposing the offender. Section and 216,
216, which is supplementary to section 212, deals with harbouring
un escaped convict or a person ordered (o be arrested. Neither
section requires to be changed.

11.27. Section 216A was added to the Code in 1894 specially — Section 216-
to deal with the bouring of persons who are about to commit. A—amend-
or have recently committed, robbery or dacoity; and it extends meat re-
to robberies and dacoities contemplated or committed out ide cgrmend-
India. Harbouring a person who has committed an offence is .
already provided for in section 212, and we do not think it neces-
sary to provide for it again in section 216A. At the same time,
we feel that kidnapping and abduction could be usefully included.

The section may be amended to read:—

>2164., Penalty for harbouring persons about to commit
kidnapping, abduction, robbery or dacoity-~-Whoever, know-
ing or having reason to believe that any persons are about
to commit the offence of kidnapping, abduction, robbery or
dacoity. harbours them or any of them, with the intention
of facilitating the commission of such offence, shall be puni-
shed with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation...For the purposes of this section,
it is immaterial whether the offence is intended to be
committed within or without India.

Exception. —This section does not extend to the
case in which the harbour is by the husband or wife of
the person about to commit the offence.”

11.28. The next four sections, 217 to 220. are designed (0. scetions
punish certain illegal acts of public servants done with corrupt or 217 to
malicious intention, A question was raised whether the expression 220.
‘legal punishment’ in sections 217 and 218 covers preventive
action under sections 107 to 110, Criminal Procedure Code.

Though it may be said that such section is, in a sense, imposing



Sections 221
to 225 B.

Format
levision and
Fe-arrange-
ment pro-
posed.

204

a punishment, we are of the view that it need not be regarded
as “legal punishment” for the purposes of this section. However
that may be, we propose that the reference to “legal punishment”
may be replaced by “punishment for an offence” which will
make the position absolutely clear.

No change is needed in sections 219 and 220.

11.29. Seven sections, 221 to 2258, deal with two connected
situations, namely, failure to apprehend a person required by
jaw to be apprehended, and escape of a person from lawful
custody, and describe in detail the various forms in which the
two situations arise. The commonest and most readily under-
standable is the case of a person resisting his own arrest or escap-
ing from custody after arrest. Similar is the case of a person helping
another to_ resist his arrest or helping him to escape from lawful
custody. Much more serious is the case of a public servant omit-
ting to arrest a person whom he is by !aw bound to arrest, and
perhaps even more serious is the case of a public servant who,
intentionally or through criminal negligence, permits a person
in his Jawful custody to escape. These acts arc reprehensible and
have rightly been made punishable. Further, the punishment is
graded according to the seriousness of the offence, and, broadly
speaking, the grading is as it should be.

11.30. Since, however, some of these acts were not made
punishable when the Code was first enacted, there has come to
be a certain want of neatness in the arrangement of the various
sections. Thus, omission to apprehend a person fiable to be ap-
prehended was first confined to persons liable to be apprebended
for any offence punishable with imprisonment. Later on, a pro-
vision had to be made for cases where a person was liable to be
apprehended but not for an offence punishable with imprison-
ment, and section 225A had to be enacted. Similarly, resistance
to the lawful apprehension of another person was, at first, puni-
shable only if the arrest was for an offence, and other cases were
later provided for by section 225B. We also find that in some of
these sections, too many ideas are introduced at one place, which
is avoidable. We, therefore, propose to re-arrange this set
of seven sections in such a way that, as far as possible, one section
would express one idea, as follows:—

(i) Redraft of section 221, combining with it sections
222 and 225A(a) :--

“221. Public servant intentionally omitting to arrest
or permitting escape.—Whoever, being a public servant
Jegally bound to arrest any person or to keep him in
custody, intentionally omits to arrest him or intentio-
nally aids him in escaping or attempting to escape from
such custody or intentionally permits him to escape
from such custody, shall,—

(व) if that person is to be arrested or kept in
custody by reason of a conviction or charge or sus-
picion of a capital offence, be punished with rigorous


205

imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine;

(0) if that person is to be arrested or kept in
custody by reason of a conviction or charge or sus-
picion of any other offence punishable with imprison-
ment for life or for ten years or upwards, be puni-
shed with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to
fine;

{c) in any other case, be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may ex-
tend to three years, or with fine, or with both.”

(ii) Redraft of section 223, combining with it section
22SA(a):—

“222, Public servant negligently omitting to arrest
or suffering to escape.—Whoever, being a public servant
legally bound to arrest any person or to keep him in
custody, negligently omits to arrest him or negligently
suffers him to escape from such custody, shall be punish-
able with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.”

(iii) Redraft of section 225, combining with it part of
section 225B:—

223. Rescue from lawful custody —Whoever  re-
scues, or attempts to rescue, any other person from
lawful custody shall,—

(a) if such person is in custody by reason of
conviction or charge or suspicion of a capital
offence, be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine;

(6) if such person is in custody by reason of
a conviction or charge or suspicion of any other
offence punishable with imprisonment for life or
for ten years or upwards, be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years, and shall also be liable to fine;

(c) in any other case, be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

(ir) Redraft of section 2258, combining with it part of
section 225 :--

“224. Resistance to arrest of another person.—
Whoever offers resistance or illegal obstruction to the
jawful arrest of another person shall be punished with
the punishment provided in section 223.”


Section 227.

Section 228
Increase
in punish-
ment recom-
mended.

Punishing
of persons
appearing
drunk in
Court.

1. The Contempt of Courts Act. 1952 (A Bil
alfect the substance of the relevant pro.

206

0) Redraft of section 224, combining with it part of
section 225B:—

हा "225. Escape from lawful custody-—Whoever. being
in lawful coustody, intentionally escapes or attempts
to escape from such custody shall,_—

{a) if he is in custody by reason of a conviction
or charge or suspicion of an offence, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term
phich may extend to two years, or with fine, or with

oth;

(#) in any other case, be punished with imptison-
ment of either description for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in
addition to the punishment for which the person in cus-
tody was liable for the offence of which he was convicted,
or would have been fiable on a conviction for the offence
with which he was charged or of which he was suspected,
as the case may be.”

(vi) Redraft of section 2258, combining with it part of
section 224:

“226. Resistance to arrest.—Whoever _ intentionally
offers resistance or illegal obstruction to his Jawful
arrest shall be punishable with the punishment provided
in section 225.”

11.31. No change is needed in section 227.

11,32. Section 228 provides for wilful interruption of judicial
proceedings, not only before a court. but also before any other
public servant. We feel that the present maximum punishment
of six months’ imprisonment or one thousand rupees’ fine is not
adequate for dealing with serious cases, e.g., deliberate interrup-
tion of the proceedings of a Court of Justice. The punishment
provision may be amended to read “with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.”

11.33. We considered a suggestion that a new section to pu-
nish persons appearing drunk in courts should be inserted, but
did not accept it. The court can always order any such person to
remove himself. or be removed, from the court, and, if the case
is serious, the High Court can take cognizance of the offence
as a contempt of a subordinate court!.

pending to replace this Act, but it does not
ion).



207

11.34. Another suggestion considered by us was that it
should be an offence for a person to take photographs in Court
without the Court's permission. Reference was made, in this
connection. to the provision in England on the subject. We
doubt if there is any real need for sucha provision. The Court
can maintain 15 dignity by ordering out the person who takes
photographs, and a penal provision on the subject is not re-
quired

11.35, Section 229 will cease to be useful when the jury system
is completely abolished. and may be omitted.

11.36. We propose three additional sections in this Chapter.
penalising certain legal acts which atfects the proper admini
tration of justice. The first is interference with witnesses.

9A, Interference with witnesses.—Whoever, by threats,
bribes or other corrupt means, dissuades or allempts to dis-
suade any person from giving evidence before a public ser-
vant legally competent to examine him as a witness, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend 10 six months. or with fine. or with both. ~

11.37. Another penal provision we consider necessary is in
regard to bail jumping. We notice that section 174 which punishes
non-attendance in obedience to an order received from a public
servant will not suffice, as it is applicable only where the public
servant orders a person to be present before him. [n the Canadian
Criminal Code?, there is an express provision against bail jumping.
which appears to be a suitable model. The new section may be
as follows:

>2298, Failure by person released on bail or bond to
appear in Court—Whoever, having been charged with an
aflence and released on bail or on his own bond fails without
suflicient cause (the burden of proving which lies upon him)
to appear in Court in accordance with the terms of the bond,
shall be punished with imprisonment of cither description for
a term which may extend to one year. or with fine, or with
both.

“xplanation.—the punishment under this section

(व) in addition to the punishment to which the
offender would be liable on a conviction for the
ollence with which he is charged: and

(h) without prejudice to the power of the Court
to order forfeiture of the bond.”

ion 41, Crinvinat Justice Act, 1925 (English).
ior 125, Caaadian Crininal Code.

pet

Punishing
of persons
taking
photo-
graphs

in Court
without
permission.

Section
229 omit-
ted.

Three
additional
sections
proposed.
(6) dates-
fering
with wit.
nesses.

(ii) Bail
jump:
ang.


a} Vexa- ||
tious
search
made
with-
‘out reas
son-
able
ground.

208

11.38. Apart from the powers of search and seizure conferred
on the police by the Criminal Procedure Code, various special
and local laws confer similar wide powers on various law en-
forcement officers. Some of these laws contain safeguards against
abuse of these powers in the shape of provisions penalising vexa-
tious and unreasonable searches, e.g.. section 22 of the Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944, section 136(1) of the Customs Act,
1962 and section 94 of the Gold (Control) Act. 1968. We think
a simple, general provision in the Penal Code to cover searches
under the authority of any Jaw would be useful. ! The new section
may be as follows:—

“229C. Vexatious search without reasonable ground.—
Whoever, being empowered by law to order or conduct search
of any place, vexatiously and without having a reasonable
ground for so doing orders or conducts such search, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.”

ome of the Earopean Criminal Codes coniain such a provision, e. g., section 116 of

the Penal Code of Norway.


CHAPTER 12

OFFENCES RELATING TO CURRENCY NOTES,
COINS AND STAMPS

12.1, Chapter 12 deals exhaustively in as many as 24 sections
with olfences relating to the counterfeiting, debasing or altering
of coin, both Indian and foreign. and the trafficking in counter-
feit or spurious coin. Analogous activities in respect of “stamps
issued by the Government of India for the purpose of revenue’
(including Indian postage stamps) and in’ respect of foreign
postage stamps are covered in ten sections.

12.2. Originally, the Penal Code did not make any specific
provision relating to the counterfeiting of currency notes, Indian
or foreign, The general provisions relating to forgery were con-
sidered applicable and sufficient to deat with such counterfeiters.
This was perhaps natural at a time when coin played a much more
vital and important part in the monetary system of the country
than currency notes. Legislation relating to paper currency.
however, ४७८५ back to 1861. Between that year and 1923. there
were as miury as six Indian Paper Currency Acts. passed successi-
vely in 1861, 1871, 1882, 1905. 1910 and 1923. The last of these
Acts wits repealed by the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 when
the duty and responsibility of issuing and regulating currency
Nols was entrusted (० the Reserve Bank. In 1940, however, the
Government of India assumed the power and authority to issue
one rupee notes as legal tender in addition to the Reserve Bank
notes under the Currency Ordinance. 19401,

Forging छा counterfeiting of currency notes and bank notes,
both indian and foreign, and cther related offences. like posses-
sing counterfeit notes, using them as genuine, and possessing,
insicuments material for forging such notes. were first brought
into the Penal Code by the Currency Notes Forgery Act. 1919.
Four sections, 489A to 4890. were added in Chapter 18. on the
basis that these offences were closely allied with forgery and
other offences relating to documents dealt with in that Chapter.
(Section 489E was added during the fast war by Act 6 of 1943
to deal with a compuratively trifling matter). In recent times,
crim Courts are much more concerned with prosecutions
under these four sections than with prosecutions under all the
35 sections of Chapter 12 put together.

3, We propose that sections 489A to 489£ should be put
in Chapter $2 where they rightly belong. The heading of the
Chapter should. in consequence. be changed to “Offences relating
to Currency Notes. Coins and Stamp: We propose also

1. Although called an Ordinance, thi

209
3M of Law TIS

iniroduc-
tory

Forning of
currency
notes-
gislative
history.

Chapter 12
to cover
currency
notes also.

1995 continues in force as a permanent law.


Seei
ISDA
“Currency
voles or
bank
notes”.

Punish-
ment pros
vision
moditiod.

Section re.
vised.

section 1(2) of tke (U. K.» Counter!
ines “

egal tender in the countcy in which they ate issued”.
2. See sections 31 and 3

216

that in view of their greater importance the sections relating to
currency notes should come first.

12.4. Section 489A which is the principal section in this group
punishes the counterfeiting of “Currency Notes or bank notes”.
While there is no definition of “Currency Notes” the expression
“bank note” is defined in an explanation as “a promissory note
or engagement for the payment of money to bearer on demand
issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any
part of the world, or issued by or under the authority of any
State or Sovereign Power, and intended to he used as equivalent
fo, or as a substitute for money”. This definition is compre-
hensive cnough to cover all notes issued by the Reserve Bank of
India or by the Government of India, which are used as money
in the country, and also, notes issued by or under the authority
of the Government of 4 Forzign State used as money in that State.
Currency Notes, as commonly understood, are notes which are
in current circulation as money or, in other words. which are
legal tender. in the country in which they are issued.' ft does
nol appear that the intention or effect of the Explanation in
section 489A is to cover any other type of bank notes, if at all
it exists in a foreign country. So far as India is concerned, since
privaic persons arc prohibited? by the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 from issuing a Bill of Exchange, hundi, Promissory Note or
engagement for the payment of money payable to bearer on
demand, there can be no such “bank notes”. We Propose,
therefore, to adopt a clear and simple definition of “currency
notes” in place of the lengthy definition of “bank notes” in the
existing Explanation, and to omit all reference to “bank notes”
in section 489A and the following sections.

12.5. The punishment prescribed at present for the offence
of counterfeiting currency notes is imprisonment for file
prisonment cf cither description upto ten years to wh
may be added. We consider that life imprisonment is not
called for, but on the other hand. the possibility of imposing
simple imprisonment for a number of years should not be alowed.
The maximum punishment for the offence may be rigorous
imprisonment for fourteen years and fine.

12.6. The first section in the revised Chapter 12 will accor-
dingly read :

“230. Counterfeiting currency notes.—-Whoever counter-
लिए. ov knowingly performs any part of the process of counter-
feiting, any currency notes shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fouricen
years, and shail also be liable to fine.

Currency (Conver a) “Act. 1935 which

ency notes” as including any “notes (by whatever name called) which are

Reserve Bank of india Act, 1934.


21

Explanation. -The expression ‘currency mates) means-~
(i) any currency notes of the Gavernment of India;

eles issued by th

(ii) any bank Reserve Bank of
indi ad

(iii) any notes (by whatever name called} issued by
oron behalf of the Government of any country
outside india which are tezal tender in’ that

country

Ss are required in: sections
ad
ons

12.7. Only a few formal chan
4898, 489C and 4891. which ४
233 after they are trans]
will read :

“3h, Using ay genuine counterfeit currency notes —
Whoever sells to, or buys or receives from. any other person,
or otherwise traffics in or uses as genuine, any counterfeit
currency notes, knowing or having reason lo believe the
same to be counterfeit, shatl be punished wiih rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years,
and shail also be liable to fine.

232. Possession of counterfeit currency notes. ~Who-
ever has in his possession any counterfeit currency note,
knowing or having reason to believe the same to he counter-
feit and intending to use the same as genuine or that it may
be used as genuine, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven
years. or with tine, or with both,

233, Making or possessing instruments or piaterials
for coumerfeiting currency notes. Whoever makes, or per>
forms any part of the process of making, or buys or sells or
disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instru-
ment or material for the purpose of being used. or knowing,
or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for
counterfeiting any currency note. shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment fora term which may extend to fours
teen years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

12.8. While section 489A makes the counterteiling of currency
notes punishable with imprisonment for tile, section 489E imposes
a small fine of not more than Rs. 100 on a person who makes a
document “so nearly resembling a currency note as to be cal-
culated to deceive” the unwary individual. It is doubtful if this
section has at present any practical use. However, we see no
harm in retaining it, but we propose increasing the maximum
fine under sub-section (1) to Rs. 200 and that under sub-section
(2) to Rs. 500. The words “or bank note” occurring in sub-
section (1) and the marginal heading will be omitted.

Sections
any B,
489 Cand
yD.

Sestion
459६.


212

Sections 12.9. We now proceed to consider the group of sections in
330 10. Chapter 12, sections 230 to 254, which deal with offences relating
to coias. A noticeable aspect of the scheme of these sections
is the distinction drawn between ‘coins’ in general and ‘Indian
coins’, Apparently, the maker of the Code were of the view that
the offences when committed in relation to Indian coins were
more reprehensible than when they related to non-Indian coins.
This is reflected in the elaborate method of providing two diffe-
Tent sections for each distinct offence, one relating to ‘Indian
coins’ and carrying a severe punishment, and the other relating
(० ‘coins’ with a comparatively lighter punishment.

other coins.

Abolition 12.10. This distinction was, no doubt, important at the time
fecommend- when the Code was first drawn up. There were then a number

of Indian States some of which had their own coinage. This
condition no longer exists. Counterfeiting of non-Indian Coins
should no doubt continue to be punishable: but it is not necessary
(6 have two sets of provisions to deal with Indian and non-
Indian coins separately. We would, therefore. recommend that
cach pair of sections dealing with one particular offence be
combined into one.

Punishment J2.41. As for punishment. we feel that a scale of punishment

to be somewhere in between the comparatively light punishment pres-

modified cribed for non-Indian coins and the more severe one provided
for in the case of Indian coins. would be suitab’e. In this context,
one must also keep in mind the diminishing importance of coins
in the monetary system as compared with currency notes and
the resulling lack of incentive to counterfeit coins. «

Simplifica- 42.12. Further, we fecl that the scheme of sections 489A

tion of pro- to 4890 dealing with offences relating to currency notes should

Visions be followed here also. as the former is much simpler and the
provisions better drafted.

12.13. section 230 defines ‘coin’ and ‘Indian coin’, In view
of our proposal! to do away with the distinction between Indian
coins and foreign coins, this section may be revised as follows :—

“235. Coin defined. —Coin is metal used for the time
being as money, and stamped and issued by the authority
of the Government of India. or of the Government of a
country outside India, in order to be so used.

Explanation. ~Metal which has been stamped and issued
by the authority of the Government of India in order to
be used as money shall continue to be coin for the purposes
of this Chapter. notwithstanding that it may have ceased to
be used as money.”

1. See paragraph 12.10 above.


213

The illustrations to section 230 are unnecessary. Some of
them deal with coins which are now obsolete, and none of them
throws any special light on the definition. We, therefore, recom-
mend the deletion of all ittustrations to the section.

12.14. Sections 231 and 232 deal with the offence of counter- Sections
feiting ‘coins’ and ‘Indian coins respectively. They should be 238 and
combined into one section. The punishment provided for in Beg
section 231 appears sufficient. in view of the definition’ of amended.
“counterfeit”, the Explanation to section 231 is not of any prac-
tical use and may safely be omitted.

12.15. Section 233 deals with the offence of making or scHing Sections
instruments for counterteiting ‘coins’, and section 234 deals with 233. x
the same offence in relation to Indian coins. These sections may and कल
be combined. Further, section 235 which deals with the offence Soy revised,
of possessing such instruments may also. following the scheme of
the provisions dealing with the counterfeiting of currency notes?,
be incorporated in the same section.

12.16. Section 236, which deals with the abetment of the Section 236
counterfeiting of coins performed outside India, should be to be
omitied, as section 108A covers the situation contemplated in emitted.
this section,

12.17. Sections 237 and 238 dealing with import and export Sections
of counterteit coins may be combined into one section, with pro- 237 and

sion fe i se ears, 23 uM

vision for imprisonment upto seven years. Rea
amended.
12.18, Sections 239 and 240 deat with the offence of “deli- Sections

very’ of counterfeit coin. Section 241 deals with the ‘delivery” 239. cd
of counterfeit coins which the offender did not know to have 4 31,
been counterfeited at the time they came into his possession. aud revised.
These may be combined into one section, with one punishment of
seven years’ imprisonment. The wording of the sections should
also be changed, to bring them in conformity with section 48983
which deals with a simitar offence relating to counterfeit currency
notes.

12.19. Sections 242 and 243 dealing with possession of coun- ions
terfeit coins may be combined into one section, with provision 342 aat
for imprisonment upto five years. The present sections des- Bo
cribe the mens rea as “fraudulently or with intent to defraud”. शक
We propose to follow the language of the corresponding section4
relating to Currency notes, as it is more precise than the present
wording.

1. Section 28.

2. Section 489-9 (reaumocred 233 above).

3. Renumbered 231; see paragraph 12.7 abore.
4. Section 4992 (remundered 232,



Section:
244 are
245.

fons 24t
to 25
tobe
omitted.

pla
sect iors
230. te

211

12.20, Section 244 relates 10 employees in minis and section
ing out coining instruments from mints. These
AOL require any change.

the weight. com-
ppearance af coins. They were important wher
in the minting of coins. The present
Position is qu would take the trouble
of trying to aiter the weight or composition of the coins which
dite Muse at present. These seclions are out of date and may be
omitted.

2. fn the fight of the above sussion. sections 231 10
2placed by the following sections

236, Counterfeiting coins—Whoever counterfeils, oF
forms any part of the process of counterfeiting.
॥ be punished with imprisonment of either
scription Ter 9 term which may extend to seven years, and
shall abo be tiable to fine.

27, Using as geauine counterfeit coin. - Whoever sells
to or buys or receives from any other person, or otherwise
traffics i OF USZS 65 geNuNE any Counter feit_ coin, knowing
or having reason to believe the same to be counterfeit. hall
be ished with imprisonment of — cither description
for a term which may esiand 10 seven years. and shall also be
liable to fine.

238. Possession of cataitesfeit coin —Whoever has
in his possession any counterfeit coin, knowing = or
having reasan to believe the same to be counterfeit. and
11 to use the same as genuine or that ji may be used
hall be purished with imprisonment of either
ption for a term which may extend (0 five years. or with
fine. or with both.

239, Making or possessing instruments or materials for

coustentciiing cein= Whoever mukes. or performs any
fart of the process of making. or buys er sells or disposes: of.
ork his possession any Machinery. instrument, or material
for the purpose of being used, or knowing OF having reason
to belive that it is intended to be used. for counterfeiting any
॥ be punished imprisonment of either descrip-
term which may extend to five years, and shall also
bie te fine.

3, fsport ov export of comiterfci coin.—Whoever
imports inte India or exports thereirom any counterfeit coin,
Know ing oF having reason to believe thal the same is a counter-
feit coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which aay extend 10 seven years, and
shall sile be fable to fine.



245

41. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of diffe-
rent weight or composition from that fixed by law.—Whoever,

being employed in any mint lawfully established in India.

does any act, or omit what he is legally bound to do, with the
Intention of causing any coin issued from that mint to be of a
ciffercat weight or compasition from iis weight or composi-
or fixed by law. shall be punished with imprisonment of
cither description for a term which may extend to seven years,
ang shall also be Hable to fine.

TAD. Cntafilly taking coming insiranent from mint.—
Whoever. without lawful ity. takes out of any mint
Jawfally established in India, any coining 1001 ता instrument.
hall be punished with imprisenment of cither description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be

.23. Before considering the next group of sections relating
६0 revenue stamps, we would suggesi the insertion of a new
section relating to coin. With increasing mechanisation
the use of ng machines for selling various arlicles
and even services or for collecting fares and tolls is bound to
come into vogue in the near future. Such machines are usually
operated by inserting the requisite coin, or other valuable token.
Experience of other countries shows that the machine, or rather
its owner, is cheated by dishonest persons inserting ‘slugs’ instead
of coins. Such conduct is harmful and dishonest, and should be
made punishable as has टला done in some countries. We see,
for instance, section 397 of the Canadian Criminal Code which
makes il an offence for any one “who fraudulently inserts or uses
भी ॥ machine that vends merchandise or services or collects
fares or tolls, anything that is intended to puss for the coin or the
token cf value that the machine is designed 10 receive in exchange
for the merchandise. service. fare, or toll, as the case may be,”
We would, therefore, recommend the insertion of a new section
to deal with this offence. Punishment of im Prisonment upto
one year, or fine, or both. will suffice for the offence. The new
provision may Le as follows

“243. Dishonest use of slugs in vending machines.—
Whoever dishonesty inserts or uses i a machine which sells
goods or services or collects fares or tolls, anything that is.
Intended to pass for. but is not the coin or the token of value
that the machine is designed to receive in exchange for the
goods. services, fare or toll, as the case may be, shall be
punished wiih imprisonment of cither description for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.”

12.24. Sections 255 to 263 deal with the counterfeiting of,
and connected offences relating to, “stamps issued by Govern-
ment for the purpose of revenue”. As “Government” means
the Government of India or any State Government, the sections
apply in relation to all revenue siamps, whether State or Central.
By virtue of section 17 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, Indian

Use of
spurious
coin or
token in
automatic
vending
machine.

Sections 253
to 263—
General
discussion.


Amend-
ments to
sections
255. to
263 con-
sidered.

Sections
256. and
257 com:
bined — and
revised.

Sections
258, 259 and
260 combi-
ned i and

263 revised
and re-
numbered.

216

postage stamps (including impressions produced by franking
machines) are deemed to be such revenue stamps within the mean-
ing of section 255 et. seq. Then, sub-section (4) of section 263A
makes the preceding sections applicable also in relation to foreign
postage stamps.

12.28. No substantial change appears necessary in these
nine sections. However, a considerable shortening of the
Janguage of these sections can be achieved; in particular, the
repetition in each section of the words ‘stamp issued by the
Government for the purpose of revenue’ can be avoided by using
the term ‘revenue stamp’ with a definition in the first section.
We also propose that these sections may be revised on the
same lines as the sections relating to coin.

12.26. In section 255, the severe punishment of imprisonment
for life appears to be unnecessary; rigorous imprisonment upto
ten years should be adequate. In view of the clear definition of
“counterfeit” in section 28 of the Code, the Explanation to sec-
tion 255 is not necessary and may safely be deleted.

42.27. Section 256 deals with the possession of instruments.
or material for counterfeiting, and section 257 with the sale of
such instruments. These two sections may be combined into
one. Further, the language of the corresponding section regard-
ing currency notes—section 489D—appears to be simpler, and
could be foliowed with advantage.

12.28. Sections 258, 259 and 260 deal with the sale, possession
and use of counterfeit stamps. The thrce sections may be
combined into one,

12.29. Sections 261 to 263 require no change of substance.

12.30. In the light of the above discussion, sections 255 to
263 may be revised and re-numbered as follows :—

“244. Counterfeiting revenue stamp.—Whoever counter-
feits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of counter-
feiting, any revenue stamp shail be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and
shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation.—The expression ‘revenue stamp’ means
a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue.

245, Making or possession or sale of instruments or
materials for counterfeiting revenue stamp.—Whoever makes,
or performs any part of the process of making, or buys or
sells, or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery,
instrument or material for the purpose of being used. or
knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be


217

used, for counterfeiting any revenue stamp, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall aiso be liable to fine.

246. Sale, use and possession of counterfeit revenue
stamp.—Whoever—~

(a) sells, or offers for sale, any stamp which he
knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit
revenue stamp, or

(9) has in his possession any stamp which he knows
to be a counterfeit revenue stamp. tending
to use or dispose of the same as genuine, or

(८) uses as genuine any stamp, knowing it to be a
counterfeit revenue stamp,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years. or with fine, or
with both.”

247. Effacing, writing or removing revenue stamp with
intent to cause loss to Government.—Whoever, fraudulently
or with intent to cause loss to the Government. removes or
effaces from any substance bearing a revenue stamp, any
writing or document for which such stamp has been used,
ot removes from any writing or document, a revenue stamp
which has deen used for such writing or document, in order
that such stamp may be used for a different writing or docu-
ment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either des-
cription for a term which may extend to three years, or with
tine, or with both.

248. Using revenue stamp known to have been before
used.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to
the Government, uses for any purpose a revenue stamp which
he knows to have been before used. shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

249. Erasure of mark denoting thar stamp has been
issued.— Whoever —

{a) fraudulently or with-intent to cause 1055 to the
Government, erases or removes from a revenue
stamp, any mark put or impressed upon it for
the purpose of denoting that the stamp has been
used, or

(0) knowingly has in his possession or setls or dis-
poses of any such stamp from which such
mark has been erased or removed, or

(०) selis or disposes of any such stamp which he
knows to have been used,


Section
203

distinction
berseen
fictitious

and counter

Feit stamp.

Amend
INENIS pro-
poses.

Revised sec-

tons in
place or
section
265A,

218

shall be punished with imprisonment of cither description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both,

12.31. Section 2634 prohibits dealings in “fictitious” postage
stamps. The distinction betwecn counterfeit stamps and fictitious
slamps appears to be that if a person uses a stamp resembling &
stamp in general. but not resembling a particular stamp actu:
in use. then it would not be counterfciting. but it would be uw: ing
a fictions stamp. Secondly. though imitation is required for
the offence of making a fictitious stamp, a chose resembhance
(as is required in counterfeiting) is net necessary. Lastly
tion to deceive is not necessary in the case of un offence against
this section. As the potentiality for mischief of such acts
much less than counterfeiting postage slamps. the offence
of making. using or possessing fictitious stamps is punishable
only with a small fine. The language used in scction 263A is
wide enough to cover cven serious acts of counterfeiting: bul.
obviously. the intention is 10 cover only which do not fall
within the more serious offence of counterfeiting.

42.32. We do not consider it necessary to disturb the section
since it has seldom, if ever, been invoked. But we propose to
simplify the definition of “fictitious stamp’ given in sub-section
(3). Sub-section (4) which makes this section as well as the nine
preceding sections applicable in relation to foreign postage
stamps should be put in a separate section. Further, the marginal
note to the section should contain the word ‘postage’. as the
section deals with postage stamps only.

. Section 263A may be replaced by two

1
follows +

“250. Application of preceding sections to foreign postage
stamps. The provisions of sections 244 to 249, both inclu-
sive, apply in relation to postage stamps issued by the Govern-

ment ofa foreign country as they apply in relation to revenue
stamps.

251, Prohibition of fictitious postage stamps.--(1} Who-
ever—

(a) makes. knowingly utters. deals in or sells any
fictitious postage stamp, or knowingly u
for any postal purpose any such stamp, or

(0) has in his possession, without lawful excuse,
any such stamp, or

{c) makes, or, without Jawful excuse, has in his
possession, any die, plate, instrument or material
for making any such stamp,


219

shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred
rupees.

(2) Any such stamp. dic, plate. instrument or materials
i the possession of any person for making any fictitious
Postage stamp may be seized and, if seized. shalt be forfeited

(3) In this section, “fictitious postage siamp’ means any
stamp falsely purporting to be issued by the Government
of India छा 01 a foreign country for the purpose of denoting
a rate of postage. or any facsimile or imitation or representa-
tion, whether on paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by
such Government for that purpose.”

sa


Sections
264 to
267— Re-
commenda-
tion for
increasing
punish.
ment.

.

Analogous
State laws.

Section

Section 24,

Section 25.

Section 26.

Secrion 27.

CHAPTER 13
OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURERS

13.1. The four main offences relating to weights and meusures
are made punishable in Chapter 13 of the Code. These are
fraudulent use of a false weighing instrument. fraudulent use
of a false weight or a false measure of length or capacity, posses-
sing such instrument, weight or measure, and making or selling
such instrument, weight or measure. The maximum punishment
under any of the four sections is imprisonment upto one year.
Since these offences are committed frequently and with impunity by
unscrupulous traders in relation to commodities of every day use,
thereby causing much hardship to people, especially to the poorer
sections, we feel that the offenders merit deterrent punish-
ment. We would, therefore, suggest that the maximum punish-
ment of one year’s imprisonment now provided under these
sections should be increased to two years.

43.2. We find that the State laws dealing with weights and
measures also contain penal provisions which cover the kind of
acts punishable under sections 264 to 267. We give below,
by way of sample, an analysis of the provisions in the Punjab
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act. 1958 :-~

Gist of offence Punishment

>

Selling or delivering, in course of For first offence—fine upio Rs.
trade of commerce, any article by 2000; for sccond or subsequent
weight or measure other than offence imprisonment upto 3
standard weight or measure. months, or fine, or both.

Selling unverified or —unstamped Fine upto Rs. 2000.
commercial weights or measures
of measuring instruments.

Using in. trade or commerce, or For first. offence—fine upto Rs.
having in possession for such use, 2000; for second or subsequent
unverified of unstamped weights. offence imprisonment upto 3

months, or fine, or both.

Manufacturing or. repairing or selling Imprisonment upto, 3 months. or
commercial weights 2: measures. fine upto Rs. 2000, of both.

without licence.
Contravening notification prescribing Fine upto Rs. 2000.
the use of weights only, or measures
‘only, in specified trade or com-
merce.

220


221

Section 28. Selling, or having in possession for Fine upto Rs 2000.
sale. articles in sealed containers
without marking of weight or
measure on the containers.

Section 29. Fravduiently using standard weights Imprisonment uplo_ one year, or

and measures “knowing them to fine upto Rs. 2000,
be false.

Svetion 30. Being in Possession of commercial fmprisonmen: upto

or both.

one year,

Selght of measure, knowing the or fine upto Rs. 2000, Orbost

same (0 be false and intending
that the same may be fiaudulently
used.

Making.
flandard weights or measures etc. fine upto Rs, 3000.
knowing the same to be false or
knowing that the same may be or is
likely to be used as true.

Section 3),

sale article by short Fine upto Rs, 2000.
ites

Section 32. Delivering in
weight orm

Pilling | OF, dispersing of Imprisonment upto. one year, or

oF both.

Section 53. Forging or counterfeiting siamps Imprisonment upto one year, or

used for stamping weights and fine upto Rs. 2000,
Measures ९०... or knowingly using,
selling or disposing of such false
Stamps on it,

Section M. Refusing or neglecting to produce Fine upto Rs. 2000.
weights and “measures cic. for
inspection.

Seciion 35. Inspector knowingly stamping}weight Imprisonment upto o
oF measure in contravention of the fine. or bot
Act.

It will be noticed that the State Acts are mainly de-
signed to enforce the central legislation? establishing standard
weights and measures. Prosecutions for offences against these
Acts can be instituted only with the sanction of the State Con-
tolter of Weights and Measures ot othe: i

Private person's tight to make a com
conduct ought to be retained, and that is one reason for main-
taining the provisions in the Penal Code. Further, the State
Acts do not impose a severe punishment: none of them, we find,
imposes more than one year's imprisonment. In view of the
need to treat these offences more severely, we consider it desir-
able to retain sections 264 to 267 of the Penal Code with the
amendment already indicated.

1. The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1956 (89 of 1956.)

oF both.

one year, or

Code pro-
४ is:ons
should be-
Telained,


fowoduc-
tory
General 1८५
commenda-
tion Sor in
crease in
punish
ment

Seetions
26s and
290--Com-
bined and
revised.

CHaprer 14

AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH. SAFETY,
ENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS

OFFENCES
CON

14.5. A “public nuisance’ is defined in section 268 of the
Code as “an act or omission which causes any common injury.
danger er annoyance to the public or 10 people in general who
dweil or occupy property in the vicinity”. — Speaking
generally, such acts arise out of careless or callous disregard
of other people's welfare or convenience. The sections that
follow mention specific instances of such conduct which are
expressly made punishable. such as, the negligent spreading of
an iniectious disease, adulteration of food or drink or drugs,
the fouling of a public spring or reservoir, endangering human
life by h driving or careless navigation, or negligent keeping
of explosives or dangerous animals. In modern times. such
careless conduct is likely to cause a lot of harm to a lot of people,
and should be regarded as truly nti-social; and viewed in that
light. the punishment provided by the Code for such anti-social
conduct we think, inadequate. Mostly, the maximum pus
nishment is imprisonment for six months, and in some cases.
it is less: only in two cases does it exceed six months’ imprison-
ment. We find, that the special Acts dealing with such offences
do provide deterrent punishment. and it is proper that our
Penal Code should treat these offences in a similar manner.
We propose. therefore, 10 raise the maximum punishnient con-
siderably for most of the offences.

14.2. Section 268 defines “public nuisance’ in a very general
and comprehensive manner. In fact, the definition is 50 wide
that it could be said that many of the offences de sibed in
detait in the subsequent sections are merely particular instances
of public nuisance, Accordingly, the penal provision in section
290 prescribes the punishment for public nuisance “in any
case not otherwise punishable by the Code™. Instead of de-
fining the offence at the beginning of the Chapter and prescrib-

ing the punishment practically at the end of it, we suggest that
jt would be clearer to bring them together in one section at the
beginning. The punishment of fine provided in section 290
\Which js now limited to Rs. 200, may, we suggest, be unlimited.

The revised section may be as follows

268. Public nuisance.—(1) Whoever docs any act or
is guilty of an illegal omission which—~

(a) causes any common injury, danger or annoyance
to the public or to the people in general who dweil or
occupy property in the vicinity. or

222


223

(9) must necessarily cause injury, obstruction,
danger of anno '९ 10 persons who may have occasion
10 use any public right, commits a public nuisan

ENplonation > Any such act or iHegal omission is not
excusable on the ground that it catises some convenience or
advantage.

(2) Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case
nol otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished
with fine.”

14.3. Sections 269 and 270 deal with the spreading of in- Sections
fectious diseases da life --section 269, when iv is done 369 and
“unlawfully or negligently” and section 270, when it is dene पर
“malignantly”. revised.

With regard (0 the first type of mens rea, there has been
some doubt about the meaning of “unlawfully”. The ander-
lying idea is that when the person acts without lawful excuse.
As regards the second section, there seems no point in using a
word like “malignantly” which has a condemnatory overtone.
The distinction should, as usual, be between negligent acts and
intentional acts. the latter being punishable more severely than
the former. The punishments provided in both sections require
to be enhanced. We propose to combine the (७० sections in
one, reading as follows : ~

69. Act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous
Whoever does any act which is, and which he knows
or has reason to believe to be. likely to spread the infection
of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished—

{a) if he does such act negligently. with imprison-
ment of cither description for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine, or with both;

(0) if he does such act intentionally. with imprison-
ment of cither description for a term which may extend
to three years. or with fine. or with both.”

14.4. No changes are required in section 271. peter
14.5. The next five sections deal with the anti-social and — sections
yeprehensible offences of adulteraiing food or drink and drugs, 272 and
While the definition of all the offences is comprehensive and — 276--punish
clear and docs not require any modification, we propose that Ment incre:
the punishment provided in cach of these sections should be “"

increased to “{hree years, or with fine, or with both”,

14.6, Section 277 punishes the “corrupting or fouling” of — Section
a public spring or reservoir, but docs not expressly speak of a 277 amend-
public well. {t would be useful if a well is specifically men-  °%

tioned, On the cther hand. the archaic word “corrupting” is



Section
278 amend-
ed

Section
279 amend.
ed.

New $6९-
tion 279A—
Dangerous-
ly over
loaded
vehicles.

Sections
280 to
‘283 amend-
ed.

Sections
284 to
290 amen-

224

redundant and may be deleted. The punishment should be
increased to imprisonment upto six months, or untimited fine,
or both. The section may be revised as follows :—

“277. Fouling water of public spring, well or reservoir. -—
Whoever voluntarily fouls the water of any public spring.
well or reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purposes
for which it is ordinarily used. shalf be punished with im-
prisonment of either description for a term which may ex-
tend to six months. or with fine. or with both”.

14.7, Section 278 punishes those who vitiate the atmosphere.
but the punishment is only “fine which may extend to five hund-
red rupees This is inadequate, and we recommend that these
words may be replaced by “imprisonment of cither description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with
both”.

14.8. Section 279 deals with the offence of rash driving of a
vehicle on a public way. We propose to make the fine under
this section unlimited by omitting the words “which may ex-
tend to one thousand rupees”.

14.9. There is, however. no provision corresponding to
section 282 under which carrying passengers in a boat which is
unsafe either because of its condition or because of its load is
an offence. A similar provision should, in our opinion, be
made for taking on the road an unsafe vehicle. and we suggest
the addition of a new section 279A as follows:—

“279A, Driving unsafe or overloaded vehicle on a public
war.--Whoever Knowingly or negligently drives any vehicle
on a public way when that vehicle ts in such 8 state oF so
loaded as to endanger life. shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may exiend to
six months.Zor with fine. or with both.”

14.10. Sections 280 to 283 are designed to ensure public
safety on waterways. While the punishment under section 281
is justifiably severe. that under the other three sections is mild
and should be increased by making the fine unlimited. In
sections 280 and 282, the words “which may extend to one
thousand rupees” should be omitted: and in section 283, the
words “which may extend to two hundred rapses’ should
be omitted.

14.11. The same amendments are required in section 284
to 290.

14.12. No amendinent is requirsd in section 291.


228

14.13. Section 292 punishes the sale of obscene books,
section 293 punishes the sale of obscene objects to young per-
sons, and section 294 punishes obscene acts in public and also
the singing of obscene songs in or near a public place.

Section 292 has been extensively amended very recently.!
An attempt has been made to lay down a test of obscénity, but
since the words used are the same as Judges have, before
now, used in theis judgments, it does not scem that the concept
oi obscenity has become any clearer. the practical problem
still being the difficuly of deciding what is ‘lascivious’ and what
‘appeals to the prurient interes. acd what does or does not
‘tend ta deprave or corrupt. Only the actual working will
show wiether the amendment is useful to the Conrts. More
important than this attempted definition is the new exception.
which allows a defence on the ground that the ‘publication
ix in the interest of art or science or literature or learning
This wiil actwatly turn on expert evidence. and it scems to have
been assumed that such expert evidence would be permissible
under section 45 of the Evidence Act. The assumption is pro-
bably well-founded. but it would be safer if, in the section itself
a provision is specitically made for admission of expert evidence.
We propose that the following sub-section may be added? to
scetion 202 2 --

“Where, in any prosecution under this section. the
question is whether the publication of any book. pamphlet.
paper. writing, drawing. painting, representation or figure
is in the interest of science, literature, art or learning or
other object of general concern, the opinion of experts as
lo its scientific, literary, artistic, academic or other merits
may be admilted in evidence.”

14.14. Section 293 needs no change.

14.15, The punishment provided in section 294 for singing
obscene songs Is imprisonment upto three months. We think
that imprisonment is hardly necessary for such an offence,
and propos: to limit the punishment to ६ fine not exceedi
one thousand rupees.

14.16. The last section in this Chapter (294A) prohibits
lotteries except those run or authorised to be run by the State
Goverment. No indication is given of the circumstances in
which the State Government may authorise a lottery, and
this Kind of power entrusted to the State Government may
be open to objection. We think it proper that broad guide-
lines should be inserted in this provision, to assist the State
Goverar i siding when to authorise a lottery. A lottery
in aid of a charity, for instance, may well be authorised, and

(Amendment) Act, 1969 (36 of 1969).

3M. of Law, 71-16

Section
292 Ree
commenda-
tion 1०५
garding ex-
pert evid-
cnee.

Section
293.

Section
294—Re-
commenda-
von,

Section
294A—
Guidelines
for autho-
rising pi
vate loueri-
es.

jy. the necessary amendment could be made in section 45 of the Evidence


Revision
recom-
mended.

226

so might a lottery confined to a smal! group or a lottery inci-
denta! to an entertainment, if there be no other objectionable
features about it. We are suggesting that the State Govern-
ment should be guided by such considerations although, of
course, the discretion of the State Government is nol to be
unduly restricted.

14.17. We also propose that the provision in section 294A
should be amplified, and certain acts concerning the keeping
of a lottery office or the running of a lottery should be specified
and expressly made punishable. The new section should, we
think, read thus :—

“204A. Offences in connection with lotteries.) Who-
ever, in connection with any lottery promoted or proposed
10 be promoted, whether in India or elsewhere-—

(a) prints any tickets for use in the lottery; or

(0) sells or distributes, or offers or advertises for
sale or distribution, or has in his possession for the
purpose of sale or distribution, any tickets or chances
in the lottery; or

(०) prints, publishes or distributes. or has in. his
possession for the purposes of publication or distri-
bution—

(i) any advertisement of the lottery; or

Gi) any list, whether complete or nol, of prize
winners or winning tickets in the lottery; or

(ifi) any such matter descriptive of the drawing
or intended drawing of the lottery, or otherwise
relating to the lottery, as is calculated to act as an
inducement to persons to participate in that lottery
or in other lotteries; or

(व) brings, or invites any person to send, into
India for the purpose of sale or distribution any licket
in, or advertisement of, the lottery; or

(e) sends or attempts to send out of India any
money or valuable thing received in respect of the sale or
distribution, or any document recording the sale or dis-
tribution or the identity of the holder, of any ticket
or chance in the lottery; or

(f) uses any premises, or causes or knowingly
permits any premises to be used, for purposes con-
nected with the promotion or conduct of the lottery;
or

(8) causes, procures or attempts to procure any
person to do any of the above-mentioned acts,


shail be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine,
or with both.

(2) Nothing in this section applies in relation to a lot-
tery which is a State lottery or is authorised by the State
Government.

(3) The State Government may authorise a lottery
with reference to this section, where it is satisfied that—

{a) the profits of the lottery are to be appropriated
towards any charitable purposc; or

(0) participation in the lottery is confined to
the members of a society or other group of persons, and
is not open to the public: or

(०) the lottery is incidental to an entertainment;
or

(d) it is otherwise ip the public interest to authorise
the lottery.”


Introduc-
tory.

Section
29543
बाएा0ै-
ment pro-
posed.

tions,

Cuaprrr 15
OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION

. Originally. the Code formulated four offences relating
to religion and made them punishable under four sections in
Chapter 15. The first deals with damaging or defiling a place
of worship or a sacred object with intent to insult the religion
ol a class of persons: the second. with disturbing a religious
worship or ceremony: the third. with trespass in any place of
sepulture or place where funeral ceremonies are proceeding:
and the last, with utlerances in the presence of another person
with the intention ef wounding the religious feelings of that
person. Later on, it was found that there was no legal provi-
sion to punish a person who deliberately wounded the religious
feelings of a class of persons by speech or written pudfication.
A new section 295A was added in 1927 in the Code. which
made it an offence to insult the religion of any class of cilizens
by spoken or written words, if it was done with the “deliberate
and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings”
of that class.

15.2. This is a necessary and saleiary provision, but ii is
needlessly hedged in by too many conditions, His not clear
what the import of the word ‘malicious’ is : when there
sdeliberate’ intention to ouivage the religious feeling of a cl
of citizens, the state of mind is reprehensible enough to merit
severe punishment. Secondly, it is noticed that while section
297 and 298 refer to wounding the feclings of any person.
section 2950 refers (0 ovtraging the feelings of a class. There
seems to be no particular point in varying a material expression,
We therefore, propose 10 amend section 295A by describing the
mens rea as “With the deliberate intention of wounding the
religious feelings” etc.

15.3. The other sections in this Chapter do not require any
modification.

225


CHAPTER 16
OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY

16.1. Chapter 16 covers a wide range of offences affecting
the human body, extending from the petty offences of assault
and wrongful restraint at one end 10 the heinous crimes of
rape and murder at the other. These are grouped under seven
heads. the first and foremost being offences affecting life, and the
next offences reluting to infants and the unborn. Then follow
causing hurt to the bo wrongful restraint and wrongful
confinement, criminal fore
tion, and finally. rape and unnatura! offences.

Offences affecting Life

10.2
and cul
of the eminence of Sir Jam
these sections in the follow

Sections 299 and 300 define the offences of murder
81९ homicide not amounting to murder, An authority
5 Stephen criticised the drafting of
ing terms! :—-

“The delinitions of culpable homicide and murder
are, | think. the weakest part of the Code. They are
obscure. and iis obvious to me that the subject has not
been fully thought out when they were dra Culpable
homicide is first defined. but homicide is not defined at
all, except by way of expjanation to culpable homicide.
Moreover. culpable homicide, the genus, and murder, the
species. are defined in terms so closely resembling each
other that it is dificuit 10 distinguish them.”

a

16.3. We do not think there is very much substance in the
first two points made hy Stephen. Such obscurity as might
have been initially feh in interpreting the definitions—Stephen’s
vritigism dates back to 1883 -is hardly felt now after they have
been expounded and clarilied by dozens of authoritative judicial
devisions. There was, and is, no need to define a word jike
“homicide’. which is obviously used in its ordinary. signification
of causing the death of a human being. (Explanation 3 to which
Stephen apparently refers is of course not a definition of homi-
cide but furnishes a guide to help decide a border fine case).
Vie act which causes death is ‘culpable’ when it is done with
tne intention or knowledge specified in section 299; and, sub-
ject to the five exceptions set out in the second half of section 300
the act amounts to murder, if done with the intention or know-
ledge specified in the first half of that section. “The difficulty

0 Law of England, Vol. 3, page 313.

sphen, History of the

229

and assault. Lidnapping and abduc-*

Introduc-
tory.

Sections

299 and
300--Ste|
hen’s ९!
cism of the
definitions.

Considers
ed


Repitition
of ideas
analysed.

230

of these sections”, as Stephen himself emphasises, “is that the
definitions of culpable homicide and murder all but repeat
each other; but not quite, or at least, not explicitly.”

16.4. The crux of Stephen's objection is the repetition,
“not quite”, of certain ideas in the two definitions, “in terms
so closely resembling each other that it is difficult 10 distinguish
them.” The obvious repetition occurs in the very first limb
of the two definitions. Thus, under section 299, “whoever
causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death
_...commits the offence of culpable homicide; and under
section 300, “except in the cases hereinafter epted, culpable
homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is
done with the intention of causing death.” The repetition
of the same idea, with an “elegant variation” in the form of
expressing it, perhaps helps to indicate that the same act done
with the same intention will ordinarily be punished as murder
under section 302, but as culpable homicide not amounting to
murder under the first part of section 304 if it is covered by
one of the five exceptions set out in section 300.

The second limb of the definidon of culpable homicide
rests on “the intenticn of causing such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death”. in the definition of murder, this limb has
two branches, marked secondly and thirdly, respectively. The
first branch covers the case where the intention is to cause “such
bodily injury as the offender knows is tikely to cause the death
of the person to whom the harm is caused”. (Illustration (9)
explains the special point sought to be made in the underlined
words). The second branch covers the case where “the bodily
injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course
of nature to cause death”. It could be said with justification
that the distinction between a bodily injury which is likely to
cause death and a bodily injury which is sufficient in the ordi-
nary course of nature to cause death is very subile, if not ob-
scure. and creates considerable difficulty when applied to con-
crete situations. The courts, however. have resolved — the
difficulty by saying (to put it broadly) that if the probability of
death resulting from the injury is of a high degrec, then itis
murder, and if the probability is not so high. then it is culpable
homicide not amounting to murder,

Finally. we may compare the third limb of the definition
of culpable homicide with the fourth clause of the definition
of murder. ft is culpable homicice if the act is done with the
knowledge that such act is likely to cause death: but it is mur-
der. if it is done with the knowledge that it is so imminently
dangerous that it must in all probability cause death. or such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death. and the act is com-
mitted without any excuse for incurring tie risk of causing
death of such bodily injury. The distinction between the two Is

किक, page 314.


. 23h -

clear enough, and the additional circumstances necessary to
make it murder are expressed without any obscurity. Here
also in a concrete case, the degree of probability willl be relevant
for deciding between a mere likelihood of causing death by the
reckless act and the reckless act being imminently dangerous.

16.5. Stephen's observation that the two sections make
culpable homicide the genus and murder a species, and
define them accordingly, cannot be gainsaid. But what
is sought to be achieved by the two sections is primarily
a definition of murder as one species of the genus culpable
homicide, and then a definition of the other species of the
same genus, namely, culpable homicide not amounting to mur-
der. 11 is the latter offence for which punishment is provided
in the two paragraphs of section 304.

Each of the tive exceptions, in section 300 states that culpable
homicide {as defined in section 299) is not murder if death is
caused in the circumstances specified in that exception. It
leaves it 10 be implicd that, in those circumstances, the act is
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Similarly, it is left
to a process of deduction that when an act is done with the
intention or knowledge specified in the second or third limb
of section 299, but that intention or knowledge does not come
up to the level specified in the second, third or fourth clause of
section 300, the offence committed is culpable homicide not
amounting to murder.

Further, though the five exceptions in section 300 are excep-
tions to the offence of murder, this idea is not clearly brought
out in the language used. The question is not merely academic
because. by virtue of section 105 of the Evidence Act, the bur-
den of proving that the act comes within the exceptions lies
‘on the accused, but the question of discharging this burden will
arise only when the prosecution has affirmatively established
that the act amounts to murder.

We feet that the criticism of obscurity and repetition of
ideas, employment of terms closely resembling each other for
expressing similar ideas etc., should and could be met by re-
drafting the definitions. Murder being the offence of primary
importance, it should be defined first in a self-contained man-
ner, without being expressed as a graver modification of culp-
able homicide. On the other hand, it would be conducive to
clarity to define separately the offence of culpable homicide
not amounting to murder which is punishable under section
304. In the redrafting, however, it would be desirable to retain
the present formulation of ideas, since judicial interpretation in
the course of a century has invested the phrases with welt un-
derstood significance.

Two clear
definitions
desirable.


Section
299 to
be revised
to define
murder.

232

16.6. We propose that murder may be defined in section
299 as follows :—

299. Murder—-Whoever causes. death by doing an

act—

{a) with the intention of causing death, or

(0) with the intention of causing such bodily injury
as is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature (o cause
death, or as the offender knows to be likely to cause the
death of the person to whom the harm is caused. or

(c) with the knowledge that the act isso imminently
dangerous that it must. in all probability, cause death
or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. and
without any excuse for incurring such risk,

commits murder except in the circunistances specified in
section 300.

Explanation. -Fer whe purposes olf his section and

section 300.—

(i) causing the death of a child in the mother’s
womb is not causing the death of a human being: but
causing the death of a living child, after any part of
it has emerged from the womb. is causing ihe death of
of a human being, though the child may not have brea-
thed or been completely born;

(ii) a person who causes bodily injury to another
who is labouring under a disorder, discase or bodily
infirmity and thereby accelerates the death of that
other shail be deemed to have caused his death;

Gii) where death is caused by bodily injury. the
person who causes such bodily injury shall be deemed
10 have caused death. although by reserting to pro-
per remedies and skilful treatment death might: have
been prevented.

SNustrations

(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing
him. Z dies in consequence. A commiis mur-
der.

(0) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or
club-\wound sufficient to cause the death of a man
in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in con-
sequence. Here A is guilty of murder although
he may not have intended to cause Z's death.


233

(c) A. knowing that Z has an enlarged spleen
a blow against which is likely to cause his death,
strikes him there with the intention of causing
him such bodily injury. Z dics in consequence
of the blow. A is guilty of murder although the
blow might not have been sufficient in the ordinary
course ef nature to cause the death of a person
with a sound spleen.

(d) A. without any excuse, fires a loaded cannon
sato a evowd of persons and kills ene of them. A
is guilty of murder. although ke may noi have
designed (10 kill any particular individual.

(०) A knows Z to be benind a bush. B does
not know it. A induces B to fire at the bush know-
ing that such tiring must in all> probability cause
Z's death or such bodily injury us is likely to cause
his death. and without any excuse for incurring the
risk. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be guilly
of no offence but A is guilty of murder.

14.7. Culpable homicide not amounting to murder has to
be deiined in two parts whic we propese to put in section 300,
$ two sub-sections. Sub-section (1) will. as indicated above!
cover thase cases where the act causing death is dene with the
intention of cansing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death,
॥ the intention is not Uhac specified in clause (b) of the revised
definition of murder, [will also cover those cases where the
act is done with the knowledge that itis likely io cause death.
hut it is not murder Secause the strict conditions hud down in
couse (c) of the revised definition of murder ere not iulflled.

The second part of the def जा. will cover Uhose cases
falling within one or other of the five exceptions set out in the
existing section 300, In substance. these exceptions appear to
us to have been cavefuliy thought out and they have stood the
test of practical application over the years. We have only a
1९५ misor ard 1011 wiendments to suggest. Thus tbe ९४-
planation to exception bis not required after the abolition of
the jury triais. A few of the illustrations could also be omitted
or modified with advantage.

We propose accordingly that culpable homicide not am-
ounting to murder may be defined in section 300 as follows .—

“300. Culpable honticide not anounting to nnirder.~ (1)

SO 5 death by doing an act wiih the in-
tention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause
death or with the knowledge that by पी एल be 15 likely to
cause death. and such act is not murder under clause (0)
or clause (c) of section 299, he commits culpable homicide
eet amounting to mur

Section

300 to

be revised
to define
culpable
homicide
not amount+
ing to mur-
der.



234

Illustration

A lays sticks and turf over a pit with the knowledge that
death is likely to be thereby caused. Z treads on it, falls in
and is killed) A has committed culpable homicide not am-
counting to murder.

(2) Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention
or knowledge specified in section 299, but in the exceptional
circumstances hereinafter specified. commits culpable homicide
not amounting to murder, namel}

{i} when the offender. whilst deprived of the power of
self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the
death of the person who gives the provocation or causes
the death of any other person by mistake or accident, pro-
vided the provocation- -

{a) is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the
offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any
person. or

(b) is not given by a public servant in the fawful
exercise of the powers of such public servant. or

(0) is not given by anything done in the lawful
exercise of the right of private defence. or

(9) is not given by anything done in obedience to
the law;

ii) when the offender, in the exercise in good faith of
the right of private defence of person or property. exceeds
the power given to him by law and causes the death of the
person against whom he is exercising such right of defence
without pre-meditation and without any intention of doing
more harm than is necessary for the purposes of self-defence.

(iii) when the offender, not being a public servant or
aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public
justice, exceeds the powers given 10 him by law and causes
death by doing an act which he, in good faith. believes to be
lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duties as
such public servant and without ill-will against a person
whose death is caused:

(iv) where the offender causes death without pre-medi-
tation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden
quarrel and without having taken undue advantage or
acted in a cruel or unusual manner; it is immaterial in such
cases which party offers the provocation or commits the
first assault:

(२) where the person whose death is caused, being
above the age of eighteen years, consents to suffer death or
to take the risk of death.


235

Illusteations

{a) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A.
A on this provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither in-
tending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who
is near him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here A has
not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide
not amounting to murder.

(0) A, under the influence of passion excited by a
provocation given by ४, kills Z, Y’s child standing
nearby. This is murder, inasmuch as the- provocation
was not given by the child,

(०) A is fawlully arrested by 27, a bailiff. A is
excited to sudden and violent passion by the arrest,
and kills Z. This is murder, inasmuch as the provo-
cation was given by a thing done by a public servant
in the lawful exercise of his powers.

(व) A attempts to pull Z's nose. Z, in the exer-
cise of the right of private defence, lays hold of A to
prevent him trom doing so. A is moved to sudden
and violent passion in consequence and kills Z. This
is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was given by
a thing done in the exercise of the right of private de-
fence.

(९) Z strikes B. Bis by this provocation excited
10 violent 1 A, 4 bystander, intending to take
advantage of B's rage. and to cause him to kill Z, puts
a knite into B's hand for the purpose. B kills Z with the
knife. Here B may have committed only culpable
homicide not amounting to murder. but A is guilty
of murder.

(f) Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a man-
ner as to Cause grievous hurt to A. A draws out a
pistol. 2 persists in the assault. A. believing in good
faith that he can by no other means prevent himself
from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not
commiticd murder, but only culpable homicide not
amounting to murder.

16.8. With reference to the fifth exception, the question may
arise whether it applics where two rival factions, after having
thrown out mutual challenges. indulge in a free fight and some
of the persons get killed. There was previously a controversy
on the subject as is shown by two carly Calcutta cases!: but the
question was answered in the negative by a later Full Bench
decision of that High Court?. We agree with the view taken

Applica-
bility of
Exceptions
to faction
fights.

“1. (9) Rahinuedlin, (1873) 1. 1... 8. 5 Cal. 31.
(bd Samerai, (1879) 1. 1... 1९. 6 Cal. 154.
2, Napamnddin, (189) 1. 1... 8. 18 Cal. 483 (#, BD,



Section
301 -doet-
rine of “trae
nsferred
malice,”

336

in the later case. The filth exception is not meant for situations
where there is a pitched battle between two factions. To hold
that the persons killed in the battle had “consented to suffer
death or to take the risk of death” would be to take a unvealistic
view. Consent requires some degree of particularity with
reference to the act consented to or authorised, and with refer-
ence to the person or persons authorised. That particularity
iy missing in such situations. A member of the faction may be
Prepared to run the risk of being killed; but the does not (in
the absence of further facts) ‘consent to take the risk of death’
visead-ris the persen who actually causes bis death. No change
is. therefore, needed in 4

9, It will be noticed that the law of homicide does not
+ the oifender must have : d to kill a parecular
is enough if there is an intention or knowledge to
th of a human being. What is sought to be pun-

per
cause the di

meas rea. Vt is immaterial w death
is an intent to kill the person in fact killed, or even any pani-
cular person: and the same applies to knowledge.

le is Mustrated by three situa-
tiens. First. ह॥ indifferent about his victim:
the act charged ma to endanger the life of a number
of nersons. 9 one of whom js killed: but the offender
i r son in mind. Secondly. the offender may
en abont entity of erson attacked. Oy
the ofcader may intend ia hit A. but actually Bis hit
4 killed. - ith os Of accident er extraneous inter
vention or some such: factor.

The application

:r, provided. of con s2,
+ 4 specific pros

The law regards ail these acts as murs
the requisite mens rea existed. In section 301
vision iy made in regard to the last-mentioned situation. Though
the language of the section ts elaborate, the idea is clear. namw
that where the death of one person is caused by an act constic
tuting culpable homicicic, but the mens rea was wiih reference
to another pe then the culpable homicide is of the descrip-
tion of which it would | been if the death ted bi ed of
the person with reference to whom such sexs req oxi

॥ A intending to kill Y, shoots ai him. but misses aad kills

7. who, unknown to ihe accused, was standing close by, A is

uilty of murder under section 30}. notwithstanding Uiat he did

not intend to kill Z. His malice towards ¥ “ransferred

(bv a legal fiction) as existing towards Z. Section 301 is based

on what is referred to in English law as the doctrine of trans-
ferred malice.



16.10. The question wheiher the application of this doctrine
is dependent on the knowledge of the accused that the death of
the unintended victim was a likely consequence arose before
the Madras High Court which heid! by a majority that it 15
sufficient for the purpose of this section if criminal intention
or knowledge on the part of the accused existed with reference
to any human being. though the death of the person who actu-
ally became the victim was never compassed by the offender.
In other words, it is not necessury that the death of the person
must have been a tikely consequence of the offender's act. Sun-
dara Ayyar J. sented and cmphasise the nced for proof
that the death of the unintended victim was a likely conse-
quence of the original act.

Since the majo view has been followed
elsewhere and has created no difficulty, we do i:
amentnent of section 301 is necessary by way of ¢

think any
tion.

16.11. A nice question of law arises where an offender.
intending to kill 8 person, docs an act which does not cause
death, and then, believing the victim to be dead, he does another
act which ses the death of the victim. A study of decided
cases on the subject reveals some controversy as 10 whether.
in such cases, the killer can be held guilty of murder. The
majority view is that, if the two acts of the offender are parts
of the same transaction, then his mistaken belief that deat: was
caused by his first act should be disregarded. To use a meta-
phor, this belief should not be allowed to act as a veil dividing
the previous intentional act aimed at killing. and the 5
quent action aimed at concealment. We carefully consi
the question of inserting a new section to provide thai, where an
act done with the intention or knowledge referred io in section
299 or section 300 does not cause death, bul death is caused by
another act forming pari of the same transaction, then
acts taken together would constitute the offence which would
have been committed if the first act alone had caused death
We have, however, decided inst the insecti such a se
tion in view ef the full consideration of this subject in recent
decisions? of High Courts.

16.1 jon 302 which lays down the punishment 10
murder necds no change.

caravan Murthy, (3 Cr 1... 3. 175 (Mads
ipror, XA AR. 1917 Ail, 455. Ballan, ALL R. 19.

1. Si
2. Me. feani y

3. hana 7205. (19441 1. LR. 24 Pat. 131:
Mehta, 4०४०) 1. 1... 1६, ES Pat. 435;
कीवहबपरण हि canter, (19335) 1. 1... 8, 57 Mad. 158:

Taam rad, ALL Re 1943 ५
Namers, (1990) Cre L. ४. 605.

571 4

Not neces-
sary that
death of
unintended
victim
should be

quence.
Act intend-
ed to kill,
not Ieading
to death,
but de:
caused by
subsequent
acl,

Section 302.

Atl. 626.


Euthanasia
Question
put

Replies re-
ceived.

Position in
ether
countries,

Legalising
cuthanasia
not recom.
nyended at
present.

1. From the translation published in the Journal of Cri
Vol. 30, No. 4 (1939).

238

16.13. For the last few years, the question of legalising
‘euthanasia’ or “mercy killing’ has been engaging the attention
of lawyers. moralisis, physicians and laymen. Should the
act of putting 10 death a person who is in physical agony. or to
whom life has become useless because of his bodily condition,
be regarded as culpable homicide when it is done with the per-
son's consent 2? We included ia our Questionnaire the question,
“should cuthanasia (or ‘mercy killing’ as it is popularly called),
be exempted from punishment either as homicide or as abet-
ment of suicide 77

16.14. The majority of the replies to this question show a
strong opposition to exempting euthanasia from punishment.
They emphasise that if euthanasia is to be legalised, very elabo-
rate safeguards will be required, that there is great danger of
abuse. that it will be difficult, almost impossible, to distinguish
between a genuine case of killing for mercy with consent anda
case of murder, and that these practical aspects must outweigh
humanitarian considerations. Those who favour exemption
point out that there is no reason why a man in serious agony
arising out of incurable disease or otherwise should be forced
to protract his agony. They consider that with adequate safe-
guards, such as certificates from two medical officers and the
conseat in writing of the sufferer before witnesses, euthanasia
should be permitted.

16.15. In most English-speaking countries the causing of
voluntary death in cases of painful and incurable disease is
punishable even though the sufferer is willing. It is suicide if
performed by the patient himself, and murder if performed by
any other. Even in countries where an attempt 10 commit
suicide is not an offence, abetting the commission of suicide is
punishable. Thus, the Swiss Penal Code provides! in Article
114 that “whoever kills a human being upon the latter's earnest
and urgent request shall be confined in prison”; and in article
115, that “whoever, from selfish motives, induces another
person to commit suicide or aids him in it, shall be confined
in the penitentiary for not over five years, or in prison,
rrovided that the suicide has cither been completed or attemp-
ted.”

16.16. On a consideration of various aspects of the matter,
and in particular the state of public opinion on the subject,
we have come to the conclusion that it would not be advisable
to insert a provision totally exempting euthanasia from crimi-
nal liability. The Code has taken note of it as a circumstance
for reducing the offence from murder to culpable homicide not
amounting to murder?. Moreover, the range of punishment

fo!

provided for the latter offence? is wide enough to allow the court

inal Law and Criminology,

2. Section 300, Exception 5.
3. Section 304.


239

to pass light sentences in appropriate cases. The {aw is thus
elastic and a total exemption from fiability is hardly called for
at present. If later on, in consequence of a change in world
opinion. there is a strong demand for legalising mercy-killing,
the matter may be re-considered.

16.17. Under section 303, if the murderer is “under sen- Section
tence of imprisonment for life" he shall be sentenced to death. 303.
The words quoted have caused some difficulty. A person whose
sentence of imprisonment for life has been remitted uncondi-
tionally by the Government has been held not (o be under the
sentence', but if a person is released conditionally. he is held

to be “under” it?. This may look somewhat anomalous. The
primary object of making the death sentence mandatory for an
offence under this section scems to be to give protection to the
prison staff. Hf so. replacing the words “being under” by the
words “whilst undergoing” may remove the anomaly and res-

trict the application of the section to life convicts actually in
prison. But as section 303 is very rarely applied, no change is
recommended. Where there is an exceptionally hard case, it
could be easily dealt with by the President or the Governor
under the prerogative of mercy.

Incidentally, we note that in its Report on Capital Punish-
ment}, the Law Commission was against making the punish-
ment of death under section 303 discretionary

16.18. Section 304 lays down the punishment for culpable — Section
homicide not amounting to murder, and is in two parts. Under 304.
the first part, the punishment is imprisonment for life. or im- analysis
prisonment upto ten years. if the act by which the death is
caused is done with the intention of causing death. or of causing
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. Under the second
part. imprisonment upto ten years, or fine. or both. is the punish-
ment, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is hkely to
cause death. but without any intention to cause death, or to
cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. This scheme
is thus based on a distinction between intentional homicide and
unintentional homicide, with a higher punishment in the first
case.

16.19. This distinction, though theoretically sound, is un- Distinction
necessary in practice. The Court has always the discretion — wnneces-
to pass a lenient sentence if the homicide was based on guilty 8१-
knowledge and not on guilty intention, and there is no need to
waste time in deciding whether the offence comes under the
first part or the second part. We, therefore. recommend only
one maximum punishment for all types of offences under this

1. Ghulam Mohd. A. 1. Ro 1943 Sind. 114

2. Po Kun, A. 1. हि. 1939 Rang. 124;
Sohan Singh, A. 1. R. 1965 Punjab 156.

3. 35th Report.


Simplifies
tion of sec-
tion Tecom-
mended

Section
304A and
quality
of negli-

History of
section.

Meaning of

“negti-
gence’

1. #. ९, Bateman, (1925) 19 Cr. App. Re

240

section. While life imprisonment is never given for this
offence und is not necessary. we feel that imprisonment should
be mandatory even in cases falling under the second part of
the section.

16.20. Section 304 may, accordingly, be simplified as
follows

104, Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting 10
prurder--- Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting
to murder. shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend te ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.”

16.21. Section 304A deals with homicide by a rash or negli-
gent act. That the negligence mentioned in the section is not
of the same Lype a: civi! disputes has been made cicar by judi-
cial decisions. In civil cases, courts insist 00 a maximum sland.
ard of care, while criminal courts require minimum care. IT
the minimum care is taken. then the criminal courts would
acquit the accused. It was suggested that this judicial inter-
pretation should be embodied in the section, ¢.g.. by adding
the words ‘so as to indicate a want of due regard for human
lire’.

16.22. The provision in Macaulay's Draft Penal Code was
as follows :

auses the death of any person by any
act or any illegal omissi which act or omission was $:
rash or negligent as to indicate a want of due regard for
human shall be punished with imprisonment of cither
descripuon for a term which may extend to two years, or
fine. or boi.”

This clause was inadvertently or otherwise. left out in the fina!
draft. The present section 304A was subscquently inserted,
al the instaace of the then Law Member, Sir James Stephen.
by Act 25 of 1870. 1 was stated in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons :-

“The Code, as it stands, contains no adequate provision
for the punishment of what English lawyers call manslaugh-
ler by negligence. This was provided for in the draft Code,
section 304. and the present Bill supplics the omission

16.23. The connotation of ‘negligence’ in relation to man-
slaughter was explained by Lord Hewart, C.J.1, as follow:

g the law to juries on the trial 0. indist-
ghter by negligence, judges have often
referred to the distinction between civil and criminal liability



241

for death by negligence...... In the civil action. if it is
proved that A feli short of the standard of reasonable care
required by law, it matters not how far he fell short of the
standard. The extent of his liability depends not on the
degree of negligence, but on the amount of damage done.
In the criminal court, on the contrary, the amount and
degree of negligence are the determining questions. In
explaining to juries the test they should apply to determine
whether the negligence, in the particular case, amounted
or did not amount to a crime, judges have used epithets
such as ‘culpable’, ‘criminal’, ‘gross’, ‘wicked’, ‘clear’, ‘com-
plete’. But, whatever epithet be used and whether an epi-
thet be used or not, in order to establish criminal liability
the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the
negligence of the accused went beyond a mere matter of
compensation between subjects and showed such disregard
for the life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against
the State and conduct deserving punishment...... "

16.24. 11 this connection, we also noted that sections 336 No clari+
and 357 refer to acts done “so rashly or negligently as to en- Feation
danger human life or the personal safety of others”. But obvi- 7
ously these or similar words would not be adequate or appro-
priate for the purposes of section 304A. We find it difficult
to devise a satisfactory form of words which, while giving effect
to the concept of “criminal negligence”, could be regarded as
sufficiently expressive and simple. Judicial decisions have fully
explained the scope and content of the section and on the whole,
it seems best not to make any change in the wording.

16.25, We are, however, of the view that the present maxi- Punishment
mum punishment for the offence is inadequate, and should be inadequate.
increased, This is desirable, in view of the greater importance
which this offence has assumed since the section was inserted
due to the wide use of fast moving mechanically propelled vehi-
cles and the frequency in the commission of the offence, accom-
panied by callousness of the offender towards the victim; often
there are cases tried under this section which are very near to
culpable homicide and deserve a severe sentence.

16.26. We may note that in the views expressed on our Opinions

question as to the quantum! of punishment under the Code, ९४४०९:
there has been a strong demand for increase in the punishment
for offences under this section. The suggestions vary from three
years to seven years. There is also a suggestion to increase
the period to seven years if more than one death has been caused.
A Presidency Magistrate referred to a case where 17 fatalities
occurred in a house collapse, owing to non-repair of the house
by the landiord, and to another where three deaths had been
caused by the negligence of the hospital staff.

1. Question 5 of the Questionnaire. ee ~
3M of Law:71—17


242

wee 16.27. After taking into account our proposal to fix the

ment to be ™aximum punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to
five years. | Murder at ten years, we recommend that the maximum punish-

ment for causing death by negligence may be half that period,
namely, five years.

Eulogy of 16.28. We examined the question whether it would be de-
murder strable to penalise eulogy of murder'. We think that such a
provision may lead to aifficulties; for example. where there is
some apparent moral justification for the particular murder. a
prosecution may be embarrassing. Further, killing in private
defence may. sometimes technically amount to murder. if the
right of self-defence is grossly exceeded. Hence, there are
risks involved in the proposed amendment. So long as an act
of approval of an offence does not amount to actual incitement

to repeat the offence approved, there is no need to have 2 penal
provision.

Sections 16.29. Sections 305 and 306 relate to abetment of suicide.
308 and Some countries take a milder view of this offence in two special
_ situations—(i) suicide pacts; (ii) abetment of suicide for pur-
poses which are not selfish. Thus, the Penal Code of Denmark
provides? that “any person who assists some other person in
committing suicide shall be liable to a fine or to simple deten-
tion”. and “if such an act of assistance is committed for reasons
of personal interest, the penalty shall be imprisonment for any
term not exceeding three years’. We have refcrred3 earlier to
the provision in the Swiss Penat Code which requires “selfish
motives” to be established for a person to be severely punishable
for aiding suicide. We are of the view that no such special
provision is necessary. The question of punishment may be
left to the discretion of the Court, which can take into account

all the circumstances in which the suicide was abetted by the
offender.

Sections 16.30. Sections 307 and 308, which deal with attempt to
307 and ५ हु we

308 to commit murder and attempt to commit culpable homicide not
be revise amounting to murder, have been considered in a previous
ed. Chapter, and a revision of both the sections has been proposed 4.
Compare Atticle 213, Argentina Penal Code. which provides that anybody who publicly,
by any means, extols the commission of any crime or any person sentenced therefor,
shalt be punished by g from one month to one year.

ction 240, Penal Code of Denmark.
16.15 above.



243

16.31. Section 309 penalises an attempt to commit suicide. Section |
1६ may be mentioned that suicide was regarded as permissible Bor eicise
in some circumstances in ancient fndia. In the Chapter on Yanna
“The hermit in the forest, Manu’s Code! says-— shastras.

“31. Or fet him walk, fully determined and going
straight on, in anorth-easterly direction, subsisting on water
and air, until his body sinks to rest.

32. A Brahmana having got rid of his body by one of
those modes (i.e. drowning. precipitating burning or starv-
ing) practised by the great sages, is exalted in the world
of Brahamana, free from sorrow and fear”.

Two commentators on Manu, ?Govarndhana and Kuilluka,
say that a man may undertake the mahaprasthana (great depar-
ture) on a journey which ends in death, when he is incurably
diseased or meets with a great misfortune, and that, because
it is taught in the Sastras, it is not opposed to the Vedic rules
which forbid suicide} To this Max Muller adds a note as
follows:—¢

“From the paralicl passage of Apas tambha IL, 23,
2, it is, however, evident that a voluntary death by stacva-
tion was considered the befitting conclusion of a hermit’s
life. The antiquity and general prevalence of the practice
may be inferred from the fact that the Jaina ascetics, too,
consider it particularly meritorious.”

16.32. Looking at the offence of attempting to commit Should

icide, it has be a पर iter :5 atteropt to
suicide, it has been observed by an English writer: comnnt suc

cide be
punishable?
“It seems a monstrous procedure to inflict further

suffering on even a single individual who has already

found life so unbearable, his chances of happiness so

sfender. that he has been willing to face pain and death in

order to cease living. That those for whom life is altoge-

ther bitter should be subjected to further bitterness and

degradation seems perverse legislation.”

Acting on the view that such persons deserve the active
sympathy of society and not condemnation or punishment,
the British Parliament cnacted the Suicide Act in 1961 whereby
attempt to commit suicide ceased to be an offence.

1. Laws of Manu, transtated by George Bubler, Sacred Books of the East edited by F.
Max Muller, (196? Reprint) Vol. 25, page 204, Shlokas 31 and 32.

2. See Medhatithi’s commentary on Manu.

3. Laws of Manu, transtated by George Bubler, Sacred Books of the East edited by F.
Max Maller, (1967) Vol. 25, page 204, footnote 35.

4. Ibid.
5. H. Romilly Fedden: Suicide (London, 1938), page 42.



Seetion
309 to

ie repealed

Inducing
suicide by
itl-treat-
meni.

244

16.33. We included in our Questionnaire the question whe-
ther attempt to commit suicide should be punishable at all.
Opinion was more or less equally divided. We are, however,
definitely of the view that the penal provision is harsh and un-
justifiable and it should be repealed.

16.34. Among the diverse reasons which lead a person to
seek the ultimate refuge in death. one that occasionally comes
to light and shocks sociey is continuous cruel treatment. The
Suicide Inquiry Commitiee set up by the State Government
of Gujarat reported in 1964 that systematic ill treatment of a
young woman by her husband and/or in-laws leading to her
committing suicide was. allegedly at any rate, not uncommon,
in that State. Such cruel conduct deserves to be punished as
criminal. The provisions as to abetment of suicide may not
be applicable to such conduct because the series of acts consti-
tuting ill-treatment may not be regarded as ‘instigation’ or
‘intentional aid’. The need for a separate provision on the
subject was felt during our preliminary examination of the
Code. and we included in our Questionnaire the question, “should
there be a provision in the Code for punishing a person who
drives another person by systematic cruel treatment to commit
suicide.”*

Most of the replies to this question were opposed to any
provision for punishing such acts. Even in Gujarat which
for some time had a high female suicide figure, Judges of the
High Court and lawyers were generally not in favour of the
suggestion, but some of the Sessions Judges were. Some
Judges of a High Court have suggested making penal an omis-
sion to report promptly to the authorities an unnatural death
caused by persistent ill-treatment. But we do not think that
this will be enforceable in practice and in any way effective.

The main grounds on which the suggestion was opposed
were that it would be difficult to detect and prosecute the offen-
ders, that proof of casual connection would not be easy, and,
therefore, prosecutions would not succeed, and that a person
could be punished for his own cruelty, but not for another’s
suicide, even though it was provoked by his cruelty.

While we appreciate the relevance of the first two objections,
we are nevertheless of the opinion that where such cases
do come to light, the law should not overlook them. Difficulties
of proof not withstanding, there is justification for expressing
strongly the law’s condemnation of such conduct, which tanta-
mounts to homicide caused indirectly through the hands of
the luckless victim herself. ft has been observed by some
Judges of a City Civil Court that there are clear cases where
the victim appeared to have committed suicide only because
life became unbearable and in order to escape persistent cruelty.
There are cases where there is no proof of any overt acts on the
part of the offender, but still the circumstances clearly establish


245

that the victim was driven to commit suicide to escape the
mental torture and agony. It was observed by Dua J. (as he
then was of the Punjab High Court},?-~

“Women in such circumstances as those of the appel-
Jant, in our society, normally submit themselves to their fate
and bear ill-treatment at the hands of their husbands, and
unless a climax is reached, they usually do not take the
desperate step of going to a police station to 10486 a report;
the poor financial condition of such women and lack of
proper understanding on their part would also stand in
their way of securing a proper medical certificate....
Besides, even if the injuries on the person of Smt.
Kaushalya are considered not to be so serious as to call for
their treatment by a medical practitioner, if she has actually
been ill-treated as deposed by her, that treatment must be
held to amount to cruelty according to the standards of all
civilised societics....The approach of the court below
appears to me to be inconsistent with the public policy clearly
discernible in the recent legislative measures whereby attempts
have been made to raise the social status of woman in this
Republic. New rules of social behaviour and conduct in
respect of the status of women in Indian society of today
must in my view, be recognised and kept in the forefront
while determining what would really amount to cruelty
under the Hindu Marriage Act.”

16.35. We are strongly of the opinion that this type of New see-
cruel conduct towards a member of the family ought not to go ere
unpunished for want of a suitable provision in the Penal Code. 6g
We, therefore. recommend that the following section should

be inserted after section 308 of the Code?:—

“309. Whoever, by istent acts of cruelly, drives a
member of his family living with him to commit suicide
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extent to three years, and shal! also
be liable to fine.”

16.36. Sections 310 and 311 selate to “thugs These Sections
are obsolete. and may be omitted. x0 and

omitted,

1. Kaushalya ५. Wisakhi Ram, A. 4. R. 1961 Punj $21, 524.

2. Cf. Articte 107 of the R.S.F.S.R. Penat Code which is a more general provision
reading,—
“Inciting a person economically or otherwise dependent on the guilty person to
commit suicide or to attempt suicide, by cruci treatment of the victim or
systematic lowering of his personal dignity, shali be punished by deprivation
of freedom for a term not exceeding five years”


Sections
312 and
313 abor-
tion.

The Medi-
cal Teri-
mination of
Pregnancy
Bill pend-
ing in the
Rajya
Sabha.

1, Section 315 pu

246

Causing of miscarriage and injuries to unborn children.

16.37. Culpable homicide is causing the death of a human
being. The offence would not be committed by an act which
destroyed a life before it had separate existence from the
mother. This gap is filled up in the Code by five sections,!
312 to 316, dealing with abortion. The main offence is des-
cribed in section 312 as voluntarily causing a woman with child
to miscarry. It is only when the miscarriage is caused in good
faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman it is not
punishable.

16.38. The movement for the reform of the law of abortion,
which has been going on outside India for the last thirty years,
has found official support in India. Some time ago, the
Government of India appointed a Committee to study the
subject, and in the light of its recommendations,? introduced a
Bitl3 in the Rajya Sabha. Its provisions may be summarised:—-

(1) A registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty
of an offence under the Code or under any other law if a
pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the
provisions of the Bill.

(2) A registered medical practitioner can terminate a
pregnancy if he is of opinion, formed in good faith, that
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would in-
involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of
injury to her physical or mental health, or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were
born, it would suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.

(3) Where the pregnancy is alleged by the woman to
have been caused by rape, “the anguish caused by such
pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to
the mental health of the pregnant woman.”

(4) where a pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any
device used by any married woman or her husband for the
purpose of limiting the number of children, “the anguish
caused by such unwanted pregnency may be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the preg-
nant woman.”

(5) In determining whether the continuance of a preg-
nancy would involve such risk of injury to the health as is
mentioned above, account may be taken of the pregnant
woman's “actual or reasonably foreseeable environment”.

nes acts done with intent to cause an infant to die after birth, 85. well

as acts done with intent to prevent an infant being bora alive.
2. Report cf the Committee to study Legislation of Abortion, (1966).
3. The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill (Rajya Sabha) (1969).


247

(6) If the length of the pregnancy does not exceed
twelve weeks. the opinion of one registered medical practi-
troner is sufficient. If it exceeds twelve weeks, but does
not exceed twenty weeks, the opinion of two medical practi-
tioners is required. If it exceeds twenty weeks, the Bill
does not apply.

(7) The termination of pregnancy must be with the
consent of the woman.

(8) The operation is to be performed only at a Govern-
ment hospilal or other place approved by the Government,

The Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the Bill.
first emphasises that (i) this very strict law has been observed
in the breach ina very large number of cases all over the country:
(ii) most of these mothers are married women, under no parti-
cular reason to conceal their pregnancy; and (iii} doctors have
often been confronted with gravely ill or dying pregnant women
“whose pregnant uterus have been tampered with.” It then
sums up the evilby stating that “there is, thus, avoidable wast-
age of the mother’s health, strength and sometimes life’.

It is then stated that the proposed measure, seeking to
lberslise existing provisions, has been conceived (i) asa health
measure, when there is danger to the lifecr risk to physical or
mental health of the woman; (7) as a humanitarian measure.
when pregnancy arises from a sex crime; and (iti) as an
cugenic measure where there is substantial risk that the
child, if born, would suffer from deformities and diseases.

16.40. In this context. a scrutiny of the development of the
law in other countries will be helpful. In England. abortion
was not a common 18७ offence. but was made an offence by
statute. Untit 1967, the statute law in England was very strict
There was no express immunity, not even for an act done to
save the woman's life! In the celebrated case of Dr. Bourne,
a Harley Street specialist aborted a sixteen-year old girl who
had become pregnant following rape. He reported his action
to the police and successfully defended himself at his trial by
claiming that the operation was, in his opinion necessary to
the future health of the girl, His acquittal seems to have been
based mainly on the view taken by the jury that the probable
consequence of the continuance of the pregnancy would be to
make the patient a physical and mental wreck and that conse-
quently the operation was performed in good faith for preserv-
ing the life of the girl.

1. Section 58, Offences Against the Person Act, 1861 (English).
2. Rv. Bourny, (1938) 3 AWE. R. 615.

Position
in England.


Position in
Sweden.

पे 966 May) 274 House of Lords Debates, 1201.

248

But a substantial section of the public took the view that
the immunity should be widened in its scope. The births of
tragically deformed children asa result of mothers having taken
thalidemide drug prior to the births had certainly contributed
to this view. The Abortion Act was passed in 1967 by the

i iament. The operative provision of this Act is as

“1, (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a
person shall not be guilty of an offence under the law relating
to abortion when a pregnancy is terminated by a registers
medical practitioner, if two registered medical practitioners
are of the opinion formed in good faith,—

(a) that the continuance of the pregnancy would
involve risk to the life of the pregnant woman. of of
injury to the physica} and mental health of the pregnant
woman or any existing children of her family. greater
than if the pregnancy were terminated; or

(9) that there is a substantial risk that if the child
were born it would suffer from such physical or
mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.

(2) In determining whether the continuance of a
pregnancy would involve such risk as is mentioned in
paragraph (a) of sub-section (1), account may be taken
of the pregnant woman's actual or reasonably foresce-
able environment.”

Jt will be noticed that in the English Act, risk to the life.
or of injury to the health. of, the woman is not by itself conclu-
sive: it must be greater than if the pregnancy were terminated.
Secondly, there is no presumption selating to ai.aish caused
by an unwanted preganancy, though the Act mentions injury
to the existing children of the woman's family. At some stage,
there was a proposal to take into account the fact that “the
pregnant woman's capacity as a mother will be severely over-
strained by the care of a child or of another child as the case
may be". But the provision does not find a place in the Act.

16.41. Sweden is a notable example where abortion has
been allowed on what are now known as ‘socio-medical’ reasons.
Under the Swedish law (as it stood in 1962). abortion is per-
mitted in the following circumstances*:—

(1) If due to a woman's illness, physical defect or weak-
ness, child birth would entail serious danger to her life or
health, i.c. on medical reasons;3

2. Extract from Report of the Committee 10 study the question of Legalisation of
portion, (1966) pages 127-128.

3. This aspect is developed fully in a book by Professor [kbald. Induced Abortion on
Psychiatric grounds.


249

(2) If with regard to a woman's conditions of fife and
other circumstances there is reason to assume that her
physical or phychic strength would be seriouly reduced
through child-birth and child care, i.e. on medico-social
reasons;

(3) If a woman has become pregnant as the result of
rape, other criminal coercion or incestuous sexual inter-
course, if she is insane or an imbecile, or under 15 years of
age at the time of the fertilizing coition, ie, on /uenanitarian
reasons ;

(4) If there is reason to assume that the woman or the
father of the unexpected child would transmit to their off-
spring hereditary insanity, imbecility, a serious disease or
a serious physical handicap; i.e. on eugenic reasons, An
abortion for the reason of any such hereditary defect in the
mother is contingent on sterilization simultaneously with the
abortion unless sterilization appears risky or unnecessary
(c.g. with regard to the woman's advanced age or because
she is to be permanently committed to an institution).

(5) An abortion for reasons other than disease or phy-
sical defect in the woman may not be performed after the
twentieth week of pregnancy, but the National Board of
Health may make exceptions and authorise the performance
of the operation before the end of the twenty-fourth week.

The procedure in Sweden appears to be dilatory. About
85 per cent of all Jegal abortions in Sweden are authorised by
the Roval Medical Board in Stockholm. on the basis of written
reports by physicians and social agencies throughout the country.
Consequently. a substantial proportion of legal abortions is
performed after the third month. These late abortions contri-
bute heavily to the total number of deaths. !

16.42. The law of abortion in Sovict Russia has now (1965) Position in

been made liberal after undergoing major fluctuations during Soviet
the last 50 years. Soviet women have been given freedom Russia.
to decide, by themselves. the question of their motherhood.
The abortion operation is allowed to all women wishing to
undergo the operation, except where the pregnancy is over 12
weeks or there is inflammation of certain parts, or the existence
of infections diseases such as flue, quinsy, etc. and high
temperature etc. Jf necessary a wom could be operated for
abortion at a qualified medical institution that guarantecs
her the maximum innocuausness of the operation.

1. Report of the Commit
paragraphs 2 (० 32.

2 on the Legalisation of Abortion (1966), page 21,


Position in
Japan

Position in
the LSA

Liberalisa-
tion of the
penal law
proposed:

250

16.43. In Japan, the matter is regulated by the Eugenic
Protection Law which is a very elaborate piece of legislation.?
It is unnecessary to refer in detail to its provisions. The pri-
mary object of the law is to prevent the increase of inferior
descendants from the eugenic point of view and to protect the
life and health of the mother as well. Provision is made for
what is Known as * Eugenic Operaton’ to be performed by a
surgeon with the consent of the person concerned and his or
her spouse. There is provision for artificial interruption of
preganancy under various circumstances, including pregnancy
caused by rape, and also where the mother’s health may
be affected seriously by the continuation of the pregnancy either
from the physical. or the economic view point.

16.44, The past few years have seen a definite trend towards
liberalisation of the Jaws relating to abortion in the U.S.A.
The position, however, varies from State to State. The New
York law, which is the most radical, states that an abortion 15
justifiable when done with the woman's consent by a ‘duly
licensed physician, acting (a) under the belief that s act 15
necessary to preserve her life. or (b) within 24 weeks from the
commencement of her pregnancy. A woman performing
abortion upon herself in similar circumstances is also justified.
There is no residence requirement.

16.45. The penal prohibition of abortion seems to be based
on four main grounds, (i) protection of the life of the unborn
child. (ii) protection of the society's interest in the continuation
of the race. (iti) sentimental objection to the destruction of a
potential human life and (iv) protection of the life and health
of the mother. On all these matters. opinion is sharply divided
and no useful purpose will be served by any claborate dis-
cussion of the various views. Generil opinion, however, 15
definitely in favour or attaching paramount — impor-
tance to the life and health of the mother over all other con-
siderations. it seems to us that the decision whether to bear
achild or not must remain with the mother. but a distinction
could be drawn between desiruction of a nearly full grown
child in the womb and termination of pregnancy at an early
stage. As Lord Riddell said,? “the destruction of a full grown
child is a revolting affair, whereas the abortion of an early
foetus differs little from the removal of a uterine tumor.” Abor-
tion procured by a qualified physician within the first three
months of pregnancy is attended with hardly any risk to the
life or health of the woman. If the pregnancy is within this
period, the woman must have full freedom to have it termi-
nated by a qualified physician. If, however, the duration
of the pregnancy exceeds three months, risk to the life and health

1. Japan's Law No. 156 of Suly 13, 1948, as extracted in the Report of the Committee
to study the question of Legatisalion of Abortion (1966), pages 102 to 106.

2 Lord Riddell, Medico Legal Problems (1929). page 35, cited by Williams, “Sanctity
of Life", (1958), page 209.


251

of the woman is much greater, and termination of the preg-
nancy may justifiably be permitted only in the circumstances
and under the conditions set out in the Bill now before Parlia-
ment.?

16.46. We, therefore, recommend that. so far as the Code
concerned, a proviso may be added to section 312 as follows:

“Provided that it shall not be an offence under this
section if the miscarriage is caused within three months
of the commencement of pregnancy by 2 registered medical
practitioner with the consent of the woman.”

As a consequential amendment, the Explanation to the section
may be modified to read:—

“ Explanation—A woman who causes herself to mis-
carry wher she has been pregnant for more than three
months is within the meaning of this section.”

16.47. Scction 313 rightly makes it a very serious offence
10 cause miscarriage in a pregnant woman without that woman's
consent. The maximum — punishment of imprisonment
for life, however, seems to be ‘excessive. We propose that the
punishment provision should be modified to “rigorous impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to ten years. and shail
also be liable to fine.”

16.48. Sections 314 to 316 need no change.

16.49. Section 317 speaks of exposing a child or leaving
it ‘in any place’ with the intention of abandoning it. [t does
not apply where the child is left with a person who is incapable
of looking after it. We considered the question whether this
restriction should be removed. in view of an Allahabad deci-
sion.

In that case.? the mother of an illegitimate child aged about
six months lett the child in charge of a blind woman in whose
company she was, saying that she was going to get food and
would return shortly. But actually the mother went to another
village and did not return. The blind woman handed over the
child at the police station. The mother was prosecuted under
section 317, but acquitted. On appeal, Blair J. (with whom
Aikman, J. concurred)$ observed—

“Jt seems to me that the words of section 317 of the Indian
Penal Code should be dealt with in the most literal sense.

1. Ors of us, Mrs. Anna Chandi, is of a different view set out in a Note appended to

ths Report.
2. 0. vy. Mirchia, (1896) 1. ६... R. 18 All. 364, 367.
3. Knox J. dissented.

Section
312 to be
amended.

Section
33
punishment
provision
to be
amended.

Sections
314 10
316.
Section

317 -leav-
ing child
with 8 per
son


252 5
t

“To expose” literally means to physically put outside, so
that such putting outside involves some physical risk to the
person put out. Having reference to a child, it would mean
putting it somewhere where it could not reccive the pro-
tection necessary for its tender age; as, for instances, putting
jt outside the house, whereby it would be exposed to the
risk of climate. wild beasts and the like. The exposure
contemplated by the Act was one by which danger to life
might immediately ensue. The explanation of section 317
seems to be to indicate with much clearness the scope and
purview of the section and the nature of the evil
against which it sought to provide. That explanation
provides for the case of injuries actually ensuing that the
guilty person shalt be punished for the injury so inflicted
according to the circumstances under which the injury is
done. i.e. for murder or culpable homicide, as the case may
be. It seems to me that, as the word 1९8४९ comes in immed-
diate juxtaposition with the word ‘expose’, the word ‘leavi
means leaving in a sense ejusdem generies as the exposure,
and indicates an offence only slightly distinguishable from
exposing. It cannot in my judgment mean leaving in the
large sense of abandonment. but must be construed in strict
connection with the word ‘exposure’, The narrower cons-
truction of the words ‘expose or leave’ is much strengthen-
ed by the insertion of those striking words ‘in any place’.
I cannot conceive of any possible antithesis to those words
unless it be ‘with any person’, 1६ scems to me manifest
that if the framers of the Act had intended to inchide in
the section a case like the present, they would have used
alter the expression ‘in any place” the words ‘or with any
person’, or some other words to that effect. 1 find myself
wholly unable to understand where, upon airy other cons-
truction but the one suggested, a fine is to be drawn in cases
of abandonment of children. I do not see how in point of
taw the abandoning of a child in the protection of a person
able to take care of it, and willing, perhaps. from kindly
motives to do so. but uader no Jegal obligation to take care
of it, is to be distinguished from leaving a child, as was done
in the present case. in the protection ofa blind woman who
could and did afford some limited protection to the infant.
1 have yet to see upon what principle this conviction can
be supported. Take the case of a person who leaves a child
of cleven years of age at a hill school under the care and
protection of a schoolmaster with intent to abandon. [am
quite unable to see where a line can be drawn which would
inchide the one case and exclude the other. Of course
there may be cases, as my brother Knox pointed out, of
much difficulty and requiring some discrimination. One
would have to consider whether putting 2 child in physical
possession of another child wholly incapable of _ protecting
॥ would come at all within the meaning of the section:
whether, for instance, leaving 8 child of eleven years under
the care of another child of five years would fall within the



253

purview of the section. These difficulties do not arise in
the present case. Here the blind woman was to some Cx-
tent capable of protecting, and did protect, the child. She
was a person with whom the child had been left.”

16.50, We note that the English section on the subject does
not contain a limitation that the child must be left in a ‘place’.
Section 27 of the Offences against the Person Act, 1861, provides
that “whosoever shall unlawfully abandon or expose any child,
being under the age ‘of two years, whereby the life of such child
shall be endangered, or the health of such child shall have been

or shall be likely to be permanenily injured, shall be liable to
imprisonment for any term not exceeding five years.” te oaly
emphasises the risk of danger to life or risk of permanent injury

to health, and is, therefore, wider than the Indian section.

We do not. however, consider it necessary to expand the
section im the Code. Cases not covered by the Code will be
taken care of by the Children Act,! which punishes the act of
neglecting or abandoning 4 child so as to cause unnecessary
mental and physical suffering. Though the maximum punish-
ment under that Act is not very high (six months’ imprison-
ment), it should be adequate.

16,51. In. view of the severity of the punishment under
section 317, we think it desirable that the offence should be
more restricted in scope, and confined to exposure etc. of
children below 5 years, and that the mens rea should be indi
cated more precisely, with reference to the risk of life or serious
injury to health, The Explanation stating that the section
does not prevent the trial of the offender for murder or culpa-
ble homicide if the child dies in consequence of the act
appears to us to be unnecessary and could safely be omitted.
The section may, accordingly, be revised as follows:—

“317. Exposure and abandonment of child under five
years by parent or person having care of it-—Whoever being
the father or mother of a child under the age of five years,
or having the care of such child, shall expose or leave such
child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning
such child, shall, if such act endangers, 0 is likely to endan-
ger, the life of the child or permanently injures, or is tikely
to permanently injure, the health of the child, be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a_ term which
may extend to seven years, 0 with fine, or with both.”

16.52. Section 318 punishes concealment of birth by secret
disposal of the dead body of a child. In our view, the Penal

Code need not punish such concealment. For statistical pur- -

poses, concealment of birth can be punished under the law
relating to registration of births and deaths. If the child is ille-
gitimate, it is wrong to use the criminal law for the purpose

Le g section 41, Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960).

Corres
ponding
provision

in England.

Section
317 to be
tevised.

Section

318 (Con-
cealment of
birth)—
Omission
recommend-
ed.


New sec-
tion to
punish
failure to
provide
necessaries
of life.

Section
319.

Section
320 to be
revised.

1. The word “privation™ now used in these clauses is archaic.

254

in modern times. If the child is legitimate, there would not, ordi-
narily. be any inclination to conceal the birth. The practice
of killing femate children has practically disappeared. If the
child has been killed after birth, and then the crim2 is sought
to be suppressed by concealing the birth, section 201 can be
resorted to. This being the position, section 318 may be safely
omitted.

16.53. Cases often arise where persons when legally bound
to do so, fail without lawful excuse to provide the necessaries
of life. Such illegal omissions ought to be punishable, and we
recommend the insertion of a new section after section 317
in place of the present section 318. It may be as follows:—~

“348. Failure to provide necessaries of life-—Whoever.
being fegally bound to provide the necessaries of life to any
person, fails without lawful excuse to do 50. knowing that
such failure will endanger the life or seriously impair the
health of that person, shail be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.”

Causing hurt

16.54. Section 349 which defines causing hurt needs no
change.

16.55. The following changes are recommended in section
320 which defines grievous hurt:—-

(i) The first clause may be omitted in view of the pro-
posed widening of the fifth clause.

(ii) The second and third clauses may be combined
and amplified to read “deprivation! or impairment of the
sight of either eye or the hearing of either car.”

(iii) In the fourth and fifth clauses, the word “organ”
should be added, since the reference to “any member or
joint” is not comprehensive.

(iv) In the seventh clause, there is no need to mention
“tooth” expressly.

(v) In the eighth clause, any hurt which causes the
sufferer to be in severe bodily pain for a period of ten days
should be regarded as grievous hurt. On the other hand,
relating grievousness of the hurt to the injured person being
unable to follow his ordinary pursuits for twenty days
does not appear to be the right approach, and it certainly
leads to abuse in the nature of false hospital certificates.



255

We propose that section 320 may be revised as follows :—

“320. Grievous hurt—The following kinds of hurt only
are designated as grievous:—

(i) deprivation or impairment of the sight of either
eye or the hearing of either ear;

(ii) deprivation or destruction of any organ,
member or joint;

(iii) permanent impairment of the powers of any
organ, member or joint;

(४) permanent disfiguration of the head or
face;

(v) fracture or dislocation of a bone;

(vi) any hurt which endangers life or which causes
the sufferer to be in severe bodily pain for ten
days.”

16.86, While dealing with the legal aspects of the family Docs vol-
planning programmes, the Seminar on Criminal Law, which — untary ster
was held some time ago under the auspices of the Central Bureau isation ‘
of Investigation, felt that voluntary sterilization might arguably causing °
render the medical officer liable for grievous hurt and suggested — gricvous
that section 320 of the Code should be amended “‘so as to lega- hurt?
lise sterilization when carried out as a part of family planning
programme by a qualified doctor on an adult who has had some
children”. The Commission was asked to consider the sug-
gestion in view of the importance attributed to family planning
in general, and to sterilization as a method of population control
in particular. !

Our examination of the position, however, reveals no need
for an amendment of the law on the point. Sterilization would
amount to grievous hurt, as it would amount to “permanent
impairment of the powers of an organ”, even if it might not be
regarded as permanent impairment of the powers of any member
or joint. But we have no doubt that the operation of sicrili-
sation done at the instance of the person undergoing it is covered
by the general exception in section 88. That section exempts
from penal liability an act not intended to cause death, if the
act be done in good faith for the benefit of the person to whom
hurt is caused. Votuntary sterilisation done with consent is
certainly for the benefit of the person undergoing it. No
amendment of the [aw is necessary on this score.

16.57, No change is needed in sections 321 and 322. Sections
321. and
322.

1. 6. 3086.1. 60. Part VIS. No. 408 (Suggestion of the Ministry of Home Affairs)


Sections
323--Amend
ment re-
commend-
ed.

Causing
hurt to en
voys

Sections
324 and
326—caus-
ing hurt
by corros-
ive sub-
stance.

F, 39)/56-L. C., 5. No. 130 (Ministry of External Affairs)

256

16.58. In section 323, the amount of fine should be unli-
mited. The words “which may extend to one thousand rupees”
should be omitted.

16.59. We considered the question whether a special pro-
vision to punish the causing of hurt to diplomatic envoys
is needed. It was suggested’ that, at present, there is no special
provision in our laws for dealing with offence against the per-
son of diplomatic envoys or members of their staff. In ail cases
when a non-cognizable offence is committed against them, they
are precisely in the same position as any private person, and
unless they choose to waive their immunity and step into a court
of law, no case can be made out against the assailant. Hence,
it was suggested that a new section should be inserted making
the offence of voluntarily causing huri to a diplomatic envoy
punishable with imprisonment for three years or fine or both
and that this offence should be made cognizable. We do not,
however, see any need for such provision. Though causing
hurt is not a cognizable offence. there is nothing to debar a
member of the diplomatic staff from making a complaint in
court. The fact that the diplomatic representative enjoys immu-
nity from appearance in court does not prevent a complaint
by him or by a member of his staff. The present law creates
no practical difficulty, and no amendment is needed.

16.60. With reference to section 324 and 326, we consi-
dered the question whether there is any need for laying down
a minimum punishment where the hurt or grievous hurt is
caused by a corrosive substance. In a private member's Bill?
introduced in the Rajya Sabha in 1968 it was proposed that
a minimum sentence of three years’ rigorous imprisonment
should be prescribed in the case of simple hurt, and life imprison-
ment in thecase of grievous hurt. The Statement of Objects
and Reasons attached to the Bill said:—

“Of all the offences affecting human body, throwing of
acids is the most heinous. 16 not only destrous the happpi-
ness of the human being against whom such offence is
committed, but also ruins the entire family. Of late, an
increase in the incidence of such crime is being noticed.
Only a highly deterrent punishment can check such crimes.”

We have carefully considered the suggestion. Jn our view,
however, the mode of inflicting the injury should not be the
main criterion for prescribing a heavy minimum punishment.
The nature of the injury, the result of the assault and many
other factors enter into the picture in determining the proper
punishment. The reasons given by the Member for singling

1
2. Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1968, introduced in the Rajya Sabha by
Shri G. ९. Patil (Bill No. 12 of 1968).


257

out, for minimum punishment, hurt or grievous hurt caused by
throwing acid are not, in our view, convincing. The general
question of providing minimum punishment for some of the
offences under the Penal Code was discussed by us with the
judges of the various High Courts and leading members of the
Bar. The majority opinion was against the provision of such
ininimum punishment (except for a few offences), on the ground
that they would unnecessarily fetter the discretion of the trying
court. We are of the view that it should be left to the con-
vicling court to impose a severe sentence where hurt or grievous
hurt has been caused by a corrosive substance, if the circums-
tances of the case justify a severe punishment.

16.62. It was suggested that, for the offence under section
325, the court should have a discretion to award fine, and that
imprisonment should not be mandatory, but we do not favour
any such change.

16.63. Section 326 punishes the offence of voluntarily
causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means, the
maximum punishment being imprisonment for life or for ten
years. We consider imprisonment for life to be unnecessary
for this offence and recommend its omission.

16.64. Section 327 punishes the offence of voluntarily
causing hurt to extort etc. with imprisonment upto ten years.
We recommend that the imprisonment should be reduced to
seven years, 50 as to maintain a distinction between this section
and the corresponding offence under section 329 as proposed
to be amended.

16.65. Section 328 punishes a person who administers to any
person any “stupefying, intoxicating of unwholesome drug or
other thing” with intent to cause hurt or to commit or facilitate
an offence or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause
hurt. We recommend that the expression ‘substance’ should
be substituted for the words ‘drug or other thing’. This wilt
make it clear that the ‘other thing’ must also have the effect
of ‘stupefying, etc. and that it need not be a ‘drug’ as nor-
mally understood.

We considered the question whether an offence under sec-
tion 328 can be committed in the absence of the requisite intent
or knowledge. It was felt that the language of the section was
cleat on the point. Intent to cause hurt etc. or intent to commit
an offence etc. or knowledge that hurt is likely, is an essential
ingredient. The Allahabad case,! cited in some of the com:
mentaries as caising a doubt on the point, is concerned with the
quality of intent. The section could be re-arranged to deal
first with (i intent to cause hurt or knowledge that hurt is likely,

Section
325.

Section
326- Re-
commenda-
tion to
remove

life impri-
sonment.

Section
327—-recom-
mendation
to reduce
the period
of imprison-
ment.

Section
328-
Amend-
ments pro-
posed.

1. जहर Khan, 1, 1... R46 All 77; A. BR. 1924 AML 215...
3 M. of Law/71—18


Section
329-Re+
commenda-
tion to ree
move im=
prison-
ment for
life.

258

and then with (ii) the other type of intent, so that there would
be less scope for an argument on this point. Bui the deletion of
@ portion of the section as recommended below renders a re-
arrangement unnecessary.

_ Administration of poison with intent to cause hurt or
with the knowledge that hurt is likely to be caused, is covered by
section 324 if hurt is caused, and by section 324 read with sec-
tion 511 (attempt) if hurt is not caused. The punishment
under section 324 {three years) is adequate. That portion of
section 328 should, therefore, be deleted, as unnecessary.

We considered the question whether knowledge that commis-
sion of an offence will be facilitated, should be added in section
328. But this did not find favour with us. If a person adminis-
ters poison etc., the connection between that act and another
offence will invariably be one of intent and not of mere knowledge
that an offence will be facilitated.

The marginal heading to section 328 is inaccurate even on
the wording of the present section, and requires modification.
वा begins with the words “causing hurt’ but the act punished
is the administration of poison, etc...

In the light of the above discussion, we recommed that
section 328 may be revised as follows:—, .

“328. Administering poison etc. with intent to commit
an offence.—Whoever administers to or causes to be taken
by any person any poison or any stupefying intoxicating
uawholesome substance with intent to commit or to faci-
fitlate the commission of an offence, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend 10 ten years, and shall also be fiable to fine.”

16.66. Section 329 punishes the offence of voluntarily caus-
ing grievous hurt to extort property or to constrain to an
illegal act. The maximum punishment is life imprisonment or
imprisonment up to ten years. Life imprisonment for this
offence appears to be unnecessary and should be omitted.

A question was raised whether the section should not extend
to all cases of coercion by causing grievous hurt, ¢.g., to compel
a person to do or omit something what he is not legally bound
to do or omit. Causing hurt in order to compe? a person to
withdraw a suit? or 10 extract a promise of marriage, is not
within section 329. We think, however. that such an amendment
would unduly widen the section, and raise difficult questions
of motives etc. Such widening may bring in many cases not
fit to be regarded as aggravations of grievous hurt. We do not,
therefore, recommend any such change.

प See Jorubha v. The State, A. 1. R. 1951 Sau.

“yo (D. B).

eg TE


259

16.67. No change is needed in sections 330 and 331.

16.68. AS segards sections 332 and 333, we note that its
wording differs from that of sections 186, 332 and 353 and we
considered the question whether the verbal diversity represented
by the words “discharge”, “execution”, etc. could be avoided.
We, however, think that since no difficulty has arisen in practice,
no such change is necessary.

We also considered a suggestion to include persons acting
under the directions of a public servant. But such cases could
be adequately dealt with under the general provision punishing
hurt or grievous hurt, and no enhanced punishment is needed.

The word “lawful” in the latter part of sections 332 and 333
should be omitted, since it does not occur in the earlier part.

16.69. Imprisonment for one month which is provided
in section 334 is unnecessary. Short term sentences serve no
purpose. The maximum amount of fine should be increased.
The punishment provision may be amended to tead “punished
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees”.

16.70. Imprisonment under section 335 should be reduced
from four years to three years, which is the usual period in the
Code, but the fine may be unlimited.

16.71. The punishment under sections 336 to 338 are not
adequate, and should be increased as follows:—

(i) Section 336: Substitute “six months” for “three
months”, and “five hundred rupees” for “two hundred
and fifty rupees”.

(ii) Section 337: Substitute “one year” for “six months”
and omit the words “which may extend to five hundred
rupees”.

(iii) Section 338: Substitute “three years” for “two
years” and omit the words “which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees”,

Sections
330 and
333.

Sections
332 and
333 —Re-
commenda-
tion regard-
ing the
word “law
ful”.

Section
334--
Recom:
mendation
regarding
punish-
ment.

Section
335-—Re-
commenda-
tion re-
garding
punishment.

Section 336
to 338—
Recom-
mendation
for increase
in panish-
ment.


260

Section 16.72. There has been a controversy as to whether the

339. offence under section 339 is made out if a person is prevented
from proceeding in a particular vehicle (say, a car), but is al-
Towed to proceed on foot. A narrow view was taken in an
early Bombay case! and in two Calcutta cases.? But later
decisions of both these High Courts} have taken a wider view
which appears to us to be correct. We considered whether an
explanation should be inserted that where a person has a right
to proceed in any direction in a vehicle, then voluntarily ob-
structing him so as to prevent him from proceeding in that
direction in that vehicle amounts to an offence under section
339, but in view of the later decisions mentioned above, decided
that this was unnecessary.

Section 16.73. No change is needed in section 340 which defines
40. wrongful confinement.

Section 16.74, For wrongful restraint under section 341, a sen-
341. tence of imprisonment is unnecessary but fine may be up to

rupees one thousand. Where, however, the offence is jointly
committed by ten or more persons, it should, in our opinion,
be more severely punishable ¢.g., with imprisonment of either
description up to one year, or fine, or both.

Section 341 may accordingly be revised as follows:—

“341. Punishment for wrongful _restraint.--Whoever
wrongfully restrains any person shall be punished with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees;

and, if the offence is jointly committed by ten or more
persons, every one of them shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.”

Section 16.75. Imprisonment upto one year. or unlimited fine, or
342-—Re- both, should be the punishment under section 342 for wrong
commenda- fy) confinement. Here again, if the offence is committed by

garding ten or more persons, the punishment should be heavier. In
punish- recent years, it has been a feature of agitational propaganda
ment. and demonstration for a large number of persons to “gherao”

officials and others. The views received in response to our
Questionnaire* show a very substantial support for providing
a severe punishment for this offence. We propose that the
naximum punishment for wrongul confinement by a group
ol fen or more persons should be imprisonment for three years
and fine.

Vr Emperor v. Rama Lal, 092) 15 Bom. L.. R. 103 (0. B).
 Durea Prasad v. Nitman, A. 1. R. 1935 Cal. 252; and Mahendra Nath, 1. 1... R. 62 Cal.
629.

3. Emperor v. Lahanu Manali, A. 1. R. 1926 Bom. 118; and Madhab Chandra v. Nalini,
ALE R. 1964 Cal. 286.

. Question 7 (b) was, “Should ‘gherac’ Gvrongful confinement by a large group of per-
sons) be made a separate offence with a severe puniskment”,

-



261

Section 342 may accordingly be revised as follows:—

“342, Punishement for wrongful confinement —Whoever
wrongfully confines any person shall be punished with impri-
sonment of either description for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine, or with both;

“and, if the offence is jointly committed by ten or more
persons, every one of them shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

16.76. Sections 343 and 344 prescribe a heavier punishment
for wrongful confinement according to its duration. If it lasts
for three days or more, the offence is punishable with two years’
imprisonment; and if it lasts for ten days or more, then it is
punishable with three years’ imprisonment. We do not think
two gradations are necessary. We propose, instead, one section
for this aggravated form of wrongful confinement, reading as
follows :—

' “343. Wrongful confinement for days or more-—Whoever ,

wrongfully confines any person for five days or more, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable
to fine.”

16.77. No change is needed in sections 345 to 348,

Criminal force and Assault

16.78. We have next a group of ten sections dealing with
criminal force and assault. The first three sections define ‘force’,
‘criminal force’ and ‘assault’, respectively. The definition of
‘force’ in section 349 is very complicated and the language reminds
us of the definitions given in the science of mechanics. Consi-
dering that no other penal code has found it necessary to define
the expression and that there is nothing abstruse in the concept
requiring definition, we think that section 349 could be safely
omitted. !

16.79, After defining the expression ‘to use criminal force’
in section 350, and the expression ‘to commit an assault? in
section 351, all the seven penal sections that follow equate the
two acts and refer to “whoever assaults or uses criminal force”.
There is thus practically no difference between assault and using
criminal force from the point of view of punishment. {t is
apparent that, in keeping the two ideas distinct, the Code merely
follows the distinction between ‘assault’ and ‘battery’ under the
common law of England. “Assault and battery are two distinct
crimes at common law; but it is common in ordinary usage, and

Sections
343 and
344 to

placed by
one sec
tion.

Sections
345 to
348,

Section
349—omise
sion re-
sgmmend-

Sections
350 and
351--66«
finitions to
be cone
bined,

1. The expression “force” occurs in sections 146, 350, 362, 366, 366A and 3668 of the
Indian Penal Code, and in sections 46, 128 and 352 of the Criminal Procedure Code


“Criminal
force” to
be defin-
ed in
Section
141.

Section 350
to be omit-
ted and
section 351
to be revise
ed

यू Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 2nd edition, page 249.

262

even in statutes, to use the term ‘assault’ to cover both.”"' We
think that, so far as the Code is concerned, it is needless to main-
tain the distinction between assault and using criminal force,
and that it would-be simpler to refer to the offensive act merely
as “assault”. The definition of assault should, however, comp-
rise the ideas set out in section 349 and those set out in section
350.

16.80. Apart from this Chapter, the expression ‘criminal
force’ is to be found only in three sections of the Code, viz.,
sections 12!A, 141 and 152. In section 121A, as already indi-
cated,? the word ‘criminal’ is not required in the context and
could be omitted. We have also proposed$ the addition of an
explanation in section 141 to indicate when force will be regarded
as criminal for the purposes of that section, and the same ex-
planation will be sufficient for interpreting section 152.

16.81. We accordingly propose that section 350 may be
omitted, and that section 351 be revised as follows :--

“351. Assault.—A person is said to assault another when
he, without that person’s consent

(a) applies force, directly or indirectly, to that person
in order 10 the committing of an offence, or intending
or knowing it to be fikely that he will thereby cause in-
jury, fear or annoyance to that person, or

(b) Threatens, by any gesture or preparatory act,
to apply such force as aforesaid to that person, in-
tending or knowing it to be likely that the gesture or act
will cause him to apprehend that such force is about to
be applied.

Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault;
but the words which a person uses may give to his gestures
or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures
or preparations amount to an assault.

Dlustrations

(४) Z is sitting in a moored boat, on a river. A
unfastens the moorings, and thus intentionally causes
the boat to drift down the stream. Here, A has indirectly
applied force to Z.

2. Sce parageaph 6.8 above.
3. See paragraph 8.9 above.


263

(0) Z is riding in a horse-carriage. A lashes the
horses. and thereby causes them to quicken their pace.
Here A has indirectiy applied force to Z.

हि (९) A pulls up a woman's veil without her consent,
intending or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
frighten or annoy her. He has assaulted her.

(व) A incites 2 dog to spring upon Z without Z’s
consent. Here, A has applied force to Z and if he in-
tends to cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he has
assaulted Z.

(९) A begins to unloose the muzzie of his dog,
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog to
attack Z. A has assaulted 2.

(f) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it
to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe
that A is about to strike Z. A has assaulted Z.

{g) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “E will give you
a beating’. Here, though the words used by A could
not amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture,
unaccompanicd by any other circumstances, might not
amount to an assault, the gesture explained by the words
may amount to an assault.”

16.82, Under section 352, a slight increase in punishment is
recommended. The imprisonment at present three months,
should be increased to six months; and the fine, at present limited
to Rs. 500/-, should be unlimited.

16.83. While section 352 punishes assault otherwise than
"grave and sudden provocation, the punishment for assault
on such provocation is provided in section 358. Since the
Explanation of section 352 also has to apply to section 358, the
two sections may be combined and revised as follows :—

“352. Punishment for assault—-(1) Whoever assaults any
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given
by that person, shail be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine, or with both.

(2) Whoever assaults any person on grave and sudden
provocation given by that person shall be punished with fine
not exceeding five hundred rupees.

(3) Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the
punishment for assault if the provocation—

(9) is sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender
as an excuse for the offence, or

Section
352—pun-
ishment to
ine
creased.

Sections
352 and
358 to.
come
bined and
revised,


Section
353.

Section

354—out-
raging the
“modesty”

of a baby— *

‘Supreme
Court's
view.

264

(9) is given by anything done in obedience to the
law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise of the
powers of such public servant, or

(०) is given by anything done in the lawful exercise
of the right of private defence.

The provision in the existing Explanation that “whether
the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate
the offence, is 2 question of fact” is not required after
abolition of jury trials, and has, therefore, been omitted.

16.84. No change is needed in section 353 except the omission
of the words “or used criminal force to”.

16.85. Section 354 punishes a person who assaults or uses
criminal force to a woman with intent to outrage her modesty.
We have earlier! referred to a judgment of the Supreme Court?
in which it was held that even a baby of seven and a half months
‘old has modesty that can be outraged by use of criminal force
within the meaning of this section. In that case, the accused had
indecently assaulted the baby and caused injury to its genitals,
and the question arose whether the act amounted to an offence
under section 354. The High Court of Punjab acquitted>
the accused holding that a girl of seven and a half months cannot
have a “modesty” which can be outraged. The Supreme Court,
by a majority, reversed the High Court's judgment. Bachawat,
J. observed :—

“The essence of a woman’s modesty is her sex. The
modesty of an adult female is writ Jarge on her body.
Young or old, intelligent or imbecile, awake or sleeping, the
woman possesses a modesty capable of being outraged.
Whoever uses criminal force to her with intent to outrage
her modesty commits an offence punishable under section
354. The culpable intention of the accused is the crux of
the matter.

“The reaction of the woman is very relevant, but its
absence is not always decisive, as for example, when the’
accused with a corrupt mind stealthily touches the flesh of a
sleeping woman, She may be an idiot, she may be under
the spell of anaesthesia, she may be sleeping, she may be
unable to appreciate the significance of the act, nevertheless,
the offender is punishable under the section.”

1. See paragraph 2.5.
2. State of Punjab v. Major Singh, A. ¥, R. 1967 S. 0. 63, 65, 67, Cri. L. J. 1 5 (1966) Supp).
3. ८. R, 286.

3. A. 1. 7. 1963 Pun. 443 (F. BL).


265

And Mudholkar J., observed as follows:—

“It speaks of outraging the modesty of a woman and at
first blush seems to require that the outrage must be felt by
the victim itself. But such an interpretation would leave out
of the purview of the section assaults not only on girls of tender
age but on even grown up woman when such 2 woman is
sleeping and did not wake up or is under anaesthesia or stupor
or is an idiot. It may also, perhaps, under certain circum-
stances, exclude a case where the woman is of depraved moral
character. Could it be said that the Legislature in-
tended that the doing of any act to or in the presence
of any woman which, according to the common notions of
mankind, is suggestive of sex, would be outside this sec-
tion unless the woman herself felt that it outraged her modesty?
Again, if the sole test to be applied is the woman’s reaction toa
particular act, would it not be a variable test depending upon
the sensitivity or the upbringing of the woman? These con-
siderations impel me to teject the test of a woman’s individual
reaction to the act of the accused. I must, however, confess
that it would not be easy to lay down a comprehensive test;
but about this much I feel no difficulty. In my judgment
when any act done to, or in the presence of, a woman is
cleatly suggestive of sex according to the common notions
of mankind that act must fall within the mischief of this
section.”

Sarkar, C.J., however, dissented:—

“To say that every female of whatever age is possessed
of modesty capable of being outraged seems to me to be laying
“down too rigid a rule which may be divorced from reality.
There obviously is no universal standard of modesty. If
my reading of the section is correct, the question that remains
to be decided is. whether a reasonable man would think that
the female child on whom the offence was committed had
modesty which the respondent intended to outrage by his
act or knew it to be the likely result of it. I do not think
a reasonable man would say that a female child of seven and
a half months is possessed of womanly modesty. If she had
not, there could be no question of the respondent having
intended to outrage her modesty or having known that his
act was likely to have that result. 1 would for this reason
answer the question in the negative.”

16.86. While substantial justice was done in the case, one
cannot (with great respect) help observing that the conclusion
was reached by the majority after some straining of the language.
The expression “modesty” connotes a retiring,|bashful or decorous
disposition. It is a strain on the ordinary use of language to
apply that expression to a baby in arms. It is better to have a
direct provision on the offence of indecent assault on children
of whatever age or sex, so that courts may not (in the case of girls)

Indecent
assault on
children to
be an

offence.


266

be thrown back upon a restricted provision like the present section
354. We are of the opinion that apart from assault to outrage
‘modesty’, acts of indecency with children should be made speci-
fically punishable by a new section reading as foliows :—
“354A. Indecent assault on a minor.—Whoever assaults
any minor under sixteen years of age in an indecent, lascivious
or obscene manner, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.”

Section 16.87. No change is needed in section 355 except the omission
~ of the words “or uses criminal force to”.

Seg 16.88. Section 356 speaks of assaulting a person “in attempt-
commen- 1g to Commit theft on any property which that person is wearing
dation. or carrying”. The preposition ‘on’ appears to be incorrect,
and should be replaced by ‘of’.t

Section 16.89. No change is needed in section 357 except the omission
357. of the words *0 uses criminal force 107, ‘

Section 16.90. Section 358 which is proposed? to be combined with
358 section 352 will have to be omitted.

Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour

Kidnap- 16.91. Derived from the word ‘kid’ meaning child, and ‘napper’,
0४) an American cant word for thief, the word ‘kidnapper’ originally

(seventeenth century) meant one who stole children and others
to provide servants and labourers for the American plantations.>
in England, however, “according to East, the most aggravated
species of faise imprisonment is the stealing and carrying away,
or secreting of some person, sometimes calied kidnapping, which
is an offence at common Jaw. Blackstone confines this offence
to the case where the victim is sent into another country, and
East appears to agree that this is strictly & constituent of kidnap-
ping properly so called. According to Russell. the offence is
committed if a minor is taken away against the will of his friends
or lawful guardians.”* Child-stealing, as such. is a statutory
offences punishable with seven years’ imprisonment. The
offence is uniawlully, either by force or fraud, to take away or
entice any child under the age of fourteen years, with intent to
deprive its guardian of the possession of such child, or with intent
to steal any article from the child. It appears that the common
law offence of kidnapping is of small importance at the present
day in England.®

Jaw.

«This mistake i aso found in the printed copy of the Indian Penal Code as passed in

. See paragraph 16.33 above.

. Oxford Dictionary of English Ftymology.

. Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 2nd edition, page 276.

|. Offences against the Person Act, 1861, section $6.
Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 2nd edn., page 277.

AWN


267

16.92. The Penal Code distinguishes between two kinds of
kidnapping, viz., kidnapping from India and kidnapping from
lawful guardianship. The first kind is defined in section 360
as conveying any person beyond the limits of India without the
consent of that person or of some person authorised to consent
on behalf of that person. This offence was of importance in
the last century when the practice of indentured labour was
common and “coolycatching” by devious methods had to be
put down, As will be seen by a comparison of the definition
of kidnapping from India in section 360 with the definition of
abduction in section 362, the difference between the two is very
slight; where an adult is conveyed out of India without his consent,
it is almost certain that he would have been compelled or induced
to go from some place, i. e., “abducted”. We think it is un-
necessary to have the first kind of kidnapping as a speciat offence,
and propose that both section 359 and 360 should be omitted.

16.93. In order to amount to kidnapping of a minor from lawful
guardianship, the age limit of the minor is fixed in section 361
at 16 for boys and 18 for girls. It was suggested that since, under
clause fifth of section 375, it is not rape to have sexual inter-
course with a girl of 16 or more with her consent, the age limit
for kidnapping also should be 16 for girls asweli as boys. We
do not. however, think that this is a vali¢ argu ont since the two
offences are very different. Kidnapping being an offence against
lawful guardianship, it is logical to tx the age of majority as the
age limit. In fact, we see no reason why it should be 16 in the
case of boys. We propose that all minors under 18, whether male
or femaie, should be brought within the scope of the definition
of kidnapping, but the punishment may be more severe where
the kidnapped person is under 15.1

The explanation of the section refers to “any person lawfully
entrusted” ctc. These words have led to a needless controversy
as to whether there has to be a formal entrustment.? For instance.
orphanages and similar charitable institutions which take
charge of neglected or abandoned children may find it difficult
to establish that they have been lawfully entrusted by anyone with
the care or custody of a particular child. De facto guardians are
clearly intended to be covered by the Explanation.? We pro-
pose to use the words “any person who has lawful custody of”
etc. in the Explanation.

Kidnapping may accordingly be redefined as follows :—

“261. Kidnapping. Whoever takes or entices any person
who is under eighteen years of age or is of unsound mind, out
of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such person. without the
consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap that person.

Kidnapping
to be of

one kind
only—sec- ५

tions 359

and 360

to be
omitted,

Revised

definition

of kidnapp-

ing.

1. Sce para 16.93 below.
2. Sce discussion in State v. Harbans Singh, A. 1. R. 1954 Bom. 339.
3. Jungli Milan, A. (. हि, 1934 Pat., 170 ; Saharali, A. 1. R. 1931 Cal. 446,



Exception
in section
३61. consi-

| dered and
revised.

268

Explanation.—In this section, the words ‘lawful guardian’
include any person who has fawful custody of a minor or of
a person of unsound mind.”

16.94, The exception under section 361 provides for two
different cases which may arise in relation to the immediate care
and custody of an illegitimate child. The first is where the alleged
kidnapper in good faith believed himself to be the father of the
child and takes it away from the custody of its present guardian.
The second exception is where there is a bona fide dispute over
the custody of the illegitimate child. 1६ will be noticed that the
exception has no application in relation to legitimate children.

In England, under section 56 of the Offences against the
Person Act of 1861, the mother of the child (whether legitimate
or illegitimate), a person who shallhave claimed any right to
possession of the child, and a person who shall have claimed to
be the father of the child where it is illegitimate, are all exempted
from prosecution for child-stealing. While we do not consider
that the scope of the exception in section 361 should be widened
to this extent, the distinction it makes between legitimate and
illegitimate children is neither logical nor satisfactory. Disputes
do arise between the parents of a child who have fallen out over
the custody of the child: should it be regarded as a culpable act,
and a serious offence at that, for either of them to take or entice
the child out of the keeping of the other? There may, in some
cases (but not necessarily in all) be good justification for the father
of an illegitimate child to take it out of the custody of its mother,
but, equally, there could be justification for the mother of a child
born in wedlock to take it out of the keeping of the father even
if he is its Jawful guardian. It seems to us, therefore, that the
exception should be extended to the taking of a child by either
parent, and where it is illegitimate, by a person who in good faith
believed himself to be its father, Bona fide claims by other persons
to the lawful custody of a child, whether legitimate or illegitimate,
should not, in our opinion, be sufficient to exculpate them from
the offence of kidnapping.

We propose accordingly that the exception should be revised
to read as follows :—

“Exception.—It is not kidnapping when a minor is taken
or enticed out of the keeping of his lawful guardian by either
of his parents, or, where the minor is an illegitimate child,
by a person who in good faith believes himself to be the father
of such child, unless such act is committed for an illegal
or immoral purpose.”

It will be noticed that in the above re-draft, we have mentioned
“iHegal purpose” instead of ‘unlawful purpose”, which are the
words used in the present exception. The question what is an


269

‘unlawful purpose’ has led to contraversy! in courts because of
the vagueness of the expression. As the word ‘illegal’ is defined
in section 43, il is desirable to replace it by the more precise ex-
pression ‘illegal purpose’.

16.95. The language of section 362. which defines abduction,
is defective in two respects. First, it is doubiful if it covers the
act of bodily lifting and carrying away a person, when he is un-
conscious or asleep. Such cases do not literally fall within the
words ‘by force compels or by deceitful means induces’ —which
is the formula used in the present section. Secondly. while
‘force’ is mentioned, show of force is not mentioned, with the
result, that some High Courts have construed the section as
confined to cases where force is used.? 1६ appears to us that it
would be useful to amend the section so as to clarify the position
on the first point and widen the section on the second point,’ as
follows :—

“362. Abducéion:--Whoever, —

(9) by force or show of force compels, or by any
deceitful means induces, any person to go from any
place; or

(b) takes any person away from any place without the
consent of that person or some person legally
authorised to consent on behalf of that person, is said
to abduct that person.”

16.96. It was suggested that, to cover cases of hi-jacking
of aircraft or other vehicles, an amendment may be made so as
to punish those who indirectly cause persons to be transported
to a place which is not their intended destination. The need for
such amendment was emphasised on the ground that the com-
pulsion in such cases, at least so far as the passengers are concern-
ed, is indirect. We are, however, of the view, that such cases
could be regarded as falling within the scction, notwithstanding
the indirect nature of the compulsion, and no amendment is
necessary.

16.97. As regards section 363, we are of the view that the maxi-
mum punishment for kidnapping a person not under 15 years
of age should be less severe than at present. If such kidnapping
is for one of the purposes, mentioned in the succeeding sections,
then the increased punishment under the relevant section will
apply. The section may be revised as follows :

“363. Punishment for kidnapping.—Whoever kidnaps
any person who is under fifteen years of age shail be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and

62 Cal. 629 ;
2. E. हु. see A. 1. R. 1949 All, 710.

Section
362—Re-
commenda-
tion for
amendment.

Abduction
incidental
10 hi-jack-
ing.

Section
363.

rs, (934) 1. 1.. Re


270

whoever kidnaps any person who is not under fifteen years of
age shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, and shail also
be liable to fine.”

Section 16.98. Section 363A deals with kidnapping for begging. We
amend. have examined the recommendations of the Committee appointed
ments pro- {0 inquire into this offence, as well as the papers relating to the

posed. Bill prepared by the Home Ministry io amend the section.

(i) It has been suggested that the definition of ‘begging’
in sub-section (4) (a) of section 363A, should be expanded
so as to cover persons wandering without visible means
of subsistence, on the analogy of the definition of ‘begging’
in the Bombay Prevention of Begging Act, 1959. The
object of anti-beggary legislation is not punitive, but to
tackle the problem of begging by remedial and welfare
measures, whereas the object of section 363A is to
prevent the cruelty to minors involved in kidnapping
children and making beggars of them. The act
punishable is kidnapping : subsequent use for begging is only
the motive of the act. | Where there is evidence of begging
in any form, there should be no difficulty, even in the absence
of a definition. We, therefore, recommend omission of the
detinition.

(ii) As in section 361, we do not think it necessary to
have one age for boys and another for girls while defining
‘minor’, it may be 18 years for both.

(iii) In regard to punishment, the Committee considered. १
and we agree, that the maximum provided in the section is
sufficient. We also agree with the Committee? that a
minimum punishment of 3 years’ imprisonment would be
justifiable in order that the provision might be effective as a
deterrent. We do not think that there is any need to give the
court a power lo award a lesser punishment, as the offence in
guestion is bound to be grave in every situation. Imprison-
ment should be rigorous.

Accordingly, section 363A may be amended as follows :—

- (i) in sub-section (1), for the words ‘imprisonment of
cither description’. the words ‘rigorous imprisonment’ shall be
substituted; and after the words ‘ten years’, the words “but
which shall not be less than three years’, shall be inserted;
and

{ii) for sub-section (4) the following shall be substituted,
namely :—
(4) In this section, ‘minor’ means a person under
eighteen years of age.

1. Report of the Committee on Kidnapping of Children for Begging, (1969), para 5.2.5.
2. Ibid.


we

271

16.99. Section 364 punishes the offence of kidnapping or
abduction of a person in order to murder him, the maximum
punishment being imprisonment for life or for ten years. In
view of our general recommendation as to imprisonment for life,
we propose that life imprisonment should be omitted and term
imprisonment increased to 14 years.

The illustrations to the section do not eiucidate any particular
ingredient of the offence and should be omitted.

16.100. We consider it desirable to have a specific section to
punish severely kidnapping or abduction for ransom, as such
cases are increasing. At present, such kidnappig or abduction
is punishable under section 365 since the kidnapped or abducted
person will be sccretly and wrongfully confined.

We also considered the question whether a provision! for
reduced punishment in case of release of the person kidnapped
without harm should be inserted, but we have come to the con-
clusion that there isno need for it. We propose the following
section :—

“364A. Kidnapping or abduction for ransom.—Whoever
kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to hold that person
for ransom shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to 14 years, and shall also be
liable to fine.”

16.101. We have proposed above the omission of the separate
offence known as kidnapping out of India, but kidnapping or
abducting any person, whether a minor or an adult, with the
intention of taking him out of {ndia, should be severely punishable.
This offence may appropriately be included in section 365 by
revising it as follows :—

“365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent to convey out of India

or secretly confine person.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any

person with intent to cause that person 10 be conveved out of

India or to be secretly and wrongfully confined shall be punish-

ed with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend

to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

Ta this connection, we considered the question whether inter-
State abductions should be made an offence, but came to the con-
clusion that this is not necessary.

16.102. Section 366 is in two parts. The first part puni-
shes a person who kidnaps or abducts any woman in order that
she may be compelled “to marry any person against her wilt”.
There is a sharp divergence of judicial opinion as to the meaning
of these words in cases where the person kidnapped is a minor.
Are these words to be taken as referring to the will of the guar-
dian, or are they limited to the will of the person kidnapped, even
though she is a minor?

1. The New South Wales Criminal Code contains such a provision vide section 904.

Section
364—
amendments

proposed.

Section.
3644—
Kidnapp-
ing or
abduction
for ran-
som.

Section
365 to be
amended,

Section
366 and
the ८
pression
‘against her
will,



Renal

Rome

wichand ४.
ishnath Prasad v. Emp., A. 1. हि, 1948 Oudh 1, 4, and 9.

. Khatitur Rahaman v. Emp., A. 1. R. 1933 Rang. 98, 101.

कु Re v. Fletcher (1859) 8 Cox C. ८. 181 ; 28 L. J. M,C, 85-5 Jr. (19) 179-7 W.R.

. District Magistrate ४. Sat
. Kunjukunju v. State, A. 1. R. 1959 Ker. 197.

272

In a Calcutta case,! these words were taken as referring to the
will of the girl, and not to the will of her guardian, though the
girl was a mivor. The Oudh Chief Court? also seems to have
taken the same view.

Jn a Rangoon case,3 the High Court considered the distinc-
tion between “against the will” and “without the consent” ofa
person:—

“Further, in the Penal Code a distinction is drawn bet-
ween an act which is done ‘against the will’ and an act done
‘without the conscat’ of a person*. Every act done ‘against
the will’ of a person, no doubt. is one ‘without his consent’,
but an act done ‘without the consent’ of a person is not neces-
sarily ‘against his will’, which expression, I take it, imports
that the act is done inspite of the opposition of the person to
the doing of it.

Now, having regard to the distinction that is drawn in
the Penal Code between the expression ‘against the will’ and
*without the consent’ of a person, and the fact that in section
366. it is specifically provided that the woman may be com-
pelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be compelled,
to marry ‘against her will’, {am of the opinion that the provi-
sions of section 90 are not to be applied to section 366.”

But in a Madras case,$ Panchapakesa Ayyar, J., was provision-
ally of the view that inasmuch as the principle of section 366
was to “uphold the lawful authority of the parents or guardians
over their minor wards and to throw a ring of protection over
the girls themselves”, the consent or will of the girl was immaterial,
and the will of the guardian was decisive for this purpose. But
he did not give his final opinion on the subject, as the casc was
remanded.

In a Kerala case,6 a girl under 18 years of age was kidnapped
by the accused, and he later married her. He was charged under
section 363, and also under section 366, the allegation being that
his object was to marry her. The accused, besides raising the
defence that the girl was major, also took the defence that the
girl was a consenting party throughout. The defence was negativ-
ed, and his conviction was affirmed by the High Court, which
observed that “for purpose of section 366 also, the minor’s consent
to the marriage or illicit intercourse is not of any significance.”

mp. A. 1. R. 1932 Cal. 433

hanna, A. (. R. 1951 Mad. 990.



273

With ail respect. this observation appears to us to ignore
the specific words of section 366, which require that the kidnapp-
ing of the minor from jawful guardianship must have been with
intent to compel her to marry against her will. if a minor gitl
(above 12 years)! is taken away with her consent and married
with her consent, the offence under section 363 may be made out,
but section 366 cannot apply. Further, we are of the view that
an intention to marry the minor girl without the consent or
‘against the will’ of her guardian is irrelevant for establishing the
olfence under section 366. We do not however think it necessary
to aher the wording of the section despite the different views
expressed by the High Court as to its meaning and effect.?

16,103. The second half of section 366 and section 366A
(hoth of which were inserted by an amending Act in 1923) are
closely connected with each other, and could appropriately be put
am ane section,

16.104. In the light of the above discussion, sections 366 and
366A may be revised as follows :—

“366. Kidnapping or abducting woman to compel her to
marry etc.—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman—

{a) with intent that she may be compelled, or know-
ing it to be likely that she will be compelled to marry
any person against her will, or

(0) with intent that she may be forced or seduced
to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she
will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse,

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

366A. Procuration of woman or minor girl.—(1} Whoever,
by means of criminal intimidation or of abuse of authority
or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman
to go from any place with intent that she may be, or kaowing
it lo be likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse with another person shall bz punishable with
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any
minor girl urder the age of eighicen years to go from any
place or to do any act with intent that such girl may be. or
knowing it to be ikcty that she will be, forced or seduced to
iMicit mtercourse vith another person shall be punished with
rigorous ieprisonment which may extend to ten years. and
shall also be liable to fine.”

90, consent of a minor under 12 years is not sufficieni.

Under sectic

2. One of us, Shri R. £. Narasimham, is of a different view. Sez his separate note.

3M of Law/71- 19


Sections
366B and
367.

Section
368—Re-
commenda-
tion Fe
garding
punish-
ment,

Section
369-  Re-
commenda-
tion — for
minimum
punish-
ment.

Section
370 to be
amended
and sec~
tion 371
to be
omitted.

Section

72+
Amendment
recomm-
ended re-
garding
Punishment.

274

_ 16.105. In sections 3668 and 367, the only change required
is to provide for rigorous imprisonment.

16.106. Section 368, which deals with wrongfully concealing
a person knowing to be kidnapped or abducted, leaves the punish-
ment to be regulated according to the punishment for the princi-
pal offence of kidnapping or abduction. We think that this
refinement is @mnecessary and a specific punishment may be pro-
vided. The section may be revised as follows :--

“368, Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement
kidnapped or abducted person.—Whoever, knowing that any
person has been kidnapped or abducted, wrongfully conceals
or confines, such person shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.”

16.107. The offence under section 369, kidnapping or abduct-
ing a child with intent to steal from its person is, in our view
serious enough to justify a minimum punishment of two years’
rigorous imprisonment. Further, as the offence is grave, the
minimum punishment need not’ be subject to relaxation by the
Court. We. therefore, recommend that section 369 be revised
as follows :—

“369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with
intent to steal from its person.—Whoever kidnaps or abducts
any child under the age of ten years with the intention of
taking dishonestly any movable property fromthe person of
such child, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years, but which shall not
be less than two years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

16.108. Sections 370 and 371 deal with slavery. Though,
slavery and trafficking in slaves no longer exists in_ India, s2ction
370 may be retained as a deterrent. Imprisonment for the offence
should be rigorous. Section 371, which punishes habitual dealing
in slaves more sevesely is, however, unnec:ssary and may be omitt-
ed.

16.109, Section 372 punishes selling, or hiring a minor for
prostitution, illicit intercourse or any ‘unlawful and immoral
purpose”.

It was suggested that, for the words ‘unlawful and immorat
purpose’, the words ‘illegal or immoral purpose’ shoutd be substi-
tuted, but we think that the purpose should be both immoral
and unlawful. Although the expression ‘unlawful’ may bz vague
in other contexts, itis notso in this section, because the
further restriction impeszd by ‘immoral’ narrows down its
scope.


275

Imprisonment under this section should be rigorous, having
regard to the gravity of the offence.

16.110. There is a conflict of decisions on the question whether Section
section 373 is confined to obtaining possession of a minor from 373--diff-
a third person. The Bombay! and the Patna? High Courts have erence Ot
held that it is not necessary that the buying, hiring, or other- to taking
wise obtaining possession, of the minor should be from a third possession
person. Any one taking a girl under eighteen years for the pur- of minor.
pose indicated in the section is liable even though there is no one
who has given him possession of the girl, and he himself has taken
possession of her. The Madras3 and the Calcutta* High Courts
have taken a narrower view. The Calcutta case expressly dissents
from the Bombay view.

16.111. We are of the opinion that a clarification on {the point Recom-
would be useful. Further, we regard the wider view as prefer-  ™mendation.
able. This is a beneficial provision, and a wider scope is desirable
for effective protection against mercenary exploitation of helpless
minor girls, We, therefore commend the addition of an
Explanation to section 373 as follows :—

“Explanation III.—For the purpose of this section, it
is not necessary that possession of the minor should have
been obtained from a third person.”

46.112. No changes are needed in section 374, Section

Sexual offences

16.113. The definition of rape in section 375, which section
refers to the woman’s consent in four of its five clauses, raises 375—
the question as to how far, if at all, the general exception in section Applicabi-
90 is applicable in relation to the consent “intended” by the second 1004 90
clause of the definition. Concretely, if the consent is given by to ‘con-
a woman, who from unsoundness of mind or intoxication, is un- sent’ of
able to understand the nature and consequence of the actto which woman.
she has in fact submitted, has the man committed rape?
if the second paragraph of section 90 is applicable, such consent
must be ignored and the man must be regarded as having had
sexual intercourse with the woman without her consent. While
there are quite a few English cases leading to this conclusion under
the common law of England, the question docs not appear to
have arisen in any Indian case.

> Shamoundarbai, A.A. R. 1921 Bom. 323 ; Bhagchand, A. LR. 1934 Bom. 200; Gor
dhan Kalidas, A. 1. R. 1942 Bom. 23.

. Shamsunder Prusti, A. है. R. 1930 Pat. 219.

3. Dowlath Bee ४. Shaik Ali, (1870) 5 M. H.C. R, 473, 475, 1 Weir 377 (See judgments
of Holloway and Innes 33.).

4. Jateendra Mohan Das, 1. L. R. (1937) 2 Cal. 187 ; A. 1. R. 1937 Cal. 250 (Cunliffe and
Hunderson JJ.).

५. 8. Raju cites Bhonri, 1953 R. L. W. 254, for the view that “sexual intercourse
with a woman under the influence of drink cannot be said to be with consent. (Raju,
Commentaries on the Indian Penal Code, 3rd Edn., Vol. Uf, page 1321). A full report
of the decision was not available.

yo


Consent
obtained

by threaten-
ing death
or hurt to
another
peeson
present on
the spot.

1. Moriram ४. Stute, A. हैं. R. 1955 ‘Nag. 121

276

The special exceptions in the second and third clauses of
section 375 obviously do not cover the same ground as the general
exception formulated in the first paragraph of section 90. Under
section 375 read by itself, it is only when the woman's consent to
the act has been obtained by putting Aer in fear of death or physi-
cal hurt. the consent does not count; whereas, under section
90. if she has given her consent under fear of ‘injury’ —a wider term
than physical huri--to herself or any one else and the man knows
that the consent was given in consequence of such fear, the consent
does not count. Ina Nagpur case,! the High Court held that,
where the woman had consented or submitted to sexual inter-
course with the accused who pretended to have a warrant to
arrest and take her to Bombay, and, by that deceit, abducted her
10 a circuit house for the purpose, the consent was not vitiated
by its being given in fear of some ‘injury’ to herself other than
bodily hurt. The applicability of section 90 to the charge of
rape in those circumstances was neither raised nor considered
in the judgment.

Similarly, under the fourth clause of section 375, only one
misconception of fact, viz., the induced belief that the man is her
husband. vitiates the consent of the woman; whereas, under
section 90, any misconception of fact vitiates, provided the man
knows or has reason to believe that the consent was given
in consequence of such misconception. Here again, we have no
Indian decisions on the applicability or otherwise of the general
exceptions to a charge of rape when the particular exception in
the fourth clause of section 375 is not applicable.

The third paragaph of section 90 raises no such* problem.
The minimum age of ‘consent’ for the offence of rape being speci-
fied as 16 in the fifth clause, the 12 year age limit in the general

exception does not apply.

It seems possible to take the view that the third and fourth
clauses of section 375 relating to fear of hurt and misconception
are special provisions and hence exclude the application of the
corresponding general provision in the first para of section 90;
Dut the general exception in the second para is rot excluded by any
thing specified in section 375. We do not, however, consider
jt necessary to clarify this point by an amendment of that section
since no difficulty has been felt in practice.

16.114. Under the third clause of section 375, the consent of
the woman is vitiated only when she has been put in fear of death
or body hurt to herself. The clause does not extend toa case
where death or grievous hurt is threatened to some one else pre-
sent on the spot, e.g., the woman's child. parent or husband,
and she is thereby compelled to subniit to sexual intercourse.
Though such cases would be very rare there is no reason in
principle why such consent should not be held to be vitiated.


277

We notice that the definition of rape proposed in the American
Draft Penal Code includes the case where the man “compels
(the woman) to submit by force or threat of imminent death,
serious bodily injury, extreme pain or kidnapping. fo be inflicted
onany one.” We propose to amplify the third clause to cover
the cases envisaged above.

16.115. The exception in section 375 provides that sexual
intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under
tifteen years of age. is not rape. The punishment for statutory
rape by the husband is the same when the wife is under twelve
years of age, but when she is between 12 and 15 years of age. the
punishment is mild, being imprisonment upto two years, or fine.
or both. Naturally, the prosecutions for this offence are very
rare. We think it would be desirable to take this offence al-
together out of the ambit of section 375 and not to call? it rape
even in a technical sense. The punishment for the offence also
may be provided in a separate sectiorf.

Under the exception, a husband cannot be guilty of raping
his wife, if she is above 15 years of age. This exception fails
to take of note one special situation, namely, when the husband
and wife are living apart under a decree of judicial separation
or by mutual agreement. In such 8 ९35९, the marriage technically
subsists, and if the husband has sexual intercourse with her against
her will or without her consent, he cannot be charged with the
offence of rape. This does not appear to be right. We consider
that, in such circumstances, sexual intercourse by a man with his
wife without her consent should be punishable as rape.

16.116. Under the fifth clause of section 375, it is rape for a man
(० have sexual intercourse with a girl, not being his wife, who
is over twelve years but under sixteen years of age, even when she
has consented. We are of the opinion that this offence need
not be equated to, and punishable as severely as, rape. Jt some-
times happens in such cases that the man has been led to believe,
and in good faith believes, that the girl is over sixteen. A
hona fide mistake as to age should be a defence to a charge of
rape of this type. We propose, therefore, to deal with this offence
in a separate section.

16.117. In the light of the above discussion, section 375 may
be revised as follows :--

“375, Rupe—A man is said to commit rape who has
sexual intercourse with a woman. other than his wife —

(a) against her will; or
(४) without her consent; or

ction 213.1, clause (1)9), Model Penal Code.

1.
2. The mary
as ‘marital misbehaviour.

Exception—
“rape” by
husband,

Sexual in-
tercourse
with con-
senting
roinor girk
to be a
separate
offence.

Section
375—re-
sision re-
commend-
ed.

al heading of section 1983 , Criminal Procedure Code, refers io th ९ offence


278

(©) with her consent when it has been obtained by
putting her in fear of death or of hurt, either to herself
or to anyone else present at the place; or

(9) with her consent, knowing that it is given in the
belief that he is her husband.

Explanation I—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the
sexual intercourse necessary to the offence of rape.

Explanation I.—A woman living separately from her
husband under a decree of judicial separation or by mutual
agreement shall be deemed not to be his wife for the purpose
of this section.”

Section 16.118. In view of the proposed changes in the definition of
ive toy Tape, the latter part of section 376 has to be omitted. Further,
a in place of the punishment now provided in the section, 1iz.,

imprisonment for life or imprisonment of either description for
ten years, we propose to substitute rigorous imprisonment for
fourteen years. We considered the question whether a mini-
mum sentence of say, three. years imprisonment, should be
provided for this offence. but decided against it. Adequate
punishments are imposed by Sessions Courts by which this offence
is ordinarily triable. The section will accordingly read as follows:

“376. Punishment for rape.—Whoever commits rape
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

Prohibition 16.119. The separate section penalising sexual intercourse
of inter by a man with his child wife may run as follows :—
course by
husband
wih child
wife.
“376A. Sexual intercourse with child wife.—Whoever
has sexual intercourse with his wife, the wife being under

fifteen years of age, shall be punished—

(a) if she is under twelve years of age with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shali also be liable to fine; and

(b) in any other case, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years
or with fine, or with both.

ilicit in- 16.120. The provision against illicit intercourse by a man
tercourse with a girl under sixteen years of age, with her consent, may

Mie er be as follows :--

sixteen.

“376B. Ilicit intercourse with a girl between twelve and
sixteen.—Whoever has illicit intercourse with a girl under
sixteen years, but not under twelve years of age, with her


279

consent. shail be punished with imprisonment of either des-
cription for a term which may extend to seven years, and
shall also be fiable to fine.

It shall be a defence to a charge under this section for the
accused to prove that he, in good faith, belicved the girl to
be above sixteen years of age.”

16.121. it was suggested that a mature woman, who compels
or seduces a boy under sixteen years of age to sexual intercourse,
shoutd be just as severely punishable asa manin the converse
case. Apart from the physiological fact that forcing a boy, in
the strict sense, to perform the act is impossible, complaints of
cither forcing or seducing minor boys to such illicit intercourse
are unheard of. Such lascivious acts on the part of the woman
are sociatly not so evil as to merit a penal provision.

16.122. We considered the need for a new section punishing
a person who knowingly exposes another to infection of venereal
disease by sexual intercourse. We are of the view that such
an act need not be made an offence. It may be that if the
act causes the disease, then it might amount to causing hurt
which, as defined in section 319, perhaps includes disease; this
is, however, doubtful, the notion of hurt and the notion of disease
being basically different from each other. If at all such an act
is to be made an offence, then it has to be by means of a specific
provision, but it is fairly obvious that any such provision is unlikely
to be enforced in practice. It is, therefore, not recommended.

16,123. There are certain situtations in which, although force
or fraud cannot be established, the compulsion of the situaion
is such that the woman's will is dominated by the will of the man,
and taking an undue advantage of the situation, the man takes
liberties with the woman. The woman’s submission to sexual
intercourse in such a situation is really not a willing
consent, and we think that provisions punishing this reprehensible
conduct on the part of the man should be included in the Penal
Code. We do not, however, wish to make the provisions very
wide because they may furnish a weapon for blackmail in the hands
of unscrupulous women or their relations. We would confine
it to those situations where the need for throwing a cloak around
the woman for protecting her chastity outweighs the opportunity
for blackmail. On this principle, we recommend the insertion
of three new sections as follows :—

“376C. Illicit intercourse of public servant with woman
in his custody.—Whoever, being a public servant, compels
or seduces to illicit intercourse any woman who is in_ his
custody as such public servant shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both,

Compelling
or seduc-
ing a boy
to illicit
intercourse.

Knowingly
infecting
another
with vene-
Teal disease.

Compelling
a woman
to illicit in-
tercourse
in certain
special sit-
uations.


Section
377—ques-
tions put.

1. Cf. section 2, W

280

376D. Illicit intercourse of superintendent etc. with inmate
of women’s or children’s institution —W hoever, being the super-
intendent or manager of a woman's or children’s institution
or holding any other office in such institution by virtue of
which he can exercise any authority or control over its inmates.
compels or seduces to illicit sexual intercourse any female
inmate of the institution shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to two years.
or with fine, or with both.

Explanation.—In this section, “women’s or children’s
institution” means an institution, whether called an orphan-
age, home for neglected women or children, widow's home or
by any other name, which is established and maintained for
the reception and care of women or children,! but docs
not include.—

(a) any hostel or boarding house attached to, or
controlied or recognised by, an educational institution.?
or

(0) any reformatory, certified or other school. or
any home or workhouse, governed by any enactment for
the time being in force.3

376E. Illicit intercourse of manager ete. of a hospital with
mentally disordered patient—Whoever, being concerned
with the management of a hospital or being on the staff of
a hospital. has illicit sexual intercourse with a woman who
is receiving treatment for a mental disorder in that hospital,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

Explanation.—It shall be a defence to a charge under
this section for the accused to prove that he did not know,
and had no reason to believe, that the woman was a men-
tally disordered patient.”

16.124. Section 377, which is the fast section in this Chapter,

deals with unnatural offences, including buggery and bestiality.
and provides for these a punishment as severe as that provided
for rape in section 376. In order to elicit informed public opinion
on the subject. we had included in our Questionnaire the
following two questions :—

(a) Should unnatural offences be punishable at ull, or
with heavy sentences as provided in section 377?

n’s and Children’s Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956.

2. Cf section 10, Women’s and Children’s Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956.

3. Cf. section 21, Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956,


281

(0०) Should exception be made for cases where the offence
consists of acts done in private between consenting adults?

The replies received by us are conflicting, but a larger number
of those who have cared to express an opinion are in favour of
retaining the section more or less as it stands. Some were of
the view that homo-sexual acts done in private between consenting
adults need not be ireated as offences, but other thought that
such acts are*tabominable and loathsome which tend to make
men and women depraved” and should be punishable in all
circumstances. There was, however, a general feeling that the
punishment provided in section 377 is unduly harsh and quite
unrealistic. No court is likely to sentence a man to impri-
sonment for fife for committing such acts.

16.125. The question has in recent times received much atten-
tion in the West. The Wolfenden Committee in England set
out the main arguments against punishing homo-sexual acts,
viz., that the act harms no body, that it falls within a sphere of
private immorality which is not the Jaw’s business and that it
could be tackled by other measures. Referring to the punishment
of imprisonment usually awarded for the offence, one American
psychiatrist has pertinently observed that “segregating a mate
homo-sexual for months or years in a prison, where he will see
only other men and where he will often be isolated with a group
of other homo-sexuals, can hardty result in anything but rein-
forcement of the homo-sexual tendencies.” #

16.126. There are. however, a few sound reasons for retaining
the existing law in India. First, it cannot be disputed that homo-
sexual acts and tendencies on the part of one spouse may aifect
the married life and happiness of the other spouse. and from
this point of view, making the acts punishable by 18७ has a social
justification. Secondly. even assuming that acts done in private
with consent do not in themselves constitute a serious evil.
there is a risk involved in repealing legislation which has been
in force for a tong time. The position might be different if we
were merely refraining from legislating about a type of private
conduct whose suitability for punishment is in dispute, but we
are not legislating on a blank slate. Ultimately, the answer
lo the question whether homo-sexual acts ought to be punished
depends on the view one takes of the relationship of criminal
law to morals, The debate on the subject. sparked off by the
Report of the Woilenden Committee, has not yet come to an
end. ‘There will always be two views on the question how far
it is the business of criminal law to enforce notions of private
morality. If one shares the reasoning of the Committee. namely,
that there is a sphere of private morality in which criminal law
has no business, then the answer is clear, but it is well known that
there are distinguished thinkers who take a different view, em-
phasising the need for preserving the society's cherished beliefs.

Arguments
against
punishing
homo-
sexual acts,

1. Prof. Karl M. Bowman, “Review of Sex Leg
in the 0, $. AS" cited in Donnelly, Ci

aw (1962), page 153.

ion and Control of Sex Ollenders


Amend-
ments
recommend-
ed

282

it appears to us that, in this highly controversial field, the only
safe guide is what would be accepiable to the community.
We are inclined to think that Indian society, by and large, dis-
approves of homo-sexuality and this disapproval is strong enough
to justify it being treated as a criminal offence even where adulis
indulge in it in private.

16.127. We think, however, that cases of bestiality should
be regarded as pathological manifestations ignored by the crimi-
nal law. Buggery may continue to be an offence, punishable
much less severely than at present, but where it is committed
by an adult on a minor boy or girl, the punishment should be
higher.

We propose that section 377 may be revised as follows :—

“377. Buggery.—Whoever voluntarily has carnal inter-
course against the order of nature with any man or woman shal!
be punished with imprisonment of either description for 8 term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;

and where such offence is committed by a person over
eighteen years of age with a person under that age, the im-
prisonment may extend to seven years.”

“Explanation :—Penetration is sufficient to constituic
the carnal intercourse necessary to the offence described in
this section.”


CHAPTER 17
OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

17.1. {n any statistical survey of crime. offences against pro- Introduc-
perty would find a prominent place. This is readily understand- tory
able, as one of the basic motives behind unlawful conduct is greed
which, in the main, directs itself towards property, the result
being that the law-breaker takes or attempts to take things that
do not belong to him. The range of such activity is wide, and
although much of it could, in a broad sense. be described as
theft, the Penal Code—wisely, we think,—describes it under
ten sub-heads, namely, theft, extortion, robbery and dacoity,
criminal misappropriation of property, criminal breach of trust.
receiving stolen property, cheating, mischief, fraudulent disposi-
tions of property, and criminal trespass.

The main element common to these offences is ‘dishonesty’,
which the Code describes as ‘the intention of causing wrongful
gain to one person or wrongful loss to another’, but the manner
in which dishonesty is exercised, is, in different cases, different.
Thus, a pick-pocket and a cheat, both dishonestly take another
person’s property; but while the former does it surreptitiously,
the latter does it openly. Hence the need for these subdivisions,
for a clearer understanding of the different concepts involved.

Theft

17.2. Theft, by its definition, in section 378. is the dishonest Section
removal of movable property out of the possession of any person fnition
without his consent. It is thus an offence against possession and of theft.
not against ownership, so that even the owner of movable
property can be guilty of theft in respect of that property. Tllust-

rations (j) and (६) to section 378 make that clear.

17.3. There are five Explanations added to section 378, and — Explana-
although we think the meaning of the section would not be की. शी:
doubt without Explanations 2, 3, and 4, we are not suggesting their
deletion, as the reason behind such deletion may be misunder-
stood.

17.4. We considered a suggestion that another Explanation Bona fide
may be added to section 378, making it clear that a bona fide claim of
claim of right to property is a good defence to a charge of theft. "* 1.

The idea behind the suggestion was that this principle, laid down

by judicial decisions!, should be enacted into the section, Our

1. See S. Sanyasi Apparal, A.L.R. 1962 S.C. $86; (1962) Suppl. 1 $.C.R. 8; and Chandi
Kumar v. Abandidhar, A.L.R. 1965 5.0. 585.

283



Theft in
Vehicles.

Theft by
an emplo-
yee other
than
“clerk”
cor “ser
vant"

Theft of
public
property
and of
temple
properly.

Theft Crom
victims of
calamities.

284

attention was also invited to an express provision? in the recently
passed Theft Act of England to that effect. We are of the view,
however, that the judicial decisions have settled the question so
firmly that no legislative action is necessary, and we propose
none.

17.5. Ordinarily, theft is punishable with a maximum of
three years’ imprisonment under section 379. Then, we have three
aggravated forms of theft defined in sections 380, 381 and 382.
Theft in a dwelling house, etc. and theft by a clerk or servant are
punishable with seven years’ imprisonment under sections 380
and 381 respectively; and theft after preparation made for causing
death or hurt is punishable with ten years’ imprisonment under
section 382.

We think a maximum of seven years’ imprisonment should
be enough for any offence of theft. We have already before us
several suggestions for punishing certain kinds of theft more
severely than section 379 does, and we have accepted some of
them. We propose to add them in section 380, so that the punish-
ment will be seven years’ imprisonment, apart from any fine that
may be imposed.

17.6. The first suggestion is that theft in a vehicle used for
the transport of goods or passengers should be treated in the
same way as theft in a building, and we agree that these is proper
justification for this.

17.7. The second suggestion is that section 381 arbitrarily
ड$ out “clerks” and “servants” from a host of employees for
harsher penalty. if any of them commits theft of property in the
possession of his employer. We agree that it would be better
if ail employees were treated in the same way, and we propose
that the wording of section 381 should be suitably changed.
Further, we have an apprehension that the expressions “clerk”
and “servant” are likely to be narrowly construed as referring to
persons close to a private employer. Since that is not the inien-
tion, we propose to substitute wider words in their place.

17.8. Next. it is suggested that theft of public property is
more reprehensible than ordinary theft, and should be so treated:
and again we agree. The same is the case of property in a place
of worship or intended for the purpose of worship. These can
be added in section 380.

17.9. Another suggestion equally acceptable to us is that
theft from the possession of a person who is at that time the vicum
of a calamity like fire, flood, earthquake or accident. shouid be
treated as aggravated theft. This could be dealt with in a new
section.

Section 1a), Theft Act, 1968 (Englis!

), provides that ‘a person's appropriation of

property belonging to another is not to be regarded as dishonest, if he uppropriates
the property in the belief that he has, in law the right to deprive the other of it on behalf
of himself or of a third person”.


285

17.10. We suggest. therefore, that in place of sections 380
and 381, the following be substituted :--

“380. Theft in a building, vehicle, temple etc——Whoever
commits theft--

(a) in any building or tent used as a human dwelling
or for the custody of property, or,

(4) in, or in respect of. any vehicle. vessel or aircraft
used for the transport of goods or passengers, or

(c) in a temple, mosque, church, gurdwara, or other
place of worship open to the public, in respect of
any property which belongs to, ऊ is part of, such
place of worship, or

(d) in respect of any property of the Government
or of a 160७ authority,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for aterm which may extend to seven years, and shalt
aso be liable to fine.

380A. Theft of property affected by accident, fire, flood
etc.—Whoever, taking advantage of the occurrence of an
accident in a public place or of a fire, flood, riot, earthquake
or similar calamity, commits theft in respect of any property
affected by such accident or calamity, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may ex-
tend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

381. Theft by employee.—Whoever, being employed
in any capacity by another person, commits theft in respect
of any property in the possession of that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be tiable to
fine.”

17.41, Section 382 should be amended by substituting “seven
years” for “ten years”, as we have already indicated that imprison-
ment for seven years is enough! for any aggravation of theft.

Extortion

17.12. Extortion is the dishonest obtaining of property by
putting any person in fear of injury. 1.2... any harm illegally caused
in body, mind, reputation or property, and the maximum punish-
ment is three years’ imprisonment. Even if property is not ob-
tained, the mere threat of injury for committing extortion, is
punishable with two years’ imprisonment.

paragraph 17.5 above.

Revised
sections

in place
of sections
380 and
381.

Section
382—-puni-
shment to
be reduced
to seven
years.

Sections
383 to
385.


286

Blackmail— 17.13. Some doubt has arisen whether the definition of
tow छः extortion covers every case of blackmail, as, for instance, where
commend- Money is obtained by threatening to expose something true but
ed. unsavoury about a person. Such conduct is, of course, reprehensi-

ble; but we are not clear if such a threat would amount to threat
of injury in the sense of illegally causing harm. We feel, however,
that the Jaw of extortion should, as far as practicable, make such
infamous conduct punishable.

The question whether a person actually offended by some
wrongful act of X can demand money from X with the threat
that otherwise he will expose the conduct of X, was considered
by us. Most of us were of the view that, it would be covered by
the draft proposed below, though one of us! had a doubt on the
point.

The question was also considered whether in the proposed
section, threat of injury, other than harm to reputation, should
be included. But the essence of blackmail is harm to reputation.
If, for example, the act threatened is prosecution, it is a species
of harm to reputation. Hence other harm need not ke covered.

We recommend the insertion of the following new section:--

“385A. Blackmail—Whoever dishonestly threatens any
person with the making or publication of any imputation
which is likely to harm his reputation or the reputation of
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be Jiable to fine.

Explanation.—Where the threat is to accuse a person of
the commission of an offence, it is immaterial whether the
accusation is true or false.

Blackmail 17.14. We note that section 21 of the (English)? Theft Act,
in Englsh which relates to blackmail, is wider than the section proposed
law. above, and practically covers the entire ground covered by the

offence of extortion as defined in the Code. But this is obviously
unnecessary in India, as we have a specific offence of extortion,
and only extortion by libel is to be covered.

1. Shri R.L. Narasimham.

2. Section 21 (4), Theft Act, 1968 (English) defines the offence thus—“A person is
guilty of blackmail if, with a view to gain for himself or another or with intent
to cause Joss to another, he makes any unwarranted demand with menaces; and
for this purpose a demand with menaces is unwarranted untess the person
making it does so in the betief—

ta) that he has reasonable grounds for making the demand, and

(9) that the use of the menaces is a proper means of reinforcing the demand.”


°

287

A question which looms large in English cases is how far
the belief of the accused that the demand was justified renders
the act non-punishable. Initially, a real and honest belief that the
accused had good and probable cause for the demand was re-
garded as a sufficient excuse by the courts.? This view was later
overruled.2 With the passage of time, however, it came to be
realised, that there are two aspects to the question, namely,
() the honest belief in the legal demand and also, {ii) the honest
belief in the legitimate character of the means employed, that is,
the threats or menaces. These considerations seem to have weigh-
ed with Parliament in England while enacting the new Act. The
accused must believe that he is “warranted” (or_in the old fan-
guage, has a reasonable and probable cause), (i) in demanding
the property cic. (ii) in demanding the particular thing demanded,
(iii) in demanding it with menaces, and (iv) in demanding with
the particular kind of menace which he has used.

It may also be added that the English section brings in the
test of propriety of the threats, while we propose to use the word
“dishonestly”, which is defined in the Code and is well under-
stood. In England, the matter was left elastic, so that the jury
could decide the issue as one of fact.

17.15. Sections 386 and 387 need no change.

17.16, Both in section 388 and in section 389 the special
reference to section 377 should be deleted. as we are reducing?
the punishment for an “unnatural offence’.

Robbery and Dacoity

17.17. Robbery and dacoity are dealt with together, and
rightly, as the only difference between them lies in the number
of offenders. A suggestion was made that robbery when commit-
ted by three or more persons, instead of five or more persons
should be called ‘dacoity’, but this suggestion did not find favour
with us. The definition of “robbery” under section 390 is satis-
factory, and the punishment provided adequate.

17.18. We suggest only a small change in section 394, which
punishes robbery accompanied by hurt with imprisonment for
life or imprisonment extending to 10 years. We have elsewhere
suggested an alteration in this kind of alternatives, and recom-
mend that the offence should be punishable with imprisonment
for a term upto 14 years.

1. Rv. Miard, (1844) (Northampton Assize) 1 Cox C.C. 22 (Tindal C.J).

Sections
386 and
387.
Sections

388 and

389 Amen-
dment 16-
commended.

Sections
390 to 393.

Section
394 Am-
endment
recommen-
ded.

2. #. ९. Diamond, (1920) 2 K.B. 260; (1920) Al E.R. Rep. 259 (C.C.A.) considered in
Hardie ५. Chillon, (1928) AW E.R. Rep. 36 and in R. v. Bernhard, (1938) 2 Ail E.R. 140.

3. Sez paragraph | 6.127 above.


Section
395,

Section
396 Am-
endinent
recam-
mended

Section
397 Am-
endment

proposed.

Dipa

35: fnve

288

47.19. The maximum punishment under section 395 for
dacoity is imprisonment for life, which needs no change.

17.20. If one of the dacoits commits murder, each one of
them is liable to death sentence under section 396. There can be
no doubt that the need for imposing this vicarious liability exists
and we do not suggest any relaxation.! We would go further, and
recommend that this kind of liability should be extended to rob-
bers irrespective of their number. We propose that section 396
should be amplified to read—.

“396. Robbery or dacoity with murder—If any one of
two or more persons who are conjointly committing robbery,
commits murder in so committing robbery, or if any one of
five or more persons who are conjointly committing dacoity,
commits murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those
persons shail be punished with death or imprisonment for
life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to ten years, and shail also be liable to fine."

17.21. Section 397 provides a minimum punishment of seven
years’ imprisonment if, while committing robbery or dacoity,
the offender ‘uses any deadly weapon’ or causes grievous hurt
to any person.

There used to be a controversy previously as to whether a
person, other than the offender who carried the deadly weapon,
. fell within this section. The question is now answered in the nega-
tive by almost all High Courts, and no clarification is needed on
this point.

As to the expression ‘uses’ in section 397, it is now settled?
that the actuat use of a deadly weapon is not necessary, and
it is enough if the offender carries, brandishes or exhibits such a
weapon at the time of committing robbery or dacoity. We think
that it is unnecessary to provide for a minimum punishment of
seven years for merely carrying a deadly weapon. Even when the
weapon is used against the victims, but it cannot be said that it
amounted to an attempt to cause grievous hurt. there is litde
justification for bringing the case under section 397. We propose,
therefore, that the words “uses any deadly weapon, or” should be
omitted.

tion of death penalty for this offeace was favoured in the Law Commission's 35:h

ston “Capital Punishment”.

2. 0.0, ४. Nagappau, A.A.R. 1941 Mad. 718 (us: may be against person not robbed); Nan!
v. Emp. AAR. 1931 All, 363, 367 (८३

ying is enough, as it inspires fear): | Govind
The State. ALR. 1956 Bom. 353; Nugar Singh v. Emp., ALR. 1933 Lah.
Thevar Servat, ALR. 1938 Mad. 477.



289

17.22. Ia view of the omission proposed above in section
397, it will be necessary to extend section 398 to cases of commis-
sion of robbery or dacoity, besides cases of attempt to which the
section at present applies. The minimum punishment for the
offence, however, need not be as heavy as seven years, and may
be reduced to three years.

17.23. Te was suggested that section 399 which punishes
preparation to commit dacoity should be amended to cover
robberies also. We do not think this would be desirable. lt will
be noticed that under section 402 assembling for the purpose of
committing a dacoity, which undoubtedly is a preparatory act,
is punishable with imprisonment upto seven years only. At times,
it ts difficult to decide whether a case falls under section 399 or
402. In order to avoid this difficulty, and also in view of the fact
that it is only a preparatory act which is being punished under
section 399, the maximum under section 399 may be the same as
the maximum under section 402, viz., seven years.

17.24. One of two formal amendments are required in sec-
tions 400 and 401. The words “at any time after the passing of this
Act” and the reference to “thugs” should both be omitted.

17.25. We propose that section 402 should be extended to
cover the cases where three or four persons assemble for the pur-
pose of committing a robbery.

17.26. {n the light of the above discussion, sections 397
to 402 may be revised as follows:—

“397. Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death
or grievous hurt—if at the time of committing robbery or
dacoity, the offender causes grievous hurt to any person,
or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person,
the imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished
shall not be less than seven years.

398. Robbery or dacoity, when armed with deadly
weapon, ~-If, al the time of committing or attempting to com-
mit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed with any
deadly weapon, the imprisonment with which such offender
shalt be punished shall not be less than three years.

399. Making preparation to commit dacoity.-Whoever
makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shail also be liable to fine.

400, Belonging to gang of dacoits—Whcever belongs
to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually
committing dacoity, shall be punished with imprisonment for
lite, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend 10 ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

3 M of Law. 71—20

Section
398—Am-
endment
proposed.

Section

399—Am-
endments
proposed.

Scetions
400 and
401.

Section
402 to
cover robe
beries
also.
Sections,
397 to
402—revi-
sion pro-
posed.


Section
403---Expla-
nation 2 to
be revised.

290

401. Belonging to gang of thieves or robbers—Who-
ever belongs to any wandering or other gang of persons
associated for the purpose of habitually committing theft
or robbery. and not being a gang of dacoits, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be fiable to fine.

402. Assembling for purpose of committing robbery or
dacoity.—Whoever—

(a) is one of three of four persons, assembled for
the purpose of committing robbery, or

(b) is one of five or more persons assembled for the
purpose of committing dacoity,

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shail also be
liable to fine.”

Criminal Misappropriation

17.27. Section 403 punishes a person who ‘“‘dishonestly
misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property”.
To this rather brief description of the offence, two Explanations
arc added. The first merely says that a temporary misappropria-
tion is also misappropriation. The second Explanation is lengthy,
and attempts to express three ideas. First. a person who finds
property which is not then in anybody's possession, does not
act dishonestly if he takes it in order to keep it for the owner
with the idea of restoring it to him. Secondly, if he knows the
owner, or can reasonably find out who the owner, is, and in
spite of that, he converts the property to his own use without
attempting to get into touch with the owner and informing him,
then he acts dishonestly. Thirdly, it is not necessary that the finder
should know the identity of the owner; and so long as he does
not honestly believe that the owner cannot be found, his conduct
is dishonest.

We think that these ideas could be expressed more briefly.
and perhaps more clearly, than the existing Explanation, which
seems to us unnecessarily lengthy and still somewhat incomplete.
It may read:—

“Explanation 2.—It is not dishonest misappropriation for
a person who finds property not in the possession of any
other person, to take it for the purpose of protecting it for,
or of restoring it to the owner, but it is such misappropria-
tion if he appropriates it to his own use,—

(a) when he knows, or has the means of discovering
the owner, or


291

(8) when he does not in good faith believe that the
owner cannot be discovered, or

(c) before he has used reasonable means to discover
and give notice (0 the owner, and allowed a reasonable
time for the owner to claim the property.”

17.28. Illustration (c) to section 403 indicates when one of
two joint owners could be regarded as committing misappropria-
tion of a chattel belonging to both and in the possession of the
other. It says, ‘A’ and '8' being joint owners of a horse, ‘A’ takes
the horse out of ‘B’s possession, intending to use it. Here as
+A’ has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misap-
propriate it. But if ‘A’ sells the horse and appropriates the whole
proceeds to his use. he is guilty of an offence under this section.”

We should have thought that if ‘A’ and ‘B’ were partners and
the horse partnership property, and if ‘A’ sold the horse and
appropriated the proceeds to his own use, the legal situation would
be the same and ‘A’ would be guilty of the offence. Under the
Partnership Act', “subject to contract between the partners, the
property of the firm shall be held and used by the partners ex-
clusively for the purposes of the business”, The Supreme Court
has however held?-—

“I is obvious that an owner of property in whichever
way he uses his property and with whatever intention will not
be liable for misappropriation, and that would be so even if
he is not the exclusive owner thereof. As already stated, a
partner has undefined ownership along with the other part-
ners over all the assets of the partnership. If he chooses to
use any of them for his own purposes, he may be accountable
to the other partners. But he does not thereby commit any
misappropriation.”

17.29. W this general statement of law were to be applied
to every case, the result would, in our opinion, be unfortunate,
and dishonest partners, dishonestly dealing with partnership
property, would be immune from punishment. We are confident
that the Supreme Court did not intend such a consequence. To
remove the possibility of any misunderstanding on the subject,
we suggest that another illustration. expressly dealing with part-
ners, should be added. While making the position clear, the
illustration will exclude from penal liability cases where the part-
ner has a sight to use the property. For example, the partnership
agreement may authorise the partner to appropriate the proceeds
but with an obligation to make adjustment at the end of a speci-
fied period. Partnership agreement of this type, under which the
other partners are only “sleeping” partners, are not uncommon.

Partners
and illus-
tration {¢).

Additional
illustra-
tion
proposed.

1. Se ion 15, Indian Partnership, Act, 1932.
2. Velji Raghavji v. State, (1965) 2 S.C.R. 429, 434.


Section
404-—Am-
endment
recom-
mended.

Sections
405 to
409.

Section
408—An-
endment
recom
mended.

Section
409 Am-
endments
recom
mended.

292

We accordingly propose that the following illustration be
added after illustration (C):—

“(d) A and 8 are partners in a firm which carries on the
business of jewellers. A takes a jewel which is the property of
the firm, intending to show it to a prospective customer.
Here, as A has a right to do so, A doesnot dishonestly mis-
appropriate, But if A sells the jewel and appropriates the whole
Proceeds to his own use, without authority to do so under
the Partnership agreement, he is guilty of an offence under
this section.”

17.30. In contrast with section 403 which specifically refers
to “‘movabic property”, section 404 refers to dishonest misap-
propriation or conversion to own use of “property” in the pos-
session of a person at the time of his death. The omission of the
word “‘movable” is clearly deliberate, and the Supreme Court
has said 50.1 We think this view of the matter will be brought
out by inserting the word “any” after the words “to his own use”,
and before the word “property”.

Criminal breach of trust

17.31. The next five sections (sections 405 to 409) deal with
ctiminal breach of trust. According to the definition in section
405, it means dishonest misappropriation or conversion to his
own use of property which has been entrusted to the offender,
or dishonest disposal of such property contrary to any agree-
ment or any direction of law. The definition is, in our opinion,
satisfactory, and the illustrations to that section, which are six
in number, bring out the idea clearly.

17.32. Section 406 provides the punishment for criminal
breach of trust in ordinary cases, and the three sections that follow
deal with aggravated forms of that offence. Section 408 dealing
with breach of trust by “clerk or servant” may be broughi into
line with section 381 as proposed to be revised,? so that breach
of trast by any employee in respect of his employer’s property
will be covered.

17.33. If the offence is committed by a public servant or by
a banker or agent, the maximum punishment is life imprison-
ment under section 409. We consider this eXcessive, and as pro-
posed in regard ta other similar sections in the Code, we recom:
mend thal the punishment may be “rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to 14 years’, besides fine. The word
“factor”, which is obsolete. should be omitted.

RK. Dalmia v. Dethi Administration, (1963) | 50.8. 253, ALR. 1962 5.0. 1821.
2, 569 paragraph 17.10 above,


293
Receiving Stelen Preperty
17.34, Section 410 to 414 deal with stolen property this is
defined in section 410 as property ‘the possession of which has
been transferred by theft, extortion, robbery’ and also property
‘which has been misappropriated or in respect of which criminal
breach of trust has been committed’, whether any of those offences
took place in or out of India. In case, however, such property

comes into the possession of a person legally entitled to its pos-
session, it thereupon ceases to be stolen property.

17.35. We do not understand why property obtained by
cheating is not called stolen property. Cheating seems to us as
close to theft as criminal misappropriation, and perhaps even
closer, because although in cheating property is taken with the
consent of the person cheated, that consent is vitiated by decep-
tion, We suggest, therefore, that the definition of ‘stolen property’
should be extended to cover property obtained by cheating.
This may be done by substituting for the words “‘by theft, or by
extortion, or by robbery’ the words “by theft, extortion, robbery
or cheating”.

17.36. Further, we feel that the definition does not expressly
cover a situation which it should, namely, when a child below the
minimum age of criminal responsibility?, or an insane person2,
commits theft which, in Jaw, is not theft, and passes the property
to another fperson who receives it dishonestly. Such a person
should be liable to punishment in the same way as any other per-
son receiving stolen property, and we propose that this idea should
be clearly expressed in the definition section by adding to it an
explanation and illustration as follows:—

‘‘Explanation..—Property the possession whereof has
been transferred by an act which would otherwise be theft,
robbery or criminal misappropriation, but it not that offence
by virtue of section 82 or section 84, shall be deemed to be
stolen property.

IHustration

A, a child nine years of age, snatches away a necklace from
another child, voluntarily causing hurt to that child. Z, knowing
this fact, dishonestly receives the necklace from A. Though A’s
act ts not robbery by virtue of section 82, the necklace is stolen
property, and Z has committed the offence defined in section
4H”.

Section
410.

Property
obtained

by cheating
be included,

Explana-
tion and
iNustras
tion to be
added,

I. Under section 82 as proposed, the age will be ten years. Soe paragraphs 4.23 and 4,24

above.
2. Section 84,


Section
4k Am-
endment
Tecom-
mended.

Section
412 and
413 Am.
endment
recom:
mended.

Section
414 Am-
endment
recommen:
ded.

Section

Damage
or harm
10 one
other than
person
deceived.

294

17.37. The punishment under section 411 for receiving stolen
Property is three years’ imprisonment as the maximum. We
think that the punishment should be higher if the stolen property
is the property of Government or of a local authority. In such
a case the imprisonment may be upto seven years. The following
may be added to section 411:—

“and if the stolen property is the property of the Govern-
ment or of a local authority shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.”

17.38 Section 412 relates to dishonesily receiving property
stolen in the commission of a dacoity, and section 413 punishes
a habitual dealer in stolen property. The same punishment
is provided for these two offences, namely, imprisonment or
life or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years. As in other sections we suggest that this should be altered
to “rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to four-
teen years”, life imprisonment being deleted.

17.39. As in the case of dishonestly receiving stolen property
punishable under section 411, we propose that under section 414
also, where the stolen property is the property of the Govern-
ment or of a local authority the imprisonment may go upto seven
years. Accordingly, the following words may be added to the
section at the end:—

“and if the stolen property is the property of the Govern-
ment or of a local authority, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.”

Cheating

17.40. The definition of ‘cheating’ in section 415 is really
in two parts though printed as one. The first part says, “whoever
by deceiving any person, fraudulently, or dishonestly induces
the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person or to
consent that any person should retain any property” cheats. The
second part describes as cheating the act of a person who “by
deceiving any person. intentionally induces the person so deceived
to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if
he were not so deceived and which act or omission causes or is
likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind,

reputation or property’”.

17.41. The first part of the definition presents no difficulty,
and has caused none to the courts. The second part. however,
has. First, the notion of harm is not clear-cut, and situations have
arisen where no tangible harm to the person deceived is apparent,

although undue and unfair advantage has been taken by the offen-
der and the courts have had to stretch the meaning of harm to


295

cover those situations. Secondly, where real harm has occurred,
not to the person deceived, but to somebody else, the question
whether there has been cheating has not been easy to answer.

17.42. In an Allahabad case,! for instance, the accused pre-
tended to be a well-known eye specialist, and induced the com-
plainant to let him operate on the eye of his 12 years old son.
{t was held that, though bodily harm was done to the son, he was
not the person deceived, but since the deceived father had also
sufferred harm in mind, because of. the anguish caused to him,
the conviction for cheating was upheld. This desirable result was
reached indirectly.

In a Lahore case,? ‘A’ represented to a Patwari that one ahi
Baksh had sold some land to A, and in corroboration, he produced
*B’, who represented himself to be Llahi Baksh. The Patwari made
an entry to that effect in the mutation register. The mutation was
placed before the Naib Tehsildar, and the same false representa-
tions were repeated before him. The trial court convicted A and
B of cheating. The High Court, on appeal, set aside the convice
tion, holding that the person deceived—the Naib Tehsitdar—did
not suffer any “harm'™3, and though Wabi Baksh was likely to
suffer damage or harm no deception had been practised on him.
In the course of their judgment the learned Judges observed:—

“IL appears to me that the definition of ‘cheating’ in
section 415, Penal Code, requires modification in order
to cover cases where one person is deceived and another
person suffers, or is likely to suffer, damage or harm in body,
mind, reputation or property. It has been revealed in a num-
ber of cases that serious deception has been practised on
Government officials as a result of which certain other per-
sons have suffered a great deal of harm in reputation or
property, As the definition of ‘cheating’ at present stands,
such cases are not covered by section 415, Penal Code,...
Persons who practise such deception, may be convicted under
section 182, Penal Code, but the punishment prescribed for
that offence is not sufficiently deterrent, and it is desirable
that such convicts should be liable to be heavily punished
under section 420, Penal Code, which prescribes a maximum
sentence of seven years’ rigorous imprisonment.”

17.43. That harm must be caused to the person deceived
has also been emphasised in cases decided by other High Courts.*

1. Baboo Khan v. State, ALR. 1961 Ail. 639.

Muhammad Baksh v. Emperor, कै... 1941 Lah, 460, 464 (Bhide aad Abdul Rashid,
J).

3. As to meaning of “harm”, see Veeda Menezes, A.1.R. 1966 S.C. 773; (1965) 2S.CR.
377.

4. Seetharam Rao, A.LR. 1954 Mysore 9; Baboo Khan, ALR. 1961 All. 639.


296

A recent Supreme Court case? seems to support this view by
implication. In that case, the two appellants were charged with
having cheated an Assistant Station Master by dishonestly in-
ducing him to make out a railway receipt with false particulars,
which was capable of being converted into a valuable security.
The receipt as made out stated that a wagon “said to contain 251
bags of chillies” had been despatched. The wagon was found
to contain 197 bags of bhusa (chaff). The charge of cheating the
Station Master could not be established, as the railway did not
incur any additional liability by the false representation
that the consignment contained 25! bags of chillies. The issue
of the railway receipt was not likely to cause any damage or harm
to the railway as the freight due was paid. The Court therefore
held that no question of cheating the railway or the Station
Master arose, and acquitted the appellants. The facts of the case,
the long-drawn trial and the final conclusion seem most un-
fortunate and deplorable, “both because the courts are reluctan-
tly compelled to allow dishonesty to go unpunished and because
of the serious waste of judicial time involved in the discussion of
futile legal subtieties.2”

There is also a suggestion? that misrepresentation of facts
by any person which leads an officer of Government to pass orders
to the detriment of third parties should be brought under the defi-
nition of cheating. This will be covered if cases of harm caused
to third persons are included in the definition.

As against this, there is the plain fact that the idea of harm
cannot be dispensed with, as that would widen the scope of this
offence to the extent of taking innocent activities like practical
jokes. In actual experience it is found that undue advantage to
‘the cheat results in some harm to some person. We consider,
therefore, that the idea of harm must be retained as a necessary
element of cheating, but we would include within its scope harm
to anybody, and not only to the person deceived.

Amend- 17.44. We propose accordingly to substitute for the words

ment 970: “harm to that person” the words “harm to any person”.
posed.

Explana- 17.45. Section 415 contains an explanation that “a dishonest
tion amend- concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this
ment pro- section”. Since “concealment” conveys the idea of some thing
Posed. active, the question was often arisen whether mere non-disclosure

of facts, when there is no legal obligation to disclose them, is

1. Hari Sav v. State of Bihar, A.L.R. 1970 S.C. 843.

2. (1956) 72 Law Quarterly Review 183, quoted by Lord Goddard C.J. in Russell ४. Sinith,
(1957) 2 All. E.R. 797.

3. F.3(9)/56-L.C., S.No. 106 (Suggestion from Legal Remembrancer and Secretary to a
State Government).


s

297

deception. The view generally taken by the courts is that such
non-disclosure is not concealment and there is no deception.
It would make for certainty if this is expressly mentioned in the
explanation. We propose therefore to amplify it as follows:—

“ Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts, or,
where there is a legal duty to disclose particular facts, a dis-
honest omission to disclose those facts, is a deception within
the meaning of this section.”

17.46. Section 416 which defines cheating by personation
needs no change.

17.47. The next three sections provide the punishment for
cheating simpliciter, cheating by personation and cheating in
order to cause wrongful loss to one whose interest the offender
is bound to protect. No change is required in these sections.

17.48. There is a noticeable overlap between the definition
of the offence punishable under section 420 and the definition
of cheating contained in section 415. Section 420 envisages, be-
sides the essential actus reus of cheating with its concomitant mens
rea as set out in section 415, one or other of three ingredients
turning on delivery of property and tampering of valuable securi-
ties. The typical offence under section 420 is committed when the
offender “‘cheats”—not merely deceives—and by such “cheating”,
dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property
to any person. But then according to section 415, a person
“cheats” when he deceives another, and dishonestly induces
the person deceived to deliver any property to any person. Where
a person “cheats” in this manner, it would appear that he is pu-
nishable under section 415 as well as section 420. In fact, the
earlier section curiously and unnecessarily mixes up the parti-
cular type of cheating for which a severe punishment is provided
in section 420 and a general description wide enough to cover
all forms of deception which should be regarded as culpable.
As a general definition of cheating, section 415 should have con-
fined itself to the latter. e.g., by stating that “whoever, by deceiving
any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
deceived... to do or omit todo anything which he would not
do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omis-
sion causes, or is likely to cause, damage or harm to any person
in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat’. Delivery
of property, making, altering or destroying of a valuable secu-
rity, etc., specifically mentioned in section 420, would ail be
covered by the general formula and appropriately treated as
aggravated forms of cheating. We, however, do not think that
there is any great practical advantage in making this change.!

Section
416.

Sections
417, 418
and 419.

Section 420
overlapping
section 415
in some
respects.

in section 415.

1. One of us, Shei K.V.K. Sundaram, was strongly in favour of recommending this change


Cheating

in respect
of Govern-
ment con-
tracts—new
section
proposed.

1. 29th Report - Proposal 10 include certain social and economic offences in the 1.

298

17.49. While the idea of inducing the person deceived to con-
sent to the retention of property by a third person is expressly
mentioned in-section 415, it is not referred to in section 420
which appears to be an oversight. We think this should be recti-
fied. The section may be redrafted in clauses as follows to facili-
tate understanding:—

“420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of
property.—Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces
the person deceived.

(a) to deliver any property to any person, or

(0) to consent that any person shall retain any
property, or

(c) to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part
of a valuable security, or

(4) to make, alter or destroy anything which is sig-
ned or sealed and which is capable of being converted
into a valuable sccurity,

shail be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be Jiable to fine.”

17.50 The Law Commission in an earlier Report! considered
how to tackle the problem of cheating of Government on a
large scale by dishonest contractors while supplying goods
or executing works, and recommended a specific provision pena
lising it as an aggravated offence of cheating. € sidering the
wide range of State activity at present (and it is likely to grow
wider), there are, we think, sound reasons for enacting a special
provision expressly covering such fraudulent conduct. The maxi-
mum punishment for such conduct, we think, could be more
severe than that suggested in the earlier Report, and we propose
a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment. We propose that after
section 420, a new section be inserted reading as follows:—

“420 A. Cheating public authorities in performance of
certain contracts.—Whoever, in performance of any contract
with the Government or other public authority for the
supply of any goods, the construction of any building or the
execution of any other work—

{a) in the case of a contract for the supply of goods,
dishonestly supplies goods which are less in quantity
than, or inferior in quality to, those he contracted to
supply, or which are, in any manner whatever, not in
accordance with the contract or

paragraphs 137 to 139


299

(0) in the case of a contract for the construction of
a building or execution of other work, dishonestly uses
materials which are less in quantity than, or inferior in
quality to, those he contracted to use, or which are, ie
any manner, whatever not in accordance with the con-
tract,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall be also
liable to fine.

Explanation —In this section “public authority” means—

(a) a corporation established by or under a Central,
Provincial or State Act;

(6) a Government company as defined in section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956; and

(टी a local authority”.

17.51, The provisions of Chapter 9 of the Code relating to
corruption are applicable only to acts of ‘public servants’, and
as defined in section 2}, that expression does not include private
employees. Commercial corruption, i.e.. corruption by emplo-
yees of private organisations is thus not- punishable in India,
unless falls within the definition of cheating or criminal breach
of trust or other offences made punishable in other Chapters.

With rapid industriatisation and the formation of big joint stock
companies and the wide delegation of managerial functions to
professional business executives, close personal contact between
the employer and employed has practically disappeared, especially
where the employer is not a human being, but a corporate body.
Opportunities for committing acts akin to “bribery” by such
employees have increased greatly and legislation is necessary to
penalise such act. Thus an executive employce of a private
undertaking, receiving a substantial personal advantage for fa-
vouring a particular firm with a contract {not necessarily the
most advantageous to his employer) or conniving at the deli-
very of inferior materials in return for a consideration would,
at present, be immune from criminal law. The only actions open
to the employer-company would be a civil action and internal
disciplinary measures against their servant.

17.52. In England, a statute? makes it a misdemeanour tria-
ble. summarily or on indictment, for any ‘agent’ to accept a
bribe as an inducement for doing or forbearing to do any act in
relation to his principal’s business; or for showing favour or
disfavour, and for any person to give a bribe to an agent as such
an inducement. Although the term ‘agent’ is defined to include
persons serving under the Crown or under .any corporation etc.,
the term is wide enough to include persons-employed in private
business. This statute has frequently been invoked to deal with
corruption in private industry.

1. The Presention of Corruption Act, 1906.

Commer-

Tuption.

Statutory
offence in
England

and othet
countries.


Shouid be
made an
offence in.
India.

New sec
tion 420 के
recom-
moeaded.

300

Similar legislation exists in France, Germany and Sweden
and in some of the United States.!

17.53. We consider that in India also a provision on the
subject applicable to all private employees is desirable. Corrup-
tion is perhaps as rampant amongst employees of private con-
cerns, especially big concerns, as amongst public servants. Though
our main object is to check corruption amongst employees of
big undertakings, we recommend that the language of the pro-
vision should be wide enough to include all classes of firms,
because it may not be feasible to frame the provision so as to ex-
clude smail firms.

17.54. We recommend that the following section which is
modelled on section 161 be added after section 420A proposed
above.?

“420B. Employee taking bribe in respect of employer's
affairs or business.—Whoever, being employed by another
accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain,
from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification other than legal remuneration, aS a motive or
reward—

(a) for doing or forbearing to do any act in relation
to his employer’s affairs or business, or

(b) for showing or forbearing to show, in the exer-
cise of his functions, favour or disfavour to any person
in relation to his employer's affairs or business.

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.

Explanations. (1) The word ‘gratification’ is not restric-
ted to pecuniary gratifications, or to gratifications estimable
in money.

(2) The words “legal remuneration” are not restricted to
remuneration which an employee can lawfully demand, but
include all remuneration which he is permitted by his employer
to accept.

(3) “A motive or reward for doing”. A person who re=
ceives a gratification as a motive or reward for doing what he
does not intend or is not in a position to do or has not done,
comes within these words.

1. Seo note in (1962) 11 L.C.L.Q. 880, 884, 885,

2. See paragraph 17.50 above.


301

Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case
in which the employee is a public servant acting as such.”

17.55. It was suggested that there should also be a provision
for punishing corruption by professional persons. For example,
if a chartered accountant or an advocate takes money and gives
a false certificate, he may not be guilty of any offence. We are,
however, of the view that such acts would amount to professional
misconduct, and may be left to be dealt with more appropriately
by the disciplinary tribunal of the profession concerned.
Suspension or revocation of right to proctice the profession
(as a chartered accountant or advocate) has a more deterrent
effect than imprisonment. A provision in the Penal Code cannot
be easily enforced and may prove a dead letter. We. therefore,
do not suggest a provision for punishing professional corruption
in general.

Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property.

17.56. Sections 421 to 423 which deal with fraudulent deeds
and dispositions of property do not require any comments or
modification.

Mischief
17.57. The next fascicle of 16 sections dea! with the offence
of mischief which is clearly and neatly defined in the first section
(425). While the corresponding English law as codified! in the
same year as the Indian Penal Code describes the mental element
in many of its sections as “unlawfully and maliciously”, our
definition adopts the simpler formulation of intention or know-

ledge of likelihood of the consequence with which we are familiar.

The classification of the offences for the purpose of prescribing
punishment is also much less detailed and cumbrous than that
adopted in the English Act of 1861. While that Act creates about
50 different offences of malicious damage to property, our Code
is content with 15.

17.58. A very light punishment of imprisonment upto three
months or fine or both is provided in section 426 for the ordinary
offence of mischief when none of the aggravating circumstances
specified in the subsequent sections exist. Aggravations are
based on value of damage caused, (5. 427), nature of the
property damaged (ss. 428 to 434), the method adopted
to cause damage (ss. 435 to 438), other criminal motives
influencing the act (ss. 439 and 440), and, of course, a combina-
tion of these aggravating circumstances. The maximum senten-
ces provided for the various offences are three monihs, one year,
two years, five years, seven years, ten years and life. We propose
a closing up and reduction of this spectrum of seven to five -one
year, three years, seven years, ten years and life—and also a
reduction in the number of different offences.

Professio-
nal corrup-
tion.

Sections
421 10 424.

Iniroduc-
tory.

1, The Malicious Damage Act, 1861.


Section
425.

Sections
426, 427
and 434,

Section
428 to be
omitted.

Section

429 Amend-
ments,
recom
mended,

Section
430 An
endments
10६ ७॥-
mended.

New Pro-
vision
Mischief
in respect
of public
property
and mis-
chief ia
respect
‘of machi-
nory.

Sections
434 and 432

302

17.59. Section 425 which defines mischief does not require
any modification.

17.60. The maximum punishment under section 426 for
mischief in its simple form may be increased from three months’
imprisonment to one year. When this is done, there will hardly
be any need for treating mischief causing damage to the amount
of a specified sum as an aggravated form of mischief punishable
with imprisonment upto two years. We propose that section 427
be omitted; and also section 434 under which destroying or da-
maging a landmark fixed by public authority is punishable with
one year’s imprisonment.

17.61. Section 428 punishes any one who kills, poisons or
aims any animal of the value of ten rupees or more, the punish-
ment being two years’ imprisonment. Since the maximum punish-
ment under section 426 is being raised, this special provision is
unnecessary, and we suggest that section 428 be omitted.

17.62. In section 429. the minimum value of the “other
animal” may be raised from fifty rupees to two hundred rupees.
But the maximum sentence of five years seems excessive and
may be reduced to three years.

17.63. Section 430 deals with mischief causing diminution of
the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or
drink for human beings, or for animals, which are
property. or for cicantiness or for carrying on any
manufacture. This kind of enumeration seems to us both
unnecessary and incomplete. It would be sufficient to say
that mischief by causing diminution of supply of water to the
public or to any person for any purpose is punishable. The
maximum sentence for this offence also may be three years only.

17.64. Mischief to public property, although of course co-
vered by the definition of mischief and by the basic section
punishing mischief, is not expressly provided for in the section
punishing aggravations of mischief. It would, we think, be
helpful if a specific provision is made to punish such mischief.
We suggest three years’ imprisonment as the maximum punish-
ment for this offence. We would also suggest a specific provision
for mischief in respect of machinery, punishing it with impri-
sonment upto three years, as instances of malicious damage to
expensive machinery have occurred.

17.65. While sections 431 and 432 do not call for any change
of substance, they could be combined into one. The maximum
punishment for these offences also may be three years instead of
five.


303

17.66. Section 433 punishes mischief by destroying or mov-
ing any light-house or other sea-mark or buoy, etc. To these
should be added marks for aerial navigation, interference with
which can be even more disastrous.

17.67, In section 435, it is hardly necessary to fix the very
low limit of ten rupees in respect of agricultural produce, as
distinguished from other property. The minimum of one hun-
dred rupees may be made generally applicable by omitting the
words “or, where the property is agricultural produce, ten rupees
or upwards”.

17.68. Section 436 punishes mischief by fire caused to any
human dweiling or place of worship or a building used for the
custody of property. We suggest that mischief to any sacred
object in such building should also be included and expressly
mentioned.

17.69. In section 437. which mentions mischief to vessels a
reference to aricraft should be added.

17.70. Section 438 needs no change of substance,

17.71, Section 439 does not punish any act of mischief, but
only the act of intentionally running a vessel a ground or ashore,
so that theft may be committed of property in it. We do not

think that such a provision fits in, at all, in this part of the Code.

Nor, in fact, do we see any point in such a provision, as the
conduct contemplated would be punishable in many other ways.
Hence section 439 should be omitted.

17.72. Tn section 440, the maximum punishment may be
increased from five years to seven years.

17.73. Accordingly, the following sections should be subs-
tituted in place of sections 426 to 440 :--

“426, Punishment for mischief—Whoever commits
mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to one year. or with
fine, or with both.

427. Mischief causing damage to public property or
machinery to the amount of one hundred rupees.—Whoever
commits mischief in respect of any property of the Govern-
ment or of a local authority or in respect of any machinery,
and thereby causes 1055 or damage to the amount of one
hundred rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine. or with both.!

Section
433.

Section
435 to be
amended.

Section
436 to
cover
sacred
objects.

Section
437 Am-
endment
recommens
ded.
Section
438.
Section

439 to 96
omitted.

Section
440 puni-
shment to
in-
creased.
Revised
sections
in place
of sec~
tions 426
to 440.

1. New provision.


veer:

304

428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal—Whoever
commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming, or render-
ing useless. any elephant, camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull,
cow or ox, whatever may be the value thereof, or any other
animal of the value of neo hundred rupees or upwards, shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.!

429. Mischief by causing diminution of supply of water
or inundation or obstruction in public drainage—-Whoever
commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he
knows to be likely to cause.—

(a) a diminution of the supply of water to the public
or to any person for any purpose, or

(0) an inundation of, or obstruction to any public
drainage,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.?

430. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or
channel.--Wboever commits mischief by doing any act
which renders any public road, bridge, navigable river or
navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable or less
safe for travelling or conveying property shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three vears, or with fine, or with both.?

431. Mischief committed after preparation made for
causing death or hurt or wrongful restraint.—Whoever com-
mits mischief, having made preparation for causing to any
person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of death
or of hurt or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 4

432. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less
useful air-route, beacon etc.—Whoever commits mischief
by destroying or moving or rendering less useful any air-route
beacon or aerodrome light, or any light at or in the neigh-
bourhood oi an air-route or aerodrome provided in com-
pliance with law, or any other thing exhibited or used for the
guidance pf aircraft, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
or with fine, or with both.>

५ Section 429 slightly amended.

tions 430 and 432 combined and amended.
. Section 431 slightly amended.

. Same as existing section 440.

. New provision.



305

433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less use-
ful a light-house or sea-mark.—-Whoever commits mischief
by destroying or moving any light-house or other light used
a sea-mark. or any sea-mark or buoy or other thing placed
as a guide for navigators, or by any act which renders any
such light-house, sea-mark. buoy or other such thing as afore-
said less useful as a guide for navigators, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend 10 seven years, or with fine, or with both.!

434. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe aircraft
or vessel. Whoever commits mischief to any air-craft or
to any decked vessel or to any vessel of a burden of twenty
tons or upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or render
unsafe, that aircraft or vessel, shall be punished with im-
prisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be fiable to fine; and if such
mischief is committed or attempted by fire or any explosive
substance, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or
with the punishment aforesaid.?

435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to
cause damage to amount of one hundred rupees-—Whoever
commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance, intend-
ing to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby
cause, damage to any property to the amount of one hundred
rupees or upwards, x xx shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.>

436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent.
to destroy place of worship, house, etc.—Whoever commits
mischief by fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause,
or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, the
destruction of,—

{a) any building which is ordinarily uscd as a place
of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place
for the custody of property, or

(b) any object therein which is held sacred by any
class of persons,

shall be punished with imprisonment for life,
or with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be liable to fine.”*

4. Same as existing section 433,

2. Sections 437 and 438 combined and amended to cover aircraft

3. Section 435 slightly amended.

4, Section 436 amended to cover sacred objects.

3M of Law:71-21.


Talroductory.

Part to be
simpli-
fied.

Section
441 to be
amended.

306

Criminal Trespass

17.74. The last item in this Chapter is criminal trespass.
In its least reprehensible form it is “entry upon .property in
another person's possession with the intention of annoying that
person”, the punishment being a maximum of three months’
imprisonment. At its worst, criminal trespass takes the form of
house-breaking when the punishment can be fourteen years”
imprisonment. The forms of criminal trespass described in the
Code are—

(i) house trespass (section 442);
(ii) turking house trespass {section 443);
ii) lurking house trespass by night (section 444);
(iv) house-breaking (section 445); and

(v) house-breaking by night (section 446).

17.75 Punishment to be provided for these offences according
to their gravity and according to the aggravating circumstances
in which they are committed. We recognise that simple trespass
is a very different matter from house-breaking, and the difference
in the punishments for the two offences is justified. We do
not, however, see much need for distinguishing between lurking
house trespass during the day and lurking house trespass by
night. Nor indecd does there seem any need for evolving these
different ideas, when plainly all that we wish to do is to severely
punish what is commonly understood as “burglary”. We
think this part of the Code could be considerably simplified by
dropping the notions of lurking house trespass and house-break-
ing and introducing, instead, the idea of burglary which should,
in substance, mean house trespass for committing theft or any
other serious offence. If adequate punishment is provided for
these two offences, there should no need for any intermediate
category of offence. We suggest that the maximum punishment
for criminal trespass should be raised from three months’ im-
prisonment to six months’ imprisonment, and for house trespass
it should be raised from one year to three years’ imprisonment,
while. for burglary the maximum punishment should be ten
years’ imprisonment.

17.76. Out of the definition of criminal trespass in_ section
441, a curious difficulty has arisen. The definition is in these
words :—

“Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession
of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate,
insult or anney any person in possession of such property,

or having lawfully entered into or upon such property,
unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to intimidate,
insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an
offence,

is said to commit ‘criminal trespass’.


307

The difficulty is about the second paragraph, the object of
which seems to be to cover the case of a person who enters
‘ another's property without any intention of annoying him or
committing any offence there, but later changes his mind and
insists on staying on the property in order to annoy the person in
possession. Some couris have thought that if the initial entry
1s unlawful though not accompanied by any of the intentions
mentioned in the section, then the second part of the definition
becomes inapplicable, and if such a wrong-doer continues
to stay on the property expressly for annoying the person in
possession, he commits no offence. The Calcutta High Court!
has put the matter thus:

“There appears to be two types of cases which arise for
consideration, one of the type of the case of Baldewa v.
Emperor? of unlawful entry without remaining with one of
the intentions prescribed and secondly a case like the present,
of the unlawful entry with the necessary intent followed by
the unlawful remaining also with the necessary intent. In
my opinion, neither type of case is covered by the plain words
of section 441 plainly interpreted. Whether they ought 106
be made punishable or not is 2 matter for the legislature”.

We are not worried by the second situation mentioned above,
for, in that case, the entry itself’ will be punishable; but the
first situation. if understood in the light of this judgment, could
hardly be tolerated. It could not be that the section punishes a
person who acts lawfully in the beginning but later forms an
evil intent, but not a person who acts unlawfully from the begin-
ning. It seems to us desirable, that the words of the definition
should be altered to bring out its purpose more clearly.

We have noticed a recent amendment made in Uttar Pradesh
in this respect. That is designed to deal with a trespasser who
refuses to vacate the property, after proper notice has been serv-
ed on him. We do not think the present Code is a fit place for
such special legislation, and we are not, therefore, adopting it.
The real defect will be met by revising the section as follows:

“441. Criminal trespass.—Whoever—

(a) enters into or upon property in the possession of
another with intent to commit an offence or to intimi-
date, insult or annoy any person in possession of such
property, or

(0) having entered into or upon such property with-
out such intent, unlawfully remains there with such
intent,

is said (0 commit criminal trespass”.

1. Sunil Kumar, ALR. 1951 Cal. 297-98.
2, Baldewa v. Emperor, A.LR. 1933 All. 816,



Section
442.

Sections
443 and
444 00॥7-
ted and
section 445
revised to
deti

Section
446 lo be
omitted.

Sections
447 to
460 to be
revised.

1, Compare section

308

47.77. In section 442, we considered the question whether
house-trespass should include trespass into a vehicle or aircraft,"
but decided that no such change is needed.

17.78. As indicated above, sections 443 and 444 which define
lurking house-trespass and lurking house-trespass by night should
be omitted and instead of house-breaking, burglary should be
defined in section 445 as foliows:—

“445. Burglary.--A person commits burglary, if-—

{a) he commits house-trespass in order to commit
theft or any offence punishable with imprisonment for
seven years or with a more severe punishment, or

(b) having committed house-trespass, he commits
theft or any such offence as aforesaid.”

Clause (b) of the above definition is intended to cover cases
where the original entry is not proved to have been with
intent to coramit the specified offence, but the trespasser does
commit the specified offence after his entry.

17.79, Section 446 which defines house-trespass by night may
be omitted.

17.80, Sections 447 to 460 which provide graded punish-
ments may be replaced by the following sections:—

“447, Punishment for criminal trespass.—Whocver com-
mits criminal trespass shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

448. Punishment for  house-trespass.—Whoever com-
mits house-trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.

449. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault
or wrongful restraint.—Whoever commits house-trespass,
having made preparation —

(a) for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting
any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person,
or

(0) for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of
assault, or of wrongful restraint,

#0 as proposed to be amended.



309

shall be punished with impriso nment of either description
for a term which may exteynd to seven years and shall also be
liable to fine.t

450. Punishment for burglary.—Whoever commits bur-
glary, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.?

451, Grievous hurt caused whilst committing burglary.—
Whoever, whilst committing burglary,—

(a) causes grievous hurt to any person, or

(9) altempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any
person,

shall 86 punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable
to fine.3

452. All persons jointly concerned in burglary punishable
where death or grievous hurt caused by one of them—If, at
sthe time of committing burglary, any person guilty of such
offence shall voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or
grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned
in committing such burglary shali be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years,
and shall also be liable to fine.4

17.81. Sections|461.and 462 do not require any comments or

change.

1
2
3
4

+ Existing section 452.
. New section covering existing sections 449, 450 and 451.
. Existing section 459 modified.

Existing section 460 modified,

Sections
461 and
462.


Sections
463 and
464 ana}
lysed.

fish Act.

CHAPTER 18

OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND
TO PROPERTY MARKS

18.1. The offence of forgery is defined in sections 463 and
464. The two sections have tobe read and construed together
for deciding whether a person has committed the offence. The
actus reus is making a false document, and the mens rea, under
the first section may be any one of the following:—

(i) intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to
any person;

(ii) intent to support any claim or title;

(iii) intent to cause any person to part with property;
(iv) intent to cause any person to enter into a contract;
(५) intent to commit fraud;

(vi) intent that fraud may be committed.

The actus reus, which is indicated in bare outline in that
section by the words “makes a false document” is described ela-
borately under three heads in section 464. Practically every
conceivable way of preparing a false document or of falsifying
a genuine document is covered in this description. But, not
content with being comprehensive as to the nature and method of
falsification, the section requires in cach of the three heads a
culpable state of mind (either dishonesty or fraud) to accompany
the physical making of the false document. When one remem-
bers that mere making of a false document is not punishable as
such under this Chapter, it is difficult to find any cogent reason
why the mental clement is first given under two broad heads
“dishonestly or fraudulently”) with reference to the making
of the false document. and then under six heads (in section 463)
with reference to the complete offence of forgery.

18.2. The position in England where the offence of forgery
stands codified in the Forgery Act of 1913 is very much simpler.
By sub-section (J) of section | of this Act, “forgery is the making
of a false document in order that it may be uscd as genuine... .,
and forgery with intent to defraud or deceive, as the case may
be, is punishable as in this Act provided”. Sub-section (2) of the
same section sets out in detail (more or less on the same lines as
section 464 of our Code) the circumstances in which a document
will be considered to be false or to have been made false, but it
docs nof again bring in the mental element. Thus, the English
definition amounts to stating that whoever dishonestly or fraudu-
lently makes a false document in order that it may be used as
genuine commits forgery.

310


311

18.3 We consider that sections 463 and 464 could be easily
combined and simplified giving a clearer definition of the offence
of committing forgery. The duplication of the mental element
which is patent and unnecessary should be removed. When one
analyses the six “intents” specified in section 463, it is clear that
all of them, except perhaps the last, are covered: by the “dis-
honestly or fraudulently” formula repeated three times in section
464; the mental element of the offence would, it seems to us,
be sufficiently specified by the words “dishonesily or fraudulent-
ly or with intent that fraud may be committed on the public
or on any person”. It may be recalled that under the revised
definition of “fraudulently” proposed by us in Chapter 2, the
intention to deceive another and by that deceit to cause injury to
any person or to induce any person to act to his disadvantage
is covered by that word.

18.4 As regards the act required for the offence, the
description given in section 464 requires little modification.
Under the first clause, a person makes a false document if he
makes it appear that the document was made “‘at a time at which
he knows that it was not made’, it being understood, of course,
that the time of making the document is material for the object
in view. The place of making a document may be just as material
as the time and it should be forgery if this detail is somehow
falsified. We. therefore. propose that the first clause should
refer to “place” as well as “time” but expressly qualify both by

adding “when the time or place is material”.!

In the second clause of section 464, it seems desirable to men-
tion “addition” and “obliteration” besides “cancellation”.

18.5 As many as 17 illustrations are appended to the section.
1६15 doubtful whether any of them is reatly required to elucidate
any obscure point in the definition’ Jn fact, they seem to be
staling the obvious and we sugges) that they could be omitted
in the revision.

18.6 The two sections may accordingly be combined and re-
vised as follows :—

“463. Forgery.—A person is said to commit forgery
who, dishonestly or fraudulently or with intent that fraud
may be committed on the public or on any person.—-

(a) makes, signs or executes a document or part of
document with the intention of causing it to be believed
that such document or part of a document was made,
signed or executed—-

(i) by, or by the authority of, a person by whom,
or by whose authority, he knows that it was not
made, signed of executed, or

Mental
ciement
of the

offence.

The cul-
pable act.

Mlustrae
tions unne-
cessary.

Sections
463 and
464 com-
bined and
revised,

. Cf.s. 1 (2) of the (U-K.) Forgery Act, 1913.


Section
465.

Sections
466 and
467 Am-
endment
regarding
punish-
ment.

“Authority
to adopt”
10 be omit-
ted.

312

_ Gi) (when the time or place is material) al a
time or place at which he knows that it was not
made, signed or executed; or

(b) by cancellation, addition, obliteration or other-
wise, alters a document in any material part thercof,
after it has been made, signed or executed cither by hi
self or by any other person, whether such person be liv.
ing or dead at the time of such alteration: or

(c) causes any person to sign, execute or alter a docu-
ment. knowing that such person, by reason of unsound-
ness of mind or intoxication cannot, or by reason of de-
ception practised upon him does not. know the contents
of the document or the nature of the alteration.

Explanation.—(1) {n this section, “execute” includes seal-
ing and making any mark denoting execution of a document.

(2) A man’s signature of his own name may amount to
forgery.

(3) The making of a document in the name of a fictitious
person, intending it to be believed that the document was
made by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person,
intending it to be believed that the document was made by
the person in his life-time, may amount to forgery”.

18.7. Section 465 prescribes the punishment for the offence
of forgery. The maximum period of imprisonment now provided
is two yeal We propose to increase it to three years, having
regard 10 the gravity of the offence.

18.8. Section 466 deals with forgery of Court records. public
registers etc., and section 467 with forgery of valuable securi-
ties, wills etc. These types of forgery are rightly considered
aggravated forms of the offence and visited with higher punish-
ment. However, the imprisonment for life provided in section
467 for forgery of valuable securities appears to be too harsh.
On the other hand, the maximum punishment of seven years
prescribed in section 466 for forging a Court record or a public
register appears to be too light. when compared with the life
imprisonment or imprisonment for 10 years provided in section
467 for forging a valuable security. We are of the view that the
two equally grave offences should be treated alike, and a maxi
mum imprisonment of 10 years should be provided for both.
‘The proposed punishment being common to both sections, they
may be combined into one section.

18.9. We are also of the view that “the authority to adopt a
son” now mentioned alongwith valuable security in section
467 may be omitted, as the legal importance of an authority to
adopt is no longer what it was under the uncodifided Hindu law.


313

18.10. Another point that requires to be considered regard-
ing sections 466 and 467 is the use therein of the words “a docu-
ment purporting to be”. Apparently, thesc words have been
employed by the Legislature to cover a document which does
not possess legal validity gua a document of the enumeraicd type,
though it “purports” to be such a document. The question
whether the document possesses such legal validity is immaterial
and what is material is what character the writing attempts to
put on. But this attempt at subtlety may create its own pro~
blems. For example, when a person forges a document, —e.g.,
a public register containing a few thousand entries,—is he forging
“a document which purports to be a public register”, or is he
merely forging *8 document which is a public register”? Since
the rationale of sections 466 and 467 seems to be that tampering
with public registers, Court records, valuable securities ctc.
should be considered aggravated forms of the offence of forgery,
we feel that, in the interests of clarity, the words “a document
purporting to be” should be replaced by the words “in respect
of a document which is or purports to be”, which will be wide
enough to cover valid documents as well as documents whose
validity (in the sense discussed above) is doubtful.

18.11. Sections 466 and 467 may be combined and revised as
follows 2—

“466. Forgery of Court record, public register, will,
valuable security, & Whoever commits forgery in respect
of a document which is, or purports to be—

(i) a record or proceeding of or in a Court of Jus-
tice:

Gi) @ register kept, or document made, by a public
servant in his official capacity;

(iii) a register of birth, baptism, marriage or burial;

(iv) a will;

{v) a valuable security;

(vi) an authority to make or transfer any valuable
security ;

(vii) an authority to receive or deliver any valuable
security, movable property or money; .

(viii) an acquittance or receipt for the delivery of
any valuable security or movable property or for the pay-
ment of any money;

(ix) an authority to institute or defend any suit or
to take any procecdings therein or to confess judgment;
or

{x} a power of attorney;

“Purpor-
ting to
be”.

Sections
466 and
467 com-
bined and
revised.


Sections
468 and
469 to be
omitted.

Section
470,

Section
471 cane
flict of
decisions.

314

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

18.12 Sections 468 and 469 deal, respectively, with forgery
for the purpose of cheating and forgery for the purpose of harm-
ing reputation; the punishment is seven years for the former
offence, and three years for the latter. We do not think that
these ure particularly aggravated forms of the offence of forgery;
and as we have already proposed a slight increase in the punish-
ment for forgery,! we recommend that sections 468 and 469
should be omitted.

18.13. Section 470 defines a “forged document” as “a false
document made wholly or in part by forgery”. This is defective,
inasmuch as forgery is itself defined in section 463 as “making
a false document” with the requisite intent, so that,’when one
reads section 470 and section 463 together, one meets the idea
of “making a document” twice. Further, in view of the revised
definition of “forgery’’ proposed above, a “forged document”
could be defined as a document in respect of which, or any part
of which, forgery has been committed. We propose that this
revised definition be put in as section 464 thus :~

“464. Forged document—A document in respect of
which, or any part of which, forgery has been committed is
a forged document.”

18.14, Under section 471, whoever uses as genuine a forged
document shall be punished in the same manner as if he had
forged such document. The use of the words “in the same
manner as if he had forged” has led to some conftict of decisions,
regarding the question whether a person who has both forged
the document and used it as genuine, can be punished for both
the offences.

In Umrao Lal,? Aikman, J. of the Allahabad High Court
said—

“The concluding words of this section lead me to believe
that it is directed against some person other than a person
proved to be the actual forger. The section is useful as an
alternative charge when it is not certain whether the accused
person is himself the forger of a document or has merely
used it as genuine. But [ cannot recollect a case in which the
forger has been punished both for forging a document and
for using it as genuine.”

Tn the later case of Badri Prasad}, Knox and Muhammad
Ratliq, JJ of the same High Court said they knew of no authority
for the proposition that “the accused cannot be convicted at one

1. Sec paragraph 18.7, supra.
2, Unirao Lat, (1900) LL.R. 23 All. 84.
3. Badri Prasad, (1912) LL.R. 35 All. 63.


315

and the same time of forging a document and using that
document as genuine, and the charges under sections 467 and 471
must, therefore, be regarded as alternative’. Apparently, Umrao-
Lal’st case was not brought to their notice, nor did they go
into the question in any detail.

In Sriramulu Naidu,? however, Waller and Jackson, JJ. of
the Madras High Court expressly disagreed with Aikman, Jes
view and said—-

“All, it seems to us, that section 471 lays down is that the
sentence that can be imposed for the offence of using a forged
document as genuine is the same as the sentence that can be
imposed for the offence of forgery. They are separate offen-
cesand, under section 35, Criminal Procedure Code, separate
sentences may be passed on an accused person who has
been convicted at the same trial of both.”

In Gajanan Sakharam,> Halifax, A.J.C.. of Nagpur was cm-
phatic that committing forgery and using a forged document as
genuine are separate transactions, the commission of one does
not necessarily involve the commission of the other, and a per
son committing the two offences can certainly be convicted of
them both. But, in Ismail Panju,* Findlay, A.J.C., of the same
Court agreed with the reasoning of Aikman, J. in Umrao Lal
and thought that “the language of section 471 most obviously
suggests that this provision is expressly directed against some
person other than the forger himself’. According to him, “the
reason for the presence of section 471 on the statute book, in
the somewhat unusual language which is employed therein, is in
order (0 provide a useful alternative charge in cases where there
is uncertainty as to whether the person on trial is himself the
forger of the document, or has merely used it as genuine, know-
ing it to be nothing of the sort”.

18.15. To the extent that this controversy has arisen from
the mewhat usual language employed” in section 471, we
are of the view that it should be avoided by dropping the referen-
tial form and making the punishment provision self:

-contained.
We have ourselves no doubt that the object of employing the abbre-
viated form the punishment to be imposed for the offence of using
a forged document is simply to equate jt to the punishment for
committing forgery in respect of that document which may fall
under section 465 or 466 or 467, The wording of the punish-
ment provision in section 471 does not appear to be specially
designed to provide a useful alternative charge in cases of un-
certainty. The offence under this section may be committed
either by the forger himself or by another person, ९४७ one who
1. Umrao Lal, (1900) 1.L.R. 23 All. 84.
2. Sriramutu Naidu, (1928) LL.R. 52 Mad. 532.
3. Gajanan Sakharam, AA.R, 1924 Nag. 162.
4. Ismail Panja, ALR. 1926 Nag. 137.
5. Umrao Lat , (1900) LL.R. 23 All. 84.

Section
471 1९5
vised.



Sections
472 and
473 com-
bined and
revised,

Section
474 ree
vised.

316

has employed a professional to prepare the forged document for
him. It is difficult to see why in the former case the offender
should not be charged with. and convicted of, both the offences.

Section 471 may be revised as follows :—

“ATL, Using as genuine a forged document—Whoever
fraudulently or dishonestly use as genuine any document
which he knows, or has reason to belicve, to be a forged
document—

{a) shall, if the document is one of the description
mentioned in section 466, be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten year ,
and shail also be liable to fine; and

(b) shail, in any other case, be punished with impri-
sonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.”

18.16. Section 472 punishes the making of any instrument
for the purspose of forging any.document mentioned in section
467, while section 473 punishes similar acts for the purpose of
forging any other document, including documents of the type
mentioned in section 466. While this preparatory act requires
to be punished where the object is forgery of any document men-
tioned in section 466 or section 467, it is hardly necessary in
the case 01 other documents. The punishment of
life imprisonment now provided in section 472 appears to be un-
duly harsh. The maximum punishment of imprisonment for
ten years should be sufficient for the offence. We propose that
sections 472 and 473 may be combined and revised as follows: —

“472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, १९९... with
intent to commit forgery punishable under section 466.—Who-
ever makes or counterfeits any seal. plate or other instrument
making an impression, intending that the same shail be
used for the purpose of committing aay forgery which would
be punishable under section 466, or with such intent, has in
his possession any such seal, plate or other instrument. know-
ing the same to be counterfeit. shall be punished with rigor-
ous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten ycars,
and shall also be tiable to fine.””

18.17. In view of the proposal to combine sections 466 and
467 in one section, section 474 may be revised as follows:—

“474. Possessing a forged document described in section
466.—Whoever has in his possession any doument of the
description mentioned in section 466, knowing the same to
be forged and intending that the same shall traudulently or
dishonestly be used as genuine, shall be punished with rigor
ous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to finc.


317

18.18. Sections 475 and 476 are similar to sections 472 and 473.
These two sections also may be combined and revised on the
same lines as follows:—

“475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticati-
ing documents described in section 466 or possessing counter-
feit marked material.—Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the
substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the
purpose of authenticating any document described in section
466, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the
purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any
document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such
material, or who, with such intent, has in his possession any
material upon or in the substance of which any such device
or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with rigor-
ous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be-liable to fine.”

18.19. Section 477 deals with the offences of cancellation,
destruction etc. of “a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or any
valuable security”. For the reason given! under section 467,
the words “or an authority to adopt a son” may be omitted from
this section also. The punishment for this offence may be the
same as that provided for the aggravated offence of forgery under
the revised section 466 above. Section 477 may be revised as
follows :—

“477, Fraudulent cancellation, destruction etc. of valuable
security or will—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or
with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to any
person,—

(a) cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to can-
cel, destroy or deface, or secrets or attempts to secret,
any valuable security or any document which is or pur-
ports to be a will; or

(b) commits mischief in respect of such valuable
security or document;

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

18.20. Section 477A deals with the offence of falsification of
accounts by a clerk, officer or servant with regard to books,
papers etc. belonging to his employer. There appears to be a
difference of judicial opinion on the question whether the section
applied to the case of a partner who falsifies the accounts of the
firm. हैं

Sections
475 and 476
combined
and

revised,

Section 477
revised.

Section
4774
applica-
bility to
partner
keeping
accounts
of the firm.

1. Sce paragraph 18.9 above.


Sections
ATS 10 489.

Sections
489A to
4897.

C.V. Krishnan v. Virji Kunverji & another, A... 1959 Cal. 498.

318

in a Calcutta case,! it was held that a partner cannot be guilty
under this section, and that the offence can only be committed
by somebody in the employ of another person as a clerk or officer
or servant, and the falsification can only be committed in respect
of the books of accounts of the employer. A similar view has
been taken by the Allahabad High Court.2 But in a Bombay
case,> it was held that a partner, if appointed as such to manage
the business or to write the accounts of the firm. acted as its ser-
vant, and if he falsitied the accounts, section 477A would apply
to him.

On a full consideration of both the views. we were inclined
to agree with the former interpretation. The opinion expressed
by the Supreme Court4 that a partner cannot be held guilty of
breach of trust under section 405 is likely to prevail as regards
the liability of partners under section 477A also. No amendment
of the section by way of clarification is. therefore, necessary.

18.21. The next twelve sections originally dealt with offences
relating to trade marks, property marks and merchandise marks.
Two of them, namely, sections 478 and 480 were repeated, and
the other scctions were amended, by the Trade and Merchandise
Marks Act, 1958. Ths group of icn scctions now deals with
offences relating to property marks only. There is no contro-
versy about them.

18.22. Sections 489A to 489E, which deal with offences
regarding currency notes and bank notes, have been considcred
in a previous Chapter.5

Hari Prasad ४. State, A.A.R. 1953 All. 660.

Velji Raghavji, A.i.R. 1965 S.C. 1433; (1965) 2 S.C.R. 429.

3.

2.

3, State v. Devakinandan, AAR. 1959 Bom. 484.
4.

5.

See Chapter 12 above


CHAPTER 19

CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF
SERVICE

19.1. This chapter, which has now got reduced from its origi-
nal three sections to one, is itself a relic of the last century when it
was considered necessary and proper to safeguard contracts of
service with a penal provision for breaches. An old Act of
1859 provided “for the punishment of breaches of contract by
artificers, workmen and labourers”, who, having received money
in advance on account of work which they had contracted to per-
form, refused to perform the work. Three special cases were
considered serious enough to be included in the Penal Code.
One was breach of contract of service during a voyage or journey
and another was breach of contract to serve at a distant place to
which the servant was conveyed at the master’s expense. These
two were made punishable as offences by section 490 and section
492, respectively. All these oppressive enactments were repealed
in 1925 by the Workmen’s Breach of Contract (Repealing)
Act, 1925.

19.2. The surviving section 491 is perhaps not altogether on
a par with the two repealed sections. {t may be regarded as hav-
ing some ethical justification in that the person affected by the
breach of contract is, because of youth, unsoundness of mind,
disease of bodily weakness, in a helpless condition. By failing
to look after such persons after having agreed to do so, an offend-
er may be causing serious harm to the health of the helpless
individual. However, the offence itself is treated as trivial and
made punishable with a small fine not exceeding Rs. 200, or in a
very bad case, with a short term of imprisonment not exceeding
three months. It is noticed that in recent times there have been
no complaints under this section. We consider, therefore, that
the practical utility of the section is negligible and that it is not
necessary to retain it in the Penal Code. The whole Chapter
may be repealed.

319

History of
Chapter.

Repeal of
Section
491 16-
commen-
ded,


Jotroduc-
tory.

Section
493.

Section
494—Deli-
nition of
bigamy.

CHAPTER 20
OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE

20.1. In this chapter are enumerated six offences relating to
the ancient institution of matrimony to which most communities
and, indeed, most people attach vital importance as forming the
essential basis of family life. Besides the principal offences of
bigamy and adultery, fraudulent conduct in this field is made
punishable under two sections (493 and 496). The maximum
punishment prescribed for these offences ranges from five to ten
years’ imprisonment. Enticing or detaining a married woman
with intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person
is also made an offence, but a minor one, punishable with
imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine or with both.

20.2. Section 493 punishes.a person who deceives a woman
into believing that she is lawfully married to him and makes her
live with him as wife and husband. Jn a way, the offence
is very near to, but not the same as, an offence of rape under
clause four of Section 375. As such, the punishment of ten
years’ imprisonment for the offence is not unduly severe.

We considered a suggestion that the section should apply
also to a woman who deceives a man in the same way and with
the same object. Apart from the improbability of such cases
occurring, the injury done to the man in body, mind or reputation
by such deceit is negligible and need not be taken notice of in
the Penal Code.

20.3. Bigamy is defined in section 494 as the act of a person
who, having a husband or wife living, marries, but only in a case
where such subsequent marriage is void under her or his personal
law. Until recently, polygamy was permissible for all commu-
nities in India except Christians and Parsis, and consequently
the impact of this section fell mainly on women. With the
passing of the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955, the whole population
of India, except the Muslim male and some tribes among whom
polygamy is permitted by custom, are concerned with the scc-
tion.

The phrase “having a husband or wife living” used in the
definition was natural at a time when divorces were rare even
where permissible by 189, and the bond of marriage subsisted
until death of one party to the marriage severed it. In a case
where the first marriage was dissolved under the law, cach of
the parties would cease to be “husband” and “‘wife’’, respective-
ly, of the other and, consequently, the fact of that individual

320


321

being alive would be irrelevant to the application of this section.
Since it is really, not so much the fact of the person “having
a husband or wife /iving”, as the legal subsistence of the first
marriage that makes the subsequent marriage void and an
offence, we consider that it would be preferable to define bigamy
as follows :-—

“Whoever, being married, contracts another marriage in
any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its tak-
ing place during the subsistence of the earlier marriage,
commits’ bigamy.”

The expression “contracting a marriage” which is used in the
second paragraph of the exception seems to us to be more expres-
sive than the word “marries” used in the existing definiton.

20.4. The first exception provides that the section does not
extend to any person whose marriage has been declared void by
a court of competent jurisdiction. It has been remarked?
“that a person accused of an offence under section 494 may
plead in his defence that the first marriage was null and void even
though he had not obtained a declaration to that effect” by a
court. Inacase where the parties have gone through a ceremony
of marriage which is utterly ineffective in law so that they have
never acquired the status of husband and wife, neither party
can be said to “have a husband or wife living” at the time of
contracting the second marriage, and consequently neither party
commits the offence defined in this section. It is, therefore,
doubtful whether the first exception serves any useful purpose
even at present. When the definition of bigamy is altered, as
proposed above, it would be rendered quite superfluous, A
person whose alleged first marriage was void ab initio cannot be
said to “tbe married” and his subsequent marriage cannot be said
to be contracted during the “subsistence” of any earlier marriage.
We, therefore, propose to omit the first exception.

20.5. The second Exception is necessary and should be retain-
ed with a few verbal modifications.

20.6. It has been held that, though section 494 makes no
reference to intention or knowledge, the normal presumption
that a penal statute requires some mens rea must be given effect
to. In Kunju Ismail?, the first accused, a Muslim woman,
took legat opinion that she could effectively divorce her hus-
band, went through the formalities thereof, gave notice to him
and, after waiting for a reasonable time, married the second
accused. The Court found that the divorce was valid and con-
sequently the accused was not guilty of bigamy. It 2150 held,
after an elaborate discussion of the mens rea aspect of the offence,

Exception,
first part
to be omit-
ted as sup-
erfluous.

Seéond
part to be
retained.

Mens rea of
the offence.

1. Gnanasaundari ५. Nallathambi, AJ.R. 1945 Mad. 516.

2, Kunju Ismail, A.J.R. 1959 Ker. 151. See also Janaki Amma, 1.L.R. (1955) Trav.—Cochin,
137.

3M. of Law/71—22.


322

that there could be no criminal knowledge on the woman's part
that her first marriage was subsisting when she married again,
and hence she could not be guilty under section 494. We do
not think ॥ is necessary to indicate the mens rea specifically
in the definition of bigamy.

Re-marci- 20.7. Where a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of

age after divorce, but the law! fixes a period during which it will rot

decree of f < 4 .

divorce. be lawful for either party to the dissolved marriage to marry
again, the question may arise whether a person remarrying
within that period commits an offence against section 494 as it
stands. It may be urged that as soon as the decree of divorce
is pronounced, the parties cease to be husband and wife and,
thereafter, neither has a “husband or wife living™ for the
purposes of section 494. But. obviously, this line of argument.
if accepted will defeat the object of the marriage law in pro-
hibiting the divorce from remarrying until the expiry of a specifi-
ed period afier the decree. The same question may be rais-
ed with reference to the revised definition of bigamy. Do the-
parties to the divorce proceedings cease to “be marricd” im-
mediately a decree of divorce is pronouned or only after the
expiry of the specified period ? We consider that the answer
should be the latter, if not as a matter of interpretation, at any
rate, as a matter of policy. We, therefore, propose to add an
Explanation to this effect.

Fitect of 20.8. Incidentally, we wish to point out that there is at
conver present considerable uncertainty as to the effect of conversion
sarge . on marriage, particularly when the conversion is from a mono-

*  gamous religion to a polygamous religion and vicerersa. The
Law Commission in a previous Report? had gone into this
question and recommended legislation to replace the existing
Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act of 1866, which would be
uniformly applicable to all conversions and confer on a con-
vert a right to have the marriage contracted before conversion
dissolved on such terms as might be considered just and proper.
We would draw the attention of Government to this Report
and express the hope that it will be implemented 5001.

Punish- 20.9. Under section 494, the offence of bigamy is punish-
ment for able with imprisonment upto seven years. Where it is eccom-
bigamy panied by concealment of the former marriage from the person

Hone 49g, with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the offence

and 495, is punishable with imprisonment upto ten years, We are of
the view that the maximum in both cases is unnecessarily high
and should be reduced to three years for ordinary bigamy and
(७ seven years for the aggiavated form.

1. See section $7 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1969; section 48 of the Parsi Marriage and

Divorce Act, 1966; section 30 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954; and section 15 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. IU is noticed that these four sections use different language
to express more or less the same idea. It is desirable that the language of these
sections should be assimilated.

2. 11h Report an the Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1856.



323

20.10. In the light of the foregoing discussion, sections
494 and 495 may be replaced by the following two sections:—

“494. Bigamy—Whoever, being married, con-
tracts another marriage in any case in which such marriage
is void by reason of its taking place during the subsistence
of the earlier marriage, commits bigamy.

Explanation—Where a marriage has been dissolved
by the decree of a competent court under an enactment, but
the parties are, by virtue of a provision of the enactment under
which their marriage is dissolved prohibited from re-marrying
within a specified period, then, for the purposes of this section,
the marriage shall, notwithstanding its dissolution, be deemed
to subsist during that period.

Exception —The offence is not committed by any
person who contracts the later marriage during the life of
the spouse by earlicr marriage, if, at the time of the later
marriage, such spouse shall have been continually absent from
such person for seven years and shall not, within that period,
have been heard of by such person as being alive, provided
the person contracting the later marriage informs the person
with whom it is contracted of the real siate of facts so far as
the same are within his or her knowledge.

495, Punishment for bigamy.—{1) Whoever commits

bigamy shall be punished with imprisonment of cither
description for a term which may extend to three years,
and shail also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever commits bigamy, having concealed from
the person with whom the later marriage is contracted the
fact of the earlier marriage, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, and shail also be liable to fine.”

20.11. Section 496 punishes one who fraudulently goes
through a marriage ceremony knowing that he is not thereby
lawfully married. In keeping with our recommendation to
reduce the maximum punishment under the two preceding
sections, the maximum here also should be reduced from seven
years’ imprisonment to three years, «

20.12. The offence of adultery under section 497 is very
limited in scope as compared to the misconduct of adultery
as understood in divorce proceedings. The offence is commit-
ted only by a man who has sexual intercourse with the wife of
another man and without the latter’s consent or connivance.
The wife is not punishable for being an aduiteress, or even as
an abettor of the offence for which the man can be (but never
is) sent to jail for five years.

Sections
revised.

Section
996 puni-
shment to
be redu-
eed.

Section
497.


Views of
Macaulay
and of the
Law Com-
missioners.

324

20.13. The section did not find a place in the first Draft
Penai Code prepared by Macaulay, His reasons for not in-
cluding it were as follows! :-~

“We considered whether it would be advisable to pro-
vide a punishment for adultery, and in order to enable our-
selves (o come to a right conclusion on this subject we
collected facts and opinions from all the three Presidencies.
The opinions differ widely. But as to the facts there is a
remarkable agreement.

The following positions we consider as fully established :
Stst, that the existing laws for the punishment of adultery
ate altogether inefficacious for the purpose of preventing
injured husbands of the higher classes from taking the law
into their own hands; secondly; that scarcely any native
of the higher classes ever has recourse to the Courts of law
in a case of adultery for redress against either his wife, or
her gallant; thirdly, that the husbands who have recourse in
case of adultery to the Courts of law are generally poor men
whose wives have run away, that these husbands seldom have
any delicate feelings about the intrigue, but think themselves
injured by the elopement, that they consider wives as
useful members of their small households, that they generally
complain not of the wound given to their affections, not
of the stain on their honor, but of the loss of a menial whom
they cannot easily replace, and that generally their princi-
pal object is that the woman may be sent back.***Where
the complainant does not ask to have his wife again, he
generally demands to be reimbursed for the expenses of his
marriage.

These things being established, it seems to us that no
advantage is to be expected from providing a punishment
for adultery. The population seems to be divided into two
classes—those whom neither the existing punishment nor
any punishment which we should feel ourselves justifed
in proposing will satisfy, and those who consider the injury
produced by adultery as one for which a pecuniary compensa-
tion will sufficiently atone. Those whose feelings of honor
are painfully affected by the infidelity of their wives will
not apply to the tribunals at all. Those whose feelings ate
Jess delicate will be satisfied by a payment of money. Under
such circumstances, we think it best to treat adultery merely
as a civil injury.”

The Law Commissioners in their Report on the Draft Penal
Code took a different view and said :—

“While we think that the offence of adultery ought not
to be omitted from the Code, we would limit its cognizance

1, Maca ulay’s Draft Penal Code, (1837), Note 0.


325

to adultery committed with a married woman, and consider-
ing that there is much weight in the last remark in Note ‘Q’,
regarding the condition of the women in this country, in de-
ference to it, we would render the male offender alone liable
to punishment. We would, however, put the parties accus-
ed of adultery on trial together, and empower the Court in
the event of their conviction to pronounce a dectee of divorce
against the guilty woman, if the husband uses for it, at the
same time that her paramour is sentenced to punishment by
imprisonment or fine.”

This latter recommendation was not accepted, and in 1860,
section 497 was enacted in its present form.

20.14. It is not surprising that the attitude of criminal law Position in
towards adultery varies from country to country. In the Unit- the U.S.A.
ed States of America, it varies from one State to another. We
may quote from the Harvard Journal of Legislation (January
1970) the following :—~

“A review of the many different definitions of criminal
adultery throughout the United States will highlight the
variance problem. Four major formulations of adultery
exist under State law ; the ‘common law’ view, the ‘canon
law’ view, and two hybrid views. Under the common
law view, adultery takes place only when the woman is marri-
ed, but both parties are deemed to be guilty. Under the
canon law view, adultery is the voluntary sexual intercourse
of a married person with a person other than the offender’s
husband or wife, only the married person is guilty. Under
the majority hybrid rule, followed by twenty States, if either
spouse has sexual intercourse with a third party, both trans-
gressors are guilty of adultery. Finally, eight jurisdictions
make both transgressors guilty if the woman is married,
but if the woman is single, only the man is guilty. Six States
have never passed a statute changing adultery from acommon
law tort to a statutory crime, so it is not a crime unless it
constitutes a public nuisance by being open and notorious ;
three of these States, however, have anti-cohabitation ‘‘statut-
es. Three States have statutes punishing adultery but de-
fine it neither by statute or case law. Georgia has held
that the parties cannot commit adulrety unless both are
married to someone else ; if one is unmarried, the crime is
called ‘fornication and adultery’, and indictments have been
quashed where the wrong crime is charged. Eight States
require a showing of cohabitation or at least more than a
single adulterous act for conviction of adultery.”

20.15. While adultery is not a criminal offence in Britain, Position in
it is punishable, though mildly, in some of the countcies of Britain,

Europe. Thus, in France a wife guilty of adulteryis punishable Fran.
by jailing for a period ranging from three months totwo years many. ,

but the husband may put an end_to her serving the sentence
by agreeing to take her back. The adulterer is punishable


Questions
‘on which
opinion

was sou-

ght.

Views of
the Com-
mission.

326

similarly. A husband who keeps a mistress at the matrimonial
home is, on prosecution by the wife, punishable with fine. In
Germany, if a marriage is dissolved as a result of adultery,
then the guilty spouse, as well as the guilty partner, is punish-
able by imprisonment for a term of not less than six months,
but the prosecution has to be initiated by the aggrieved spouse
by means of a petition.

20.16. Against this background we included in our Question-
naire the Questions (a) should adultery be punishable at all,
and (b) if so, should the offence be limited to men only as in
section 497. We found opinion to be more or less equally
divided between those who favoured the total abolition of the
offence, those who favoured retention of section 497 without
any change, and those who would have the section modified so
as to make the errant wife punishable along with her paramour.

20.17. We also could not come to an agreed conclusion
among ourselves on these points. It seemed to us, however,
that from the factual and practical point of view, the position
to day is not appreciably different from that described by Macau-
lay more than 130 years ago. Criminal complaints of adultery
(which under section 199 of the Criminal Procedure Code can
be brought only by the husband of the woman or, in certain
circumstances, by someone else on his behalf) appeared to be
comparatively few and confined to the poorer and unsophisticat-
ed sections. The object of such prosecutions is seldom to
send the offender to jail, that is, if the court will regard the offence
as serious enough to merit a sentence of imprisonment. It
is more often with a view to come to a settlement with the offender
on the mercenary level. The existence of the section in
the Penal Code has no apparent affect on the number of cases
where the irate husband metes out condign punishment on the
wife or on her lover or on both of them.

However that they be, among the judges and lawyers who
expressed their views on the subject, the majority were in
favour of retaining the offence of adultery as defined in section
497. Though some of us were personally inclined to recom:
mend repeal of the section, we think on the whole that the time
has not yet come for making such a radical change in the exist-
ing position. We however, think that the reasons which weigh-
ed with the Law Commissioners in the last century in exempt-
ing the wife from punishment are by and large no longer valid,
and there is hardly any justification for not treating the guilty
pair alike. The suggestion that, in the name of equality of the
sexes, the unfaithful husband who has a mistress or goes to a
prostitute should also be punishable for committing adultery
did not find a sympathetic response in any quarter.

4, The statistics furnished in the official reports of Administration of Criminal Justice in the
States lump together all offences under Chapter 20, making it impossible to find out the
number of complaint cases under section 497 only.


327

20.18. After much discussion and careful consideration,
we are of the opinion! that the exemption of the wife from punish-
ment under section 497 should be removed, that the maximum
punishment of five years’ imprisonment prescribed in the
section is unreal and not called for in any circumstances and
should be reduced to two years, and that with these modi-
fications, the offence of adultery should remain in the Penal
Code. It is accordingly recommended that the section may
be revised as follows :—

“497, Adultery —If a man has sexual intercourse with
a woman who is, and whom he knows or has reason to believe
to be the wife of another man, without the consent or con-
nivance of that man, such sexual intercourse not amounting
to the offence of rape, the man and the woman are guilty
of the offence of adultery, and shaif be punished with im-
prisonment of either description for a term which may ex-
tend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

20.19. Section 498 punishes any one who “takes or entices
away” a married woman from her husband with intent that she
may have illicit intercourse with any person, and also any one
who “conceals or detains” any married woman with the same
intent.

As observed by the Supreme Court,? “the gist of the offence
under section 498 appears to be the deprivation of the husband
of his custody and his proper control over his wife, with the
object of having illicit intercourse with her. Section 498 is
intended to protect, not the rights of the wife, but those of her
husband ; and so, prima facie, the consent of the wife to deprive
her husband of his proper control over her would not be mate-
rial. It is the infringement of the rights of the husband, coupl-
ed with the intention of illicit intercourse, that is the essentiat
ingredient of the offence.”

20.20. The question raised before the Supreme Court in
that case was whether the word “detains” did not involve the
detention of the married woman against her will. In regard
to the three other acts mentioned in the section, namely, taking
away, enticing away and concealing, it cannot be seriously
contended that the consent of the woman affects the guilt of
the actor so long asthe intention and knowledge specified
in the section are established. In regard to the act of the deten-
tion also, the Supreme Court, after reviewing the decisions of
the High Courts, has held that, although the word may denote
detention of a person against his or her will, it is impossible to
give it this meaning in the context.

Revision.
of section.
497 re-
commen-
ded.

Section
498.

Meaning,
of “de-
tains”.

1. One of us, Mrs. Anna Chandi, is of a different opinion. Her views are set out in the

annexure to this Chapter.
2. Alamgir ५. State of Bihar, (1959) Suppl. 1 S.C.R. 464, 467, 468.


328

20.21. Gajendragadkar, J. (as he then was) remarked that
“the policy underlying the provisions of section 498 may no
doubt sound inconsistent with the modern notions of the ‘stat-
us of women and of the mutual rights and obligations under
marriage. Indeed Mr. Saran vehemently argued before us that
it was time that sections 497 and 498 were deleted from the Penai
Code. That, however, is a question of policy with which Courts
are not concerned”.

We considered whether section 498 should be repealed or
amended so as to make it accord with “‘modern notions of the
status of women”. By way of amendment, it could
hardly be suggested that it should be an offence for any one
(man or woman) to entice away or conceal a married man so
that he may have illicit intercourse with a woman. On the
other hand, repealing of section altogether might result in giv-
ing unchecked liberty to procurers and go—between which.
point of vicw, would not be desirable.

20.22. We fecl, however, that it would be an improvement
to limit the offence to the three acts of taking away, enticing away
and concealing. Detention which in the context may even
cover the act of giving shelter to a married woman who has left
her husband of her own free will, may be omitted. We propose
the section may be amended as follows :—

“498, Taking or enticing away or concealing with cri-
minal intent a@ married woman.—Whoever takes or entices
away or conceals any woman who is, and whom he knows
or has reason to believe to be, the wife of any other man, from
that man or from any person having the care of her on be-
half of that man, with intent that she may have illicit inter-
course with any person, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of cither description for a term which may extend to
two years or with fine or with both.”

20.23. We considered a suggestion that the Penal Code
should contain a provision for punishing a person who, hav-
ing made a woman pregnant leaves her uncared for and help-
less at the time of her confinement. It is provided in the Ger-
man Penal Code? that “anybody who unscrupulously with-
holds assistance from a woman whom he has rendered pre-
gnant, which assistance she need by reason of such pregnancy
or child birth, and thereby endangers the life of the mother or
child, shall be punished by imprisonment’. We think, how-
ever, that such a provision cannot be appropriately put ina penat
law. The man’s conduct will certainly be disapproved by
society, but to haul him up before a criminal court does not
seem right. Interference of the criminal law in these matters
of family life should, we think, be extremely limited. If any
hardships are caused to the woman or to the child by such in-
dificrence or neglect on the part of the male, then, the remedy

1. Section 170८


329

certainly does not lie in treating it as a crime ; the welfare of
the woman or child, could be better taken care of by other
measures,

20.24. Another suggestion we considered was also derived
from the German Penal Code. A section? makes it an offence
punishable with imprisonment for “anybody who endangers
the physical or moral welfare of a child by grossly and unscrupu-
lously neglecting his duty of supporting and educating the child,
especially by leaving the child without sufficient food or care.”
We do not, however, think that such a provision is particularly
suited for inclusion in the Code as a punishable crime, The
complaint being that the offender has failed to maintain his
child, the proper remedy would be to force him to maintain
his child. This is already provided for to a certain extent in
section 488 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Alternatively,
it could be appropriately included in special legislation relat-
ing to children.

1. Section 1704.

Endanger-
ing a child
by neglect.


Section
499. ,

Explana-
tion 4.

First Excep-
tion

CHAPTER 21
OF DEFAMATION

21.1. As the law of defamation is a restriction on the free-
dom of speech and expression, we had, in our Questionnaire. !
pointedly asked whether defamation as an offence should be
retained in the Code. Mostly the answer has been that it should
be retained. The reason is that, if the sanction of criminal
law is removed, the only remedy left toa defamed person would
be a suit for damages. which is not only expensive but also in
many cases useless. Many such persons guilty of defamation
are men of no substance and nothing can be recovered from
them. Further, public servants are being frequently defamed,
and the criminal law alone can effectively deal with such law
breakers. We are consequently not suggesting that defama-
tion should cease to be an offence. The right of free speech
is. we think, sufficiently safeguarded by the several explana-
tions and exceptions added to the definition of defamation in
our Code.

21.2. Explanation 4 to section 499 explains what is meant
by harming a person's reputation, and it excludes every thing
except an imputation “that, directly or indirectly, in the esti-
mation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character
of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers
the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the
body of that person is in a lothsome state, or in a state generally
considered as disgraceful.”

We considered the possibility of simplifying this lengthy
statement, but found it undesirable, as it was likely to become
less concrete and, perhaps, more difficult to understand.

21.3. The first exception (o section 499 sys that a true
imputation made for the public good is not defamation, and

treat pros then adds a sentences “whether or not it is for the public good
posed. is a question of fact’. This is to make it clear that the question
has to be decided by the jury in a jury trial. After the aboli-
tion of jury trials, this explanation has 1090 its significance, and
we, therefore, propose to delete the second sentence of the first
exception.
Fourth 21.4. A substantially true report of the proceedings of a
Exception court of justice is expected by the fourth exception to section
amend. 499. We considered a suggestion that this exception should
proposed be limited to report of the proceedings in open court, and should
“not apply to proceedings in camera which are not meant to be
1. Question 25,

330


331

published. The object of excluding the public from the court
is to deny publicity of any sort to those proceedings, and if any
one violates that understanding and gives publicity to defama-
tory statements, he should not be allowed to avail of the pro-
tection of this exception. We agree with this reasoning, and
recommended that the exception be amended by inserting the
words “in open court” after the words “report of the proceed-
ings”.

The Explanation given in this exception is intended to cover
commitment proceedings before Magistrates. Since according
to the revised definitions of “judge” and “court of justice” pro-
posed hy us, all proceedings before a Magistrate acting judicially
will be “proceedings of a court of justice’ and no further
explanation is necessary. The present Explanation can, therc-
fore, be deleted.

21.5. The maximum punishment for defamation provid-
ed in section 500 is two year’s simple imprisonment. Although
some suggestions have been made for enhancing it, we find no
practical justification for doing so. We think, however, that
the imprisonment need not necessarily be ‘simple’ as is now
provided, and should be altered to imprisonment of either de-
scription.

Another useful suggestion is that, where the defamatory
statement has been published in a newspaper and thus made
known to a large number of persons, the fact of the offender's
conviction should be similarly published. Such a step would,
we think, afford more satisfaction to the innocent victim than
the mere punishment of the offender, and we recommend the
insertion of a new provision in section S00 empowering the con-
victing court to order such publication in suitable cases. The
cost of publication should be made recoverable from the offender
asa fine. The order for publication will, of course, be in addi-
tion to any other punishment to which the person convicted may
have been sentenced. Section 500 should, accordingly, be re-
vised as follows :—

“500. Puishment for defamation.—

(1) Whoever defames another shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

(2) Where the offence has been committed by publish-
ing an imputation in a newspaper, the Court convicting the
offender may further order that its judgment shall be publish-
ed, in whole or in part, in such newspaper as it may spce-
cify.

(3) The cost of such publication shall be recoverable
from the convicted person as a fine.

Section
500 am-
endments
recommen-
ded.


Sections
01 and
502—puni-
shment
provi-
sion am-
ended.

332

21.6. Section 501 punishes any person who knowingly
prints or engtaves any defamatory matter, and section 502
punishes any person who knowingly sells the printed or engraved
libel. As under section 500, the punishment under these two
sections need not necessarily be simple imprisonment. We
propose to replace the words “simple imprisonment” in both
sections by the words “imprisonment of either description”.


CHAPTER 22
CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE

22.1. Criminal Intimidation is defined very comprehensively
in section 503. But rather curiously the punishment for the
offence in its simple form and in two different aggravated forms
is prescribed in sections 506 and 507, after dealing with insult
with intent to provoke breach of peace in section 504, and pub-
lication of statement conducing to public mischief in section
$05. The last mentioned section (particularly after the recent
amendment of 1969) contains’a mixture of ideas some of which
could more appropriately have been put jn the earlier chapters.
Section 508 constitutes an offence substantially similar to the
offence of criminal intimidation. Section 509 is connected
with section 504, insult being the common feature, while section
510, falls under the category of annoyance, the third limb men-
tioned in the chapter heading. The chapter is thus a hetero-
geneous, ill-arranged, but nonetheless useful, mixture of penal
provisions.

22.2. These four sections relating to criminal intimida-
tion do not require any change but should preferably be brought
together.

22.3. Another type of intimidation which, in our opinion,
should be punishable under the Code is threatening to commit
suicide with the object of coercing a public authority to pursue
‘a course of action which it is not prepared to do. We have in
a previous chapter recommended that an attempt to commit
suicide should cease to be an offence. Suicide threats of the
type mentioned above, of which we have experienced quite a
few in recent years, are in a different category. Their main
object can only be described as coercion or intimidation of pub-
lic authorities ; and the persons indulging in such threats hope
to achieve their object by the disturbance of public order and
tranquillity which they expect to create during the days when they
are ostentatiously preparing it carry out their threat. In our
opinion, there is no justification for the State permitting such
agitational activity to be carried on with impunity. This view
is shared by a large number of persons who replied to our Ques-
tionnaire in which we had included a specific question on this
point.

We accordingly propose that a new section may be added
after section 506 as follows :—

“506A. Threat of suicide with intent to coerce a pub-
lic authority.—Whoever holds out a threat of suicide to

333

Intro-
ductory.

Sections
503 and
$06 to
508.

Suicide
threat to
coerce
public
authori-
ties to be
an offence.


Section
S01—Ane
endment
recommen
ded.

Mock

funerals of
living per-
sons 10 be
an offence.

334

a public authority, with intent to cause that authority to
do any act which it is not legally bound to do, or to omit
to do any act which it is legally entitled to do, as the means
of avoiding the execution of such threat, and does any act
towards the execution of such threat, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine or with both.”

The offence should be made cognizable and triable by a Magis-
trate of the First Class. ,

22.4. Section 504 punishes a person who “‘inteutionally
insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person. intend-
ing or knowing it 10 be likely that such provocation will cause
him to break the public peace or to commit any other offence”.
The section, in our view, unnecessarily stresses the giving of
provocation. What should really attract Jiability is the inten-
tional insult. Provocation is only a fink in the chain, and is
used merely to describe the quality of the insult. The section,
therefore, requires to be re-cast, so asto bring out more directly
the connection between the insult and the breach of peace. We
recommend thai the section should be revised so as to read as
follows :—~

“304. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach
of the peace.—Whoever intentionally insults any person,
intending or knowing it to be likely that such insult will pro-
voke that person to break the public peace or to commit
any other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of
cither description for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine. or with both.”

22.5. it has been brought to our notice that mock funerals
of living persons are being frequently staged in public to the
annoyance of not only those persons but also of the public in
general, and such demonstrations are calculated to result
in a breach of the peace. In certain circumstances. a mock
Suneral might be punishable as defamation ; but it would be
more satisfactory to prohibit it as an offence of insult and an-
noyance in this Chapter. Werecommend a new section 504 A
as follows to meet such cases :--

“504A. Performing mock funeral of a living person.—
Whoever, with intent to cause annoyance to the public or to
any person or with the knowledge that annoyance is likely
to be caused to the public or to any person, performs. or
takes part in the performance of, any mock funeral associat-
ed with, or referrable to a living person, shali be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

The offence should be made cognizable and triable by any
Magistrate,


335

6. Section 505 punishes the making, publishing or cir-
culating any statement, rumour or report “conducing to public
mischief” (as briefly put in the marginal heading). We have
in a previous Chapter recommended that clause (a) of sub-
section (1) relating to statements made with intent to cause
mutiny, dereliction of duty, insubordination etc. among the arm-
ed forces should find a place in the Chapter relating to offences
against the armed forces.1 We have also recommended that
the rest of the section which could well be regarded as creat-
ing offences against public tranquillity, should be taken in Chapter
8 as section 158 B.2 Section 505 may accordingly be omitt-
ed.

22.7. While on the subject of statements causing “fear or
alarm to the public’. we may mention a suggestion made by
the Press Commission? in 1954 as regards astrofogical pre-
dictions of a calamitous chapter. The point was referred to
the Law Commission at that time. The suggestion was to
punish persons who published astrotogical predictions foretell-
ing death or disaster which were bound to cause fear or alarm
to the public. After considering the suggestion in the light
of experience we think that the harm that results from such pre-
dictions is of a temporary and fleeting character and on the
negligible. 10 does not seem necessary to make their publica-
tion an offence.

22.8. In our Report on the Code of Criminal Procedure,*
we have recon:mended that the offence under section 509 should
be cognizable. No changes are needed in the section.

22.9. Section 510 punishes a person appearing drunk and
causing annoyance to people in a public place. There is a pro-
vision in the Potice Act® which punishes ‘any person who is
found drunk or riotous or who is incapable of taking care of
himself’. The punishment is fine upto fifly rupees or imprison-
ment upto eight days. The offence must be committed “on any
road or in any open place or street or thoroughfare’. within a
notified town. This provision should be enough, for areas noti-
lied under that section. In areas where section 34 of the Police
Act is not applicable. there is hardly any need for section 510
of the Code. as such misconduct is not noticeable. We recommend
that section 510 may be omitted, .

. See paragraph 7.9 above.
. See paragraph 8.26 above.

. The Press Commission's Report (1954), Part T, page 347.
. 4180 Report, Vol. 1, paragraph 47.8

. Section’ 34. clause sixthly, Police Act, १861.

vRenn

Section
50.

Asiroiogi-
cal predic-
tions-sugg-
estion not
accepted.

Section
509.

Section
5t0 re-
peal ree
commen-
ded.


Cuaprer 231

VIOLATION OF PERSONAL PRIVACY
Right of
privacy. 23.1. “The quest for privacy is a strong one. The poet
Robert Browning said in Paracelsus :

” T give the fight up : let there be an end,
A privacy, an obscure nook for me.

T want to be forgotten even by (09.72

A man’s privacy, his “right to be left अंग, requires protec-
tion from the law to the extent to which it would be infringed
by others without just cause. For such protection, the laws of
the last century are inadequate mainly because of the rapid ad-
vancement of technology, especially in the field of electronics,
sound and light. With the modern electronic, optical and other
artificial devices, it is very easy to infringe on the privacy of a
person even inside his house, without his knowledge. Hence
invasion of privacy, which was perhaps the subject of mere poeti-
cal imagination in the last century, has now become a real menace
requiring statutory interference. As one American author ob-
serves :—

“We are slowly drifting into a world of nakedness. Each
year an increasing number of technological devices invade
the world that we once considered private and personal. In
spite of this, we are still confident that our lives, activities,
ideas, thoughts, and sensations are shared with no one unless
we so chose.""¢

Microphones reduced to the size of a matchhead pick up sound
waves and transmit the same to eavesdroppers. Infra-red light
techniques enable a room to be watched and photographd from
an adjoining room even though opaque walls. Long distance
photography has also developed to such a remarkable extent
that photographs can be taken from a distance without the person
concerned being aware of the same.

. The subject of At rempt has been dealt with in Chapter 5 above in paras 5.41 to 5.54,
Chapter 23 of the code is proposed to be omitted and replaced by a new Chapter 5B.

2. Rosenberg; The Death of Privacy, P, 142. हु

3. Cooley on Torts, 2nd Edition, 1888.

4. Rosenberg: The Death of Privacy, page 143.

336


337

23.2. In article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948), the right of privacy was emphasised in the follow-
ing terms ;—

“No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with
his privacy. family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks
upon his honour and reputation. Every one has the right to
the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.”

Though this Declaration may not be legally binding on the na-
tions, its status as an authoritative guide to the interpretation
of the Chapter of the United Nations is well esiablished. In that
capacity, the Declaration has considerable indirect legal effect
and is regarded by the General Assembly of the United Nations,
and also by some jurists, as a part of the law of the United
Nations. This right has been reiterated in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, adopted by the General
Assembly on the 16th December, 1966, to which India is a party.

Article 17 of the Covenant reads:—~

“(i) No one shail be subjected to arbitrary or unlaw-
ful interference with his privacy, family, home or correspon-
dence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour and reputation,

(2) Everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against such interference or attacks.”

23.3. As the safeguarding of privacy is thus made, for all
practical purposes, a part of International Law, it is not neces-
sary for us to dilate at Jength on the need for legislation in this
ficld. We need only quote an observation by Pope Pius XII in
the course of his address to the Congress of the International
Association of Applied Psychology in 1958:—

“And just as it is illicit to appropriate another's goods
or to make an attempt on his bodily integrity, without his
consent. so it is not permissible to enter into his inner domain
against his will. whatever is the technique or method used.”

23.4. We find that the right of personal privacy is protected
by specific legislation in several countries. In the Norwegian
Penal Code, breach of professional privacy, tampering with
private correspondence and tapping private conversation by any
mechanical aid have been made penal.! In the Penal Code of
Austria, fixing up instruments clandestinely for hearing ‘sounds
not intended for the public and publication, by pictorial represen-
tation or otherwise of facts about the private or family Jife of a
person which are of a derogatory nature, are made punishable. ?
in some other countries the subject has been taken up and laws.

1, Sections 144, 145 and 1458.
2. Sections 310d and 489.

3M. of Law.7i—23.

Right in-
ternation-
ally re-

cogaised.

Obser-
vation by
Pope Pius
Xu.

Right pre
tected
legislation
in certain
countries.


Recommen-
dation in
England

by “Com-
mittee

of Jurisis”.

Replies of
Judges and
lawyers in
India to
question.

338

on the subject are in the process of being enacted. Thus, in the
Draft German Penal Code, prepared in 1962, a whole title has
been set apart to deal with “violation of personal privacy’. The
several sections! under this title propose to make it an offence
to discuss publicly another's private affairs, eaves drop. obtain
knowledge of confidential communications, violate confidential
disclosures by professional persons. breach of privacy by office-
holders and persons especially obligated for public service and
commercial exploitation of secrets. In the Draft Japanese Penal
Code, prepared in 1961, opening sealed correspondence and
breach of privacy by professional persons have been made punish-
able.?

23.5. In England, a Committee was set up by “Justice”
(British Section of the International Commission of Jurists} to
examine the whole subject of privacy, with special reference to
the safeguarding of the same in the English law. The Committee's
Report published in 1970, while suggesting comprehensive leyis-
lation on the civil side, recommended that to make use of electro-
nic, optical or other artificial devices as a mean of surreptitious
surveillance should be made a criminal offence except in certain
clearly defined circumstances. They also recommended further
investigation as regards criminal sanctions for industrial espion-
age.

23.6. We therefore thought it advisable to examine this sub-
ject and included in our Questionnaire the following question: —

“In view of Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (1948), doyou think thatthe Criminal Law
ought to recognise and protect the right of privacy. and if so,
what kind of interference with the right should, in your
view, be punishable?”

Though a large number of replies received to this question
were unfavourable, some of the judges and lawyers were in favour
of Jegisiation to make certain types of invasion of privacy penal.
Two of the Judges were in favour of a special provision in ‘the
Penal Code for invasion of privacy based mainly on the Norwe-
gian pattern. One of the Chief Justices suggested that some begin-
ning should be made in the law of privacy. During discussions
some of the Judges observed that specific invasions of privacy
like telephone tapping, tape-recording of conversations, unautho-
rised shadowing should be made punishable. One of the Advocates-
General of a State suggested that interference with the
right of privacy without authority of law should be made penal.

1. Sections 182 to 1869.

2. Articles 334 and 335.


339

A Dear of Law Faculty stated that opening of sealed tetiers and
usauihors.cd disclosure of information by professional persons
such as Medical Officers and legal practitioners should be made
offences,

23.7. As the law on the subject is still rudimentary even in
advanced counisies, we would not advise comprehensive tegisla-
tion to deal with all aspects of invasion of privacy. ft is better
to make a beginning with those invasions which may amount to
what is known as eavesdropping and unauthorised publication
of photographs and 1९४४८ the rest to be considered Jater on in
the light of the experience gained, and legislation introduced,
in other countries. In any such law, the magistracy and the police
will naturally have to be exempted from the penal provisions so
long as they act in good faith in the discharge of their duties.

23.8. We recommend the insertion of the following new
sections in a separate Chapter which may take the place of the
existing Chapter 19 proposed to be omitted.

CHAPTER 19
OFFENCES AGAINST PRIVACY

490, Use of artificial listening or recording apparatus.—
(1) Whoever, knowing that any artificial listening or recording
apparaius been introduced into any premises without the
knowtedge or consent of the person in possession of the premises,
listens to vay conversation with the aid of such apparatus or
uses such apparatus for the purposes of recording any conversa-
tion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine. or with
both.

(2) Whoever publishes any conversation or a record thereof.
knowing that it was listened to or recorded with the aid of
any artificial listening or recording apparatus introduced into
any premises without the knowledge or consent of the person
in possession of the premises, shall be punished with imprison-
ment of cither description for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.4

494, Unauthorised photography.—U) Whoever, intending to
cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will cause, annoyance to
any person, takes a photograph of that person without his con-
sent elsewhere than in a public place, or takes his photograph
in & public place when that person has prohibited such taking,
shail be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both,

1. It may be noted that the section does not cover the entry into
person and fixing therein an artificial listening or recording apparatus.

Beginn-
ing to be

Proposed
offences,
against
Privacy.

the premises of another

Such entry

and fixing would obviously amount to criminal trespass, since it would be either for

annoying the owner or for committing the new offence.


340

(2) Whoever, intending 10 cause, or knowing it io be hkely
that he will cause. annoyance to any person, publishes
photograph of that person taken i contravention of sub-section
(1) shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term shich
may extend to one year. or with fine, or with both.

492. Exception regarding certain acts of public servants an i
persons acting under their directions —Nothing in section 490
or section 491 applies-—

(8) to any public servant acting in good faith in the cours
of his dutics Connected with the security of State. the preven-
tion, detection or investigation of offences. the administration
of justice. er the maintenance of public order. or

(b) to any person acting under ihe directions of suck
public servant.”


CHAPTER 24

TIME LIMITS FOR PROSECUTIO:

it now remains to consider a subject which, though
procedural. is usually deait with in the Code of substantive erimi-
imal law in many countries. namely, the Gime fimit for initiating
prosecuiions.

24.2. in our Questionnaire, we had included the following
question 2 =

“Do you consider that there should be a statutory period
of limitation for prosecution for any offence under the Code,
and. if so. for what offences?”

A majority of the replies received on this question is against
prescribing a period of limitation for prosecution. Of the smaller
number in favour of introducing the jaw of limitation in criminal
cases, a few are for prescribing a time-limit for all or almost all
offences, and others only for comparatively minor offences.

24.3. In civil cases, the law of limitation in almost ail count-
ries where the rule of law prevails, Jurists have given several con-
Vincing reasons to justify the provision of such a law; some of
those which are equally applicable to criminal prosecutions may
be referred to here:

(1) The defendant ought not to be called on to resist
a claim when “evidence has been lost. memories have faded,
and witnesses have disappeared.!”

(2) The 189 of limitation is 8150 a means of suppressing
fraud, and perjury. and quickening diligence and preventing
oppression.

(3) 1६ is in the general public interest that there should
be an end to litigation. The statute of limitation is a statute
of repose.

(4) A party who is insensible to the value of civil remedies
and who does not assert his own claim with promptitude has
little or no right to require the aid of the state in enforcing
it.

(5) The court should be relieved of the burden of adjudi-
cating inconsequential or tenuous claims.

1. Onder of RR. Tele ress Agency, (4944)

“US. 342, 349...

Reasons
for time
Jimits in
civil

cases,


342

Appiigabi- _ 24.4. Theoret H the aforesaid reasons apply with equal
Wis oF. force in the field minal law. Evidence is 85 much likely 1७

sons to become stale in criminal cases as in civil cases. Memory. if it
criminal fades. would Jade irrespective of the nature of the proceed
Jaw subject to the quali that a serious criminal injury perpet

ted on a victim may remain fixed in his memory for a very long

time.
Reasons 24.5. The usual reasons given for not extending the law of
for fo es Jimitation to criminal cases are that. in a criminal Prosecution,
endin

henitae apart from the injured Party and the offender. the community”
tion (0 cris aS a Whole has an interest in the detection and punishment of
minal pro- the offender, and this interest may be defected if the mere expiry
SECULOT. of lime is allowed to operaiz as a bar to Prosecution. Moreover.
in a civil case there is always a victim with an active persosat in-
terest in secking his remedy. and the wrong-doer 15 generaliy
known: but in many criminal cases the wrong-doer may not be

known or else may be untraceable due to his abscondi 2 ता for
other reasons.

Position in
Indi
gene

24.6. In India. following the Eng ish model. tiv is no
general law of limitation for prosecutions. But, in some of the
special and loca! laws. a priod of limitation has been prescribed;

e.g.. section 106 of the Factories Act, 1948, and section 122 of
the Army Act. 1950.

Position 24.7, In most of the countries where penal law has been codie
in other

(तप fied. it is generally found that there is a law of limitation. no:

where only for initiating prosecutions. but also for execution of senten-

penal ces passed by the courts. Among the foreign Penal Codes we

codsivd. have been able to look into, such rules are to be found in the
(०961 of Argentina. Austria, Ceylon. Colombia. France,
Germany, Japan. Norway, Russia and Yugoslavia.

Position 24.8. In countries where the Angto-saxon system of juris-
in coun- prudence prevails, though there is no general law of limitation for
लाश crimes. nevertheless, for cestain classes of offences. limitation

Anglo- has been prescribed. For example, in England there is a time limit
saxon le- of three years for treason or misprision of treason.? except
gal sys where there is a plot to assassinate the sovereign or treason com-
tem.

mitted abroad. There is a general limit of six months for trial
by Magistrates of summary offences, but this rule is subject io
. Argentine Penal Code, Article 62; Austrian Penal Code (1852), republished in 1945,
as amended upto 1965, Chapter 27, sections 227 and 228: Ceylon Code of Criminal
Procedure. s. 444, Colombian Penal Code, 1936, Article 105; Freach Code of Cciminal
Procedure 1958, Articles 6, 263-767; German Draft Penal Code, 1962. Articles 127 and
131; German Penal Code, 1871, Articles 61. 67 and 70: Jananese Draft Penal Coue,
1961, Articles 100 and 104; Nor eean Penal Code. 1902, xs. 67 and 72: Russian Soviet

Federated Socialist Republic (R' R) Criminal Code, 1958, Articles 48 and 49;
Yogoslavia Criminal Code, Articles 80 und 81.

‘tions 5 and 6, Treason Act. 1695. and Treason Aci. 1708 (Eng.).
Section 104, Magistrates” Courts Act. 1952 (Eng.).



343

several exceptions. Then, there is a time limit of 12 months for
the offence of unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl above the
age of 13 and below the age of 16.1 Similar provisions exist for
these offences in some Australian States.?

We note that the Law Commission of England has proposed
for consideration the general question of limitation in criminal
proceedings and included it in working paper? for eliciting
opinion.

The Model Penal Code* of the American Law Institute pro-
poses a period of limitation for all offences except murder.

24.9, The distinguished Norwegian Jurist.S Johannes Ande-
naes, has given the following special reasons why there should be
a Jaw of limitation for crimes also :—

“The factor of preof :

As time passes, evidence becomes more and more uncertain,
and the danger of error therefore greater. This is true whether
the claim stems from the penal law or from the civil law. Some
evidence is lost. other evidence becomes unreliable. Thus
testimony of witnesses can change character completely because
of changes in recollection or a mere lapse of memory. By setting
a definite time limit. the law avoids basing decisions on a weak
foundation,

The factor of prevention :

{n the civil law we often refer to a preventive purpose as
a reason for limitation; the owner of a right should not
let things remain unsettled; there must be some pressure on him to
have the matter cleared up within a reasonable time. The same
argument can be made with respect to limitation of the private
tight to prosecute. And, theoretically similar reasons can also
be advanced with respect to the ordinary limitation in the penal
law; there should be some pressure on the public prosecution to
clear up matters within a certain time. However, no 8 reat weight
can be given to this argument. There are other methods to prevent
delays on the part of the public prosecution; there are methods
more direct than relieving the offender of criminal liability.

The need for punishment diminished : .

What is more important is that the need for punishment dimi-
nishes as time passes. This is especially clear from the individuab

View of
Dr. Ande-

naes.

. Soxual Offences Act, 1956, section 37, and 2nd Schedule, Part 4, No. 10 (a).

2. e.g. section 212, Queensland Criminal Code.

3. Working Paper on General Principles of Codification of Criminal Law, Subject No. 5
page 15.

4. Section 1.06.

5. Andenaes, The General Part of the Crimina? Law of Norway, pages 308-314.


344

preventive point of view. If the guilty party has kept peace fora
number of years, it would be contrary fo any and all purposes
to punish him now and if he has been guilty of new offences,
he can be punished for those. Nor do the consideration of general
prevention or the demands for retribution apply with the same
force as the years go by. Time heals all wounds. Both the victim
and the public calm down after a while, at least “with respect to
less serious offences. Jt is important for the authority of the penal
law, of course, that the guilty person does not escape punishment,
but what is at least equally important in this respect is that the
matter is cleared up and the guilty party brought to court while
the offence is still rather fresh. A prosecution many years fater
does not have the same beneficial effect.

The opposite considerations become stronger :

On the other hand, the opposite considerations become stron-
ger as time moves on. For the guilty. party, who perhaps has over-
come his criminal inclinations and has ceased to think of punish-
ment, it would seem harsh to be held liable after many years have
gone by. Aud it would also be harsh to his wife and chiidren who
may have no knowledge about this part of his past.

The Penal Law Commission said, a criminal investigation
after perhaps fifty years, even with respect to the most serious
crime, would have no real benefit but rather would cause sorrow
and unhappiness to the innocent and the guilty alike.”

View of 24.10. Two German writers have, in an article! discussing
Garman war crimes, explained the object of the principle of limitation,
Tiers. in terms of the result of an inactive judicial process on the crime

and the removal of the crime from social consciousness. “The
term is set when, through the passage of time,—juridically the
length of the interval is made to depend upon the gravity of the
crime,—the injuries inflicted upon the community by the crime
are healed and the act itself has ceased to imperil the life of the
community and the rule of law, by force of a bad example left
unpunished; the conditions too must be ripe for the removal of
a particular crime from the consciousness ‘of men, so that they
are no longer preoccupied with it......Consequently, prescrip-
tion is not only and simply a one-sided waiver of prosecution by
society and the State, and still less the juridical expression of an
unprincipled indifference. Basically, it is rather a special form
of suppression of crime, reflected and shaped by the law from the
principle that the organs of criminal prosecution must make every
effort within their powers to ensure the detection and punish-
ment of crimes committed. To illustrate, according to the law in
force in the Federal Republic (of Germany) prescription does
not operate if there is a general suspension of the judicial process;

पे Paper presented by Dr. Lekschas, Dean of the Law Faculty of Humboldt University of
घाव Dr, Renneberg, translated in (1965) 14 International and Comparative

Law Quarterly, pages 627, 629.


”

4“

345

under the Code of Criminal Procedure, article 44, no time-limits
operate in such a case und the previous position is re-instated.
From this it is obvious that time cannot of itself and without
certain presumptions be taken to have healed the wound inflic-
ted on the community by the crime: So Article II, s. 5, of law
No, 10 of the Allied (०1६०! Council directed that in Germany,
an individual charged with a grave crime committed in the period
between January 30, 1933 and Juiy 1, 1945, could notinvoke
the rule of prescription, even though there had during this period
been a suspension of the judicial process in respect of such
crimes... Again since the length of periods of prescription is
determined by the gravity of crimes committed, and the extent
of the effect necessary to secure fair and effective prosecution,
the longest period of twenty years is fixed by the Penal Code,
article 67(1). for the most serious ctimes, But even this period is
not absolute : on the contrary the runniag of time for the purpose
of prescription is broken and starts afresh with every judicial
Process, which is initiated against an offender in respect of a
crime commitied by him, and which may, by reason of the gra-
vity of the offence,!be repeated and removed without restriction,”

24,11. te seems to vs that there is a strong case for having
a period of limitation for offences which are not very serious,
For such offences, considerations of fairness to the accused and
the need for ensusing freedom from Prosecution after a lapse of
time should outweigh other considerations, Moreover, after the
expiry of a certain period the sense of social retribution loses ils
edge and the punishment does not serve the Purpose of social
retribution. The deterrent effect of punishment which is one of
the most important objectives of penal Jaw is very much im-
paired if the punishment is not inflicted promptly and if it is
inflicted at a time when it has been wiped off the memory of the
offender and of other persons who had knowledge of the crime.

24.12. Apart from the aforesaid considerations, for the
purpose of peace and repose, it is very necessary that a person
who has committed a minor crime should not be kept in conti-
nuous apprehension that he may be prosecuted at any time. Neg-
ligence or undue delay on the part of a private prosecutor should
be severely discouraged. The reasons given by the Norwegian and
German writers apply with equal force in India also. As one learned
author, pointed! out, “at one time or another approximately
91 per cent of the adult population have committed, crimes and
punishable with imprisonment. If they have escaped conviction
it is due partly to their good luck and partly to other citcumstan-
ces.” If the law gives them absolute immunity from Prosecution
after the lapse of a specified period they will have peace of mind;
otherwise, the risk of their being prosecuted will remain and may
be taken advantage of by blackmailers especially if their conduct

1. James Brands, “Criminal Law in the Seventies—-Some Suggestions” (June 1970) New

York State Bar Journal.

Case for
extending,

limnita~
tion to

original
prosecu-

tions,


Delay by
itself no.
ground for
dismissing
complaint,

Recam.
mendation
to intro-
duce prin-
ciple of
fimita-
tion.

Limita-
tion to be
graded.

Starting
point
possible
alterna-
tives,

346

after the commission of the offence has been exemplary. The
modern view! that the essential aim of punishment should be
reformation and social rehabilitation of the offender can be better
implemented by conferring absolute immunity from prosecution
after the lapse of a certain period, instead of by requiring him
10 undergo the harassing process of prosecution and punish-
ment.

24.13. At present no court can throw out a complaint solely
on the ground of delay. because, as pointed opt? by the Sapreme
Court, “the quesiion of delay in filing a complaint may be a
circumstance to be taken into consideration in arriving at the
final verdict, but by itself, it affords no grounds for dismissing
the complaint”. It is true that unconscionable delay is a good
ground for entertaining grave doubts about the truth of the
complainant's story unless he can explain it to the satisfaction of
the court. But it would be illegal for a court to dismiss a com-
plaint merely because there was inordinate delay.

24.14. We, therefore. recommend that the principle of limi-
tation should be introduced for less serious offences under the
Code. We suggest that. for the present, offences punishable with
fine only or with imprisonment upto three years should be made
subject to the law of limitation. The question of extending the
law to graver offences may be taken up later on in the light of the
experience actually gained.

24.15. As regards the period of limitation, we propose that
it should be graded according to the maximum punishment for
the offence, as follows

{a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine
only:

(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding one year; and

(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding three years.

24.16. As regards the question what should be the starting
point for computing limitation, three possible alternatives could

thought of, namely, (i) date of commission of the offence;
(ii) date of discovery or knowledge that the offence has been
committed, whether the offender be known or not; and (iii) date
of discovery or knowledge that the offence has been committed
by a particular offender.

1. Article 10 (3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966).
2. Assi. Customs Collector, Bombay U.L.R. Melwani A.L.R. 1970 S.C. 962, 964.


347

24.17. On the analogy of the law of limitation for civil suits, Aherna-
ulternative {i) above may strike one as the natural choice, but ite wer
there is an important difference to be noted in regard to criminal Siered
prosecutions. In a civil wrong, only the person wronged is actively — sion of
Interesicd in pursuing his claim. the wrong-doer is known. offence.
In the case of a crime. the victim is not necessarily interested
in instituting a criminal prosecution: and even if he is interested,
the offender is, more often than not, unknown, the person really
harmed by an offence may not for some time come to know that
un offence has been committed. Sometimes, there may be no
“yictim’ us such, as in the case of public nuisance sale of obscene
publications, rioting, mischief to public property. etc. Practical
considerations. therefore, compel one to reject the first alternative.

24.18. The second alternative is more attractive. In some of (ii) Dis-
the special laws (e.g. section 106 of the Factories Act) the date of covery of
discovery or knowledge of the offence has been taken as the start- offence.
ing point of limitation. in England also, in some statutes, the
slarting point 107 the purpose of limitation is the date of the dis-
covery of the offence and not the date of commission of the
offence. ¢.g.. section 164(4) of the Factorics Act, 1961, section 20(2)
of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965, section 244 of the Road Traffic
Act, 1960! and section 24(3) of the Pharmacy and Poisons
Act, 1933.2 There are, however, practical difficulties in making
the date of knowledge of the commission of the offence the start-
ing point for all offences. So far as cognizable offences are con-
cerned. an information can be lodged before the police by the
aggrieved party against an unknown offender, it being left to the
police to investigate and find out his identity. But in respect of
non-cognizable offences which are generally initiated by filing
complaints before Magistrates, no prosecution will ordinarily
be initiated unless the complainant gives the name or other iden-
ulying marks of the offender. Perhaps, on a strict construction
of section 190(1), read with section 200, Cr. P.C., an aggrieved
party may be entitled to file a complaint against a person unknown
leaving it to the court by due investigation or enquiry under
section 202 to find out the identity of the offender. But in practice
such a complaint is likely to be dismissed with a direction to the
complaint to find out the name of the offender and then move
the court. Hence, if the date of the knowledge of the commission
of the offence be taken as the starting point of limitation for all
iminor offences. time may run against the aggrieved party through
no fault of his, and by the time he comes to know the identity
of the offender the period of limitation might have expired.

1, Summary proceedings for certain offences under the Road Traffic Act may be brought
within a period of six months from the date of the commission of the alleged offence of
within a period which exceeds neither three months from the date on which it cane to
the knowledge of the prosecutor that the offence has been committed, nor one year from
date of the commission of the offence, whichever period is longer.

nmary proceedings for an offence under this Act may commence within 12 months

he commission of the offence or. in the case of proceedings instituted by or by the

ion of a Secretary of State, either within that period or within three months next
ke date on which the evidence justifying, in the opinion of the Secretary of Stale,

a prosecution comes to his knowledge.



रच) Know
Jedge of
offender's
identity (०
be the
siarting
point,

Prosecu-
tion com=
mences
when court
takes
cognizance.

Exclusion
of first
day.

Infructu-
ous pro-
ecedings.

pee!

” pau Doval v. State of U.P., ALR. 19359 S.C. 433; (1959) Suppl. 1 S.C.R. 639.
ef. section 12 (1). Limitation Act, 1963.
B.P. Thakur, AAR. 1959 All. 78

348

24.19. We. therefore, consider that the starting point for the
purpose of limitation should be the date on which knowledge
of the identity of the offender was known cither to the aggrieved
party, or to the officer investigating the offence. However, ifa
special law provides a different starting point that will prevail
over the general law to be provided in the Penal Code.

24.20. The question whether prosecution commences on the
date on which the court takes cognizance of the offence or only
on the date on which process is issued against the accused, has
been settled by the Supreme Court! with reference to section 15
of the Merchandise Marks Act, 1889, Where the complaint was
filed within one year of the discovery of offence, it cannot be
thrown out merely because process was not issued within one
year of such discovery. The complainant is required by section
15 of the Act to “commence prosecution” within this period,
which means that if the complaint is presented within one year
of such discovery, the requirements of section 15 are satisfied.
The period of limitation is intended lo operate against complai-
nant and to ensure diligence on his part in prosecuting his rights.
and not against the Court. It will defeat the object of the enact-
ment deprive traders of the protection which the law intended to
give them, to hold that unless process is issued on their complaint
within one year of the discovery of the offence, it should be
thrown out.

24.21. A few matters of detail may now be considered. First.
as in civil cases,? in computing the period of imitation for taking
cognizance of an offence, the day from which such period is to
be reckoned should be excluded. It may, in this connection, be
noted that section 29, Limitation Act, 1963, (which applies the
provisions of that Act to other laws). may not suffice 10 apply
the corresponding provision (section 12) of that Act to prosecu-
tions, as section 12 is confined to suits and applications. Though
some judicial decisions regarding a complaint as an ‘application,?
and so falling within section 29, Limitation Act. it is better 10
have a specific provision.

24.22. Secondly, as in civil cases,* in computing the period
of limitation for taking cognizance of offence. the time during
which any person has been prosecuting with due diligence another
prosecution whether in a court of first instance or in a court
of appeal or revision, against the offender, should be excluded,
where the prosecution relates to the same facts and is prosecuted
in good faith in a court which, from defect of jurisdiction or
other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it.

Sita Rai v. The State, A..R. 1961 All, 151; Damo-

davan ५. State of Kerala, (1961) 2 Cr. (..3. 102.
4. Section 14, Limitation Act, 1963.


349

24.23. Thirdly, inthecase of a continuing offence.! a fresh  Continu-
period of limitation should begin to runat every moment of the "8 oft-
lime during which the offence continues;? and we recommend °°
the insertion of a provision to that effect.

24.24. Impediments to the institution of a prosecution have Jepedi-
also to be provided for. Such impediments could be (a) legal, OO on
or (9) due to conduct of the accused, or (०) due to the court
being closed on the last day.

As regards legal impediments, two aspects may be considered.
first, the time for which institution of prosecution is stayed
under a legal provision, and secondly. prosecutions for which
previous sanction is required, or notice has to be given, under
legal provision. Both are appropriate cases for a special provision
for extending the period of limitation. We recommend that,
where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence
has been stayed by an injunction or order, than. in computing
the period of limitation for taking cognizance of that offence,
the time of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day
on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was with-
drawn. shall be exctuced.3

24.25. We also recommend‘ that where notice of prosecu- Notice of
tion for an offence has been given, or where for prosecution for Prosecu-
an offence the previous consent or sanction of the Government Hon.
or any other authority is required, in accordance with the require-
ments of any law for the time being in force, then in computing
the period of limitation for taking cognizance of the offence, the
the period of such notice or, as the case may be. the time required
for obtaining such consent or sanction, shall be excluded.

24.26. As illustrations of impediments caused by the conduct Absence of
of the accused. we may refer to his being out of India, and his accused
absconding or concealing himself. Running of the period of limi Conding.

tation should be excluded in both cases.

24.27. Finally, it is necessary to provide for the contingency Closure of
arising out of the court being closed on a day: and we recom- SOU"
mend’ that, where the prescribed period for taking cognizance
of an offence expires on a day when the court is closed, the court
may take cognizance on the day when the court re-opens.¢

1. As to continuing offence (with reference to section 106, Factories Act, 1948), see A.TR.
1966 Mys, 136.

of. section 22, Limitation Act, 1963.
15(4), Limitation Act. 1963.
Limitation Act, 1963.
tation Act, 1963.

of, Section 5, Limitation Act, 1963.



Power of
court to
condone
delay not
needed.

No fimita-
tion for
execution
of sent-
ence.

Recom-
mended
sections.

Defini-
tions.

Bar to
taking
cogniza-
nce after
lapse of
time.

Commen-
cement of
the period
of limita
tion,

350

24.28, We do not think it necessary to give power 10 the court
io excuse delay in other cases, like the power conferred on the
Court by the Limitation Act, in respect of appeals and appiica-
uons.

24.29. For the present, we do not recommend any limitation
for the execution of sentences, because experience shows that in
India there is no undue delay in execution. Even if there is some
delay in a few cases due to the accused absconding after jumping
bail or otherwise, he cannot take advantage of that delay.

24.30. We recommend that the following Chapter be added
to the Penal Code at the end.

CHAPTER 235

LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF
OFFENCES

“511. For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context
otherwise requires,—

(a) ‘period of limitation’ means the period of limitation

for taking cognizance of an offence specified in section 512;

(b) ‘prescribed period’ means the period of limitation.

computed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

512. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, no
court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this
Code after the expiry of the prescribed period.

(2) The period of limitation for taking cognizance of un

offence shall be—
(3) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine
only:
(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprison
ment for a term not exceeding one year;
(०) three years, if the offence is punishable with im-
prisonment for a term not exceeding three years.

“513. (1) The period of limitation commences, in relation
to any offender, from the day on which his participation in the
offence first comes to the knowledge of a person aggrieved by the
offence or of an officer investigating the offence.

(2) In computing the said period the day from which it is to
be reckoned shall be excluded.?

This could take the place of existing Chapter 23 (Attempts), as attempts are proposed to

be dealt with in a new Chapter 5B.
2. of. section 12(1}, Limitation Act, 1963.


351

314, (1) In computing the period of ‘imitation, the time
during which any person has been prosecuting with due deli-
gence another prosectition, whether in a court of first instance
or ina court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be
excluded, where the prosecution relates to the same facts and is
prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from defect of juris-
diction or other cause of a like mature, is unable to entertain
it?

(2) Where the institution of the prosecution ia respect of an
offence has been stayed by an injunction or order. then, in com-
puting the period of limitation, the time of the continuance
of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or
made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shail be exclud-
ed.

(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given.
or where for prosecution for an offence the previous consent or
sanction of the Government or any other authority is required,
in accordance with the requirements of any law for the time being
in force, then in computing the period of limitation for taking
cognizance of the offence, the period of such notice or, as the
case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or
‘sanction, shall be excluded.

Explanation —In excluding ihe time sequired for obtaining
the consent or sanction of the Government or any other autho-
rity, the date on which the application was made for obtaining
the consent or sanction and the date of receipt of the order of
the Government or other authority shall both be counted,3

(4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during
which the offender— :

(a) bas been absent from India and from the territories
outside India under the administration of the Central Govern-
ment,4 or

(0) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing him-
self shall be excluded.5

Exclusion
of time in
certain
cases,

1. cf. section $4(1), Ibid

2. of. section 15(1), Limitation Act, 963.
3. fe. section 15(2), tion Act, 1963.
4.
5.

ef. section 15(5), Li tion Act, 1963,
ef, section 4, Limitation Act, 1963.



Exctusion
of date on
which
court is
closed.

Continu-
ing oflen-
ees.

1. ef: section 22,

352

515. Where the prescribed period for taking cognizance of
an offence expires on a day when the court is closed, the court
may take cognizance on the day when the court re-opens.

Explanation.—A court shall be deemed to be closed om any
day within the meaning of this section, if during any part of its
normal working hours. it remains closed on that day.

516. In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limi-
iation begins to run at every moment of the time during which
the offence continues.”?



Cuapin 25
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

25.1, We have now come to the end of our detaited study of
the Code. The recommendations which we have made for its
improvement are numerous, ranging from verbal changes design-
ed to remove ambiguities and clarify underlying ideas. to si
tantial changes with a view to its simplification and moderni
tion and also some additions to its provisions. We have given
special attention to the extent and nature of the punishments
prescribed in the Code for various offences and suggested modi-
ations to bring them into accord with modern notions of
penology. We have indicated in each chapter of this Report.
corresponding to a chapter of the Code, the provisions which
should be made in lieu of, or in addition to, the existing provi-
sions. and also the amendments. both major and minor. to
be made in them. A brief summary of the principal recommenda-
lions made in each chapter is given below:—

1. (1) The extsa-territorial application of the Code should
be extended to any offence committed ouiside India by an
alien wiilst in the service of Government, when such offence
is committed in connection with such service. or is punishable
under Chapter VI. VEL or 1X of the Code. (Para 1.17).

2. Steps should be taken to extend the Code to Jammu and
Kashmir. (Para 1.5)

if. (1) The General Clauses Act should be made applicable
to the Code and redundant d2tinitions eliminated. (Para 2.2).

(2) The chapter should be re-arranged giving simple defini-
tions of words and expressions in alphabetical order. (Para 2.82).

(3) The definition of “public servant” should be revised to.
include specifically any member of Parliament or of a State
Legislature. (Para 2.35).

(4) A clearer definition of “fraudulently” is proposed. (Para
2.50),

1॥1. (1) A system of corrective labour, without deprivation
of freedom, should be introduced as a substiture for short-term
imprisonment, (Para 3.11).

(2) Provision should be made in the Code itself for orders to
pay compensation out of fine to victim of the offence when the
ishable under Chapter XVI. 2७५७ or 2९२1. (Para

353

3Mof Law 7 24

Summary


354

(3) fn regard to certain offences of an anti-social character
committed for the second lime, public censure should be provided
as an additional punishment. (Para 3.25).

33 i Death sentence on minors should be prohibited. (Para

(3) Besides laying down that life imprisonment. shalt be
rigorous, the sentence should be retained for a few heinous
offences only. (Para 3.35 and 3.40).

(0) Light labour should be permissible by law in simple im-
prisonment. {Paras 3.41 to 3.44).

(7) Provisions relating to imprisonment in default of pay-
ment of fine should be made clearer by re-drafting. (Para 3.52
to 3.58).

(8) Solitary confinement as a form of judicial punishment
should be abolished. (Para 3.80).

(9) Section 75 which provides for enhanced punishment for
repeated offences should be rationalised and liberalised. (Paras
3.82 to 3.89).

19५. (1) The minimum age of criminal responsibility should be
raised from seven years to ten years. The further provision in
section #2 for exempting a child between seven and iwelve years
if he has not attained maturity of understanding should be
omitted. At the same time it is very necessary that Children

Acts should be properly enforced in all States. (Paras 4.23 to
4.25),

(2) The defence of duress, now limited to threal of instant
death to the person compelled, should be extended to threat
of instant death or grievous bodily harm either to the person
compelted or to his near relative. (Para 4.45).

(3) ‘he present restriction on the right of private defence in
cases where there is time to have recourse to the protection
of the public authorities should be omitted. (Para 4.54 and 4.55).

V. (1) Abetment by conspiracy should be omitted. (Para
2

(2) A revision of the definition of abetment contained in sec-
lions 107, 108 and 108A is recommended. (Para 5.4 and 5.13).

(3) Where the abettor of an offence is a public servant whose
duty it is to prevent its commission, he should be punishable
With the punishment provided for the offence. (Para 5.21),

(4) Abetting the commission of an offence by a child under
15, whether or not the cffence is committed, should be punish-
abie with imprisonment for a term up to twice the maximum
provided for that offence. (Para 5.23 ard 5.24).


355

(5) Agreements to commit peity offences or non-
iNegal acts should not be punishable as criminal conspiracces.
(Para 5.37).

(6) A definition of attempt is re

Vi. (1) Treason. sedition and other offences thi
security and integrity of India are not adequately dealt wih सा
the Code. The strengthening. consolidation and review cf this
branch of the criminal law should. however, be taken ap asa
separate project. (Para 6.4).

(2) Assisting India’s enemies in any manner should be a spec’
fic offence punishable with rigorous imprisonment upto ten
years. (Para 6.7).

(3) Conspiracy to overawe Parliament or the Legistviure of
a State should be included in section 121A along with conspiracy
10 overawe the Government. (Para 6.8).

(4) Scction 124 should be expanded 16 cover assault cic. on
{a) the Speakers,Chairmen of the Legistatures and (0) Chief
Justices, (Para 6.10).

(5) The offence of sedition should be redefined
within its purview the exciting of disaffection towards (he Cons-
titution, or the Government or Parliament of India, or the
Government or Legislature of any State. or the administration
of justice, as by law established, and expressing the icity rea
as “intending or knowing it to be likely to endanger the integrity
or security of India or of any State. or to cause public disorder”.
The present punishment for sedition imprisonment for life or
imprisonment upto three years---shoutd be replaced by rigorous
imprisonment upto seven years. (Para 6.19).

{6) Deliberate insult to the book of the Constitution. the
national flag, the national emblem or the national anthem. by
burning, desecration or otherwise, should be made an offence.
(Para 6.20).

VEL. (1) Chapter Vil, now limited to offences relating te the
rvegular Army. Navy and Air Force should be extended to all
armed forces of the Union. (Para 7.2).

(2) The important offence of inciting to mutiny or other act
of insubordination by publishing statements, circulating ru-
mours or otherwise (now included in section 505) should be putin
this Chapter. (Para 7.9).

(3) Similarly, dissuading persons from joining the armed
forces, and instigating them to mutiny or ubordination after
joining, which are now offences against the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Act, 1938. should be dealt with in this Chapter. (Para 7.10).

VIN. (1) Making any preparation for rioting should be made
an offence . (Para 8.13).


356

(2) A person promoting enmity between different groups on
grounds of religion. race. language, etc, should be punished only
if it is done intentionally. Section 153A should be amended to
make this clear. (Para 8.25).

(3) As section 505, after excluding sub-section {i)(a) thereof.
deals with offences against public tranquillity similar to the
offence punishable under section 153A, its provisions should be
transposed to this Chapter as a new section 153B. (Para 8.26).

12. (1) In order to check oppression, a public servant who
wilfully conducts himself in the performance of his functions as
such public servant with intent to cause injury to any person
shall be punishable with imprisonment upto one year, or fine. or
both. (Para 9.9 and 9.10).

(2) Another new section recommended is to punish a public
servant who authorises payment on bdchalf of Government cr
other public authority for goods supplied or works dons uader
any contract. when he knows that the goods or works are not in
accordance with the contract. (Para 9.12).

IXA. (1) The offence of undue influence at clections should
be detined more closely on the lines of the British, Canadian
and Australian definitions, by expressly mentioning use or threat
of force, violence or wrongful restraint as an ingredient of the
offence. (Para 9A.10 and 98.11).

(2) Punishment for the offences of bribery. undue influence,
personation and false statements should be enhanced. (Para
94.6 and 98.13).

(3) Sections 171H and 171-1, which create two petty offences
in relation to elections. should be omitted. (Para 98.15).

X. (1) The punishments provided in this Chapter dealing with
contempis of the lawful authority of public servants err on the
side of leniency and should be increased. (Para 10.1).

2९1, (1) In order to check the growing malpractice of issuing
and using false medical certificates, it is recommended that any
medical practitioner who knowingly issues any false medical
certificate or certificate of fitness, and any person who corruptly
uses it as a truce certificate, should be punishable with imprison-
ment upto one year, or fine, or both: and if the certificate is, or
is to be used. in a judicial proceeding, the punishment could
be upto three years. (Para 11.1॥ and 11.12).

(2) Harbouring of persons about to commit kidnapping or
abduction should be included in section 216A. (Para 11.27).

(3) Sections 221 to 225B relating to resistance to arrest. res-
cue from custody, omission to arrest, allowing escape etc. should
be revised and re-arranged. (Para 11.29).



337

(4) Three additional sections are proposed to punish (i) dis-
suading a witness by threats, bribes or other corrupt means
from giving evidence, (ii) failure, without sufficient cause, bya
person released on bail, to appear in court in accordance with
the terms of the bond; and (iit) the ordering or conducting of
vexatious searches without reasonable grounds. (Para 11.36).

XII. (1) Provisions refating to the counterfeiting of currency
notes and bank-notes, at present contained in Chapter 18. should
be placed in Chapter 12 which deals with counterfeiting of coin
and Government stamps. (Para 12.3.).

(2) The present scheme of two sets of provi sions for counter-
feiting of foreign coins and counterfeiting of Indian coins should
be done away with, and the number of sections reduced. These
provisions should also be simplified on the lines of the corres:
ponding provisions relating to counterfeiting of currency notes.
(Para 12.9 and 12.10).

(3) The dishonest use of slugs in vending machines should be
punished with imprisonment upto one year or fine or both,
(Para 42.23). .

(4) A completely revised Chapter X11 on offences relating to
currency notes, coins and stamps is recommended.

20111. (1) The maximum term of imprisonment for offences
relating to weights and measures should be increased from one
year to two years. (Para 13.1).

XIV. (1) The punishments prescribed in this Chapter for
various anti-social offences affecting public health. safety and
convenience are generally low, and should be increased as indi-
cated, (Para $4.1).

(2) To the section dealing with the sale. publication. etc. of
obscene books (as amended in 1969), a provision should be add-
ed to the effect that where the question is whether the publication
of a book, pamphtet, etc., is in the interests of science, literature,
art, learning or other objects of general concern, expert evidence
on that question may b> admitted. (Para 14.13).

(3) Section 294A dealing with unauthorised lotteries should
be more detailed as in some State Acts. It should contain broad
guide-lines for the State Government in the matter of authorising
private lotteries, (Para 14.16 and 14.17).

XVI. (1) A re-drafting of the definitions of murder and
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, contained in sec-
tions 299 and 300, is recommended to meet the criticism of obs-
curity and repetition of deas. It is desirable to have a self-con-
tained definition of murder in section 299, and another of the
lesser offence in section 300. (Para 16.6 and 16.7),



358

(2) Section 304 should be simplified by abolishing the dis-
ction between the two parts of the section and prescribing
a uaiform punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to
murder. (Para 36.18 to 16.20).

(3) For the offence of causing death by rash or negligent act,
the maximum term of imprisonment under section 304A should
be iacreased to five years. (Para 16.27).

(4) Atiempt to commit suicide should
(Para 16.31 10 16.33.

se to be an offence.

(5) A person who. by persistent acts of cruelty, drives a
member of his family Jivmg with him to commit suicide should
shed with imprisonment upto three years, or fine, or both.
$6.34 and 16.35).

(6) Miscarriage caused by a registered medical ;practiuoner
with the woman’s consent. within three months of the com-
mencement of the pregnancy, should not be punishable under
section 312. (Para 16.45 and 16.46.).

(7) The offence of concealing the birth of a child by secret
dispowal of the dead body shouid be abolished. (Para 16.52).

(5५ ft should be made an offence for a person who, being
legaity baund to provide the necessaries of life to another.
fails without lawful excuse to do so. knowing that such failure
will endanger the life or seriously impair the health of that per-
son, (Para 16.53).

(9) The offences of wrongful restraint and wrongful confine-
ment, when jointly committed dy ten or more persons, should be
regarded ay aggravated forms and be more severely punishable.
(Para 16.74 and 16.75).

(10) The distinction between ‘assault’ and ‘using criminal
force’ without any practical difference necd not be maintained.
There is aiso no need for elaborate definitions of ‘force’ and
‘criminal force’. The expression ‘assault’ should be so defined
ard employed as to imclude what is now covered by “criminal
forces’. (Para 16.78 10 16,80).

(111 A new offence of indecent assault on a minor under 16
years of age punishable with imprisonment upto three years
should be created. (Para 16.86).

(12) Kidnapping need be only of one kind, viz. kidnapping
from iawlul guardianship. Kidnapping out of India need not be
weated as a separate species of kidnapping. (Para 16.92).

or the offence of kidnapping a minor for the purposes
. there should be a minimum sentence of three years”



359

(14) Kidnapping or abduction for ransom should be an
aggravated form of the offence of kidnapping or abduction.
punishable with rigorous imprisonment upto fourteen years and
fine. (Para 16.100).

(15) Sexual intercourse of a man with his child wife, and
illicit intercourse with a girl between twelve and sixteen with con-
seni, both of which are statutory rape, should be taken out of
the definition of rape and made sp2cific offences. In regard to
the lattes, it should be a defence for the accused to prove that he.
in good fuith, believed the girl to be over sixteen years of age.
(Para 26.115 to 16.120).

(16) Three other sexual offences are recommended for
inclusion in this Chapter. (i) A public servant compelling or
seducing to illicit intercourse any woman who is in his custody
as such public servant, {ii} a supe intendent or manager of a
women’s or children’s institution compelling or seducing to
illicit intercourse any female inmate of the institution, and (iii)
a person on the management or staff of a mental hospital having,
iftcit intercourse with a woman who is receiving treatment for a
mental disorder in that hospital, should be punishable. (Para
16.123)

XVIE. (1) A person who, taking advantage of the occurrence
of an accident in a public place or of a fire, flood. riot, earth-
quake etc., commits theft in respect of property affected by such
accident or calamity, should be punishable with imprisonment
upto seven years. (Para 17.9).

(2) Blackmail, in the sense of dishonesily threatening one
with publishing an imputation harmful to his reputation, should
be made a separate offence. (Para 17.13).

(3) Robbery with murder committed by two or more persons.
should be treated in the same way as dacoity with murder for
purposes of punishment. (Para 17.20).

(4) Property. the possession whereof has been transferred by
cheating, should be included within the definition of “stolen
property”. (Para 17.35).

(5) Cheating a public authority in the performance of a con-
tract for the supply of goods or the construction of a building or
execution of oiher work shouid be punishable with imprison-
ment upto ten years and fine. (Para 17.50).

(6) Bribe taking by employees in the private sector of com-
merce or industry in respect of the employers’ affairs or business
should be punishable in the same way as bride taking by public
servants. A new section to deal with this type of commercial
corruption is recommended. (Para 17.53).


360

(7) Mischief in relation to aircraft, should be specifically
dealt with as an aggravated form of mischief. (Para 17.69).

(8) The aggravations of house trespass, which are at present
described as “lurking house-trespass”, “‘Jurking house-trespass
by night”. “house-breaking” and “house-breaking by night”,
should be replaced by one aggravation to be called “burglary”.
and the sections numbering twenty, now dealing with trespass
in great detail, reduced to nine. (Para 17.75 and 17.78).

जा, (1) The definition of forgery should be made self-
contained, incorporating ail that is now set out in sections 463
and 464. (Para 18.2 to 18.4).

(2) The numerous penal sections relating to forgery and allied
offences should be simplified and reduced in number so as to re-
move unnecessary or over-lapping provisions. (Para 18.8 to
18.16).

XIX. (1) The existing provision punishing very lightly a
breach of contract to attend on the wants of a helpless person un-
abie to look after himself, should be repealed as being of negligi-
ble utility. (Para 19.2).

XX. (1) The definition of “bigamy” should be revised. {1
should be made clear, in particular, that where the relevant di-
vorce law prohibits re-marriage of the parties within a specified
period after the decree of dissolution, such re-marriage wou'd
amount to bigamy. (Para 20.3 to 20.7).

XXI. (1) Where the offence of defamation has been com-
mitted by publishing an imputation in a newspaper, the Court
convicting the offender should have power to order that its judg-
ment shall be published in whole or in part in such newspaper as
it may specify. (Para 21.5).

XXIL. (1) Intimidation, in the form of a threat to commit
suicide with the object of coercing a public authority to pursue a
course of action which it is not legally bound to do, should be
made an offence. (Para 22.3).

(2) Performing mock funeral of a living person with intent to
cause annoyance to the public or to any person should be made an
offence. (Para 22.5).

XXL (1) There should be a chapter in the Penal Code
dealing with violation of personal privacy. (Chapter 23).

(2) As a beginning, the use of artificial listening or recording
apparatus to eavesdrop on private conversations, unauthorised-
ly taking photographs of a person without his consent or against
his wishes, and the publication of any information gathered by
such methods, should be made punishable. (Para 23.7 and 23.8).


ay

361

XXIV. (1) The principle of limitation for taking cognizance
of an offence should be introduced in regard to less serious
offences punishable under the Code either with fine only or with
imprisonment not exceeding three years. (Para 24.14).

(2) Detailed provisons are recommended. {Para 24.30).

25.2. A draft of a Bill to amend the Indian Penal Code, design-
ed to implement all the recommendations made by us, is annexed
to this Report. We were gratified to note that special steps were
taken by the Government on our last Report on the Code of
Criminal Procedure, and legislation to replace the existing Code
of 1898 by a new Code as recommended by us is well on its way.
{t would be in the fitness of things if the Penal Code could be
revised and brought up-to-date by the present Parliament and we
would therefore recommend to Government that equaily
expeditious action may be taken in this behalf.

Draft of
Amendment
Bilt.


Note by Mrs. Anna Chandi
है, Amendment of section 342

T regret | am unable to agree with the recommendation that
a proviso be added to section 312 whereby, causing misca’riage
would not amount to an offence if it were done by a registered
medical practitioner with the consent of the woman who has not
been pregnant for more than three months. [In my opinion the
effect of this recommendation would be to liberalise our law on
aborUen beyond socially acccptable limits.

Unser the penal laws of most countries. the causing of
abortion was considered, until quite recently, a culpable crime
except when such abortion is necessary to save the life of the
woman. Following widely supported demands for liberalisation
of these rules. many countries have enacied less restricted laws
on abortion. In India too, there have been demands for such
liberalisation. and the Government of India in 1964, appointed
a committee to study the question of legislation of abortion.
The committee under the Chairmanship of Sri Shantilal Shab,
the then Minister of Health of the Government of Maharashtra
consisted of representatives of the Central Social Welfare Board,
Family Planning Association of India. Association of Medical
Women in India, All-India Women’s Conference, Federation of
Obstetrical & Gynaecological Societies of India. Indian Medical
Association and Indian Council of Child Weifare. The Com-
mittee. after a detailed study of the subject, submitted its report
in 1966. The recommendations were that the provision regard-
ing aboruon in the Indian Penal Code was too restrictive, and
should be liberalised to allow termination of pregnancy by a qua-
Jified medical practitioner acting in good faith not only for sav-
ing the pregnant woman's life but also:

(a) when the continuance of the pregnancy would involve
serious risk to the life, or grave injury to the health, whether
physical or mental, of the pregnant woman, whether before.
at. or after the birth: or

(b) when there is a substantial risk that if the child were
born i: would suffer from such physical or mental abnormali-
ties as to be seriously handicapped in life; or

_ when the pregnancy results from rape. intercourse
with an unmarried girt under the age of 16 or intercourse
with a mentally defective woman.

_ It is obvious from its membership, that the committee was a
wide-based expert body with adequate representation for women
who, after all, are those primarily concerned with the subject

362


363

of abortion. Ia my opinion, the Committee’s recommendation
has gone as far as one may properly go in liberalising abortion
laws without doing damage to our social and cuitural values.

Contrived termination of pregnancy. al whatever stage of the
child’s development in the mother’s womb, amounts to wilfully
extinguishing a human life. One may do so only for good and
sufficient reasons. These reasons may change with changing
social and cultural values; but there must always be some demons-
trable reason. if. at one siage, a society will accept only immi-
nent danger to the mother’s life as sufficient justilication, the
same society at another stage of its evohition may consider the
fikelihood of an adverse effect on the mother’s health as good
enough reason fer permitting abortion. The recommendation
of the Committee appears to reflect such a change in our society's
attitude.

However, our present recommendation goes far beyond that
The effect of the recommended proviso to section 312 would
be to permit abortion at wil} during the first 12 weeks of preg-
nancy. This is a quantum jump from abortion to save the
mother’s life (0 abortion for convenience.

it would be difficult to justify such latitude unless we consider
the 12 weeks old foetus in the mother’s womb not as an incipient
human life but merely as a ‘uterine tumour’, J do not think
such disrespect for human life is compatible with our social
values.

It. Amendment of section 497

1 regret that 1 find myself unable to agree with my fearned
colleagues on their recommendation regarding the amendment
of section 497, This section which punishes the offence of adul-
tery is a part of Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code dealing
with offences relating 10 marriage.

Generaily speaking the whole chapter is based on the postulate
ihat the wife is the property of the husband and the wife has
no corresponding rights in relation to her husband. Any
transgression by or relating to the wife is to be punished. while
the law is silent on similar misdeeds by or rejating to the hus-
band.

This postulate is nothing peculiar to India or to the Indian
Penal Code. Most countries in the world had, at some time or
other, laws relating to property, succession, polygamy and other
material offences. which were quite frankly biased in favour of
the male. This however is no longer very prevalent. Most
advanced societies have already done away with such debasing
discrimination. India too is progressing in the same direction
and has passed some enlightened legislation, such as those
relating to women’s rights of succession, prevention of poly-
gamy etc. And now that we are at the job of amending the Penal



1. Macaulay's Draft Penat Code (1837) Notes, Note 0, pages 90-93.

364

Code, 1 think it is the right time to consider the question whether
the offence of adultery as envisaged in section 497 is in tune with
our present day notions of woman's status in marriage.

_ The Commission discussed this section at some length. The
final decision of the majority of the members is that the section
should be left as it is, after deleting the provision which exempts
the wife from punishment for adultery.

In my opinion, the recommended amendment would be a
retrograde step, which would be difficult to justify.

To appreciate the effect of the amendment, it would be useful
to glance briefly at the back ground of the section.

Macaulay had, in his Draft Penal Code,! decided not to make
adultery an offence. One of the reasons for that decision was
given thus:—

“There is yet another consideration which we cannot
wholly leave out of sight. Though we well know that the
dearest interests of the human race are closely connected
with the chastity of women, and the sacredness of the nuptial
contract, we cannot but feel that there are some peculiarities
in the state of society in this country which may well lead a
humane man to pause before he determines to punish the
infidelity of wives. The condition of the women of this
country is unhappily very different from that of the women
of England and France. They are married while still children.
They are often neglected for other wives while still young.
They share the attention of a husband with several rivals.
To make Jaws for punishing the inconstancy of the wife while
the Jaw admits the privilege of the husband to fill his zenana
with women, is a course which we are most reluctant to adopt.
We are not so visionary as to think of attacking by law an
evil so deeply rooted in the manners of the people of this
country as polygamy. We leave it to the slow, but we trust
the certain, operation of education and of time. But while
it exists, while it continues to produce its never failing effects
on the happiness and respectability of women, we are not
inclined to throw into a scale already too much depresssed the
additional weight of the penal law. We have given the rea-
sons which lead us to believe that any enactment on this sub-
ject would be nugatory. And we are inclined to think
that if not nugatory it would be oppressive. It would streng-
then hands already too strong. It would weaken a class
already too weak. It will be time enough to guard the matri-
moniai contract by penal sanctions when that contract be-
comes just. reasonable, and mutually beneficial.”


365

The Law Commissioners, in their second report! on the
draft Penal Code, did not think it advisable to exclude the offence
of adultery from the Code. but relied on Macaulay's remarks
quoted above to recommend the exemption of the woman from
punishment for adultery. They gave their reasons thus:

“While we think that the offence of adultery ought not
10 be omitted from the Code, we would limit its cognizance
10 adultery committed with a married woman, and consider-
ing that there is much weight in the last remarks in Note Q,
regarding the condilion of the women of this country, in
deference to it we would render the male offender alone lia-
ble to punishment. We would however put the parties
accused of adultery on trial “together, and empower the
Court in the event of their conviction to pronounce a decree
of divorce against the guilty woman. if the husband sues for
it, at the same time that her paramour is sentenced to punish-
ment by imprisonment or fine. By Mr. Livingstone’s Code
the woman forfeits her “matrimonial gains’. but is not
fiable to other punishment.”

The present Commission's recommendation is that this exemp-
tion clause be deleted. The reasoning behind it is that with the
general advancement in the status of women and especially their
education. they can now be held responsible for their own actions
and so have no further need for any artificial protection. This
idea of equality between men and women in the field of res-
ponsibility for their awn actions is progressive and is quite un-
exceptionable: but the resultant recommendation, | am afraid.
does not fully reflect the idea. Ln fact, far from disapproving the
mediacval postulate behind the present provision. the recommend-
ation in effect reinforces it.

The wife being considered the husband's property, the present
provision reserves for the husband the right to move the law for
punishing any trespass on it, while not giving the wife any corres-
ponding right to complain against any transgressions on the part
of or relating to her husband. Perhaps to make amends for this
harsh discrimination, the present section provides that the wife
should not be punished along with the trespasser. The removal
of this exemption clause does not cause damage to the basic
idea of the wife being the property of the husband. On the
other hand. it merely restates the idea. and adds a new dimension
to it by making rot only the trespasser but the property also liable
to punishment. This, as noted before, can hardly be consider-
ed 9 progressive step.

3. Second Report on the draft Indian Penal Code (1847). pages 134-135


व Alamgir v. State of Bidar, AAR. 1959 5.0. 436 (per Gajendragadkar, 3.)

2. Section 172, German Penal Code (1871).

246

The Supreme Court, while dealing with a case! under section
498, observed :—

“The provisions of section 498, like those of section 497
are intended to protect the rights of the husband and not of the
wile. ...The policy underlying the provisions of scction
498 may no doubt sound inconsistent with the modern notions
of the status of women and of mutual rights and obligations
under marriage.”

itis time now that we began to look at marriage as an equal
partnership, and not as a transaction giving rise to proprictary
rights for one over the other. Uf this equality is to be reflected
in the Code, then seclion 497 would have to be either omitted
altogether or reframed so as to make transgressions by either
party equally punishable.

Speaking for myself. | am not for removing the offence of
adultery from the Penal Code. No doubt, the idea is spreading
in most advanced societies that adultery is not a criminal offence
but onlyacivil wrong. The example of countries which no long-
er treat adultery as a crime, is no doubt of persuasive value,
but it is not binding on us. 1 do not think our society is as yet
ready to take that step. From ancient times our society has
stressed the sanctity of marriage and has always considered any
violations of it as highly reprehensible. This is the real sanction
behind the punishment for adultery. 1 do not think that there is
any change in the popular mind with regard to this matter.

The main argument against making adultery a crime, is that
marital morality is the private concern of the husband and wife,
and law has “no business” there. True, it is a private matter
tO a great extent: but society has also a vital interest in
the prescivation of the family. When immorality goes to the
extent of endangering the existence of the family. society can
rightly claim to step in; for. in the preservation of the family unit
lics ultimaiely the preservation of society itself. This border
line between private and social concern is crossed when adultery
results in the dissolution of the marriage and the break up of the
family.

The idea that the State should step in only at this stage is noth-
ing new. iis reflected in the provision on adultery in the Ger-
man Penal Code.? which is as follows

“172. Adultery.

1. Ifa marriage is dissolved as a result of adultery. then
the guilty spouse as well as the guilty partner shall be punis}
ed by imprisonment for a term of not fess than six months.

2. Prosecution shall be commenced only upon petition.”


367

bam. therefore. of the view that the section be amended to
bring out thai a person. male or female—who, being married
has sexual intercourse with a female or a male (as the case may
be), noi his or her spouse, without the consent or connivance of
such spouse. commits adultery, provided that it shal! not amount

to adultery unless the marriage had been dissolved by reason of
that offence.

Mrs. Anna Chandi,


Note sy SHrt R. L. NARASIMHAM
General

The indian Penal Code, 1860, is based on the original draft
prepared by Lord Macaulay and the colleagues in 1837 and it
retains its pre-eminent position as one of the great Codes of the
world. it has been widely adopted (with modifications} in
several countries and has undergone very few amendments during
its long tence for more than a century. But its pre-eminence
amongst codified laws should not. by itself, be taken as a good
reason for not recommending suitable amendments and additions
to bring it into conformity with the modern view on penology.
Even in some well informed quarter. an erroncous view still
persists that apart from minor drafting changes to some of the
sections with a view to reconcile conflicting decisions of the High
Courts and to give legislative recognition to some of the decisions
of the Supreme Court. the Code should not undergo a thorough
revision. This view overlooks the following obvious defects
from which the Code suffers.

(1) Macaulay seems to have ignored some of the principles
of Hindu criminat jurisprudence which though laid down in the
Smritis made bet.veen the Ist and 6th centuries are applicable
even now.

(2) Macaulay drafted the Code to suit the needs of India at
a time when it was a mere police state with purely agricultural
economy whercas Independent india is now a “Welfare State”
with an appreciable percentage of industrial Society.

(3) Macaulay was a Liberal following the school of Bentham
and 3.5. Mill and for him the principle of Laisse= faire was almost
sacrosanct. But India is now a socialist state with extensive
state powers and control of personal liberties and economic rights
and the penal jaw (like other laws) must be modified. especially
as regards nature of punishment. classification of new crimes,
rehabilitation of a convict लए, to suit the prevailing economic
theory.

(4) Subsequent to Macaulay, the science of Penology (Crime
and Punishment) has undergone a drastic change at the hands of
world jurists and some of their ideas have been incorporated in
the U.N. Charter and in the Penal Codes of several foreign
countries.

2. The social consciousness of society is generally reflected
jn the state of the criminal law. As pointed out by an eminent
American authority: --

The purpose of the penal law is to express a formal
social condemnation of forbidden conduct, buttressed by

308


369

sanctions calculated to prevent it.’ (Wechalor “The Criteria
of Criminal Responsibility” 22 University of Chicago L.R.
at p. 374).

“Social change affects criminal law in many ways:
through developments in science especially in biology and
medicine. through changes in the predominant moral and
social philosophy: through changes in the structure of society,
especially in its transition from a moral self-contained and
relatively sparsely populated. to a highly urbanised and indus-
trialised pattern”. (Law in a Changing Society by W. Fried-
mann, 9. 166).

“Criminal law has, quite rightly been called one of the
most faithful mirrors of a given civilisation reflecting the fun-
damental values on which the latter rests. Whenever these
values change, the criminal law must follow suit”. (Crimi-
nal law by Richard C. Donnelly, Joseph Coldstein, and
Richard D. Schwartz, P. $24).

3. 89 the end of the last century, there was a striking change
in the concept of crime and punishment, brought about mainly
by the ftalian jurist Ferri and his followers. The classical school
of criminology which prevailed till then believed that the greatest
happiness of the greatest number was the primary object of puni-
shment and that special emphasis should be given to the restric-
tive und repressive functions of punishment. Ferri, however.
maintained that the rehabilitation aspect of punishment should
be the guiding principle in the prevention of criminal behaviour
and in the handling of the criminal, and became the leading ex-
ponent of the positive school of punishment. Ferri's ideas have
gradually received world recognition and in the recent U.N.
Covenant adopted by the General Assembly of U.N.O. on
16-12-1966, the following resolution was unanimously passed :—

Article 10:
(1) All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated

with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity
of the human person.

0) ...........-७--.--.- वन निफ नि फशिफनिफमिक,

(3) The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of
prisoners the essential aim of which shall be their reforma-
tion and social rehabilitation”.

It is now well recognised in all civilised countries that sentences
should be based on the nature of the criminal personality and not
exclusively on the nature of the crime committed. In the report
of the Study Group of the British Labour Party (Crime—A
Challenge to us ail) there is this significant passage :—

“Although society may be justified in demanding a
measure of retribution to deter the criminal, this in a negative

3M of law:7i—25


370

approach. Something more is needed for the true protec-
tion of the citizen: the prevention of crime by the care of the
inadequate and immature, the healing of the sick, the reha-
bilitation of the offender, the restoration of his self-respect
and his training in respect for the rights of others”.

These are positive aspects of penal practice and penal reform.

4. By the middle of the 20th century, the term “Welfare
State” has become the commonly accepted description of the soci-
ety in several western countries and in the recent edition of the
Oxford Dictionary the term has been explained as “A polity so
organised that every member of the community is assured of his
due maintenance with the most advantageous conditions possible
for all”. In such a state, it is recognised that fundamentally
crime is a sign of sickness in the individuals and sickness in the
society that breeds him. Thus, as it is no good condemning
plants for not growing and blossoming as they should, if the
soil is sour, similarly the society should not, when there is preval-
ence of crime put the entire blame on the criminals and assume
a wholly innocent attitude. The same idea was conveyed in
Manu, Book viii, sloka 304:

watt oudagar oat भवति tH:
saa षड़्भागों.. wae  ह्वारक्षतः

“A king who (duly) protects (his subjects) receives from
each and all the sixth part of their spiritual merit; if he does
not protect them then the sixth part of their demerit (sin)
also (will fali on him).”

Hence according to Manu, the Government (King) shares
1/6th of the sin committed by a criminal. This shows that the
Government also should share, to some extent, the responsibility
for the prevalence of crime. In Valmiki’s Ramayana also, the
close relationship between the King (now Government) and the
prevalence of crime in a country is brought out while describing
Ram Rajya:

राममेवानुवर्तनंतों नाउभ्यहिसत te
(Yuddha Kanda—Ch. 128, sloka 100).

“The subjects followed the example set up by Rama
(their Ruler) and did not commit crimes against one another”.

5. This change in the attitude towards crime and punishment
is reflected in some of the Articles of the United Nations Organisa-
tion. Thus in the U.N. Charter it was stated that one of the main
purposes of the United Nations was to promote and encourage
respect for human rights. In pursuance of this objective, the
General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights unanimously on the 10th Decem-
ber, 1948. This Declaration has considerable indirect legal
effect and is regarded by some jurists as a part of the “Law of


371

United Nations”. Those articles of the Declaration which have
a bearing on the reform of the Indian Penal Code are given below:

Article 5:

No one shall be subjected io torture, or to cruel, inhu-
man or degrading treatment or punishment.

Sections 73 and 74 of the ¥.P.C. which deal with solitary
confinement will have to be omitted from the Code in pursuance
of this Article. Again, for the same reason, the punishment of
whipping cannot be provided in the Code as suggested to us by
some sections of the Bar and the judiciary.

Article 12:

No one shail be subjected to arbitrary interference with
his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks
upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to
the protection of the jaw against such interference or attacks,

For implementing this article new offences dealing with the
unauthorised invasion of privacy have been provided in the Penal
Codes of some countries. In the Indian Penal Code also a new
chapter dealing with offences affecting the right of privacy will
have to be provided.

On the 16th December, 1966, the General Assembly of the
U.N.O. unanimously adopted the International Covenants on
Human Rights in which the aforesaid Articles of the Declaration
were reiterated. (See Articles 7 and 17). In addition, the Coven-
ants lay down certain principles relating to punishments for
crimes. Thus, Article 6, para. 5 says that sentences of death
shall not be imposed for crime committed by persons below 18
years of age.

6. There is an unfortunate tendency, in some circles, to
ignore or to belittle the Hindu criminal jurisprudence on the
main ground that it provides for barbarous punishments such as
mutilation for some offences. These critics overlook the obvious
fact that the Smritis were written between the Ist and 6th centuries
A.D. and the punishments provided in them were less barbarous
than those provided in the criminal laws of western countries as
1816 as the end of the 17th century when petty theft was punish-
able with death and burning of witches and heretics was sancti-
oned by law. Hindu criminal law was more humane in the treat-
ment of offenders than the laws of other countries of the same and
even later period. Moreover, punishments such as externment
from a locality, direct payment of compensation to the victim
of the crime, wide publication of the name of the offender
(social_censure) which are now found in the penal laws of some
of the Foreign countries, have been provided in the Hindu
Smritis. As regards complete social rehabilitation of convicts after
they have undergone the sentences, Smritis were more liberal
(as will be shown subsequently) than modern penal law.


372

7. In my opinion, while considering the reform of Penal
Law in India, the Law Commission, should approach the subject
with a juristic outlook keeping in view the modern development
in penal law of the leading Welfare States of the world and the
norms laid down by the U.N.O. Proposals for penal law reform
should not be scrutinised with the typical bureaucratic mistrust
of new and experimental schemes nor should undue importance
be attached to the absence of enthusiasm for reform in India,
or to financial and other practical difficulties that may be antici-
pated. All sound reforms—whether legal or political or social—
include an ideal element. Practical difficulties should undoub-
tedly be carefully considered and overcome at the time of imple-
menting the reform but they should not be used as an excuse for
not initiating reform altogether. There should be no hesitation
in freely borrowing ideas from the Hindu criminal jurisprudence
as laid down in the Smritis of Manu, Narada and Brihaspati.

8. A study of the Penal Codes of several countries of the
world (as far as available here) shows that in most of the Wel-
fare States the penal law provides for!:—

(1) Several intermediate types of punishments between
“fine” and “imprisonment”.

(2) Law of limitation for the initiation of prosecution
against the offenders and the execution of sentences.

(3) Complete rehabilitation of some classes of convicts
under certdin conditions either by judicial pardon, expung-
ing or cancellation of convictions and sentences.

(4) Relaxing the rigour of the old maxim “ignorantia
juris non excusat” by providing even for complete acquittal
where notwithstanding due diligence, the law on a particular
subject could not be ascertained.

In my opinion ail the aforesaid subjects should be included
in the revised Indian Penal Code and where I have been unable
to persuade my colleagues to agree with my views, | have pre-
pared a separate minute.

1. Phave been much handicapped in my study of the Foreign Penal Codes, due to the

non-availability of complete and uptodate texts, The Commission was denied an
opportunity for an intensive study tour in some of the leading Weifare States of the
World for the purpose of examining the actual working of the Penal Laws, in
those countries. Hence any observation in these minutes about the penal laws of

foreign countris

should be taken as subject to the limitation of being either in+

complete or not uptodate.


373

EXTERNMENT

One of the important omissions in the Code is the absence of
any punishment intermediate between (a) imprisonment and {b)
fine (see section 53). The punishment of forfeiture of property
is retained only for three offences, viz., sections 126, 127 and 169
Indian Penal Code.

The result is that where the court feels that the sentence of
fine may not be suitable for an offender, it has no other alternative
except 10 sentence him to imprisonment. The evil effects of
imprisonment—especially short-term _imprisonment—are well-
known. As pointed out by Nigel Walker (Reader in Crimino-
logy at Oxford) in his “Sentencing in a Rational Socicfy” at p.
76, the unwanted by-products of imprisonment are these:

(1) The prisoner loses his job, is separated from his
family and is compelled to associate with other delinquents.

(2) Prison work is seldom more than a way of reducing
the economic burden which prisoners represent and of wean-
ing them from idleness: it is only in exceptional cases that
he learns a trade which he afterwards takes up.

(3) Though prisons make efforts to palliate the effects
of separating the prisoner from his wife and family by allow-
ing them to visit him, yet this does not prevent many marriages
from breaking up during a jong or even a medium sentence,

(4) In a prison there is ample scope for contamination
of the unsophisticated offender by the professional criminal.

Hence, there is a necd for Providing for other types of sentences
for certain classes of crimes,

The recent decision of the Supreme Court of United States
in Tate v. Short decided on 2nd March, 1971, is instructive.
it was held that any Jaw which Jimits punishment to payment
of fine for those who are also able to Pay it but to convert the fine
to imprisonment for those unable to pay it, offends the equal
protection of the clause of the Constitution. The learned Judges
indicated that the State was free to choose some other method
(0 avoid imprisoning an indigent person for involuntary non-
payment of a fine. It is not unlikely that an enterprising lawyer
in India also may challenge the constitutional validity of section
64, I.P.C. as contravening article 14 in so far as it enables the court
to send a poor convict to jail whereas a convicted person who
is able to pay the fine, escapes imprisonment. This is, therefore,
an additional reason for the Law Commission to devise some
intermediate punishment between (a) fine, and (७) imprisonment.

2. The sentence of externment for an offence was suggested '
by me, but as it was not acceptable to my colicagues, I have been


374

constrained to write a separate minute on the subject. The neces-
sity for such a punishment arises from the fact that notwithstan-
ding universal condemnation, short-term senterices are widely
prevalent. In England, according to Nigel Walker (ibid,
p. 125) in 1967, sentences of six months or less accounted for 72
per cent of all prison sentences. In the book entitled “Crime,
Punishment and Cure” by Giles Playfair and Devrick Sington,
the learned authors point out (p. 20) “The statistics supplied by
the various countries show that the great majority of sentences
of imprisonment passed by the Courts are of short duration.
Sentences of six months and less form on an average more than
75 per cent of all prison seatences.”

Jn India, in the State of Bihar, during the year 1963, short-
term imprisonments of less than six months amounted to more
than 90 per cent of the total convictions. The condition in other
States must be equally bad.?

Jn some countries, the penal law provides for the sentence of
externment from a specified locality, as a substantive punishment
either in liew of or in addition to other punishments.

Thus in U.S.S.R. article 21 while enumerating various kinds
of punishment for offences includes “banishment” (Sub-section
3). This punishment of “banishment” is in substance the punish-
jnent of what is known as externment because article 26 says
“Banishment shall consist in the removal of a convicted person
from a place of his residence without prohibition against living
in certain localities.”

In the French Penal Code (as amended in 1959) article 44
provides for ‘restriction of freedom of movement consisting of
the prohibition to frequent certain places’.

In the Columbian Penal Code (as amended upto 1936) article
42 provides ‘prohibition to reside in a specified place as an acces-
sory punishment’.

In the Austrian Penal Code (as amended up to June 1965)
deportation from a place is one of the punishments provided for
gross and petty misdemeanours. (See section 240 clause (f)
and also section 249).

Yn the Norweigian Penal Code also (amended upto 1961) in
section 39 (1) there is a provision for forbidding certain classes
of convicts from residing in a particular place.

it also appears that similar provisions are found in the Penal
Codes of Ethiopia, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Switzerland,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Germany, but as accurate texts of the
Penal Codes are not available here, { am unable to give full parti-
culars about this punishment as prevalent in these countries.

1. See noie on “Duly to Make Amends for the Harm Caused” in this folder.


375

In Narada Smriti (about Sth century A.D.) externment from
the town was prescribed as one of the punishments for the offence
of ‘Sahasa’ (violence) of the highest degree. (Narada Smriti
by Max Muller, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXHI, Chap-
ter XIV, Sloka 7).

awa सर्वस्वहरणं बुरान्तिवसिनाइकना
तदड्गच्छेद TERT दण्ड उत्तम साहमे:

(Moreover corporal punishmeat, confiscation of entire pro-
perty, banishment from the town and branding, as well as ampu-
iation of that limb [with which the crime has been committed],
is declared to be the punishment for Sahasa of the highest degree).

This sentence should be distinguished from the sentence of
banishment from the country which is not recommended. {t
should also be distinguished from the preventive action of ex-
ternment from any place provided in some local Acts for goondas
and other undesirable persons.

3. My detailed suggestions as regards this form of punish-
ment are given below:

(1) “Externment” should be included as a punishment
in the Penal Code. It means the prohibition of the convic-
ted persons from residing in any specified area or locality
for a specified period.

(2) The area from which the convicted person is to be
externed must be within the jurisdiction of the convicting
court.

(3) Such a punishment may be imposed either in lieu of or
in addition to any other punishment for offenecs under sec-
tions 143, 147 and 148, LP.C.; sections 188, 189 and 190,
LP.C.; sections 379, 380, 381 and 382 1.P.C. and for aggra-
vated forms of theft such as robbery and dacoity and also for
the offence of criminal trespass and its aggravated forms.

(4) The maximum period of externment should be two
years, But it should not exceed the maximum period of
imprisonment prescribed for the offence.

(5) Externment as a punishment may be imposed in addi-
tion to or as an alternative to the punishment of imprison-
ment or fine to which the convict may be sentenced.

(6) If the convict fails to comply with the order of extern-
ment he shall be liable to imprisonment for a period to be
specified by the convicting court.

(7) The period of imprisonment in default of complying
with the order of exterament shall not exceed the maximum
period of imprisonment prescribed for the offence.


376

(8) Whenever a part of the period of externment has
been undergone, the term of imprisonment fixed in default
shall be deemed to be reduced by such numbér of days as
bears to the total number of days in that term the same pro-
portion as the number of days for which externment is
undergone bears to the number of days of externment ordered.

(9) 1 calculating the reduction under proposition (8).
y fraction of a day less than onc-half shall be left out of
account and any other fraction shall be counted as one day.

4. The main advantages of providing the punishment of
externment for offences under the Code are these:

(1) Short-term imprisonment can be avoided in a large
number of cases: thereby the evil effects of short-term senten-
ces mentioned in para.f will also be avoided and conges-
tion in jail removed.

(2) Where persons otherwise in respectable stations in
life commit offences involving defiance of authority such as
offences under sections 188, 189, 190 I.P.C. or even offences
under sections 147 and 143. it may be preferable to extern
them from the place where there is potentiality for mischief
due to their local influence. rather than send them to jail.

(3) As this punishment can also be imposed in addition
to the punishment of imprisonment, it will be more effective
than section 106 Cr. P. C. in preventing undesirable persons
{for a limited period of course) from committing offences
ina locality where they have much influence, after they have
undergone a substantive sentence of imprisonment.

5. There need be no apprehension that such a sentence will
be unconstitutional. It is a less severe sentence than imprison-
ment and as the constitutionality of the latter is beyond question,
the former is also unassailable. It will be a ‘reasonable restriction”
in public interest for the purpose of clause (5) of Article 19. dn
the International Covenant of 1966 also while paragraph (1)
of Article 12 says that there should be liberty of movement for
‘every one lawfully within a state’, paragraph 3, excludes from the
scope of this article those restrictions which are provided by law
to protect public order (omitting other particulars).

DUTY TO MAKE AMENDS FOR THE HARM CAUSED

As pointed out by me in my note on “Externment’’, one of the
important omissions in the Penal Code in the absence of a kind
of punishment intermediate between (1) imprisonment, and (2)
fine. Many petty offences under the Code are committed by
poorer sections of society who are not in a position to pay any
fine. In consequence, the jails are crowded with short-term
prisoners and alt the evil effects of short-term imprisonment
pointed out in my note on “Externment” operate with full force.


oO

Bewe!

377

2. The extent of the evil of short-term imprisonment preval-
ent in India does not appear to have been fully appreciated even
in informed circles. A scrutiny of the Report of the Administra-
tion of Criminal Justice in the State! of Bihar during the year
1963 shows that the total number of persons sentenced to impri-
sonment (both rigorous and simple) in Magistrates’ Court during
ihat year was 19,038 plus 7.646-26,684, OF these, 9,340 were
sentenced to terms of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, and
15,032 to terms not exceeding six months. Thus, more than 90
per cent of the persons convicted in Magistrates’ Courts in Bihar
In the year 1963 were sentenced to short-term imprisonment not
exceeding six months. This figure may be taken as typical not
only of Bihar, but of most of the States of India. [t is reported
(See my note on ‘Externment’) that in England the percentage of
Prisoners sentenced (0 short-term imprisonment of six months
or less amounted to only 72 per cent of all Prison sentences. २
in India the figure is very high indeed, and the Law Commission
will be failing in its duty if it does not suggest reform of the penal
law with a view to eradicating this evil of short-term imprisonment
av far as possible. There can be no doubt that if there is a kind
of punishment intermediate between imprisonment and fine,
व substantial number of sentences of short-term imprisonment
could be avoided.

3, Jurists ail over the world have been very much concerned
with this problem, and various types of intermediate punishments
have been provided in some of the foreign Codes. In the Code
of the U.S.S.R..3 the punishment known as “imposition of duty to
make amends for harm caused” has been provided as one of the
supplementary punishments. which may be imposed either as the
only punishment or as an additional punishment for certain classes
of offences. In Article 324, of that Code the nature of this punish-
ment has been fully described as follows:—

“Article 32:-Imposition of the duty to make amends for
harm caused. -Execution of the duty to make amends for
harm caused shall consist in direct elimination, by one’s own
resources, of the harm caused, or in compensation, with one’s
own means, for material 1055, or in a public apology before
the victim or before members of the collective in a form
prescribed by the court.

Punishment in the form of imposing the duty of directly
climinating. by one’s own resources, the harm caused may
be assigned in the event that the court, taking into account
the character of the harm caused, deems that the guilty per-
son is capable of directly eliminating it in the indicated man-
ner.

» Report of the Administcation of Justice in State of Bihar (1963) paragraph 6.
Nigel Walker, “Sentencing in a Rational Society”, p. 125.

R. Penal Code, Article 21 (8).

5.7, Penal Code, Article 32.



378

Punishment in the form of imposing the duty to com-
pensate for material loss may be assigned if the amount of the
Joss caused does not exceed one hundred rubles.

Punishment in the form of imposing the duty of publicly
apologizing before the victim or members of the collective
may be assigned if there has been an infringement of personal
integrity or dignity or a violation of the rules of socialist
communal fife not causing material loss.

If the convicted person fails to fulfil his duty to make
amends for the harm caused within the period established
by the court, the court may replace this punishment by
correctional tasks, or a fine. or dismissal from office, or
social censure. In such event, and also in the event that
material loss is caused in an amount of more than one
hundred rubles, compensation for loss caused to the victim
shall be effected by way of civil proceedings.”

It will be noticed that the main advantage of this type of
punishment is that it provides for the dircct reparation to be paid
by the offender to the injured victim by compensation cither
in money, labour or in kind, for the harm caused or for public
apology where it may suffice.

4. One of the important advantages of this type of punish-
ment is the prompt payment of reparation to the victim for the
injury caused. It is one of the justified complaints against
the penal law (both of Britain and India) that in criminal
proceedings the injured party is generally neglected. The
conviction and sentence passed on the offender may satisfy
the State, which is generally responsible for initiating the pro-
secution; but it is poor consolation to the innocent victim of
the crime. The recent White Paper! “Penal Practice in a
Changing Society” points out that “the assumption that the
claims of the victim are sufficiently satisfied if the offender is
punished by society.......... .-becomes less persuasive as
society increasingly emphasises the reformative aspects of punish-
ment and adds the view that the concept of reparation might
give ‘greater moral value’ to our penal system”.

In India, the victim may rely on section 545 Criminal Proce-
dure Code for payment of compensation out of the fine impos-
ed on the offender if and when it is realised. He may havea
right of civil action against the convicted person but in view
of the dilatory and costly nature of civil Jitigation this kind of
relief is seldom sought for.

"1 (1959) 227 Law Times , 117, 118.


379

5. In ancient Hindu Law, the law-givers were fully aware of
the necessity of directly compensating the victim of the crime.
Thus, Manu? in Chapter VIII, verse 287, says :--

“If a limb is injured, a sound {is caused ) or blood
(flows, the assailant) shall be made to pay {to the sufferer) the
expenses of the cure, or the whole (both the usual amerce-
ment and the expenses of the cure as a) fine (to the king).

Jn Chapter VIII, verse 288, Manu says :

“He who damages the goods of another, be it inten-
tionally or unintentionally, shail give satisfaction to the
(owner) and pay to the king a fine equal to the (damage).”

Manu, thus, provides for direct reparation to the victim of
the crime apart from payment of fine to the king (the State).
In Chapter XXI, Verse 10, Briksaspati ? says :

“He who injures a limb, or divides it, or cuts it off,
shall be compelled to pay the expenses of curing it; and (who
forcibly took an article in a quarrel restore) his plunder.”

In Chapter XXII, verse 7, he says :

“A merchant who conceals the blemish of an article
which he is selling, or mixes bad and good articles together,
or sells (old articles) after repairing them, shall be compell-
ed to give the double quantity (to the purchaser) and to pay
a fine equal (in amount) to the value of the article.”

Here also a distinction is made between imposition of fine which
goes to the State and direct reparation to the victim of the crime.

6. In many other countries the victim is permitted to request
the prosecution to include his claim in the criminal case against
the accused. This is provided in Austria, Norway, Sweden,
Spain, Colombia and Italy. In France, a special action
known as “actione civile” can be started by the injured person,
which is heard along with the criminal case against the accus-
ed.4 वा Germany also, in the criminal proceedings against
the accused the injured party may assert his claim im the
property rights arising out of the offence.S

In my opinion, section 545, Cr. P. C. is wholly unsatisfactory,
for the following reasons :

(1) Under section 545 Cr. P. C. compensation can be given
only in money, to the injured party. There is no provi-
sion for direct reparation for the harm caused.

3. The Laws of Manu in “Sacred Books of the East” by Max Mutler, Vol.
2. Brihaspati in the “Sacred Books of the East”, by Max Muller, Vol. 33.
3. “Crime and Punishment —Reparation to the Victim” (1959) 227 Law Times, 117.
4. Articles 2 to 4, 85 to 91, 371-375, 418 to 426 , 497, French Cr. P.C.

5. Articles 403 to 406-a, German Code of Criminal Procedure.



1. (1959) Law Times, 117, 118, 227.

380

(2) The procedure involved in section 545 Criminal Proce-
dure Code, is circuitous, dilatory, expensive and causes much
harassment to the injured complainant. The court is required
first to impose fine on the accused and then await its realisations.
Thereafter, the injured party has to apply for withdrawal of
compensation awarded to him and this procedure. as is welt
known in law courts in India, involves much delay and harass-
ment and also expense in the form of illegal gratification to
the subordinate court staff. ॥ will be very rarely indeed that
any aggrieved party can hope to receive the full amount of the
compensation awarded to him within reasonable time.

(3) It does not cover cases of those accused persons who are
unable to pay the fine. The evil effects of short-term imprison-
ment already pointed out persist and the complaintant also may
not be able to derive any advantage so far as reparation is
concerned

8, Even in England, learned writers are slowly veering round
to the view that apart from payment of fine, personal reparation
including the undoing of the damage where possible or perfor-
mance of other useful services by the convict, is desirable. 1
may quote the following passage in the Article “Crime and
Punishment—Reparation to the Victim”.!

“Personal reparaion-linked, if necessary, to some scheme
of national compensation—might involve revision of prison
carnings and new arrangements for the supervision of often-
ders who are at liberty, but it would surely cmphasise a
man’s responsibility for his own crime. Jt need not
be confied to money payments but could be extended to un-
doing the damage, where possible, or performing other use-
ful services. It would at once be just and reformative.”

9. The number of minor offences for which the convicted
person may be directed to make amends directly to the victim
is very high in India. Thus, taking the figures of Bihar for
1963 as how in the Reportof the Administration of Criminal
Justice referred to above, the number of persons convicted of
the following classes of minor_offences is_as follows (Table V)

Hurt : . . + . . 4,815
Wringful restriction and wrongful confinement. . 175
Criminal force and assault . . 273
Theft . . . . . . 7,230
Fxtortion | . . : . . . . : . 43
Criminal misappropriation . . . . . 40
Receipt of stolen property . . . व . 561
Cheatin; . . . . . . . . 196
Mischic! . . . . : 994
Criminal Trespass . . . . . . 1,483
Defamation . . . . . . . . : 36
‘Criminat intimidation,

insult and annoyance. पु . . पु . . 50

“FOTaL : 15,897


381

The total number of convicted persons under the Indian Penal
Code during that year was 26,050. Thus the percentage of
persons convicted of minor offences was more than 60 per cent.
For all these offences a sentence of direct payment of compensa-
tion to the victim of the crime could easily have been impos-
ed. I fully realise that even if such a sentence is passed many
of the convicted persons may not pay such compensation but
may prefer to undergo imprisonment in default. Hence, to
some extent. sentence of short term imprisonment cannot be
wholly avoided. But the number of sentences can be appre-
ciably reduced. Some of the persons convicted of these offen-
ces may prefer to repair the damage caused to the complainant
either by their own labour or by replacing the article damaged
or lost, rather than go to jail. Moreover, the injured victim
may be sufficiently recompensed without the circuitous pro-
cedure of awaiting the realisation of fine and payment of
compensation. In my opinion, this will be a distinct improve-
ment on the existing law and 1 would advocate this reform not-
withstanding any pessimism that may be entertained in some
quarters about its efficacy. J am suggesting below a draft of
sections 70A and 70B.

“JOA. (1) In the case of conviction for an offence
against the human body, and offence against property,
defamation or an offence against privacy, the court may
direct that the person convicted shall pay compensation
to the person mentioned in sub-section (4).

(2) Such compensation need not necessarily be mone-
tary and it may be in any form which the court considers
to be a sufficient recompense to the injured party. But
while passing the order for compensation, the court shall
estimate its monetary value for the purpose of execution
of the order.

(3) A court shall not, under this section direct payment
of compensation whose monetary value exceeds the amount
of fine which it is empowered to impose.

(4) An order under sub-section (1) may be made--

(a) in addition to any other punishment to which
the person convicted may have been sentenced ;

(b) in substitution of fine, where the offence, not
being a capital offence, is one punishable with fine.

(5) The compensation under this section may be directed
to be paid—

(a) to any person who has incurred expenses in
prosecution, for defraying expense properly incurr-
ed:


382

(b) fo any person for any loss or injury caused by
the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of
the court, recoverable by such person in a civil court;

(०) in the case of a conviction of any offence for
having caused the death of another person or of having
abetted the commission of such an offence, to the{persons
who are, under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855,
entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced.
for the loss resulting to them from such death; or

(d) in the case of a conviction for any offence
which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, crimi-
nal breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly
received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted
in disposing of, stolen property knowing or having rea-
son to believe the same to be stolen, to any bona fide
purchaser of such property, for the loss of the same,
if such property is restored to the possession of the
person entitled thereto.

(6) At the time of awarding compensation in_any sub-
sequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court shall
take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensa-
tion under this section.

70 8. (1) In every case in which the offender is senten-
ced to payment of compensation under section 70 A, it shall
be competent to the Court which sentences such offender,
to direct by the sentence, that in default of the payment
of compensation, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a
certain term, which imprisonment shall be in excess of any
other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or
to which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.

(2) The provision of sections 65 to 70 (of the Indian
Penal Code) shall, after substitution of references to
compensation or its monetary equivalent in place of referen-
ces to fine, apply in relation to imprisonment in default of
payment of compensation, as they apply in relation to im-
prisonment in default of payment of fine.”

10. If this suggestion is accepted, consequential provisions
will have to be made in the Criminal Procedure Code also for
execution of this type of sentence. Section 545 of the Criminal
Procedure Code may be omitted altogether and new sections
388A, 388B and 388C, as shown below, may be inserted in
the Criminal Procedure Code.

“388A. (1) Whenever an offender has been sentenc-
ed to pay compensation under section 70A of the Indian
Penal Code, the Court passing the sentence shall order
the payment of compensation to the person concerned with-
in a specified period. If the said compensation is not paid


383

within that period or within such further period as may be
exteaded by the Court, the Court, shall, subject to the pro-
visions of sub-section 2, take the same action for recovery
of compensation as jt could take for recovery of the fine under
section 386 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and
the provisions of sections 386 and 387 of the Code shall,
after substitution of references to compensation in place of
references to fine, apply for the purpose as they apply for
the recovery of the fine.

(2) Proceedings for recovery of compensation as
indicated in sub-section (4) shall be taken up by the court
only on the application of the person in whose favour the
order for compensation was passed. Such an application
shal be filed within one month of the last date of the period
specified for payment of compensation. If such an appli-
cation is not filed within the time so fixed, the right of the
person to receive the compensation shall be extinguished.

388B. When an offender has been sentenced only
to pay compensation under section 70A of the Indian Penal
Code, or to pay such compensation and fine and to impri-
sonment indefault of payment of compensation, and the
compensation is not paid within the date ordered by the
Court, the Court may suspend execution of the sentence
of imprisonment by passing the same orders as it could under
sub-section (1) of section 388 (of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898) if the offender had been sentenced to fine only ;
and the provisions of sub-section (1) of that section shall,
after substitution of references tocompensation in place of
references to fine, apply for the prupose as they apply in case
of a sentence of fine.

३88९. For the purpose of section 388 {of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898), an offender sentenced to pay
compensation under section 70A of the Indian Penal Code
and to fine, shall be deemed to be an offender who has been
sentenced to fine only.”

ENTRAPMENT

Entrapment is broadly divided into two classes (1) legiti-
mate entrapment, and (2) illegitimate entrapment. In the
penal law of U.S.A. the expression “Entrapment” is used in
the narrower sense of illegitimate entrapment.

2. It is recognised throughout the civilised world that certain
offences cannot be detected easily without taking help from agent
provocateirs any decoys or tap witnesses. But judicial de-
cisions both in the west and in India have repeatedly laid down
a sharp distinction between the legitimate method of utilising
the services of such witnesses and illegitimate or objectionable



384

and unethical method. As pointed out in Perkins ‘Criminal
Law,’ 1957 Edn. ‘It is not the entrapment of a criminal upon
whom the law frowns ; but the seduction of innocent people
into a criminal career by its officers is what iscondemned and
wili not be tolerated.” If the authorities who are engaged in
the duty of enforcing law themselves instigate the commission
of crime by implanting criminal ideas on innocent minds and
thereby bring about the commission of offences which other-
wise would not have been perpetrated such an entrapment is
considered as illegitimate. As one Judge of the United States
put it “Decoys are permissible to entrap criminals but not to
create them” (United States v. Healy, referred to in Perkins
Criminal Law, page 523, Footnote 12.) Illegitimate trap con-
sists in the conception and planning of an offence by a law en-
forcing officer or his agent and the procurement of the commis-
sion of the offences by a person who would not have perpetrat-
ed it except for trickery. persuasion or fraud of the officer.

3. Legitimate trap, on the other hand, comes under the cate-
gory of what is known as detection of an offence. Traps may
be laid or decoys employed to secure the conviction of those
bent on crime. The distinction between legitimate and il-
legitimate traps arises mainly as regards the point of origin of
the criminal intent. ff the intention to commit the crime
originates in the mind of the accused and the enforcement agency
merely places himself in a position to apprehend the accused
by laying a trap for him, his action will not be blameworthy.
But if the intention to commit the offence originates in the mind
of the public official and the accused is Jured into the commis-
sion of the offences for the purpose of prosecuting him there-
after, such a method may be highly objectionable and unethical.

4. In U.S.A. such illegitimate traps are now universally
condemned as contrary to public policy and as operating as
estoppel “Just as no other plaintiff is entitled to judgement {ex-
cept against his agent) based upon harm of which his agent was
the instigating cause, so it has been held that the acts of its
officers estop the Government to prove the offence.’ (Per-
kins ibid, page 925). In a very recent decision Cox v. Loui-
siana, (1965) 379 U. S. page 559, the Supreme Court of the
United States reversed the conviction of the lower court in a
case where the police officers first permitted demonstrations
in the vicinity of the court-house and thereby gave consent
to such demonstration, but subsequently prosecuted the demons-
trators for picketting near a court with intent to obstruct
justice. The Supreme Court observed that such prosecution
was violation of ‘duc process’ and that it constituted an ‘inde-
fensible sort of entrapment by the State’.

5. The leading decision on the doctrine of Entrapment in
the United States in Sherman ५. The United States (356 U.S.
369 [1958]) where Chief Justice Warren of the Supreme Court


385

of America, after citing with approval Sorrels v. United States
(287 US. p.435 observed :

“The function of law enforcement is the prevention of
crime and the apprehension of criminals. Manifestly that
function does not include the manufacturing of crime. Though
stealth and strategy are necessary weapons in the arsenal
of a police officer for detecting criminal activity these become
objectionable police methods if the criminal design originates
with the officers of the Government and is implanted into
the mind of an innocent person.”

Chief Justice Warren further said that such objectionable police
methods are in the same category as coerced confessions or un-
lawful search. To quote the Chief Justice :

“Congress could not have intended that its statutes
were to be enforced by tempting innocent persons into viola-
tions.”

Mr. Justice Frankfurter, while dismissing the indictment (when
the case was remanded) examined the principle of entrapment
and pointed out :

“No matter what the defendant's (accused person’s) past
record and present inclinations to criminality or the depths
to which he has sunk in the estimation of the society certain
police conduct to ensnare him into further crime is not to be
tolerated by an advanced society....The possibility that
no matter what his past crime and general disposition the
defendant might not have committed the particular crime
unless confronted with inordinate inducements must not be
ignored. Past crimes do not for ever outlaw the criminal
and open him to police practices aimed at securing his re-
peated conviction from which the ordinary citizen is protect-
ed. The whole ameliorative hopes of modern penology
and prison administration strongly counsel against such
a view.”

While recognising that it is the obligation of the police to
detect those engaged in criminal conduct and ready and willing
to commit further crimes, should the occasion arise, Frank-
furter J. further observed :

“It does not mean that in holding out inducements
they should act in such a manner as is likely to induce to
the commission of crime only those persons and not others
who would normally avoid crime and through self-struggle
Tesist ordinary temptations....The power of Government
is abused and directed to an end for which it was not constitu-
ted when employed to promote rather than detect crime and
to bring about the downfall of those who left to themselves
might well have obeyed the law. Human nature is weak
enough and sufficiently beset by temptations without
Government adding to them and generating crime.”

3M of Law/7i—26


386

6. It seems to be thus clear that in ‘U.S.A entrapment 35
a sufficient ground for the court to quash the conviction of an
accused even though he may be guilty of the offence. The
‘due process’ clause of the ‘Constitution has been applied for
this purpose, even in those States where there is no statute law
on the subject. In the American Model Penal Code also a
provision (section 2.13) has been made for quashing the criminal
proceedings initiated against the victim of such illegitimate
entrapment. In the New York Penal Law, article 35.40, the
following provision is found :

“Yn any prosecution for an offence, it is an affirmative
defence that the defendant engaged in the prescribed con-
duct because he was induced or encouraged to do so by
a public servant, or by a person acting in cooperation
with a public servant, seeking to ‘obtain evidence
against him for purpose of criminal prosecution, and when
the methods used to obtain such evidence were such as to
create a substantial risk that the offence would be commit-
ted by 8 person not otherwise disposed to commit it. In-
ducement or encouragement to commit an offence means
active inducement or encouragement. Conduct merely
affording a person an opportunity to commit an offence
does not constitute entrapment.”

7. In Britain though there is no statutory law allowing an
accused to plead successfully that he was the victim of an
illegitimate trap for the purpose of quashing a conviction, never-
theless judicial decisions have expressed strong disapproval
of this type of entrapment. 1 need only refer to the recent
judgment of the Court of Appeal in Regina v. Birtles (1 Weekly
L.R. 1969, p. 1047) where Paker, C. J. observed : “It is one thing,
for the police to make use of information concerning an offence
that is already laid on. In such a case the police are clearly
entitled, indeed it is their duty to mitigate the consequences of
the proposed , offence, for example, to protect the proposed
victim, and to that end it may be perfectly proper for then to
encourage the informer to take part in the offence or indeed for
a police officer himself to do so. But it is quite another thing,
and something of which this court thoroughly disapproves. to
use an informer to encourage another to commit an offence
‘or indeed an offence of a more serious character, which he would
not otherwise commit, still more so if the police themselves
take part in carrying it out.” In Brannan v. Peek (1947) 2 All.
E. R. 572, where a police officer committed a crime with a view
to detect a crime Goddard C. J. observed :

“| hope the day is far distant, when it will become a
common practice in this country for police officers to be
told to commit an offence themselves for the purpose of
getting evidence against someone.”


387

8. In India also judicial decisions have unanimously con-
demned the use of illegitimate traps to secure evidence against
an accused. I may refer to A. 1. R. 1938 Mad. p. 893 and
A.LR. 1968 Kerala p. 60.

In the Supreme Court this question came up for considera-
tion in A. 1. R. 1954 5. C. 9. 332. To quote their Lordships at
p. 334: “kt may be that the detection of corruption may some-
times call for the laying of traps, but there is no justification
for the police authorities to bring about the taking of a bribe
by supplying the bribe money to the giver where he has neither
got it nor has the capacity to find it for himself. It is the duty
of the police authorities to prevent crimes being committed.

It is no part of their business to provide the instruments of the
offence.”

Having passed strictures on the action of the Additional
District Magistrate, their Lordships further stated that they would
completely climinate from consideration the evidence of the Ad-
ditional District Magistrate, Shantilal Ahuja, who was the princi-
pal trap witness to prove the illegitimate trap. In the well-
known case of Ramjanam Singh v. The State of Bihar (A.1.R.
1956 5. C. p. 643) their Lordship expressed themselves in more
sympathetic terms against the laying of iNegitimate traps. To
quote their Lordships :

“.... that’ this was not a case of laying a trap. in the
usual way, for a man who was demanding bribe, but of
deliberately tempting a man to his own undoing after his
suggestion about breaking the law had been finally and con-
clusively rejected with considerable emphasis and decis-
sion.

**Whatever the criminal tendencies of a man may be. he has
a right to expect that he will not be deliberately tempted beyond
the powers of his frail endurance and provoked into breaking
the law; and more particularly by those who are the guardians
and keepers of the law. However, regrettable the necessity
of employing agents provocateurs may be (and he realises to
the full that this is unfortunately often inevitable if corruption
is to be detected and bribery stamped out), it is one thing to
tempt 3 suspected offender to overt action when he is doing all
he can to commit a crime and has every intention of carrying
through his nefarious purpose from start to finish, and quite
another to egg him on to do that which it has been finally and
firmly decided shall not be done.

“The very best of men have moments of weakness and
temptation, and even the worst, times when they repent on
an evil thought and are given an inner strength to set Satan
behind him; and if they do, whether it is because of caution,
or because of their better instincts, or because some other
has shown them cither the futility or the wickedness of


388

wrong-doing, it behaves society and the State to protect
them and help them in their good resolve; not to place
further temptation in their way and start afresh a train of
criminal thought which had been finally set aside. This is
the type of case to which the strictures of this Court in Shiv
Bahadur Singh v. State of Vindhya Pradesh apply,” (A.LR.
1954 $.0. 322, 334; 1954 S.C.R. 1098). :

In that case they set aside the order of the High Court and
restored the order of the trying court acquitting the accused.
In 1958 S.C. p. 500, their Lordships pointed out that as the law
stands in India. such trap witnesses, though they may be consi-
dered as partisan or interested witnesses could not in law be
treated as accomplices. This was reiterated in A.I.R. 1969 S.C.
p. 17.

10. The question for consideration by the Law Commission
is whether in view of the aforesaid strictures passed by the Courts
against laying of illegitimate traps, statutory protection should
be given to the victim of an illegitimate trap in the Penal Code
or else whether the law as laid down by the Supreme Court should
be left for due implementation by authorities concerned.

1). In my opinion, the Legislature should step in and make
a special provision in the Penal Code enabling a court to quash
the criminal proceedings against an accused who is the victim
of illegitimate traps. As the law now stands, though Courts may
pass severe strictures on the methods used by the police, neverthe-
less, they have no other alternative but to convict the accused,
even though it may be apparent that he would not have committed
the offence but for the instigation and facilities provided by the
police themselves. Strictures passed by courts even of a serious
nature remain generally as pious observations which the prosecu-
ting agency may or may not care to follow. On the contrary, if
the law provides for quashing such proceedings, illegitimate
traps will disappear altogether from the country. I am fully aware
that in view of the wide prevalence of corruption especially
amongst public officials laying of traps for detection of corrup-
tion cannot be avoided. But it must be done in a manner recogni-
sed as proper in all civilized countries. To quote Mr. Justice
Holmes (277 U.S. p. 438).

“It is desirable that criminals should be detected and to
that end that all available evidence should be used. Jt also
is desirable that the Government should not itself foster
and pay for other crimes, when they are the means by which
the evidence is also to be obtained... For my part I think
it a less evil that some criminals should escape than that the
government should play an ignoble part.”

} would specially emphasise the words anderlined which shouid
be the object of the jurists and Law Reformers in India.


389

12. My colleagues consider that legislation on the subject
is unnecessary and that the prosecuting agency may be trusted
to follow the principles laid down by the Supreme Court and avoid
laying illegitimate traps. With great respect, | am unable to
take such an optimistic view. Not infrequently the observations
of the Court will be ignored and illegitimate traps laid. In such
instances, the Court will have no discretion to quash the proceed-
ings and can only insist on adequate corroboration of the evidence
of the trap witness. The ‘due process’ clause in the American
Constitution which enables a court to quash a conviction
based on indefensible entrapment is not available here. | consider
that in a country where rule of law prevails, a person who was
the prime instigator and active helper of a person who would
not have committed the crime but for such instigation and help,
should not be permitted to successfully prosecute his victim.
Any proposal for penal reform should in the Code itself provide
for the quashing of the conviction of the victim of an illegitimate
trap. This is the only effective way of eradicating this evil in this
country and it will also correct a glaring omission in the Penal
Code.

13, 1, therefore, recommend the addition of a new section
at the end of Chapter 4. on the lines of the New York Penal
Code (see para 5) with suitable drafting modifications.

PRINCIPLES OF PUNISHMENTS TO BE
PROVIDED IN THE PENAL CODE

In the new Criminal Procedure Code recommended by us
we have specially provided for the hearing of the accused on the
question of sentence by a court before passing sentence according
to law. See draft sections 241(2) and 256(2). It seems therefore
desirable to formulate in the Penal Cade the main principles
to be borne in mind by a court while passing sentence on a con-
victed person. The necessity for such formulation arises mainly
because it is notorious that in india the Magistracy is not fully
conversant with the principles of punishment. It is true that these
principles have been repeatedly faid down by the High Court
and the Supreme Court in several decisions. But these are not
available in a convenient form for the benefit of the trying Magis-
trates. In the Draft German Penal Code of 1962, article 60(2) laid
down the various matters to be considered by a court in fixing
the punishment and they are reproduced below:

“(2) In fixing a punishment the court shall weigh against

each other such circumstances, other than definitional ele-
ments, as speak for and against the perpetrator.

“Especially there shali be considered :
the motives and aims of the perpetrator;


390

the state of mind which the act be speaks and the exercise
of volition involved;

the extent of breach of duty;

the mannet of perpetration and the wrongful effects of
the act;

the prior life of the perpetrator, his personal and econo-
mic circumstances, as well as his conduct after the act, especial-
ly his endeavour to make restitution.”

In Argentinian Penal Code also articles 40 and 41 which are re-
levant on the subject may be quoted :

“40. In the case of punishments divisible as to time and
amount, the Court shall determine the sentence in accordance
with the mitigating and aggravating circumstances of each
particular case, under the provisions of the next following
article.

“41. To effectuate the preceding article, the following shall
be taken into consideration :

(1) The nature of the deed and the means employed in
its commission, as well as the extent of the damage and danger
created thereby.

(2) The age, education, habits and previous conduct of
the individual, the nature of the motives which lead him to
commit the crime, especially his poverty or his difficulty to
obtain the necessary sustenance for himself and his family.
the extent of his participation in the deed, his criminal and
his personal record, as well as his personal relations, i.e.
the character of the persons and the circumstances of time,
place, occasion and others, which may indicate his greater or
lesser dangerousness,

The judge shalt take direct and visual cognizance of the
subject, the victim and the factual circumstances to the extent
necessary for each ०४५९६."

The main advantages of inserting a similar provision in the
Penat Code are these:—

(1) The trying court's attention is prominently drawn to the
principles of punishment so as to enable the court to properly
discharge the duty conferred on it by Draft Artices 241(2) and
256(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code.

(2) Both the prosecutor and the defence counsel get due notice
of the matters that will be taken into consideration in imposing
sentence and this enables them to collect the necessary materials
for making their submissions on this point.


391

{, therefore, recommend that at the end of Chapter dealing
with punishment, Chapter 3, a new section 75A may be inserted
as follows:—

~75A. Jn fixing a punishment the court shall take into
consideration, amongst others, the following matters:—

(1) The motives and aims of the perpetrator.

(2) The state of mind of the perpetrator at the ume
of the commission of the crime.

(3) The extent of breach of duty, if any.

(4) The manner of commission of the crime and the
wrongful effects of the crime.

(5) The nature of the deed and the means employed
in its commission.

(6) The age, education, habits, previous conduct of
the perpetrator, his personal and economic circums-
tances and the extent of his participation in the deed.

(7) His conduct after the commission of the crime,
especially his endeavour to make restitution and to help
the authority in tracing out his accomplices.”

JUDICIAL PARDON OR EXPUNGING OR
CANCELLATION OF CONVICTION

The positive school of crime and punishment has been strongly
ad¥ocating the principle of complete rehabilitation of a convict
under certain conditions. The necessity for such rehabilitation
arises because conviction in a criminal case carries with it a
certain stigma which persists throughout the life of the person
even though he might have turned from his criminal activity and
taken to Jegitimate activity and led an exemplary life. It also car-
rics with it certain penalities and disabilities which persist so long
as the conviction remains on record. In a very illuminating article
entitled “Criminal Law in the Seventies, Some Suggestions”
(published in the New York State Bar Journal, June, 1970),
James V. Brands, who is an Assistant District Attorney of
Dutchess County, New York, stated :

“tt has been estimated that at one time or another thro-
ughout their lives approximately 91 per cent of our adult
population have committed crime for which they could be
sent to jail. We might consider that those in prison are to
some degree only the unlucky ones, the failures are those
without money for adequate counsel. In that light, an under-
standing that of all those convicted of misdemeanours he
who leads a life free of convictions for five years thereafter
should have his first conviction dropped from the record.


392

This should be allowed to the extent that he can answer no
to any question on a Questionnaire asking whether he has
been convicted or arrested for a crime.”

The well-known international jurist of Norway, Johannes
Andenaes, in his book “The General Part of the Criminal Law
of Norway”, p. 79, has commented on this subject as follows:--

“According to modern views, the resocialization of the
convict must be accorded the greatest significance. Both
purely humanitarian and social considerations make it clear
that one who has served his sentence should be helped to his
feet again. Of course, the traits which he has revealed by his
offence may be of such a nature as to require that certain
cautions be taken. But within these limits he should be allowed
to support himself in an honest way and to regain his lost
Tespect.”*

This subject has been dealt with in an article “Rule of Law
in Criminal Justice” by Helen Silving who has been acclaimed
as the “first lady of modern criminal law” by G.O.W. Mueller
in his “Essays in Criminal Science.” She observed at p. 139 ibid :

“Retribution implying ‘rehabilitation’, a limit should be
set to the legal and social disabilities attaching to a ‘criminal
record’. After lapse of a certain period, unless there is reinci-
dence the conviction should be completely erased from the
record, so that no one be permitted to disclose the fact of
such conviction in any context and that the person concerned
need never admit it to anyone, including state authorities.
When probation is granted and is successful, certain convic-
tions should be deemed never to have occurred (French
system). When probation is denied on grounds not connected
with the actor's guilt provision should be made to afford Rim
appropriate relief against the disadvantage of such denial.
Finally, reports of criminal cases should not disclose the name
of the defendant. Such disclosures, particularly in small com-
munities, is highly prejudicial to the defendant throughout
his life. [६ also adversely affects innocent family members.”

In P.G. Fitzgerald's Criminal Law and Punishment, Claren-
don Law Series, p. 204, the learned author points out :

“There is, however, a valuable claim concealed in the
notion of expiation, namely, the idea that the wrong-doer
who has been punished has by paying his debt wiped the
state clear for a fresh start; and this claim is worth pressing
in the face of practical consideration which operate to prevent
the criminal making a fresh start. The known fact that a man
has been convicted, the stigma of a prison sentence, together
with various other factors make it impossible for his start
to be entirely fresh, but in so far as the notion of expiation
involves the demand for a possibility for such a start it goes
hand in hand with the demand for reformation and rehabili-
tation.”


393

The Hindu jurists also have laid down that once a person has
been punished for an offence he becomes completely pure like a
sinless person. Manu, Chapter 8, Sloka 318, enunciates the princi-
ples of rehabilitation of convicts in the following manner:—

usta: कृतदण्डास्तु क॒त्वा Tafa ATT:
निर्मला: ea मायान्ति wea: सुकृतिनो यथा
(But men who have committed crimes and have been

punished by the King go to heaven being pure like those who
performed meritorious deeds.)

Kulluka Bhatta (15th century) the great commentator on
Manu, while commenting on this verse says :

सुवर्णस्ते बादीति प्रापानि कृत्वा पश्चात्‌ राजाशि:

बिहित coat: मनुष्या: सन्त: प्रतिबन्धक दुरिता भावात्‌

पूर्वाजित पृष्यवशेन साधवः सुकृत कारिण इव स्वर्ग कल्छन्ति t

एवं प्रायक्षित दण्डस्थापि na हेतुत्व eae ॥

(Having committed crimes such as theft of gold etc.,
the criminal after undergoing the punishment inflicted by the
King becomes pure just Jike a person who has done good
deeds (sadhus) and goes to heaven. It is indicated that the
punishment purifies the criminal and absolves him from all
sin in the same manner as expiation ceremony).

Again in the XIth Book, in Sloka 189, Manu says :
oafeata: अनिभिनिने: ard किन्विष्त्‌ समाहरेत्‌
कृतनिर्नेजणांश्रेक्ष न जुगृप्सेत कहिचित्‌
{Let him not transact any business with unpurified sin-

ners but fet him in no way reproach those who have made
atonement.)

While commenting on this, the famous commentator
Medhatithi (early 10th century) says:
निर्णेजनम्‌ शोधनम्‌ पापापनोनदस्‌ +
तस्मिन्‌ इते नैनम्‌ जुगुप्सेत ।
कुतप्रायश्विलान त क्त्सबेन्‌
(Expiation is purification, wiping off of the sin. When
this has been done, one should not despise the men. That is,

no one should reproach one who has duly performed the
prescribed expiation).

Kullaka Bhatta also says :

कुत प्रायश्चित्तात्‌ Aa कदाचिदावि पूर्वकृत
करापात्वेन निम्देत्‌ । fea पूर्व am बहरेत्‌


394

{Once a person has expiated for his sin, he should never
be despised for his sin, but he should be treated in the same
manner as he was treated before he committed the sin.)

It is thus clear that Manu condemns the action of those per-
sons who despise and reproach those unfortunate people who
after having committed crimes have undergone the prescribed
punishment. Though Manu Smriti might have been written at
the commencement of the Christian era (the exact date is not
known), nevertheless the fact that commentators like Medhatithi
(early 10th century) and Kulluka Bhatta (J5th century) reiterate
the view of Manu on this point, shows that the Hindu law-givers
took a very humane view of punishment and emphasised that
afer the purification ceremony either by expiation or punish-
ment the offender should be completely rehabilitated into society
without any stigma attached to him.

The aforesaid view of distinguished jurists on the principle
of rehabilitation of a convict has now been recognised in the
international covenant on Civil and Political rights which was
passed unanimously by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on the 16th December, 1966. Article 10.3 of the Covenant
(already quoted) says that the primary aim of the treatment of
prisoners should be their reformation and social rehabilitation.
The subject has thus now passed beyond the stage of mere dis-
cussion or controversy and the question for law reformers ali
over the world (including the Law Commission here) is only one
of how to implement this resolution.

It will be useful to study the provisions in the Penat laws of
some of the countries of the world where this principle has been
given legislative recognition.

Thus in the California Penal Code, p. 1203.4 :

“Even defendant who has fulfilled the conditions of his
probation. . .shall at any time thereafter be permitted by the
Court to withdraw his plea of guilty and enter a plea of not
guilty; or if he has been convicted after a plea of not guilty,
the Court shall set aside the verdict of guilty; and in either
case the court shall thereupon dismiss the accusations or
information against such defendant, who shall thereafter be
released from all penalties and disabilities resulting from the
offence or crime of which he has been convicted. . . provided,
that in any subsequent prosecution of such defendant for
any other offence. such prior conviction may be pleaded and
provided and shail have the same effect as if probation had
not been granted or the accusation or information dismis-
sed.”

In para. 1203, it is provided that probation, however may not
be granted to inter alia, any defendant :

“convicted of robbery, burglary, burglary with ex-
plosives, rape with force or violence, arson, murder, assault


395

with intent to commit murder, commit murder, train wreck-
ing, kidnapping, escape from a state prison, conspiracy to
commit any one or more of the aforementioned felonies.”

In the Yogoslave Criminal Code [article 87(2)] the court is
given power on the application of the convict after lapse of a
specified period to order the removal of all legal consequences
arising out of his conviction provided the convict has deserved
it by reason of his behaviour. Article 88 further says that some
sentence may be expunged from the criminal record provided
the convict does not commit a fresh criminal offence within
five years of the date on which the punishment has been served.

In the German Penal Code, 1875, section 25, permits the court
to pass an order restricting information about the conviction of
a convict if his conduct is found to be exemplary. This has been
described as “Judicial Pardon”.

in the French Criminal Procedure Code also there is a sepa-
rate chapter entitled “Rehabilitation of Convicts” (Book Five,
Title Nine) where detailed provisions for complete rehabilitation
of a convict under certain conditions have been made and the
effect of such rehabilitation is mentioned as follows in article
799, “The rehabilitation shall wipe out the conviction and cause
all the incapacities that result from it to cease for the future.

in the Criminal Law and Procedure of Russian Soviet Fede-
rated Socialist Republics, article $7 provides for cancellation of
the record of conviction of certain classes of offenders by a court
under certain conditions. Similarly in the Japanese draft Penal
Code also there is a separate section (article 108) dealing with the
subject of estinguishment of sentences.

In India there is no such power with the court of justice to
wipe out the stigma of conviction. It is true that in the Criminal
Procedure Code, section 562, permits the suspension of a sen-
tence in the case of first offenders. The probation of Offenders
Act also permits the court to release a person after conviction
without sending him to jail. But these provisions are of restric-
ted application and deal with the problem of rehabilitation in a
half-hearted way. The court has no power to completely oblite-
rate the conviction and to remove the stigma arising out of it.
This power is conferred only on the executive by the right of par-
don conferred by article 72 (for the President) and article 161
(for the Governors of States). This power of pardon is generally
exercised on political or quasi-political grounds and cannot be
claimed as of right. Hence a person who through sudden tempta-
tion commits a crime and afterwards sincerely repents for the
same, undergoes the full penalty of law and thereafter leads a
blameless life cannot wipe out the stigma during his lifetime
except by asking for pardon and depending on the whims of the
executive, Under Explanation (2) to section 54 of the Indian
Evidence Act, his previous conviction is evidence of bad character