LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-THIRD REPORT

ON

OFFENCES AGAINST THE NATIONAL SECURITY


K. V. K. Sundaram New Delhi
August 31, 1971
Dear Law Minister,

I have pleasure in sending herewith the Fortythird Re-
port of the Law Commission on offences against the rational
security. The Report, as will be evident from its subject matter,
supplements the Commission’s recommendation for revision of
the Indian Penal Code, as embodied in its 42nd Report.

2. AS we have done in our Report on the Code of Cri-
minal Procedure and on the Indian Penal Code, we have in this
Report added a draft Bill, together with a draft of the conse-
quential amendments which will be found necessary in the Penal
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Yours sincerely,
K. V. K. Sundaram
Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law & Justice,
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY

REPORT ON THE OFFENCES AGAINST THE NATIONAL -

1 पु SECURITY

1.1. Treason is the gravest crime known to society and by the
Jaw of every country traitors are liable to the severest punish-
ment. It is a crime directed against the very existence of the
State itself and is therefore peculiarly odious. “Treason is the
crime of betraying a nation or sovereign by acts considered dan-
gerous to its security. Sedition though it might have the same
ultimate objective as treason refers generally to the offence of
organising or encouraging opposition to Government in a man-
ner (such as by speech or writing) that falls short of the more
dangerous acts constituting treason.”’!

1.2, While revising the Indian Penal Code, we considered
the question of the adequacy of the law of treason with reference
to the consolidation of the law which at present is scattered in
several special Acts, We observed in our Report? on the Indian
Penal Code—

“6.4 We notice that treason, sedition and cognate
offences which may be classified as offences against the secu-
rity of the state, are dealt with in foreign codes in much
greater details than in our Penal Code. In particular, it is
Noticeable that treason and treasonable activities are spelt
out elaborately, and not limited to waging war against the
Government and assaulting the Head of State. On a pre-
jiminary study of the problem, we have come to the con-
clusion that the strengthening, consolidation and revision
of this important branch of the criminal law should be taken
up as a separate project and studied in depth”. .

1.3. In February, 1971, the Ministry of Law3 also had re-
quested the Commission to “consider the enactment of a self-
contained law on treason relating to substantive as well as pro-
cedural matters and the preparation of a self-contained law on
this subject.” After submitting the Report on the Penal Code,
the Commission therefore made a detailed study of the various
enactments in force relating to treason and allied activities and
also the corresponding law ig various other countries available
here. This Report contains th e recommendations of the Com-
mission on the subject.

The crime
Of treason,

Genesis of
the Re-
port,

Suggestion
to conso-
lidate the
law.

1, Encyclopaedia Brittannica, Vol. 22, p. 196.

2. 42nd Report, para. 6.4. The Report was submitted to the Govermnent in June,

1971.
3. Vide Law Secretary's letter No, Law Secy. 95/71, dated 20-2-197),


Scope _of
‘treason.

Title of
National
Security
Act recom-
mended.

Existing
Centrat

Acts on the
subject.

Foreign
Recruit-

ment Act,

2

1.4, The expression ‘treason’ in its narrow and restricted
sense is generally applied to those very serious offences which
directly and dangerously affect the security and integrity of the
State. Thus, waging war against the State, adhering to its
enemies, compassing the death of the Head of State and such
other offences usually described as ‘high treason’ will come
within this narrow sense. But the crime has also been treated
in its widest aspect as including not only high treason but also
other acts of disloyalty which have the effect of directly or in-
directly endangermg the security and integrity of the state. We
notice that while in Britain and U.S.A. treason is generally re-
stricted to what may be conveniently described as high treason,
in other foreign countries where codified penal law is in force,
yarious other acts of disloyalty of lesser gravity have also been
included under this class.

1.5. We consider that the expression “crime against national
security" conveys more comprehensively the idea cf treason
in a wide sense, and hence recommend that the consolidated
law on the subject may be entitled “The National Security Act”.

1.6. The various enactments in force in India dealing with
offences against the national security are:—

(७ chapters 6 and 7 of the Indian Penal Code;

(ii) the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874;

(iii) the Official Secrets Act, 1923;

(iv) the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1938;

(v) the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961; and
(vi) the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.

Of these chapters 6 and 7 of the Indian Penal Code have been
fully consigered by us in our Report on that Code. We have
recommended! therein that the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
1938, should be included in chapter 7 of the Code. A brief
summary of the other statutes on the subject will be useful,

‘

1.7. The Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874 deals mainly with re-
cruitment in India for service in a foreign state. The definition
of “foreign state” is very wide and will include all countries
beyond the limits of India, including not only de jure Govern-
ments but also de facto Governments. Recruitment for service
in such foreign states has an indirect but close bearing on national
security and hence should find a place in the proposed law.

1.8. Reference should also be made to the foreign Enlistment
Act, 1870, an Act of the British Parliament which, though not
formally repealed, is of doubtful application to India. since the

“1 and Report, para. 7.10.


3

Constitution. This Act regulates the conduct of British sub-
jects throughout Her Majesty's dominions during the. existence
of hostilities between foreign States with which the British Crown
is at peace. It is obvious that similar legislation should find

lace in our statute book.! Like recruitment for a foreign State,
enlistment for service in a foreign State has also an indirect
but close bearing on national security.

1.9. The Official Secrets Act, 1923 is the main statute for fight-
ing espionage activities which vitally affect the national security.
The main offences created by this Act are as follows:—

(i) “spying”, or entry into a prohibited place etc., trans-
mission or collection of secret information, and the like;

(ii) wrongful communication of, or receiving secret
information of the specified type;

(iii} harbouring spies;

(iv) unauthorised use of uniforms, falsification of re-
ports etc., in order to enter a prohibited place, or for a pur-
pose prejudicial to the safety of the State;

(¥) interference with the police or military, near a pro-
hibit place.

1.10. The primary object of the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1961 is to punish persons who question the territorial in-
tegrity or frontiers of India in a manner prejudicial to the safety
and security of the country. Though there is undoubtedly neces-
sity for retaining some. of these provisions which have a direct
bearing on national security and integrity, in view of the pas-
sing of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, some of
the provisions of the earlier Act may not be necessary. This
question will be considered at the appropriate place.

1.11. The Unlawful ‘Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 was
passed for the effective prevention of disruptive activities, whether
they are in support of cession of a part-of the territory of India,
or in support of the secession of a part of the territory of India
from the Union, or etherwise disclaim, question or disrupt the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. It deals with such
activities of individuals and also of associations. Its provisions
as to unlawful associations are detailed and elaborate.

1.12, That this Act constitutes a vital link in the chain of
enactments of importance to national security, cannot be doubted.
Activities intended to “detach a part of the territory of a coun-
try” (as described in some of the foreign Penal Codes? ) stand

Official
Secrets
Act.

Criminal
Law Am-
endment
Act, 1961.

Unlawful
Activities
{Preven-
tion) Act.

Its impor-
tance,

1. Cf. Sth Report of the Law Commission, British Statutes Applicable to India, page

50, item

- 2. Bug. section 80 of the German Penal Code provides that anybody who by force or
threat of force undertakes to detach a part of the territory thereffom shall be guilty of
high treason, Article 101 of the Yogoslav Penal Code punishes acts aimed at detaching
a socialist republic, autonomous unit or any part of the territory from Yogoslavia by force

or in any other unconstitutional way.


4

at the apex of treasonable activities, They go much beyond
the formation of a parallel Government or acts of overthrowing
the Government, which are the subject matter of some of the
Provisions in Chapter 6 of the Indian Penal Code. Such acti-
vities, if successful, would bring into existence a parallel nation
with its own “sovereignty and territorial integrity” which will
be a rival to the country from which the territory is “detached”.

There is, therefore, enough justification for bringing the
offences covered by this Act within the fold of legislation on
national security.1:

1.13. Apart from the aforesaid statutes, there are provisions
in other Acts maialy of a procedural nature which have a bearing
on national security and integrity? but as they form part of special
statues, dealing with other subjects also, we would not recom-
mend their incorporation in the new law.

Advan- 1.14, The first question we have to consider is whether there

tages of is a really necessity for a separate consolidated law on the sub-

consolida Jeet, or else whether the aforesaid statutes} may be allowed to

7 remain as before. The main advantages of- consolidation of
statutes are these:—

(1) Consolidation diminishes the bulk of the statute
book and makes the law easier for those who have to adminis-
ter it (including Judges, administrators, the Bar and the liti-
gant public); for they have only one document to consult
instead of two or more.

(2) The consolidated Act speaks from one and the same
time, and thus the convenience arising from the interpreta-
tions of sections of various Acts speaking from different times
is avoided. The act of legislative drafting has altered very
much during the last century and the language ‘used, the
length of the sentences, the arrangement of the clauses and
the sections may have to be drastically altered to conform to
modern style of drafting. This applies specially to the Foreign
Recruiting Act and the Official Secrets Act which will, in
any cas¢, require revision.

(3) Some of the provisions of the earlier Acts may have
to be omitted as unnecessary.

. Tt appears that the constitutional validity of this Act is under challenge in two
wet peieees राय. 60 and 81 of 1971), which have recently been admitted by the
Supreme Court. But we may proceed on the assumption that Act is constitutional
until the Supreme Court holds otherwise,

2. (a) The Dramatic Performances Act, 1876, s.3{b),
(b) Sections 990 to 990 and section 108 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,
{c} Sections 20 to 27 of the Post Office Act, 1897.
(8) Section {1 of the Customs Act, 1962,

"3, Para. 1.6 above,



5

In addition to these advantages, there arises an opportunity
of incorporating in the new Act some of the provisions of the
foreign codea dealing with national security which may be suited
for Indian conditions also. For these reasons, we are of the
view that there should be a consolidated statute entitled the
National Security Act.

1.16, Another question is whether the new law should be a
Separate enactment, or else, whether it could be inserted 23 a
separate chapter in the revised Indian Penal Code. it is true
that crimes affecting national security form an essential part
of the criminal 18९ of the country, and we find that in many
foreign codes, these critees are included in a separate chapter
in the penal Code. But we consider it desirable to pass separate
legislation on the subject, for the following reasons:—

(1) A special rule of limitationt may have to be provided
for some offences affecting national security.

(2) The necessity of obtaining sanction from the Govern-
Ment before initiating prosecutions for offences under the
new law is a special feature, not found in respect of most of
the offences under the Penal Code,

(3) In some other respects also, the provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code may have to be modified in their
application to offences under the new law.

(4) The rules of evidence ordinarily applicable for trial
of criminal cases will have to be very much modified in their
application for the trial of some of the offences under the
new law,

These reasons make the new law distinguishable from most
of the provisions of the Indian Pena! Code and it may, hence,
be somewhat incongruous if the new law is introduced as a
separate chapter in the Indian Penal Code. We therefore re-
commend separate legislation on the subject.

Form of
the new
law.

1, See Chapter 11 below.


Constitu

CHAPTER 2

CONSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS, EXTENT AND APPLICATION

g 2.1, While our comments on the various chapters of the

Genel var National Security Bill’ annexed to this Report will be given in

some pro- the succeeding chapters of this Report, we consider it desirable

visions ex- to refer here to two possible constitutional grounds on which

amined the validity of some provisions of the Bill might be challenged.

with refe.

rence to

‘public or-

EPscd

‘security

of the

State’.

Fonda- 2.2. The first is that these provisions are inconsistent with the

mental fundamental rights guaranteed under clause (1) of article 19,

rights. especially the right of freedom of speech, the right to assemble
peaceably and without arms and the right to form associations
,or unions [sub-clauses (a), (0) and (c) respectively} We have
no doubt that, as the Bill is drafted, the provisions are saved by
clauses (2), (3) and (4) of article 19. They are entirely reasonable
restrictions in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India,
security of the state and friendly relations with foreign states.

Legislative 2.3, The second possible ground of objection is that some

toc of the provisions relate to ‘public order’ which is exclusively in

e the State legislative field (Entry 1 of List 2) and consequently
outside the legislative competence of Parliament.

The expression ‘public. order’ mentioned in Entry 1 and List

2 and referred to in clauses (2), (3) and (4) of article 19 is capable
of a wide, or of a narrow, construction according to the context,
Ifa wide constcuction is given, provisions dealing with the security
of the state may be held to fall within ‘public order’. But, as
observed by the Supreme Court in Romesh Thapar?—

“The Constitution thus requires a line to be drawn in
the field of public order or tranquility marking of, may be
roughly, the boundary between those serious and aggravated
forms of public disorder which are calculated to endanger
the security of state and the relatively minor breaches of the
peace of a purely Local significance treating for this purpose
differences in degree as if they were differences in kind.”

1. Appendix 1.

2. Romesh Thapar v. The State af Madras, (1950) S.C.R. 594; A.LR, 1950 S.C. 124,

128, 129.

6


7

These observations of. Patanjali Sastri J. (as he then was) ~

were cited with approval in Dr. Lohia’s case? in the following
terms:

“-Public order’ is synonymous with public safety and
tranquility; it is the absence of disorder involving breaches
of local significance in contradistinction to national upheavals,
such, as revolution, civil strife, war affecting the security of

tate.”

Ina later case,2 Gajendragadkar J. (as he then was), observed:
“So far ar clause ६2) [of article 19] is concerned, security of the
state having been expressly and specifi.ally provided for, public
order cannot “include the security of state, though in its widest
sinse it may be capable of including‘ the said concept.”

2.4. There is.thus sufficient judicial authority to support the
view that the expresion ‘public-ordur’ in Entry 1 of List 2 should
normally be given a narrow meaning, a: referring to the absence
of disorder and involving relatively minor breaches ofthe peace
of a purely loca! significance, in contradistinction to thosr serious
and aggravated forms of public disorder which are calculated
to endangir the security of the state. We are satisfied that none
of the provisions of the Bill will come within the scope of ‘public:
order’ in the narrow sense, and henc the legislative competence:
of the Parliament may be taken as unassailable.

It is true that the subject ‘security of state’ does not figure
either in List I or in List III; but it may be taken as included in.
the expression ‘defence of India’ (Entry 1 of List 1), which must
includ’ defence, not only from external aggression, but also
from extensive internal insurrection and public disorder of a
violent type spread over a large area. We may, in this connec-
tion, also refer to two articles of the Constitution which lend
support to the above interpretation. Article 352(1) relating to
the Proclamation of Emergency describes the situation in which
the President can issue such a Proclamation as ‘a grave emergency
. .whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof
is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internai
disturbance’. Similarly, article 355 provides that it shall be
the duty of the Union. to protect every state against “external
aggression and internal disturbance”. In any case, it can also’
be brought under the residuary power of legislation mentioned
in article 248.

2.5. The territorial extent of the new law may now be consi-
dered. Of the various Acts whose provisions are to be incorpo-
rated in the new law, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
1967, the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874, and the Official Secrets

Provisions
not falling
within

Extent of
the new
law.

1. Superintendent, Centrat Prison १, Ram Manohar Lohia, (1960) 2 5.C.R. 821; A.LR.

1960 S.C. 633, 641, para 18.

2. O.K. Ghosh v. Ex. Joseph, (1963) Suppl. 2 S.C.R. 789; A.LR, 1963 5 C, 812, 814.

’


Offences
under the

Recom-
mendation.

Two alter-
watives as
to exter-
Titoria} ap~
plication.

8

Act, 1923, extend io the whole of India! including the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. it appears to us that the provisions of
these Acts fall under Entries | and 2 of the Union List, supported
if need be by entry 97. Entries | and 2 apply without any modi-
fication to the State of Jammu & Kashmir. ‘As regards entry 97
it has in its application to this State been modified as follows:—

“97. Prevention of activities directed towards disclaiming,
questioning or disrupting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of India or bringing about cession of a part of the
territory of India or secession of a part of the territory of
India from the Union or causing insult to the Indian National
Flag, the Indian National Anthem and this Constitution.”

The modified entry clearly covers the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

2.6. The subject-matter of Chapters 6 and 7 of the Penal
Cede which are to be incorporated in the new nw also falls
within Entry 1 and Entry 2, respectively, of the Union List.
Though these matters pertain to “criminal law” and fail within
“matters inchuded in he Indian Penal Code at the commence-
meni” of the Constitution (Concurrent List, entry 1), they relate
primarily to the Union List, entries 1 and 2, The entries in the
Concurrent List are to be read subject to those in the Union
List?, Moreover, Concurrent List, entry 1, expressly excludes
offences against laws with respect to any of the matters specified

+n List Tor List I. There should accordingly be 40 constitutional

difficulty in exiending those provisions also to the whole of India
including the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

2,7, We, therefore, recommend that the new law should
extend 10 the whole of India.

‘

2.8. tn our Report on the indian Penal Code,> we examined
the general question of the exterritorial application of the criminal
laws of the land, and recommended that so far as that Code was
concerned, its exterritoriql application to aligns should be limited
to acts committed by them whilst in the service of the Govern-
ment and relatable to offences committed either ia connection
with their service or punishable under Chapters 6, 7 or 9 of the
Penal Code. As to the extervitorial application of the National
Security Act, two alternative courses are open to us. We may
either adopt the same type of application clause as thet proposed
by the Indian Penal Code, or else, we may widen it so as to include
all offences against national security committed outside India
by aliens whether or not they are in Government service.

1. The Unlawful Activities Act was amended in 1969 so as to extend it to the whole of
Tadia; the other two Acts were amended by the Part के States Laws Act (3 of 1951) so 2s to
extend them to the whole of India.

2. Cf. Indu Bhushan ९. Rama Sundar’, २1968, 2 S.C.C. 289.
3, 42nd Repart, paras. 1.32 to 120,


9

2.9. The second view is not so fantastic as may appear at Protected.
first sight. Though Anglo-American jurisprudence is reluctant interest
to extend the principle of exterritoriality to acts committed by Principle.
aliens abroad, world opinion seems to be veering round to the
view that where the security of a state is involved, widest exterri-
toriality must be given. This is based on what is known as
“protected interest principle” and, in the Harvard Researches
in International Law, one suggestion as to extetritoriality was
as follows! :—

“A state has jurisdiction with respect to any crimes
committed outside its territory....by an alien against the
security, territorial integrity or political independence of that
State, provided the act or commission which constitutes the
crime was not committed in exercise of a liberty guaranteed
to the alien by the law of the place where it was committed.”

2.10. This principle has been accepted in the Penal Codes of Provisions
several nations. Thus in France? it is provided that “every Codes”
foreigner who outside the territory of the Republic renders based on
himself guilty, either as perpetrator or as accomplice of a felony the pro-
or misdemeanor against the security of the state or the counter- tective
feiting of the seal of the state or current national monies, may be Principle.
prosecuted and tried according to the provisions of French law
if he is arrested in France or if the Government obtains his
extradition”.

The German Penal Code provides? that “Regardless of the
law of the place of commission, the German Criminal law is
applicable to... .conduct amounting to high treason or treason
against the German Federal Republic or one of her member
States, as well as felonies of constitutional treason.” .

In the Swiss Federal Penal Code, 1942, article 4 provides
that “whoever commits in a foreign country any felony or mis-
demeanor against [Switzerland], carries on an illegal news service
establishes an illegal organisation, or disturbs military security
shall be subject to this law.”

In the Draft Penal Code of Japan it is proposed in Article 5
that “the Code shall apply to an alien who, being outside
Japan, commits a crime against the State of Japan or a Japanese
national, punishable by death, or imprisonment or confinement
for life or for a maximum term of five years or more: provided
that this shall not apply when such act is not criminal under the
law of the place of offence.”

1. Harvard Researches in International Law—Jurisdiction with respect 10 crime—Draft
Convention (reprinted in (1935) 29 American Journal of international Law, (Supplement),
pages 435-438), Article 7(c).

2, Section 694 of the French Code of Criminal Procedure, 1958,

3. Section 4, para. 3,



Desirabi-
Tity of
wider al-
ternative
cons

Anglo-
American
practice,

Special
case

of alien
entering
the country
for a pur-
Bose pr -eju-
dicial “to
national
security,

10

2.11. At first sight, it may seem desirable if we also adopt
a similar extent clause for offences involving national security
and make it penal for any alien to commit any offence under the
National 10, Act even outside India,’ Doubtless there
will be 4 nes in enforcing this provision, unless he is subse-
quently found in India or-else he is extradited according te law.
It would indeed be extremely difficult to enforce such a provision
and it may remain a dead letter on the statute book.

2.12. It will be useful to refer the well-known case of Joyce
vy. D.P.P!. In that case the Lord Chancellor Lord Jowitt referred
in wide terms to the following principle of exterritoriality in
respect of thaicrime of treason in the following terms:

“No principle of comity demands that a State should
ignore the crime of treason committed against it outside its
territory. On the contrary, a proper regard for its own
security requires that those who committed that crime whether
they committed within or without the realm’ should be amen-
able to its laws.”

Having laid down this general proposition, the House of
Lords, however, convicted Joyce of treason on the ground that,
though he was an alien who committed the act outside Britain,
nevertheless during the relevant period he held a British passport
and thereby owed allegiance to the British Crown. It is true
that this judgement has raised some controversy in legal circles.
But neither England nor the United States appears to have gone
to the extreme limit of applying the Jaw of treason for aliens
committing the crime outside their territories, unless allegiance
10 the country could be established either by the holding of a
passport or otherwise.

2.13, If, however, an alien enters into our territory for the
purpose of completing an ‘offence involving national security for
which he has made preparations abroad, he may be guilty by
the express languagé of some of the provisions be: ause the act
of entry with that intention may itself be an overt act sufficient
to fasten the guilt on him?. This view seems to prevail in
U.S.S.R3. “The textbooks‘ consider a foreign citizen who enters
the Soviet Union with the intention of committing a crime for
which he has made preparations abroad, as punishable according
to Soviet criminal law (०.४. espionage or smuggling)’””.5

1,-Joyce v. D.P.P., (1946) 1 AI E.R. 186, 192 (ALL).

2. Compare provision suggested below as to infiltration for a purpose prejudicial to the
national security,

3, F.J, Feldbrugge, Soviet Criminal Law (1964), bemg Vol. 9 in the Series, Law in Fas-
tern Europe, (University of Leyden) at page 68.

4. The refetence is to a text-book in the Russian language Soviet Criminal Law, Gen-
eral Part, Edited by V.M. Chkhikvadze, Moscow, (1959).

5. In a footnote it is added “Tt is doubtful whether this view can still be held under
the new legislation.”


il

2.14, We do not therefore recommend the widest form of
territoriality for offences under the National Security Act. The
application clause recommended by us for offences under the
Indian Penal Code may be followed, and sub-clause (3) of
clause 1 of the Bill may read:—

“(3) It applies also outside India—

(a) to citizens of India;

(०) to aliens on any ship or aircraft registered in
India; and

(०) to aliens in the service of the Government.”

Recom-
mendation
as to ex-
territorial
application.


Introduc-
tory.

Existing
offences

with wag-
ing war,

Prevent
by force

the autho-
tity of a
State.

CHAPTER 3
INSURRECTION

“3.1. We shall now deal with the offences to be included in the
consolidating law. The first group of such offences should deal
with direct internal opposition to the authority of the State.

3.2, The most important of such offences is “waging war”
against the Government of Indiat, or “levying war” as it is
described in England, Canada and other Commonwealth countries.
Preparation to wage such war?, and concealing a design to
wage such war}, are connected offences. Then, there are less
grave forms of opposition, illustrated by the offence of conspiracy
to overawe the Government of India‘, or of any State, or the
Parliament, or a State Legislature.

Opposition to the established Government may manifest
itself in the form of a physical assault on its functionaries and
other dignitarics.5 AJI these crimes are provided for in Chapter 6
of the Indian Penal Code, and the relevant provisions as propos-
ed to be revised in our Report on the Code$, could be collected
under the head “Insurrection”.

3.3. In addition, we recommend a new provision to punish
those who prevent, or attempt to prevent, by force the exercise of
the authority of a State in furtherance of an inter-State dispute.
During the last decade, there have been occasions for apprehend-
ing a threat to the country’s security from certain centrifugal
forces, which aim at the disintegration of the country. Article 19(2)
of the Constitution was amended in order to ensure that the
freedom of speech and expression is not abused by the propaga-
tion of views supporting such tendencies. Two Central Acts,
the Criminal Law Amendments Act, 1961 and the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 have been enacted to deal with
the menace to the country’s integrity from such sources. A
corfesponding provision to protect the territorial integrity of
States has not been considered necessary. Logically, there
ought to be adequate protection against any resort to force for
preventing a State from exercising its lawful authority within
its territory. Movements for the alteration of boundaries of a

1. Section 121, 1,

(No change in the 42nd Report).

2, Section 122, 1.P.C., as amended in the 42nd Report

3. Section 123, LP,

» as amended in the 42nd Report.

4. Section 121A, LP.C., renumbered as section 1238, and amended in the 42nd Report.
5, 8.124, LP.C., as substituted in 42nd Report.
6. 42nd Report, Chapter 6.

2


13

State or disputes which arise between two States should be pursu-
ed in a constitutional manner and not by violent means. If by
the use of force a State is prevonted from exercising its authority
over a particular area within the State, the security of the State,
and consequently, the nation’s security is gravely jeopardised.
Any such activity should be punishable as a grave offence. Such
a provision would not be an innovation, since we find it in the
Penal Codes of a few countries'.

The new provision may be as follows:

“Whoever, by means of force or show of force, prevents
or attempts to prevent any State from exercising its authority
in any part of the territory of that State, with a view to securing
an alteration of the boundaries of that State or in furtherance
of a dispute between that State and another State, ‘shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

3.4, In some countries, there are special provisions against the
assumption of dictatorial powers, intended perhaps to prevent
the resurgence. of movements like Nazism and Fascism. Thus,
the Penal Code of Argentina? penalises any member of the Con-
gtess who gives dictatorial powers to specified persons or bodies
of persons.

Similarly, the Draft German Penal Code? has a section en-
titled “‘prepatation of a Despotism” punishing anybody who un-
dertakes.to promote groups set up for the purpose of subversion,
violence, etc. and who thereby pursues efforts directed against
the existence of the Federal Republic or constitutional principles,

3.5. We considered the advisability of adopting some such
provision against the possible assumption of dictatorial powers
by any group of persons. We came to the conclusion that so
far as the criminal law is concerned, it would be preferable to
check specific acts which are in the nature of various steps-in-aid
for such attempts at assuming dictatorship, than to punish the
final assumption of dictatorial powers. If the attempt succeeds,
the provision will not be needed. Tf it has failed, it will not be
difficult to establish the offence of attempt to wage war or prepar-
ing to wage war, for that is whal the act really amounts to.

3.6. The subject of treasonable acts against a State which forms
part of a Federation is an interesting one, and we went into “he
question how far our law covers such acis. There was in fact. a
suggestion that section 121, Indian Penal Code, should mzke

Penalty for
assuming
dictatorial
powers,

Treason

against a
State unit
of a Fede-
ration etc.

1. (4) Articles 100 ana 10161) of the Yogoslav Criminal Code.
(0) Article 98(t) of the Denish Penal Code.
(०) Article 229 of the Argentina Penal Code.
2. Section 227, Penal Code of Argentina.
3. Section 369, Draft German Penal Code.
34M of Law/71—2


Olfences to
be included
in this
group.

14

punishable the waging of war not only against the Government
f India but also against a State Government,

We looked into the position in other federal countries in this
respect. The Argentinian Penal Code provides? that “anybody
who, without rebelling against the national government, arms one
province against another, or takes arms in order to change a locat
constitution, or to overthrow any provincial or federal territorial
government or sub-division thereof, or to force out of any such
government or sub-division thereof. any measure or concession,
or to prevent, although temporarily, the free exercise of its legal
functions, or the formation or renewal in the time and ways es-
tablished by law, shall be punished by jailing from ore to three

years”. The matter has received some attention in the United
States also.

We are not convinced, however, that the present law
suffers from any deficiency from the practical point of
view. Conspiracy to ‘overawe a State Government
or Legislature and exciting disaffection against a State
Government. or Legislature “are proposed to be severely
penalised.? Even if the violent action goes beyond the stage of
conspiracy, the maximum punishment Provided for conspiracy
will suffice for the completed offence. We, therefore, do not
recommend any additional provision on the subject,

3.7. In the result, the following offences will be included under
the heading “Insurrection” :--

1, Waging war against the Government of India.
2. Preparation to wage war.
3. Concealing design to wage war.

4. Conspiracy to overawe the Government, Parliament
ete.

5. Preventing by force exercise of State authority in
furtherance of inter-State disputes.

6, Assault on the President and other high dignitaries.

|. Section 229, This is contained in Tille 10, Crimes against the Government and the
Constitutional Order, Chapter 2, Sedition. The praceding titke—Title 9- deals with crimes
against the security of the Nation.

2. See clauses 6 and 39 of the proposed National Security Bid.


CHAPTER 4
Assistinc THE ENemMy

4.1. The preceding Chapter! was mainly concerned with
direct opposition to the State from within. Threats from without
form the subject matter of this Chapter.

4.2, The most direct of such threats arises from dhe act of
giving assistance to India’s enemies. In our Report? on the
Penal Code, we have brought out the defect in the existing Jaw on
the subject, and recommended the insertion of a provision for
punishing a person who assists India’s enemies or the armed
forc2s of a country whose armed forces are engaged in hostilities
with India, whether or not war has been declared between that
country and India. It is appropriate that that provision should
form the first section in the group of sections with which we
are now concerned.

4.3. While‘ direct assistance to the enemy country would be
covered by the above provision, the law has also to take into
account activities which represent an earlier stage of collabora-
tion with a hostile power. Such collaboration may take various
forms, and some of the acts of collaboration may fall within the
corners of the Official Secrets Act. There is, however, a residue
of conduct which, though definitely inspired by a purpose prejudi-
cial to the national security and aided usually by a hostile power,
requires to be checked. ‘

4.4. It is well known that prior to the state of direct assistance
to the enemy and much earlier than the commencement of war or
direct hostilities, clandestine measures are resorted to in order to
carry on, later, activities prejudicial to the national security.
Those prejudicial activities themselves would be punishable under
the relevant specific penal provisions, such as, sabotage, espionage,
sedition, or incitement of disaffection among the members of the
armed forces. But the mere act of infiltrating into the country
for carrying out those nefarious activities is at present not punish-
able.

4.5. During recent times, infiltration into India with the object
of doing acts prejudicial to security has been on the increase,
Such act should obviously be checked at the very inception.
The Forcigners’ Act etc. and similar laws, are designed primarily
for other purposes. The technical offence of illegal entry (i.e
entry without a valid travel document} or similar acts, which may
be punishable under those laws, are quite different from un in-
filtration with a sinister motive,

1. Chapter relating 10 waging of war and connected offences (Chapter 3)
2. 42nd Report, Para, 6.7, and Bill annexed (0 the Report, section [23A,

15

Introduc-
tory.

Assisting
India’s
enemies.

Cotlabora-
tion with
hostile
countrics,

Infiltration.


16

_ 4.6. We consider that unlawfully entering into, or remaining
in, the Indian territory, with the object of committing an offence
against the national security, should itself be an offence. Such
acts are preparatory to, and pave the way for, more harmful
activities, and there is enough justification for the law punishing
fuch acts, provided, of course, the prejudicial purpose is estab-
lished.

4.7, Exactly parallel provisions are not found in foreign Codes.
But it is of interest to find in the Yugoslav Criminal Code?
which punishes with “strict imprisonment” any one who “infil-
trates himself into the territory of Yugoslavia for the purpose of
carrying out hostile propaganda”. Hostile propaganda is de-
fined comprehensively in the same section to include all types of
subversive or treasonable propaganda affecting the national
security.

A writer on Soviet Criminal Law? says that/‘‘the text-books?
consider a foreign citizen who enters the Soviet Union with the
intention of committing a crime for which he has made _prepara-
tions abroad, as punishable according to Sovict criminal law (e.g.
espionage or smuggling)”. But he adds in a footnote that .“it ts
doubtful whether this view can still be held under the new Iegisla-
tion”.

We think, however, that the provision which’ we are proposing
below is justifiable on the principle that the offender has been
guilty of preparation for a crime against which the State has
tight to act in the interests of protection of its security.

4.8, The new provision may be on the following lines:—

“Whoever unlawfully enters into, or remains in, India
for the purpose of committing an offence under this Act shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years. and shail also be liable to fine.”

4.9. If a war does take place with an external power, and pri-

Offences

concerned soners are captured, the question of preventing their escape

with priso- 5° Te Aue aires 4

ners of war, rises. There are provisions in the Penal ‘ode concerned with
the escape of prisoners of wart. These penalise any person who
aids the escape of or rescues or harbours a prisoner of war, or
a public servant who voluntarily allows or negligently suffers
a prisoner of war to escape. These acts, usually committed in
the course of or after hostilities, are proper for inclusion in the
group under discussion.

1. Section 118,

2. BJ. Feldbrugge, Soviet Criminal Law (1964), being Vol. 9 in the Series, Law in Eas-

tern Europe (Univer

‘of Leyden), page 68.

3. The reference is to a Text-book in the Russian language—Soviet Criminal Law,
General Part, Edited by ¥.M. Chkhikvadze. Moscow (1959)

4, Section 128 to 139, Indian Penal Code.


17

4,10. In the result, the following offences will be included in Offences to
the Chapter:-- be included
in this
(1) Assisting India’s enemies; group.
(2) Infiltration for committing offences against national
security;

(3) Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring prisoner of
wary

(4) Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of war
to cscape; .

(5) Public servant negligently suffering prisoner of war
10 escape.


Introduc-
tory,

Offences
connected
with war or
depreda-
tions on
foreign
States.

CHAPTER 5
RELATIONS WITH FoREIGN STATES

5.1. Indian statute law is not unfamiliar with legislative pro-
visions on the subject of relations with foreign States. For
some time, the statute book had a specific Act on the subject!,
The Penal Code has a few provisions intended to act as a deter-
fent against waging ‘war or depredations on foreign states which
are friendly with India?. The Constitution, while guaranteeing
the freedom of speech and expression, expressly permits> reason-
able restrictions in the interests of friendly relations with foreign
states*. One of the grounds on which the Government can pro-
hibit the import of a book under the Customs Act4 is the main-
tenance of friendly relations with foreign States. The primary
reason why the matter did not receive prominent attention during
ihe last century was. perhaps, the political status of the country
and the comparative infrequency of occasions raising questions
involving such relations.

5.2. There is of course no doubt as to the close connection
between friendly relations with foreign States and national
security. The maintenance of friendly relations with foreign
States is of vital importance for the protection of the country
mainly from external danger. Protection from internal danger
also cannot be wholly ruled out because a hostile foreign power
may try to create internal disturbances through fifth columnists
in the country. The connection between the two may be indirect
in point of causation, but is unquestionable. Besides, there is a
practical advantage in utilising the present opportunity for con-
solidating the law on the subject.

53, Chapter 6 of the Penal Code has three provisions which
punish the following offences:--

(1) Waging war against any foreign State in alliance or
at peace with India;

{2) Committing depredation on territories of foreign
State in alliance or at peace with India;

(3) Receiving property taken by means of such waging
war or depredations.

4. The Foreign Relations Act, 1932 (12 of 1932) (Repealed).

2. Sections 125 to 127, LPC.
3. Article 192) of the Constitution,

4. Also see Union List, Entry 10, “Foreign Affairs; all matters which bring the Union
into relation with any foreign country.”

5. Section 11(2\t), Customs Act, 1962.

18


19

These provisions are obviously intended to ensure the main-
tenance of friendly relations, and will be placed in the group
under’ discussion.

5.4. Recruitment for service in the armed forces of foreign
State and voluntary eniistment of Indians for such service are
two other matters which could have repercussions on our external
relations. The subject is regulated partly by a Central Act?
and partly by a British Statute?, Such recruitment may fall in
one or other of the following categories :—

(1) recruitment for a foreign State at war with India,
which can be called, for brevity, an enemy country;

(2) recruitment for a foreign State at peace with India,
which can be called, for brevity, a friendly country;

(3) recruitment for a country which is friendly to an enemy
country; aad

(4) recruitment for a country which is enemy of a friendly
country. ‘

5.5. Recruitment for an enemy country (at least where the
recruitment is for military or semi-military service) is treason in
English law3. In India, it is bound to be held as abetment of
the waging of war against India punishable under section 121
of the Penal Code.

5.6. Recruitment foe a friendly country can,in England, be
regarded as criminal, if it subjects the party to an influence or
control inconsistent with the allegiance due to the sovereign.
Russell says4:

“Entering into the service of a foreign State without the
consent of the King, or contracting with a foreign State aay
engagement which subjects the party to an influence or contro!
inconsistent with the allegiance due te our own sovercign,
is said to be a misdemeanour indicatable at common Law$,
and where the foreign State is at war with Great Britain, is
treason®”,

Tn India, such recruitment can be regulated under the Foreign
Recruiting Act, 1874.

5.7. Recruitment far a country friendly to an enemy countzy
may or may not amount to treason in England or to abetment of

Recruit-
ment and
enlistment
of forcign
States.

1. Fhe Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874,
2. The Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870 (33 and 34 Vic. ५. 90).

3. R. ७. Lynck, (1903) 1 K.B, 444; Russell on Crime, (1964), Val. 2, page 1545.

4. Russell on Crime, (1964), Vol. 2, page 1544.
5, 1 East P.C. 81, 4 81. Com, 122.
6. Rv. Lynch, (1903) 1 KB. 444.


Two Acis
‘on the sub=
Ject.

Foreign
Reeruiting
Act, 1874,

The
Foreign

Enlistment.
Act, 1870
(33 ‘and 34
Viet. ०. 90),

20

waging war in India. The answer depends on the nature of the
service to which the person is recruited, the use to be made of the
person recruited, and other circumstances. Usually, if the
third country is giving solid military assistance to the enemy
country, war would have been declared against that country
also. ‘The regulatory power under the Foreign Recruiting Act,
1874, can also be exercised.

\ 5.8, Recruitment under the last category, i.e. for the enemy of
a friendly country was not, in itself, an offence at common law.
Russell says!, “It appears not to have been an offence at common
law for British subjects to enter into the service of belligerent
powers at peace with Great Britain unless the act involved a
breach of duty to the Crown?. This category is now regulated by
the (U.K.) Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.

5.9. The (U.K.) Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870 applies only
when the recruiting is for the service of any foreign State at war
with any foreign State at peace with the Government. The
Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874, on the other hand, authorises
the Government to prohibit or regulate recruitment in India for _
any type of foreign service. As the wider of the two, it may be

discussed first.

5.10. Under the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874, recruitment
for the service of any foreign State may be probibited by the
Central Government, or that Government may impos? conditions
on such recruitment4, Where such, prohibition or condition
has been imposed, then a person who, in violation thereof, induces
or attempts to induce any person to accept a commission or
employment in the service of a foreign State, or induces any person
to proceed to any place to obtain such commission etc. or know-
ingly acts in the engagement of any person so induced, is punisia-
ble with imprisonment upto seven years, or fine, or both>.

5.11. The (U.K.) Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870 regulates the
conduct of British subjects throughout Her Majesty’s dominions
during the cxistence of hostilities between foreign States with
which the British Crown is at peace® . Section 4, which is the
crucial provision, prohibits (in the absence of a licence from the
Government, a British subject from enlistment in the service of
a foreign State which is at war with another foreign State, friendly
with the British Crown.

. Russell on Crime, (1964), Vol.2, page 1544.

. See also para. 5.12, below.

. Section 4, Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874.

I
2.
3. Section 3, Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874.
4.
5.

. Section 6, Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874,

6. The British Act has not been repealed in its application to India by the British Statu~
tes ctc. (Repeal) Act, 1960.


21

5.12. The position at common law has been thus stated ?-?:-—

“A foreigner who enlists in the forces of either belligerent
when an international war is in progress (including a civil
war in which recognition of belligerency has been granted
by the parent Government or by his own Government)
commits no crime against the other belligerent, who is not
entitled to punish him if captured. But, following the great
example of President Washington (and it was of him that
George Canning said : ‘If I wished for a guide in a system.of
neutrality, 1 should take that laid down by America in the day
of the Presidency of Washington and the Secretaryship of
Jefferson’), many countries, including our own, have made
it a criminal offence to join the forces of any Government at
war with a State which is at peace with His Majesty, Our
present statute is the Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870. We de
not often enforce this part of it, and it is notorious that Britist
subjects are found fighting in nearly every war that occurs.”

5.13. The present English Act on the subject prohibits : (1)
the enlistment by a British subject in the military or naval service
of either belligerent, and similar acts3 ; (2) the building, equipping
and despatching of vessels for employment in the military or
naval service for employment in the military or naval service of
either belligerent‘; (3) the increase by any person on British
territory of the armament of a man-of-war of either belligerent
being at the time in a British port’; (4) the preparing or fitting
out of a naval or military expedition against a Ireindly State®,
The last two prohibitions apply to any person, subject or alien,
within Her Majesty’s dominions.

5.14. The extra territorial application of the Act is interesting.
The drafismen of the Act seems to have devoted considerable atten-
tion to this aspect, as is abvious from the care he has taken to
indicate, in most of the penal sections, whether the act is to be
punished when committed “within Her Majesty’s dominions,”
or when committed “within or without” those dominions.

5,15, In its Report on British Statutes applicable to India, the
Law Commission observed in regard to this Act? :—

“This statute regulates the conduct of British subjects
throughout the Dominions during the existence of hostilities
between foreign States with which the British Crown is at

1 Me. Nair “Law relating to Civil War in Spain”, (1937) 53 Law Quarterly Review
471, 494,

2, 56७ also para. 5.8, above. .

3. Sections 410 7, Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.

4. Sections 8 and 9, Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.

5. Section 10, Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.

6. Section 11, Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.

7. Fifth Report of the Law Commission (British Statutes applicable to India}, page 50,
Item 87.


Recom-
mendgtion
regarding
the — Fo-
reign Re-
cruiting
Act.

Recom-
mendation
regarding
the
Foscign
Enlistrnent
Act,

22

peace. Thus, section 4 prohibits a British subject dam
enlistment in service of a foreign State which is ai war with
another foreign State, friendly with the British Crown.

Since the extent clause of this statute refers to ‘Dominions’
it has become inapplicable to India, according 1o Menon’s
case! -2,

But such a legistation is necessary for india, for no
Indian citizen can be allowed to side against a State friendly
with India, in case of war between that State and another,
Further, whether the benefit of the legislation should be exten-
ded to all members of the Commonwealth is another question
io be considered.”

5.14, As regards the Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874, we are of
ihe view that it is sufficient to incorporate the substance of section
4 of the Foreign Recruiting Act and ihe penal provision in section
8 of thet Act, with the modifications indicated below’. That
section gives power to the Central Government fo issue a general
onier prohibiting recruitment for service under a foreign State,
or imposing conditions on such recruitment, This should, in.
out view, serve a weapon to deal with any situation that may arise
by reason of attempts at recruitment on a large scale.

The other elaborate provisions which are contained in the
Foreign Recruiting Act, mostly deat with acts in the nature of
abetment of the commission of, the principal offence of unauthe-
rised recruitment for service in a foreign State. They are unnece-
ssary as the general provision of the Penal Code+ punishing
abetment would apply to all offences under the proposed law.

Further, we think that there is no need ta have a provision
directing a particular person to slap recruitment as is found in
section 3 of the Foreign Recruiting Act. The general pawer
under section 4 will do.

5.17. As regards the (U.K.} Foreign Enlistment Act, 1870.
which concentrates bn recruitment for a foreign State at War with
a frieadly State, we do not think that elaborate provision under
that category is required. The matier could be left io be dealt
with by the Central Government, which caa be given genera)
powers to prohibit or regulate enlistment for foreign State similar
to its general powers under section 4 of the Foreign Recruiting
Act. 1874. Moreover, many of the activities made punishable
by the British Act, like illegal ship building, are such that in the
conditions of the present day it would, be physically impossible for
individuals to embark on them without detection. The rest of

4, State af Madras v.C.G, Menon, ATR. 1954 S.C. 517; (1955) 1 5.0.8. 280,

2. After the Fifth Repors, similar questions as to copysight atise in Black woud dk Sans
y, Parasuramon, ALR. 1959 Mad. 410, हि

3, Bara, 5.18, below.
4, Existing sections (09 to (16, 1.P.C.; peapased sections 67 to 74, 42nd Report.


23

the activities punishable under the Act could be dealt with as
abetment of the commission of, the principal crime, which is—
to put the matter shortly—unauthorised recruitment for a foreign
Stale.

A provision similar to section 4 of the Foreign Recruiting
Act would be adequate to regulate, restrict or prohibit such re-
cruitment, whatever be the status of the foreign country in ques-
tion,

5,18, Existing section 4 of the Foreign Recruitment Act, how-
ever. is very wide in two respects, First, as the Central Govern-
ment is given unlimited power to prohibit recruiting for servic of
any foreign State or to impose conditions on such service, the
section is not confined to military service, and covers all kinds of
non-military service. Secondly, it does not specify the cosidera-
tions which should weigh with the Government in issuing a pro-
hibition or restriction. In our epinion, the section needs to be
modified, in both these respects. Apart from any objections that
could be raised from the constitutional point of view with reference
to article 19(1}(g) of the Constitution, such a wide power is aot
needed now. Need for restrictions on civil service under a fri-
endly foreign State! is extremely improbable, at the prescnt day.
Even as regards restrictions for enlistment. in service in the armed
forces of a foreign State, there should be some critetion ou which
the Central Government could act. We think that the interests
of national security or maintenance of friendly relations with
foreign States are adequate criteria in this context.

5.19. We are, further, of the view that a maximum punishment
of imprisonment for 3 years will be adequate for the offence.

3.20. We, therefore, recommend the incorporation of the
following provisions in the Bill? :—

(1) The Central Governmeut may, if satisfied that it is
necessary to do so in the interest of the national security of
the maintenance of friendly relations with foreign State, by
general: order notified in the Official Gazette either prohibit
rectuiting or enlistment for service in the armed forces of
a foreign State or impose conditions on such recruiting.

(2) Contravention of the prohibition or breach of any
of the conditions of such restriction will be punishable with
imprisonment of eithr description for a term which may extend
to three years, or with fine, or with both.

1, We carefully considered a suggestion for inserting a
provision punishing the acts of individuals which jeopardise the

Modifica-

q

section 4,
Foreign
Recruiting
Act.

Punish-
ment to be
‘three years”
imprison-
ment.

Recom-
menda-
tions as to
Tecruit-
ment and
enlistment.

Jeopardi-
sing neut-
ality.

1. As 10 service in an enemy couniry during ng war, see para. 5.5, above.
2. See clause 17 of The Nation : “ecurity Bill, below.


24

neutrality of the country. Attention was invited to the provisions
in some of the foreign Penal Codes?.

English 5.22, The British practice on the subject of neutrality legis-

practice as Jation? does not favour general and permanent provisions of the

कण nature which we find in South American countries3, ut contines

lation, itself to dealing with the important matters, leaving other measures
to be undertaken as and when a situation arises. Examples of
such specific measures are furnished by the Foreign Enlistment
Act, 1870 and by orders issued under the Customs Act which
prohibit (without licence from the Board of Trade or other com-
petent authority), the export of arms and other’materials of war.
But most measures adopted in England are of a temporary charac-
ter. For example, during the Spanish Civil War, the Merchant
Shipping (Carriage of Munitions to Spain) Act, 1936, was passed,
to prohibit the carriage of ammunitions to Spain. Section 2(5)
of the Act declared that the Act ‘shall continue in force “until
His Majesty by Order in Council is pleased to declare that it is
no longer necessary or expedient that it should continue in force.”
Another device is to pass statutory orders under a particular sta-
tute, such as the Treaty of Peace Act, 1919. Yet another device
is to issue executive orders, circulars. instructions and depart-
mental communications drawing attention to the provision of
the Foreign Enlistment Act or other relevant law and its applica-
bility in a particular situation which has arisen at the particular
moment,

Position in 5.23. In some of the South American and Central American
South countries and in seme Continental Codes, however, there are
American provisions in the Penal Code of a permanent and general nature,
and’, punishing acts compromising the neutrality of the country. At

and in a <
some Con- the same time, in the event of a particular war between other
tinental States, detailed legal prohibitions are also issued4.

Codes,

Position in 5,24. The United States represents a midway position. The

the U.S.A. provisions for enforcing neutrality are more numerous than in
England and Commonwealth countries. But they are specific
and precise, rather than general and abstract as in the South
American countries.

Various 5.25. Acts jeopardising neutrality have various facets.

aspects of First, there is the question of international law. Where there
3९1५ jco- isa war between two countries, international law may impose

1, (a) Argentinian Penal Code, Articles 219 and 220.
(b) Sections 121 to 131, Colombian Penal Code.
(c) Article 43, Draft Penal Code for Japan.
(9) Section 110c, Danish Penal Code.
2. See Deak and Jessup, Neutrality Laws, Regulations and Treaties, (1939), Vol. 1.
Preface, page xv.

3. As to South American countries, see para. 5.23, below.

4. See Deak and Jessup, Neutrality Laws, Regulations and Treaties, (Carrnergie Endow-
ment for International Peace) (1939) Vol. 1, page 82.


25

certain obligations on the States as a consequence of its neutra- pardising
lity. The precise extent of such obligations may be gathered neutrality.
from leading text books on the subject!.

Secondly, there is the question of friendly relations with foreign
States. {Irrespective of the question whether or not abstaining
from a certain act is required as a matter of its obligations under
international law, a neutral State may desire to abstain from
that act in order to maintain its friendly relations with foreign

States in general.

Thirdly, there is the question of internal security. A State
which has adopted the position of a neutral one may wish to
avoid jeopardy to its neutrality in the interests of its own secu-
rity. « .

5.26, [1 appears to us, however, that the subject is one of Provision
considerable complexity involving a number of repercussions. as to है act
General rules framed in absteact terms may lead to consequen- jag” neul-
ces which cannot be anticipated at the time of framing the rules, rality "not
and this may cause embarrassment. favoured.

Further, such a provision may result in considerable vagueness
in its application, partly because of the difficulty of precisely
defining an act which jeopardises neutrality. We do not there-
fore think it proper to have a penal provision on the subject of
a general and permanent nature.

5.27. As a result of the above discussion, the following Offences io

offences are recommended for inclusion wader the group dealing be indicat:
with foreign States: — ह जा
पर group.
(1) Waging war against any foreign State at peace with
India:

(2) Committing depredations on territories of foreign
State at peace with India;

(3) Receiving property taken by means of such waging
war or depredations;

(4) Recruitment lo, or enlistment in, armed forces of
foreign Slates.

1. Sco Oppenheim, International Law, (1960), Vol. 2 pages 653 to 661, and page 45°
et seq.


Introduc-
tory.

provisions
to be in
corporat-
ed,

Provisions
relating to
armed
forces—im-
portance
of,

Statutory
provisions,
in England

CHAPTER 6
OFFENCES RELATING TO ARMED Forces

6.1. We have so far dealt with direct attacks on national
security. .

The security of a country may also be threatened by indirect
acts, such as those which weaken the agencies established for the
maintenance of its security. Since the armed forces of a country
are the most important of such agencies, provisions punishing
interference with their preparedness and efficiency in the dis-
charge of their functions are found in the criminal law of all
countries.

6,2. In India, such provisions are contained in Caapter 7
of the Indian Penal Code, and it is appropriate that they should
be placed in the new law, with the changes recommended in our
Report on that Code!,

6.3. Tt is not a mere coincidence that in the Indian Penal
(०५६, the Chapter dealing with offences relating to armed forces
appears immediately after the Chapter relating to offences against
the State. The importance of armed forces as the chief instru-
ment for maintaining hational security must have been the princi-
pal reason. The Chapter attempts to provide, in a manner more
consistent with the general character of the Code. for the punish-
ment of ctvilians who abet military crimes. The inter-relation-
ship of the offences in Chapter 7 of the Code with the offences
in the laws relating to armed forces has been explained briefly
in our Report on the Penal Code.? The necessity for hese pro-
visions is obvious. The military law does nat apply to civilians,
as so they cannot be punished as abettors under that law. And
the general provisions of the Penal Code as to abetment would
also not apply, because the principal offences of mutiny, deser-
tion, insubordination and the like, are outside the (१००2,

6.4. In England, there are several enactments on the Statute
Book which are designed to prevent the spread of disaffection.
These are mainly concerned with the Protection of public ser-
vants, and more particularly members of the Armed Forces who
may be exposed to attempts to seduce them from their duty or
allegiance, The. Aliens Rejtriction (Amendment Act), 19193
prohibits an alien from causing sedition or disaffection among
the civil population as well as among the Armed Forces of the

1. 42nd Report, Chapter 7.
2 42nd Report, paragraphs 7.1 and 7.2.

3. Section 3, Aliens Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1919 (9 & 10 Geo. 5 ८, 920.

26


27

Crown and those of its allies, and provides for summary punish-
ment for the promotion of, or interference in an industrial dis-
pute by, an alien in any industry in which he has not been en-
gaged in the United Kingdom for at least two years immediately
preceding.

6.5. In 1797, on the occasion of the mutiny at the Nore, an
Act! was passed punishing, as a felony without benefit of clergy,
the incitement of soldiers or sailors to mutiny. It was at first a
temporary measure?, intended to expire at the end of the first
month of the then next session, but it was several times re-enac-
ted, and was in force till? August 1, 1807, when it was suffered
to expire, but it was revived and made perpetual4 in 1817.

6.6. The Tncitement to Disaffection Act, 1934 was intended
. to provide less harsh penalties than those under the (unrepealed)
Incitement to Mutiny Act, 1797, The principal offence under
the Act punishes a person who seduces a member of the forces
from his duty or allegiances. The Act contains stringent pro-
visions for the prevention, and detection of this offence. More-
over, it is an offence for any person to be in possession (with in-
lent to commit, or to abet, counsel or procure the commission
of the principal offence), of any document of such a nature that
the dissemination of copies thereof among members of the Forces
would constitute the principal offences,

A leading author on Constitutional law has made the fotlow-
ing comment after referring to the provision relating to posses-
sion of documents in the 1934 Act—

“This measure arms the Government with a means of
restricting the distribution of political propaganda; parli-
cularly it could be used to suppress the distribution of paci-
fist literature. It must be admitted that prosecutions are rare
and that juries are reluctant to convict?.”

6.7. A few suggestions for the addition of new provisions
relevant to armed forces may be briefly discussed.

68. We had, during our consideration of the subject
of offences against the national security, looked into the Trea-
chery Act®. an English Act passed during the second world
war. The Act, which was a temporary one, has been repealed

1. The Incitement to Mutiny Act, 1797 G7 Geo. 3. 70),
2. Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England, Vol. 2, page 193.
3. 41 Geo. 2 ०. 29,

Other sup.
gestions
considered.

Tivachery,

4. 57 Geo, 3, ९. 7 referred to in Stephen, History of the Criminal Law of England, Vol.

2, Page 193.
5. Section 1, Tncitement to Disaffection Act, 1934 (24 & 25 Geo, 5, ८, 56).
6, Section 2, Incitement to Disaffection Act, 1934 (English),
7. Wade and Phillips, Constitutional Law, (1979), page 529.
8, The Treachery Act, 1940 (3 & 4 Geo. 6 ८. 21).


28

in England. It has also been repealed in its application to India.1
But, in view of the importance of the subject, its provisions re-
quire consideration. The main section? read:—

“Tf, with intent to help the enemy, any person does, or
attempts or conspires with any other person to do, any act
which is designed or likely to give assistance to the naval,
military or air operations of the enemy, to impede such opera-
tions of His Majesty’s forces, or to endanger life, he shall be
guilty of felony and shall on conviction suffer death.”

We have given some thought to the subject; but we have ulti-
mately come to the conclusion that the practical importance
of such a provision would be very limited, and we are not, there-
fore, inclined to recommend any such provision. If war is dec-
lared or is very imminent, suitable emergency legislation could
be readily enacted, and such legislation would be comprehen-
sive enough to cover such acts.

Propa- 6.9. Propaganda in the nature of subversive activities among
amongst the armed forces was referred to during our discussions and it
armed was suggesfed that a spécific provision aimed at such acts corrup-
forges, ting the minds of members of the armed forces was needed. It

was stated that the acts would not amount to inciting mutiny nor
fall under section 505, Indian Penal Code.

Now, an attempt to seduce an officer or member of the armed
forces from his duty is punishable? even under the present law.
So is a statement, rumour or report inducing him to fail in his
duty.4 If there is no such incitement or inducement, a mere
attempt at indoctrination—though morally reprehensible—
cannot, in our opinion, be made penal. Special provisions
applicable to armed forces may be needed, and may be pro-
vided in the special Acts applicable to armed forces. But per-
sons outside the armed forces cannot be punished for mere in-
doctrination falling short of incitement or inducement to seduc-
tion or other objectionable conduct.

Offences to 6.10, Hence we recommend that the offences to be included

be included in the Chapter relating to armed forces may be as follows®:—

group. 5 (1) Abetment of mutiny.

(2) Attempting to seduce an officer or member of any
of the armed forces from his duty

1, The British Statutes (Application to India) Repeal Act, 1960.

2. Section 1

3. Section 133, L.P.C. as proposed in the 42nd Report; existing section 131.

4. Existing section 505; proposed section 139, LP.C. (42nd Report).

5. Cf. article 33 of the Constitution.

6. These are the same as sections 132 to 140 of Chapter 7 of the Indian Pena! Code as
proposed to be revised in the 42nd Report.


29

(3) Abetment of assault on a superior officer.

(4) Abetment of desertion from armed forces.

(5) Harbouring a deserter.

(6) Abetrent of an act of insubordination.

(7) Incitement to mutiny or other act of insubordination,

(8) Dissuasion from eniisting, and instigation to mutiny
or insubordination after enlistment. पु

(9) Wearing garb or carrying token used by officer or
™ember of the armed foxce.

34M of Law/71--3


CHAPTER 7
Subversive ACTIVITILS

Antroduc- 7.1, In the preceding Chapters, we were concerned will: acts
von. in the nature of direct opposition to the State.” Lesser forms,
or indirect modes, of attacks on the security of the State will now
require consideration. These could assume a variety af forms,
such as disruptive activities, organising para-military graups,
maintaining relations with a foreign power or body fer ४ pur-
pose prejudicial to the national security. deceiving a public ser-
vant for a purpose prejudicial to the national security, sabotage.
espionage and seditious acts. Though the external characteris-
tics of these acts may differ, they all share some common charac-
teristics, namely—(i) the acts are the result of, or are intended
to cause, a shift of allegiance, a split between the nation and
its citizens; and (ii) the acts represent a preparatory or other
stage earlier than treason proper. The ultimate end is not in
doubt; but the connection between the visible act and the ulti-
mate end is not always easy to discern. For example, sedition
usually consist of words, not action. The ultimate end is to
destroy the bond between the nation as represented by the Go-
vernment established by law and those whose obedience the
Government is entitled to command, But the means adopted
—usually, words—represents a stage preparatory towards graver
acts, Similarly, an act of sabotage, undoubtedly committed
with the object of impeding the defence efforts of the nation. is,
nevertheless, an indirect---and, therefore, not easily discoverable
mode of achieving that object. The expression ‘subversive
activities” is, we think, apt as a convenient Jabel for describing
these acts, as distinct from graver acts of ‘overthrowing’ the
Government. And we proceed now to indicate the offences
to be included in this group.

7.2. We think that the principal offence? dealt with in the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (so far as relates to
individuals), namely, taking part in, committing advocating,
abetting, inciting or advising certain activities described in the
Act as ‘unlawful activities’ could form the first section in the
group of subversive activities. The definition of an ‘unlawful
activity’ in that Act comprises three kinds of acts, concerned
respectively with (i) cession of Indian territory, fii) secession of
a part of the territory from the Indian Union, and (iii) laim-
ing, questioning or disrupting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of India. The first two are really in illustrative of the
third, which is the most general, and the essence of it i disrup-

1. Discussion as to constitutionality is contained in Chapter 2 above.
2. Section 136), Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.

30


31

tion. A more expressive designation for this type of anti-
national activity would, therefore, be “disruptive activity”.
it is obvious that such acts are in their essence subversive acts.
As has been stated more than once, the essence of treason is
destruction of the Bond between the citizen and the State. These
acts are aimed at such destruction. हा

The provision which we propose on the subject is modelled
on section 13(1) of the Act, which contains the penal provision.
The gist of section 2(f) which defines ‘unlawful activity” and of
section 2(b) and 2(d) which explain “cession” and ‘‘secession”
fespectively, is put in the Explanation.

The relevant section will be as follows:—

“Whoever commits, or abets the commission of, any Disruptive
disruptive activity, or advocates or advises any disruptive activity.
activity, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
ता may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to

ine,

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—

(a) “disruptive activity” means any action taken,
whether by act or speech, or by written words, signs
or visible representation, or otherwise,— .

"  @) which questions, disrupts; or is intended
to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of India, or

(i) which is intended to bring about, or supports
any claim for, the cession of any part of India, or
the secession of any part of India from the Union,
or

(ii) which incites any person to bring about
such cession or secession;

(b) “cession” includes the adntission of the claim
of any foreign country to any part of India;

(९) “secession” includes the assertion of. any claim
to determine whetber a part for India will remain within
the Union.

£xception.—Nothing in this section applies to any treaty,
agreement or convention entered into between the Govern-
ment of India and the Government of any other country or
to any negotiations therefor carried on by any person autho-
rised in this behalf by the Government of India.”

7.3. The waging of war against the Government of India can Para-mili-
‘be committed effectively only by organising large groups. But tary Broups
there could be lesser offences committed by groups, such as the sve. pure

setting up of a para-military group. It is 8 serious defect in poses.


Prohibited
by jaw in
some
countries.

32

our law that there is no provision for punishing the act of setting
up of a private military organisation, by whatever name called,
whose objects are of a subversive character. That such organi~
sations are capable of developing into a serious threat to internal
security cannot be denied. This’ is particularly so when the
object of the group isto usurp the functions of the armed forces.
Further, in a society organised on the rule of law, any group
trained to use force in the achievement of its objects should be
regarded as criminal,

7.4. We notice that the laws of many countries prohibit the
formation of such groups. Thus in England, quasi-military
organisations are penalised by statute as. follows!

“If the members or adherents of any association of
persons, whether incorporated or not, are:—

(a) organised or trained or equipped for the pur-
pose of enabling them to be employed in usurping the
functions of the police or of the armed forces of the
Crown; or

(8) organised and trained or organised and equip-
ped either for the purpose of enabling them to be em-
ployed for the use or display of physical force in promot-
ing any political object, or in such manner as to arouse
reasonable apprehension that they are organised and
either trained or equipped for that purpose;

then any person who takes part in the control or management
of the association, or in so organising or training as afore-
said any members or adherents thereof, shall be guilty of an’

offence under this section.”

In Denmark, the Penal Code has a provision? punishing,
with imprisonment upto six years, “participation in, or subs-
tantial support to, any corps, group or association which in-
tends, by the use of force, to influence public affairs or to dis-
turb public order.” The same section punishes participation
in “unlawful military organisation” (not defined) with fine, sim-
ple detention or (in aggravating circumstances) imprisonment
upto two years.

The French Penal Code has, in the chapter entitled “Felo-
nies against the Internal Security of the State,” a provision?
punishing a person, who raises or causes to be raised an armed
force, enlists or causes enlistment of soldiers or supplies or pro-
vides them with arms and ammunition without legitimate autho-
tity.

L. Section 20), Public Order Act, 1936.
2, Section 114, Danish Penal Code,
3. Atticie 92, French Penal Code,


33

The Russian Penal Code has!, under the Chapter “Crimes
against the State,” a group of sections under the head “Espe-
cially dangerous crimes against the State.” One of these sections
punishes organisational activity directed to the preparation or
commission of especially dangerous crimes against the State or
to the creation of an organisation which has for its purpose
the commission of such crimes, or participation in an antic-soviet
organisation.

7.5. There should hardly be any question that such organisa-
tions ought to be prohibited and participation in them severely
punished. The question of defining in precise terms the kind
of organisations to be prohibited was carefully consideted by us.
Before a group can be regarded as punishable, two tests shou'd
in our opinion, be satisfied.. First, the group must be of such a
character that its members are trained or equipped to use force
for achieving its object. Secondly, the group must be organised
for a purpose prejudicial to the national security. That will
include, of course, the purpose of usurping the functions of the
armed forces, or of committing any acts of sabotage. But the
last two purposes: may be specifically mentioned.

The following section is recommended :--

“Whoever organises, trains, maintains or promotes any
group the members of which are trained or equipped to use
force for achieving its object and which is organised—

(a) for the purpose of usurping the functions of the
armed forces; or

(8) for the purpose of committing any acts of sako-
tage; or

(ले for any other purpose prejudicial to the national
security.

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
and whoever participates in, or belongs to, any such
group as aforesaid shall be punished with rigorous imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also
be liable to fine.”

7.6. The offences referred to above are concerned primarily
with internal security. Danger to external security can arise
from other acts, and these will now be dealt with.

The gravest act endangering external security is, of course,
what has been described in England and U.S.A. as being adherent
to the (country’s) enemies, giving them aid and comfort and in
the Canadian Code as “assisting the King’s enemies.” Such acts

Provision
recom
mended.

Maintain
ing rela-
tions with
foreign
States for
purpose
prejudicial
to national
security.

1. Section 72, read with sections 64-71, R.S.P.S.R. Penal Code.

7


34

will be covered by the new section which we have recommen-
ded in our Report on the Penal Code. and which is to be ia-
cluded in the proposed Consolidation Act. But there are lesser
offences which require attention. While assisting an enemy
js an act confined to time of war, there are acts committed in
peacetime which show a guilty association with a hostile country.
In some respects, these are different from the graver act of assis-
ting the enemy, because—

(i) the country assisted may not have commenced war
or hostilities,

(ii) the assistance is not direct, but is of a subtle character
not easily descernible.

But precisely because the assistance is indirect and the situa-

; tion has not yet attained the stage of war, there is greater reason
for punishing such sinister preparatory acts which pave the way
for treason in its highest form. We shall refer below to a few

of such acts,

For example, collaboration with hostile countries may be
referred to. It appears that certain groups are in league with
hostile foreign powers in some of the border, areas and indulge
in hostile acts, preparatory to insurrection. Owing to want of
evidence, it is difficult to bring any charge of waging wat or pre-
paration of waging war. But collaboration with a potential
enemy in a.secretive form and for a subversive purpose, is un-
questionably resorted to. For example, a group of Indian citi-
zens go over the border, obtain some arms from an neighbouring
hostile country, come back to India and then carry on subver-
sive activities. The prepatatory acts are built up slowly, and
before any convincing evidence could be obtained. The State,
therefore, loses ground while the insurgents are gaining ground.
‘After arrival in fndia, the insurgents do not go with arms openly
and usually scatter themselves. The essence of their crime is
foreign inspiration coupled with such preparatory acts showing
collaboration with a foreign power. Such acts should, it was
suggested, be dealt with by a specific provision.

Provisi 7.7, We find. that some of the foreign Codes have provisions
rovision : < विष i °

in foreign designed to pimish collaboration with the “enemy” and, in some
Codes. cases, collaboration with a foreign state in a manner detrimen-

tal to the State,
For example, the Norwegian Penal Code has this provision.?

“Any Norwegian cilizen or resident of Norway who

receives from a foreign power or patty or orgapisation acting
in its interest, for himself or for a party or organisation,

~ 4 Gand Report, section 123A.
2. Chapter 4, above.
3°Sectio 97a Norwegian Penal Cod


35

economic support to influence, public opinion about the
country’s form of Government or foreign policy or for party
Purposes, or is accessory thereto, shall be punished by jailing
or imprisonment upto two years.””

The German Penal Code, providés punishment for such ‘trea-
sonable relations’ in a sectidn! reading as follows: —

“1. Anybody who, with the intent of bringing about or
furthering a war, an armed undertaking, or coercive measures.
against the Federal Republic of Germany or one of her States,
enters into or maintains relations with a Government, a party,
an alliance or organisation in existence in a territory outside.
the territorial jurisdiction of this law. or with a person who
acts in the service of such a government, party. alliance or
organisati shall be punished by confinement in a peni-

tentiary. .

2. If the perpetrator acts with the intent of bringing
about or furthering other measures or efforts of a government,
party, alliance, or organisation in existence in a territory
outside the territorial jurisdiction of this law, which are desi
ned to impair the existence or the security of the Federal
Republic of Germany or to abrogate or invalidate the consti-
tutional principles designated in section 88, the punishment
shall be imprisonment. The attempt is punishable.”

The provision in tHe’ Yugoslav Penal Code for participating
in hostile activity against the country is simpler.?

“A Yugoslav citizen who with intent to overthrow the
State system and 50291 organisation. or because .of any hos-
tile activity against Yugoslavia establishes contacts with a
foreign state, foreign organisation or a particular foreign.
group of refugees, or who assists them in the performance
of hostile activities, shall be punished by strict imprisonment.”

7.8. It is obvious that as the law in India stands now, colla-
boration with, or receiving. assistance from, a foreign power with
which there is no war or active hostilities, is not an offence, ex-
cept where the collaboration takes the shape of transmission
of secret information falling under the Official Secrets Act. A
special provision, is therefore, required, to penalise such acts,
if committed for a purpose prejudicial to national security.

During our discussions, it was suggested that persons who
have contact with countries which commit or have committed
aggression against India and propagate’ their ideology should
be punished. The provision we recommend below: will cover
such activities to some extent. The essential mens rea, namely,
a purpose prejudicial to the national secutity, will, of course,
have to be proved. ' हु

Provision
recom-
mended:

1. Section 100d, German Penal Code.
2 Article 109, Yugoslav Penal Code.


Treasonable
* deception.

Provision
recom-
mended.

Sabotage.

Different

motives for
destruction
of property.

36
The new section may be as follows:—

“Whoever, for any purpose prejudicial: to the national
security, maintains relations with a foreign State or with an
institution or organisation outside India shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”

7.9. Threat to external security of a country may arise not
only from the use or likelihood of use of force, but aiso from acts
done fraudulently or clandestinely. It is possible to conceive
of fraudulent acts which mislead the public authorities, and there-
by prejudice the national security by disrupting its relationship
with a foreign country.

7.10, Violence, when constituting a threat to external secu-
rity, is amply taken care of by the present provisions of the Penal
‘ode; and clandestine acts, which usually consist in the collec-
tion or transmission of intelligence, are atso fully provided for
in the laws relating to espionage. But fraudulént acts of the
nature mentioned above are not specifically provided for, and
the lacuna should, we think, be filled.

7.1L. We propose a new section! on the subject, as follows:—

“Whoever, for a purpose prejudicial to the national
security, intentionally transmits to a public servant a false
report, the content of which is likely to disrupt relations bet-
ween India and a foreign state or an international institution,
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.”

7.12, Another subversive activity of which serious notice
has to be taken is sabotage. The offence consists not only in
wanton destruction of, or damage to, the property and under-
taking required for defence purposes, but it also includes organi-
sing and participating in unlawful strikes in defence plants, and
in the essential services which impair and impede the proper
functioning of such plants and services and thereby endanger
national security.

7.13. Malicious or wanton destruction of Property could be
committed from different motives, The object may be to impair
the defence effort of the nation, or to undermine its economic
prosperity, or to harm the owner of the property, or scme other
object. Provisions in different Penal Codes of foreign countries
emphasise one or more of these objects. Here we are primarily
concerned with those provisions which deal with jeopardy to
the security of the country, हु

1. Cf. (a) Section 391, Draft German Penal Code.

(0) Swedish Penal Code. Chapter 19, section 8.


37

In Canada, under the Heading ‘offences against public order’,
there is a section! punishing sabotage as a ‘prohibited act’.
The purpose must be one prejudicial to the safety, security or
defence of Canada or to the safety or security of the armed forces .
of any other country lawfully present in Canada. The act may
impair the efficiency of any vessel, vehicle, aircraft, machinery,
apparatus “or other thing”, or cause loss, damage etc. of Property.
The property need not be State property; this is emphasised by
the words “by whomsoever it may be owned”.

7.14. There is no separate offence of sabotage in England.
But in Chandler’s case?, it was pointed out that the Official
Secrets Act is widely framed so as to cover some acts of sabotage.
Lord Radcliffe observed (with reference to the Official Secrets
Act):—

“The saboteur just as much as the spy in the ordinary
sense is contemplated as an offender under the Act.”

7.15, The French Penal Code punishes? such acts by a provi-
sion appearing in the Chapter entitled “Felonies and misdemean-
ours against the security of the State”.

In the German Penal Code4, the offence of sabotage is included
under Chapter 2, entitled “Endangering the State”. The object
must be to impair the existence of the Republic, or of abrogating,
invalidating or undermining the constitutional principles etc.

7.16. In the Russian Code, sabotage is included under
“Chapter One—Crimes Against the State”, “Sub-Chapter I—
Especially dangerous Crimes Against the State”. The purpose
should be to weaken the Soviet State. The gist of the offence
is the destruction or damage by explosion, arson, or other means,
of enterprises, structures, routes and means of transportation,
means of communications or other state or social property.
Death is a permissible punishment.

7.17, There is also, in the same Code the offence of wrecking.
The gist of this offence is an act or omission directed towards
subversion of industry, transport, agriculture, monetary system,
trade or other branches of national economy or activity of state
agencies or social organisations, for the purpose of weakening
the Soviet State.

7.18. Mere destruction or material impairment of property
with such intent is not left unpunished even at present. A
group of sections in the Penal Code dealing with mischief and
its aggravated forms provides adequate punishment for such

Position in
England
regarding
sabotage.

Provision
in Russia
relating to
sabotage.

Crime of
“wreck~
ing” in
Russia.

Present

provisions
in India as
to destruc-

1. Section 52, Canadian Criminal Code.

2. Chandler v. D.P.P.,(1962)2 All England Law Reports, 142, 148 (HLL).
3. Section 76, French Penal Code.

4, Section 90 and 1906, German. Penal Code (1871).

5 Sections 68-69, R.S.F.S.R. Penal Code.


38

tion ofpro- destruction and impairment. But the emphasis in that group.

perty.

Provision
recom-
mended.

Espionage
(Official
Secrets
Act).

‘The new section may be as follows

of sections is on the proprietary aspect, as is evident from the
fact that the sections are placed in the Chapter on offences relating
to property: We consider that, for cases where such destruc-
tion and impairment take place for the purpose of prejudicing
national security, a specific provision is required; the offence
may be conveniently described as “sabotage”.

7.19. The physical act punishable would be an act which
impairs the efficiency or impedes the working of or causes damage

(a) any means of public transportation,
(6) any means of telecummunication,
(2) any place used for the production of any article

useful for the defence of {ndia or any machinery or apparalus
therein.

There should be an exemption clause dealing wilh stoppage
of work arising out of an industrial dispute.

The provision which we recommend on the subject is, in
form, less elaborate than that which was contained in the Defence:
of India Rules!.

“Saborage:—(1) Whoever, for any purpose preiudicial
to the national security, does any act which impairs the
efficiency ot impedes’ the working of, or causes
damage to,---

(a) any prohibited place or any machinery ता
apparatus therein, or
(8) any means of public transportation, or

(c) any means of  telecommunication, shall 0:
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years, and shail also be
liable to fine.

(2) A person shall not be guilty of an offence under this

section by reason only that he stops work as a result of au
industrial dispute as defined in clause (k) of section 2 of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; but nothing in this sub-
section shall affect his liability to be prosecuted for any offence
which he may have committed against the provisions of
that Act.”

7.20. A number of offences relating to espionage are
dealt with in the Official Secrets Act, Hence it is necessary to
consider in detail.the various provisions of that Act.

ule 36 Defence of India Rules, 1962.


हे 39

7,21. Section 2(1) says that any reference to a place belonging Section
to Government includes a place occupied by any department of फिर f
the Government, whether the place is or is not actually vested paar
in Government. The definition is unnecessary, and should be jonging tu

omitted. Govern-
ment to be

. omitted.

7.22. Section 2(2) is an inordinately long sentence mixing Section’
up several ideas. First, it explains the scope of expressions (2)—expre-
which refer to communicating or receiving, Next, it explains Terring दि
the scope of expressions which refer to obtaining or retaining. communi-
Lastly, it explains that expressions referring to the communica- cating, re-

tion of any sketch, plan, model, article or document include the “<iving.

transfer or transmission of the sketch, plan, model, article, note ob
or document. ing to be
omitted,

The whole definition appears to be unnecessary, and shouly
be omitted.

7.23, Section 2(3) defines “document” as including part of Section 2
a document. The definition is unnecessary because the defini- @)—“do-
tion of ‘document’ in the General Clauses ‘Act! is applicable to “ment”
the whole as well as a part of a document. Clause (3) of section 2
should therefore be omitted,

7.24. We considered the question whether the expression Definition
“enemy” should be defined. The expression occurs at several Of cemy-
places in the Official Secrets Act, There is an English decision?
which contains observations to the effect that the word ‘emeny’
in the Official Secrets Act includes a potential enemy.

7.25. In one of the foreign Penal Codes? the concept of — Provision

‘constructive enemy country’ has been introduced in these terms. as to con

“In any of the crimes of Article 93 through the preceding county

Acticle,4 a foreign country or a group of foreigners taking in Korea.
a hostile action against the Republic of Korea shall be deemed
an enemy country.”

The English decision’ is likely to be followed in India also
and it is not desirable to define the expression ‘enemy’. Tr
may be left undefined so as to facilitate an elastic construction
according to context.

1, Section 3618), General Clauses Act, 1897, defines a document as including “any
matter written, expressed or desctibed upoa any substance by means of letters, figures o
marks, or by more than one of those means which is intended 10 be used: or which may
be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.” .

2. R. v. Parrott, (1913) 8 Cr. App. Rep. 186 (C.C.A.).

3. Section 102, Korean Penal Code.

4. Article 93, Korean Penal Code punished a person who fights against the Republic
of Korea by joining an enemy country. Article 101 punishes, inter ala, व preparation om
conspiracy 10 commit _an offence under article 93.

5. Para. 7.24 above. |


40

Definition 7.26. There is, in section 4(2}(b) a definition of “foreign

of Moreign agent’, which needs no change but can be inchided in the general

beans. definition!

ferred

from — sec-

tion 4(2)

{b) of the

Secrets

Act,

Section 7.27. Section 2(4) which defines ‘model? needs no change?,
"model". . ses .

Selon 3) 7.28. Section 2(5) defines ‘munitions of war’. The importance

‘munitions of this definition is mainty for the purposes of the definition of

of war’. ‘prohibited place’3, and for one of the penal provisions#, No
change of substance is needed in this definition’.
Section 7.29. Section 2(6) defines the expression ‘office under Govern-

2(6)— De. ment’, as including any office or employment in or under any
finition of department of the Government. We think that the definition

under is unnecessary. The expression ‘office under Government’ is
Govern- well understood. The definition should be omitted,
fant tee The definition does not include employment under public

enterprises, and hence a person holding office in such enterprise
does not fall within that part of the penal provision in sectionS(1),
which® relates to information entrusted in confidence by
a person ‘holding office under Government’ or ‘information
obtained as a person who holds office under Government’. But
that part of section 5(1) which refers to prohibited places or
information likely to assist the enemy may be attracted. More-
over, where munitions of war are the subject matter of the infor-
mation, the specific provision relating to munitions of war in
section 5(3) would also come into play. Hence the scope of the
Act need not be expanded on this point.

Section. 7.30. Section 2(7) defines photograph 85 including an undeve-
20)— loped film or plate. It needs no change”.

photo-
graph”,
Section 7.31, Section 2(8) defines the expression ‘prohibited place’.
2@)— | ed This is the most important definition in the Act. Its importance
Pie is illustrated by several provisions, but it is sufficient to mention

section 3(1) which, iater alia, punishes, (under the head of “spying’),
any person who, for any purpose prejudicial to the safety or
interest of the State, approaches, inspects, passes over or is in
the vicinity of, or enters, any ‘prohibited place’.

“TL. The definition of ‘foreign agent’ is proposed to be included im the general definitions
applicable to the whole Act.

2. The definition of ‘mode!’ is proposed to be included in the general definitioas appli-
cable to whole Act.

3. Section 2(8\(d).

4. Section 5(3).

5. The definition of ‘munitions of wat’ is Proposed to be included in the general defini-
tions applicable to the whole Act.

6. Cf. para. 7.61, below.

7. ‘The definition of photograph’ is proposed to be included in the general definitions
applicable to the whole Act.


क्र

41

7,32, The definition in section 2(8) covers four classes-of
places. Clause (a) relates to certain works, which, broadly
speaking, comprise works of defence or establishments relating
to the armed forces, mines, military communications and the
like, and factories etc. used for manufacturing munitions of
war. The works, establishments, mines, communications and
factories etc, must belong to or be occupied by the Government,
under clause (a). Clause (b) covers any piace not belonging to
Government, where any rounitions of war or any sketches, models,
plans or documents relating thereto are being made, repaired,
gotten. or stored, under contract’ with, or with any person on
behalf of, Government or otherwise on behalf of Government.

Clause (c) covers any place belonging to or used for the purpose
of Government, which is for the time being declared by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a
prohibited place for the purposes of the Act, on the ground that
information with respect thereto, or damage thereto, would be
useful to an enemy!.

Clause (d) covers a railway, road etc. or other means of
communications by land or water or any place used for gas,
water or electricity or other public works etc., or a place where
munitions of war etc. are being made etc. otherwise than on
behalf of Government, which is for the time being declared by the
Centrai Government by notification to be a prohibited place,
on the ground that information with respect thereto, or the des-
truction or obstruction thereof, would be useful to an enemy!,

7,33, Clause. (0) lacks clarity. While enumerating the
various places, it does clearly not bring out the idea that the two
requirements, namely,—

(4) a declaration should be made that information relating
to, or obstruction ete. of the place, would help the enemy, and

(ii) a copy of the notice declaring the place to be a
Prohibited place should be affixed,

are intended to apply to every one of the places enumerated in
the clause.

7.34. Apart from this verbal defect, it would be seen from the
above analysis, that while places directly concerned with defence
installations are adequately covered, other places, information
tegacding which may be useful to the enemy, are not sufficiently
provided for. Clauses (०) and (0), which relate to places, infor-
mation cegarding which may be useful to an enemy, are hedged
in with minute limitations; under clause (c), the place must
belong to or be used by Government, and under clause (d), the

t
Definition
of “prohi-
bited
place”
analysed.

Defect in
clause (५)
of the de-
finition.

Recom-
mendation
for amen~
ding the
definition
of “prohi-
bited
place”.

Rotifi

J. The clause requires that a copy of the notification should be affied to the place so


‘Other
minor
changes
recom

mended.

42

emphasis is on the nature of the place (namely, means of com-
munications or places used for public works or Places where the
munitions of war are made etc.). It is felt that there may be
places which do not fall under clauses (०) and (d), and which,
nevertheless, are important from the point of security, insofar
as information with respect thereto may be useful to an ememy.
The Central Government should have power to notify avy place
as a prohibited place on that ground: We, therefore, propose
a new clause, giving such power to the Central Government.
This will render (c) and (d) unnecessary.

7.35. The changes which we recommend in clauses (a) and
(0) are of minor verbal nature. The definition is Proposed to
be split up into more intelligible categories. A short expression
‘armed force establishment’ is proposed to be used, in place of
the lengthy enumeration of such establishments; the reference to
‘mine’ is to be omitted as Unnecessary, as a ‘minefield’ is already
mentioned!,

The revised definition will be as follows:—
“(i) ‘prohibited place’ means,—
(i) any armed force establishment, station or camp;

५ G) any work of defence, wireless or signal station,
telegraph or telephone installation, arsenal, minefield,
ship or aircraft under the control of any of the armed
forces;

(iii) any factory, dockyard or other Place belonging
to, or occupied by or on behaif of, Government, and used
for the purpose of making, Tepairing or storing any
munitions of war or any sketch , models or documents
relating thereto, or for the purpose of getting any metals,
oil or minerals of use in time of war;

(iv) any place not belonging to Government where
any munitions of war or any sketches, models or docu-
ments relating thereto are being made, repaired or stored
under contract with, or otherwise on behalf of, Govern-
ment;

{») any other place which is for the time being de-
clared by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette to be a prohibited place for the purposes
of this Act on the ground that information with respect
thereto, or the destruction or obstruction thereof, or
interference therewith, would be useful to an enemy,
and at which a copy of such notification is displayed
for public information.”

1. The definition of ‘prohibited place’ is proposed lo be included in the general dehak

‘tions applicable to the whole Act.


43
7.36. Section 2(9) defines @ ‘sketch’ as including any “photo-
graph’ or other mode of representing any place or thing. We
propose to add ‘plan’ in this definition, so as to avoid repetition
of the word ‘plan’ in the various succeeding provisions!.

7.37, Section 2(t) defiries ‘Superintendent of Police’, The
only practical utility of the definitions in the power of the
Central Government {6 designate lower officers as Superintendents
of Police. The various powers under the Act may weil-be confined
to officers appointed as Superintendent of Police, Where it is
considered necessary to invest some power on subordinate police
officers, this has been expressly provided for?. As regards higher
officers, no practical difficulty is likely to be caused by the absence
of a definition. We, therefore, recommend omission of this
definition.

7.38. Section 3[1) deals with the most important offence
under the Act. Though described as ‘spying’, it comprises acts
of three types, as indicated in three clauses of the sub-section.
‘Clause (a) emphasises certain acts done in relation to a ‘prohi-
bited place’, described as approaching, inspecting, passing over,
being in the vicinity of, or entering ‘for any purpose prejudicial
to the safety or interests of the State’, Clause (0) is concerned
with making a sketch etc. useful to an enemy, with the same
purpose. Clause (c) deals with obtaining or communicating
etc. any secret official code or pass word or sketch etc. or infor-
mation useful to an enemy, relating to a matter the disclosure
of which is likely to affect the sovereignty and integrity of India,
the security of the State or friendly relations with foreign States,
again with the same purpose.

7.39. For a correct interpretation of the expression ‘safety or
interests of the State’} occurring in this provision, we may refer
to an important English case* on a similar provision in the English
Act. In that case the airfield, which was cecupied by the United
States Air Force Squadrons, had been declared a ‘prohibited
place” within section 3 of the Official Secrets Act, 1911 (English).
Thereafter, the appellants, members of ‘Committee of 100°,
which was carrying on a campaign for nuclear disarmament by
organising demonstrations of civil disobedience, planned to
urge demonstrators to sit or lie on the road outside the entrance
to the airfield so as to black access to it, and to encourage a
smaller number of persons to enter the field, and, by sitting in
front of aircraft, to prevent them from taking off. This second
object was not carried out, as the demonstrators were prevented
by the police from entering the fieid. On these facts, the appellants
were charged with conspiring to commit a breach of section ?
of the Official Secrets Act, 1911.

Section.
20)—
Definition
of
“sketch”,

Section
20)—
“Superin-
tendent of
police” to
be omilled.

Section
30—
Analysis,

Chandler's
case.

1, The definition of “sketch” is proposed fo be incliided in the general definitions appli-

cable to the whole Act.
2, See paras. 7.82 and 7.84 below (relating to sections 8 and 10).
3. Para, 7.38, above.

4, Chandlery. DP.P., (1962) 3 W.L.R, 694, 705 (H.L.) (Lord Reid) 709 (Lord Radcliffe).


Meaning
of “safety
of the
State’ ex-
plained by
Lord Reid.

Meaning
of ‘motive’
and ‘pur
pose” ex-
plained by
Lord

o
Radcliffe.

Question
‘of capital
punish-
ment con-
sidered,
with refe-
rence to
sections 3
and 5.

44

7,40. While constructing the expression “Safety or interests
of the State,” Lord Reid said

“Next comes the question of what is meant by the safety
or interests of the States, “State” is not an easy word.
It does not mean the Government or the Executive. .‘E’erat
c'est moi’ was a shrewd remark, but can hardly have been
intended. as definition even, ig: France of the time. And 1 do
not think that it meang,as counsel urged, the individuals who
inhabit these. islands. The statue cannot be referring to the
interests of all those individuals because they may differ and
the interests of the majority are not necessarily the same as
the interest of the State. Again we have seen only too clearly
in some other countries what can happen if you personify and
almost deify the State. Perhaps the country or the realm are.
as good synonyms as one can find and I would be prepared
to accept the organised community as coming as near to a
definition as one can get.

7.41, Lord Radcliffe dealt with motive and purpose in these
words, “All controversies about motives or intentions or purposes
are apt to become involved through confusion of the meaning of
the different terms and it is perhaps not difficult to show by analy-
sis that the ideas conveyed by these respective words merge into
each other without a clear line of differentiation. Nevertheless
a distinction between. motive and purpose, for instance, is familiar
enough in ordinary discussion and there are branches of law in
which the drawing of such a distinction is unavoidable......[
do not think that the ultimate aims of the appellants! in bring-
ing about this demonstration of obstruction constituted a pur-
pose at ail within the meaning of the Act. I think that those
aims constituted their motive, the reason why they wanted the
demonstration, but they did not qualify the purpose for which
they sought to enter the airfield.

We may assume that the Courts in India wilt adopt the same
view.

7.42, There is a suggestion that the maximum penalty for
offences under sections 3 and 5 should be enhanced to include the
death penalty, if the act relates to defence installations? The
suggestion raises important and controversial issues as to the
desirability of capital punishment,

The Law Commission in the Report on “Capital Punishment”,
observed.

473, The offence of espionage should, it has been suggested.
be made a tapital one. It may be noted, that where espionage

1. The ultimate aim was said to be the prevention of a nuclear war.
2. F.1()/71-L.G., S.No. 21 (Suggestion forwarded by one Ministry).
3, 34th Report (Capital Punishment), paragraphs 473-474,


45 1

consists of acts which constitute an abetment of the waging of
war against the State, the offence would be amply covered by
section 121 of the Indian Penal Code, which allows the penalty
of death, Other cases of collection and transmission of State
secrets mostly fall under the Official Secrets Act!, section 3(1)
of which provides the maximum punishment of imprisonment
up to 14 years. In.times of emergency, additional provisions
are made by special legislation?.

474. Thus, under section 5(4) of the Official Secrets
Act, 1923, as amended. by the Defence of India Act3, a person
guilty of an offence under section 5 of the Official Secrets Act
shall, if such offence is committed with intent to wage war
or to assist any country committing external aggression against
India, be punishable with death, or imprisonment for life or
imprisonment upto ten years etc’

We think that the provisions of the law on the subject as
they exist now are, in substance, adequate.”

7.43. We have also come to the same conclusion. We are
aware that in some countries spying (disclosure of national defence
secrets) is a capital offences. These are China (Taiwan), Daho-
may, Spain, some States of the U.S.A., France, Greece, Iran,
Luxembourg®, Poland, United Arab Republic, Central African
Republic, South Africa, El Salvador, Somalia (Northern), Cze-
choslavakia, Togo, Turkey, U.S.S.R. and Yugoslavia, But,
having regard [0 the recent positive and unmistakable trend
towards abolition of capital punishment ail over the world, we
do not think that death penalty for any offence under the Act
would be acceptable ai the present day, except during emergency
or war.

7.44, Thete is, however, another point relating to punishment
which requires atterition. Section 3(1) classifies the offences into
two parts, according to their gravity and provides for two types
of punishment. The offender (to quote the relevant portion)
“shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend, where the offence is committed in relation to any work of
defence, arsenal, naval, military onair force establishment or
station, mine, mine-field, factory, dockyard, camp, ship or aircraft
or otherwise in relation to the naval, military or air force affairs
of Government or in relation to any secret official code, to
fourteen years, and in other cases to three’ years.”

Death pea-
alty जि
spying not
Tecom-
mended.

Question
of punish-
ment un-
der section
3(1) consi-
dered,

1. The Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923).
2. See the Defence of India Act, 1962.
3. See section 6(1)(b). 1 Defence of India Act, 1962 (51 of 1962).

4, See also rule 34(6), rule 38(1}(a) and (b), rule 38(5), rule’ 39(1)(a) and rule 39(2),

Defence of India Rul
5. See U.N. Publication on Capital Punishment (1962), Table at the end.
6. Luxembourg is, however, de facto an abolitionist country.

34 M of Law/71—4


Imprison-
ment under
section

Fine to be
added,

Drafting
changes
Fecom-
mended in
section
31).

Section
3(@2), first
half, (Evi-

dence of
purpose,
prejudicial
to national
security) to
be extend-
ed.

46

7.45. This classification is unnecessary. Apart from the
involved nature of the language used, it may be difficult in prac-
tice to classify offences into those two parts. It would not be
easy to demarcate precisely the scope of the quoted words, especia-
19 the phrase “‘in relation to the naval, military or air force affairs
of Government” If a wide meaning is given to that phrase, it may
include almost ali offences under section 3(1) within the graver
part punishable with 14 years. We, therefore, recommend
that the distinction should be removed, and the maximum
should be 14 years’ rigorous imprisonment, leaving it to the
discretion of the trying court to impose a lesser sentence, accord-
ing to the facts and circumstances of each case.

7.46. We also propose the inclusion of fine as an additional
punishment, in section 3(1).

7.47. No other change of substance is necessary in sub-section
(1) of section 3, but we recommend a few drafting changes.

Some of these are consequential on the amendments proposed
in the definitions, e.g., removal of the word ‘plan’! from section
3(1), and change in the expressions indicating prejudice to sovere-
ignty and integrity of India or safety or interests of the State.?

The lengthy phrase “which is calculated to be, might be, or
is intended to be, useful to any enemy”, which occurs in section 3,
is proposed to be replaced by the shorter but equally comprehen-
sive phrase ‘‘which is intended or likely to be”.

Jn clause (c) of section 3(1), words referring to the various types
of documents or information are proposed to be shortened.
Tn particular, the expression ‘document or information’ is regard-
ed as sufficient to cover code words and pass words. It also
appears to be desirable to split up the clause into two portions,
@, obtaining etc. a document, or information, and (ii) publishing
its,

7.48. Section 3(2) contains a special rule of evidence which
relaxes the high standard of proof required for conviction on
a criminal charge.

The first part of this sub-section states that on a prosecution
for an offence punishable under section 3(1), it shall not be nece-
ssary to show that the accused person was guilty of any particular
act tending to show a purpose prejudicial 10 the safety or interests
of the State, and, notwithstanding that no such act is proved
against him, he may be convicted, if, from the circumstances of
the case or his conduct or his known character as proved, it
appears that his purpose was a purpose prejudicial to the safety
or interests of the State.

1. See proposed definition of “sketch”; paragraph 7.36, above.
2. See proposed definition of the expression “prejudicial to national security”,
3. Revised drafts of pénal provisions in sections 3 to 10 are given in para 7.86, below.

~


4

We consider that this part of section 3(2) should be extended
toa few other offences also. In all those offences, the essential
ingredient is the mental element, namely, the existence of a pur-
pose prejudicial to the national security. Such a purpose cannot be
ordinarily proved by direct evidence and has to be inferred from
the facts and circumstances of such case and the antecedents of
the accused. Hence the rule of evidence applicable for proof
of the offence of spying may, with equal justification, be applied
for those offences also.

Our recommendation will necessarily involve the omission
of sub-section (4) of section 6, because according to our sugges-
tion, the aforesaid special rule of evidence will be applicable?
to the whole of section 6. .

7.49, The second part of section 3(2) provides that if any
sketch, plan, model, article, note, document, or information
relating to or used in any prohibited place or relating to anything,
in such a place, or any secret official code or pass word is made,
obtained, collected, recorded published or communicated by
any person other than a person acting under lawful authority,
and from the circumstances of the case or his conduct or his
known character as proved it appears that his purpose was a
purpose prejudicial to safety or interests of the State, such sketch,
plan, model, article, note, document, information, code or pass
word shall be presumed to have been made, obtained, collected,
recorded, published, or communicated for a purpose prejudicial
to the safety or interests of the State.

“ 7.50. This provision corresponds to section 12) of the
(English) Official Secrets Act, 1911, as amended in 1920, The
latter, in its turn, appears to follow the language of a parallel
provision in the (English, Prevention of Crimes Act, 1870. That
Act, provides with reference to the offence of vagrancy3, that
“in proving the intent to commit a felony (now an arrestable
offence), it shall not be necessary to show that the person sus-
pected was guilty of any particular act or acts tending to show
his purpose or intent and he may be convicted if from the cir-
cumstances of the case, and from his known character as proved
to the justice of the peace or court before whom or which he is
brought, it appears to such justice or court that his intent was

Section
3Q), latter
alf-pre~
sumptions
in prosecu-
tions for

spying.

Compara-
ble English

provision,

1. (a) Para-military groups;
(®) Treasonable relations with foreign State ete. or institution ete.
(c) Treasonable deception;
@ Sabotage;
(० Spying;
(0) Divulging official secrets;
(g) Using false official uniform etc.

2, At present, section 6(4) applies the provisions of section 3(2) only whete the

offence rejates to specified matters.
3. Section 15, Prevention of Crimes Act, 1870.


General
tule as to
evidence of
bad = char-
acter modi-
fied.

Section 3(2)
second
part to be
‘com!

with sec-
tion 4
Section
40).

Section
42)

48

to commit an arrestable offence; and the provisions of the said
section, as amended by this section shall bein force in Scotland
and Ireland...... ”

7.51. It is well-established in England! as well as in India?,
that (subject to certain exceptions not relevant for the present
purpose), evidence of bad character of the accused cannot be
given. The provision in section 3(2) is in the nature of an excep-
tion to that rule. The exception has, apparently, been considered
necessary in view of the nature of the offence, and the difficulty
of securing direct evidence of purpose.

7.52. We recommend that the second part of section 32)
should be combined with section 4, as they both deal with rules
of evidence3,

7.53, Section 4(1) provides that in any proceedings against
a person for an offence under section 3, the fact that he has been
in communication with, or attempted to communicate with, a
foreign agent, whether within or without India, shall be relevant
for the purpose of proving that he has, for a purpose prejudicial to
the safety or interests of the State, obtained or attempted to obtain
information which is calculated to be or might be, cr is intended
to be, directly or indirectly, useful to an enemy.

This provision creates no presumption, but establishes
rule about “relevance” of one fact to another. The relevance is
for both the actus reus and the mens rea as will be clear if refer-
ence is made to section3. The act of obtaining information
useful to an enemy, for a purpose prejudicial to the safety or
the interests of the State, is, under section 3, punishable with im-
prisonment for not more than 14 years. Section 3, thus, requires
(i) an act, and (ii) a purpose. The act is obtaining of the informa-
tion. The purpose is one prejudicial to the interests or safety of
the State. Under section 4(1), communication with a foreign
agent is relevant, both to prove the act of obtaining information
which might be useful to an enemy, and to prove the purpose.

7.54, Section 4(2) contains a variety of provisions relevant for
decision of the question whether a person can be said to have
been in communication with a foreign agent within the meaning
of sub-section (1). Two of the provisions contain rebuttable
presumptions, and one provision is in the nature of a definition
applicable in construing one of the rebuttable presumptions.

Under clause (a) of the sub-section, a person “may be presumed
to have in communication with a foreign agent” if—

(i) he has, either within or without India, visited the

address of a foreign agent or consorted or associated with a

foreign agent, or

1. R. ९. Butter wasser, (1947) 2 &1 8.२, 413 (C.C.A.).
2. Section 54, Evidence Act.

3. Re-drafts of sections 3(2) and 4 are included in the procedural provisions at the «nd
of this Chapter. Paragraph 7.119, below,


49

(ii) either within or without India, the name or address
of, or any other information regarding, a foreign agent has
been found in his possession, or has been obtained by him
from any other person;

Under clause (b), the expression “foreign agent” includes
any person who employs or has been employed, or in respect
of whom it appears that there are reasonable grounds for
suspecting him of being or having been employed, by a foreign
power, either directly or indirectly, for the purpose of committ-
ing an act, either within or without India, prejudicial to the safety
ef interests of the State. It includes also a person who has or is
teasonably suspected of having either within or without India,
committed, or attemptd te commil, such an act in the interests
of a foreign power.

Under clause (c) any address, whether within or without
Jndia, in respect of which it appears that there are reasonable
grounds for suspecting it of being an address used for the receipt
of communications intended for a foreign agent, or any address
at which a foreign agent resides, or 10 which he resorts for the
purpose of giving or receiving communications, or at which he
carries on any business, “‘may be presumed” to be the address
of a foreign agent, and communications addressed to such an
address to be comonunicatious with a foreign agent,

7.55. The actus reus of obtaining useful information may,
in short, be evidenced by attempted communication with the per-
son reasonably suspected of being a foreign agent. Proof of the
mens rea is facilitated by allowing, in evidence 1, statements of the
accused’s past behaviour and character, under section 3(2).

7.56. These presumptions and rules of evidence may appear
to be very drastic. But they are very necessary for offences of
this type. We may, in this connection, refer to a view expressed
in the U.S.A. where such presumptions are not available. Ari
American writer has observed?—

“A further point in the program to improve our security
posture is that we should.review and tighten up our espionage
Jaws in certain respects. Since 1946, on several occasions, atte-
opts, all abortive, have been made by the executive branch of
government to amend the Espionage Act so that a prosecution
would not fail merely because of difficulties in establishing
“an intent ot reason to believe” that the information wrongly
divulged or passed to a foreign government was “to be used
to the injury of the United States or tothe advantage of a fore~
ign nation. Thisis hard to prove. Fortunately, the requirements
of proof of such intent has already been eliminated in cases
involving restricted data under the Atomic Energy Act and
with regard to disclosure of classified information in the field

proof of
mens res
facilitated.

Drastic
presuimp-
tions
necessary.

4. Paragraphs 7.49 and 7.50, above.
2, Allen Dulles, The Craft of Intelligence, (Harper), (1963), page 248,


Minor
changes in
section 4
recom-
mended.

Section
50).

Overlap-

ping in
part bet-
ween sec+
tion 3(1)
and section
S(t).

Wide
scope of
section 50)
and 5@).

All _conft-
dential
sommuni-
cations
covered by
section
50).

50

of ‘communications intelligence’. ‘The requirements still
holds, however, in cases where other types of secret and classi-
fied information are divulged”.

7.37. We do not recommend any change in this section,
except the transfer of the definition of “foreign agent” to the
definition clause’ and the merger of section 3(2) with this
section,

7.58, Section 5(1) punishes the wrongful communication of
the specified documents or information by a person in possession
or control of the document or information. These may be
conveniently described as “official secrets.”

7.59. The wrongful communication of an official secret is also
dealt with in section 3 (1) (c) and there may be some overlapping
between thai section afd section 5(1). But section 3(1Xc) is
restricted to communications intended to be useful to an enemy
or relating to matters likely to affect the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State or friendly relations with foreign
States (after the amendment made by Act 24 of 1967). Section
5(1) on the other hand is somewhat wider, and penalises not only
communication and use for a purpose Prejudicial to the safety
and interest of the State but also unauthorised retention, or failure
to take care of such official secret,

7.60. Section 5 (1) and section 5 (3) speak, respectively, of
“any person”, “any foreign power or in any other manner pre-
judicial to the safety of the State”, and “directly or indirectly",
to any foreign power or in any other manner prejudicial to the
safety or interest of the State”. These indicate sufficiently the
wide scope of the section.

7.61. The wide language of section 5(1) may lead to some
controversy. It penalises not only the communication of inform-
ation useful to the enemy or any information which is vital to
national security, but also includes the act of commu-
nicating in any ‘unauthorised manner any kind of secret infor-
mation which a Government servant has obtained by virtue of
his office. Thus, every noting in the Secretariat file to which
an officer of the Secretariat has access is intended to be kept
secret, But it is notorious that such information is generally
communicated not only to other Government servants but even
to some of the non-official public in-an unauthorised manner.
Every such information will not necessarily be useful to the
enemy or prejudicial to national security, A question arises
whether the wide scope of section 5(1) should be narrowed down
40 unauthorised communication only of that class of informa-
tion which is either useful to the enemy or which may prejudi-
cially affect the national security leaving unauthorised commu-
nication of other classes of secret information to be a mere

4, Paragraph 7.26, above.
2, Paragraph %52, above,


ही

31

breach of departmental rules of justifying disciplinary action,
It may, however, be urged that all secret information accessible
to a Government servant may have some connection with
national security because the maintenance of secrecy in Govern-
ment: functions is essentially for the security of the State. In
this view, it may be useful to retain the wide language of this
section, leaving it to the Government not to sanction prose-
cution where leakage of such information is of a comparatively
trivial nature not materially affecting the interests of the State!.

7.62. Incidentally, we may point out that a query was
raised whether the words in this sub-section are wide enough
to include retired or dismissed GoVernment officers also.
We think that they are. The Words “has held)” should, in the
context, be taken as including retired or dismissed Government
servants also.

7.63. The language of sub-section (1) of section 5 is cum-
bersome and lacks clarity. Hence, without any change in
substance, we recommend the adopt'on of the drafting device
separately defining ‘“‘official secret” as including the enumerat-
ed classes of documents and information.

7.64. The punishment for offences under sub-section (1)
of section 5 is, at present, mentioned separately in section 5(4).
We propose to include it in sub-section (1). Further, the present
punishment—imprisonment of either description for three years
or-fine or both—is, in our view, inadequate, for some cases.
We propose a maximum of seven years for important official
secrets, and three years in other cases. In the former case,
imprisonment will be mandatory, but fine can be added. In
the latter case, the existing punishment will continue. Under
the category of important official secrets we include secrets
intended or likely to be directly or indirectly useful to an enemy
or prejudicial to the natignal security.

7.65. Section 5(2) penalises voluntary receipt of official
secrets (fully described in that sub-section) if the offender at
the time of such receipt knew or had reasonable grounds to
believe that the secrets were communicated in contravention
of the Act. It is extremely difficult to prove this mental ele-
ment namely that he knew or had reasonable grounds to believe
that the secrets were communicated in contravention of the
provisions of the Act. The language of this sub-section is
somewhat similar to the language of section 411, 1.P.C. which
requires guilty knowledge on the part of a person retaining
stolen property. Just as there is a presumption of such guilty
knowledge arising out of recent possession [see illustration
(a) to section 114 of the Evidence Act] we consider that a simi-
Jar presumption should be made to the effect that where a per-
son is in possession of an official secret without lawful autho-

rity. there may be a rebuttable presumption that he received

Applica-
bility to
retired
Govern-
ment
servants,

Drafting

change 16-
commend-
ed in sec-
tion 5().

Provision
of section
3(4) as to
punish-

ment to be
amended.

Section
5(2)-- Re-
ceiving
official
secrets,

1. Shri Narasimham, however, has a reservation on this subject.


52

it knowing or having reason to believe that it was communi-
cated to him in contravention of the Act.

Section 7.66, Section 5(3) deals with certain acts regarding infor-

50) to be mation relating to munitions of war. Briefly,,a person who,

omitted, having in his possession or control any sketch etc. document
or information which relates to munitions of war!, communi-
cates it directly or indirectly to any foreign power or in any
other manner prejudicial to the security of the state, is punished
under the sub-section. We think that most cases of such com-
munication would fall either under section 3(1){c) or under
section 5 (1) (a), and, therefore, do not see any need for retain-
ing sub-section (3). We recommend that it should be omitted
as a redundant provision.

Section 7.67. Sub-section (4) of section 5 prescribes the punishment
54. for offences under the section. It has already been dealt with.?
Section 6, 7.68. Section 6 punishes a variety of acts when committed

andthe va- for the purpose of gaining admission to a prohibited place*

riety of or for any other purpose prejudicial to the safety of the State.

d. . . ith off . मु
vere This section deals with offences relating to three kinds of

articles, which can be coveniently labelled as official uniforms,
official passes or documents and official seals. The dominant
object of the section Is to punish frauds pertaining to any of
these three, when committed for the purpose mentioned above.
Many of the punishable acts would, no doubt, fall under the
offence of cheating or the offence of forgery (or allied offences)
under the Penal Code. What distinguishes the offences under
the Official Secrets Act from such crimes under the Penal Code,
is the purpose behind the offences, and it is this purpose which
renders appropriate their inclusion in a law primarily design-
ed to protect national security. It is this purpose, again,
which constitutes the common link between types of conduct
which are otherwise before hetereogeneous in character. -

This essential link may sometimes be overlooked due to the
Jength of sentences in this section and their lack of clarity.

Section 7.69. In the opening paragraph of section 6(1), the purpose
6), is described as one of gaining admission to a prohibited place,
opening (or of assisting another person to do so), pr “any other pur-
paragraph pose prejudicial to the safety of the State”, The word ‘other’
ther? to iS Rot correctly used in this context. it implies that the pur-
beomitied. pose mentioned earlier in the paragraph, namely, the “purpose
of gaining admission or of assisting any other person to gain
admission to a prohibited place”, is necessarily one prejudicial
to the safety of the State. But that view would conflict with

1. “Munltions of war” is defined in section 25).

2. See discussion relating to punishment under section 5(4), Paragraph 7.64, above.

_3. Section 6(2), however, does not include the purpose of gaining admission to a pro-
hibited place.



. 53 ..

the opening line of section 3(1}. Section 3(1) (so far as is rele-
yant) punishes a person, who, “for any purpose prejudicial to
the safety or interests of the State”, approaches etc. a pro-
hibited place. If gaining admission to a prohibited place
necessarily and in all cases indicative of a purpose prejudicial
to safety of the State, then there was no need to mention that
purpose in the opening paragraph of section 3(1).

Hence the word ‘other’ is misleading in the opening para-
graph of section 6(1), and should be omitted.

7.70, We further recommend the shortening of clause (a)
in section 6(1) by substituting the expression “armed force”
in place of the words referring to naval, military and air
force.

7.71, Clause (b) of section 6(1) punishes a person who makes
any false statement, for the above purpose, orally or “in writing
in any declaration or application” or in any document signed
by the offender. The quoted words are, in our view, unneces-
sary, as the word ‘document’ would cover writing in a decla-
ration or in an application. We, therefore, proposé to omit
them.

7.72, Clause {c) of section 6 (1) punishes a person who
forges, alters or tampers with, any passport or naval, military
etc. pass, permit, certificate etc. or other document of a simi-
Jar character, as well as a person who knowingly uses or has
in possession any forged etc. passport. The Word “know-
ingly”, which occurs in the latter part, does not occur in section
1 (1) (०) of the English Act of 1920. The word was inserted in
the Indian Act as a result of the amendment suggested by Shri
K.S.L. Agnihotrit, which was accepted by Government.2

No change of substance is needed in clause (c), But we
propose to add a definition of “official document” separately,
and this enables the clause to be shortened.

7.73, Clause (d) of section 6 (1) punishes a person who,
for the specified purpose—{i) personates a person holding an
office under Government, or (ii) falsely represents oneself to
be or not to be a person to whom an official document or secret
official code etc. has or has not been communicated, or (iii)
with intent to obtain an official document etc., knowingly
makes a false statement. It needs no change of substance.

7.74. We recommend a slight recasting of this clause for
securing grammatical accuracy, and also suggest that the latter
part of this clause relating to making a false statement could
be made into a Separate clause. ‘

Section
COMES
be shorten-
ed.

Section
6C1)(b}—
verbal

changes re-
commend-
ed,

Section
S(D()— to
be shorten-
edafterad-
dition of
definition
of “official
document”,

Drafting
changes
tecom-
mended,

1, Legislative Assembly Debates, Vol. HII, No. 44, dated February 24, 1923,
2. Also see Council of States Debates, dated 8th March, 1923, Vol. IIT, No. 44,


Section
66)(७ to
‘be shorten-
ed after ad-
ding defini-
tion of
‘official
seal’.

Section
6(1)(6)--
Portion re-
lating to
counter-
feit die to
be omitted.

Section
6(2){a).

Section
620०.

Section
60).
Section
664).

Section 7.

Section 8.

34

“7.75. Clause (०) of section 6(1) punishes the use or possession.
of certain dies, seals and stamps without the authority of Gov-
ernment or the authority concerned. Briefly, the dies, seals
or stamps with which the clause is concerned are those belong-
ing to or made by Government etc. The clause needs no change
of substance. But we propose to define “official seal” sepa-
rately, thereby enabling a shortening of the clause.. Also,
we propose to transfer the matter contained in section 6(2)
(c) to this clause, as the subject-matter of both is the same.

7.16. The last portion of section 6(1) (७) punishes a person
who knowingly uses or has in his possession or under _ his
control “any such conterfeited die” etc., ie.. any counterfeit
official seal. This appears to be unnecessary, since section
6(2)(c)! will cover it, We therefore propose to omit this por~
tion.

7.77. In clauses (a) and (b) of section 6(2) minor jverbal
changes alone are suggested.

7.78. Clause (०) of section 6(2) deals with the offence of
manufacturing without lawful authority or excuse (and other
acts in respect of), “any such die, seal or stamp as aforesaid”
ie., as is Teferred in_ section 6(1)(@). We have already recom~-
mended? transfer of the substance of this clause to section 6(1)

(©).
7.79. Section 6(3) needs no change of substance.

7.80. As already recommended, sub-section (4) of section 6,
need not be separately rétained, in view of the proposed exten-
sion of the scope of section 3(2), first half.

6.81. Section 7 punishes interference with officers of the
police or members of the armed forces of the Union. But
the interference must be “in the vicinity of any prohibited
place”,—a very important ingredient not brought out in the
marginal note. The words “of the Union” in subsection
(1) should be omitted, in view of the proposed definition of
“armed forces*”.

7,82. Section 8 imposes an obligation to give information
about certain matters, on a demand being made by (i) A Superin-
tendent of Police or other police officer not below the rank of
Inspector, empowered by an Inspector-General of Palice etc.,
or (ii) any member of the armed forces engaged in guard, patrol,
sentry or similar duties. This corresponds to section 6 of the
English Act of 1920, as it stood before 1939.

1, Paragraph 7.78, below.

2. See discussion relating to section 6(1)(€), paragraph 7.75, above.
3. Paragraph 7.48, above.

4, Seo the proposed definition of ‘‘armed forces”.


55

We propose to substitute “Sub-Inspector” for “Inspector”,
as it appears that the present restriction cause some practical
difficulty. We also propse to. put the portion relating to armed
forces first, as that is_of greater practical importance in the con-
text of this section.

7.83. Section 9 punishes any person who attempts to com-
mit or abets the commission ए था offence under the Act. Such
person is punishable with the same punishment and is liable
10 be proceeded against as if he had committed such offence.
This section corresponds to section 7 of the English Act of
1920.

We are of the view that section 9 can be safely omitted.
Abetment of an offence under the new law can be taken care
of by the general provision in the Penal Code. So far as attempts
are concerned, many of the acts punishable under the penal
sections, by their very terms, cover them.

7.84, Section 10 prescribes the penalty for harbouring spies.
Section 7 of the English Act of 1911, on which our section 10 is
based, is wider in one important respect, namely it covers the
harbouring of a person about to commit or who has commit-
ted any offence under the Act. The Indian section is limited
to the harbouring of a person who has committed one of the
moré serious offences under the Act.

Farther, the Indian section creates two separate offences.
The ambiguity caused by the use of the words ‘omits or re-
fuses’ in section 7 of the English Act, has been avoided, and it
has been provided that the information shall be given on de-
mand to the police officers who may demand it under section
8.

The first is a departure of substance. The second is a matter
of drafting, and represents a change made by the Select Com-
mittee on the Indian Official Secrets Bill, 19221,

It should, finally, be noted that section 10, in some respects,
goes beyond section 212, Indian Penal Code, which is the gene-
ral provision punishing the harbouring of offenders.

7.85. No change of substance is needed in this section,
But we propose to substitute? ‘Sub-Inspector’ for ‘Inspector’ |

in sub-section (2) which relates to the duty to give, on demand,
[certain information ,to the specified officer.

Section 9
to be omit-
ted.

Section 10,

Minor
changes re-
commend~
ed.

1, Report of the Select ‘Committee, 20-1-1923, portions relating to clause 10, Official
Bill, on

2, Cf. amendment proposed in section 8(1), Paragraph 7,82, above.


Redrafts of
Penal pro-
visions in
sections 3
40 10, Off-
cial Secrets
Act.

Divulging
official
secrets,

56

7.86. The penal sections to be taken from the Official Secrets
Act (as we propose to redraft them) will be as follows ;?

“33, If any person, for any purpose prejudicial to the
national security,— S

(a) enters, inspects, passes over, approaches, or
is in the vivinity of, a prohibited place; or

(b) makes any model, sketch or note which is
intended or likely to be, directly or indirectly, useful
to an enemy; or

(c) obtains, collects or records any such model,
sketch, or note as aforesaid, or any article, documents
or information which is intended or likely to be, directly
or indirectly, useful to an enemy, or relates to a matter
the disclosure of which is likely to be prejudicial to
the national security; or

(d) punishes or communicates to any other person
any such things or information as aforesaid,

he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also
be liable to fine.

34. (1) If any person, having in his possession any
official secret,—

(a) uses it for the benefit of any foreign State or
in any manner prejudicial to the national security;
or

(b) wilfully communicates it to any person other
than a person to whom he is authorised to communi-
cate it, or a person to whom it is, in the interests of
State, his duty to communicate, or a Court of Justice; or

(c) retains it when he has no right to do so, or
when it is contrary to his duty to do so, or wilfully fails
io comply with any direction issued by lawful authority
with regard to its return or disposal; or /

(d) fails to take reasonable care of, or so conducts
himself as to endanger the safety of, the official secret,

he shall--
6) if the official secret is one specified in clause
(0) or clause (c) of section 33, be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii) in- other cases, be punishable with imprison-
ment for three years, or with fine, or with both.

1, The rules of evidence and presumptions in section 3(2) and section 4, Official Secrets
Act, wil) appear at the end of the Chapter.


37

(2) If any person receives any official secret knowing
or having reason to believe that it is communicated to him
in contravention of sub-section (1) of this section or section
33, he shall—

(i) If the official secret is one specified in clause

(0) or clause (0) of section 33, be punishable with

Tigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend

to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;

i) in other cases, be punishable with imprison-
ment for three years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2) a person who
is in possession of an official secret without lawful authority
may be presumed, until the contrary is proved to have
received it knowing qr having reason to believe that it is
communicatd to him in contravention of sub-section (1)
of this section or section 33, as the case may be.

(4) In this section, “official secret” means any thing or
information—
(a) which is specified in clause (b) or clause (c)
of section 33; or

(b) which has been entrusted in confidence to the
offender by any person holding office under the Govern-
ment; or

(©) which the offender has obtained or to which
he has had access owing to his position as a person
who holds or has'held office under Government, or as
a person who holds or has held a contract made on
behalf of Government, or as a person who is or has
been employed under a person who holds or has held
such an office or contract.

35. (1) If any petson, for the purpose of gaining admis-
sion, or of assisting any other person to gain admission, ito a
prohibited place or for any purpose prejudicial to the national
security,—

(a) uses or wears, without lawful authority, any
armed force, police, or other official uniform, or any
uniform so nearly resembling the same as to be cal-
culated to deceive, or falsely represents himself to be
a person who is or has been entitled to use or wear any
such uniform; or

(b) orally or in any document signed by him or
on his behalf, knowingly makes, or connives at the making
of, any false statement or any omission; or

(c) forges, alters, or tampers with any official docu-
ment, or knowingly uses or has in his possession any
such forged, altered, or irregular official document;
or

a

Using false
official uni-
forms, do-
cuments
and seals
for pur-
pose छाए-
judicial to
national
security.


58

(d) personates, or falsely represents himself to be,
a person holding office under Government, or falsely
represents himself to be or not to be a person to whom
an official document has been duly issued or communi-
cated; or

(०) with intent to obtain an official document
whether for himself or any other person, knowingly
makes any false statement; or

(f) without lawful authority, uses, has in his po-
session or under his control, manufactures or sells any
official seal, or any die, seal or stamp so nearly resembling
an official seal as to be calculated to deceive, or counter-
feits any official seal,

he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

(2) If any, person, for any purpose prejudicial to the
national security,—

(a) retains any official document, whether or not
completed or issued for use, when he has no right to retain
it, or when it is contrary to his duty to retain it, or wil-
fully fails to comply with any directions issued by, or
under authority of, Government with regard to its return
or disposal thereof; or

(9) allows another person to have possession of,
or communicates to another person, any official docu-
Ment issued for his use alone; or

' (०) without lawful authority or excuse, has in his
possession any official document issued for the use of
some person other than himself; or

(d) on obtaining possession of any official document,
by finding or otherwise, wilfully fails to restore it to the
person or authority by whom or for whose use it was
-issued, or to a police officer;

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) In this section —

i (a) “official document” means any armed force,
police or official pass, permit, certificate, licence or other
document of a similar character, and includes any secret
official codé or pass-word;

(0) “official seal” means any die, seal, stamp of or
belonging to, or used, made or provided by any depart-
ment of Government, or by any diplomatic or armed
force authority appointed by, or acting under the autho-
tity of, Government,


59

36, If any person in the vicinity of any prohibited place
obstructs, knowingly misleads or otherwise interferes with or
impedes, any police officer or any officer or member of the
armed forces engaged on guard, sentry, patrol, or other similar
duty in relation to the prohibited place, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.

37. If any person fails—

(a) to give on demand to any member of the armed
forces engaged on guard, sentry, patrol or other similar
duty, or to any superintendent of Police, or to any other
police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector
empowered by an Inspector-General or Commissioner
of Police in this behalf, any information in his power
relating to an offence or suspected offence under section
33 or section 34, or हि

(0) Ifso required, and upon tender of his reasonable
expenses, to attend at such reasonable time and place
as may be specified for the purpose of furnishing such
information,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

38. (1) If any person knowingly harbours any person
whom he knows or has reasonable grounds for supposing to
be a person who is about to commit or who has committed an
offence under section 32 or section 33, or knowingly permits
to meet or assemble in any premises in his occupation or under
his control any such persons, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.

(2) If any person who has harboured any such person as
aforesaid, or who has permitted to meet or assemble in any
premises in his occupation or under his control any such
persons as aforesaid, fails to give on demand to a Superinten-
dent of Police or to a police officer not below the rank of
Sub-Inspector empowered by an Inspector-General or Commi-
ssioner of Police in this behalf, any information in his power
relating to any such person or persons, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.”

7.87. The procedural provisions in the Official Secrets Act
may not be considered.

7.88 Under section 11 (1), if a Presidency Magistrate, Magis-
trate of the first class or sub-divisional Magistrate is satisfied,
by information on oath, that there is reasonable ground for
suspecting that an offence under the Act “has been or is about

Interfering
with the
Police or
armed for-
ces on duty

at a profi
bited place.

Penalty for
harbouring
saboteurs
of spies,

Procedural
provisions
in the
Official
Secrets
Act.
Section 11
(1) -Search
warrants
Magistrates


Section 11
(2) and 11
(3). -Search
by the po-
Tice.

Exceptional
powers
needed.

Applicabi-
lity of
Code of
Criminal
Procedure.

i
Position
considered,

60

to be committed”, then he may grant a search warrant authoris-
ing the specified officer to enter, “at any time,” “any premises or
place named in the warrant”, (if necessary, by force) and to search
the premises or place and “every person found therein”, The
police officer can, further be authorised to seize any sketch, plan,
model, article, note or document or anything of a like nature,
or anything which is evidence of an offence under this Act having
been or being about to be committed and with regard to which
he has reasonable ground for suspecting that an offence under this
Act has been or is about to be committed.

7.89. Under section 11(2), where it appears to a police officer,
not below the rank of Superintendent, that the case is one of great
emergency, and that in the interests of the State immediate action
is necessary, he may, by written order under his hand, give to
any police officer the like authority as may be given by warrant
of a Magistrate, as aforesaid. But sub-section (3) provides that
he must report such action to the Chief Presidency Magistrate
(in presidency town) or to the District or Sub-divisional Magis-
trate {outside a Presidency town).

7.90. It is obvious that these powers are of an exceptional
character, in so far as they cover even situations where an offence

is about to be committed, and can be exercised at any time and in .

respect of any place. At the same time, they are needed in the
interest of the security of the State. They are exercisable only
by judicial or police officers of a high rank, and this is a sufficient
safeguard against abuse.

7.9]. There is, however, a matter of considerable interest
which arises by reason of the fact that the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1898, has also a sct of provisions which authorise Magis-
trates to issue search warrants!, and also empower an officer in
charge of a police station? to conduct or order searches for the
purpose of an investigation.

7.92, We therefore considered it proper to go into two ques-
tions, namely,—

(a) how far section 11 of the Act overlaps the power of
search under section 96 and section 165, Cr. P.C. and similar
provisions; and

(6) whether the detailed provisions regulating the exercise
of the’ power of search, as laid'down in the Cr. P.C. (८.६.
section 103, Cr. P.C. which requires two witnesses) are to be
complied with when conducting a search under section 11

1. Clause 93, Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970 (Existing section 96).
2. Clause 167, Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970 (Existing section 1965).


61

7.93. As regards question (a)!, it may be pointed out that
the Magistrates’ power under the Code is limited to cases where
there isa proceeding pending or imminent?. Section 11 (1),
Official Secret Act, on the other hand, contains no such restric-
tion.) Where an offence has been committed, section 11(1) applies
even if cognizance has not yet been taken and is not about to be
taken, Further, as regards cases where an offence is likely to be
committed, there is no overlapping between the Code and section
il, Official Secrets Act, because the Code does not apply.*

7.94, Hence. netwithstanding the partial overlapping that
exists between the Code and section 11, we think that it is pre-
ferable to retain section If. The section should not, of course,
be taken as superseding the Magistrates’ power under the Code,—
though the question is mostly academic having regard to the wide
scope of section 11.

7.95. As regards question (9)5, our view is that the procedure
in the Criminal Procedure Code is not attracted. We recommend
that those provisions should, as far as may be, extend to searches
under this section.

7.96. We think that the provisions of section (1 can be use-
fully extended to sabotage 1.6. the new offence’ proposed to be
added by us on the subject, since need for issuing search warrant
can arise in respect of that offence also.

Change in the nomenclature of Magistrates consequential on
separation, involve verbal changes in sections 11(1) and 11(3),
and we propose to modify these sub-sections suitably, for that
purpose also.

7.97. Section 12 deals with the tender of pardon to a person
whose evidence is essential for the successful prosecution for an
offence under the Act. The position in this respect may be left
to be governed by the general provisions in the Criminal Procedu-
re Code.?

As the punishment in most cases, under the Official Secrets
Act, as now proposed to be amended, will be imprisonment for
seven years, or more, the need for a special provision disappears.
Section 12 may, therefore, be omitted.

Magistrat-
es’ power
of issuing
search war-
rants com-
pared.

Section 11
to be re-
tained.

Provisions
of the Cr.
P.

Section 11
to be ex-

tended [0
sabotage.

Section 12--
“tender of
pardon” to
be omitted,

1. Para. 7.92, above.

2. That is the result of existing section 96, Cr. P.C. and the judicial constzuction of

that section.

3. See para. 7.88, above.

4, 566 para, 7.88, above.

5. Para, 7,92, above.

6, Para, 7,12, above.

?, Sections 337 to 332.4 Ce.P.C .
34M of Law/?1—5


1967—Cog-
nizable
offence.

Suggestion
relating to
section 497
(3५७), CrP.
C, consider-
ed.

62

7.98. Before 1967, section 12 dealt with other topics. One of
them was the offences that were to be cognizable. Under the
section as it then stood, only offences punishable with imprison-
ment upto fourteen years, and offences under section 6(1)(a)
of the Act, were cognizable. Section 12, did not in this respect,
go as far as the Canadian section,! which covers even a
person about to commit an offence, and also authorises his arrest
without warrant and detention by any constable or police officer.
The English Act? has also a similarly wide provision.

After the amendment of 1967, all offences under the Act have
become cognizable, because under the Criminal Procedusc
Code? if the punishment provided is imprisonment or three
years or more, offences under special laws are cognizable.

7.99 There was also, before 1967, 2 provision in section 12
regarding the bailability of offences. The provision was somewhat
over-liberal, having regard to the nature of the offence. The sec-
tion after its amendment in 1967, does not deal with bail at all.
The matter wili, therefore, be governedS by the Criminal Pro-
cedure Code, under which offences under special laws, which are
punishable with imprisonment for three years or more, are non-
bailable.

This does not end the matter, because, even where the offence
is technically non-bailable, bail is not to be refused as a matter of
course. In the case of person suspected of an offence connected
with the disclosure of secrets of national importance, there is a
probability that his ties with India are very thin, and the probability
of his absconding is greater than in the case of other offences.
This consideration, no doubt, will be taken into account by
courts in considering applications for bail. A legislative provisi-
on, by way of restriction on the power of the Courts may not be
desirable.

3,100, According to sub-section (3A) of section 497, Criminal
Procedure Code® -if, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial
of the person accused of any non-bailabie offence is not concluded
within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking
evidence in the case, then such person shall, if he is in custcdy
during the whole of the said period, be released on bail unless,
for reasons to be recorded, the Magistrate otherwise directs.
Now, there is a suggestion? that this tenefit should be denied to
the accused tried for offences under the Official Secrets Act.
Money, it is stated, is no consideration to foreign agents, and they
can afford to jump bail.

~ Section 10, Canadian Official Secrets Act, 1939.

|. Official Secrets Act, 1911.
. Criminal Procedure Code Bill, 1970, First Schedule.

|, Criminal Procedure Code Bill, 1970, First Schedule.
. Cf 41st Report, Vol. 2, 9892 168, Clause 446(6).
. F.L(I)/7I-L.C. 5. No. 21 (Suggestion forwarded by one Ministry).

1
2.
3.
4. For the law before 1967, see Stare v. Jagjit Singh, A.J.R. 1962 S.C. 253.
5.
6,
7.


63

7.101. Tt does not, however, appear to be proper to insert
a rigid provision and 10 take away the benefit of the above provi-
sion in all cases. The Magistrate has a discretion not to release
the accused on bail, even if the period of sixty days has elapsed.
That discretion should be adequate for practical purposes,

7.102. Tn one suggestion forwarded to us!, the position with
reference to the three Acts relating to armed forces has been
referred to. Tt has been stated, that section 38 of the Navy Act
provides that a person not subject to Naval law who is ot who
acts as a spy for the enemy is punishable under the Act with
‘death.’ (This provision could be applied to persons not other-
wise subject to the Navy Act, only if they commit the offence of
epying in respect of naval secrets or intelligence). It is stated, that
if a similar offence is committed in regard to Army or Air Force
secrets or intelligence, then civilian personnel could be tried only
under the Official Secrets Act?

7,103. The suggestion is that to remove the existing disability
in the Army and Air Force Acts in respect of bringing to trial
Persons not governed by those Acts for offences of espionage,
a provision similar to that in existing section 38, Navy Act
should be introduced in the Army and Air Force Act also, to
bring civilians under the three Service Acts.

7.104. We consider that it would hardly be appropriate to
bring civilians within the laws relating to armed forces. The
provision in the Navy Act, whatever be its precise scope, does not
appear to furnish a satisfactory precedent. We cannot accept
the suggestion.

7.105, Section 13(1) deals with the court competent to try
offences under the Act. District Magistrates and presidency
Magistrate can try any offence under the Act, while other Magis-
trates can do so only if they are of the first class and are specially
empowered by the appropriate Government. Section 1302)
gives a right 10 the accused to make a claim to be tried by the
Court of Session for an offence under the Act. We propose to
omit both the sub-sections, The general provision in the Sche-
dule to the Criminal Procedure Code as to the competence of
courts will govern the matter. As the punishment for a few
offences under the Act is proposed to be increased, most offences
will now go to the higher categories of criminal courts.

7.106. Section 13(3) contains certain provisions requiring
complaint of the appropriate Government or some officer em-
powered by the appropriate Government, as a condition prece-
dent to a court’s taking cognizance of an offence under the Act,
and makes certain other provisions as to the place of trial.

Suggestion
to being ci-
vilians with-
in the
enactments
relating to
armed forc-
es.

Suggestion
considered,

No change
recommen-
ded.

Sections 13
(1) and 13
(7) to be
omitted,

Section 13
(3) to be
amended.

1. F.L()71-1.C., 5. No, 2 (Suggestion forwarded by one Ministry).

2. The suggestion also discusses the position regarding members of ihe array and the

ait force, But that aspect is not of importance for the present purpose.


64

We propose to substitute sanction of the appropriate Govern-
ment in place of complaint, as the Present provision creates
difficulties in the Court. If cognizance is taken only on a
complaint then the more elaborate procedure provided in the Code
of Criminal Procedure for cases instituted on complaint is to be
followed, which is dilatory. ,
Calcutta 7.107. A calcutta case!, though not directly involving this
“Case. aspect, may be referred to. It was held in that case that the

Official Secrets Act provides for a special procedure of complaint,
and since a complaint by a person authorised under the Act was
required, cognizance was taken under section 190(1)(a) and not
under section 190(1)(b) of the Criminal Procedure Code. The
Procedure for trial would, therefore, be regulated by section 252
of that Code, which applies to cases instituted on complaint.

Position 7.108. The change which we recommended will alter this
altered. Position, as cognizance will now be taken in the usual manner?,
Section 13 7.109. Section 13(4) deals with the venue for trial of offences
4), under the Act. - It needs no change of substance3.

Section 14. 7A. Section 14 provides for exclusion of the public from

proceedings of the Court in prosecutions under-the Act. A
Judicial decision on the section may be referred to.

Ina Calcutta case4, an order had already been passed under
section t4 excluding the public from the Court room. The
question fell to be considered whether the granting of copies of
documents, under section 173, Cr. B.C. would be in
conflict with the order under section 4. The Magistrate passed
a general and vague order granting copies as a matter of course,
in respect of documents as found in his order, But the High Court
held that such general order of granting or refusing would not be
Proper in the instant case. The generat rule will be that the
opposite parties are entitled to such copies, but in respect of
each individual copy paid for, the Magistrate has to consider and
apply his mind to come to a finding whether the grant of the copy
would affect his own order under section 14. If there is no
such conflict, then the copies may be Branted; but if there is
conflict, then the copies cannot be and should not be granted,

Section 14 7.111, Strictly speaking, the section is not required, as there is
to be re- a general provision in the Criminal Procedure Code5 on the sub-
tained and ject. However, as the section is harmiess, it may be retained.
extended हि .

1. Romendra Singh v. Mihit Chaudhary & Others, AR. 1969 Cal. 535, 338, pata, 19.

2. It is proposed to have a general provision requiring sanction of the Central Govern-
ment or the State Government for every offence under the law.

3. It is proposed to adopt the Principle in section 13(4), Official Secrets Act, for all
offences under the new law.

4. Superintendent & Rembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal v. Satyen thowmik
and others, A.LR. 1960 ८४४४

rat Section 352, Criminal Procedure Code, 1898; section 335, Criminal Procedure C ode

Bill, 1970,



65

If it is to be retained,.we think that it can be usefully extended
to some of the offences!’ which we propose to include in the law,
as an emphasis on the power to hold proceedings in camera can
be useful for those offences also.

7.112. Section 15 deals with the offences by Companies,
and needs no change. After its amendment in 1967, the section
has been brought in line with similar provisions in recent Acts. 2

7.113. So far, we have dealt with espionage. The group
with which we are concerned should also include sedition (already
contained in the Penal Code),

7.114. We do not consider it necessary to provide specially
for insult to the Constitution, the National Flag, or the National
Anthem, because the Lok Sabha has just now passed a Bill which
fully deals with the subject.

7.115. It was stated during our discussions with officers of
one Ministry that anti-national slogans, and slogans extolling
a country which has committed aggression against India, were
frequently written or shouted. Such acts could not be punished
at present, and the suggestion made was that this defect in the law
should be removed. It appears to us, however, that this is a very
minor act of disloyalty, and could even be regarded as a passing
phase. We do not consider it necessary to include such offences
in a permanent law on national security,

7.116. We considered the question if publicly defaming or
maliciously vilifying India or one of the State should be punished.
Reference was made in this connection to the German’ Penal4-5
Code. We think, however, that if the defamation of this
type is really harmful, it would be possible to take action under
other provisions. For example, if a class of persons is defamed,
section 153A of the Penal Code could be invoked. If the speech
or written causes disaffection likely to lead to a disturbance of
public order, the act would amount to sedition.

In the circumstances, no further legislative provision is called
or.

Section 15,

Sedition to
be included,

Insult to
the Cons-
titution,
National
Flag etc.

Writing
anti-nation-
al slogans.

Defama-
tion of the
State.

1. (a) Disruptive activity,

(8) Para-military groups,

(c) Treasonable relations with foreign States,
(d) Treasonabdle deception,

(९) Sabotage.

2. Nis proposed toeatend the provision relating to offences by Companies to all offences
tl Ww.

new
3. The Prevention of Insult to National Honour Bill, 1971.
4. German Penal Code, 1871, section 96, para. 1(1).

5. Also Draft German Penal Code, section 378.


6
इक niet”, It was suggested to us that a provision prohibiting
foreign izens of India from accepting titles from foreign Governments
Govern- should be inserted. It may be pointed out that article 18(2) of
ments. the Constitution already prohibits the acceptance of such titles.
it was emphasised that there ought to be a penal sanction to en-
force it. We do not, however, consider such a provision to be
needed. Such cases may be very rare, and, in any case, the con-
duct in question has no necessary connection with national secu-
rity. :
Offences to 7,118. As a result, the following offences should be included

beincludedy a5 constituting subversive activities:—

(1) Disruptive activity!;
(2) para-military groups? ;

(3)_ Maintaining relations with a foreign State or insti-
tution for a purpose prejudicial to the national security3;

(4) Treasonable deception4;
(5) Sabotages;

(6) Spying®;

(7) Divulging Official Secrets;

(8) Using false official uniforms, documents and seals
for purpose prejudicial to the national security;

(9) Interfering with the police or armed forces on duty
at a prohibited place;

(10) Failure to give information;
(11) Harbouring saboteurs or spies;
(12) Sedition’.

Revised 7.119. The procedural and evidentiary provisions in the

Late rio Chapter® relate to:—
Nena () search warrants®;
bie rape (ii) Exclusion of the public from certain proceedings! °;

1, Para. 7.2, above.
2. Para, 7.5., above, ;
3, Para, 7.6., above.
4, Para, 7.11, above.
5, Para. 7.12, above.
6. see para, 7.86, above for spying and other offences. .

के, Para. 7.113, above. ह
8. Procedural and evidentiary provisions which are relevant also to offences under
other Chapters will appear at the end of the new law.

9. Cf. para, 7.88 to 7.96, above. -
10, Cf para. 7.111, above.


67

(iii) Evidence of purpose prejudicial to national secu-
rityt;

(0. Presumptions in prosecutions for spying.?
The relevant provisions will be as follows:—

40. (1) If a metropolitan magistrate, magistrate of the
first class or sub-divisional magistrate is satisfied by informa-
tion on oath that there is reasonable ground for suspecting
that an offence under any ofthe sections 32 to}38 has been or
is about to be committed, he may grant a search warrant
authorising any police officer named therein, not being below
the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, —

(a) toenter at any lime any premises or place
named in the warrant, if necessary, by force, and

(0) to search the premises or place and every per-
son found therein, and

(c) 10 seize any sketch, model, article, note or docu-
ment, or anything of a like nature, or anything which is
evidence of an offence under any of the said sections hav-
ing been or being about to be committed which he may
find on the premises or place or any such person, and
with regard to or in connection with which he has reason-
able ground for suspecting that an offence under any of
the said sections has been or is about to be committed.

(2). Where it appears to a police officer, not being below
the rank of superintendent, that the case is one of great
emergency, and that in the interests of the State immediate
action is necessary, he may, by written order under his hand.
give to any police officer the like authority as may be given by
the warrant of a magistrate under this section.

(3) Wheré action has been taken by a police officer under
sub-section (2), he shall, as soon as may be, report such action,
in a metropolitan area to the Chief metropolitan magistrate,
and outside such area to the district or sub-divisional magis-
trate.

(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1971, shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to any search or
seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure
made under the authority of a warrant issued under"section
94 of that Code.

41. In addition and without prejudice of any powers
which a Court may possess to order the exclusion of the pub-
lic from any proceedings, if, in the course of any inquiry into
of trial of, any person for an offence under any of the sections

Search
‘Warrants.

Exclusion
of public
from cer-
tain pro-
ceedings.

1. (1. para. 7.48, above.
2 Cf nara. 7-49 to 7°62 above.


‘ 68

28 to 38 or in the course of any proceedings in appeal or revi-
sion from such inquiry or trial, application is made by the
prosecution, on the ground that the publication of any evidence
to be given or of any statement to be made in the conesry of
the proceedings would be prejudicial to the national security,
that ail or any portion of the public shail’be excluded during
any part of the hearing, the Court may make an orders to that
effect, but the passing of sentence shall in any case take place
in public.

“Evidence 42. In & prosecution for an offence under any of the

of नेक कवि sections 29 to 35, it shall not be necessary to show that the

projudici ५

to national accused person was guilty of any particular act tending to show

security. a purpose prejudicial to the national security, and notwith-
standing that no such act is proved against him, he may be
convicted if, from the circumstances of the case or his conduct
or his known character as proved, it appears that his purpose
was 8 purpose prejudicial to the national security!.

Presump- 43, (1) imany prosecution for an offence ustder section

tons ae 33, if any sketch, model, article, note, document or inform-

Sons tor ation relating to or ‘used in any prohibited place or relating to

spying. anything in such a place is made, obtained, collected, record-

ed, published or communicated by any person other than a
person acting under lawful authority, and from the.circumstan-
ces of the case or his conduct or his known character as prov-
ed it appears that his purpose was a purpose prejudicial to the
national security, such sketch, model, article, note, document,
or information shall be presumed to have been made, obtained,
collected, recorded, published or comiminicated for a purpose
prejudicial to the national security?,

(2) 17 any prosecution of a person for an offence under
section 33,—

{a} the fact that he has been in communication with,
or attempted to communicate with, a foreign agent,
whether within or without India, shall be relevant for the
purpose of proving that he has, for a purpose prejudicial
to the national security, obtained or attempted to obtain
information which is intended to be or Nikely to be, direct-
ly or indirectly, useful to an enemy;

(8) a person may be presumed to have been in com-
munication with a foreign agent if—

6) he has, either within or without India visit-
ed the address of a foreign agent or consorted or
associated with a foreign agent, or

1. This corresponds to section 3(2), earlier half, Official Secrets Act.
2. This corresponds to section 3(2), latter half, Official Secrets Act.
3. This corresponds to section 4{J}, Official Secrets Act.


69

(#) either within or without India, the name
or address of, or any other information regarding,
a foreign agent has been found in his possession or
has been obtained by him from any other person!;

{c) any address, whether within or outside India,
in respect of which it appears that there are reasonable
grounds for suspecting it of being an address used for the
receipt of communications intended for a foreign agent,
or any address at which a foreign agent resides, or to which
he resorts for the purpose of giving or receiving communi-
cations, or at which he carries on any business, may bz
presumed to be the address of a foreign agent, and com-
munications addressed to such an address to be communi-
cations with a foreign agent?”,

1. This corresponds to section 420), Official Secrets Act.
2. This corresponds to section 4(2)(c), Official Secrets Act.


Introduct-
ory.

Constituti-
oni

aspects
discussed
before the
Joint Com-
mittee,

Activities
dealt with
in the Act.

CHAPTER 8
SUBVERSIVE ASSOCIATIONS

8.1. A statute equal in importance to the Official Secrets Act
is the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, which was pass-
ed primarily to deal with secessionist activities. Pursuant to the
acceptance by Government of a unanimous recommendation of
the Committee on National Integration and Regionalism
appointed by the National Integration Council, the Constitution
(Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963 was enacted empowering Parlia-
ment to impose, by law, reasonable restrictions in the interests of
the sovereignty and integrity of India, on the freedom of speech
and expression, on right to assemble peaceably and without arms
and the right to form associations,

The object of the Act of 1967 was to check and penalise activi-
ties directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India.

8.2, During the consideration of the Bill (which led to the
Act of 1967) in the Joint Committee discussions took place as to
whether the legitimate expression of one’s honest opinion about
the giving up of a certain territory to a foreign state, would be
attracted by the penal provisions of the Bill. The Attorney-
General', while referring apparently to the penal provisions re-
lating to ‘unlawful activity?’, said in his evidence before the Joint
Committee} :—

“Judicially, it is interpreted to mean inciting anyone to

“action for the purpose of obtaining a particular end. May |

say that in my opinion, if we have to give away something or
half of our territory and so on, that does not come within that

mischief.”

8.3. Broadly speaking, the unlawful activities which the Act
seeks to contro! are those which encourage claims to a cession of
Indian territory, or secession of any State from India, or disrup-
tion of the sovereignty or territorial integrity of India.

The definition in the Act is as follows:—

“unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or asso-
ciation, means any action taken by such individual or association
(whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or
written, or by signs of by visible representation or otherwise),—

(0) which is intended, or supports any claim, to
bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of

~ GK. Daphtary.

jon 13.
३, Lok Sabha, Joint Committee on the Untawful Activities (Prevention) Bill, 1967.

Evidence, (November, 1967), page 12.

70


W

a part of the territory of India or the secession of a part of
the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any
individual or group of individuals to bring about such
cession or secession;

(ii) which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is
intendéd to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of India.”

8.4, Equally important is the definition! of “unlawful asso- Definition

ciation” which reads— ful ascoct.

“Unlawful association” means any association which has ton".
for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or

aids persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which

the members undertake such activity”.

This covers three types of associations, first, associations whose
very object is the commission of an unlawful activity, secondly,
associations which encourage or aid persons, whether members
or not, to undertake any unlawful activity, and thirdly, associa-
tions whose members undertake such activity, whether or not the
object of the association is the commission of such acts. The
three classes are not mutually exclusive and there could be over-
lapping.

8.5. Though the provisions of the Act infringe the funda- Constitu-
mental rights guaranteed in sub-clauses («) and (¢) of clause (1) tional aues-
of Article 19, nevertheless they are saved because they are “‘reason- "°"*
able restrictions” within the meaning of clauses (2) and (4) of that
Article. They are directly relatable to the prevention of injury
to the sovereignty and integrity of India.

A doubt may, however, be entertained as to whether the wide
definition of “unlawful activity” may unreasonably restrict even
the honest expression of opinion by a person for the cession of a
portion of Indian territory or giving of support to such an opinion
without incitement to violence. There are, however, two consid-
erations which weigh with us in not suggesting any amendment to
clarify this doubt. First, the definition begins with the word
‘action’, This requires something more positive than an academic
speech. Hence the courts may be persuaded to construe the
Act narrowly in the manner suggested by the Attorney-General
in his evidence before the Joint Committee?; and secondly, it
is unlikely that Government will consider it necessary to launch
a prosecution for a purely academic expression of opinion. The
question of a prosecution itself will, therefore, remain as academic
as the opinion.

8.6. In the leading case on the right to form an association, Supreme
the validity of the Madras Amendment of 1950 to the Indian Court de-
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908 was under challenge. The °°" है

“4, Section 20).
2. Paragraph 8.2. above.



V.G. १0४5
case,

Criterion
of provisi
for judi
inguiry.

ion
ial

Defect avoi-
ded in the
Unlawful
Activities
Act.

72

Supreme Court, after setting out the considerations to be borne
in mind in examining the reasonableness of restrictions, observ-
801...

“Giving due weight to all the considerations indicated
above, we have come to the conclusion that section 15(2)(6)
cannot be upheld as falling within the limits of authorised re-
strictions on the right conferred by article 19(1)(c). The
right to form associations or unions has such wide ard varied
scope for its exercise, and its curtailment is fraught with such
potential reactions in the religious, political and economic
fields, that the vesting 6f authority in the executive Govern-
ment to impose restrictions on such right, without allowing ihe
grounds of such imposition, both in their factual and lege!
aspects, to be duly tested in a judicial inquiry, is a strong ele-
ment which, in our opinion, must be taken into account in
judging the reasonableness of the restrictions imposed by
section 15(2)(4) on the exercise of the fundamental right under
article 19(t)(c); for, no summary and what is bound to be
a largely one-sided review by an Advisory Board, even where
its verdict is binding on the executive government, can be a
substitute for a judicial enquiry. The formula of subjective
satisfaction of the Government or of its officers, with an Ad-
visory Board thrown into review the materials on which the
Government seeks to override a basic freedom guaranteed to
the citizen, may be viewed as reasonable only in very exception-
al circumstances and within the narrowest limits, and cannot
receive judicial approval as a general pattern of reasonable
testrictions on fundamental rights.””

8.7. Thus, the vesting of power in the government to impose
restrictions on this right withowt having the grounds therefore
tested in a judicial inquiry, is an important element to be taken
into consideration in judging the reasonableness of the restrict-
ions, The existence of a summary, and largely one-sided. review
by an Advisory Board could not be an adequate substitute fora
judicial inquiry.

8.8. -It is obvious that while framing the Unlawful Activities
Act, Parliament has tried to avoid the above defect. The import-
ant points of difference between ‘the 1908 Act (as amended ‘in
Madras in 1950) and the 1967 Act, are worth pointing out.

(2) The 1908 Act? did not categorically lay down that the
notification declaring any association unlawful shall net have
effect until the Advisory Board has confirmed the declaration.
The 1967 Act3 provides for confirmation by the Tribunal, except
in urgent cases.

1, State of Madras v. V.G. Row, (1952) S.C.R. 597; A.TR. 1952 S.C. 196.

2. Section 16A(6), 1908 Act, as amended in Madras.
3, Section 3(3), 1967 Act.


73

(ii) In the 1908 Act!, the scope of the reference to the
Advisory Board was not defined in a precise manner. In the 1967
Act?, the reference to the tribunal is specifically for the purpose of
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring
the association unlawful,

(ii) The Advisory Board constituted under the 1908 Act
was to consider the materials placed before it (and any such fur-
ther information as it may deem fit to call for from the State
Government or the association concerned). Under the 1967 Act,
the Tribunal has to call upon the association to show cause and
to hold an ‘inquiry’ in the prescribed manner. (It has power to
call for such further information as it considers necessary)4,

(iv) Under the 1908 Act5, the report of the Advisory Board
containing its op:nion as to whether or not there was sufficient
cause for the issue of the notification, was to be given separately.
Its proceeding and its main report were to be treated as con~
fidential. Under the 1967 Act,® the order of the Tribunal is
required to be published ‘in the official gazette.

(x) Under the 1903 Act,7 no person was entitled to appear
before the Advisory Board, either himself or through a legal
representative. In the 1967 Act, there is no such bar. Since
the Tribunal holds a regular inquiry®, it must necessarily give
the parties concerned an Opportunity not only to appear before
it, but also to argue their case. It may also be mentioned that the
tules* under the Act require the Tribunal to follow the Evidence
Act.

Tt appears to us, therefore, that the constitutional validity of
the Act is unassailable.

8.9. We propose that the scope of the Act should be widened Scope of
to cover any association which has, for its object, a subversive he act ea
activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake such 1000
activity. We'tecommend this change, as it is obvious that such
subversive associations constitute as great a danger to
national security, as the associations which are at present cover-
ed by the 1967 Act under the nondescript designation of “unlaw-
ful associations”. The penal and prohibitory provisions con-
tained in the 1967 Act in our opinion are urgently needed in
respect of all subversive associations.

4, Section 16A(3), 1908 Act as amended in Madras,
2, Section 4(1), 1967 Act.

3. Sections 4(2) and 4(3), 1967 Act.

4. Section 4(3), 1967 Act.

5. Section 16A(5), 1908 Act, as amended in Madras.
6. Section 4(4), 1967 Act.

16A(5), 1908 Act. as amended in Madras.
है. Section 9, 1967 Act.

9. Rule 3, Uniawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968, as amended upto 1970,



‘Subversive
activity.

Section 24
References
to laws not
in force in
Jammu aod
Kashmir.

Section 3—
basic pro-

vision for

Applica bili-
4y of penal
Provisions,

4

8.10. For this Purpose, the expression subversive activity”
will include sot only activities which: are “unlawful activities”
under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (correspon

what we ard Tecommending to be included in “disruptive activity’!
but also certain other acts designed at subverting the Govern-
ment. Briefly, these are—

(व) waging war against the Government of India:
(5) preparing to wage war; 5

(c) conspiracies to overawe the Parliament, Govern-
ment ete, ;

(व) preventing by force exercise of State authority in
furtherance of inter-State disputes;

(e). disruptive activity;
(/) forming paramilitary groups;

(8) treasonable relations with foreign State or institu-
tion or organisation ; n

(A) sabotage.

8.11. Section 2A of the Unlawful Activities Act (inserted in
1969) deals with the construction of Teferences to laws not ia
force in Jammu and Kashmir. It may be incorporated without
change.

8.12, Under section 3, if the Central Government is of the
opinion that any association is or has become an unlawful associ-
ation, it may declare it to be an unlawful. It is only after such
declaration that the operative Provisions of the Act come into
effect. The penal Provisions in sections 10, 1], 12 and 132),
and the prohj ibitory provisions in sections 7-8, are so framed as to
apply only where the association has been declared to be unlaw-
ful. The’ penal provisions provide the following penalties: —

(4) penalty for being members of an unlawful associ-
ation so declared (section 10); (Imprisonment upto 2 years,
and fine.

(ii) penalty for dealing with the funds of an unlawful
association in violation of the prohibitory provisions ;
(section 11); [Imprisonment upto 3 years or fine or both; Also
additional fine to recover the amount of the funds etc. used in
conteavention.]

penalty for use of an article of an unlawful asso-
ciation, in violation of the Pprohibitory provisions; [section
12(1)|; [Emprisonment upto | year, and fine.)

1. See para 7.2. above.


75
(i) penalty for entry into a notified place, ie. a place
notified as used for an unlawful association, entry into which
has been prohibited section 12(2)] ; [Imprisonment upto 1
year, and fiine.}

(0 penalty for unlawful activity'; [section 13(1).]

(vi) penalty for assisting the activities of an unlawful
association, after it has beon declared to be unlawful; [section
13(2).] {Imprisonment upto 5 years or fine, or both.)

8.13. In the penal provision in section 10 of the Act, we
recommend the enhancement of the sentence to five years’
imprisonment, as the offence, is fairly serious.

Sections 11 and 12 need no changes of substance.

8.14, Section 13(2) overlapes?, to some extent, section 10,
In view of our recommendation} to enhance the sentence for an
offence under section 10, section 13(2) may be omitted.

8.15. The saving provision in section 13(3), is not intended
to apply to associations but only to the activities of individuals.
Hence it need not be included in this Chapter.

8.16. The prohibitory provisions in sections 7-8 do not
require any change.

8.17. The notification by the Central Government declaring
an association to be unlawful, has to be confirmed by the Tribunal.
Sections 4 to 6 and section 9 contain detailed provisions in that
respect, including provisions as to the composition and procedure
of the Tribunal.

8.18. Section 4 deals with references to the Tribunal to be
appointed for the purposes of the Act. The Tribunat is to be
constituted under the Act, for approving or disapproving the
orders of the Central Government declaring an association to be
unlawful.

8.19. No changes of substance are needed in sections 5 to 9
which deal with the Tribunal, the period of operation of the Noti-
fication and with powers of the Central Government to prohibit
the use of funds of an unlawful association, and to notify places
used for the purpose of an unlawful association, and with the
power of the District Magistrate to prepare a list of properties of
an unlawful association and ancillary matters.

8.20. Section 14 of the Act declares certain offences under the
Act to be cognizable. The matter can be left to be dealt with by
the general provision in the Criminal Procedure Code‘. As the

Sections 10,
TL and 12.

Section
13(2) to be
omitted,

Section.
13).

Sections 7
and 8,

Sections 4
to 6 and 9—
Proceed-
ings before
the Tribun-
al_or Dis-
wict Judge.

Sections 5
to 9.

Section 14
t be

0
omitted.

1. This offence can be committed by "1. This offence can be committed by individual. it has been covered by ti Jt bas been cavere d by the provisions

relatin g to ‘disruptive activity’,
2, Section 13(1) has been already dealt with in para 7.2. and 7.3. above,
3. See para 8.13. above.
4, Criminal Procedure Code Bill 1970, First Schedule.


Sections 15
and 16.

Section 17,

Sections
18 to 21.

Offences ta
be inchud~
ed this
group.

76

punishment under section 10 is proposed to be increased', section
14 is unnecessary and should be omitted.

8.21. Section 15 of the Act deals with the meaning of ‘con-
tinuance of an association’ and needs no change.

Section 16 of the Act deals with bar of jurisdiction of court,
and needs no change.

8.22, We have already recommended the insertion of a gene-
ral provision regarding sanction? of prosecutions under the pro-
posed Act, and hence section 17 of the Unlawful Activities Act is
unnecessary. पु

8.23. Sections 18, 19, 20 and 21 of the Unlawful Activities
Act may be incorporated in the proposed Act without substantial
modifications.

8.24. As a result, the following offences will be included in
this group:—

(1) Being member of a subversive association3.
(2) Dealing with funds of a subversive association+.

(3) Contravertion of an order made in respect of a
notified places.

1, Para 8.13, above.

2. See chapter 7 above.

3. Para 8.12(i) above.

4. Para 8.12 (ii) above.

5. Para 8.12 (iii) and (iv) and 8.16. above.


CHAPTER 9
Tne CriminAL Law AMuNDMENT Act, 1961

9.1. The Criminal Law Amendment Act. 1961, contains a
few provisions relevant to national security. The object of the
Act was thus described in the Statement of Objects and Reasons
appended to the Bill?:—

“Certain recent developments in the regions adjoining
the borders of India and in other parts of the country likely
to jeopardise the security of the country and its frontiers point
to the necessity of placing curbs on such activities. The
Criminal’ Law Amendment Bill, 1960, accordingly seeks to
provide for punishment to persons who may question the
territorial integrity or frontiers of India in a manner prejudi-
cial to the safety and security of the country, and for other
cognate matters.”

The Act has not been frequently used—at least, there is a
paucity of reported decisions on the Act?,

9.2, Under section 2 of the Act, a person who questions the
territorial integrity or frontiers of India in a manner which is,
or is likely to be, prejudicial to the interests of the safely or secu-
rity of India, is punishable with imprisonment upto 3 years, or
fine or both. It appears to us that section 2 is practically covered
by the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. The com-
bined effect of section 200 and section 13(1) of the Act of 1967
is to punish “any action, whether by committing an act or by
words either spoken or written or by signs or by visible represen-
tation or otherwise, which is intended or supports any claim to
bring about.....cession......or secession.....ar which ‘disclaims,
questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and
territorial integrity ‘of India”. The 1967 Act, unlike section 2
of the 1961 Act, does not mention ‘frontiers’ expressly, But
a serious challenge to frontiers (barring, perhaps, an academic
discussion) cannot escape the all-embractng clause “questions
the sovereignty”, occurring in section 2(f) of the 1967 Act.

Moreover, the maximum punishment under section 13 of
the 1967 Act is imprisonment upto five years, while the Act of
1961 punishes the act with imprisonment upto 3 years, even
though the latter Act is more stringent, as it requires that the
act be done in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the safety
or security of India. हे

Introduct-
ory.

Sectiori 2
covered by
the Act of
1967—Re-
peal recom-
mended.

1, Gazette of India, (1969) Extraordinary, Part I, section 2, page 938.
2. See para 9.4. below,

7
34 M of Law—6


78
We, therefore, recommend that section 2 should be repcaled!,

Section 3. 9.3. Under section 3, statements etc. in a ‘notified arca’ pre-
judicial to the maintenance of public order therein or to the safety
or security of India or to the maintenance of essential supplies,
are punished, and the entry of persons in such area is also
fegulated. The basic provision is in section 3(1), which gives power
to the Central Government to declare an area adjoining the
frontiers of india to be a notified area, where the Central Govern-
ment considers that in the interests of the safety or security of
India or in the public interest, it is neces: ry or expedient to do
so.

Delhi 9.4, The only reported case? under the Act is that o the Delhi
High Court. The petitioner in that case had been wranted a
permit to enter an area notitied under the Act and to remain in
it, for a specified period, Before the expiry of the peviod, how-
ever, the permit was cancelled arbitrarily and in violation of the
tules of natural justice. The order of cancellation was. for that
reason, quashed by the High Court,

Sections 9.5, The State Government has, under section 4, power to

4&5, declare certain publications to be forfeited, being publications
which appear to the State Government to contain any matter the
publication of which is punishable under section 2 or section 3(2),
There is also a power to issue search warrants,

Sections 3 9.6. It appears to us that sections 3 to 5 of the Act are not

to $ not appropriate for inclusion in the Proposed consolidated law on

suitable for national security. These provisions are of a special character,

inclusion and applicable only in relation to notified areas, Moreover,

lew the provisions are not confined to national security. The order
under section 3(1) can, for example, be passed not only in the
interests of the safety or security of India, but also in “the public
interest”. Again, under section 3(2), a statement prejudicial
to the maintenance of essential supplies can also be punished.
Such provisions would not fit in with a law primarily designed at
the protection of national security. We do not. therefore. con-
sider it necessary to include these provisions (sectio
in the new law.

1. Consequential changes will be required in section 4 which refers to seation 2
2. Abdal Bute ए. Government of Himachal Pradesh. ALR. 1968 Delhi 49, 54 (Hardy
है)


CHAPTER 10
Proctipure, Limiration AND MISCELLANEOUS

10.1. Having discussed the substantive provisions relating to
offences against the national security, we now discuss the pro-
eedural and ancillary provisions.

10.2. Procedural provisions may be divided into three groups:

First, there are new provisions i.e. provisions not found in
any of the existing enactments. Secondly, there are provisions
already contained in one or more of the respective laws, which
appear to be appropriate for being applied to all offences against
the national security. In the third group are provisions con-
tained in existing laws, whose application may be confined (as at
Present) to offences under those laws. These need not be dis-
cussed here again, as they have been dealt with under the
relevant Chapters.

10.3. The subject of limitation comes, in the first group. We
have, in our Report! on the Penal Code, recommended the
introduction of the law of limitation for prosecution for offences
punishable with not more than three years’ imprisonment. The
amendment recommended therein will not cover most of the
offences under the proposed Act because these are punishable
more severely.

10.4. In England, an indictment for high treason within the
realm (with the exception of treason by designing, endeavouring
or attempting any assassination on the body of the Queen by
poison or otherwise) must be signed within three years after the

offence is committed?,

An “information” for Blasphemy by words spoken must be
filed. hin four days of the speaking, and the prosecution must
be within three months of the information3,

A prosecution for an offence under the Unlawful Drilling
Act, 1819, must be commenced* within six calendar months after
the offence committed’.

Introduct-
cry.

Three
kinds of
procedural
Provisions
relating 10
offences
against the
nationat
security.

Limitation
for
offences.

Limitation
0 trea-
son in
England
Statute of
1695

1. 42 Report, Chapter 24.
2, Treason Act, 1695 (7 & 8 Will, 3, ¢.3) section 5 and 6,
3. Section 2, Blasphemy Act, 1697.

4, Section 7, Unlawful Frilling Act, 1819.

5. The discussion is illustrative only. Provisions as to the time-limits for prosecutions

‘are contained in several other Statutes.

79


Transitory
nature of
some
offences
against
national

Recom-
mendation
regarding
lime-limits.
for pro-
secutions
for certain
‘effcnces,

80

No particular explanation is given by Stephen! as to the
reason for passing the 1695 Act, which introduced the provisions
relating to limitation for treason; he makes just a brief reference
to it, Maitland, in his Constitutional History?. refers to this
Act, and points out how the Act made a number of exceptions
from the general law in favour of persons accused of treason.
But he does not deal with the historical reason for the particular
provision relating to limitation.

But the background of the 1695 Act in general can be gathered
from what Kenny states in his Criminal Law3:

“As treason was, of all crimes, that in which the Crown
had the strongest direct interest in securing the conviction of
an accused person, it was the one in which a public prosecutor
or a subservient judge had most temptation to conduct the
trial so as to press harshly upon the prisoner. The reigns
of the Stuarts afforded so many instances of this harshness
that after the Revolution of 1688, the legislature in 1695
introduced great innovations into the course of criminal pro-
cedure so far as trials for treason were concerned,”

Though British jurisprudence does not recognise the appli-
cability of the law of limitation to crimes in general, nevertheless,
its special application to the crime of treason was presumably
made with a view to preventing political victimisation.

10.5, Some of the offences relating to national security are
transitory in nature, and should be subject to limitation even
though the punishment may be more than three years’ imprison-
ment. A traitor or arch seditionist of today may be the head of
the Government some years later and may even be considered
a great patriot. If there is a subsequent change in Government
(duc to change in ideology or otherwise), there should be no
apprehension of political victimisation of such person for a crime
committed several years before. Hence we consider that there
should be a law of limitation for some of the offences under the
proposed Act especially those of mere speeches and writings.
For very serious offences such as waging war or serious acts of
sabotage, the law of limitation should not be applicable.

10.6. Acting on this principle, we think that there ought to
be a time-limit for a prosecution for the following offences:—

(1) Incitement to mutiny or other act of insubordina~
tion. (Maximum period of imprisonment—3 years).

(2) Dissuasion from enlisting and instigation to mutiny
or insubordination after enlistment.
(Maximum period of imprisonment—3 years)

1. Stephen, History of Criminal law, Vol. 1, pages 415-416 and Vol. 2, page.
2, Maitland, Constitutional History, (1946), page 314.
3, Kenny, Criminal Law, (1966), page 403.


81

(3) Disruptive activity,

(Maximum period of imprisonment—7 years).
(4) Sedition,

(Maximum period of imprisoument—7 years). -
(5) Contravention of an order made in respect of a

notified place.

(Maximum period of imprisonment—tl year),

A time-limit of one year should suffice in alt these cases.

In other respects, such as computation of the time-limit 800 the

like, the detailed provisions recommended in our Report on
the Penal Code! should apply.

10.7. The new preyision will be as follows:—-

“(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence puni-
shable under sections 24, 25, 28, 39 or 55 after the expiry of
one year.

(2) The provisions of sections 513 to 516 of the Indian
Penal Code? shall apply for the purpose of computing the
said period of limitation under sub-section (1) as they apply
for the purpose of computing the period of limitation for
taking cognizance of an offence under that Code.” .

10.8. The following procedural provisions belong to the second — procedural
group referred to above? and are २० be applicable te ail offences provisions

under the new law:— applicable
tall

(४) (0७ provision‘ requiring sanctionS of the Govern- offences.
ment, for 2 prosecution for an offence;

(i#) the provision® relating to place of trial; and
(ii) the provision’ relating to offences by companies,

The gist” of these provisions has been already dealt with’, wie ee

. en . rizability

10.9. One point regarding cognizability of certain offences sf certain
and the courts competent to try them requires to be mentioned, offences and
Offences under chapters 6 and 7 of the Penal Code arc to be trans- “OUTS som

fe nae 5 on tent
ferred to the new law. Now, the position as regards bailability, ty then.

1, 42nd Report, Chapter 24.

2. The reference is ta sections 413-516, 85 recommended in the 42nd Report, which
contain detailed rules as to starving point, cxcluding the first day, containing offences,
ele.

3, Para 10.2. above.
4, Section (33), Official Secrets Act, as proposed to be revised.

3. It is proposed now to substitute sanction in place of the present requirement of
complaint.

6. Section 13(4), Official Secrets Act.
7. Section 15, Official Secrets Act.
A 8. Chapter 7, discussion relating to section 13(3), 13/4) and section 15, Official Scerets
ct.


82

cognizability and courts competent to try them is, at present.
governed by specific items in Schedule UI to the Code! of Criminal
Procedure, 1898. On the transfer of those offences to the new
law, those specific items will cease to apply, and the provision
in the said schedule relating to offences against other laws will
become applicable. Where the position so resulting would be
different from the present one, it will obviously be necessury
to consider if a specific provision is required for maintaining the
present position. We deal below with this matter.

(1) Assaulting the President ete, with intent to compel or
restrain the exercise of any lawful powers?..—This offence (punish-
ment—imprisonment for 7 years, and fine) is under the specific
entry in the Schedule to the Cr.P.C.3, triable by the Court of
Session’. Under the part of the Schedule applicable to offences
under other (55, the offence would be triable by a Magistrate
of the First Class. We are of the view that this change may stand,
Though the offence involves high dignitaries, it can cover a variety
of acts, and there is no harm if it is triable by a Magistrate of
the First Class. Serious cases can be committed to the Court of
Session. Hence no special provision is required.

(2) Public servant negligently allowing prisoner of war to
escape’—-This offence (punishment—imprisonment for 3 years,
and fine) is, under the specific provision in the Scheciule, non-
cognizable. It would now become cognizable. We are of the
view that the offence should be cognizable. Hence no special
provision need be recommended.

(3) Sedition?. This offence (proposed punishment—impri-
sonment for seven years, and fine} is, under the Schedule, non-
cognizable, non-bailable and triable exclusively by the Court of
Session®. It would now become cognizable, non-baiiable and
triable by a Magistrate of the first class which, in aur opinion
would not be desirable. Hence it will be necessary to provide
that the offence is non-cognizable and triable by the Court of
Session.

(4) Committing depredativen on territories of foreign State
at peace with India’.

(5) Receiving property taken by means of such waging wer
or depredation!9,—-These two offences (punishment for each—

1. First Schedule to the Cr. PC. Bill, 1970,

3
3
4.
5.

i

we

Section 124, LP.C.; section 8, National Security Bil, 1971.
The zeference throughout is to the First Schedule 10 the Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970.
Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report does aot alter this position.

Secticn 129. LP.C.: section 13, National Security Bilt, 1971.

Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report has not altered this position,

Section 124A, 1.P.C.: section 39 of the National Security Bill, 1971.
Appendix 3 to che 42nd Report has not altered this position.

Section 126, 1.7,0.; section 15, National Security Bill, 1971

Section 127, LP.C.; section 16, National Security Bill, 1971.



83

imprisonment for 7 yeats and fine, and forfeiture of certain pro-
perty) are, under the Schedule, triable by a Court of Session!
They will now become triable by a Magistrate of the First Class.
To avoid that result, it will be necessary 10 provide they are tei-
able by the Court of Session.

(6) Abeument of desertion—Tnere are two situations:

(a) Abetment of desertion from armed forces, if the deser-
tion be committed?.—This offence (punishraent—imprison-
ment for 5 years, and fine, or both) is, as proposed+, cogni-
zable, non-bailable and triable by a Magistrate of the First
Class. This position remains unaltered, and no special
provision will be required for this offence. But, 2 special
provision is needed for situation (09) below.

(6) Abetment of desertion from armed forces in other
easest.—-This offence (punishment—imprisonment for 2
years or fine, or both) is, uader the Schedule cognizadh:.
It will now becomz non-cognizable. It is, therefore, neces-
sary to provide that it is cognizable.

(7) Harbouring a deserter’ —This offence (punishment-—
imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, or bothjis, under the Schedule
cognizable*. ft would now become non-cognizable. It _ is,

therefore, necessary to provide that the offence is cognizable.

(8) Abetment ef an act of insubordination’.
(a) if such act be committed;

(6) in any other case.-—This offence (punishment for situation
under (a)—imprisonment for two years. or fine, or both and for
situation under (5}—imprisonment for 6 months, or fine, or
both} is, under the Schedule, cognizable. [1 would now become
non-cognizable, Hence, it would be necessary to provide that
it is cognizable.

(9) Wearing garb or carrying token used by officers or member
of the armed forces*—This ofence(punishment !¢— imprisonment

1. Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report has not altered this position.

2, Seotion {35(a\(new), as proposed by the 42nd Report, section 21 .
curity Bill, J971. P n 21(8), National Se-

3, Schedule to the Cr. P.C, as amended by 42nd Report, Appendix 3,
4, Section 148, LP.C.; section 21(b), National Security Rill, 1971.
5, Section 135, ILP.C.; section 22, National Security Bill, 1971.

6. Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report has nol altered this position.

7, Section 138, 1.P.C,; section 13%(@) and (8) as progosed in the 42nd Rey i
axa) and (0), National Security Bi, 1971. Port, section
&. Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report has not altered this position. Se ti am
and (bat the Schedale appended thereio. ४ section 157(8)

9, Section 149, LP.C.; section 27, National Security Bill, 1971.

10, As proposed in the 42nd Report.



84

for 6 months, or fine or both) is, under the Schedule, cognizable'.
Jt would now become non-cognizable. Hence, :t is necessary
to provide that it is cognizable.

We accordingly recommend a special provision as follows:—

“Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1971,—

(व) offences under sections 21, 22, 23 and 27 shalt
be cognizable;

{b) the offence under section 39 shall be non-
cognizable; and

(c) offences under sections 15, 16 and 39 shall be
triable only by the Court of Session.”

Repeal. 10.10. Consequential on the incorporation of the provisions
of various statutes, as proposed in this Report, repeat of those
statutes is recommended.

Provisions 10.11. As a result, the following provisions ef a procedural

we ced ण miscellaneous character will be included:—
(1) Cognizance of offences?. (requiremen: of sanction),
(2) Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of time,
(3) Place of inquiry or trial‘.
(4) Offences by companies’.
(5) Cognizability of offences and courts competent to
try them®,
(6) Repeal and savings?.
Appendice 10.12. We annex to this Report, two Appendices, one showing
os our recommendations in the form of a draft Bill, and the other

showing the consequential amendments needed in various Cen-
tral Acts as a result of the recommendations incorporated in the

draft Bill.
1. K. ५. K. SUNDARAM—Chairman.
2. $, 8. DULAT, है

है
3. Mrs. ANNA CHANDI, = |
4. R. L. NARASIMHAM,*

5. D. 8. KULKARNI J

P. M. BAKSHI—Secretary
New DELHI;
The 30th August, 1971.

६ Appendix 3 to the 42nd Report has not altered this position.
Para 10.80), above.

Para 10.7. above.

Para 10,800, above.

Para 10.8(iii), above.

Para 10.9. above.

7. Para 10.10, above.
*Shri R.L, Narasimham has signed the Report, subject to the note appended,

Members.

ay मे जप


BS

NOTE BY SHRI R. L. NARASIMHAM

As T have been unable to persuade my colleagues to aceept
some of my suggestions for inclusion in the proposed Nationa}
Security Bill, 1971, I am constrained to give my separate Note.
These suggestions are based mainly on the provisions found in
some of the foreign Penal Codes telating to treason. It appears
to me that they will be suitable for Indian conditions also, and
hence may be inchided in our Proposed law.

1. Repentance

Under our existing Jaw, the only inducement for an accom-
plice to betray his colleagues is the tender of pardon urder
section 337 and the succeeding sections of the Criminal Procedure
Code. But this pardon cannot be claimed as of right; and it
is within the discretion of the appropriate court [See sub-section
(1) of section 337] to tender pardon to an accomplice who js
veady and willing to betray his colleagues by making a full dis-
closure. Though the section has been very usefully empluyed
in a few instances, nevertheless, it cannat be Said to be a sufficient
inducement. On the other iand, if the law itself confers absolute
immunity from punishment on a person who discloses the com-
mission of the crime (subject to certain cond; itions and restriction 8),
it may be a greater inducement for accomplices to betray their
colleagues even in the earlier Stages of the commission of the
crime (such as the preparatory stage or the stage of attempt),
and thereby either prevent the completion of the crime allogether,
or facilitate the detection, of arch-criminals. Conspiracy to
commit the crime of treason is generally hatched in great secrecy,
and a study of the history of treason trials all over the world
shows that such offences are detected mainly on the basis of the
evidence of the accomplice, This is an additional reason why,
for offences involving national security, a special provision giving
complete immunity from either prosecution or punishment,
as the case may be, is highly desirable. I would not teommend
such a provision for all the offences under the Penal Code.

1 will be useful to compare the provisions found in some of
the foreign Codes:

Argentina.—Articles 216 and 217—The person who takes
Part in a plot of two or more Persons 10 commit treason and
discloses the plot before execution of the crime is commenced,
is punished by imprisonment or jailing from | to 8 years.
(Article 216). "But the plotter who reveais the plot to any autho-
rity before the criminal process has been started, is exempt “tom
any punishment (article 217),

Germany!.—4Draft Penal Code), section 368—

1) The court may mitigate, under section 64, paragraph 1,
the punishment provided in sections 361. 362, 364, paragrash 1,
and section 365, if the perpetrator voluntarily abandons the

1. Section 82, German Penal Cole, 1871, 9 simpler


86

further carrying out of the act, and averts or materially lessens.
any danger that might exist that others will further carry oul
the activity, or if he voluntarily Prevents completion of the act.

(2) The court may mitigate in its discretion (s. 64, paragraph 2)
the punishment provided in 5. 363 and 5/ 364, Paragraph 2, or
refrain [rom punishment, if the Perpetrator voluntarily aban-
dons his design, and averts or miaierially lessens any danger
that may have been caused by him that others will further prepare
or carry out the activity or if he voluntarily prevents completion
of the act.

(3) The court may mitigate in its discretion (s. 64, paragraph 2}
the punishment provided in s. 366 or refrain from punishment.
if the perpetrator voluntarily abandons his activity and averts
or materially lessens any danger that may have been caused by
him that others will further pursue the treasonable efforts their
in stated. The foregoing shall apply correspondingly to acts
punishable under section 367.

Japan.—Ariicle 80—The punishment of a person who atter
committing the crimes mentioned in the two preceding articles
denounces himself before the disorder is created, shall be remitted.

I would, therefore, suggest the insertion of a new provision
in the last chapter of the proposed Bill, conferring complete
immunity either from prosecution (where a prosecution has.
not yet been initiated) or from punishment (if the trial has already
commenced), to the person who has committed an offence under
the National Security Act, if he will make a full and true dis-
closure of the whole of the circumstances within his knowledge
relating to the offence and to every other person concerned
whether as principal or abettor in the commission of the same,
either before the authority empowered to investigate the com-
mission of the offence or before the court empowered to take
cognizance of the offence or the court before which ha is under-
going trial.

IL Distoyatty ॥ NerGoriations

I notice that in many foreign countries there is a special
provision in the law of treason for penalising disloyalty in nego-
tiations.

Argentina —Article 225--Anybody being in charge of a
negotiation with a foreign nation on behalf of the Argentinian
Government, who conducts such negotiation in a way prejudi-
cial to the nation by deviating from any instructions given to
him shall be punished by imprisonment or jailing from three
to ten years,

Colombia, —Article 120—Anyone entrusted by Colombia
to negotiate matters of State with a foreign Government or with
persons or groups of another country, who behaves disloyally
in the exercise of his agency shail suffer penal servitude for five
or fifleen years.


87

Denmark,—Article 106—Any person who acts against the
interests of the State in carrying out a mission entrusted to him
to negotiate or settle on behalf of the State any matter with any
foreign power shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not

exceeding 16 years.

Draft Penal Code of Gerimany,—Article 392(1).—Danger in
the conduct of State matters—A representative of the Federal
Republic of Germany or of one of her States who deliberatzly
or knowingly condusts a matter of State with a foreign Govern-
ment or a supra national or international institution to the
detriment of his principal, shall be punished with confinement
in a penitentiary upto fifteen years.

Sweden,—Chapier 19, section 3—If a person, who has received
a commission to negotiate with a foreign power or otherwise to
protect the concerns of the Realm, in being with some one who
represents the interests of a foreign power misuses his authority
to represent the Realm or otherwise his position or trust and
thereby causes the Realm considerable harm, he shall be sentenced
for disloyalty in negotiation with a foreign power to imprison-
ment for a fixed term of at least two and at most ten years, or
for life.

Some acts of disloyalty may possibly come under the wide
sweep of some of the provisions of the Official Secrets Act, 1923.
Bul. as we are recommending the repeal of that Act and the
inclusion of its provisions in the proposed National Security
Act, it seems desirable to take this opportunity of inserting a
new provision penalising disloyalty in negotiation.

TH. Duty TO PREVENT THE COMMISSION OF THE CRIME

Under our penal law there are some provisions casting a
duty on a person to give information in his possession to the
Proper authorities regarding the commission of or intention to
commit some offences. (See section 44 of the Cr. P. C, and
clauses 39 and 42 of the Bill), But there is no provision casting
a positive duty on a person to prevent the further progress in
the commission of any treasonable activity, if he could prevent
the same without danger to himself. In a few instances, such
as sabotage, espionage, etc. the mere giving of information to
the appropriate authorities may not suffice.

The Ausirian Penat Code, section 60, contains the following
interesting provision: “He who intentionally fails to prevent,
the further progress of an undertaking which is included in
the definition of high treason, although he could have done so
easily and without danger to himself, his relatives or to those
persons who are by law under his protection, becomes an acccs-
sory to the felony and shall be punished by severe imprisonment
of from five to ten years,”



88

It may be useful to have a similar provision in the proposed
Bill also. It is true that occasions for Prosecution of a person
for contravention of that provision may be very fare indeed.
But if a person without danger to himself or his near relatives
can prevent the commission of an offence and yet fails to prevent
the same, there is no reason why he should not be held punishable
under the law for an offence involving national security. To
cite an extreme case, suppose an cxpert on explosives notices
that a time bomb has been laid by some unknown culprits to
blow up an installation which is vital to national security. At
present the only duty cast on him by law is to ceport the matter
to the authorities. There is no duty on him to remove or defuse
the bomb or otherwise render it harmless, though he could
easily have done so without danger to himself in view of his
expert knowledge. The consequences may be very serious.
But by the time the authorities, on receiving the information,
tush to the spot, the installation may be blown up. There is
no reason why the law should not punish that citizen for his
grievous sin of omission. Instances of this type can be giyen
for the offence of espionage also.

T notice that in the French Penal Code (Article 62) and in
the Draft German Penal Code (Article 233) there are provisions
making it penal if a person omils to prevent the commission of
some offences if such prevention could be done without danger
to himself. I am not, however, in favour of extending this rule
for all classes of offences under the Penal Code. It will be suffi-
cient if this rigorous rule is applied for offences involving
national security alone.

R, L. NARASIMHAM


ApPendix 1

THE NATIONAL SECURITY BILL, 1971
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES

1 Short title, extent and application.
Definitions,

ta

CHAPTER 2
INSURRECTION

Waging war against the Government of India.
Preparing to wage war.
Concealing design to wage war.

Conspiracy to overawe the Parliament or Government of India or the
Legislature or Government of any State.

7 Preventing by force exercise of State authority in furtherance of inter-
State disputes.

8 Assaulting President etc, with intent to compel or restrain the exercise
of any lawful powers.

Au hw

CHAPTER 3
ASSISTING THE ENEMY

9 Assisting India’s enemies,

10 Infiltration for committing offence against national security.
11 Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring, prisoner of war.
12. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of war to escape.
13 Public servant negligently suffering prisoner of war to escape.

CHAPTER 4

RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN STATES

14 Waging war against any foreign State at peace with India.

15 Committing depredation on territories of foreign State at peace with
India,

89


90

‘CLAUSES

16
7

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

26
27

Receiving property taken by means of such waging war or depredation,
Recruitment to, or enlistment in, armed forces of foreign States.

CHAPTER 5

OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMED Forcrs

Abetment of mutiny.

Attempting to seduce officer or member from duty.
Abetment of assault on superior officer.

Abetment of desertion from armed forces.

Harbouring deserter.

Abetment of an act of insubordination.

Incitement to mutiny or other act of insubordination.

Dissuasion from enlisting and instigation to mutiny or insubordination
after enlistment.

Persons subject to certain laws, not to be punished under the Chapter.

Wearing garb or carrying token used by officer or member of the armed
forces.

CHAPTER 6

SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES

Disruptive activity.

Para-military groups.

Treasonable relations with foreign State or institution or organisation.
Treasonable deception,

Sabotage,

Spying.

Divulging official secrets.

Using false official uniforms, documents and seals for purpose pre-
judicial ta national security.

Interfering with the police or armed forces on duty at a prohibited
place.

Failure to give information.

Penalty for harbouring saboteurs or spies.

Sedition.

Search warrants,

Exclusion of public from certain proceedings.

Evidence of purpose prejudicial to national security.

Presumptions in prosecutions for spying.


45
46
47
Ag
49
50
51

34
55
56
AT
58
59

61
62
63

64
65

9]
CHAPTER 7

SUBVERSIVE ASSOCIATIONS

CLauses.

Definitions.

Declaration of an association as subversive association.

Reference to Tribunal.

Tribunal,

Period of operation and cancellation of notification.

Power to prohibit the use of funds of a subversive assoc:ation,

Power to notify places used for the purpose of a subversive association.

Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this
Chapter.

Penalty for being member of a subversive association,

Penalty for dealing with funds of a subversive association.

Penalty for contravention of an order made in respect of a notified place.
Continuance of association.

Bar of jurisdiction.

Protection of action taken in good faith.

Power to delegate.

Power to make rules.

CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS

Cognizance of offences.
Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of time.
Place of inquiry or trial.

Provision as to certain offences regarding cognizability and competent
court.

Offences by companies.
Repeals und savings.


Short
title,
extent and
applica-
tion.

Delinivons.

THE NATIONAL SECURITY BILL, 1971

A
BILL

to consolidate and amend the law relating to offences against the

1971

national security

CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Security Act,

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It applies also outside India—
(a) to citizens of India;

4 (6) to aliens on any ship or aircraft registered in India:
an

(2) to aliens in the service of the Government.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—-

(a) “‘armed forces” means the military, nuval and air
forces, and includes any other armed forces of the Union;

(8) “foreign agent” means any person who is, or has
been, or in respect of whom it appears that there are reasonable
grounds for suspecting him of being, or having been, employed
by a foreign State, either directly or indirectly, for the purpose
of committing an act, either within or without India, prejudi-
cial to the national security, or who has, or is reasonably
suspected of having, either within or without India, committed,
or attempted to commit such an act in the interests of a foreign
State;

(c) “member”, in relation to the armed forces, means
a person in the armed forces other than an officer;

(d) “model” includes design, pattern and specimen;

(e) “minitions of war” includes the whole or any part
of any aircraft, ship, submarine, tank or similar engine,
arms, ammunition, torpedo, missile or mine intended or
adapted for use in war, and any other article, material or
device, whether actual or proposed, intended for such use;

92


93

[1) “officer”, in relation to the armed forces, means 8
person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer of the
armed forces, and includes a junior commissioned officer,
a petly officer and a non-commissioned officer;

(8) “photograph” includes an undeveloped film oF
plate;

(4) “prejudicial to the national security” means pre-
judicial 10 the sovereignty and intergrity of India, or te the
afety or security of India or any part thereof, or to India’s
Sriendly relations with foreign States;

(i) “prohibited place” means,—
(i) any armed Force establishment.
station or camp;

(ii) any work of defence, wireless or signal station,
clegraph or telephone installation, arsenal, minefield,
ship or aircraft under the controt of aay of the armed
forces;

(iii) any factory, dockyard or other place belon3-
ing to, or occupied by or on behalf of, Government.
and used for the purpose of making, repairing or
storing any munitions of war or any sketches, models
or documents relating thereto. or for the purpose of
getting any metals, oif or minerals of use in time of
war;

(iv) any place not belonging to Government where
any munitions of war or any skerches, models or do-
cuments relating thereto are being made, repaired or
stored under contract with, or otherwise on behalf of,
Government;

(vj) any other place which is for the time beiag
declared by the Central Government by notification in
the Official Gazette to be a prohibited place for the
purposes of this Act on the ground that information
with respect thereto, or the destruciion or obstruc-
tion thereof, or interference therewith, would be useful
to an enemy, and at which a copy of such notification
is displayed for public information;

(7) “sketch” includes any plan, photograph or other
mode of representing any place or thing;

(k) words and eapressions used but not defined in this
Act and defined in the Indian Penal Code have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Code;

(f) any reference ta a law which is not in force in the
State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State,
be construed 2s a reference to. the corresponding law
in force in that State.

24M of Law!71—7


Waging
war
against
the
Govern-
ment of
India.

Preparing
to wage
war.

Concealing
10 wage
war.

Conspiracy
to overawe
the
Parliament
or Govern-
ment of
India or
the
Legislature
or Govern-
ment of
any State.

Preventing
by force
exercise of
State
authority
in further-
ance oF
inter-
State dis-
putes.

Assaulting
President,
etc, With
intent to
compel or
restrain the
exercise of
any lawful
powers,

94

CHAPTER 2
INSURRECTION

3. Whoever wages war against the Government of India,
or attempis to wage such war, or abets the waging cf such war.
shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and
shall also be liable to fine.

CHAPTER 7
SUBVERSIVE ASSOCIATIONS

4. Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise
prepares to wage war with the intention of either waging or
being prepared to wage war against the Government of India.
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life or rigorous.
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall
also be liable ta fine.

5. Whoever, by any act or illegal omission, conceals the
existence of a design to wage war against the Government of
India, intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing
it to be likely that such concealment will facilitate, the waging.
of such war, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall alsc be
liable to fine.

6. Whoever, conspires to overawe, by means of force or
show of force, the Parliament or Government of India or the
Legislature or Government of any State, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for life or with rigorous imprsonment for
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable
to fine.

Explanation.—To constitute a conspiracy under this section,
it is not necessary that any act or illegal ommission shall take
place in pursuance thereof.

7. Whoever, by means of force or show of force, prevents or
attempts to prevent any State from exercising its authority in
any part of that State, with a view to securing an alteration of
the boundaries of that State, or in furtherance of a dispute
between that State and another State or the Union, shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to a fine.

8. (1) Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compel-
ling any office-holder or to whom this section applies. to exer-
cise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of his lawful
powers, assaults, or wrongfully restrains, or overawes by means
of force or show of force, such office-holders, shall be punish-
able with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine,


95
(2) The office-holders to whom this section applies are
(i) the President of India;
the Vice-President of India;
(ii) the Chief Justice of India;
iv) the Speaker of the House of the Peoples;
(v) the Governor of any State;

(vi) the Chief Justice of any High Court;

(vii) the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of any
State; and

(viii) the Chairman of the Legislative Council of any
State.

CHAPTER 3
ASSISTING THE ENEMY

9. Whoever, assists in any manner an enemy at war with
India, or the armed forces of any country against whom the
armed forces of India are engaged in hostilities, whether or
not a state of war exists between that country and India, shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

10. Whoever, unlawfully enters into, or remains in, India
for the purpose of committing an offence under this Act shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

11, Whoever, knowingly aids or assists any prisoner of war
in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts ५0
rescue any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such
prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or offers or
attempts to offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner,
shall be punishable with rigorous and shall imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, also be liable to fine.

12, Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody
of any prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such prisoner to escape
from any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.

13. Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody
of any prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape
from any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Assisting
India’s
enemies.

Infiltration
for coma
itting
offence
against
national
security.
Aiding
escape

of, rescu-
ing or
harbouring
prisoner of
war.

voluntarily
allowing
prisoner of
war LO 65-
cape.

Public

escape.


Waging
war against
any
foreign
State at
peace with
India.

Commit-
ting depre-
dation on
territories
of foreign
State at
peace with
India.

Receiving
property
taken by
means of
such wag-
ing of war
or depre~
dation.
Recruit
ment to,
or enlist
ment in,
armed
forces of
foreign
States,

96
CHAPTER 4

RELATIONS WITT FOREIGN STATES

14. Whoever wages war against the Government of any
foreign State at peace with India, or altempts to wage such war,
or abets the waging of such war, shall be punishable with imp-
risonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine.

15. Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparation
to commit depredation, on the territories of any foreign State.
at peace with India, shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable.
to fine and to for feiture of any property used or intended to
be used in committing such depredation- or acquired by such
depredation.

46. Whoever receives any property knowing the same to
have been taken in the commission of an offence under section
14 or section 15, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be fiable
to fine and to forfeiture of the property so received.

17. (1) If, in the interests of friendly relations with foreign
States or national security, the Central Government considers.
it necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
prohibit, or impose conditions on,—

(a) recruiting for service in the armed forces of a specified
forcign State;

(4) enlistment for such service;

(2) Whoever, in contravention of such notification,

{a) induces, or attempts to induce, any person to accept,
or agree to accept, or to proceed to any place with a view ta.
obtaining, any commission or employment in the armed
forces of a foreign State, or

(0) knowingly aids in the engagement of any person so.
induced by forwarding or conveying him or by advancing
money or in any other way whatsoever, or

___ (0) enlists himself with a view to obtaining any commis-
sion or employment in the armed forces of a foreiga State,
or

(ब) knowingly aids in such enlistment of any person,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.


oF
CHAPTER 5
OFFENCES RELATING To THE ARMED Forces

18. Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer
छा member of any of the armed forces shall,—

(a) if mutiny be committed in consequence of such
abetment, be punishable with death, or with imprisonment
for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine; and

(8) in any other case, be punishable with rigorous imp-
fisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall also be Hable to fine.

19. Whoever attempts to seduce any officer or member of
any of the armed forces from his allegiance or his duty shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ien years, and shall also be liable to fine.

20. Whoever abets an assauit by an officer or member of
any of the armed forces on any superior officer being in the
execution of his office shall,—

(a) if such assault to be committed in consequence of
that abetment, be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to
fine; and

(4) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be
liable to fine.

21. Whoever abets the desertion of any officer or member
of any of the armed forces shall,—

(a) if the desertion be committed in consequence of that
abetment, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
May extend to five years, or with fine, or with both:

(6) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both.

22, Whoever, knowing or having reason 10 believe that an
officer or member of any of the armed forces has deserted,
harbours such officers or member, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or
with fine, or with both,

Exception—-This provision does not extend to the case in
which the harbour is given by a wife to her husband,

Abetment
of mutiny.

Altempt-
ing to
seduce
officer or
member
from duty.

Abetment
of assault
on superior
Officer,

Abeunent
of deser-
tion trom
armed
forces.

flarbour-
ing desert-
er.


Abetment
of an act
of insub-
ordination,

Incitement
to mutiny
or other
act of
insubordi-
nation.

Dissuation
from en-
listing and
instigation
to mutiny
or insub-
ordination
after enlist-
ment,

Persons
subject
to certain
laws, not
to be
punished
under the
Chapter,

98

23. Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubor-
dination by an officer or member of any of the armed forces,
shall,—

(०) if such act of insubordination be committed in
consequence of that abetment, be punishable with imprison-
ment fora term which may extend to two years, or with fine,
or with both; and

(6) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine,
or with both,

24, Whoever makes or publishes or circulates any statement,
Tumour or report, with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause,
any officer or member of any of the armed forces to mutiny or
otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such officer or member,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Explanation.—A_petson making, publishing or circulating
any such statement, rumour or report, who has reasonable grounds
for believing that such statement, rumour or report is true and
makes, publishes or circulates it in good faith and without any
such intent as aforesaid, does not commit an offence under this
section,

25. Whoever:—~

(a) with intent to affect adversely the recruitment of
persons to serve in the armed forces of the Union, dissuades
or attempts to dissuade the public or any person from enter-
ing any such forces, or

(0) without dissuading or attempting to dissuade from
entering such forces, instigates the public or any person to do,
after entering any such foree, anything which is punishable
as mutiny or insubordination under the law relating to that
armed force, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extent do three years, or with fine, or with
both.

Explanation —The provisions of clause (a) do not extend to
comment on, or criticism of, the policy of the Government in
comnection with the armed forces, made in good faith without any
intention of dissuading from enlistment, or to advice given in good
faith for the benefit of the individual to whom it is given, or of any
member of his family, or of any of his dependants.

26. No person subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy
Act, 1957, the Air Force Act, 1950, or any other law relating to
the armed forces of the Union is subject to punishment under the
preceding provisions of this Chapter for any of the offences
therein defined.


99

27. Whoever, not being an officer or member of the armed
force , wears any garb or carries any token resembling any garb
or token used by such an officer or member with the intention
that it may be believed that he is such an officer or member shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with fine, or with both.

CHAPTER 6
SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES

28. Whoever commits, or abets the commission of, any dis-
tuptive activity, or advocates or advises any disruptive activity,
shall be punishable with impriosonment for a term which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation —For the purposes of this section,—-

(०) “disruptive activity’ means any action taken,
whether by act done, or by words spoken or written, or by
signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, -

() which questions, disrupts, or is intended to
disrupt, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India;
or

(ii) which is intended to bring about, or supports
any claim for, the cession of any part of India, or the
secession of any part of India from the Union, or

(ii) which incites any person to bring about such
cession or secession;

(6) “cession” includes the admission of claim of any
foreign country to any part of India;

(c) “secession” includes the assertion of any claim to
determine whether a part of India will remain within the
Union.

Exception.—Nothing in this section applies to any treaty,
agreement or convention emtered into between the Government
of India and the Government of any other country or to any
negotiations therefor carried on by any person authorised in this
behalf by the Government of India.

29. Whoever organises, trains, maintains or promotes any
group the members of which are trained or equipped to use force
for achieving its object and which is organised—

(a)_ for the purpose of usurping the functions of the
armed forces; or

(0) forthe purpose of committing acts of sabotage
punishable under section 32, or

Wearing
garb or
carrying
token

used by
officer or
member of
the armed
forces.

Disruptive
activity.

groups,


Treason:
able relat-
ions
foreign
State or
Institutions
or organi-
sation.
‘Treason-
able decep-
tion.

Sabotage.

Spying

100

(c) for any other purpose prejudicial tothe national
security; shall be punishable with rigorous imprisorment
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be
liable to fine;

and whoever participates in, or belongs to, any such group as
aforesaid shall be punishable with rigorous impriscnment for a
term which may extend to five years, and shal! also be liable to
fine.

30. Whoever, for any purpose prejudicial to the national
security, maintains relations with a foreign state or with an ins-
stitution or organisation outside India shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shail also be liable to fine.

31, Whoever, for any purpose prejudicial to the national
security, intentionally transmits to a public servant a false report
the content of which is likely to disrupt relations between India
and a foreign State or an international institution, shall be punish-
able with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.

32. (1) Whoever, for any purpose prejudicial ta the 17: sional
security, does any act which impairs the efficiency or impedes the
working of, or causes damage to.—

(०) any prohibited place or any machinery or apparatus
therein, or

(8) any means of public transportation, or

(c) any means of telecommunication,

shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine,

(2) 8 person shall not be guilty of an offence under this
section by reason only that he stops work as a result of an indus-
trial dispute as defined in clause (k) of section 2 of the [ndustriat
Disputes Act, 1947; but nothing in this sub-section shall attect
his lability to be prosecuted for any offence which he may have
committed against the provisions of that Act.

33. If any person, for any purpose prejudicial to the national
security, —

(a) enters, inspects, passes over, approaches, or is in thr
vicinity of, a prohibited place; or

(6) makes any model, sketch or note which is intended
or likely to be, directly or indirectly, useful to an enemy; or

(c) obtains, collects or records any such sketch. modet
or note as aforesaid, or any article, document or information
which is intended or likely to be, directly or indirectly, useful
to an enemy or relates to a matter the disclosure of which is
likely to be prejudicial to the national security; or


101

(d) publishes or communicates to any other person
any such thing or information as aforesaid,

he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to
fine.

34, (1) If any person, having in his possession any official Divulaing

official
secret,— secrets.

(व) uses it for the benefit of any foreign State or im any
manner prejudicial (0 the national security; or

(6) wilfully communicates it to any person other than
2 person to whom he is authorised to communicate it, or a
person to whom it is, in the Anterests of State, his duty to
communicate, or a Court of Justice; or

(2) retains it when he has no right to do so, or when
it is contrary to his duty to do so, or wilfully fails to comply
with any direction issued by lawful authority with regard to
its return or disposal: or

{d) fails to take reasonable care of, or so conducts
himself as to endanger the safety of, the official secret,
he shall—

(i) If the official secret is one specified in clause (6)
or clause (८2) of section 33, be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be Mable to fine;

(ii) ia other cases, be punishable with imprisonment
for three years, or with fine, or with both.

(2) If any person receives any official secret knowing or having
season to believe that it is communicated to him in contraven-
tion of sub-section (1) of this section or section 33, he shall-—

(i) if the official secret is one specified in clause (b) or
clause (c) of section 33, be punishable with rigorous impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall
also be liable to fine;

(ii) in other cases, be punishable with imprisonment for
three years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a person who is in
‘possession of an official secret without lawful authority may be
‘presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have received it knowing
or having reason to believe that it is communicated to him in
‘contravention of sub-section (I) of this section or section 33, as
the case may be.

(4) In this section “official secret’ means any thing or in-
iformation—

(a) which is specified in clause (b) or clause (८) of section
3, or


Using
false

uniforms,
documents
and seals
for pur-

Judicial to
national
security.

102

(8) which has been entrusted in confidence 10 the offen-
der by any person holding office under Government, or

{c) which the offender has obtained or to which he has
had access owing to his position as a person who holds or
has held office under Government, or as a person who holds
or has held a contract made on behalf of Government, or as
a person who is or has been employed under a person who
holds or has held such an office or contract.

35. (1) If any, person, for the purpose of gai ing admission.
or of assisting any other person to gain admission, to a pro-
hibited place or for any purpose prejudicial to the national
security,—

(a) uses of wages, without lawful authority, any armed
force, police, or other official uniform, or any uniform so
nearly resembling the same as to be calculated to deceive.
or falsely represent himself to be a person who is or has been
entitled to use or wear any such uniform; or

(4) orally, or in any document signed by him or on his
behalf, knowingly makes, or connives at the making of, any
false statement or any omission; or

(c) forges, alters, or tampers with any officiat document,
or knowingly uses or has in his possession any such forged.
altered, or irregular official document; or

(व) personates, or falsely represents himself to be. a
person holding or in the employment of a person holding
office under Government, or falsely represents himself to
be of not to be a person to whom an official document has
been duly issued or communicated: or

(e) with intent to obtain an official document, whether
for himself or any other person knowingly makes any false
statement; or

(J) without lawful authority, uses, has in his possession
or under his control, manufactures or sells any official seal,
or any die, seal or stamp so nearly resembling an official
seal as to be calculated to deceive, or counterfeits any official
seal,

he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

(2) If any person, for any purpose prejudicial to the national

security,—

(a) retains any official document, whether or 70. completed
or issued for use, when he has no right to retain it, or when
it is contrary to his duty to retain it, or wilfully fails 10 comply
with any directions issued by, or under authority of, Govern-
ment with regard to its return or disposal thereof; or


103

(8) allows another person to have possession of, or co-
mmunicates to another person, any official document issued
for his use alone; or

(2) without lawful authority or excuse, has in his possess-
ion any official decument issued for the use of some person
other than himself; or

(४) on obtaining possession of any official document, by
finding or otherwise, wilfully fails to restore it to the person or
authority by whom or for whose use it was issued, or ta a
police officer;

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

(3) In this section,—

(a) “official document” means any armed force police
or official pass, permit, certificate, licence or other document or
a similar character, and includes any secret official code or
pass-word,

(0) “official seal” means any die, seal, stamp of or be-
Jonging to, or used, made or provided by any department of
Government, or by any diplomatic or armed force authority
appointed by, or acting under the authority of, Government.

36. If any person in the vicinity of any prohibited place abs-
trucis, knowingly misleads or otherwise interferes with or
impedes, any police officer or any officer or member of the
armed forces engaged on guard, sentry, patrol, or other similar
duty in relation to the prohibited place, he shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.

37. If any person  fails—

(a) to give on demand to any member of the armed forces
engaged on guard, sentry, patrol or other similar duty, or to
any Superintendent of police, or to any other police officer
not below the rank of sub-inspector empowered by an Inspec-
tor-General or Commissioner of Police in this behalf, any
information in his power relating to an offence or suspected.
offence under section 33 or section 34, or

(6) if so, required, and upon tender of his reasonzble
expenses, to attend at such reasonable time and place as may
be specified for the purpose of furnishing such information,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment for aterm which
may be extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

38. (1) If any person knowingly harbours any person whom he
knows or has reasonable grounds for supposing to be a person who
is about to commit or who has committed an offence under sec-
tion 32 or section 33, or knowingly permits to meet or assemble

Interfering.
with the
police or
armed
forces on.
duty ata
prohibited
place.

Failure to
give in
formation.

Penalty for
harbouring
saboteurs
of spi 5.


Sedition,

‘Search
‘Warrants.

104

in any premises in his occupation or under his control any such
Persons, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

(2) If any person who has harboured any such Person ag afore-
said, or who has permitted to. meet or assemble in any premises in
his occupation or under his control any such person as aforesaid,
fails to give on demand to a Superintendent of police officer not
below the rank of sub-inspéctor empowered by an Inspector-
General or Commissioner of Police in this behalf, any information
in his power relating to any such person or persons, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend io
three years, or with fine, or with both.

39, Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs,

or by visible representation or otherwise,

excites, or attempts to excite, disaffection towards the Con-
stitution, or the Government or Parliament of India, or the
Government or Legislature of any State, or the administration
of justice, as by law established,

intending or knowing it to be likely thereby to endanger the
sovereignty and integrity of India or the safety or security of
India or any part thereof, or to cause public disorder,

shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment. for a term
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Explanation 1.—The expression “disaffection” includes feel-
ings of enemity, hatred or contempt.

Explanation 2,—-Comments expressing disapprobation of the
provisions of the Constitution or of the actions of the Govern-
ment, or of the measures of Parliament or a State Legislature, or
of the provisions for the administration of justice, with a view to
obtaining their alteration by Iawful means without exciting or
attempting to excite disaffection, do not constitute an offence
under this section,

40. (1) If a metropolitan magistrate, magistrate of the first
class or sub-divisional magistrate is satisfied by information on
oath that there is reasonable ground for suspecting that an offence
under any of the sections 32 to 38 has been or is about to be com-
mitted, he may grant a search warrant authorising any police
officer named therein not being below the rank of an officer in
charge of a police station, —

(a) to enter at any time any premises or place named in
the warrant, if necessary, by force, and

() 10 search the premises or place and every person
found therein, and


105

(c) to seize any sketch, model, article, note or document
or anything of a like nature, or anything which is evidence
of an offence under any of the said sections having been
or being about to be committed which he may find on the
premises or place or any such person, and with regard to or in
connection with which he has reasonable ground for suspecting
that an offence under any of the said sections has been o- is
about to be committed.

@) Where it appears to a police officer, not being below the
rank of superintendent, that the case is one of great emergency,
and that in the interests of the State immediate action is necessary,
he may, by a written order under his hand, give to any police
officer the like authority as may be given by the warrant of a
magistrate under this section.

(3) Where action has been taken by a police officer under
sub-section (2), he shall, as soon as may be, report stich action.
in a metropolitan area to the chief metropolitan magistrate, and
outside such area to the district or sub-divisional magistrate,

(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1971.
shall, so far as may be applicable, apply to any search or seizure
under this section as they apply to any search or seizure mede
under the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of tat
Code,

41. In addition and. without prejudice to any powers which
a Court may possess to order the exclusion of the public from any
Proceedings, if, in the course of any inquiry into or trial of, any
person for an offence under any of the sections 28 to 38, or in the
course of any proceedings in appeal or revision from such inquiry
or trial, application is made by the prosecution, on the ground
that the publication of any evidence to be given or of any state-
ment to be made in the course of the proceedings would be pre-
judicial to the national security, that all or any portion of the
public shall be excluded during any part of the hearing, the Cort
may make an order to that effect, but the passing of sentence shall
in any case take place in public.

42. Ina prosecution for an offence under any of the sections
29 to 35, it shall not be necessary to show that the accused person
was guilty of any particular act tending to show a Purpose pre-
judicial to the national security, and, notwithstanding that no
such act is proved against him, he may be convicted, if, from the
Circumstances of the case or his conduct or his known character
as proved, it appears that his purpose was a purpose Prejudicial
to the national security.

43. (1) In any prosecution for an offence under section 33,
if any sketch, model, article, note, document or information re-
lating to or used in any prohibited place, or relating to anything
in such a place is made, obtained, collected, recorded, published

Exclusion
of public
from cer-
tain pro-
ceedings.

Fyidence
of purpose
prejudicial
to national
securily,

Presumpt-
ions in
prosecution
for spying.


Definitions,

105

or communicated by any person other than a person acting under
lawful authority, and from the circumstances of the case or his
conduct or his known character as proved it appears that his
purpose was a purpose prejudicial to the national security, such
sketch, model, article, note, document, or information shall be
presumed to have been made, obtained, collected, recorded, pub-
lished or communicated for a purpose prejudicial to the national
security.

(2) In any prosecution of a person for an offence under sec-
tion 33,

(a) the fact that he has been in communication with.
or attempted to communicate with, a foreign agent, whether
within or without India, shall be relevant for the purpose of
proving that he has, for a purpose prejudicial to the national!
security, obtained or attempted to obtain information which
is intended to be or likely to be, directly or indirectly, useful
to an enemy;

_ (6) a person may be presumed to have been jn communi-
cation with a foreign agent if —

(i) he has, either within or without India, visited
the address of a foreign agent or consorted or associated
with a foreign agent, or

(i) either within or without India, the name or
address of, or any other information regarding, a foreign
agent has been found in his possession, or has been ob-
tained by him from any other person;

(c) any address, whether within or without India, in
respect of which it appears that there are reasonable grounds
for suspecting it of being an address used for the receipt of
communications intended for a foreign agent, or any address
at which a foreign agent resides, or to which he resorts for the
purpose of giving or receiving communications, or at which
he carries on any business, may be presumed to be the address
of a foreign agent, and communications addressed to such an
address to be communications with a foreign agent.

CHAPTER 7
SUBVERSIVE ASSOCIATIONS
44. In this Chapter,--

(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
section 59;

(6) “subversive activity” means any act punishable
under section 3, 4, 6, 7, 28, 29, 30 or 32;


107

(c) “subversive association” means any association
which has for its object a subversive activity, or which en-
courages or aids persons to undertake such activity or of
which the members undertake such activity ;

(व) “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constituted under
section 47,

45. (1). If the Central Government is of opinion that any
association is, or has become, a subversive association, it may, by
notification in the official Gazette declare such association to be
@ subversive association.

(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which
it is issued and such other particulars as the Central Government
may consider necessary:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the
Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to
be against the public interest to disclose.

(3) No such notification shall have effect until the Tribunal
has, by an order made under section 46, confirmed the declaration
made therein and the order is published in the Official Gazette:

Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for that Govern-
ment to declare an association to be a subversive association
with immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be stated in writing,
direct that the notification shall, subject to any order that may be
nade under section 46, have effect from the date of its publice-
tion in the Official Gazette.

(4) Every such notification shall, in addition to its publi-
cation in the Official Gazette, be published in not less than one
daily newspaper having circulation in the State in which the
principal office, if any, of the association affected is situated,
and shall also be served on such association, in such manner as
the Central Government may think fit and all or any of the
following modes be followed in effecting such ~ service,
namely :—

(a) by affixing a copy of the notification to some conspicuous
part of the office, if any, of the association; or

(89) by serving a copy of the notification, where possible, 0:
the principal office-bearers, if any, of the association:
or

(2) by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of loud-
speakers, the contents of the notification in the area in
which the activities of the association are ordinarily
carried on; or

4d) in such other manner as may be prescribed.

Declarat-
ion of an
association
as subver-
sive asso-
ciation.


Refereace
to Tribun-
al,

Tribunal,

108

46. (1) Where any association has been declared a subversive
association by a notification issued under sub-section (1) of
section 45, the Central Government shall, within thirty days
from the date of the publication of the notification under the said
section, refer the notification to the Tribunal for the purpose of
adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring
the association as a subversive association.

(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Tri-
banal shail cail upon the association affected, by notice in writing.
10 show cause, within thirty days from the date of such notice
why the association should not be declared a subversive asso-
ciation.

(3) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the assacia-
tion or the office-bearers or members thereof, the Tribunal shalt
fold an inquiry, in the manner specified in section 51, and after
calling for such further information as it may consider necessary
from the Central Government or from any office-bearer or mem-
ber of the association, it shall decide whether or not there is
sufficient cause for declaring the association to be a subversive
association and make, as expeditiously as possible and in any
case within a period of six months from the date of the issue of the
notification under sub-section (1) of section 45, such order as
it may deem fit either confirmmg the declaration made in the
notification or cancelling the same.

(4) The order of the Tribunal made under sub-section (31
shall be published in the Official Gazeite.

47, (1) The Central Governinent, may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, constitute as and when necessary, a wibunal
to be known as the “Subversive Activities (Prevention) Tribunal”
consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Czntral Govern-
ment:

Provided that no person shall be so appointea unless he is a
judge of a High Court.

(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary
absence) occurs in the office of the presiding officer of the Tribu-
nal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person
in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy
and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal from
the stage at which the vacancy is filled.

(3) The Central Government shall make available to the
Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its
functions under this Act,

(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund cf India.


109

(5) Subject to the provisions of section 31, the Tribunal
shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all matters
arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place
or places at which it will hold its sittings.

(6) The Tribunal shall, for the Purpose of making an inquiry
under this Act, have the same Powers as-are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely—

(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
witness and examining him on oath;

(b) the discovery and Production of any document or other
material object produced as evidence;

(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or
office ;

(०) the issuing of any commission for the examination of
witnesses, पु

(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to
be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and
228 of the Indian Penal Code and thé Tribunal shall be deemed
to be a civil court for Purposes of section 196 and Chapter XXVI
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1971.

48. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a noti-
fication issued under section 45, shall, if the declaration made
therein is confirmed by the Tribunal by an order made under
section 46, remain in force for a period of two years from the
date on which the notification becomes effective.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
the Central Government may, either on its own motion or on the
application of any person aggrieved, at any time, cancel the
notification issued under section 45, whether or not the declara-
tion made therein has been confirmed by the Tribunal.

49. (1) Where an association has been declared a subversive
association by a notification issued under section 45, which has
become effective under sub-section (3) of that section and the
Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it may
think fit, that any person has custody of any moneys, securities
or credits which are being used or are intended to be used for the
purpose of the subversive association, the Central Government
may, by order in writing, prohibit such person from paying,
delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing in any manner
whatsoever with such moneys, securities or credits or with any
other moneys, securities or credits which may come into his
custody after the making of the order, save in accordance with
34 M of Law/71—8

Period of
operation
and can-
celiation of
notificat-
ion.

Power to
prohibit
the use of
funds of a
subversive
associat~
ion.


Power to
notify
places used
for the
purpose of
subver-
sive asgoci=
ation.

110

the written orders of the Central Government and a copy of such
order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the
manner specified in sub-section (3).

(2) The Central Government may endorse a copy of the
prohibitory order made under sub-section (1) for investigation
to any gazetted officer of the Government it may select, and such
copy shall be a warrant whcreunder such officer may enter in or
upon any premises of the person to whom the order is directed,
examine the books of such person, search for moneys, securities
or credits, and make inquiries from such person or any officer.
agent or servant of such person, touching the origin of any deal-
ing in any moneys, securities or credits which the investigating
officer may suspect are being used or are intended to be used for
the purpose of the subversive association.

(3) A copy of an order made under this section shall be served.
in the manner provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1971, for the service of a summons, or, where the person to be
served is a corporation, company, bank or other association,
it shall be served on any secretary, director or other officer or
person concerned with the management thereof, or by leaving it
or sending it by post addressed to the corporation, company,
bank or other association at its registered office, or where there
is no registered office, at the place it carries on business.

(4) Any person aggrieved by a prohibitory order made under
sub-section (1) may, within fifteen days from the date of the
service of such order, make an application to the Court of the
District Judge within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such
person voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain, to establish that the moneys, securities or credits
in respect of which the prohibitory order has been made are not
being used or are not intended to be used for the purpose of the
subversive association, and that Court shall decide the  ques-
tion,

(5) Except so far as it is necessary for the purposes of any
proceedings under this section. no information obtained in the
course of any investigation made under sub-section (2) shall be
divulged by any gazetted officer of the Government, without the
consent of the Central Government.

(6) Ta this section, “security” includes a document whereby
any person acknowledges that he is under a legal liability to pay
money, or whereunder any person obtains a legal right to the
payment of money.

50. (1) Where an association has been declared a sub-
yersive association by a notification issued under section 45,
which has become effective under sub-section (3) of that section,
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, notify any place which in its opinion is used for the
purpose of such subversive association.


111

___Explanation.—Fot thé purpose of this sub-section, “place”
includes a house or building or part thereof, a tent and a vessel.

(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the
district magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
such notified place is situate or any officer authorised by him in
writing in this behalf shall make a list of all movable properties
(other than wearing apparel, cooking vessels, beds and beddings,
tools of artisans, implements or husbandry, cattle, grain and
food-stuffs and such other articles as he considers to be of a
trivial nature) found in the notified place in the presence of two
respectable witnesses.

(3) If, in the opinion of the district magistrate, any articles
specified in the list are or may be used for the purpose of the
subversive association, he may make an order prohibiting any
person from using the articles save in accordance with the written
orders of the district magistrate.

(4) The district magistrate may thereupon make an order
that no person who at the date of the notification was not a
resident in the notitied place shall, without the permission of the
district magistrate, enter, or be on ‘or in, the notified place :

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shail apply to any
near relative of any person who was a resident in the notified
place at the date of the notification.

(5) Where in pursuance of sub-section (4), any person is
granted permission to enter, or to be on or in, the notified place,
that person shall, while acting under such permission, comply
with such orders for regulating his conduct as may be given by
the district magistrate.

(6) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector.
or any other person authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government may search any person entering or. seeking to enter,
or being on or in, the notified place and may detain any such
person for the purpose of searching him :

Provided that no female shall be searched in pursuance of
this sub-section except by a female.

(7) Tf any person is in the notified place in contravention of
an order made under sub-section (4), then, without Prejudice to
any other proceedings which may be taken against him, he may
be removed therefrom by any officer or by any other person
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.

(8) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued in respect
of a place under sub-section (1) or by an order made under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) may, within thirty days from the
date of the notification or order, as the casc may be, make an
34 M of Law/71-~9,


Procedure
to be foll-
owed in
the dis-
posal of
applicat-
ions under
this
Chapter.

Penalty for
being
member of
asub-
versive

association.

Penalty
for deal-
ing with
funds ofa
subversive
associat-
ion.

Penalty for
contraven-
tion of an
order
made in
respect of
a notified
Place,

112

application to the Court of the District Judge within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate—

(a) for declaration that the place has not been used for the
purpose of the subversive association; or

(b) for setting aside the order made under sub-section 161]
‘of sub-section (4), and on receipt of the application the
Court of the District Judge shall, after giving the parties
an opportunity of being heard, decide the question.

51. Subject to any rules that may be made under this Chapter,
the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding an inquiry
under sub-section (3) of section 46, or by.a Court of the District
Judge in disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of
section 49 or sub-section (8) of section 50 shall, so far as may
be, be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, for the investigation of claims, and the decision of the
Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be,
shail be final. -

32. Whoever is and continues to be a member of an associa-
tion declared to be subversive association by a notification issued
under section 45 which has become effective under sub-section
(3) of that section, or takes part in meetings of any such subversive
association, or contributes to, or receives or solicits any contri-
bution for the purpose of, any such subversive association or in
any Way assists the operations of any such subversive association,
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 2 term which
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.

53. If any person on whom a prohibitory order has been
served under sub-section (1) of section 49 in respect of any
moneys, securities or credits, pays, delivers, transfers or other-
wise deals in any manner whatsoever with the same in contra-
vention of the prohibitory order, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both, and notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1971, the court trying such
contravention may also impose on the person convicted an addi-
tional fine to recover from him the amount of the moneys or
credits or the market value of the securities in respect of which
the prohibitory order has been contravened or such gart thereof
as the court may deem fit.

34. (1) Whoever uses any article in contravention of a pro-
hibitory order in respect thereof made under sub-section (3) of
section 50 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, and shall also be liable to fine.

(2) Whoever knowingly and wilfully 18 in, or effects or
attempts to effect entry into, a notified place in contravention of


113

5 an order made under sub-section (4) of section 50 shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
and shall also be liable to fine.

55. An association shall not be deemed to have ceased to
exist by reason only of any formal act of its dissolution or change
of name but shall be deemed to continue so long as any actual
combination for the purposes of such association continues
between any members thereof.

56. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter,
no proceeding taken under this Chapter, by the Central Govern-
ment or the district magistrate or any officer authorised in this
behalf by the Central Government or the district magistrate shall
be called in question in any court in any suit or application or by
way of appeal or revision, and no injunction shall be granted
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or
to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this
Chapter.

57. (1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against
the Government in respect of any 1055 or damage caused or likely
to be caused by anything which 111 good faith done or intend-
ed to be done in pursuance of this Chapter or any rules or orders
made thereunder.

(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the district magistrate or any officer authorised in this
behalf by the Government or the district magistrate in respect of
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Chapter or any rules or orders made there-
under.

58. The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the powers which may be
exercised by it under section 49 or 50 shall, in such circumstances
and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the noti-
fication, be exercised also by any State Government, and the State
Government may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government by order in writing direct that any power which
have been directed to be exercised by it shall, in such circumstanc-
es and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the
direction, be exercised by any person subordinate to the State
Government as may be specified therein.

59. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this
Chapter,

Continua-
nee of
associat-
ion.

Bar of
Jurisdiction

Protection
of action
taken in
good
faith.

Powers to
delegate.

Power to
make rules.


Cogniz-
ance of
offences.

Bar to
taking cog-
nizance
after lapse
of time.

“|, The references is to the Cr. Py

14

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, such rules may provide: for all or any of
the following matters namely :—

(a) the service of notices or orders issued or made under
this Chapter and the manner in which such notices or orders
may be served, where the person to be served is a corporation,
company. bank or other association:

दि @) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a
District Judge in holding any inquiry or disposing of any
application under this Chapter;

(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, pres-
cribed.

(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
successive sessions. and if, before the expiry of rhe session in
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule.

CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS

60. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence
under this Act except with the previous sanction of the Central
Government*or of the State Government.

(2) The Central Government or the State Government
before granting sanction under sub-section (1), may order a pre-
liminary investigation by a police officer not being below the rank
of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have the
powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 127 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. !

61, (i) No Court shall take cognizance of an‘offence punish-
able under sections 24, 25, 28, 39 or 54, after the expiry of one
year.

(2) The provisions of sections 513 to 516? of the Indian
Penal Code shall apply for the purpose of computing the period of
limitation under sub-section (1) as they apply for the purpose
of computing the period of limitation for taking cognizance of
the offences under that Code.

Bill, 1 970.

2. As recommended in the 42nd Report, see para. 24.30,

.


115

+ 62. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Place of
Criminal Procedure, 1971, any offence under this Act may be nay of
inquired into and tried by any court within whose jurisdiction '4-
the offence was committed or the accused person is found.

63. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of

Provision
Criminal Procedure, 1971,—

as to cet
tain
{@) offences under sections 21, 22, 23 and 27 shall be offences ror
i: . garding
cognizable; दक्ष abi
i al a i. + Tity an
4 (6) the offence under section 39 shall be non cognizable; competent
an है court,
(८) offences under sections 15, 16 and 39 shall be triable
only by the Court of Session.

64, (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act — Offences
is 4 company, every person who at the time the offence was com. bY com-
mitted, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company Panes.
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be lable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly :

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
tender any such person liable to such punishment provided in this
Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his know-
ledge or that he exercised all due diligence to. prevent the com-
mission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1).
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shail be lia-
ble to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation —For the purposes of this section —

(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and

(6) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.

65. (1) The following enactments are hereby repealed, Repeuls
namely,— and save

(a) chapters 6 and 7 of the Indian Penal Code; ings.
(6) the Foreign Recruitment Act, 1874;
(c) the Official Secrets Act, 1923;


116

4 (4) section 2 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1961}
ane

(e) the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967,

(2) The British Statute entitled the Foreign Enlistment
Act, 1870 (33 & 34 vic. c. 90) in so far as it extends to, and
operates as part of the law of, India or any part thereof is hereby
repealed,

(3) Transitional provisions.

COMPARATIVE TABLE

(1) Inpian Penal Cope

Existing Proposed
Section 121 3

Section 121A 6

Section 122 4

Section 123 5

Section 124 8

Section 124A, 39

Section 125 14

Section 126 45

Section 127 16

Section 128 12

Section 129 13

Section 130 11

Section 131 18 (in part) and 19
Section 132 18 (in part)
Section 133 20 (in part)
Section 134 20 (in part)
Section 135 ai

Section 136 22

Section 137 Omitted !
Section 138 23

Section 139 26

Section 140 27

Section 505 (in part) 24

As to omission of Section 137, I.P.C., see the 42nd Report.


.

7

(2) OFFICIAL Secrets Act, 1923
Existing Proposed
Section 1 -
Section 2(1) Omitted.
Section 2(2) Omitted.
Section 2(3) Omitted.
Section 2(4) 2(d)
Section 2(5) 2)
Section 2(6) Omitted.
Section 2(7) 29)
Section 2(8) 2(i)
Section 2(9) 25)
Section 2(10) Omitted.
Section 3(1) 33
Section 3(2) 42 and 43(1)
Section 4(1), 4(2)(a), (0) 43(2)
Section 4(2)(b) 260)
Section 5(1) 341)
Section 5(2) 34(2)
Section 5(3) Omitted.
Section 5(4) 34(2) and 34(4).
Section 6(1) 35(1)
Section 6(2) 35(2)
Section 6(3) 35(1) and 35(3)
Section 6(4) 42
Section 7 36
Section है 37(a) and (७)
Section 9 “Omitted.
Section 10(1) 38(1)
Section 10(2) 38(2)
Section 10(3) 38(3)
Section 11 40
Section 12 Omitted.
Section (3(1} Omitted.
Section 13(2) Omitted.
Section 13(3) 60
Section 13(4) 62
Section 13(5) “60
Section 14 AL

Section 15 64


Hs
(3) Forrrcn Recruiting Act, 1874

Proposed
Section 1 Omitted.
Section 2 Omitted.
Section 3 17a)
Section 4 176)
Section 5 Omitted.
Section 6 17(2)fa}(b)
Seclion 7 62

(4) Foretcn ENustMenr Act, 1870 (ENG.)

Existing Proposed
Sections 1 to 3 Omitted.
Section 4 17209)
Sections 5 to 15 Omitted.
Section 16 Omitted.
Section 17 62
Sections 18 to 33 Omitted.

(5) UNLAWFUL Activiries (PREVENTION) ACT, 1967

Existing Proposed

Section 1 _

Section 2(b) 28, Explanation (b)
Section 2(c) 44{a)

Section 2(d) 28, Explanation (c)
Section 2(९) 44(d)

Section 2(f) 44(b) & 28. Explanation (a)
Section 2(g) 44(c)

Section 2A 2(b)

Section 3(1) ASQ)

Section 3(2) 45(2)

Section 3(3) 45(3)

Section 3(4) 45(4)

Sections 4(1) to 4(4) 46(1) to 46(4)
Section 5(1} 47(1)

Seetion 5(2) 47(2)

Section 5(3) 4703)

Section 5(4) 47(4)


Section 5(5)
Section 5(6)
Section 5(7)
Section 60)
Section 6(2)
Section 7(1) to 7(6)
Section ह(1) to 8(6)
Section 9
Section 10
Section 11
Section 12(1) and (2)
Section 13(1)
Section 13(2)
Section 13(3)
Section 14
Section 15
Section 16
Section 17
Section 18(1), (2)
Section 19

_ Section 20
Section 21(1), (2), (3)

119

47(5)

47(6)

47(7)

48(1)

48(2) हि
49(1) to 49(6)
50(1) to 50(8)
51

52

53

5461) and 54(2) ~
28

Omitted.
Omitted,
Omitted.

55

36

60

57(1), (2)

58

Omitted.
59(1), (2), (3)

TABLE SHOWING THE SECTION IN THE BILL AND THE CORRES-
PONDING SECTION IN THE RELEVANT EXISTING ACT

Bill

Section 1
Section 2(a)
Section 2(b)

Section 2(d)
Section 2(e)
Section 2(g)
Section 20)

Section 2(j)

Existing Act section

New

New

Section 4(2)(b),

Official Secrets Act, 1923
Section 2(4), .

Official Secrets Act, 1923,

Section 2(5),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
Section 2(7),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
Section 2(8),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
Section 2(9),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,


Bill Section

Section 2(b)
Section 3
Section 4
Section 5
Section 6
Section 7
Section 8
Section 9
Section 10
Section Lt
Section 12
Section 13
Section 14
Section 15
Section 16
Section 17(1)(a),(b)

Section 17(2(a), (b)

Section 18

Section 19
Section 20

Section 21
Section 22
Section 23
Section 24
Section 25
Section 26
Section 27
Section 28

120
Bill contd.)
Existing Act Section -

Section 2A, Unlawful Activities Act.
Section 121, LPC.

Section 122, LP.C.

Section 123, LP.C.

Section 1214, LP.C.

New

Section 124, LP.C.

New

Section 130 LP.C.

Section 128, LP.C.
Section 129, LPC.
Section 125, 1.P.C,
Section 126, 1.
Section 127, 1.P.C.

Sections 3 and 4,
Foreign Recruiting Act,
1874,

Section 6, Foreign
Recruiting Act, 1874,
also, section 4,
Foreign Enlistment Act,
1870 (Eng.),

Section 131, 1.P.C. in part,
and

Section 132, LPC. in part,
Section 131, LP.c.

Section 133, L.P.C. in part.
and :
Section 134, L.P.C. in part.
Section 135, LP.C.

Section 136, 1.P.C.

Section 138, LP.c.

Section 505, LP.C. (in part)
New.

Section 139, LP.C.

Section 140, 19.0.

Section 131),

Unlawful Activities (Preve.vion)
Act, 1967.


Bill Section

Section 28
Explanation (b)

Section 28
Explanation (c)

Section 29
Section 30
Section 31
Section 32
Section 33
‘

Section 34(1)
Section 34(2)
Section 34(4)
Section 35(1)
Section 35(2)
Section 35(3)
Section 36
Section 37(a) & (b)
Section 38(1)
Section 38(2)

Section 38(3)

Section 39
Section 40

Section 41

121
Bill (contd.)
Existing Act Section

Section 2(b),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
Section 2(d),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
New

New

New

New

Section 3(1),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
Section 5(1),

Official Secrets Act, 1923.
Section 5(2), 5(4),

Official Secrets Act, 1923.
Section 5(4),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
Section 6(1), 63),

Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 6(2),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 6(3),
Official Secrets Act, 1923,

Section 7,

Official Secrets Act, “1923.

Section 8,
Official Secrets Act, 1923

Section 10(1),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 102),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 10(3),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 124A, I.P.C.

Section 11,
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 14,
Official Secrets Act, 1923.


Bill Section
Section 42

Section 43(1)
Section 43(2)

Section 44(a)

Section 44(b)

Section 44(c)

Section 44(d)

Section 45(1)

Section 45(2)

Section 4503)

Section 45(4)

Section 46(1)
Section 46(2)
Section 46(3)
Section 46(4)
Section 47(1)
Section 47(2)
Section 47(3)
Section 47(4)
Section 47(5)
Section 47(6)

122

Existing Act Section

Section 3(2),

Official Secrets Act, 1923
also Section 6(4),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 3(2),
Official Secrets Act, 1923,

Section 4(1), 42KaXe),
Official Secrets Act, 1923.

Section 2(c),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967,

Section 20),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 2(2),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 2(e),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 3(1)
Unlawful Activities,
(Prevention)-Act, 1967.

Section 3(2),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 3(3),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 3(4),

Unlawful Activities

(Prevention) Act, 1967,

Section 41) Unlawful

Section 42) | Activities (Preven-
Section 4(3) tion) Act, 1967.
Section 4(4) |

Section 51) >

Section 5(2) |

Section 5(3) Unlawful Activities
Section 5(4) (Prevention) Act,
Section 5(5)

Section 5(6)


Bill Section

Section 47(7)
Section 48(1)
Section 48(2)
Section 49(1)
Section 49(2)
Section 49(3)
Section 49(4)
Section 496)
Section 49(6)
Section SO(1)
Section 50(2)
Section 50(3)
Section 50(4)
Section 50(5)
Section 50(6)
Section 50(7)
Section 50(8)
Section 51

Section 52

Section 53

Section S4(1)

Section 542)

Section 55

Section 56

Section 57(1)

123

Existing Act Section

Section 57) 1
Section 6(1)
Section 6(2)
Section 7(1)
Section 7(2)
Section 7(3)

Section 7(4) Unalwful Activities
Section 7(5) (Prevention) Ac:,

Section 76) $1976.
Section &(1)
Section 8(2)
Section 8(3)
Section 8(4)
Section 8(5)
Section 8(6)
Section 8(7)
Section 8(8)
Section 9,

Unlawful Activities Act, 1967,

Section 10,
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section [1,
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, (967.

Section 12(1),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 12(2),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 15,
Unlawful Activities,
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 16,
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.

Section 18(1),
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act. 1967

,


Bill. Section

Section 57(2)

Section 58

Section 59(1)

Section 59(2)

Section 59(3)

Section 60

Section 61
Section 62

Section 63
Section 64

124

Existing Act Section

Section 18(2),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
Section 19,

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967,
Section 21(1),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967,
Section 21(2),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967,
Section 21(3),

Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967,
Section 13(3), 13(5),
Official Secrets Act, 1923,
also section 17,
Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967.
New

Section 13(4),

Official Secrets Act, 1923,
also section 7,

Foreign Recruiting Act, 1874,
also section 17, Foreign
Enlishment Act, 1870 (Eng.)
New

Section 15,
Official Secrets Act, 1923,


APPENDIX 2
CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS IN CENTRAL ACTS
1, THE INDIAN Penat. Cone

1. In section $2A, the words and figure “and in section 130 ip the
case in which the harbour is given by the wile or husband of the person
harboured” shall be omitted.

2, In section 94, for the words “offences against the State”, the words
and figures “offences against the National Security Act, 1971” shal! be substi-
tuted,

प्र, THe Code or CrimmNaL Procepure!

1. In section 42, sub-section (1), claus’ (a},—

(i) the words and figures “191, 121A, 122, 123, 124, 124A, 125,
126, 130° shall be omitted;

+ (i) after the words, figures and brackets “436 to 460 (both in-
clusive)” the words and figures “or under any of the following sections
of the National Security Act, 1971, namely, 3, 4. 5, 6, 8, 11, 14, 15,
and 39”, shall be inserted.

2. In section 95, sub-section (1), for the words and figure “under section
124A or”, the words and figures “under section 39 of the National Security
Act 1971, or under” shail be substituted.

3. In section £09, sub-section (1), clause (a), for the words and figure
“under section [244 or”, the words and figures “tinder section 39 vf the
National Security Act, 1971, or under” shall be substituted.

4. In section 197, caluse (७), the word and figure “Chapter V1" shall
be omitted.

5. In section 446, in sub-section (3), the word and figure “Chapter
WI’, shall be omitted’.? .

6. Inthe First Schedule, the entries telating to offences under Chapters
Vi and VU of the Indian Penal Code shall be omitted.

1. ge amendments proposed ate to the sections of the Cade of Crimizal Procedure
Bill, 1979,

2, Except section 130, all offences under Chapter VI of the Indian Penal Code
as revised and included in the National Socurity Bill are punishable with ‘imprisonment
for seven years and more, and are therefore covered by the general ascription in section
4453) of the Criminal Procedure Code Bill.

125



126

7. In the Second Schedule, in Form No. 31, Part L-—

(/) in item No. (1), for the words and figures “under section 121
of the Indian Penal Code” the words and figures “under section 3. of
the National Security Act, 1971” shall be substituted;

Gi) in tiem No, (2), for the words and figure “under section 124
of the Indian Penal Code™ the words and figures “under section है of
the National Secruity Act, 1971” shall be substituted.

UL THe Criminat Law AMENDMENT Act, 1961

In section 4, sub-section (1), for the words, figures and brackets “under
section 2 or sub-section (2) of section 3”, the words, figures and brackets
“ander section 28 of the National Security Act, 1971 or sub-section (2) of
section 3 of this Act” shall be substituted,

MGIPRRND—34 M of Law/71-—Sec. 4 (N.S,)—21-2-72—2,000.