PLD.92. XLIV
2000

LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON

THE APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF THE
SUPREME COURT IN CIVIL MATTERS

October, 1971

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF LAW


K.V.K. Sundaram New Delhi-1,
Chairman August 31, 1971.
Shri H.R. Gokhale.

Minister of Law & Justice,

Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,
New Dethi-I.

Dear Law Minister,

1 have pleasure in sending herewith the Forty-fourth Report
of the Law Commission on the appellate jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court in civil matters,

Yours sincerely,

K.V.K. Sundaram


REPORT
ON THE APPELLATE JURISDICTION OF THE
SUPREME COURT IN CIVIL MATTERS

1. Article 133 of the Constitution provides for an appeal
to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order
in a civil proceeding of a High Court if—

(a) the value of the subject-matter of the dispute is not
less than twenty thousand rupees, or

(b) some claim or question respecting property of the
like amount is involved in the judgment, decree or final
order, or

(c) the case is in the opinion of the High Court fit for
appeal to the Supreme Court.

In case of (a) or (b), if the judgment, decree or final order
affirms the decision of the Court immediately below, there must
be involved in the appeaf a substantia! question of law.

2. This minimum limit of Rs. 20,000 was fixed in 1950
at the time of the Constitution. By 1969, it began to be felt
that, in view of the fall in the value of the rupee, this limit was
too low, and that the Supreme Court ought not to be troubled
unless a much larger amount was involved. A proposal was,
therefore, made to raise this amount to one hundred thousand
rupees, and a Bill for that purpose was introduced in 1969 in the
Rajya Sabha.! We were at one stage consulted about this
matter, and we felt at that time that it was somewhat inappro-
priate and certain cases whether fit or unfit for the consideration
of the Supreme Court should be allowed to go there merely
because of the value of the subject-matter in dispute; and, while
not objecting to the Bill as it stood, we remarked that “one
might with good justification go to the extent of saying, that, in
civil cases, appeals should lie to the Supreme Court only on a
certificate of fitness granted “by the High Court or, in other
words, only under clause (c) of Article 133(1) and that clauses
(a) and (b) of this Article should be repealed.”

3. The Bill introduced in the Rajya Sabha was passed by it
in August 1970; but, because the Lok Sabha was dissolved before
it could consider it, the Bill lapsed. We were subsequently
asked by the Law Ministry whether we would make a firm re-
commendation for the deletion of clauses (a) and (b) of Article
133, and took up this question for a closer and detailed study.

Article 133
of the
Constitu-
tion and the
valuation
limit.

Bill in-
troduced in
1969 to
enhance
the val-
uation.

Reference
to the
Commission

Bill, 1969 (No. XXXI-C of 1969).

1. The Supreme Court (Enhancement of Valuation for Civil Appellate Jurisdiction)


Note cir-
culated by
the Com-
mission.

History of
the appel-
late juris-
diction —
Privy Coun-
cil,

Position up
to 1838

Position
after 1838,

Position
from 1937
to 1950.

2

4. Before forming our opinion, we invited the views of all
High Courts, Bar Associations and State Governments, in the
country, apart from a number of jurists. For this purpose, we
prepared a working paper! stating the nature of the proposal,
its advantages and disadvantages and indicating our own tenta-
tive thinking on the subject. This was circulated and comments
invited; and, although the time at our disposal was somewhat
short, there has been a fair response from those whom we con-
sulted.

5. The appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in civil
matters is in substance a legacy from the Privy Council, which
first devolved on the Federal Court and, a little later, on the
Supreme Court. The only change of any consequence made
was the substitution of “Twenty thousand rupees” for “Ten
thousand rupees” in connection with clauses (a) and (b) of
Article 133. The Privy Council, or more appropriately, the
King’s Council, had jurisdiction over the Courts in the King’s
Dominions, and as soon as the British established a system of
Courts in India, a provision for appeals to the Privy Council
was naturally made.

6. As early as 1726, when Mayors’ Courts were functioning
in the three presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay,
an appeal was provided to the King-in-Council in cases where the
subject matter of the litigation was worth more than 1000 pago-
das. After the establishment of the Supreme Court of Calcutta
by the Regulating Act of 1773, the Charter of that Court provid-
ed for an appeal to the King-in-Council where the subject-
matter of the dispute exceeded the sum of 1000 pagodas. In
Bombay, however, the pecuniary limit for appeal to the King-
in-Councit was fixed at 3000 Bombay rupees. In the mofussil
also, where the corresponding High Courts for civil litigation
were the Sadar Diwani Adalats, a pecuniary limit was fixed for
the purpose of appeal to the King-in-Council, but it varied from
place to place.

7. By an Order in Council in 1838 uniformity was introduced,
and an appeal to the King-in-Council was permitted only where
the value of the matter in dispute in appeal was at least 10,000
company rupses. This minimum value continued the same after
the constitution in 1861 of the High Courts (which replaced
the old Supreme Courts and Sadar Diwani Adalats), and it
was incorporated in the Civil Procedure Code of 1908 notwith-
standing the considerable fall in the purchasing power of the
rupee since 1838.

8. The establishment of the Federal Court (1937) under the
Government ‘of India Act, 1935, and the advent of independence
(1947) did not make any change on this point. Civil appellate

1. Appendix 1 to this Report.


3

jurisdiction of the Federal Court was enlarged in 1948 by a Cen-
tral Act! passed in pursuance of section 206 of the Government
of India Act, 1935. This Act vested the Federal Court with
civil appellate jurisdiction heretofore exercised by the Privy
Council, but preserved the jurisdiction of the Privy Council to
hear appeals from the Federal Court. In 1949, the appellate
jurisdiction of the Privy Council was totally abolished.2 But
these legislative measures, while changing the forum of appeal,
did not disturb either the principle of valuation or the pecuniary
limit which remained at Rs. 10,000. The makers of the Cons-
titution, while maintaining the principle of valuation, raised the
amount to Rs. .20,000 and indicated that Parliament might raise
it further to any extent by an ordinary law.

9. The provision in Article 133 of the Constitution is supple- Position
mented by Article 136, which enables the Supreme Court to grant gader the
special leave to appeal to it from any decision of any court or tion.
tribunal in India. Civil appeals to the Supreme Court thus fall
into two broad categories:

(i) those found fit by the High Court or the Supreme
Court, and

(ii) those involving property or subject-matter worth
Rs. 20,000 or more.

The first category is readily understandable; but the second,
we think, is not, except on the ground that such has been the
arrangement for a long time. We feel it is now time to take a
second look at this arrangement. Forgetting the Supreme Court
for a moment, it is clear that otherwise the Code of Civil Proce-
dure contemplates only one appeal on facts, and section 100 of
the Code expressly bars a second appeal except on a question of
Jaw. The result is that, if a District Judge hearing an appeal
arrives at a finding of fact whether affirming or reversing the
finding of the Court below, that finding of the District Judge is
final, and cannot be disturbed by the High Court: should a
High Court interfere with such a finding, the Supreme Court
does not hesitate to quash the High Court’s decision. In the
circumstances, it is not easy to appreciate the rule that, if a High
Court reverses a finding reached by the lower Court, that finding
of the High Court is not final if the subject-matter of the litiga-
tion is worth a good deal of money.

10. The question of civil appellate jurisdiction of the Su- Question
preme Court was briefly discussed by the Law Commission previously
when it considered the reform of judicial administration. In considered

the 14th Report of the Law Commission,3 it was stated by the me

“The two rights of appeal, viz., the right of first appeal ™ssion.
to the High Court and a further right of appeal to the Supreme

1. The Federal Court (Enlargement of Jurisdiction) Act, 1948 (1 of 1948), section 3
read with section 2a).

2. The Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act, 1949 (Constituent Assembly Act
5 of 1949),

3. Vol. 1, page 371, paragraph 16.


Uniformity
of law.

Position in
other coun-
tries.

Appeals by
certificate.

4

Court in certain cases are, to quote the Civil Justice Com-
mittee, ‘both proper and necessary. . ., and that guarded and
conditioned as at present, they are justifiable in principle,
in practice ‘necessary as a control over the different (and
differing) High Courts and a source of strength for our judi-
cial system with the instructed and uninstructed public’.
With the abolition of the jurisdiction of the Privy Council
and the creation of a Supreme Court in India, the great hard-
ship of heavy costs which had to be incurred in England in
appeals of this type has disappeared. On the whole, therefore,
we sce no further scope for the curtailment of first appeais
to the High Court or of appeals to the Supreme Court under
article 1337,

But the matter was, it seems, not approached from the parti-
cular angle which we have mentioned above.

li. Although we have adopted a federal constitution and
administration of justice is a State subject, we have chosen
a unified system of courts with the Supreme Court as the final
interpreter of not only the Constitution but of all laws, State or
Central, and Article 141 of the Constitution expressly requires
all courts to be bound by the law as declared by the Supreme
Court. This makes for uniformity in the interpretation and
administration of laws. In the name of uniformity, it is contend-
ed that access to the Supreme Court should not be unduly res-
tricted, and if different High Courts have read the same law
differently, the Supreme Court should be enabled quickly to end
the uncertainty created by such conflict. At the same time, it
is recognised by everybody that too many cases cannot be allow-
ed to go to the Supreme Court as that would choke the working
of that Court. Admittedly, therefore, a line has to be drawn
somewhere. We would like to avoid a line that merely divides
the rich from the poor; and as we said in our working paper, the
‘valuation test’ seems to discriminate unfairly between the rich
litigant and the poor.

12. We have looked at the laws of some other countries
to ascertain if there are comparable provisions for appeals to the
highest court of the Jand.!__ In England, an appeal to the House
of Lords needs leave from the court of appeal or from the House
itself. Conditions in India are, of course, not the same as in
England; but the English experience is valid to show that such
an arrangement can work without difficulty. Some countries
like Australia, Canada and Switzerland still retain the valuation
test for appeals to the highest Tribunal, while in other countries
like France, West Germany, U.S.A. and U.S.S.R. the value of
the subject-matter is not relevant.

13. It is sometimes said that High Courts are extremely re-
luctant to certify that an appeal is fit to be taken to the Supreme

1See Appendix 1, paragraph 14 and Annexure B to that Appendix.


5

Court, and if clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133 were deleted
and only clause (c) remained, there would be few appeals to the
Supreme Court and conflicting views of different High Courts
would keep the law uncertain for long periods of time. We do
not think any such fear to be well founded. We have not been
able to obtain very detailed information about the appeals
filed in the Supreme Court under Article 133(1); but we have
obtained the figures for 1966 and 1967,! and they do not show
that appeals on certificate of fitness are rare or even smaller in
number than those under clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133.
Thus, in 1967, 367 appeals were filed in the Supreme Court
under clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133, and as many as 648
under Article 133(1)(c) and Article 132(1). Of these 648 appeals
it is unlikely that even half could be under Article 132(1) which
concerns questions of law touching the interpretation of the
Constitution. The corresponding figures for 1966 are 245 under
Article 133(1)(a) and (b), and 636 under Article 133(1)(c) and
132(1). There seems, therefore, no ground for thinking that
appeals on a certificate of fitness under Article 133(1)(c) would
be rare.

14. It is true that a certificate of fitness for appeal to the
Supreme Court is not to be granted lightly, as the Supreme Court
has repeatedly pointed out. That is precisely how we think it
should be. The Supreme Court, in our opinion, should be
troubled only if the High Court finds itself in great difficulty in
deciding a case and the question of law is of great importance.
As we have said, such occasions would and should be few. It
has to be remembered that Article 136 of the Constitution is
always available for correcting any error of the strictness that a
High Court may have committed, and, unlike the Privy Council,
the Supreme Court is near at hand.

15. We have already mentioned that administration of justice
is a State subject, and for every State there is a High Court.
The Judges there are carefully chosen on the basis of theix ex-
perience. They are more familiar with conditions in their State,
and it is reasonable to think that they are, generally speaking,
more competent than any outsider to judge matters concerning
that State. It is, therefore, proper that all ordinary litigation
should end in the High Court, and only exceptional circumstances
should justify recourse to the Supreme Court. We are not per-
suaded that the money value of the subject-matter of litigation
can, in modern times, be called an exceptional circumstance.

16. In the working paper,? we had placed three main alterna-
tives before those we consulted, namely,—

(1) no change in article 133;

Certificate
not grant-
ed lightly.

High
Courts
more fami-
liar with
local con-
ditions.

Three al-
ternatives
considered.

1. See Appendix 1, paragraph 16.
2. See Appendix 1, para. 15.


Opinion of
the Bar.

Views of
Judges.

6

(2) raise the value in clauses (a) and (b) to one hundred.
thousand rupees; and

(3) delete clauses (a) and (b) and retain only clause (c).

Another suggestion was to delete clauses (a) and (b), and
while retaining clause (c), to add another clause to provide for
an appeal from evey division bench decision of a High Court
exercising original jurisdiction. This last suggestion has not
attracted much attention. We are also of the view that a provi-
sion for appeal to the Supreme Court from every division bench
decision of a High Court exercising original jurisdiction is not
required. Although it is a good rule in general that there should
be at least one appeal so that litigation is not concluded by one
judgment, we think that in this case. a provision for appeal to
the Supreme Court is not needed. So far as writ petitions heard
and decided by a division bench of a High Court are concerned,
they invariably involve questions of law, and more often than
not, clause (c) of Article 133(1) will come into play and appeal to
the Supreme Court will be available in most cases.

17. About the other three alternatives, opinion has—as we
expected—differed. The Bar is generally against any change,
and, in particular, against the proposal to delete clauses (a) and
(b). We think that this is understandable. Members of the
legal profession practising in the Courts have a natural bias in
favour of their clients; and clients; who approach them for taking
appeals to the Supreme Court are those who usually feel that
justice has not been done to them in the High Court. The
general feeling among the Bar! therefore is that the doors to the
Supreme Court must be kept wide open. The difficulty of obtain-
ing a certificate and the uncertainty likely to be caused. have
been emphasised. It has also been urged that the more the value
of the claim the greater the stake the litigant has in the litigation,
and it would not, therefore, be proper to deprive a litigant of his
valyable right of appeal.

An eminent member? of the Bar is, however, in favour of
deleting clauses (a) and (b) of article 133(1), “particularly because
there should be no discrimination in the administration of justice
between the rich and the poor.”

18. The Registrar of the Supreme Court has furnished us
with a statement showing institutions and disposals of appeals
and writ petitions in the Supreme Court year by year from 1961
to 1970. It appears from this statement that the number of civil
appeals disposed of by the Court in each of these ten years except
1961 has been very considerably less than the number of such
appeals instituted during that year. During the last six years,
1965 to 1970, the total number of institutions was 13,229 and the -

1. Views of the Supreme Court Bar Association were not received.

2. Shri Niren De, Attorney General of India.


7

total number of disposals was only 9,249, indicating थी accumu-
lation of arrears of nearly 4,000 civil appeals-during this period.
To quote from the Registrar's letter:—

“The Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India feels that with the
present jurisdiction of and rate of institutions in the Supreme
Court, it will rather be difficult to avoid further increase in
the arrears of cases in the Supreme Court. It is expected
that, if sub-clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133(1) of the Consti-
tution of India are repealed, there will be appreciable reduc-
tion in the volume of work in the Supreme Court. The
Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India would, therefore, welcome
the suggestion or move to repeal sub-clauses (a) and (b) of
Article 133(1) of the Constitution”.

The High Court Judges generally are also in favour of the
proposal to delete clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133, Some
who do not go so far, favour some restrictions like raising the
valuation limit to Rs. 100,000, while only a few think that there
should be no change.

Many of the replies favouring deletion make the point that
valuation cannot be the yardstick for a right to appeal. An
important questionjof law can arise even in suits of small value.
The test of valuation results in cases without merit going up to
the Supreme Court.

Some of the replies have emphasised that where there is a
substantial question of law involved, there ought to be a right of
appeal to the Supreme Court, if the valuation test is satisfied.

19. Having{considered the various aspects of this problem,
we are of the opinion that in civil proceedings.in the High Court
an appeal should ‘be permitted to the Supreme Court only if the
High Court considers the case fit for appeal, keeping intact, of
course, the discretion of the Supreme Court to grant leave to
appeal. We recommend that clauses (a) and (b) of Article
133(1) should be omitted and clause (1) of the Article amended?
to read as follows :—

“(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
judgment, decree or order in a civil proceeding of a High
Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies that
the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court.”

20. We now come to the provision to be made regarding
matters pending at the date of commencement of the amendment
or judgments pronounced before that date. This is important,
because it is well-established that in the absence of an express
provision on the subject, a provision relating to the right of
appeal would not be retrospective. In a case? decided in 1957,

particularly sections 109-110 and Order 45

1. Consequential amendments will be necessary in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,

2. Veeraya v. Subbiah Choudhry and others, (1957) 8. C. R. 488 ; A. I. R. 1957 S. €.

0 (5. R. Das, ८. J.)
33 M of Law/71


Need for
express pro-
vision

Provision
proposed in
earlier Bill.

Query
made to
॥ opi-
nion.

Views re-
ceived.

1. Colo

8

where the question arose whether the increased limit of
Rs. 20.000 applied to a judgment passed after the commence-
ment of the Constitution, but arising out of a suit instituted
before such commencement, the Supreme Court held as
follows :—

“The right of appeal is a vested right, and such a right
to enter the superior court accrues to the litigant and exists
as on and from the date the /is commences and, although it
may be actually exercised when the adverse judgment is
pronounced, such right is to be governed by the law prevail-
ing at the date of the institution of the suit or proceeding,
and not by the law that prevails at the date of its decision
or at the date of the filing of the appeal.”

21, In Colonial Sugar Refining Co. v. Irving!, the Privy
Council held that the (Australian) Commonwealth Judiciary
Act, section 39. which abrogated the power of the court to grant
leave to appeal to the Privy Council, did not affect the right of
the appellant to file an appeal under the old law since the suit
was pending when the section came into force. The section
was “not retrospective by express enactment or by necessary
intendment™; and the right of appeal was not a mere matter of
procedure. ‘‘To deprive a suitor in a pending action of an
appeal to a superior tribunal which belonged to him as of right
is a very different thing from regulating procedure.”

22. We may note that the Bill passed by the Rajya Sabha
called “The Supreme Court (Enhancement of Valuation for
Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) Bill, 1970” contained a provision?
leaving appeals pending in the Supreme Court to be dealt with
according to the old law and other cases to be dealt with under
the new law.

23. We had, in our working paper3, put a specific query as
to what should be the transitional provision as regards—

(8) matters pending in the High Court by way of appeal
or revision or in its original jurisdiction, and

(b) matters pending in the High Court for the issue of a
certificate on the basis of pecuniary valuation.

There we had also referred to clause 4 of the lapsed Bill and
inquired if a provision on those lines would be satisfactory.

24. Many of the comments received on our working paper
have not dealt with this point. Out of such of them as have
answered it, a large number regard as satisfactory a transitional
provision on the lines of clause 4 of the lapsed Bill. But a few

Sugar Refining Co. v. Irving, (1905) A. C. 369, 372.

2. Clause 4 of the Bill. See Annexure A to Appendix I
3, See Appendix 1, para 15(v).


9

comments stress the desirability of a saving provision for pending
applications also, ic. applications pending in the High Court
for a certificate on the basis of valuation under the present pro-
vision.

25. We considered the matter at some length. The possible
situations at the commencement of the amending Act would be
as follows :--

(i) cases pending in the High Court or a subordinate
court on that date;

(ii) cases disposed of by the High Court before that
date by a judgment, decree or final order, where a certificate
under clause (a) or (b) of article 133(1) has not yet been
applied for;

(iii) cases disposed of by the High Court by a judgment,
decree or final order, where a certificate under clause (a) or
(b) has been applied for, but the application for the certi-
ficate is pending on that date;

(1५) cases disposed of by the High Court before that
date, where a certificate under clause (a) or (b) has been
obtained, but the appeal to the Supreme Court has not been
actually filed;

(५) cases in which, not only a certificate has been granted
under clause (a) or (b), but also an appeal has been filed and
is pending in the Supreme Court on that date.

26. We consider that in the situation at (i), (ii) and (iii) above,
the amendment can be made applicable without much difficulty.
The proceedings would not have reached such an advanced stage
as to create an expectation that the defeated party will be
able to invoke his right under clause (a) or clause (b) of article
133(1). Moreover, the provisions of article 133(1)(c) and article
136 could be resorted 10.

27. The cases at (iv) and (v) above, however, stand on a
different footing. In case (iv), for example, the prospective
appellant has done all that requires to be done on his part to
file an appeal, and, it is only the accident of the date of com-
mencement falling between the obtaining of the certificate and
the actual filing of the appeal that takes away his right. This is
likely to cause hardship, and the number of such cases is bound
to be appreciable. If the right under clause (a) or (b) is not
preserved, the appellant will have to take fresh steps to obtain
leave under article 133(1)(c). It is possible that the time limit
for applying? for such leave may be about to expire very shortly,
or may have already expired.

1. Under article 132, Limitation Act, 1963, the period of limita

the High Court for a certit

Possible
situations
analysed.

Need for
saving pro-
vision con-
sidered.

Cases where
certificate
already
obtained.

pplying “to
icate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court urfder clause (1)

of articles 132, article 133 or sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution
or under any other law for the time being in force’’is sixty days from the date ef the decree,

order, or sentence.


Saving ne-
cessary
where certi-
ficate ob-
tained or
appeal
pending.

provision.

10

28. It is, therefore, desirable that a party who has obtained a
certificate under clause (a) or (b) should, subject of course to the
law of limitation’ and other procedural conditions, be allowed
to file an appeal on the strength of that certificate, and the consti-
tutional amendment should not apply in such cases.

As regards the situation at (v) above, not much argument
is needed to show that the amendment should not affect appeals
pending in the Supreme Court when it comes into force.

29. In short, we recommend—

(1) That the amendment should not apply—

(a) to any appeal pending in the Supreme Court
on the date of its commencement; and

(b) to any judgment, decree or final order of a High
Court in respect of which a certificate under the un-
amended article has been already obtained, though an
appeal has not been filed in the Supreme Court on such
certificate; and

(2) That, subject to (1), the amendment should apply
to judgments, decrees or final orders which were pronounced’
or passed before the above date, or which arise out of any
civil proceeding pending in the High Court or any lower
court on above date.

K. ५. K. SUNDARAM—Chairman
S. 5. Dulat

Mrs. Anna Chandi
R. L. Narasimham
D. 8. Kulkarni

P. M. BAKSHI
Secretary

New Delhi,
The 30th August, 1971

7
। Members
J

1, Order 15, Rule 2, of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, provides that “subject to the
provisions of sections 4, 5, and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the petition of appeal shall
be presented within sixty days from the date of the grant of the certificate of fitness’ etc.


APPENDIX | |
WORKING PAPER CIRCULATED BY THE Law COMMISSION IN MAY, 1971

Supiecr :—Appellate Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to
civil matters under Article 133 of the Constitution.

This note deals with a proposal regarding the appellate jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court in regard to civil matters under Article 133 of the
Constitution. The proposal is to repeal sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause
(1) of the Article, and thereby limit this jurisdiction to cases in which the
High Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme
Court under sub-clause (c), without reference to the amount or value of the
subject matter of the dispute.

2. The Government of India had in 1969 introduced a Billin the
Rajya Sabha, the object of which was to enhance the amount mentioned in
sub-clause (a) from Rs. 20,000 to Rs, 1,00,000. This Bill! was passed
by the Rajya Sabha on the 3rd August, 1970, but owing to the dissolution
of the Lok Sabha before it could consider the Bill, the Bill lapsed. A copy
of the Bill, as passed by the Rajya Sabha, is attached for reference. (An-
nexure A),

3. Article 133, as is well known, was based on the provisions of
sections 109 and 110 of the Civil Procedure Code which formerly regulated
appeals to the Privy Council. The important differences b2tween the
Article and the sections were—

(i) the enhancement of the pecuniary limit from ten thousand rupees
to “twenty thousand rupees or such other sum as may be specified in
that behalf by Parliament by law”;

(ii) the right of appeal, formerly restricted to decrees and final
orders passed on appeal by the High Court, now made available against
“any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High
Court”, thus including final orders passed by a High Court in the exercise
of its revisional jurisdiction;

(iii) the right of appeal on a certificate of fitness, which was formerly
available against any order of the High Court, now restricted to final
orders of the High Court.

4. The raising of the pecuniary limit to Rs. 20,000 in the Constitution
was obviously made in view of the depreciation of the rupee, but it was by
no means proportionate to the fall in the purchasing power of the rupee.
No appreciable fall in the number of appeals to the Supreme Court could
have been expected from the ‘small increase in the pecuniary limit, becuse
the Constitution, for the first time, conferred extensive writ jurisdiction on

की Supreme Cour (Enhancement of Valuation for Civil Appellate Jurisdiction)
ill, 1970.

il


12

High Courts under article 226 if this proceeding an appeal would be to the
Supreme Court against a judgment decree or final order in such proceeding
if it can be classified a: civil proceeding” ; and it is now well-settled! that it
can be so classified if it deals with civil rights conferred either by civil law
or by statute.

5. The present position, therefore, as regards the appellate jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court in civil matters is as follows :—

(1) There is an unrestricted right of appeal to the Supreme Court
where the value of the subject matter of the dispute is not less than Rs.
20.000 or where the order of the High Court involves directly or indirectly
some claim or question respecting property of that amount or value—

(a) if the judgment or the final order of the High Court is passed
in exercise of its origina! jurisdiction (ordinary or extraordinary),

(b) if in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, the High Court
reverses the judgment or order of the Court below.

(2) Where the appellate judgment of the High Court is one of affir-
mance, there must also be “some substantial question of law” involved.

(3) Where the High Court certifies that the case is fit for appeal
to the Supreme Court. the pecuniary limit does not apply.

Judicial decisions have made it clear that the test for grant of a certi-
ficate of fitness under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 133 [corresponding
to clause (c) of old section 109, Civil Procedure Code] is much more rigorous
than the test of a “substantial question of law’ required for a certificate to
appeal against a judgment of affirmance under clause (2) of Article 1332.

6. In India, the conferment of a right of appeal to the highest tribunal
based mainly on the value of the subject matter in dispute has an historical
origin. Asearly as 1726, when Mayors’ Courts were functioning in the
three presidency towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, an appeal was
provided to the King-in-Council in cases where the subject matter of the
litigation was worth more than {000 pagodas. After the establishment
of the Supreme Court of Calcutta by the Regulating Act of 773, the Charter
of the Supreme Court provided for an appeal to the King-in-Council where
the subject matter of the dispute exceeded the sum of one thousand pagodas.
In Bombay, however, the pecuniary limit for appeal to the King-in-Council
was fixed at 3000 Bombay rupees. In the mofussil, where the corresponding
High Courts for civil litigation were the Sadar Diwani Adalats, a pecuniary
limit was fixed for the purpose of appeal to the King-in-Council, but it varied
from place to place.

7. By an Order in Council dated 1838, uniformity was introduced,
and an appeal to the King-in-Council was permitted only where the subject
matter in dispute was at least Rs. 10,000 company rupees in value. This
minimum value continued the same after the constitution in 1861 of the High

1. (a) Naryan Row ४, Ishwar Lal, (1966) 1. S.C. R. 190 >A. 1. 1२. 1965 S.C. 1818,

(0) Ramesh v. Gondalal, (1966) 3. S.C. R. 198 ; A. 1. २९. 1966 5. C. 1445, 1448,

(से Arbind Kumar v. Nand Kishore(1968)3 S. C. R. 322 ; A. 1. R. 1968 $. C. 1227,
2, See Mulla, Civil Procedure Code (1965), Vol. I, page 467.



13

Courts (which replaced the old Supreme Courts and Sadar Diwani Adalats),
and i€ was incorporated in the Civil Procedure Code of 1908 notwithstanding
the considerable fall in the purchasing power of the 109९० since 1838. The
makers of the Constitution maintained the principle of valuation, though
they raised the amount to Rs. 20,000 and indicated that Parliament might
raise it further to any extent by an ordinary law.

8. The main advantages of an unrestricted right of appeal to the
highest court in the country may be said to be

(1) It ensures uniformity in interpretation of the laws, thereby
avoiding the confusion which would result where the High Courts in the
States give conflicting decisions. ,

(2) Correct determination is more likely to be obtained in the
highest court than in the lower courts.

(3) There is always a possibility of error. and there should be supe-
rior court to correct the error.

9. On the other hand. the existence of a right of appeal based on
valuation is open to the following -criticism—

(1) It discriminates unfairly between the sich litigant and the poor.

(2) It is well known that important questions of law do not depend
on the value of the subject matter in dispute.

(3) It promotes the leading of perjured evidence as regards valuation,
and causes considerable delay in the High Court in determining valuation
for the purpose of appeal. It is notorious that litigants under-value
the subject-matter for the purpose of court fee. and then try to over-value
the same for the purpose of appeal to the Supreme Court.

(4) It causes avoidable congestion in the Supreme Court, and thereby
impairs the prompt discharge of its primary functions, namely, the grant
of speedy relief in those cases which involve (a) interpretation of the
Constitution (Article 132), and (b) enforcement of fundamental rights
(Article 32) in regard to which this Court has (in the words of Chief
Justice Pataniali Sastri) “been assigned the role of a sentinel on the qui
vive’ 1

10. Uniformity in the interpretation of civil law, as indeed of all
laws, throughout the country is essential. But this uniformity can always
be brought about either by the High Court granting a certificate of fitness
under sub-clause (c) of Article 133(1), or by the Supreme Court granting
special leave under Article 136. As regards the other two advantages
also2, the power of the Supreme Court to grant special leave under Article
136 may suffice.

11. An English Chief Justice observed} long ago that “it is the glory
and happiness of our excellent Constitution that, to prevent any injustice,

R. 597, 695 ; A. 1. 8. 1952 5. ८. 196,

to! State of Madras v. V.G. Rau, (1952) 5.

2. Para. 8 above.

3. King v. Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the University of Cambridge, (1723) 93
F. R, 698, 702-703. (Sir John Pratt, C. J.).


14

no man is to be concluded by the first judgment; but that, if he apprehends
himself to be aggrieved, he has another court to which he can resort for
relief.” This principle will not be substantially jeopardised by the repeal of
sub-clauses (a) and (b). Ordinary civil litigation reaches a High Court either
in the first appellate stage or in the second appellate stage, according to the
valuation of the subject matter of litigation. Hence, by the time the High
Court dispgses of the matter, the parties have had the benefit of at least one
appeal on law and facts, and sometimes also a second appeal on questions
of law. Even in those High Courts which have ordinary original civil juris-
diction, such as the High Courts of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras, if the
origina! judgment is delivered by a single judge, there is always an unrestricted
right of appeal to a Division Bench under the Letters Patent. It is true that
if, in those High Courts, the original trial is held before a Division Bench,
there will be no unrestricted right of appeal if sub-clauses (a) & (b) are re-
pealed. But such original trials of civil suits before Division Benches are
very rare indeed. However, if this aspect is considered important, a suitable
provision on the subject could be made in Article 133.

12. The proposed amendment is not intended to interfere with the
appeal to the Supreme Court against orders passed by the High Court,
where such a right is conferred by provisions in special laws.! That right
will not be affected in any way by the present proposals.

13. It may be said that by giving a right of appeal based solely on the
test of value of the subject matter—and that too—after an appeal to the
High Court—the law gives an opportunity “‘to put the dice into the box for
another throw’?. It only leads to heavy expense and delay in litigation,
and to some extent, affects the prompt discharge by the Supreme Court of
its primary functions.

14. Areview of the existing "position in England, France, U.S.A.
and a few other countries with a federal constitution has been made, and
the result briefly indicated in Annexure B. The value of the subject matter
in dispute at the final appellate stage is relevant in three countries, viz.,
Australia, Canada and Switzerland; in England, France, West Germany,
Russia and the U.S.A., it is not. .

15. The points for consideration are—

(i) does the existing position under Article 133 require to be changed;
and

(ii) if so, is it sufficient to enhance the valuation limit from the pre-
sent 20,000 rupees to one lakh rupees, as proposed in the lapsed Bill
(Annexure A); or

1. E. g.—(a) section 56, Indian Divorce Act, 1869 ;
. (0) section 116-A, Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951 ;
(c) section 29, Wealth Tax Act, 1957 ;
(d) section 28, Gift Tax Act, 1958 ;
(e) section 38, Advocates Act, 1961 ;
(f) section 83, Income Tax Act, 1961 ; etc.

2. Ambrose Bierce, quoted by Farpentier, Counsel on Appeal, page 145.


15

(iii) is it preferable to repeal sub-clauses (a) and (b) of Article 133(1)
allowing appeals under that Article only on a certificate of fitness under
sub-clause (c) [without prejudicing in any way the power of the Supreme
Court to grant special leave under Article 136]; or

(iv) alternatively, in place of sub-clauses (a) and (b), should there
be a provision for appeal from a judgment, decree or final order of a
Division Bench of the High Court! exercising original jurisdiction (ordi-
nary or extraordinary, e.g., on a writ petition) irrespective of value, or
when above a certain value;

(v) whichever alternative is adopted, what should be the transitional
provision as regards—

(a) matters pending in the High Court by way of appeal or
revision or in its original jurisdiction, and

(b) matters pending in the High Court for the issue of a certi-
ficate on the basis of pecuniary valuation; would a provision on the
lines of clause 4 of the lapsed Bill? be satisfactory?

16. It would be useful to know the extent to which each of the above
alternatives is likely to reduce the number of civil appeals before the Supreme
Court. Detailed and up-to-date figures are not easily available. The follow-
ing figures pertaining to the years 1966 and 1967 may afford some
guidance :—

1966 1967

1. Civil Appeals filed under Articles 133(1)

(4)&(b) . - 245 367
2. Civil Appeals filed under Articles 132(1)

and 133(1)(c) : : 636 648
3. Civil Appeals filed under Articles 132(1)

and 133(1)(a), (b) and (c) . 75 86

TOTAL . 956 1101

About one third of the total number of civil appeals filed on certificates
given under Articles 132(1) or 133(1) were on the basis of valuation only;
and it may also be mentioned that the time taken in hearing and deciding
such appeals is ordinarily more than the time taken in deciding an appeal
under Article 132(1) or Article 133(1)(c).

1. Or of a Judicial Commissioner’s Court with a single judge.
2. Annexure A,


Short title
and com-
mencement.

Enhance-
ment

of valua-
tion for
civil appel-
late juris-
diction of
the
Supreme
Court.

Amendment
of Act 5
of 1908.

ANNEXURE A

Bill No. XXXI-C of 1969

THE SUPREME COURT (ENHANCEMENT OF
VALUATION FOR CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDIC-
TION) BILL, 1970

(AS PASSED BY THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 3RD AUGUST, 1970)
A

BILL

to enhance the amount or value of the subject matier of dispute
Sor purposes of civil appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court,
and further to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first year of the
Republic of India as follows :

1. (1) This Act may be called the Supreme Court (Enhance-
ment of Valuation for Civil Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, 1970.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, for the
purpose of an appeal to the Supreme Court under sub-clause
(a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of Article 133 of the Consti-
tution,—

(a) the amount or value of the subject-matter of the
dispute referred to in the said sub-clause (a) shall be not
less than one lakh rupees instead of twenty thousand rupees;

(b) the judgment, decree or final order referred to in the
said sub-clause (b) shall involve directly or indirectly some
claim or question respecting property of the like amount
or value.

(2) Save as aforesaid, the provisions of Article 133 of the Cons-
titution shall apply in relation to any such appeal as they apply
in relation to an appeal under that Article to the Supreme Court
before the commencement of this Act.,

3. In section 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for
the words “twenty thousand rupees” the words “one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.


17

4. (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect any appeal under Continuance

sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of Article 133 of the of इन

Constitution, which, on the commencement of this Act is pending
before the Supreme Court, and every such appeal may be heard
and disposed of by the Supreme Court as if this Act had not
been passed.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1),
no appeal from any judgment, decree or final order referred to
in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of Article 133
of the Constitution arising out of a civil proceeding pending in
any court at the commencement of this Act, shall be entertained
and disposed of by the Supreme Court, unless such appeal satis-
fies the provisions of section 2.

ANNEXURE B

Relevancy of valuation in appeals to the Supreme Court or
other highest Court of the Country.

1. Australia :
Position as regards appeals to the High Court of Australia -—
(i) Valuation relevant (£ 1500).

(ii) Appeals also lie irrespective of valuation, where
question of status (marriage, divorce, bankruptcy, aliens
etc.) are involved.

(iii) Leave not required. But, besides the matters
mentioned above, leave can be granted by the High Court,
in other cases.

2. Canada :
Position as regards appeals to the Supreme Court of Canada :--

(i) Valuation relevant—10,000 dollars.

(ii) No limitation as to nature of the question involy-
ed.

(iii) Leave not required. But, in cases not covered by
(i) above leave can be granted by the Supreme Court of
Canada or the Provincial Court of Appeal.

3. England :
Position as regards appeals to the House of Lords :—

(i) Vatuation not relevant.

ings.


4,

18

(ii) No limitation as to nature of the question involved
in general, except for ‘leap-frog’ appeals etc.

(iii) Appeal is only by leave of the Court of Appeal or
the House of Lords.

France :

Position regarding appeals to the Court of Cessation :—

(i) Valuation not directly provided for. But it may be
noted that appeals to the first appellate court from the trial
court (court of grand instance) are ordinarily allowed only
if valued at a certain amount, roughly, 200 U. S. Dollars.

(ii) Appeal limited to question of law.

(iii) Leave not required.

5. West Germany :

Position regarding appeals to the Supreme Federal Court :--
(i) Valuation not relevant.

(ii) But the scope of appeal is limited indirectly, because
the function of the Supreme Federal Court is ‘to preserve
the uniformity of application of federal law”, and, apparently,
the appellate jurisdiction will be confined to cases involved
such questions.

(iii) Leave not required.

6. Russia :

Position regarding appeals to the U.S.S.R. Supreme

Court :—

7.

(i) Valuation not relevant. But it should be noted that
a private party has no right of appeal to the U.S.S.R. Supreme
Court.

(ii) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is indefinite.
Motion for review can be filed on the ground of a “parti-
cularly essential violation of the laws in force or a plain
violation of the interests of the workers’ and peasants’ State
and the toiling masses”.

Switzerland :
Position regarding appeals to the Federal Tribunal :—
(i) Valuation relevant (8000 Swiss francs). .
(ii) No express limitation as to the nature of the question

involved could be discovered. But this seems to be implicit
in the Tribunals’ function of ensuring uniform application of


19

federal law. Apparently, its appellate jurisdiction will be
confined to cases involving such application.

(iii) Leave not required.

8. U.S.A. :

Position regarding appeals or certiorari to the Supreme Court
of the U.S.A. :—

(i) Valuation not relevant.

(ii) The question involved must be what can be roughly
described as a “federal” one.

(iii) Leave not required. But review is discretionary
in many cases :

Appellate cases may be taken to the Court by two routes,
appeal and certiorari, depending on the nature of the case. The
avenue of appeal, (which replaced the older writ of error), is
reserved principally for cases from state courts in which the highest
court of the state has held a state statute valid under the federal
Constitution. Other cases from the highest courts of the states—
decisions holding staie statutes unconstitutional, construing
federal statutes, or involving federal privileges and immunities
like full faith and credit to judgments of sister states—must take
the avenue of certiorari. Jurisdiction under appeal is obligatory,
while jurisdiction under certiorari is discretionary with the
Supreme Court.

(b) Position regarding appeal to the highest Court of the
State in the U.S.A. :

There is wide variation in detail in the provisions govern-
ing the right to further review, by the higher appellate court,
of the determination made by the lower appellate court.
Seldom is such further review a matter of right in all cases.
Illustrative is a provision in one State giving such right of
further review where the lower appellate court has reversed
the judgment of the trial court, or where the affirmance of
the judgment has been by a divided court; in all other cases
review may be had only by permission, granted either by the
Jower or the higher appellate court.



APPENDIX 2

List oF Courts! Bopies AND PERSONS WHO EXPRESSED VIEWS ON THE
WORKING PAPER CIRCULATED BY THE LAW COMMISSION

High Courts

1. Allahabad

2. Bombay (Appellate Side)
3. Delhi

4. Gujarat

5. Madhya Pradesh

6. Madras

7. Mysore

8. Orissa

9. Patna

10. Rajasthan

11. Judicial Commissioner, Tripura

State Governments

12. Assam

13. Gujarat
13A. Haryana
14. Maharashtra
15. Mysore

16. Orissa

17, Punjab

Bar Councils and Bar Associations

18. State Bar Council of Andhra Pradesh
19, State Bar Council of Bihar

20. State Bar Council of Gujarat

21. State Bar Council of Kerala

22. State Bar Council of Madhya Pradesh

As to the view forwarded by the Registrar, Supreme Court of India, see the Report.
2, (a) Judicial Commissioners are also included.

(b) Some of the High Courts have sent views of individual judges, while others have
sent views of the High Court.

20


23.
24.

2:

26.
27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

21

State Bar Council of Maharashtra

State Bar Council of Orissa

tate Bar Council of West Bengal

District Bar Association, Patna

District Bar Association, Balurghat, West Bengal
Howrah Bar Association, West Bengal

Goa, Daman & Diu Advocates’ Association

Others

Shri Niren De, Attorney General of India
Shri G. A. Kamat, Speaker, Legislative Assembly,
Goa, Daman and Diu.

Shri J. H. Dalal, Advocate and Member,
State Bar Council of Maharashtra.

Shri P. Tirupai Chetty, Advocate and Member,
Bar Council of Andhra Pradesh, Cuddiapah.
Shri Haridas Govindas Gujarathi, Advocate,
419, Raviwar Peth, Motichowk,
Poona-2.

Shri B. ५. 5. Sivaram Prasad, Advocate,
Guntur, A.P.

Shri V. N. Shukla,

Head of the Department of Law,

Lucknow University.

Principal, University Law College,
Dharwar.

Principal, M. N. Law College,

Khandwa, M.P.

Principal,

Lakhamgonda Law College,

Poona.

Shri D. Gopalkrishan Sastri, Reader,

Law College, Andhra University,
Visakhapatnam.

Shri D. R. Sinha, Lecturer,

Shri Shivaji College,

Amravati.

Shri S. V. Kagi, Lecturer,

University College of Law,

Dharwar-I.

District and Sessions Judge,

Manipur.

Shri J. G. Notaney,

1204/8, Ghole Road,

Poona.

MGIPRRND—II Night-—-33 Law/71—31-1-72—2,000.