LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FORTY FIFTH REPORT

CIVIL APPEALS TO THE SUPREME
COURT ON A CERTIFICATE OF FITNESS
October, 1971

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


LAW COMMISSION,
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-1.

28th October, 1971.

P.B. GAJENDRAGADKAR,
CHAIRMAN

Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law and Justice
Government of India

New Dethi.

My dear Minister,

I am sending herewith the Forty-fifth Report of the Law
Commission on Civil Appeals to the Supreme Court on a certi-
ficate of fitness under Article 133 of the Constitution.

2. The first paragraph of the Report sets out the circumstances
under which the Commission took up this matter for its considera~
tion and report.

3. The previous Commission had considered the same ques-
tion and made the Forty-fourth Report dealing with it; before
submitting the said Report, the Commission had elicited public
opinion and had examined the same. Therefore, we did not
think it necessary to ascertain public opinion on the same point
once again. Accordingly, we carefully considered the earlier
Report, examined the merits of the problem and have made our
present Report.

4. It is unnecessary to add that the present Report should
be read along with the Forty-fourth Report. Nevertheless,
we have attempted to make our Report self-contained, and have
included in it our recommendations for the revision of Article
133 of the Constitution in a modified form.

5. Before I conclude, I wish to place on record the Commis-
sion’s warm appreciation of the valuable assistance received
from the Secretary Shri P. M. Bakshi in discussing the problem.
formulating its conclusions and preparing the draft for the
Commission’s consideration.

Yours sincerely,
P. B. Gajendragadkar.


REPORT ON CIVIL APPEALS TO THE
SUPREME COURT ON A CERTIEICATE
OF FITNESS हु

1. This Report deals with civil appeals to the Supreme Court —_Introduc-
on a certificate of fitness under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitu- ‘TY.
tion. The scope and genesis of this Report should be first
explained.

The Government of India had under consideration the ques-
tion of limiting or restricting the right of appeal to the Supreme
Ccurt. The previous Law Commission was requested to exa-
taine whether it is at all rational to base the right of appeal on
the value of the property to which the litigation relates. This
question was examined by the Law Commission in
its Report on the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
civil matters.! After due consideration and after considering the
views of all High Courts, Bar Associations and State Govern-
ments in the country, the Law Commission came to the con-
clusion that in civil proceedings in the High Court an appeal
should be permitted to the Supreme Court only if the High
Court considers the case fit for appeal, keeping intact, of course,
the discretion of the Supreme Court to grant special Jeave to
appeal under article 136. The Law Commission, there-
fore, recommended the deletion of clauses (a) and (b) of
article 133(1) of the Constitution, and recommended amend-
ment of article 133(1) so as to limit it to cases where the
High Court certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal
to the Supreme Court. This Report of the Law Com-
mission was submitted on the 30th of August, 1971. On the
reconstitution of the Law Commission, Government have re-
quested the Commission to examine the matter further. To
quote from the letter of the Minister of Law and Justice,? “Be-
fore the Government takes a decision on the said recommendation
made by the Law Commission the Government of India would
like to have the views of the new Law Commission reconstituted
under your Chairmanship. I have therefore to request you
to give the view of the Law Commission on the said question
as regards suitable amending article 133 of the Constitution
so as to abolish the basis of valuation as conferringaright of appeal
ona litigant. It may not be necessary for the Law Commission
to investigate the matter again in detail as the earlier Law Com-
mission had already fully considered the matter. On the ma-
terial that was before the said Commission the Government of
India would like to know whether the reconstituted Law Com-
mission concurs in the conclusions and the recommendations

1. 44th Report of the Law Commission of India.

2. Letter of the Minister of Law and Justice to the Chairman, Law Commiss on dated
4th October, 1971.


Analysis
of appeal-
ability
under
article 133
—Three
broad
tests.

Test of
valuation

Scope of
clauses
(@) and (b)

2

made by the Law Commission in its 44th Report dated the 30th
August 1971 or whether the Law Commission has any further
useful suggestions to make.” It is in pursuance of this request
that this Report is being made.

2. Before we proceed to indicate our views in the matter,
we consider it convenient to deal in brief with the three tests of

appealability in civil matters under article 133(1) of the Consti-
tution.

__ The main tests of appealability to the Supreme Court against
judgments of the High Court in civil proceedings under article
133 (as it now stands) may, in broad terms, be described as :—

(1) the test of valuation;

(2) the test of valuation coupled with the test of substan-
tial question of law;?

(3) the test of fitness for appeal to the Supreme Court.
By judicial decisions, the last mentioned test has come to be

regarded as a test requiring a question of wide public or
private importance. 3

3. First, as regards the test of valuation, laid down in article
133(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution, the certificate required
from the High Court is to the effect—

(a) that the amount or value of the subject-matter of the
dispute in the court of first instance and still in dispute on
appeal was and is not less than twenty thousand rupees (or
such other sum as may be specified by Parliament by law); or

(b) that the judgment, decree or final order involves
directly or indirectly some claim or question respecting
property of the like amount or value.

4. The first portion, i.e. clause (a), requires that the subject-
matter of the dispute must throughout have been of the prescribed
value or amount. This clause does not present much difficulty
in practice,

The second portion clause (b) is wider. This is indi-
cated sufficiently by the word “involves”, and also by the words
“directly or indirectly”. Judicial decisions generally emphasise
that under this clause value of some property in addition to or
other than the one in dispute in the suit, is to be taken into

account.

1, Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5, infra.
2, Paragraphs 6 to 10, infra.
3. See paragraphs 11 to 15, infra.


3

5. The Supreme Court has explained the scope of clauses(a)
and (b) of article 133(1) as follows! :—

Under clause (a), what is decisive is the amount or value
of the subject-matter in the court of first instance and ‘still
in dispute’ in appeal to the Supreme Court. Under clause
(७), it is the amount or value of the property respecting which
a claim or question is involved in the judgment sought to be
appealed from. The word ‘property’ includes ‘money’.
But the property in respect of which the appeal arises must
be property in addition to, or other than, the subject-matter
of the dispute. If, in a proposed appeal, there is no claim
or question raised respecting property other than the subject-
matter, clause (a) will apply if there is involved in appeal a
claim or question respecting property of an amount or value
not less than Rs. 20,000 in addition to or other than the sub-
ject matter of the dispute, then clause (b) will apply.

6. The second test, which has been adopted in article 133(1),
Jast paragraph, is that of a “substantial question of law”, which
is required when a judgment, decree of final order appealed from
affirms the decision of the court immediately below, and the appeal
is sought to be filed on the basis of valuation. Briefly, therefore,
this is a test of valuation coupled with a substantial question of
law. Since two ingredients are required, the test is obviously
narrower than the first test. But (as will be shown presently),2
it is wider than the third test. In practice, controversies which
arise in relation to this test are connected with the meaning of
the expression “affirmed”, and also with the meaning of the ex-
pression “substantial question of law”.

7. It may be noted that this condition (about the existence of
a “substantial question of law”) did not occur before 1874.
When provisions regulating appeals to the Privy Council were
consolidated in the Privy Council Appeals Act,3 this condition
appeared in section 5, which enacted that :4

“Where the decree appealed from affirms the decision of
the Court immediately below the Court passing such decree,
the appeal must involve some “substantial question of law.”

The Code of Civil Procedure of 1877 contained the corres-
ponding provision in exactly similar terms. The validity of this
provision was attacked before the Calcutta High Court, on the
ground that it was ultra vires of the power of the Indian Legis-
lature, as amounting to a curtailment of the jurisdiction given to
the High Court by the Letters Patent; but the contention was
Tejected.&

Decision
of the
Supreme
Court on
article
133(1)(a)
and (b).

Test of
valuation.
and subst-
antial ques-
tion of law.

History of
the provi-
sion relating
to “substan-
tial
question of
Taw.”

"1, Shan Pannalal Chandulal, AJ.R. 1965 S.C. 1440, 1441, 1442; (1965) 2 SCR. 751.

2. Paragraph 10, infra.

3. Privy Council Appeals Act (6 of 1874), Section 5.

4. This has been noticed in I.L.R. 39 Mad. 843, 845, 849.
5. Section 596, Code of Civil Procedure, 1877 (10 of 1877).

6. In the matter of Feda Hossein and Co., (1873) LL.R. 1 Cal. 431, 448 (Markby, J.).


4

Section 596 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1882, merely
reproduced the original provision. In the Code of 1908, the words
‘or final order’ were added after the words ‘the decree’, but in
other respects there was no change of substance.

8. That the word ‘substantial’ means substantial between
९ ५. the parties, was laid down long ago! by the Privy Council?.
वि This was pointed out at length in a Madras case.3..In one case
law”. decided by the Supreme Court,‘ it was pointed out that the ground
on which the appeal had been dismissed by the High Court,
raised a question of Jaw of importance to the parties, and that
being so, the certificate had been properly granted in that case.

Privy Coun- 9. The Privy Council§ deicision on the subject was concerned
cildecision. with a judgment of the Chief Court of Oudh. The Chief Court
of Oudh had, after stating that the only question of Jaw arising
in that case was as tothe true construction of a will®
said ;
“That, to our minds, is not a ‘substantial question
of law’ though it is a question of law. It is not alleged that
any recognised principle applicable to the construction of a
document of the nature of the present will has been misunder-
stood or misused by this Court, nor does our decision lay
down any general principle of construction. The const-
ruction which we have placed upon the will in question is of
no interest to any person outside the parties to the itigation.?
The old Court of the Judicial Commissioner of Oudh,
to which the Court has succeeded, consistently adhered to
the view® that the words ‘substantial question of law’ mean
a question of general importance, and do not include the con-
struction of a document in which the parties alone are

interested.”

The Privy Council rejected this approach. Viscount Dunedin,
delivering the judgment of their Lordships, regarded it as quite
clear,—and indeed it was conceded by Mr. De Oruyther—that
“substantial question of law” does not mean a question of general
importance, but it means a substantial question of law as
between the parties in the case involved. .

Meaning
f

1. (a) Raghunath Prasad Singh, A.I.R. 1927 P.C. 110.
(9) Guran Datta v. Ram Datta, A.1.R. 1928 P. ८. 172, 173.

2. The apparently contrary dicta in Moti Chand, (1902) I.L.R. 24 All. 174 (P.C,) follow-
ed in Bhagwant Lai, A.1.R. 1928 All. 10-20, are now obsolete.

3. Subbarao v. Veeraju, A..R. 1951 Mad. 971, 972 paragraphs 6-7 (F.B.).

4. Deputy Commissioner v. Rama, A..R. 1953 S.C. 521, 523; (1954) S.C.R. 506.

5. Raghunath Prasad vy. Deputy Commissioner or Partabgarh, A. 1. R. 1927 P.C.
110; LL.R. 2 Luck. 93, 96 (P.C.).

6. Observations of the Chief Court are quoted in (1927) 1.L.R. 2 Luck. 93, 94.

7. Emphasis supplied.

8. A number of Such cases were referred to, as well as the judgment of the Allahabad
High Court in ILL.R, 46 All, 227.

9. Raghunath Prasad v. Deputy Commissioner of Partabgarh, A.1.R. 1927 P.C. 110;
LL.R.-2 Luck. 93, 96.



5

10. If the question is of general public importance, then
certainly it would be substantial. But, if it directly and sub-
stantially affects the right of the parties,? then also it would be
substantial, provided it is either an open question, in the sense
that it has not been settled by the Supreme Court, Privy Council
or Federal Court, or is not free from difficulty, or calls for alter-
native views.

The Supreme Court? has, after reviewing the various shades
of view prevalent in the High Courts? on this point, observed—

The proper test for determining whether a question
of law raised in the case is substantial would, in our opinion,
be whether it is of general public importance or whether it
directly and substantially affects the rights of the parties,
and if so, whether it is either an open question in the sense
that it is not finally settled by this Court or by the Privy Coun-
cil or by the Federal Court or is not free from difficulty or
calls for discussion of alternative views. If the question is
settled by the highest Court or the general principles to be
applied in determining the question are well settled and there
is a mere question of applying those principles or that the
pleas raised is palpably absurd, the question would not be a
substantial question of law.”?

For this reason, the mere appreciation of the effect of docu-
mentary evidence or the meaning of entries and terms in a docu-
ment does not raise a substantial question of law.*

11. The third and last test is of fitness for appeal to the Sup-
reme Court. In its very nature, no precise rules can be formu-
lated as to the scope and ambit of this test as it is now expressed.
It was with reference to the corresponding clause in the Code of
Civil Procedure of 18825 that Lord Hobhouse made the following

observation :-—

“That it is clearly intended to meet special cases—such,
for example, as those in which the point of dispute is not
measurable by money, though it may be of great public or
private importance.”®

Wide sco,
of substan
tial
question of
law.

Test of
fitness for
appeal to
the
Supreme
Court,

1. See Chunilal Mehta ५. C. S. & M. Co. Ltd., AIR. 1962, S.C. 1314, 1318, paragraph

6; (1962) Supp. S.C.R. 549.

2. Chunilal Mehta v. C.S. & M. Co. Ltd., AR. 1962, S.C. 1314, 1318; (1962) Supp.

Ss.
3. (a) Kaikushroo v. C. P. Syndicate, A.I.R. 1949 Bom. 134.

(09) Dinkar Rao v. Ratten Singh, A.L.R. 1949, Nag. 300, 301-302, paragraphs 7 to
10.

(०) Subba Rao, ALR. 1951 Mad. 969 (F.B.).
4, Lachmanial, (1895) L.L.R. 22 Cal. 609, 617, 618.
Section 596, Code of Civil Procedure, 1882.

6. Banarasi Parshad v. Kashi Krishna, (1901) 28 LA. 11, 13; LL.R. 23 All. 227 ( P.



Questions
of private
importance.

6

A mere substantial question of law arising between the parties
is not, sufficient for the purpose.!

A question cannot for this purpose be said to be of public
importance unless it is such as would arise frequently for decision,
and affect many parties in litigation.2_ Further, a question which
has been settled by the highest authority is not one which can be
certified under this clause.?

12. What is meant by great private importance‘ could be
illustrated by two Madras cases. In the first of them,‘ the
actual pecuniary amounts in appeal were small (Rs. 400 and
Rs. 600); but the zamindar, who was one of the parties, contended
that the question was one of great private importance to him,
because there were many other persons in the zamindari holding
under the zamindar whose rights were governed by documents
similar to those construed by the Court in these cases. Appli-
cation for leave to appeal to the Privy Council under section
109(c), of the Code of Civil Procedure was refused by the Madras
High Court, on the ground that private importance means private
importance to both parties and not to only one of them. On
the other hand, in a later case, where there were disputes
between two temples of considerable antiquity and of considerable
importance, leave was granted because the question whether the
decision of the High Court was right or wrong was a matter of
“considerable private importance to both parties and almost of
public importance”.

13. By its very nature, the right of appeal under clause (c)

Formula-

tion of is such that no shackles can be imposed upon its ambit by precise

iva rules rules, the only test being whether the case is fit for appeal to the

possible. Supreme Court. The broad consideration, no doubt, is that
the point is of great public or private importance. But that is
only था illustration, and not an exhaustive statement of the
principles to be applied.

Some 14. It would, however, be of interest to note that the Orders-

guide-lines in-Council issued to regulate appeals to the Judicial Committee

in Orders: from many of the Colonies, after providing for appeal as of right

regarding from a final judgment of the highest court of the Colony in cases

appeals to where the matter in dispute on appeal amounted to or was of the

udicial
Committee, ___-__-__----_--_>+...जज््ज््ज- __

1. (a) Iqbal Bahadury v. Mt. Ram Sree, A.LR. 1934 All. 58, 60;

(b) Govind v. Mt. Indravati, ALR. 1950 All. 38;

(०) Sein Htaung v. V.E.A. Chettyar Fir, A.LR. 1936 Rang. 65, 66.
2. Ruchcha Sai Kiwar v. Hansrain, A.1.R. 1928 All. 220.
3. Muhammad Hussain v. Ganga Naicken, ALR. 1963 Mad. 223.

4, Paragraph 11, supra.

5. Sathupathi v. Tiruneelakantam, A.L.R. 1923 Mad. 232, 235.
6. १९. Kesana Mudaliar v. Govindachari, A.R. 1924 Mad. 231, 235 (Schwabe, C.J

and Coleridge, J.).


7

value of the specified sum or upward or where the appeal in-
volved, directly or indirectly, some claim or question to or res-
pecting property or some civil right amounting to or of the speci-
fied value or upward, dealt with appeal at the discretion of the
highest court of the Colony in a formula covering questions of
wide public or private! importance.

15. For example,? contemporancously with establishment ofa
Supreme Court for the three territories of Sarawak, North
Borneo and Brunei, there was promulgated the Sarawak, North
Borneo and Brunei (Appeal to the Privy Council) Order-in-
Council, 1951, which provides for appeal to Her Britannic
Majesty in Council—

(a) as of right, from any final judgment of the Court of
Appeal, where the matter in dispute amounts to the value
of five hundred pounds sterling, or more, or where the appeal

involves some claim or property of a comparable amount;
and

(b) at the discretion of the Court of Appeal, from any
other judgement if, in the opinion of the Court, “the question
involved in the appeal is one which, by reason of its great
general or public importance or otherwise” ought to be sub-
mitted to the Privy Council.3

16. Another example is furnished by the Order-in-Council
regulating appeals from East Africa.4 In addition to appeal
as of right on the basis of valuation, the Order-in-Council pro-
vides for appeals at the discretion of the highest court of the
country from any other judgment, whether final or inter-locutory,

in the opinion of the court the question involved in the appeal
is one which, by reason of its great general or public importance
or otherwise, ought to be submitted to Her Majesty in Council
for decision.

17. The position regarding New Zealand is understood to
be similar. Leave to appeal to the Privy Council may be given
at the discretion of the Court of Appeal from any judgment,
whether final or interlocutory, if the court considers it proper
to do so because of the great general or public importance of the
appeal or otherwise.§

Territories.

Order-in-
Council for
Africa,

Position in

lew
Zealand.

1. For examples, see Jennings, Constitutions of the Commonwealth, (1952), page 54.
2. See Sheridan, Malaya and Singapur and Borneo territories—The Development

of Laws and Constitutions, (1961), pp. 133-134.
3. Appeals to the Privy Council Order in Council, 1951, section 3.

4. Section 3(b), Eastern Africa (Appeal to Privy Council) Order in Council, 1931; 5.1.
1951, No. 609, referred to in Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 5, page 684, paragraph 1461.
st 5. Robsoa, New Zealand, the Development of its Laws and Constitution, (1967), page


Privy
Counc

dec son in
Canadian
case.

Some
guidelines
of fitness
for appeal.

First two
tests to be
deleted as
Tecom-
mended in
earlier
Report.

Father
limitation
necessary
as regards
the third
test—
Question.
involved
must be
‘one of law.

8

18. In a case! from Canada, their Lordships of the Privy
Council were dealing with the question of special leave, and laid
down that special leave should not be granted where the decision
to be appealed against does not raise a far-reaching question of
law or matters of dominant public importance.

_ 19. Some of the guidelines adopted in determining if the case
is a fit one to be certified under clause (c) of section 109, Civil
Procedure Code which corresponds to article 133(1)(c) are—
(3) the case is likely to affect numerous cases of a like
nature;? or
(b) the point is of such a nature that a decision thereon
might result in a precedent governing numerous cases, e.g.
suits for arrears of rent,3 or may affect several propertic
(c) there are other exceptional circumstances justifying
the grant of a certificate.

It is needless to repeat that these situations are mentioned
here only to illustrate what cases are likely to be regarded as fit
for appeal to the Supreme Court.

20. So far as the first two tests (based on pecuniary value)
are concerned, we'agree with the recommendation made in the
earlier Report’, to delete clause (a) and (6) of article 133(1) and
in particular, with the reasons adduced in the Report in support
of that recommendation,* namely, that all ordinary litigation
should end in the High Court, and only exceptional circumstances
should justify recourse to the Supreme Court.

21. After careful consideration of the problem, we have come
to the conclusion that we should also recommend one more
limitation with reference to the third test of appealability, which
is concerned with the grant of a certificate of fitness. In out
view, there ought to be some limitations as to the cases in which
the certificate of fitness could be granted. In the first place, the
grant of a certificate should be ruled out where the questions
involved are not of law. So far as questions of fact are con-
cerned, the judgment, decree or final order of the High Court
should be final—except, of course, in those exceptional cases
where the Supreme Court chooses to intervene under article
136.

1. Albright v. Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario, (1923) A.C. 167, 169
(P.C.). (Viscount Haldane).

2. Gotan Lime Syndicate v. Income-tax Commissioner, A.IR.1964 Raj. 277, 278, 279,
para. 4-5 (reviews case-law).

3. Gulab Bai v. Manchoo, A..R. 1953 Rai..242,45, paragraph 18 (Wanchoo, C.J.
Ranawat and Sharma, JJ). (Question whether decision of court of lower jurisdiction will
be res judicata in second suit triable by higher court by virtue of accumulation of arrears
of rent,—case held to be fit for appeal because suits for arrears of rent were common).

4, Gangaram v. Bapuji, AJR. 1943 Nag. 76, 77.

5. 44th Report, paragraph 19.
6. 44th Report, paragraph 15.


9

Secondly, it is not enough that a question of law is involved.
It should also be a condition precedent to the grant of a certi-
ficate of fitness that the question of law must be of a nature or
magnitude which justifies recourse to the highest judicial organ
of the country.

22. We shall indicate very broadly the nature of the questions
of law which we regard as appropriate for submission to the
Supreme Court under article 133.

23. First——and the most important of all,—is the considera-
tion of uniformity. The unity of the Indian legal system, brought
into being by what have come to be known as the Anglo-Indian
Codes, must undeniably be maintained. In so far as inter-
pretation of those Codes is concerned, it is the task of the judi-
ciary to maintain that unity, and the Supreme Court, as the
highest tribunal at the national level, should continue to have the
ultimate authority to establish unity by resolving divergence of
views in different High Courts,

Here, we do not have in mind merely Central Acts. There
are, on many subjects, legislative measures which, while enacted.
by invididual State Legislatures, possess features similar to
measures passed by the legislatures of other States. The various
State Acts relating to Universities, police, children, correctional
measures, land reforms, rent control, court fees, sales tax and the
like, contain provisions substantially similar to each other,
and it is desirable that uniformity of application and interpre-
tation of such laws which, while appearing on the statute book
as Acts of different States, are integral parts of the legal system,
should not be underrated.

24. It may be of interest to mention here that the Basic Law
of Germany! expressly refers to the need for preserving uniformity
of application in the Republic. The relevant provisions are as
follows :—

“Article 95. (1) To preserve the uniformity of applica-
tion of federal law a Supreme Federal Court will be establish-
ed.

(2) The Supreme Federal Court decides cases in which
the decision is of fundamental importance for the uniformity
of the administration of justice by the higher federal courts.

Similarly, in Switzerland, the primary task of the Federal
Tribunal is to ensure the uniform application of the federal
laws. As the Federal legislature has used its constitutional
grant of power to establish single uniforms codes of justice, most
law has become federal law. As there are no inferior federal

Nature of
questions
of law fit
for decision
by Supreme
Court.
Unifor-
mity.

Position in
Germany
and Swit-
zerland.

1, Article 95(1) and (2), Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany.


Questions
of law of
general
import-
ance.

Questions
already
decided by
the
Supreme
Court but
requiring
re-conside-
ration.

Difference
of opinion”
among the
Judges in
the High
Court
Bench.

Other
questions
of law fit
for decision
by the
Supreme
Court.

10

courts in Switzerland, the case which the Federal Tribunal de-
cides come to it directly from the courts of all twenty-two can-
tons. Therefore, if on any point or points of law involved in a
case, there appears to be a divergence of views, there is a fit case
for grant of certificate.

25. Secondly, apart from questions of interpretation of
Central Acts in general and of State Acts which fall in the cate-
gory mentioned above,! there arise questions of law of general
importance. The uncodified law constitutes a fertile ground
for such questions. The law of torts, and so much of the per-
sonal law as has not yet been codified, furnish examples. There
might also be questions of construction of statutes which do
not depend on the wording of particular provisions of the statute,
but concern general principles, such as the commencement of
statutes, the effect of repeal, the vires of subordinate legisla-
tion, and the like. Such questions, even though they arise with
reference to a provision in the nook and corner of a State Act,
possess an importance which transcends the narrow area of
that nook and corner.

26. Thirdly, there may be points already decided by the
Supreme Court which may, nevertheless, appear to the High Court
to require further consideration. Not unoften, a Bench of High
Court Judges dealing with a question of law on which there has
already been a pronouncement by the Supreme Court, comes
to take the view that the matter is capable of further considera-
tion at the hands of the Supreme Court and that the grant of
a certificate of fitness would further the cause of justice. In
some of the cases which may fall under this category, the High
Court may take the view that there are decisions of the Supreme
Court which contain observations that are not quite consistent
with each other, and such a case would be obviously fit for a
certificate. Similarly, where a judgment of the Supreme Court
contains observations that are ambiguous, and the High Court
thinks the ambiguity should be removed by clarification, a certi-
ficate may appropriately be granted.

27. Fourthly, when there has been a difference of opinion
among the Judges of the High Court Bench on a question of
Jaw, and the usual avenues of settling the differences within the
High Court have been exhausted, there may, amongst the Judges,
survive an impression that the question is one of such difficulty
that it ought to bé allowed 10 be submitted for decision by a yet
higher tribunal.

28. Finally, apart from questions falling within the categor-
ies stated above, there remain questions of law of a nature or
magnitude rendering it appropriate that the Supreme Court should
take cognizance of them, and the opportunity that has arisen
for its so taking cognizance should be availed of. Questions
falling within this residuary category, though not easy of defini-
tion in the abstract, can be recognised when they arise in practice.

1. Paragraph 23, s vere.


11

29. So much as regards the questions which we contemplate
as appropriately falling within the appellate jurisdiction under
article 133(1)(c). We should also state here that we do not vis-
ualise such a wide scope for the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court as would embrace every question of law which is “sub-
stantial between the parties”. This clarification on our part
becomes necessary because the expression “substantial question
of law” has been given a wide meaning! by the Privy Council.
This wide meaning was given with reference to the provisions
in the Code of Civil Procedure, sections 109 and 110, correspond-
ing to article 133(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution, In our
view, such questions should not engage the time and attention
of the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court, being essentially
the highest court at the national level which declares the law
which is binding, should not ordinarily engage itself in settling
factual controversies, however great the stakes may be, unless,
of course. it feels that in the interests of justice its interference
on facts is called for under article 136. The paramount con-
sideration indicated by the words “‘fit for appeal to the Supreme
Court” which occur in clause (c) of article 133(1), rules out such
questions. We are sure that the undesirability of an appeal
being permitted merely because the parties regard the question
of law as of some importance, will, as heretofore, continue to
be borne in mind by the High Courts after the proposed amend-
ment of article 133(1)(c).

30. The points that we have made above will show that our
anxiety is to emphasise that resort to the Supreme Court is not
to be permitted except where the question of law is one of the
nature indicated above. It may be useful, by way of compari-
son, to refer to the practice of the Supreme Court of the U.S. A.
in granting certiorari.

The analogy is not totally applicable ; nevertheless, it is
helpful as bringing out some aspects.

The Supreme Court of the U. S. A. has made it clear that it
will grant certiorari “only where there are special and important
reasons therefor”, and particularly :

Where a court of appeals has rendered a decision in conflict
with the decisions of another court of appeals on the same matter ;
or has decided an important state or territorial question ina way
in conflict with applicable state or territorial law ; or has de-
cided an important question of federal law which has not been
but should be, settled by this court ; or has decided a federal
question in a way in conflict with applicable decisions of this
court ; or has so far departed from the accepted and usual course
of judicial proceedings, or so far sanctioned such a departure
by a lower court, as to call for an exercise of this Court’s power
of supervision.?

Questions
of law
which are
not +
considered
fit for
decision
by the
Supreme
Court.

Practice in
the U.S.A.

1. See paragraph 8, supra.
2. U.S. Sup. Ct. Rule 19(1)().


Certificate
not to be
granted
lightly.

Difficulty
of formulat-
ing a test.

Jurisdic-
tion under
article 136
to be

preserved.

12

31. We believe that in emphasising what we have emphasised
above, we are not only not doing violence to the scope of arti-
cle (133) (1) (c) as properly understood, but are furthering its true
spirit. We find that in the earlier Report! also, the Law Commis-
sion observed—

“The Supreme Court, in our opinion, should be tro-
ubled only if the High Court finds itself in great difficulty
in deciding a case and the question of law is of great impor-
ance. As we have said, such occasions would and should

few”.

32. It is not easy to formulate in precise language a test which,
while excluding the questions to be excluded from the purview
of the Supreme Court, will include all questions to be included
in its purview in conformity with what we have stated above.?
And yet, some formulation was to be attempted. After careful
consideration, we have come to the conclusion that two require-
ments should be stressed, namely, that (i) the question involved
in the proposed appeal must be a substantial question of law of
general importance, and (ii) the question must be one which

.needs to be decided by the Supreme Court. The requirement

that the question must be one which needs to be decided by the
Supreme Court will render it necessary for the High Courts to
approach the matter after paying due regard to the considerations
which we have outlined above.?

33. It is needless to add that the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court under article 136 of the Constitution to entertain an appeal
by special leave—a jurisdiction which is admittedly not subject
to any rigid limitation pertaining to courts, proceedings or ques-
tions—is not intended to be affected by our recommendation or
by the preceding discussion.

Before making our recommendation as above, we had
an opportunity of consulting the Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of India, and we may state that the Hon’ble the Chief Justice
personally approves of the change proposed by us. We are
grateful to the Hon’ble the Chief Justice for giving us the benefit
of his views.

The Hon’ble the Chief Justice has further suggested that
the Law Commission may consider whether an amendment on
somewhat similar lines should not be proposed in article 134
and the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate
Jurisdiction) Act, 1970, repealed. However, this question may
have to be dealt with separately.

1. 44th Report, paragraph 14.
2, Paragraphs 22 to 29, supra.


13

- 34, In-the light of the above discussion, we recommend that
article (133)(1) of the Constitution should be amended so as to
read as follows :—

“(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any
judgement, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High
Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifiies—

(i) that the case involves a substantial question
of law of general importance ; and

(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court the said
question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.”

35. So far as transitional provisions are concerned, we think
that it is sufficient if they are framed on the same lines as were
recommended in the earlier Report.!

36. We should make it clear that we do not, in making a
recommendation? for amending article 133(1), wish to under-
rate the importance of the Supreme Court, or to impose undue
réstrictions on access to the Supreme Court for getting questions
of law decided. Opinions could differ as to the proper role of
the highest court in the land as a court of appeal in questions
not raising constitutional issues. We have attempted to indicate
what we conceive to be its proper role. The High Court should
not be thought of as another step in the ladder of appeals. So
far as questions of fact or questions of law of minor importance
are concerned, the litigant should be content with the position
as resulting from the judgement of the High Court. The possi-
bility that another Court may take a different view on facts or
on questions of law of minor importance, always remains. If
it does, its decision is not necessarily likely to be more satis-
factory to the defeated party or to the society at large than the
decision of the Court below. A party may be anxious to have
his case taken to yet another court. But the quetion still re-
mains how far it is in the public interest todo so. These are the
broad considerations that have weighed with us.

37. We cannot do better than quote a minute which the Law
Member in the Government of India had occasion to record a

century ago.3

“In considering what limit should be assigned to the
power of appealing, our leading maxim is, that it is the interest
of the commonwealth to have an end of law suits. No man
has a right to unlimited draughts on the time and money
of the public in order to get his private affairs settled as he
wishes. The State’s duty is discharged when it has provided such
a reasonavle amount of attention and skill and honesty as

Principal
Tecom- |
mendation
for
amendment
of article
133(1).

Transitional
Provisions,

Broad
considera-
tions that
have weigh-
ed with the
Commis-
sion.

Minute of
Hobhouse.

1. 44th Report, paragraph 29.
2. Paragraph 34, supra.

3. Hobhouse, Minute dated 5th September, 1872, on the Bill leading to the Privy Council

Appeal Act, 1874,


14

will satisfy reasonable men that their causes have been de-
cided, erroneously or otherwise, on the merits, and accord-
ing to the best ability of the Judge, and so will prevent them.
from feeling that resentment of sheer injustice which drives
peopple to take the law into their hands and to wage private
war. Upon this principle all laws place some limits to litiga-
tion. And so have we placed limits to the power of

appealing.”
P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman.

V. R. Krishna lyer
embers.
P. K. Tripathi है Members

P. M. Bakshi Secretary.

New Deut
The 28th October, 1971.

MGIPRRND—N—1-~35 M of Law—31-1-72—2,000


Price : Inland Re. 0.75
Foreign Ish 9 dor 27 Cents.

PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, RING ROAD, NEW BELUIT
AND PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-6, 1972,