LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON

THE CONSTITUTION: (TWENTY-FIFTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1971

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF LAW
: Vode


REPORT ON THE CONSTITUTION
({WENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1971

1. The Constitution (Twenty-Fifth Amendment) Bill,
which has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 28th
July, 1971, has not been formally referred to us by the Ministry of
Law and Justice for our opinion or report; but the Bill, and more
pacticularly clause 3 of it, falls directly within the purview of the
wider terms of reference—clauses (viii) and (ix)—under which
the present Commission has been constituted; and so we think
it right 500 motu to make a report indicating our opinion on the
merits of the Bill.

2. The Bill consists of three clauses. Clause 1 is formal
and describes the Bill as the Constitution (Twenty-fifth) Amend-
ment Act, 1971. Clause 2 contains two sub-clauses (a) and (0),
and it reads as under :— हि

“2. In article 31 of the Constitution,—

(a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be
substituted, camely,—

“(2) No property shall ba compulsorily acquired
or requisitioned save for a public purpose and save
by authority cf a law which provides for acquisi-
tion or requisitioning of the property for an amount
which may be fixed by such law or which may be
determined in accordance with sech principles and
given in such manner 35 may be specified in such
law; and no such law shall, be called in question
in any court on the ground that the amount so fia-
-ed or determined is not adequate: or that the whole
or any part of such amount is to be given otherwise
than in cash,”.

(
“¢(b) after clause (2.4),
inserted, namely,—

the followiog clause shall be

“(2B) Nothing in| sub-cha na "() of cause (1)
of article 19 shall affect any such jlaw as is referred
to in clause (2)”. | .

It is clear that the! Bill ‘ 8४% the assump-
tion that the Twenty-Fourth ent recently
adopted by Parliame: F is constifuticnally valid.

Tntroductory

ES

:

1. Bill No. 106 of 1971,


2

Background 3. It is unnecessary to refer in detail to the background of

of twenty- judicial decisions which made it necessary for Parliament to

fourth adopt the Twenty-Fourth Amendment. The question about the

ment, scope and effect of the provisions contained in Article 368 of the
Constitution was first considered by the Supreme Court in
Shankari Prasad’s case.! Patanjali Sastri J., who spoke for the
unanimous Court. held in the said case that, in substance, Article
368 conferred on Parliament power to amend any provision of
the Constitution, provided that, in making such amendment,
Parliament followed the procedure prescribed by the said Article
and complied with its requirements. This judgment was pro-
nounced on the 5th October, 1951.

The same view was reiterated by a majority of three Judges
in Sajjan Singh's case.* This judgment was delivered on the
30th October, 1964.

On the 27th Pebruary, 1967, the Supreme Court considered
the same question over again in Golak Nath’s case, and, by
a majority of 6:5, held that the earlier decisions had not properly
interpreted the s¢ope aud effect of Article 368 and that, the gai
Article did not confer power on Parliament to amend Part वी
of the Constitution in any event.

Tt is as a result of the last decision of the Supreme Court in
Golak Nath’s case that Parliament thought it necessary to pass
the Twenty-Fourth Aniendment Act.

Pyenty- 4. In order to avoid confusion, it 15 necessary to state clearly
हे that the Twenty-Fourth Amendment does not putport to confer

Amend: on Parliament any additional power not possessed by it earlier,

clarifi- but it merely clarifies what, in the opinion of Parliament, bas al

talory in ways been the true position about the scope and effect of the
ature, provisions of Article 368. Itis true that, in order to crarity

said position, Parliament has, as a matter of abundant canth
made some suitable amendments in Article 13 and Article 5
but the result of the said/ameondments is to declare that article
meant what it was interpretdd to mean by the unanimous Court
in Shankari Prasdd Singh Deo's case\ as well as by the majority
of the Judges oy =: ig the Bench in Sajjan Singh's case.
In other words, i Twenty-Fourth Amendment Act says that
law in regard to the power of Parliament to amend the Cor
tion, which was pe down atthoritatively by the Supreme

and accepted as cbrrect between the Sth October, 1951 moa
February, 1967, i

Possibility 5. We do not! think: that the constitutional validity of the
et Scion Cn tt ek i हल शीश का Act is likely to be challenged before, ‘

h .
vatidty of the Supreme Coutts but jt is hot uniikely that, if the preseat जी

1. Shankari Prasad Sieh Ded v. The Union of india, A.LR. 1951 S.C. BE
2. Sajjan Singh v. The State af Rajasthan, A.LR. 1965 §,C, 845.
3. Golak Nath ५. The State of Punjab, AIR. 1967 S.C. 1643.

8 the ;correct law.



3

is passed by Parliament, an attempt may be made to challenge
its constitutional validity on the ground that Parliament has no
power to amend Part वा of the Constitution and that the Twenty-
Fourth Amendment Act passed by Parliament is inoperative,
ineffective and void and, as such, cannot sustain the validity of the
Twenty-Fifth Amendment Bill inasmuch as its provisions seek
to modify some of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Part
गा. This fact has to be borne in mind in considering the merits
of the proposed Bill.

6. After the judgment of the Supreme Court in Golak Nath’s
case was pronounced, there has been a national debate in regard
to the merits of the decision in the said case. In this debate,
advocates of the view propounded by the majority in Golak
Nath’s case, as well as 11050 who are critical of that view have
used strong words, such as, the Supremacy of the Judiciary,
encroachment on fundamental rights, introduction of totalitarian
concepts in the democratic set-up of our. country, or tyranny
of the Judiciary; and naturally, the introduction of such political
overtones in this national debate has created an appearance of
confrontation between Parliament and the Supreme Court.
The Commission, however, does not regard the situation created
by the majority decision in Golak Nath's case as necessarily
leading to any conflict between the two great institutions, viz.,
Parliament and the Supreme Court.

7, The Cammission believes that, in_a democratic country
like India which is governed by a written Constitution, supremacy
can he legitimately claimed only by the Constitution. It is
the Constitution which is paramount, wre ich is the law of laws,
which confers on Parliament and the Statd Legislatures, the Exe-
cutive and the Judiciary their respe¢tive powers, assigns to them
their respective functions, and prescribes Emitations within
whicli the said powers and foe ns cah bé legitimately dis-
charged. Within their respective spheres, ‘each one of the cons-
tituents of Indian democracy can dlaim stpremacy in a limited
sense only. This*position is subject to the tnportant proviso
that Parliament has power to amend the Constitution; but, once
Parliament’s constituent power to: amend the Constitution is
exercised and the amended Constifution romps into operation,
even Parliament has to function again within the limits prescrib-
ed by the amended Constitution. .

8. What we have witnessed as a result! of the majority deci-
sion in Golak Nath’s case is inevitably a part of the democratic
process. It may sound platitudinoys, but-it ig nevertheless true
that it is the function and privilege iof Parliament to amend the
Constitution and make laws according to ithe pro visions of the
Constitution; it is the privilege and function the Judiciary to
interpret the laws and test their constitutional validity in’ the
light of the relevant constitutional grovisidns; and it is the duty
of the Executive to implement the ‘ows. | A

i

the Twenty
fourth
Amend-
ment.

No ques
tion of
confronta-
tion
between,
Parliament
and
Supreme
Court.

Constitu-
tion sup:
reme in
democracy,

Amend-
ment in-
evitable as
a part of
the demo-
cratic
Process,



Amend~
meat not
to be re
garded as
raising
questions
of confron-
tation.

Cardozo"s
observa-
tions.

Clause 2(a)

of the Bill
considered,

Necessity
of amend-
neni in
view of
Cooper's
case.

4

9. If, while discharging its functions, the Supreme C
interprets an ordinary law or a provision of the Constituti aa
a manner which, in the oninion of Parliament, does not rep it
the true intention of Parliament, it is open to Parliament to mf
its intention clear by taking recourse to the suitable, legitimate
and well-recognised process of amending the law or the Const#tu-
tion. But, while this process is in progress, no effort should be
made to introduce notions of confrontation between Parliament
on the one hand and the Judiciaty on the other, aa

40. In this context, we would like to refer to the observations
made by Mr. Justice Cardozo, the great American Judge of the”
Supreme Court of the United States, Said Justice Cardozo¥:—

“The great tides and currents which engulf the rest. of
men do not turn aside in their course and pass the Judas.
by.” . .

2
We would invite the Union Government and the Members of
Parliament to share our faith in the wisdom of Mr. Justice Casdip-
208 observation. ,

11. Reverting then, to clause 2 of the Biil, it would be aoticad
that sub-clause (a) of this clause deletes the word “compensation”
and introduces in its place the word “amount”, in order to ayaid
any controversy about the adequacy of the amount which Ptr-
liament may ditect to be pa aid in the manter specified by the
clause, where property ging 10 a citizen iv compulsyrly
acquired or requisitioned. “It also provides, as did Article 312)
in the unamended forni, that a Jaw passed by virtue of the powers
conferred by article 312) shail not be calied in te ist ory.
Court छा the g¢ound that the amount so fixed or di i
not adequate; ahd it adds that the said Jaw cannot also be
lenged on the ground ibat be whole or any part of sich a1
is to be given otherwige in cash, 7

12, Sub-clause (0) of clause 2 of the Bill inserts clause
after clause Ca) ) in iG txisting Article, and it lays down
nothing in sub-clause (f}:6f clause (1) of Article 19 shall

any such law is raferréd to in clause (2). Tn other

an additional si i ey been provided by clause (2B)

is sought to be i 11778 by the Bill to prevent any attack:

the law passed pnder Artidfe 31(2) on the ground that any
provisions confravend the fondamental rights guarar Bs
Article 19106) pot i

13, Every sh dent ¢ vt Constitutional Law knows Sak tha
ment thought ghat ith aq necessary to make these pr ce
because of the recent ion of the Supreme Court in et

j- Cardozo, The Nature of Jufetal Process एवम...
t poe



5

Cavasiee Cooper & Another v, Union of India’ Parliament
aes tought, and we think rightly, that the effect of this
majonity decision of the Supreme Court wes, in substanc
makz corpensesion provided for by the impugned legia) or
jusceiabls and subject it oo the test of reasouableness tuder acli-
cle 1915], and, te that extent. the said decision is inconsistent
with the view taken by the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat
v. Shantilal Mangaldass and cthers.2. Todeed, eversince the
Fourth Ameadment wes passed on the 27th April, 1955, the
Supreme Court had generally interpreted clause (2) of Article
31 to mean that the adequacy of compensation directed to be
paid by laws passed under the said clause was not justiciable as
we have explained earlier, except in cases where it Teasonably
appeared to the Court that the compensation was illusory or
that the whole legislative exercise was a fraud on the Consti-
tution, But, in Cooper's case,’ the majority view appeared
io strike a somewhat different note; 22d that, according ta Parlia-
ment, mad: it necessary to incredree Ge amended dause (2) था.
Article U1. We think that, in tae circumstances to which we
have ‘ust referred, Parliament is juatijed ix introduciag the amend-
min: tt question.

14. This takes us to clause 3 of the Bill, It reads thus— Clause 3

=
&

“3. Alter artict: 318 of the Constitution, -he following
stall be inserted, nerely,—

“UIC, Notwithsrandige othe pak contained in arti-
cle 13, no law giving effect to the icy of the State to-
wards securing the principles specified in clause (b} or
clause (c) of article 39 shall be deemed to be void on the
ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes away or
abridges any of the rights conferred ‘by article HY, article
19 of article 31; and | no Jaw cpni 2 declaration
that it'is for giving effet to such Thee armen
in question in any court on the grouind that it does not
give effect to such policy:

Provided that where quch a is made by the Legis-
Tature of a State, the prdvisi of, this article shall
not apply thereto unless sich lay, hpving been reserved
for the consideration of the Prepident, has received his
assent.”*

By introducing this clause, Parliarcent is takeing the first major
and significant step towards implementing [# of the Directive
Pricciples eashcined [1 clavse (b} and (c} of हिल 39 in Pant IV
of the Constitution, and, in that sense, the: blause under consi-
deration can be appropriately described as’ historic. After it

1, Rustam Cavasfee Cooper & Another v. Union of fidia, ALR, 1970 S.C. 564,
2. State of Gujrat y. Shanttlat Mei ond 014७8 (1969) 1 5. ८, R. 509.
like


Relation-
ship bet-
ween
Directive
Principles
and funda-
menial
tights.

Imper-
tance of
Directive
Principles
in achieves
‘ing socio-
economic
Justice.

6

is adopted, Parliament will have heralded a new era in the pur-
suit of the goai placed before the nation by the Constitution to
establish social and economic justice in this country. The Com
mission is in full agreement with this object of the clause.

15. In the two decades after the Constitution was passed,
the inter-relation between the Directive Principles and Funda-
mental Rights has been often been considered by the Supreme
Court. The Directive Principles enshrined in Part FV are, in
terms, declared to be non-justiciable and yet, Article 37, which
makes this declaration, emphatically adds that the said prinei-
ples are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country
and it ordains that it shall be the duty of the State to apply these
principles in making iaws. Broadly stated, in its judgments,
the Supreme Court has often treated the Directive Principles as
relevant in dealing with the question as to whether invasion of
fundamental rights alleged to be involved in the provisions of
any impugned statute is reasonable and is for public good or
not. But, whenever there appeared to be a clear conflict bet-
ween one or more of the Directive Principles on the one hand,
and the fundamental tights on the other, the Court invariably
held that the fundamental rights must prevail over the Directive
Principles.

16. But, in retrospect, for some time past, citizens genuime-
ly concerned with the progress of Indian democracy in its destin-
ed task of achieving socio-economic justice in this country by a
democratic process have often wondered how it would be possi-
ble to give effect to the morse important declaration contained
in Acticle 37 whereby duty was imposed on the State to apply
the Directive Principles in making law. In appreciating haw
deep is the concern felt by many of us in this behalf, it is neces-
sary to emphasize the part which the Directive Principles are
expected to play in the achievement of socio-economic objecti-
ves. The fundamental rights and the directive principles en-
shrined in Parts II and. IV of the Constitution have been des-
cribed by (एव lle Austin® as “the conscience of the Indian
Constitution.” “The Indian Constitution”, says Austin, “is
first and foremost a social document. The majority of its pro-
visions are either directly ainged at furthering the goals of the
social revolution or attempt to foster this revolution by estr-
blishing the conditions necessary for its achievement. Yet des-
pite the permeation of the entire constitution by the aim off
national renascenge, the core of the commitment, to the social
revolution lies in Parts II and JV, in the Fundamental Rights
and in the Directive Principles of State Policy.” According 10

ustin;—

“In the Directive Pfinciples, however, one finds an.
even clearer statement of the social revolution, They aim.

1. Granville Austin, The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation (Oxford Univer-"
sity Press, London) (1966).


1

at making the Indian masses free in the positive sense, free
from the passivity engendered by centuries of coercion by
society and by nature, free from the object physical condi-
tions that had prevented them from fulfilling their best sclves.”

17, The words used by Dr. Ambedkar, when he piloted the Directive

Directive Principles in the Constituent Assembly, are signi-
ficant. Dr. Ambedkar said:—

“In enacting this pact (Part IV) of the Constitution, the
Assembly is giving certain directions to the future legisla-
ture and the future executive to show in what manner they
are -

to exercise the legislative and executive power they will
have. Surely it is not the intention to introduce in this part
these principles as mere pious declarations. It is the inten-
tion of this Assembly that in future both the legislature and
the executive should not merely pay lip-service to these
princinles

but that they should be made the basis of all legislative
and executive action that they may be taking hereafter in
the matter of the governance of the country.”

principles
sot merely
pious dec-
larations.

18. Nehru described this position in his characteristically Directive

lucid. words by observing:

principles:
dynamic in

“The service of India means the service of the millions ##*te™

who suffer. It means the ending of poverty and ignorance
and disease and inequality of opportunity. The ambition
of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe every
tear from every eye. That may be beyond us, but as long as
there are tears and suffering, so long aur work will not be over.””

Thus considered, the Directive Principles can be appropria-
tely described in Nehru’s words as being dynamic in character,
while Fundamental Rights can be described as static. In des-
eribing Fundamental Rights as ste ic, we do not propose to under-
estimate their significance and inpportarice in the Constitutional
set-up devised by the tat mi ang the democratic way of
Jife was adopted by us. They, !no doubt, “constitute a distin-
ctive feature of our Constitution’ and are, ie fact, justly regar-
ded as its cornerstone. But tha very nai of the Directive
Principles postulates that their Ultimata obptve is to satisfy
the ever-growing legitimate but junsatiffied! hopes and aspira-
tions of common citizens of this epuntry ito enjoy life, liberty and
happiness in ample measures and, in that sense, they are inevi-
tably dynamic in character and their horizon would continuously
expand as the country witnesse¢ economic development and
adopts social change, and marc! z towardd. its cherished goal
of achieving socio-economic ४४० tion, | | i -

ip


Primacy of
directive
principles
recognised
by the Bill.

Clause 3—.

question of
form con-
sidered.

Paramount
obligation
of tl

State.

Article
39(b) and
(०)

8

19, However, as we have already indicated, Directive Princ}
ples, not being enforceable, were given a somewhat inferiar
position by judicial process. The proposed Bill for the firtt
time recognises the primacy of Directive Principles and has seled-
ted two of them enshrined in. Article 39(b) and (c) for implemen-
tation in the first instance. That is why we think the Bill marks
the beginning of a new era i the constitutional history of our
country.

20. Having made these preliminary observations, let us pro-
ceed to examine the provisions made by clause 3. The first
question which calls for consideration is: is it necessary to make.
the main operative provision of the clause in a negative form
beginning with the word ‘“‘notwithstanding”? Would it not be
possible to secure the implementation of the principles enshrin-
ed in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 by a positive provision ?
We have given anxious thought to this problem and we have
come to the conclusion that the form adopted by the draftsman.
in framing clause 3 cannot be avoided and is, in a sense, inevi-
table.

21. In this connection, it is necessary to remember that funda-
mental rights enshrined in Part या are conferred on. citizens,
while Directive Principles enumerated in Part IV amount to
paramount obligations imposed on the State, That being so,
4 positive provision made for the purpose of securing imple
mentation of said ciples cannot in the very nature of things
be treated as fundamental rights.

In fact, such a positive provision woe for instance, amount
to regulation or control of the citizens’ right to property guaram
teed by Article 191) (fF). While considering the question abowt
the form which the provisions of clause 3 should adopt, this
aspect of the matter must be borne in mind. .

+ 22. At this stage, it is relevant to refer to the Directive Princk
ples which are of sht to be secured by the conferment of power
on Parliament and the State Legislatures by clause 3.. Clauses
(9) and (c) of Article 39 provide:

“The State} shall, jin particular, direct its policy towards
securing—- po?

(b) that the ojwnesship and control of the mat ec
resources of the pommunity are so distributed as b
to subserve Ithe cofnmign good; हर

| i pet पु हा

“(c) that the fdtion of the economic system dong

not result ir} the epneept Pntration of wealth and means of ©
* production tp the dommfon detriment.” .


9

23. It will be noticed that implementation of these Directive
Principles would amount to the control or regulation of the citi-
zens’ right to property and, in that sense, they must find a place
under Article 31 by way of an exception or proviso or as a. part
of the scheme envisaged by all the provisions under Article 31,
and that is what the draftsman has done in the present case.
We are, therefore, unable to say that the drafting of Article 31C
which is in a negative form is open to any serious criticism.

24. However, we ought to emphasise that the effect of Article
31C, as we conceive it to be, is not that, in implementing the
principles specified in clauses (b) and (९) of Article 39, Articles
14,19 and 31 or any of them is intended to be unconstitutional-
ly contravened; it means, as is meant by Article 31B, that en-
forcement of the relevant Directive Principles by legislative pro-
cess may involve regulation of the fundamental rights guaranteed
by Article 19(1)(f) and (8) and Article 31, but such regulation
would inevitably have to be within the limits prescribed by clau-
ses (5) and (6) of Article 19 or by the relevant provisions of Arti-
cle 31, such as Article 31(2). It is inconceivable that Article
14, properly understood, can ever be violated by any legislation
contemplated by Article 310.

25. We are confident that, after the present Bill is passed,
when, in due course, Parliament and State Legislatures make
laws in accordance with the prévision$ of Article 31C, they wilt
faithfully keep in mind the basic concept:of our constitutional
philosophy that, in evolving a rational synthesis (Samanvaya)
between the competing claims of a citizen’s fundamental righis
and public good, the relative fe portance and legitimacy of the
claims must be carefully weighed and taken into account.

26. Apart from the apparent necessity to draft Article 31C
in the present form, Government présunmbly intend to avoid
any dilatory intervention of egal proceedings which inevitably
stall, retard and sometimes ially hinder the whole object
of meeting urgent economic ptoblem§ speedily and effectively,
though, of course, under valid lalws. THat, ini fact, was the genesis
of the Fourth Amendment by which Atticles 31A and 318
were inserted in the Constitution and that also appears to be
the justification of the zelevant clauge in Article 31C. But,
obviously, this clause dees not Imply that Parliament desires to
ignore Articles 14, 19 and 31 i passing i to implement the
principles enshrined in Article it, (b> aad (व. The only effect of
the clause is to avoid judicial serutiny, on ‘the point.

27. In regard to Article 31९0 as at present drafted, there is
one point to which we ought to:refer. : Article 31C as at present
drafted provides that, notwithgtanding agything contained in
article 13, a law passed to give: effect ito the policy specified in
clause (0) of clause (टी shall not ‘be deemed to be void, inter alia,
on the ground that it is inco iter nie ५ or takes away or
abridges any of the rights conferred by tr 2 19, In our opinion,

, i it

Tmplemens
tation of:
Directive
Principles—
Effect on
right to
Property. *

Effect of
atticle 31-€.
examined. |

Dilatory
legal

ings inten-
ded to be
avoided.

‘Question
as to how
far article
19 should
be over
ridden.


Consequen-
ces of
mentioning
whole of
article 19.

Recom-
mendation
to amend
clause 3
relating to
Article
31-C.

10 '

the purpose which Article 31C has in mind would be effectively
achieved if, instead of referring to Article 19(1) as a whole, re-
ference is made to Article 19(1) (1) and (8). It is these two clauses
that are likely to be contravened by legislation contemplated.
by Article 31C, and, if a provision is made that no law passed
with a view to implementing the policy enunciated in Article
39(b) and (c) contravenes, inter alia, Article 191) (1) and (g),
that would serve the purpose in view,

28. On the other hand, if the whole of Article 19 is retained
in the relevant provision of clause 3 of the Bill, it is likely to
lead to some consequences which we view with grave concern,
Sub-clauses (a), (b) and (०0) of Clause (1) of Article 19 guarantee
to all citizens fundamental right to freedom of speech and ex-
pression, to assemble peaceably and without arms, and to form
associations or unions. We have already expressed our con-
currence with the policy underlying the aim and object of clause 3
of the Bill and we have also indicated that a stage has now
arrived when the primacy of the Directive Principles must not
only be recognised in theory, but must become a reality of the
part of national life, Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the fact
that there may be citizens or groups of citizens who subscribe
to the conservative political 20० and want the status quo
to remain and /aissez-faire to thrive. Tt is well known that the
doctrine of /aissez-faire and the rule of the market characterised
the Victorian era in the English public life. So far as we are
concerned, the days of Jaissez-faire and the rule of the market
are over, and the Constitution in unmistakable terms provides
for the pursuit of the idea of establishing an egalitarian society
by the rule of law in a democratic manner. Even so, if a section
of the Indian community, however small in number, does not
believe in this philosophy and wants to propagate the con-
‘servative view of life, it would bé entitled to advocate the amend-
ment of some of the Directive Principles to conform to its socia-
economic philosophy. Freedom of speech and expression of
opinion means not only freedom of speech: and expression of
opinion which is in cpnforaiity pith the philosophy of the estab
lishment, but more isents for lom of speech and expression
of opinion which dissents ftom the philosophy of the establish-
ment. This positionino democtat can dispute.

29. If that be so, we dppréhend that retaining Article 19
without limiting its operatiog td pub-clauses (1) and (8) of clause
(1) may conceivably empower Parliament or the State Legislature
to make a law which: might: prohibit or penalise or control any
criticism of the current economig policies adopted by the present
Union Government or any thovement to change the entire philo-
sophy of the Directive Prin pte ia conformity with the conser-
yative view of economic आए pofitical life; and such a position,
we think, could not be democrétically sound or wise. Similar
situations may, speaking purely theoretically, arise even in res-
pect of the other feed loms ;guafanteed by clauses (b) to (०) of
article 19(1) if the whole of, vartiele 19(1} were mentioned. That



i

is why we recommend that, in Article 31C as drafied under clause
3 of the Bill, reference should be made to Article 191] (1) and
{g) alone and not to Article 19 as a whole.

30, Before we part with this topic, we ought to refer to one
consideration which we have carel Fully weighed in making our
recommendation about the inclusion of Article 191) (f) and
{g) and not the whole of Article 19(1), It is not unlikely that
the Government might have thought of including the whole of
Article 1901) because of their apprehension that even the free-
dom of speech, for instance, might ia future be successfully in-
voked in challenging the validity of laws implementing the
Directive Principles enshrined in Article 39(b) and (c). This
apprehension of the Government would, 00 doubt, be referable
to the decision of the Supreme Court in Saka! Papers' case
in which the freedom of speech guafanteed by Article 19(1)(a)
has been unduly and unreasonebly extended to strike down the
provisioas of what Parliament regarded as a legitimate and prog-
ressive measure. We hope that the apprehension entertained
by the Government may net come true. However, if in future,
our hope is belied and the eppreheasion of the Government
comes true, there will be time enough for Parliament to take suit-
able action by including any other part of Article 19(1).

31. That leaves another part of Article 31-C to be considered.
By this part, it is provided that, if a law made 5y Parliament or
State Legislature by virtue of Atticle 31-C declares that it is for
giving effect to the policy enunciated by Article 39, clause (b)
or (c), the said law shall not be called in question ia any coprt on
the ground that it does not give; effect to such policy. In other
words, the effect of this provision is that any question as to whe-
ther there is any rational nexus or connection, between the
provisions of the law passed by ParKament or State Legislature
and the object intended to be achieved by them will be completely
excluded from judicial scrutiny.’ It is. possible that the nexus
between the provisions of the law in question and the object
intended to be achieved by thent is, in‘ sonte cases, patent and
direct, or is indirect and remote, or is, i some other cases, iHu-
sory or non-existent; and yet, if the clayse in its present form is
adopted by Parliament, courts will d¢ prechided in all cases from
examining the question about tht existence:of such nexus.

32. It is obvious that the whgle obitet af Article 31C as at
present drafted is to enable Parljameat! Siate Legislatures
to pass laws with the object of englemen ting (he Directive Princi-

Article
31-९-
portion
Telating to
deciara-
tion bY
Parliament.

Judicial
inquiry
not ta be
excluded.

ples in question. If that is so, we ste no justification for excluding ~

judicial inquiry into the question about existence of any
Tationea? nexus between the law apd the she whet intended to be
achieved by it. We feel confident (वां, once Article 31C is adop-
ted by Parliament and the ent hat on is suitably amended,
judicial process will take cognizande or the new policy adopted

L. Saket Papers (Private) Led. v. The Union of Inilie, (1962) 3 $.C.R. 842.
H took

1


Analoey
of article
31९2).

12

by the Constitution and will not hesitate to recognise the pri

of the Directive Principles and the urgent need to implement them
in order to mect the challenge of the times. As we have already
emphasised, if Article 31C is adopted, a very significant and im-
portant steps forward will have been taken in giving due i

tion to the primacy of the Directive Principles and we feel that,
while taking this steps, it would be unreasonable to prevent any
judicial inquiry into the question as to whether laws passed im
pursuance of the new policy bear any connection with the object
intended to be served by them.

It is also necessary to bear in mind that Article 31C does not
seck to define or even describe concretely the content of the abst-
Tact economic principles enunciated in clauses (b) and (c) of
Article 39; and that, we think, justifies our recommendation that
the question about the content of the relevant Directive Princi-
ple or Principles sought to be implemented by any legislative
enactment and its or their relation with the provisions of the said
enactment should be left open for judicial inquiry. While dealing
with this aspect of the matier, we may refer to the fect that Article
31A, which was inserted by section 3 of the Constitution (Fourth -
Amendment) Act, 3955, : specifically and clearly enumerates
by clauses (a) to (व the objects for which laws could be passed
and, yet, no provision has been;made in the said Article providing
that a declaration made by the appropriate Legislarure that any
law passed by it has been so passed for carrying out the objects
enumerated in the clauses is conclusive and shall not be called
in question in any Court. We trust that, having regard to this
position, the Union Government should accept out recommenda-
tion to delete the last part of Article 31C.

33. Besides, we may point:out that, when Article 31(2) was
added by section 2 of the stitution (Fourth Amendment)
Act, 1955, Parlianjent pe aa that the question about the
adequacy of compénsation shpuld not be justiciable, but did;
not make a similar provision about the question as to whether
compulsory परम ot ti pisition of the property is for

public purpose or not. 16 wopld be recalled that, under Article |
31(2), no property ghall be: conjpulsorily acquired or requisitioned
save for a public oa ang save by authority of hich -
provides for compensati fee excluding the question of
compensation and its ss from the jurisdiction of court, :
Parhament did sot think i isable similarly to exclude the: _
inquiry as to whether the! sory acquisition or requisition: «
of any property is for a purpose or not. In our vies

just as the existence of the

is left open for judicial scrut-
ny by Article ghd 50 shoulifithe nexus between the provisions :
of the law p: to Ye: Ade in pursuance of the authority. .
conferred by Artic 21C pad their d their object, riz., the implementa >
tion of the principles in Article 39(b) and (८) be ६
left open to judicial investigation.



13

34. We would accordingly tecommend very strongly that
the relevant part in question should be deleted from Article
31C as at present drafted.

The proviso to article 31C is similar to the proviso to article
31A and, so, we have no comment to make on it,

35. Incidentally, we may be itted to observe that, if
this clause is retained in Article fea and all judicial inquiry is
excluded, laws passed under Article 31C would nevertheless
be challenged in courts of law and, in doubtful cases, courts of
law may feel inclined to reach the conclusion that the’passing of
the impugned law amounts to a fraud on the Constitution.
Such a situation, we think, ought to be. avoided. Parliament
should trust the Judiciary to do its duty fairly, fearlessly, impar-
tially and objectively and to take cognizance of the changed phi-
losophy which Parliament proposes to adopt in recognising the
importance, the urgency and the, significance of implementing
the Directive Principles in question.

36. As we have already. indicated,' though the Bill bas not.
been formally referred to us by the Ministry of Law and Justice,
it is not unlikely that it may be ‘brought before Parliament in
its ensuing session; and having regard td the material terms en-
larging the jurisdiction under w! ich the present Commission
has been constituted, we thought: it right suo motu to make a
Teport on the Bill in question.

37. In conclusion, our recommendations are :—

(1) In Article 31C as at prasent drafted, instead of Article
19, Article J9(1)(f) and (g) should be specified;

(2) The last part of the mdin parpgraph of the proposed
Article 31C, which provides that no: law containing a dec-
laration that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be
called in question in any court on the ground that it does not
give effect to such policy, should bé deleted.

P.B. Gajendragadkar—Chairman.
V.R. Krishna Tyer i

P. K. Tripathi } Mefubers. i
P.M. Bakshi—Secreiary.

New Deu,
The 28th October, 1971.

Recom-
mendation
(० amend
article

on the
round of
fraud still

possible.

Report
mnade in
view of
urgency of
the matter.

Conclu-
sion.

1. Paragraph 1, supra. हे
MGIPRRND--Sec. 3-18 M of 1000] स्गा- 0
i |; है