LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT

ON

THE TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OFFENCES

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


No.F.1(5)/71-L.C.

P.B. Gajendragadkar,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-t.
Dated 28th February, 1972.

My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the Forty-seventh
Report of the Law Commission on the trial and
punishment of social and economic offences.

Yours sincerely,

(P.B. GAJENDRAGADKAR)

Hon’ble Shri H.R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law & Justice,
Government of India,

New Delhi.


“CHAPTER
No. PaGr
1. Introductory . . . .
2. Scope of the inquiry. . : oe . . 7
3. Our approach. . पु . . . . . 9
4. Measures so far adopted . im . . . : 18
5. Causes of defective enforcement . 9... 29
-6. Existing position with reference to important enactments . 39
‘7. Desirability of amendment—substantive points common
to all the Acts considered... . : : पु 45
8. Corporations and their officers. . . . : 61
‘9. Desirability of amendments as to jurisdiction, procedure and
limitation. : 70
‘10. Desirability of amendment—probation . ‘ : : 85
11. Requirement as to sanction or complaint . : . 87
12, Presumption and evidence. : . . . . 96
13. Tender of pardon . पु >> : : : 97
14, Administrative Adjudications : - : : 99
15. Recommendations as to individual Acts : : : 103
[@6. Preventive detention . : ooo. : पु . 146
17. Interference by writs with investigation . . : : 150
18. Miscellanoous न . : : : : : 153
19, Summary of recommendations. - . पु 155
APPENDICES
Appendix !—Recommendations as shown in the form of
draft sections . . . 165
Appendix 2—Figures as to convictions and punishments. . 190
Appendix 3—Questionnaire issued by the Commission. . 194,

6)


REPORT ON THE TRIAL AND PUNISHMENT OF
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OFFENCES

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report deals with the question of effective imple-
mentation of the material provisions of certain Acts. These
offences may briefly be described as social and economic offences,
The broad question which has been referred to the Commission
can be thus stated!-—

“The Government of India had under consideration
the question of effectively dealing with certain anti-social
and economic offences, There are certain special
Acts intended for the benefit of general public and
the offences under such Acts are antisoei fal in nature, There
are special legislations as Essential Commodities Act, Pre-
vention of Food Adulteration Act, Drugs (control) Act,
Imports & Exports (control) Act. Foreign Exchange Regu-
lation Act, etc. These anti-social offences also extend to
seliberate- evasion.’ vasion,of taxes and the qliestidn that arises for
consideration 1s how drastically and swiftly pena! action can
be taken to prove a deterrent against commission of such
offences. The present trend of legislation and also
the judicial approach to such offences appears to
be that these offences are treated है 28 and the
punishments are not adequate haVing re to the gravity
of such offences. The Government of:India would like to
have a well-considered opinion of the law Commission as re-
gards desirability of dealing with adequately and swiftly such
anti-social and economic offences.”

1.2. This Report accordingly con ayes itself with the
question of dealing adequately axtd swiftly with those offences.
As we point out in a later chapter?, we’ thought it necessary
to widen the scope of our inquiry by including within its pur-
view questions about investigation, : prosecution, trial and
punishment in respect of proceedings taken under these Acts,
We wish to make it clear that we are not dealing with contents
or structure of these Acts.

1.3. It may be stated here that the questidn whether social
and economic offences should be inchided in the Indian Penal
Code has been considered at length & Report of one of the

1. Letter of the Minister of Law and Justice dated 4th October, 1971. to the Chair

man, Law Commission,
2, Para. 2.1, infra,

Reference
to the
Commis-
sion.

Scope of
the Report,

Previous
Report.



2

earlier Law Commissions!, and it is outside the scope of this
Report.

Social and i.4. By now, the concept of anti-social acts and economic

Stences’ Offences has become familiar to these acquainted with the

offences. progress of the criminal law and its relationship to the achieve-
ment of social objectives. Still, it may pot be out of place
to draw attention to some of the salient features of these
offences.

Briefly, these may be thus summarised :—

(1) Motive of the criminal is avarice or rapaciousness
{not lust or hate).

(2) Background of the crime is aon-emotional (unlike
murder, rape, defamation etc.). There is no emotional
reaction as between the victim and the offender.

(3) The Victim is usually the State or a section of the
public, particularly the consuming public (i.e. that portion of
the which consumes goods or services, buys shares or securi-
ties or other intangibles). Even where there is an individual
victim, the more important element of the offence is harm
to society.

(4) Mode of operation of the offender is fraud, not force.
(5) Usually, the act is deliberate and wilful.

(6) Interest protected is two-fold—
(a) Social interest in the preservation of —
id the property or wealth or health of its in-

dividual members, and national resources, and
(ii) the general economic system as a whole,
from
{i) exploitation, or
{ii) waste by individuals or groups.

(b) social interest in the @ugrnentation of the wealth
of the country by enforcing the laws relating to taxes
and duties, foreign exchange, foreign commerce, in-
dustries and the like.

Offences 1.5. The most important feature of these offences is the
गा fact that ordinarily they do not involve an individual! direct victim

but are punished because they harm the whole society. This
constitutes the primary reason why special efforts have te be
made to enforce them. If a manor woman is robbed, assaulted
or cheated, there is some person who is interested in getting the
offender prosecuted, and because the act is a physical one,

victims.

1, 29th Report of the Law Commission (Social and economic offences).


3

having an immediate and direct impact, both individual and so-
cial vengeance are likely to be aroused. This element is, however
absent when, for example essential commodities are hoarded,
or foreign exchange is illegally taken out of the country or pro-
hibited goods are imported. No doubt, some social offences
do involve 2 ‘victim’. For example, when adulterated food
is sold, the immediate consumer is harmed. But the criminal
act is potentially capable of harming a large number of persons
and that is the principal object behind punishing it.

It is not, of course, suggested that offences falling within
the general criminal Jaw are not to be regarded as anti-social
acts; and in a sense every crime is anti-social because the State,
when it prosecutes, does so on behalf of the society. What is
intended to be emphasised is, that the injury to society predomi-
nates in the case of some acts, while it may be in the case of
others,

1.6. The Law Commission had, in an earlier Report',
occasion to deal with the following categories of offences, while
considering the question whether provisions as to social and
economic offences should be traas! ferred to the Penal Code:—

(1) Offences calculated to prevent or obstruct the eco-
nomic development of the country and endanger its economic
health.

(2) Evasion of taxes.
(3) Misuse of position by public servants.

(4) Offences in the nature of breaches of contracts, re-
sulting in the delivery of goods not according to specifica-
tions.

(5) Hoarding and Black-marketing.
(6) Adulteration of food and drugs.

t adh Theft and Misappropriation of public property and
‘unds.

(8) Trafficking in licences, permits etc.

For the purposes of the present Report also, it is not neces-
sary to go beyond the above offences. In fact, some of the
categories mentioned above—e.g. categories (3), (4), (7) and (8)
—do not present problems of enforcement with muchffrequency
and seriousness so.as to require much attention.

1.7. It is well known that while most of the offences under
the Penai Code rule out absolute liability, the same is not true of
many offences under the special laws. Considerations of the
need of enforcement have led to the creation of absolute

Categories
of social
and
economic
offences,

Offences
of strict
liability,

1, 29th Report of the Law Commission.


White-
collar
crimes.

Socio-
economic
offences
form
intersecting
circle with
white
collar
crimes and,
offences of

Speciat
features of
economic
crimes.

1. Para,

4

liability. Some of the acts punishable under special laws may be
regarded as “public welfare offences”, “regulatory offences”

॥ “civil offences”, while some of the acts can be regarded as
akin to traditional crimes.

1.8. Another aspect to which attention can be usefully
drawn is that many—but not all—of the offences in question are
“white-collar crimes’. Without entering into details of the
definition of “white-collar crime”, one may, for the purpose
of the present Report, describe it as a crime committed in the
course of one’s occupation by a member of the upper class of
society. A manufacturer of drugs who deliberately supplies
sub-standard drugs is. for example, a white collar criminal.
So is a big corporation guilty of fraudulent evasion of tax. A
person who illegally smuggles (for his personal use) costly tele-
vision sets. is not a white collar criminal in the above sense, there
being no connection between his occupation and the crime
committed by him. Nor is a pensioner who submits a false re-
turns of income. But all of them are guilty of social or economic
offences. In short, social offences are offences which affect
the health or material welfare of the community as a whole,
and not merely of the individual victim. Similarly, economic
offences are those which affect the country’s economy, and not
merely the wealth of an individual victim.

1.9. Socio-economic offences and white-collar crimes could
thus be intersecting circles. Again. socio-economic offences
and crimes of strict liability also could be represented by inter-
secting circles,

1.10. The importance of suppressing social and economic
crimes in any modern society is obvious. The transition from
a rural and simple society to an industrialised and complex one
entails regulation by or under Jaw of activities having an econo-
mic import. The same process of transition from a simple to
complex and a rural to urban society also necessitates an in-
creasing attack on malpractices which were previously unknown.
but which now emerge as a result of the process. The process
gives rise to a two-fold increase in such malpractices—increase
in the number of socio-economic malpractices and increase in
their variety. Thus, newer forms of harmful activities not known
previously—such as. unfair competition—raise their heads.
And malpractices which would previously have been of a simple.
recurring. monotonous type, now assume diverse and varying
manifestations. Adulteration of foods and drugs is an example
in point.

1.8, Supra.


5

1.11, This has happened in every modern society. fn a
developing economy. it assumes still greater importance, be-
cause conduct which, though criminal, could previously have
been overlooked—e.g, petty smuggling—has now to be dealt
with more ‘seriously. Just as in war, every inch of territory
has to be defended, whatever the risk, so in an economic crisis or
in a massive effort 10 build up a society a sound and healthy
social structure, the purity of every grain has to be protected
and every dot of evil has to be wiped out.

The reason why offences against laws enacted to combat
such evils do not tind adequate response in the social conscious
hess is psychological. Our minds are familiar with conventional
offences like murder. rape and theft—offences where a tangible
person or property of an individual is attacked. But it takes
time to realise the seriousness of non-conventional crimes where
intangible property. in the sense of economic resources of the
community are involved. or where the harm caused is indirect
and remote. and there is no immediate tangible object of the harm
visible to the mind. Neither the offender nor the society ade-
quately realises the harm, because of the absence of an immediate
victim.

1.12, The procedure which we followed in preparing this
Report was in brief, as follows :--

After a pretiminary study, we had prepared a Questionnaire
on the subject, setting out the important, points arising from the
reference and soliciting views on those points with reference to the
major Acts.', The questionnaire was sent out to the State
Governments, Bar Associations, Faculties of Law in different
Universities, commercial bodies and -other interested persons
and institutions, We also got prepared a draft Report on the
subject. We then held oral discussions with Members of Par-
liament, Government officers, members of the Bar, commercial
bodies academic lawyers and others interested in the Subject.
The discussion were held by the fult Commission at Bombay
and Delhi, and one of our Members (Mr. Justice V. R. Krishna
lyer) held discussions at Madras, Ernakulam and Trivandrum.
Chairman discussed some aspects of the problem under our
inquiry with the representatives of the Indian Chambers of Com-
merce and Industry at Calcutta. Thereafter. a revised draft
Report was prepared and discussed. It was again discussed
and revised, and finalised,

We wish to express our thanks to all those who helped us by
communicating their views orally or in writing. It is not consi-
dered convenient to refer to each shade of view while discussing
the various points, mainly because the Acts involved are numer-
ous and se are the shades of opinion. But we ought te state
that before formulating our conclusions, we have taken into
account each of these shades of view.

Procedure
adopted

AS to the major Acts, see para. 2.3. infra.


6

Before we conclude this Introductory Chapter, we ought to
place on record our warm appreciation of the assistance which
we have received from our Secretary, Shri P. M. Bakshi. At the
commencement of the inquiry, Mr. Bakshi prepared a Working
Paper in which he posed the major problems which called for our
decision. Then a Questionnaire was drafted and, as we have
already indicated, it was widely circulated. Mr. Bakshi joined
us in our discussions with all persons who helped us by mecting
us, and took very comprehensive notes of the discussions. After
the recording of evidence was over, we discussed the problems
posed in the Working Paper, initially prepared by Mr. Bakshi,
and came to provisional conclusions on the major issues involved
in the inquiry. It was in the light of these conclusions that a
draft was prepared by Shri Bakshi for further discussions. This
draft was considered by us fully and carefully and we reached
and recorded our final conclusions on the major issues (involved
in the present inquiry). Then, Mr. Bakshi prepared a final draft
for our consideration and acceptance. This draft was again
examined by us before it was finalised.

We are conscious that some of the major recommendations
we have made in our Report are radical in character and they
constitute a departure from the traditional concept of criminal
jurisprudence. Everyone of the recommendations made by us
has, however, been carefully examined by us and the pros and
cons of the problem involved have been fully scrutinised. In
our view, the implementation of the recommendations we have
made may go a jong way in helping our country to face effective-
ly the challenge posed by the socio-economic offences with which
the Report is concerned.

Whilst we were engaged on this inquiry, the Hon'ble Minister
for Law and Justice indicated to the Chairman that the Union
Government would very muth appreciate if the present case
could be forwarded as early as possible, and, on behalf of the
Commission, the Chairman had assured the Hon’ble Minister
that the Commission hoped to be able to make its report by the
end of February, 1972. We would fike to add that we have been
able to carry out our assurang: mainly because of the very
valuable help which Mr. Bakshi has given us.


CHAPTER 2

SCOPE OF THE INQUIRY

2.1. Before we proceed to indicate our broad approach in Introduc-
respect of social and economic offences, and our vicws as to the tory.
detailed amendments needed in the existing laws on the subject,
we would like to say a few words about the scope of the present
inquiry.

Although we started with the broad object of discussing the
question of trial and punishment of the offences in question, we
felt that justice could not be done to the subject without also
entering into some consideration of the stages of investigation
and prosecution. These stages are vitally linked up with trial.
it is the material gathered during investigation that forms the
basis of the prosecution. It is obvious, therefore, that defects
in the law affecting the efficiency of the stages preceding trial
would affect the quality of the trial.

Moreover, having regard to the importance of these offences.
it appeared advisable to broaden the scope of our inquiry, so as
to include steps prior to the judicial process. Accordingly, we
have kept before us the entire subject of criminal process, in rela-
tion to the enforcement of the laws in question.

This has enabled us to consider various criticisms in relation
to the enforcement of social and economic legislation, such as,
that the investigation into the commission of such offences is
not prompt or efficient: that the presentation of the case against
the offender in Court is not effective; that, for lack of proper and
adequate evidence, or owing to purely technical objections, con-
victions are often not recorded, and that, in some cases, where
convictions are recorded, the sentences imposed are inadequate.

2.2, At the same time, certain limitations as to the scope of Scope
the present inquiry have also to be emphasised. These limita- inquiry.
tions flow from the fact that this Report is primarily concerned
with the narrow question of dealing effectively with the specified
‘offences through the criminal process. In the first place, there-
fore, questions of the content of the substantive provisions of the
various Acts are outside the ambit of this Report. Secondly,
since the emphasis is on the process of a criminal rosecution,
an examination of the imposition of penalties by administrative
adjudication has not been undertaken, except where some point
of importance arose during our oral discussions and appeared to
require special consideration. Thirdly, even as regards the penal
Provisions which properly fall within the subject-matter of the

7


Major
Acts dealt
with,

Scope of
the recom
mendation
as to direct
taxation
Jaws.

8

Report, we have dealt with only such matters as appeared to be
of importance from the broad angle of effective implementation
of the laws concerned. Therefore, the fact that we have not
made recommendations for amendment in the penal provisions
in certain points of detail, should not be taken as implying that
they are not capable of improvement in their form or content,
whether on independent considerations of merit or on considera
tions of uniformity,

2.3. Another limitation which should be pointed out is that
this Report will not go into all the Acts concerning social and
economic offences. For convenience, we shall deal only with
the following major Acts :—

we -The Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944,

2) The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

(3) The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954,
(4) The Essentiat Commodities Act, 1955.

(5) The Wealth Tax Act, 1957.

(6) The Income-tax Act, 1961.

(7) The Customs Act, 1962.

(8) The Gold Control} Act, 1968.

[On one or two points, we have, however, recommended
amendments in some other Acts1.]

This limitation was unavoidable if the inquiry was not to
become cumbersome.

2.4. Having regard to what we state later2, our recom-
mendations in respect of the direct tax laws {Income-tax Act
and Wealth Tax Act) are confined to certain points which were
specially forwarded to us at Ministerial level.

1. ६.8. (०) the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947;

(6) the Drugs Act;

(©) the Criminal Procedure Code;

(व) the Indian Penal Code;

(०) the Passports Act:

(0) the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952.

2. Paras. 3.35 and 3.36, infra.


.

CHAPTER 3

OUR APPROACH

3.1. We would, at this, stage, like to indicate broadly the introduc-
approach which we have adopted in dealing with the subject of tory.
the inquiry. .

3.2. A few general aspects of criminal law need to be advert-
ed to at the outset.

Criminal law, though it is only a part of the system of social
control, is yet an important part. Two of its aspects assume
importance—

(i) it carries a special kind of stigma,

(ii) it carries a distinct Tange of sanctions. It is these
two aspects which underlie almost all the important safeguards
that are traditionally associated with criminal law,

First, as regards stigma, the word. ‘crime’ has a symbolic
meaning for the public. The criminal law is deeply imbue d
with the idea of stigma: labelling an act as criminal goes beyon d
merely ensuring effectiveness of the law.

3.3, The meaning and shades of “stigma™ have varied in
history. It has been stated! that the Greeks originated the term
“s igma” to refer to bodily signs designed to expose something
unusual and bad about the moral status of the signifier. “The
signs were cut or burnt into the body and advertised that the
bearer was a slave, a criminal, or a traitor—a blemished person,
Titually polluted, to be avoided, especially in public places”.
(Later, in Christian times, two layers of metaphor were added to
the term: the first referred to the bodily sign of holy grace that
took the form of eruptive blossoms on the skin; the second, a
medical allusion to this religious allusion, referred to bodily signs
of physical disorder). Today, however, the term is widely used
in something like the original literal sense, but is applied more to
the disgrace itself than to the bodily evidence of it.

3.4, Next, as regards the sanctions, the coercive part of the
law—which is reflected in the laws, ‘sanctions’—-finds its strongest
fulfilment in the criminat law, because of the direct use of force
in respect of the liberty or Property of the convicted offender.

“(p,__ i. Etving and Goffmnan, Stigma: Notes on the Managemen of Spouca JdenG-(ISGy Erving and Goffman, Stigma: Notes,on the Management of Spoiled Identity, (1963)
(Prentice Hall, New Jersey), Pages 32-39, cited in Radzinowicz and Wolfgang, Crime
and Justice, (1971), Vol. 1, pages 25-26.

9


10
3.5. The sanctions of ail laws of every kind will be found to

fall under two great heads: those who disobey them may be
forced to indemuify a third person either by damages or by speci-
fic performance, or they may themselves be subjected to some
suffering’.

3.6. It is the stigma and the sanctions—the likelihood of
loss of reputation and suffering to the persons against whom.
they are put into use—which are at the basis of the safegaurds?
which we have referred to above.

3.7. In a modern industrialized society the regulation of
human conduct by means of the criminal law extends to every
phase of life’, But the ordinary principles apply whether the
crime is traditional or new.

3.8, One of the illustrations of this approach of the law
is the principle of mens rea, “The intent and the act must
both concur to constitute the crime4.”

For example, a civil action for assault would rest upon the
invasion of a person’s “right to live in society without being
put in fear of personal harm ;” and can often be sustained
by proof of a negligent act resulting in unintentional injury. But
भा indictment for the same act could be sustained oaly upon
satisfactory proof of criminal intention to do personal harm to
another by violences.

3.9, Again, since the outcome of a criminal trial may result
in the defendant's loss of liberty or even life, the courts evolved
a rule which casts upon the prosecution of heavy burden of proof.
As has been observed§—"‘No rule of criminal law is of more
importance “than that which requires the prosecution to prove
the accused’s guilt beyond reasonable doubt. In the first place
this means that it is for the prosecution to prove the defen है ९

७1६ and not for the fatter to establish his innocence ; he
is presumed innocent until the contrary is proved. Secondly,
they must satisfy the jury of his guilt beyond teasonable doubt.
In civil cases where a plaintiff sues a defendant, he who shows
that on a balance of probabilities the evidence is in his favours
wins the day. In criminal cases, however, the Crown cannot
succeed on a mere balance of probabilities. If there is any
reasonable doubt whether the accused is guilty, he must be ac-
guitted. An acquittal therefore either means that the jury be- 5
Neve the accused and are satisfied of his innocence, or that,

Seaenr

- Hall and Mueller, Crimiaal Law and Procedure, (1965), page 1.
Para. 3.2, supra.

Hat! and Mueller, Criminal Law and Procedure, (1965), page 175.
Halt and Mueller, Criminal Law and Procedure, (1965), page 143.
Hall and Mueller, Criminal Law and Procedure, (1965), page 181.
1. Ritzgerlad, Criminal Law and Punishment, (1962), page 192.


IL

while not satisfied that he is innocent, they do not feel sure
of his guilt. In England, there is no middle verdict such
as the Scottish verdict of ‘not proven’ to cover this sort of
situation ; ‘not guilty’ is the only alternative to a conviction.

3.10. The principle of legality (rulium crimen sine lege),
the rule for construing criminal statutes in favour of the citizen,
and several other cules peculiar to crimiaal law furnish illustra-
tions of this approach which, as we have said, could be, pri-
marily, attributed to two aspects of the criminal law.—the stigma
attaching to 2 conviction. and the saffering resulting from punish-
ment.

3.11, Notwithstanding our awareness of the aspects of
criminal law discussed above, we have thought it necessary to
consider “whether, in the case of social and economic offences
under the major Acts, a diffrext approach is not called for,
particularly when, the country is in the grip of an economic crisis,
and the fruits of a hard won freedom may be lost if the founda-
tion is not laid for economic stability.

3.12. Two-very important aspects of social and economic
offences have to be emphasised in this context—the gravity of
the harm caused to society and the nature of the offences ihem-
selves. The gravity of the harm is not easily apparent ; but is,
nevertheless, undeniable. The nature of the offences is peculiar,
in the sense that they are planned and executed in secrecy by
shrswd and dexterous persoas with sophisticated means. The

public welfare is gravely affected ; but detection is unusally

difficult.

3.13. These offences, affocting as they do the health and
wealth of the entire community, require to be put down with
a heavy hand at a time when the country has embarked upon
a gigantic process of social and economic planning. With its
vastness in size, its magnitude of problems and its long history
of poverty and subjugation, our Welfare State needs weapons
of attack on poverty, ill nourishment, andexploitation that are
sharp and effective in contrast with the weapons intended to 70-
press other evils. The legislative armoury for fighting socio-
economic crimes, therefore, should be furnished with weapons
which may not be needed for fighting ordinary crimes. The
damage caused by socio-economic offences to a developing so-
ciety could be treated on a level different from ordinary crimes.
In a sense, anti-social activities inthe nature of deliberate and
persistent violations of economic laws could be described as
extra-hazardous activities, and it is in this light that we app-
roach the problem.

3.14. Since the casualty is the nation’s welfare, it is these
offences which really deserve the name of ‘public welfare’ off-
ences.

1Mof Law/72—2.

Need for
stringent
action.

Concept of
public
welfare,


Sayre’s
view as
to ‘public
welfare”
offences.

Need fur
widening
the concept
of public
welfare
offences.

Justifica-
tion for
treating
social and
economic
offences
differently
from con-
ventional
crimes,

Hope about
appeal of
above
approach.

Important
changes.

2

3.15. Long ago, Sayre! cited and -lassified a large number
of cases of “public welfare offences’ and conctuded that they fait
Toughly into subdivisions of (1) illegal sale of intoxicating liquor,
(2) sales of impure or adulterated food or drugs. (3) sale of mis-
branded articles, (4) violations of antinarcotic Acts, (5) crimi-
nal nuisances, (6) violations of traffic regulations. (7) violations
of motor-vehicles laws, and (8) violations of general police re-
gulations. passed for the safety health or well-being of the com-
munity.

3.16. The time has come when the concept of “public wel-
fare offences’ should be given a new dimension and extended
to cover activities that affect national heaith or wealth on a
big scale. Demands of the economic Prosperity of the nation
have brought into being risks of a volume and variety unheard
of, and if those concerned with the transactions and activities
in this field were not to observe new standards of care and con-
duct, vital damage will be caused. to the public welfare. In the
field of health. for example, the wide di bution of goods has
become an instrument of wide distribution of harm. When
those who disperse food, drink and drugs, do not comply with
the prescribed standard of quality. integrity. disclosure and
care, public welfare receives a vital blow. In the economic
field, again. freshly discovered sources of harm require the
imposition of a higher type of Precauticns. without which
there would be vital damage to the fabric of the country and
even to its very survival.

3.17. These cases do not fit neatly in the accepted categories
of crimes. They represent harm of greater magnitude than the
traditional crimes and of a nature different from them. Unlike
the traditionat crimes, they are not in the shape of positive aggres-
sions or invasions. They may not result in direct or immediatz
injury : nevertheless, they create a danger which. or the pro-
bability of which. the law must seek to minimise. Whatever
the intent of the violator, the injury is the same. Hence. if
legislation “applicable to such offences, asa matter of policy.
departs from legislation applicable to ordinary crimes in respect
of the traditional requirements as to mens rea‘and the other sub-
stantive matters as well as on points of procedure. the departure
would, we think, be justifiable.

3.18. We hope that our approach will appealto and 10
be shared by all agencies concerned with the investigation. pro-
secution, trial and punishment of these offences.

3.19. It would, we think, be convenient if we. at this Stage.
indicate illustrations from some of the important recommenda-
tions which flow from the above approach.

है. Sayre, “Public Welfare Offences”, 33 Col. 1... Rev. 55, 73, 84, cited in Morissette v.
U.S., (1951) 342 U.S. 244, 262, fooinoie 20.


13

3.20. First we should refer 10 an important change pertain- ens rea
ing to mens rea. Having regard to the considerations mentioned Ber ४11०
above, we have recommended placing the burden of disproving shifted.
mens rea on the accused. After very careful consideration,
we have come to the conclusion that the social interest
in the prosecution and conviction of those guilty of anti-social
acts would be protected by the amendment which we propese.

At the same time, the substantive provision would not, in its
formulation, be so unreasonable as to attach culpability (and,
consequentially to impose punishment), where there is no in-
tention to evade its provisions and no want of reasonable care.

3.21. Departures from the common-law tradition, mainly (काल
under statutes in the nature of police regulations were reviewed Justice

and their rationale apprised by Chief Justice Cooley!. in these Cooley's
terms: — tions.

“I agree that as a rule there can be no crime without
a criminal intent ; but this is not by any means a universal
rule. .....Many statutes which are in the nature of police
regulations, as this, impose criminal penalities irres-
pective of any intent of violate them ; the purpose being to
Tequire a degree of diligence for the protection of the
public which shall render violation impossible.”

3.22. In the English Court of Criminal Appeal, Donovan
J. had the following observations to make while dealing with
hg ¢ire-Parchase and Credit Sale Agreement (Control) Order,

“The object of the order was to help to defend the currency
against the peril of inflation which, if unchecked, would bring
disaster on the country. There is no need to elaborate
this.’ The present generation has witnessed the collapse
of the curtency in other countries and the consequent chaos,
misery and widespread ruin. It would not be at all sur-
prising if Parliament. determined to prevent similar calamities
here, enacted measures which it intended to be absolute
prohibition of acts which might increase the risk in, however,
smell a degree. Indeed, that would be the natural expectation,
There would be little point in enacting that no one should
breach the defences against a flood, and at the same time
excusing anyone who did it innocently. For these reasons
we think that article 1 of the order should receive a literal
construction and that the ruling of Diplock, J. was correct,”

3.23. Again, Chief Justice Taft, in overruling a contention — Chief
that there can be no conviction on an indictment which makes Justice |
Taft's view.
1, People v. Roby, 52 Mich, 577, 579, 18 N.W. 365, 366 (184) cited im Moriawerle w>
U.S., (1951) 342 U.S. 246, 257.

2. Riv. St. Margarets Ltd. H.0., (1958) 2 All E.R. 289, 293 (C.C.A.).



Tacrease in
maximum
punish-
ment. *

Minimum
147
and apy
‘on the
question of
sentence.

4

no charge of criminal intent but alleges only making a sale of-
a narcotic forbidden by law, wrote! :

“While the general rule at common law was that the scienter
‘was 2 necessary element in the indictment and proof of every
crime, and this was followed in regard to statutory crimes
even where the statutory definition did not in terms include
it...., there has been a modification of this view in respect
of prosecutions under statutes the purpose of which would
be obstructed by such a requirement. It is a question of
legislative intent to be construed by the Court....”

Of course, he referred to ‘regulatory measures’ in the exercise
of what is called the police power where the emphasis of the sta-
tute is evidently upon achievement of some social betterment
rather than the punishment of the crimes as in cases of crime
‘mala in se’, But the common element between regulatory offen-
ces {on the one hand) and the offences with which this Report
is concerned (on the other hand) is that of public welfare.

3.24. Consistently, with our approach in dealing with the
Menace to social health and wealth posed by socio-economic
offences, we are also recommending an_ increase in punishment
for the principal offences under most of the Acts. In doing so,
our main object is to give adequate expression to the social dis-
approval of such crimes. One of the objects of punishment
is the emphatic denunciation of the crime by the community,
and we believe that this denunciation could be achieved only if
the gradation of punishments. is so devised as to evoke in the
public mind an intelligent reaction, and this in its turn would
be facilitated if the scales of punishment exhibit a modicum of
uniformity based on rational considerations. Tvo many scales
and variations in the quantum of punishment lead to a failure
of this object. The increase of the maximum punishments will
also make the offence cognizable and non-bailable and that we
Tegard as a welcome con:equence.

3.25, There is a complaint that courts are not awarding
adequate punishment for many of these offences. This com-
plaint has taken two shapes. First, it is stated, that though
imprisonment is awarded, the term awarded is not apporpriate
to the gravity of the crime, so that a small period (say six months)
is mechanically regarded as sufficient. Secondly, it is stated,
that the discretion to award fine only or to award imprisonment
below the minimum, is improperly exercised, so that in a very
large numberof cases the offenders are let off with a fine or with
a short term of imprisonment below the minimum. As our
Report will indicate this complaint cannot be rejected as totally

aseless.

1, United States v. Balint, 258 U.S. 250, 251-252.


15
3.26. Several possible alternatives could be thought of
to solve this problem. For example,—
@) increase of the maximum punishment ;
(é) increase of the minimum punishment ;
(iii) removal of the relaxing power of the court ;

(ir) imposition of restrictions on the discretion of the
court to relax without totally removing it ;

(0 provision for appeal on the ground of inadequacy
of the sentence.

We have made certain proposals in the nature of (iv) above.
Further, in our view, the solution at (v) above, though it may
appear to be mild, is worth trying. No doubt, evep after the
insertion of such a provision, appeals praying for enhancement
of sentence under the amended provision may not necessarily
be successful in every case. The very existence of such a pro-
vision, is however, likely to keep in check any tendency of the
lower magistracy to be unduly liberal in sentencing. We are,
therefore, reiterating! the recommendation made in this behalf
by the previous Commission.

3.27, Our next important recommendation is to provide Special
for the trial of these offences by Special Judges of a senior cadre, courts.
and it is further our intention that'such eases. should be assigned
only to one particular Judge in an area, so that he may develop
the expertise necessary for the purpose, also require familiarity
with t he special features of these offences. The administration
and enforcement of these offences requires much more than a
knowledge of general criminal law and procedure. It presupposes
an acquaintance with some of the nuisance, a grasp in depth of
the under-currents of the world of racketeers and other special
features of organised crime.

3.28. Appeals from convictions by these courts should lie faPpeails to
to the High Court?. Our object is to secure the speedy dis- High
posal of the appeals, as well as to ensure ubiformity in the in- ‘Court.
terpretation of the relevant jaws.

3.29, Finally, we should refer to an important recommenda- Preventive
tion which we are making, regarding preventive detention. detention,
Our advice has been sought on the question whether persons
suspected of large scale smuggling of goods or violations of
foreign exchange 139 should be brought within the Act provid-
ing for preventive detention3.

4. Para. 7.48, aifra.

2. This is achieved once the offences are brought within the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1952. (See section 9 of that Act),

3, The Maintenance of Internal Security Act, 1971.


16

3.30. While we do not regard- preventive detention as in
harmony with the democratic spirit, we are not unmindful
of the considerations which weighed with the Constitution-
makers when they authorised preventive detention—the par-
amount need of safeguarding certain conditions without which
the country could not survive. The various topics mentioned
in the specific legislative entries—such as, the defence of India.
foreign affairs, security of India, security of state, maintenance
of public order, and maintenance of supplies and services essen-
tial to the community—show the kind of dangers which the Con-
stitution-makers had in mind. The common governing princi-
ple behind the specifically enumerated dangers was the survival
of the nation.

3.31. That the survival of the nation may be jeopardised
+ as much by an.acute ‘scarcity of essential’ goods or services as
by war or rebellion. is evident.

Threats to the national economy arising from a violation
of the restrictions imposed in the interest of conserving foreign
exchange could constitute an equally serious danger to the sur-
vival of the nation. Economic bankruptcy can pose as serious
a problem as political insecurity ; it could. conceivably, be pro-
ductive of distress more severe in magnitude and to a large num-
ber of persons. हु

3.32. We are, therefore, of the view that so long as preventive
detention exists as a permissible measure for fighting certain
evils, it would be justifiable to use it av a weapon against large-
scale evasion of the Customs Act or the Foreign Exchange Act.
There is reason to believe that smuggling on a 18186 scale is being
carried on by persons against whom, for reasons other than the
inefficiency of the enforcement staff, it has not been and may
not be possible to procure such evidence as would lead to a con-
viction in a court of law.

3.33, Accurate figures of evasion cannot. in the very nature
of things, be expected, and estimates of evasion of the laws re-
lating to customs duties and foreign exchange are bound to
be imprecise. Nevertheless. having regard to the fact that raids
carried on during the Jast two years or so have resulted in the
seizure of startingly large stocks of smuggled goods, one can
reasonably imagine the violation of both customs and foreign
exchange laws must be going on in an organised manner, and
that, as against each case detected and proved, there must be many
others which go undetected,

3.34. We should also state here that we understand from
responsible officers that smuggling carried on systematically
on the borders provides a respectable outfront for espionage.
Tt would thus appear that the three sinister act! ities—smuggling.
spying and sabotage—-could be found in company with each



17

other. These considerations have weighed with us in recom-
mending an amendment of the Constitution to make the posi-
tion clear in this respect.

3,35. Before we conclude this chapter, we would like to
mention one matter which formed the subject-matter of our
discussion during the whole of this inquiry.

We have already indicated! that the problem referred to
us by the Government lay within a very narrow compass. and
we decided to broaden the scope of the enquiry to some extent
in order to do justice even to the narrow problem referred to
us. At the end of the enquiry, we felt that time has now arrived
when Government should take suitable steps to study in depth
the important question of evolving one common code dealing
comprehensively in one place with all social and economic offen-
ces, We venture to think that it would be useful to make a
similar study in regard to different tax laws. As our report in-
dicates, we have evolved a rule of evidence pertaining to the shift-
ing of onus in respect of socio-economic offences, but have re-
frained from recommending that the said rule should be applied
to the tax Jaws on the ground that the tax laws are far too com-
plex and complicated and lack stability, We feel that it is neces-
sary that a study in depth of the tax laws should be made with
a view to codifying all the laws in one common code which would
be simple. clear and stable. These questions however fall out-
side the purview of our enquiry. Nevertheless, we thought

it was our duty to invite the attention of the Government to
them.

3,36. .It is also necessary to refer to one matter, namely,
the suggestions referred to us for enhancing the penalties and
punishments leviable under the tax statutes, as we felt that we
ought to make some general observations. We understand
that another Commission headed by Mr. K. N. Wanchoo, for-
mer Chief Justice of India, has been entrusted with the task of
considering in depth and comprehensively the problem pertain-
ing to the amendment of the provisfons of the Income-tax Act,
and that the said Commission has already made an exhaustive
Teport in that behalf.

The Report has not yet been published. Nevertheless, some
of the questions pertaining to the effective enforcement of the
penal provisions of the tax statutes, which have been referred
10 us in a limited form, must have been considered by the Wan-
choo Commission ; and that makes our task in dealing with the
problem referred to us somewhat difficult and embarrassing.
"However, since a reference has been made to us with regard to
the suggestion to enhance the penalties and punishments under
the tax statutes, we shail make our recommendations very
briefly, in respect of the points for our consideration.

1. Chapter 20, upra,

Desirabi-
fity of

detailed
study
pointed
out

Observa-
tions as to
taxation
laws—-
Points
referred to
Wanchoo
Commis-
sion,


Measures
so far
adopted.

Amend-
ments in
the Foreign
Exchange
Act.

CHAPTER 4

MEASURES SO FAR ADOPTED
4.1. The problem of dealing effectively with social and

economic offences is not a new one. From time to time, the

legislature, being concerned with the need for proper enforce-
ment of a particular enactment on the subject, has devoted its
attention to the measures necessary in that connection.

4.2 Thus, in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
several amendments have been made from time to time dealing
with the topics referred to below :+-

Punishment :

For contravention of certain sections of the Act, depart-
mental penalty was authorised’ by section 23(1A), inserted
by Act 39 of 1957 (amended later by Act 55 of 1964).

‘

Confiscation :

Confiscation was provided for, by section 23(1B) inserted
by later amendment.

Higher powers of Magistrates :

Higher powers weré conferred on Magistrates in reta-
tion (० fine by section 23{2), inserted by Act 34 of 1950.
(Section 23(2) and (3) were fe-numbered as (3) and (4) res-
pectively]

Search and Similar powers :

(i) Sections 19A to 19F dealing with various powers
of enforcement officers (including search-examinatioa® etc.)
_were inserted by Act 55 of 1964 (Segtions 19A and 19B were
renumbered as sections 19C-H, of the same Act).

(i) Sections 191-19J were inserted by a later amendment.

(iii) Provisions of the Customs Act were applied
by section 2 A (inserted by Act 8 of 1952), which was
amended by Act 55 of 1965 to substitute a reference to seo-
tion 11 of the Customs Act, et which had been passed
in the meantime.

Special rules of evidence ;
(i) Where foreign exchange is acquired by a person
(other than an authorised dealer) for a particular purpose,

18


19

under permission granted under the Act, the burden of prov-
ing that it was used for the purpose for which permission to
acquire it was granted, was thrown on that person by section
24(2), inserted by Act 8 of 1952,

(ii) Presumption as to documents in certain cases was
inserted by addition of section 24A, by Act 8 of 1952.

4.3. The History of amendments in the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954 is also of interest. As regards punish-
ment extensive amendments were made in the Act, which included
an amendment of section 16(1) which constitutes the main penal
provision in the Act. The maximum punishment was increased
from one to six years, and a minimum of six months imposed.

As regards mens rea. section 19{2) was amended by Act 49
of 1964. Under the section, a written warranty is a defence
to the vendor if certain requirements are satisfied. Under the
amended section, it is also necessary that the vendor should
have stored the article properly.

4.4. Again, in the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, amend-
ments have been made from time to time to deal effectively
with the various offences under the Act.

Mens rea :

Section 701) was amended by Act 36 of 1967, so as to
bring in absolute liability.

Punishment :

Maximum terms of imprisonment was increased frofn
three years to five years by amendment of section 70) (b)
by Act 36 of 1967, and similar amendment of section 72)
Made by the same Act.

Confiscation :
Sections 6A to 6E relating to confiscation were added
by Act 25 of 1966.
Stoppage of business :

Power of the Court regarding stop, of business was
-inserted in section 7 (3) by Act 36 of 1967

Summary trial :

The Central Government was given power, by section
12 A inserted by Act 47 of 1964, to direct by notification
that contravention of the specified orders shall be tried sum-
marily. In a summary trial so authorised, the competent

Amend-
ments in.
Food
Adultera~
tion Act.

Amend
ments in
the
Essential
Commodie
ties Act,

1. See para. 4.8, infra.


20

Magistrate was empowered to pass a sentence of imprison-
ment for a term not exceeding one year.1

Search and similar powers +

Section 3(2) (j) was amended by Act 17 of 1961, to make
certain clarifications regarding the provisions that could be
made in the rules by way of powers of various nature.

Offences to be cognizable and bailable :
All offences under the Act were made cognizable and
bailable by section 104, inserted by Act 36 of 1967.

Amend: 4.5. In the Income Tax Act. 1961, the offence of making

the Income. @ false statement in any verification under the Act or delivering

tax Act. a false statement or account was. by an amendment in 1964,
subjected to minimum punishment.

Provision 4.6. The provision in the Income-tax Act (section 287)

सी cae relating to publication of the names of assessees and other parti-

tion. culars relating to proceedings under the same Act, was also
revised in 1964. Similarly, elaborate provisions as to search and
seizure were inserted in the Customs Act, when the law was
revised in 1962.

Measures 4.7. A survey of the various enactments relevant to social

adopted 10. and economic offences shows that one or more of the following
varigusene Provisions of a special character have been made:—
actmenis.

+ Substantive ingredients of the offence :

(1) Eli
of mens rea.

ination or modification of the requirement

Punishment :
(2) Imprisonment to be mandatory.
(3) minimum period of imprisonment.
(4) Public censure.
: (5) Confiscation.
(6) Stoppage of business or cancellation of licence.

Jurisdiction of courts =
(7) Higher powers of Magistrates.

Powers & Procedure +
(8) Summary trial .
(9) Search and similar power

1. See paragraphs 4.27 and 4.28, infra.


y

2L

Evidence:

(40) Special rules of evidence.

A few words about each of these would not be out of place.

4.8. One form in which the legislative desire to secure effec-
live enforcement of social and economic legislation finds expres-
sion is a specific provision which eliminates or modifies the re-
quirement of mens rea. in Tespect of particular offences, For
example, the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act provides.
that it will be no defence ina Prosecution for an offence! Pertain-
ing to the sale of any adulterated or misbranded article of food
to allege merely that the vendor was ignorant of the nature,
substance or quality of the food sold by him. The vendor is,
however, protected if he has obtained the article of food with a
written warranty in the Prescribed form from the manufacturer,
distributor or dealer, and if he further proves that the article.

while in his possession, was Properly stored and that he sold it
in the same state as he purchased it.

An amendment made in 1967 in the Essential Commodities
Act takes the matter further. Contravention of an order under
the Act is, and has always been. punishable. But the wording
of the relevant section, until 1967, was, any person contia-
venes any order made under section 3° This was interpreted
as not excluding mens rea3 In 1967, the language was altered
50 as to read-—“if any person contravenes wherher knowingly,

inder section 3°.) The

to deal effectively with the violation of orders under the
tial Commodities Act, and the drasti
that anxiety.

°

4.9. Very often. Parliament, in order to indicate its emphatic
disapproval of a particular anti-social conduct, has, in the rele-
vant enactment, prescribed a mandatory punishment of imprison-
ment, the object being to avoid the Possibility of the offender
being sentenced to mete fine. By way of illusteation. it is suffi-
cient to refer to the Provision in ‘the Essential Commodities

n of an order under section 3
of that Act is punishable with imprisonment {up to the specified
term), and the offender “shall also be liable to fine”. This makes

1. Section 19(1), Prevention of Food Aduiteration Act, 1954,

2. Section 7(1), Essential Commodities Act, 1955.

3. Natu Lat v. State of Madhya Pradesh, ALR. 1966 S.C. 43.
4. Section 7(1(a), Essential Commodities Act, 1955,

Elimina-
tion or
modifica
tion of the
require-
ment

of mens
rea.

Manda-
tory
imprison-
ment.


Minimum
punish-
ment,

Instances
of provi
sions for
minimum
punish-
mentin
other Acts,

Question-
naire on
Pena)
Code,

22

the punishment of imprisonment mandatory. There is, of
course, the usual proviso, that, for reasons to be recorded, the
court may refrain from imposing the sentence of imprisonment.

4.10. A further provision in connection with punishment is
one for a minimum period of imprisonment which is found in
many enactments dealing with socixl and economic offences.

There are, in the Penal: Code, only five sections which pres-
cribe a minimum penalty. Waging war against the State
(section 121) and murder (section 302), are punished with death
or imprisonment for life. Under section 303, a person commit-
ting murder while undergoing a life sentence has to be sentenced
to death. A minimum sentence of seven years’ imprisonment
is provided in section 397 for a dacoit or robber using a deadly
weapon, or causing or attempting 00 cause grievous hurt, and in
section 398 for a dacoit or ro! being armed with a deadly
weapon.

But, as noticed by the Law Commission in a previous Report!,
“during recent years, several enactments have bzen passed by the
State Legislature or Parliament providing for minimum sentenc-
es. It is true that in some of these enactments the discretion
of the court has not been completely fettered. Though the sec-
tion provides for a minimum sentence, the court has been given
the liberty, for sufficient reasons to be recorded, to award

lower sentence”. N

4.11, Instances of such legislation are : section 5 of the Pre-
vention of Corruption Act, 1947 (as amended in 1958), the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, the Suppression of
Immoral Traffic in Women.and Girls Act, 1956, and the Bombay
Prohibition Act, 1949. The principal reason for such provisions
“appears to be a feeling that courts seldom award sentences
which would have a deterrent effect, particularly in certain types
of offences which are necessary to be “‘dealt with sternly in the
interests of society.” .

.
4.12. Im the questionnaire on the Penal Code issued by the
previous Law Commission,? the following question was put :--

“The Code lays down only the maximum punishment
for offences, and no minimum punishment except in very
few cases. Are you in favour of laying down a minimum
term of imprisonment for any offences? If so, for what

offences?”
Most of the opinions expressed on the question were strongly

opposed to laying down any minimum punishment. In parti-
cular, members of the judiciary at all levels regarded any such

~ Vath Report (Reform of Judicial Administration), Vol. 2, page 840,

. 14th Report, Vol. 2, page 838,
. Questionnaire 00 the Penal Code (See 42nd Report)


23

amendment as totally unnecessary. Some of them were not
happy about the working of the provisions made in special
laws for imposing a minimum sentence.

4.13. The Law Commission had, in a previous Report!,
observed :--

“The determination of what should be the proper sen-
tence in a particular case has always been left to the court for
the very weighty reason that no two cases would ever be alike
and the circumstances under which the offence was com-
mitted and the morai turpitude attaching to it would be
matters within the special knowledge of the court which has
tried the case. There can be no rule of general application
laying down a specific quantum of punishment that should be
inflicted in the case of a particular offence. A sound judicial
discretion on the part of the trial judge in awarding punish-
ment can alone distinguish between case and case and fit the
punishment to the crime inZeach individual case,

woe $e een कऋऋक

However, the placing of restrictions on judicial discretion
in the matter of the award of a sentence is, on principle, to be
deprecated as a general practice. . i
Instances might have occurred occasionally where judges have
failed to award sentences proportionate to the gravity of
the offences. This cannot, however, warrant the assumption
that the judiciary as a whole has failed to adequate
sentences or overlooked the need for passing deterrent sen-
tences in appropriate cases.”

4.14. Tn its Report on the Penal Code? the Commission
said—
“We agree with the above view and consider that, save

in exceptional cases, there should not be any provision for
minimum sentences in the Penal Code.”

4.15. To what has been stated above}, we should add that4
where absolute liability is inserted for‘an offence, the imposition
of a minimum punishment raises important questions, Where
liability is more likely to be absolute than not, it would be
illogical to compel the court, even if it punishes an accused per-
-Son, to impose some fixed or minimum penalty, without allowing
a discretion to the Court not to impose that penalty, for reasons
to be recorded in writing. This reasoning applies 40 mandatory
imprisonment also. We shall have occasion to refer again to
this aspect later.5

Recom-
mendation
in 14th
Report as
to mini-
wom
punish
ment,

i, 14th Report, Vol, 2, pages 838, 841.
2, 42nd Report (Penal Code), para. 3.30.

3, See paragraphs 4.10 to 4.14, supra. पु
4, See also Chapter 7, infra.

5. Chapter 7, infra.


Public
censure.

Modern.

precedents.

[Indian
Precedent.

24

4.16. It is a peculiar feature of white-collar crimes that most
of them are committed by persons belonging to the upper strata
of society. Members of such classes, while they would not mind
a sentence of fine. would certainly be deterred by threats of dam-
age to their reputation. The punishment of public censure has,
therefore, been considered effective in such cases,—there also
being the additional considerations that the exposure of a person
who indulges in mala fide practices harmful to the society and
punishable by law—for example, a manufacturer who wilfully
manufactures adulterated artictes of food—can affect him in a

Pecuniary manner. and also put on guard the members of the
public.

4.17. Quite a rew penal codes of the present day provide
for the giving of publicity to the fact of conviction and sentence.
Thus, the Colombian Penal Code provides for “special public:
tion of the sentence as an accessory to penal servitude or impri-
sonment”!. The publication is made in an unofficial periodical
of the township in which the offence was committed or the con-
victed person resides. It is made at the expense of the convicted
or injured person: and if he fails to pay the cost, it is done by
proclamation.

Social censure is One of the prescribed punishments in the
U.S.S.R. According to the Russian Penal Code?, “social
censure shall consist in a public expression by the court of cen-
sure of the guilty person and, if necessary, in bringing this to the
notice of the public through the press or other means”.

4.18, In India. this form of punishment is not unknown,
Under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act}, “if any person
convicted of an offeace under this Act commits a like offence
afterwards, it shalt be lawful for the court before which the
second or subsequent conviction takes place to cause the offen-
der’s name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty
imposed to be published at the offender's expense in such news-
papers or in such other manner as the court may direct”. A
similar provision for publishing the name of a defaulting assessee
is made in the Income Tax Act4,

4.19. The Foreign Exchange Act enacts that rules under
the Act may—

“(c) provide, subject to such conditions as muy be
prescribed, for the publication of the names and other parti-
culars of persons who have been found guilty of any contra-
vention of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule, ordzr or
direction made thereunder.”

कम ६४ २

> Article 40, 52 and 54, Colombian Penal Code.
Actictes 2((9) and 33, 1९.5.
Section 16(2), Preveation of Food Adulicrat
. Section 287, Incoms-tax Act, t96t.

Section 27(2Xc), Forsiga Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

R. Penal Code.

Act. 1954.



25°

The Gold Control Act! has a provision for publicity (modelled
on a similar one in the Customs Act).?

4.20, It may also be noted that one of the forms of punish-
ment provided in the Hindu Criminal Law, was social censure
arising out of the wide pudlication of the guilt of the offender
and his identity. Thus, in Narada Smriti (about 6th century
A.D.), parading a convict on an ass along public streets was
provided as one of the punishments, for a Brahmin committing
the offence of ‘sahasa’ (violence). The relevant verse? can be
translated thus—

“10. Shaving his head. banishing him from the town,
branding him on the forehead with a mark of the crime of
which he has been convicted, and ‘parading him on an ass,
shall be his punishment.”

4.21. Though such a punishment would be a ‘degrading’
form of punishment which is prohibited by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and is otherwise un-
civilised and barbarous, publicity and social censure can be
achieved by providing for publication of the names of the offend-
ers in respect of certain crimes.

4.22. One meets with a variety of forms of publication of
the particulars of the offence as a punishment. In the Preven-
tion of Food Adulteration Act, for example, it is ordered by the
Court. In the Income-tax Act, on the other hand, the power
is given to the Central GovernmentS. One of the Provincial
Acts§ had a provision under which a dealer convicted of black
marketing could be required to fix a board outside his place of
business, announcing the fact of his conviction. In ail these cases,
the common element is to bring’ to the society’s knowledge,
and to.impress upon the convict, in a forceful manner, the guilt
which led to his conviction. On the other hand. some foreign
Codes employ public censure as a substitute for imprisonment.
The provision in the East German Code? may be quoted—

“37. (1) Public reprimand is pronounced if a lesser Public re-
crime has not caused any major harmful effect or. in spite of | PTmand.
heavy damage, the offender. whose guilt is of a minor nature.
demonstrates that from now on he will conduct himself in a
responsible manner.

i, Section 71, Gold Control Act, 1968.

2, Section 120, Customs Act, 1962.

3, Narada Smceiti, Sacred Books of the East,-Vol. XXXIIL, Chapter 14, Sloka (10).
4, Article 7, International Covenant on Civil and Political Righis.

5. Section 287, Income-tax Act, 1961.

6. West Bengal Black Marketing Act, 1948, section 20.

7. The East German Penal Code, section 37. The text is taken from Law and Legisla~
tion in the G.D.R. (1968) No. 2, page 34,


Confisca~
tion,

Stoppages
of

business.

26

(2) By means of a public reprimand the court expresses
to the offender its disapproval of his action with a view to
exhorting him conscientiously to fulfil his duties towards
socialist society.

(3) The court may state in the sentence that the penalty
is not to be recorded.”

So far as the present context is converned, it is, in our view,
appropriate to employ it as a form of censure, and leave the ques-
tion to the discretion of the Court rather than to the Central
Government.

4.23. Offences involving fraudutent economic gains obvious-
ly justify a provision for confiscation of the property so gained.
The offender should not be allowed to tetain the profits of crimi-
nality and this consideration has prevailed with the legislature in
prescribing the punishment of confiscation for many economic
offences, |

Under the Gold Control Act, for example, any gold in respect
of which any provision of the Act or any rule made thereunder
has been, or is being, or is attempted to be, contravened, shall
be liable to confiscation. There are, in the same Act, specific
provisions also for confiscation.

Thus, confiscation of (i) any package etc. which contains gold
Hable to confiscation, (ii) gold mixed with other goods from
which it cannot be separated, and (iii) gold which has changed
its form (provided the gold itself is liable to confiscation) is pro-
vided for.

4.24, We may also refer to the provision in the Foreiga
Exchange Regulation 400, under which, a court trying a contra-
vention of a provision of the Act, as well as an authority adjudg-
ing penaity for such confiscation is empowered to direct that any
currency etc. goods or other property in respect of which the
contravention has taken place, shal! be confiscated.

> iti soe
The Essential Commodities Act? has also a provision for

forfeiture of property by the Court.

4.25. Impelled by the desire to prevent a persistent offender
from harming the public by repeating his anti-social act. the
legislature has, occasionally, provided for prohibiting a person
from carrying on a particular business for a specified period.
An example is furnished by the Essential Commodities Act,
1955,3 under which, if a person convicted of an offence under
sub-section (1) of section 7 (which relates to contravention of an

* order under section 3), is convicted for a second or subsequent

1. Section 23(1), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, कक,
2. Section 7(1(0) Essential Commodities Act.
3, Section 7(3), Essentia) Commodities Act, 1955,


27

time of an offence -constituted by contraventjon of an order in
Tespect of an essential commodity, thea the convicting court
shall, in addition to any penalty which mi may be imposed on him
under that sub-section “by order direct that person shall
not carry on any business in that essential commodity for such
period, not being less than six months, as may be specified by the
court in the order”.

4.26. One device adopted by the Legislature to speed up
the trial of economic offences is the insettion of a provision en-
hancing the powers of Magistrates in relation to punishment.
For example, the Foreign Exchange Regulatio tion Act! provides
that it shall be lawful for any Magisttate of the first class, special-
ly empowered in this behalf by the State Government, and for
any presidency magistrate, to pass a sentence of fine exceeding
Tupees two thousand, on any person convicted of an offence

. punishable under section 23 of the Act.

4.27, More important in the coatext of speeding, up of trial
is the provision for summary trial which is found, though not
very frequently, in socio-economic legislation. The Essential
Commodities Act furnishes an example.4 The relevant pro-
vision empowers the Central Goverament to issue a notification
to the effect that contravention of aay order made under section
3 of the Act in refation to a particular essential commodity
should be tried summarily.

4.28. The number of special orders in respect of which noti-
fications were so issued by the Central Government authorising
summary trial since? 1964 and upto December, 1969 [as mention-
ed in Notification GSR 1842, dated 24th December, 1964 of the
Ministry of Food & Agriculture (Department of Food)]. [No.
203, Genl. 1881864 by IT] exceeds a hundred. There is also
another notification on the subject, bearing the same No. (GSR
1842), which is quoted below :—-

“MINISTRY OF FOOD & AGRICULTURE

(Department of Feed)
NOTIFICATION

New Delhi, the 24th December, 1964

G.S.R. 1842.—In pursuance of section 12A of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) and in sup2rsession of the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home
Affairs No. G.S.R. 1697 dated the Sth November, 1964, the
Central Government hereby specifies all orders made under

Higber
powers of
Magistrate.

S
Summary
trial.

1. Section 23(2), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

2. Szctioa 124, Esszatial Commodities Act, 1955. (At present, this provisioa i

in

force upto December, 1971). But it is understood that a Bill has bzen introduced to make
|.

it permanent
हे 3, Szstioa 124, Esszntial jCom npiities Act, was inserted 19 ,1964,
1M of Law;72—3



Search and
seizure.

Special
rules of
evidence.

28

section 3 of the said Act in relation to foodstuffs, including edi-

ble oilseeds and oils, to be special orders for purposes of summary
trial under the said section 12A.

No. 203 (Gen!) (18)/770/64-PY. ly” ‘

[It 5 rather difficult for an ordinary citizen to keep in touch
with various notifications issued under the entire Act; and one
can also appreciate the difficulty that must have been experienced
by the prosecuting staff, particularly in the mufassil, in this res-
pect. That, however, is a separate question.]!

4.29. Effective prosecution requires effective investigation;
and effective investigation, in its turn, requires an array of powers,
Since the general powers for search ‘and seizure contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure are restrictive in nature, either by
reason of the classes of officers who can exercise those powers,
or by reason of the conditions. precedent required before the
powers can be exercised or by reason of other restrictive require-
ments, it has become necessary to make similar provisions as to
search and seizure in most ef the:enacaments dealing with social
and economic offences, The. most comprehensive perhaps is the
group of provisions in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act?,
conferring power to call for information, to search premises, to
arrest, to examine persons, to summon persons to give evidence,
to produce documents, custody of documents, inspection and
connected matters, A recent one is thé provision in the Income
tax Act3.

4.30. Difficulty of proof that exists in respect of some of
the offences has naturally led to the insertion of provisions which
modify the burden of proof, or create rebuttable presumptions
or enact other special rules of evidence. A striking example of
a presumption is furnished by the Customs Act‘, which has the
following provision :—

“123, (1) Where any goods to’ which this section applies
are seized under this Act in the reasonable belief that they
are smuggled goods, the burden of proving that they are not
smuggled goods shall be on the person from whose posses-
sion the goods were seized.

(2) This section shall apply to gold, diamonds, manufac-
tures of gold or diamonds, watches, and any other class of
goods which the Centrat Government may by notification in
the Official Gazette specify.”

“1. Question of publicity of statutory rules and orders.

2. Section 19, 19A, 198, 19C, 19D, 195, 19%, 19G, 19H, 19, 193, Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act, 1947,

3. Section 132, Income-tax Act, 1961. See A.LR. 1970 S.C. 292, holding that the
Criminal Procedure Code applies.

4. Section 123, Customs Act, 1962.


CHAPTER 5

CAUSES OF DEFECTIVE ENFORCEMENT

5.1, As the foregoing survey shows, the statute book already
contains a variety of provisions! Hlustrating the attempts made
to deal effectively with social and economic offences. No doubt,
provision of a particular type, while occurring in one enactment,
may not be found in another enactment. The question whether
it should not be extended to the other eaactment could, therefore,
be usefully considered. That is one approach? adopted in this
Report.3

“5,3. ‘The causes of defective enforcement of social and eco-
nomic legislation are manifold. They might exist in the parti-
cular law, or they may be found in some other law forming part
of the general legal system,—-both these are ‘legal” causes. But
the causes may sometimes not be concerned with the content of
the legal system, and may be found elsewhere,—these may be
termed “‘extra-legal” causes.

“Again, in so far as the defect is connectet with the legal sys-
tem, it may be positive defect,—somevexisting provision which
creates difficulties; or, it may be.a' negative defect—the absence
of some beneficial provision which could remove a felt difficulty.

Moreover, the legal defect, whether positive or negative, may
concern the substantive law, the procedural law or the rules of
evidence.

Finally, the stage at which the defect operates may be legis-
Jative (in the formulation of the law), executive (in implementa-
tion), judicial (at the stage of trial); or the defect may be connect-
ed with sentencing. In this context, it may be pertinent to state
that one could distinguish between two different meanings of words
used to denote criminal sanctions. “Punishment” should mean the
authorisation by the legislature of the employment of criminal
sanctions; while “sentencing” should mean the application by
the judiciary of the criminal sanctions authorised by the Legisla-
ture. The Legislature provides the sword for general use, but
the judiciary unsheaths the sword and uses it in particular cases.

Variety of
provisions
made to
deal
effectively
with social
and
economic
offences,

Causes of
defective
enforce.
ment,

1, Para. 4.8, supra.
2, For detailed analysis, See Chapter 6, infra.
3. For recommendations, see Chapter 15, infra.

29


30

__ 5.3. Taking all these aspects into account, but at the same
time, confining ourselves to important defects only, we could state
that the defects in the enforcement of a particular piece of social
or economic legislation could assunte one of the following shapes:

(a) Absence of a legislative provision punishing the parti-
cular conduct which is considered to be harmful;

(b) Non-applicability of the particular regulatory provi-
sion though contained in the parent Act, because of absence
of the relevant statutory notification;

(०) Non-enforcement of the law because of failure to
detect or failure to investigate the offence;

(d) Faulty investigation or delay in investigation.
(०) Inefficiency in the actual conduct of the case;

(1 Procedural flaws which cause delay in trial, or even
failure of prosecution (e.g. absence of requisite sanction);

(g) Want of evidence;
(0) Inadequacy of the punishmeat provided in th: law;

(0 Inadequacy of the sentence actually awarded, al-
though the range of punishment as given in the law may be
adequate;

(j) Administrative difficulties, such as want of adequate
enforcement staff required for detecting investigating, ptose-
cuting आते otherwise dealing with the offences under the rele-
vant Act.

(0) A few examples will illustrate the categories.

Absence of

a. legisla- 5.4. A prosecution may fail because the situation is outside
Vision” the Act in point of stage of the criminal activity or in point
punishing _of time, or in point of the facts.

the parti-

cular con- 5.5. Thus, preparation to commit an offence is not, in g2ne-

duct which ral, punishable. Seizure of a truck with paddy in the Punjab

dered to be Territory was, for that reason held to be illegal, as there was no

harmful. “export” within the meaning of the relevant order under the
Essential Commodities Act.*

5.6. In a Madras case?, the situation was held to 03 outside
the substantive provisions of the Foreign Exchang: Act, aad
hence the prosecution failed. The following observations in the
judgment are of interest :-—

“In respect of the third paint, namzly, whether the pro-
secution of the petitioners under section 4(1) of the Act is

3. Matkiat Singh v. State of Punjab, A.LR. 1970 S.C, 713; (1970) Cr.L.J. 750.

2, M.R. Pratap v. Director of Enforcement, (1969) Cr. LJ. 1582 ,1594, para. 59 (Krishna”
swamy Reddy J.).


31

untenable, I find the same in favour: of the petitioners, We
have already noted that under section 4(1) of the Act, ‘acquir-
ing foreign exchange’ is made an effence by the Amendment
Act 55 of 1964 which came into effect from 1-4-1965. The
offence, in the complaint, was alleged to have been committed
before 1-4-1965 when section 41) on respect of this offence
was not in force, The enquiry under section 41) of the Act
has to be dropped by the lower court.”

5.7. Again, in an Allahabad case!, under sections 8 and
3(2(a), Essential Commodities Act, the track driver was trans-
porting grain from one place to another place in the same district
without a licence for transport. It was held that unless it was
shown that such transport without licence constituted an offence
under Act, the driver could not be convicted under section 8,
even if he admitted that he had committed the mistake. In
order to convict a person even on his,plea of guilty, it is neces-
sary for the prosecution to prove thal allegations made against
him, which he is alleged to have admitted as correct, constitute
an offence under the law. 4

5.8. A Gujarat case? under section 16(1{a), Prevention of
Food Adulteration Act, illustrates failure of prosecution because
of absence of mens rea. It was held that the prosecution must
first establish knowledge on the part of the accused that the Food
Inspector is to take the sample of food from him in his capacity
as a Food Inspector and in discharge of his duty as such.

5.9. It may also happen that the relevant notification is
not proved in court. In a Kerala case} relating to sale of rice
beyond the controlled price, the notification fixing the price
was not in proof. It was held that the conviction was not
sustainable.

5.10. A recent Andhra case¢ illusttates the failure of a pro-
secution because of failure to produce the notification conferring
authority to initiate a prosecution under. the Customs Act, sec-
tion 135, and Defence of India Rules, 1962, Rule 126 P (2). (There
were other defects also in the case, but they are not relevant for
our purpose).

(0) non-use
of the
particular
“regulatory”
provision
though
contained
in the
parent

Act,
because of
absence of
the
relevant
statutory
notificas
tion,

1. 1965 AIL. Cri. R. 88; 1965 All. W.R. (H.C.) 71, cited in the Yearly Digest,

2, Teja Mohan ५. Mangabhai, A.I.R. 1970 60७. 209.

966. 3. 1966 Ker. L.T. 638; (1966) Madras L.5. (Cri.) 806, cited incthe Yearly Digest for

4. PP. ९. Babulal, A.V.R. 1971 A.P. 345, 346,


32

Suspected contraband gold had been seized in that case,
but the notification under Rule 126(j4) and 126(x), Defence
of India Rules, authorising the person who sanctioned the pro-
secution to do so, was not produced. The acquittal by the Magis-
trate was, therefore, upheld by the High Court.

(०) Non- 5.11. Sometimes, there is no detection or investigation
enforce: and this may be the principal cause of failure of enforcement,
the Jaw

because of

failure of

feport or

failure to

investi-

gate the

offence.

(6) Faulty 5.12. Faulty investigation is frequently responsible for
investiga- failure of prosecution. For example, the right of the accused
tion delay to get a sample examined under section 13(2) and 13(5) of the
gation Prevention of Food Adulteration Act by the Director of Central
{including | Food Laboratory, may be defeated by inordinate delay in pro-
administra~ secution. If the sample becomes decomposed and hence im-
tee act possible of analysis, the accused is deprived of his valuable right,

and the conviction cannot be sustained'.

5.13. The finality and conclusiveness of the report under
section 13 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act
is-only to the extent that the sample as sent to the Central Food
Laboratory contained what the report disclosed and in the pro-
portions stated therein. The accused will stili be entitled to
lead evidence to show that the article of food in question is not
adulterated food. The factors which he can rely upon in such
cases, include the delay in analysis of the sample and its impact
on the result obtained?.

5.14. In an Allahabad case}, it was observed-—

“The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act does not
prescribe any time limit within which prosecutions may be
launched. But it cannot be denied that articles of food are
liable to deterioration and decay with lapse of time. More-
over, it is cardinal and fundamental principle of Criminal juzis-
prudence that if an offence has been committed the prosecu-
tion must be instituted without the feast delay. The Maha-
palika have not invited any attention to anything on the
record to explain the delay, In most of the cases the pro-
secution was launched over a year after the date of the offence.
In some cases. it has been launched more than two years
after.

1. Corporation of Delhi v. Ghisa Ram, A.LR. 1967 S.C. 970; (1967) 2 S.C.R. 116.
2, Corporation of Deli v. Om Prakash, 1970 Cr.L.J. 1047, 1050 (Delhi.
३, Chaturbhuj v. The State, A.L.R. 1968 All. 31, 36, para 34 (Satish Chandra J.).

है


33

It is reasonable to expect an explanation to explain
such a delay. Even if it may not be possible to hold that
the prosecution is invalid because of delay, this is a material
circumstance on the question of sentence.”

5.15. In a Punjab case!, the accused was tried under sec-
tion 16(1)(i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. It
was clear from the evidence that there were a number of shops
in the close proximity of the accused’s shop, and there were
also other persons near about the shop at the time when the sam-
ple was taken by the Food Inspector at about 3. P. M. But
the Food Inspector did not even care to ask any of those persons
to witness the transaction, and one of the two persons taken
by the Food Inspector as a witness was his peon, who could not
be said to be an “independent” person, and the other person
stated that he actually reached after the sample had been taken
by the Food Inspector.

It was held that the provisions of sub-section (7) of section
10 had not been complied with. The provision was mandatory,
and therefore, the accused was entitled to an acquittal.

5.16, Prosecution under the Prevention of Food Adultera-
tion Act may thus fail because of defective reports of the public
analysts?, or delay in the examination of samples’, or because
the procedure prescribed by the Act for taking samples is not
followed ¢.

5.17. On the other hand, a Bombay case$ illustrates the
success of a prosecution.

The accused/petitioner was a dealer in foodgrains. A sample
of bajari was sent for analysis, and the report of the public analyst
stated that ergot was found. The report was written on form ता,
rafe 7(3). In the certificate with which the report began,
the Analyst stated that the sample had been properly sealed.
and that he found the seal intact and unbroken. The accused
was charged under section 16(1)(3)0) of the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act read with rule 7(1). He was convicted of the
offence. On revision, before the High Court, it was contended
for the accused that rule 7(1) had not been complied with, in
that there was nothing to indicate that the Analyst compared
the seals on the container with the impression sent separately.
Secondly, it was contended that there was no evidence to show
that the specimen impression of the seal was separately sent by
the Food Inspector.

1, Ram Sarup Tara Chand v. The State, A.ILR. 1965 Pun. 366 00.5. Bedi 5.).
2, State v, Gunjilal, ALR. 1964 Punj. 475.
3. Municipal Corporation of Dethi v. Surja Ram, (1965) 2 Cr. LJ. 571.
4, Food Inspector v. P. Kannan, ALR. 1964 Ker. 261.
. 5. K. Rajaram 1. Koranne, A.LR. 1968 Bom. 247, 249.


34

5.18. As to these points, the court held that since the report
of the public Analyst was in form No. II, it need not mention
that the Analyst had compared ie seal on the packet with
the specimen seal sent separately; form simply required a
statement to.the effect that the sample was properly sealed and
intact!,

5.19. The second argument on behalf of the accused was
that the report of the Analyst did not indicate the percentage of
ergot. In this case the prosecution was under section 2(1Xf)
of the Act. Regarding this sub-clause of section 2, the Court
said :

“The expression “otherwise unfit for human consump-
tion” is wide and of general character. It is necessary to
note that clause (iii) of A. 18.06 speaks of grain having been
affected internally. It is in this case only that the question
of the percentage becomes relevant. If the damage is due to
internal affection or purification, then the question of per-
centage may have significance.”

Tt was held that what had happened was that the grains of
ergot, which are similar in size to the grains of bajari and dar-
ker in colour, had got themselves inextricably mixed up with
bajari. Since they were separate from the grains of bajari, there
was no question of any “internal affection”. At the same time,
such bajari was unsuitable for human consumption. Hence
the conviction was upheld.

(e) Flaws 5.20. Flaws in the actual conduct of the case may often
in actual result in failure of prosecution. For example, the Director's
of thecase, teport under section 13(3), Prevention of Food Aduiteration

Act, is final. But, if material circumstances in the report are

not put to the accused in the examination of the accused, the trial

is vitiated?.
Lack of 5.21. It should be noted that in contested cases, where the
legal Inspector of the Department is pitted against a professional

expertise lawyer skilled in the procedure of court work (and perhaps also
more familiar with the particular practices and foibles of the
Magistrates before whom the less forensically able inspectors
to incur the displeasure of the court by lack of familiarity with
some of the legal refinements or by the unnecessary labouring
of points which are not in issue. In extreme cases, this lack of
legal expertise may, even result in an unjustified acquittal, where,
for example, the inspector is temporarily thrown off his step
by a clever if rather specious legal point or procedural
manoeuvre.

1. The court followed State v. Umacharan, A.1LR. 1966 Ori. 81 and disagreed with State
of Gujarat v. Shantaben, A.1.R. 1964 Guj. 136 and Mary Lasradov. State of Mysore, ALR.
1966 Mysore 244.

2. Municipal Committee v. Om Prakash, 1.1... (1969) 2 Punj. 57, 68 to 72 (Sodhi_ and
Koshat JJ.).


35

3.22. Then, there are procedural flaws which cause delay 0) Proce-
in trial or even failure of prosecution. Absence of requisite sanc- dural
tion? is a familiar example. which

Thus, in a Kerala case, a notification under section 20(1) ae
of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act had been issued in trial or
1959, stating ‘The Government hereby authorise Food Inspectors even failure
appointed under the Act to institute prosecutions for offences of prosecu-
under the Act’. It was held that the authorisation given under .
the notification was only in favour of existing Food Inspectors,
and not also in favour of Food Inspectors to be appointed in
fature under the Act. Hence the Food Inspector of M. Pan-
chayat, which came into existence only in 1964, could not be said
to be a person authorised to institute a prosecution under
section 20(1).

5.23. As was held in a Rajasthan case3,a Magistrate while
taking cognizance of an offence under the Prevention of Food
Aduiteration Act on a complaint filed against specified indivi-
dual or individuals, cannot issue process and initiate prosecution
against other persons.

Also, power to institute prosecution under the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act does not include power to consent to
the filing of a prosecution*. -

5.24. Ina Patna case, which went up to the Supreme Court,
a dealer was charged for storing foodgrains without entering
them in the stock register. Fhere was seizure of the stock-
book and other registers. But there was delay in filing the com-
plaint. Conviction of the accused was mainly on the ground ~
of tampering with the record while in. the possession of the
Supply Officer. It was not proved that tampering was in the
interest of the dealer or was at his instance. . Other records also
did not prove,the prosecution case. It was held that the convic-
tion was improper. .

5.25. The Supreme Court has held in another case that
although section 6-A, Essential Commodities Act authorises
confiscation of the seized foodgrains if the Deputy Commissioner
is satisfied that there was a contravention of an order made under
section 3 of the Act, that confiscation should be preceded by the
issne of a show-cause notice under section 6-9, which should
inform the owner of the foodgtains or the person from whom
they were seized, about the grounds on which he proposed to
make the confiscation. The Deputy Commissioner should also

1. The position regatding sanction is a matter which furnishes ample scope for study.
See Chapter 11 infra.

2. Abdulla Haji v. Food Inspector, Mulivar, (1967) 1.L.R. 2 Ker. 340; (1967) Cr.L.J.
1718 (Ker.).

3, Bijai Lat. State, 4.1... 1965 Raj. 597.
4, Arvindbhai v. Hargovind, A.1.R. 1971, Guj. 20 January) (review case-law).
5. Ganga Prasad ९. State of Bihar, (1970) Cr.L:3, 895; A.LR. 1970 S.C. 989,


36

give the person to whom that notice is issued, an opportunity of
making a representation in writing within a reasonable time to
be specified in the notice against the grounds of confiscation,
and an additional opportunity of being heard in the matter.
These are the three essential preliminary steps which are made
indispensable by section 6-B, and it is plain that some of these
steps were not taken by the Deputy Commissioner before he made
the impugned confiscation order!.

5.26. In a case? which went up to the Supreme Court,
there was, under section 132(8), Income-tax Act (as amended by
the Finance Act of 1969), search and seizure of documents. The
documents seized were retained by the authorities for a period
of nineteen months, without recording any reason for retaining
the same beyond the period of 180 days, and without obtaining
the approval of the Commissioner, as required by section 132(8).
[६ was held that such retention of document was without the
authority of Jaw, and they should be released,

5.27. In another case? which went up to the Supreme Court,
an enquiry under section 23D(1), Foreign Exchange Act was ins-
lituted by the issue of a show-cause notice, but a complaint was
made to the court without having any material which could lead
to the opinion that the Director of Enforcement would not be in
a position to impose adequate penalty. It was held, that as the
complaint was filed without complying with the proviso it was
invalid.

(g) Want 5,28. A prosecution may fail for want of evidence.
of evidence, C . « .
A Supreme Court judgment? illustrates how a prosecution

under the Essential Commodities Act may fail for want of
evidence. lt was a charge of storage of an essential commodity
for business, in violation of the Manipur Foodgrains Dealers
Licensing Order (1958), clauses 3(2), (1). But the fact that the
storage was for the purpose of business, was not proved by inde-
pendent evidence. It was held that there could be no convic-
tion under section 7, on the basis of mere presumption under
clause 3(2) of the Order, without evidence of the purpose of
Storage as above.

5,29. Failure to maintain account-books properly was the
subject-matter of the charge in a Rajasthan case’. It was beld
that the offence fell under section 3(2)0) read with section 7(1 (ai),
Essential Commodities Act. It was a non-cognizable offence,

“1. Manur Madhya Kamath and Co. v. The State of Mysore, (1970) M.L.J. (Cr.) 61,
cited in the yearly Digest 1970, Column 1415-1416.

5 2. Commissioner of Income-tax v. Jawaharlal Rastogi, 78 LT.R. 486; A.LR. 1970
AC. 1951.

3, Rayala Corporation (Pvt.) Lid. v. Director of Enforcement, New Dethi, (1969)
2 S.C.C. 412; (1970) 1 S.C.A. 100; (1970) | S.C.R. 639; A.LR. 1970 S.C. 494,

4, Manipur Administration v. M. Nilla Chandra Singh, (1964), 5 S.C.R, 574; (1964)
25.C.J, 444; 1964 (2) Cr. $ . 1964 S.C. 1533, 1545, 1536. ( »

5. Gyasiram ¥. The Stare, AAR. 1964 Raj. 237, 239, para. 9.



37

and must be tried as a summons case. Hence, the trial should
proceed as a summons case. (In this particular case. the trial
had proceeded only upto the stage of charge. Hence the charge
was quashed, and the Magistrate directed to proceed as in a
summons case).

5.30. 8 Supreme Court case! under section 861) and 23-A,
Foreign Exchange Act illustrates the need for sufficient evidence.
In that case, adjudication proceedings were quashed for want of
evidence.

जन, A recent Andhra Pradesh case? illustrates failure
of a prosecution because of want of proof. (There were other
defects also, but they are not material). In that case, suspected
contraband gold had been seized from the accused. but there was
no proof that it was contraband. The prosecution relied on
the presumption in section (23(1), Customs Act, 1962, where-
under where any goods to which the section applies are seized
under the Act “in the reasonable belief” that they are smuggied
goods, the burden of proving that they are not smuggled goods
shall be on the person from whose possession the goods were
seized. In this case, it was not proved that the officer who had
seized the goods was competent to do so. Apart from that,
however. there was another defect,—the seizing officer had simply
suspected, and did not have reason to believe, that the accused
was carrying smuggled goods. Following a Bombay case3,
which had emphasised that the officers must have acted in reason-
able belief, the High Court upheld the acquittal.

5.32. The punishment provided in the law may be inade-

quate. Such a situation, of course, requires legislative action.

5.33. The punishment awarded may be mild. Such a situa-
tion. obviously, does not necessitate any statutory amendment.

(h) Inade-
quacy of
the punish-
ment pro-
vided in
the law.

(1) Inade-
quacy of
the sen-
tence
actually
awarded
alihough,
the range of
Punish-
ment 35
given in the
Act may be
adequate.

1. Hind Trading Co. ५. Union of India, ALR. 1370 SG. 1858; 1863, Para.

(Certiorari issued).
2. PP. ९. Babulal, ALR. 1971 A.P. 343, 346,
3. ALG. Abrol 5. Amichand, ALR. 1961 Bom. 227 (Shab...



() Admi-
nistrative
difficul-
ties, such
as, want of
adequate
enforce-
ment staff
required,
for
detecting,
investi-
gating,
prosecuting
and

otherwise
dealing
with the
offences
under the
relevant ©
Act,

38.

5.34, There may be administrative difficulties in enforcement
of the particular Act such as want of adequate enforcement staff
required for detecting, investigating, prosecuting and otherwise
dealing with offences under the Act.

5.35. In conclusion, it may be stated that the most signi+
ficant feature of the prosecution process, is undoubtedly the
difference between the Departmental inspector's view of the case
and that which, in the event, he is able to give to the magistrate.
The inspector's view of the case is obviously coloured by his
involvement in what may have been a lengthy series of visits and
discussions with the accused and by his knowledge of the past
history of the dealings with the accused over the previous five or
six years. The magistrate, on the other hand, is only permitted
to hear the details of the particular incident with which the
proceedings are concerned, and in addition he must pay some
attention at least to the mitigating circumstances which defence
counsel will put before him.



CHAPTER 6

ExistinG Position WitH REFERENCE To IMPORTANT
ENACTMENTS

6.1, It will now be convenient to analyse the position under Detailed
the existing laws. with reference to provisions of the nature @
referred to above!.

The analysis will be confined to important enactments?, in Teference

order to avoid cumbersomeness. to impo! -_
actments.
(1) Elimination or modification of mens rea
(a) Central Excises Act, 1944, —No such provision.
(b) Foreign Exchange Regulation —No legislative rar
Act, 1947, sion. But courts have
modified the mens rea,
(० Prevention of Food Adulteration —Section 19 (Modit
Act, 1954. tion).
{d) Essential! Commodities Act, 1955. —Section 7(1) (Elimina-
tion).
(०) Wealth Tax Act, 1957, —No such provision.
(7) Income-tax Act, 1961, —No such provision.
(९) Customs Act, 1962, —~See sections 112(a),
114, 117, 134(a), 134(b),
1361).
{h) Gold Control Act, 1968. —No such provision.

(2) Mandatory imprisonment
{a) Central Excises Act, 1944 No such provision.

4, Para. 4.7, supra,

2. (a) Central Excises Act, 1944,
(6) Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
(० Prevention of Food Adufteration Act, 1954.
(d) Essential Commodities Act, 1955,
(e) Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
(f) Income-tax Act, 1961.
(g) Customs Act, 1962.
(A) Gold Control Act, 1968.

3. State of Maharashtra v. M. H. George, A.LR. 1965 S.C. 722, 732 and 740, paras-
15, 40 (Majority view).

39


(b)
(०
(9)

(e)
(0)
(छ)
(h)

(a)
(b)

©)

(4)
(e)
(0)
(8)
(h)

(a)
(0)

(c)

(१)
(e)
(fy
(g
(h)

(a)

40

Foreign Exchange Regulation —No such provision.
Act, 1947,
Prevention of Food Adulteration —Section 16.

Act, 1954.
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 —Section 7(tXa) (i) and
(i).

Wealth Tax Act, 1957, —No such provision.
Income-tax Act, 1961, —Section 277.
Customs Act, 1962, —Section 13506).
Gold Control Act, 1968, —Section 85,

(3) Minimum punishment
Central Excises Act, 1944, —No such provision,
Foreign Exchange Regulation —No such provision.
Act, 1947.
Prevention of Food Adulteration —Section 16(1)."

Act, 1954.
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. —No such provision.

Wealth Tax Act, 1957, —Section 36(2), proviso.
Income-tax Act, 1961, —Section 277.
Customs Act, 1962. —Section 135(t) proviso.
Gold Control Act, 1968, — (i) Section 85;
(ii): Sectians 86-87;
(iii) Section 89.
(Second
conviction),
(4) Public censure
Central Excises Act, 1944, —No such provision.
Foreign Exchange Regulation’ Section 27(2)(c) (By
Act, 1947. rules).
Prevention of Food Adultera- —Section 16(2).

tion Act, 1954,

Essentiat Commodities Act, 1955. —No such provision.

Wealth Tax Act, 1957, —Section 42A,

income-tax Act, 1961, —Section 287.

Customs Act, 1962, —No such provision,

Gold Control Act, 1968 —No such provision.
(5) Confiscation

Central Excises Act, 1944, —Section 10  (Forfei-

ture by court), section

1, See City Corporation १. KJ. Mathew, ALR. 1968 Ker, 139,


0b)
(०)
qd)
(०)
(f)
(8)
(0)

(a)
(b)

©
(da)

©)
(0)
(g)
(hy

(a)
(b)

)

(०)
()
(6)
(8)
(h)

Foreign Exchange Regulation

Act, 1947.

Prevention of Food Adulteration

Act, 1954.

41

12 (application of pro-
visions of Customs
Act), section 28, (con-
+ fiscation), section 23
(adjudication).

—Section 23(1B).

—Section 18.

Essential Commodities Act, 1955 —Sections 6A to 6D

Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
Income-tax Act, 1961.
Customs Act, 1962,

Gold Control Act, 1968,

and section 7(1)(b).
—No such provision.
—No such provision.
—Sections 111, 113, 115,

118, 1192).
Section 92 (Forfeiture)

sections 71, 72, 73

(Confiscation).

(6) Stoppage of business or cancellation of licence

Central Excises Act, 1944,

Foreign Exchange Regulation

Act, 1947.
Prevention of Food.

Essential Commodities Act, 1955

Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
Income-tax Act. 1961.
Customs Act, 1962.
Gold Control Act, 1968.

—No such provision.
—No such provision.

—Section 16(1D) (Can-
cellation of licence).

—-Section 7(3) (Stoppage
of business).

—No such provision.

—No such provision.

—No such provision.

—No such power with
the ‘court.

(7) Higher powers of Magistrates

Central Excises Act, 1944,

Foreign Exchange
Act, 1947,

Prevention of Food Aduiteration

Act, 1954,

Regulation

—No such provision.
—Section 23(2).

-~Section 21.

Essential Commodities Act, 1955. —Section 12.

Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
Income Tax Act, 1961.
Customs Act, 1962.
Gold Control Act, 1968.

—No such provision.
——No such provision.
“No such provision.
—No such provision.


42

(8) Summary trial
(3) Central Excises Act, 1944.

Specific summary trial is not prescribed. But under
* section 12, the Customs Act can be applied’.

(b) Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
Specific summary trial is not prescribed.

(©) Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
Specific summary trial is not prescribed.
(१) Essential Commodities Act, 1955.

Section 12A of the Essential Commodities Act deals with
summary trial.

Section 12-A, power to try summarily

(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that a
situation has arisen where, in the interests of production,
supply or distribution of any essential commodity or trade
or commerce therein and other relevant considerations, it
is necessary that the contravention of any order made under
section 3 in relation to such essential commodity should be
tried summarily, the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette specify such order to be a special order
for purposes of summary trial under this section, and every
such notification shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
issued, before both Houses of Parliament.

(2) Where any notification issued under sub-section (1)
in relation to a special order is in force, then, notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898
(5 of 1898), all offences relating to the contravention of such
special order shall be tried in a summary way and by a Magis-
trate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by
the State Government or by a Presidency Magistrate, and the
provisions of section 262 to 265 (both inclusive} of the said
Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial :

Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary
tial under this section, it shall be lawful for the Magistrate
to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding _
one year.

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), there shall
be no appeal by a convicted person in any case tried summarily
under this section in which the Magistrate passes a sentence
of imprisonment not exceeding one month, or of fine not
exceeding two hundred rupees, or both, whether or not any

. See, however, Collector of Customs v. A.S. Bawa, A:1.R. 1968 $.C. 13, 15, 15 Para
8 and 11 (1968) 1.S.C.R. 82, as to the scope for applying the Customs Act.


43

order of forfeiture of property or an order under section 517
of the said Code is made in addition to such sentence, but an
appeal shall lie where any sentence of imprisonment or fine in
excess of the aforesaid limits is passed by the Magistrate.

(4) Where any notification is issued under sub-section (1)
in relation to special order, all cases relating to the contraven-
tion of such special order and pending on the date of the issue
of such notification shall, if no witnesses have been examined
before the said date, be tried in a summary way under this
section and if such case is pending before a Magistrate who 15
not competent to try the same in a summary way under this
section, it shall be forwarded to a Magistrate so competent.

(९) Wealth Tax Act, 1957.
Specific summary trial is not prescribed.
(f) Income-tax Aci. 1961,
Specific summary trial is not prescribed.
{g) Customs Act, 1962.
Section 138—Offences to be tried summarily—

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an offence under this
Chapter other than an offence punishable under clause (i)
of section 135 may be tried summarily by a Magistrate.

(h) Gold Control Act, 1968.

Section 98—Offences to be tried summarily—

Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898—

(i) no magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate
or Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence against
this Act;

(ii) every oftence against this Act may be tried sum-
matily by a Magistrate.

(9) Search and similar powers
(a) The Central Excises Act, 1944 —Sections 13 to 23 and
tules under section 27.

(b) Foreign Exchange Regulation —Sections 19 to [9J and
Act, 1947, section 254.

(©) Prevention of Food Adulteration —Section 10.
Act, 1954.

(9) Essential Commodities Act, -—Section 3(2)(h) and
1955, (0)

(©) Wealth Tax Act, 1957 ~Section 37A.
(1)  Income-tax Act, 1961 —Section 132,
1M of Law/72—4.


®)
(0)

(8)
“®)

©

(०)
€)
0)
(8)
{h)

4

Customs Act, 1962 Sections 100, 101,
103, 105, 106.
Gold Control Act, 1968 —Sections 58 to 70.
(10) Special rules of evidence
Central Excises Act, 1944 —No such provision.

Foreign Exchange Regulation —Section 24 and 24A.
Act, 1947.

Prevention of Food Adulteration —Section 13.

Act, 1954,

Essential Commodities Act, 1955 —Section 14.
Wealth Tax Act, 1957 —wNo such provision.
Income-tax Act, 1961 —No such provision.
Customs Act, 1962 —Section 139,

Gold Control Act, 1968 —Section 99,


CHAPTER 7

DESIRABILITY OF AMENDMENTS—SUBSTANTIVE POINTS COMMON
TO ALL THE ACTS CONSIDERED

7.1. Before dealing with changes needed in each individual
Act, we should deal with certain matters of the general nature
applicable to all! or most of the Acts.

7.2. Of such questions, the most important is that of mens
rea.

7.3. Traditional criminal jurisprudence requires that before
criminal liability be imposed, a certain mental element of the
offender must be proved. The most familiar name used to de-
note this mental element in crime is ‘mens rea’. Some vagueness
exists as to the exact range and ambit of this expression. But the
general concept is fairly well established, namely, that a person}
ought not to be punished for an act in the absence of a culpable_
state of mind with reference to the act. -

7.4, The validity of the general principle of mens rea is not
disputed today. Illustrations could be drawn from some of the
criminal codes of other countries. Thus, the Russian Penal
Code enacts. !

“3. Only a person guilty of committing a crime, that is,
who intentionally or negligently commits a socially dangerous
act provided for by law, shall be subject to criminal responsi-
bility and punishment.

Criminal punishment shall be applied only by judgement
of a court.”

7,5. Itis also well-established that the burden of proving the
required mental element is on the prosecution which, in accord-
ance with the general rule applicable to criminal proceedings, is
required to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.

7.6. Necessities of the*time have, however, witnessed the
emergence of a category of offences—sometimes called “public
welfare offences’—where the element of mens rea has undergone
modification or even suffered elimination. A controversy is
going on amongst academic writers as to how far such a depar-
ture is justified even in the case of public welfare offences; and

General
matters
common to
all Acts
considered.

Mens rea.

Mens rea
and burden
of proof.

Basis of
criminal
responsi-
bility.

1. Article 3, R.S.F.S.R. Penal Code.

45


46

judicial disagreement on the question how far a particular statu-
tory offence requires mens rea to be read into legislative language
silent on the point, has enriched the law reports during recent
years,

7.7. We have already drawn attention to the need for deai-
ing with economic offences! in a manner different from tradi-
tional crimes.

7.8. Another aspect of practical importance should also be
emphasised. Although the actual facts of a particular case
relating to an economic offence may appear to possess only a
minor significance, there is, behind the curtain, a ring of asso-
ciates engaged in committing a number of crimes. These crimes
it is difficult to prove before the court in conformity with the
traditional standard of proof. The moral conviction of tespon-
sible enforcement officers is difficult to be translated into legal

, conviction of the minds of the judigial agencies operating in
the traditional manner. The mental element undoubtedly exists.

; But it is difficult to prove it. The act that has-caused damage

~ has been unearthed; the mind behind it remains unproved.

Such a situation, we think, is productive of grave harm.

7.9. Itis for these reasons, that we have thought of a solution
which, while preserving the requirement of mens rea a require-
ment which we would be loth to dispense with? in any act carry-
ing serious punishment—throws the burden of proof on the
accused, Petty cases causing minor injuries are not worth the
trouble of creating a special rule as to burden of proof. But
acts causing substantial damage justify a departure, to the extent
indicated above.

7.10, In formulating the test as to constitutional validity of
presumptions in criminal cases, the Supreme Court of the U.S.A.
has considered, as against the magnitude of the disadvantage
created by the operation of a presumption, the comparative
convenience test. The test was first formulated by Justice Car-
dozo in a dictum in Morrison v. California?, when he wrote:

“The decisions are manifold that within limits of reason

j and fairness the burden of proof may be lifted from the state
in criminal prosecutions and cast on the defendant. The
limits are in substance these, that the state shall have proved
enough to make it just for the defendant to be required to
repel what has been proved with excuse or explanation, or at
least that upon a balancing of convenience or of the oppor-
tunities for knowledge the shifting of the burden will be found
to be an aid to the accusor without subjecting the accused to
hardship or oppression, ...For a transfer of the burden,

० इज (5

(काट 3, supra.
. See also pata. 4.15, supra.

Morrison v. California, (1933) 291 U.S. 82, 88-91,


47

experience must teach that the evidence held to be inculpatory
has at least a sinister significance,......, of if this at time be
lacking, there must be in any event a manifest disparity in
convenience of proof and opportunity for knowledge, as, for
instance, where a general prohibition is applicable to every
one who is unable to bring himself within the range of an
exception. Greenleaf, Evidence, Vol. 1, Section 79. The
list is not exhaustive. Other instances may have arisen or
may develop in the future where the balance of convenience ;
can be redressed without oppression to the defendant through’
the same procedural expedient. The decisive considerations

afe too variable, too much distinctions of degree, too depen-

dent in last analysis upon a common sense estimate of fairness |
or of facilities of proof, to be crowded into a formula one t
can do no more than adumbrate them; sharper definition

must await the specific case as it atises.” -

7.11, The considerations which have weighed with us are
not dissimilar. Stringent provisions are necessary to deal
effectively with economic offences at the present time. The
same considerations that have justified the imposition of restric-
tions on the normal business activities, furnish the justification
for measures aimed at proper enforcement of those restrictions.
The situation is one of a semi-crisis, a general threat to national
wealth and welfare. The balance of convenience therefore
makes it imperative to adopt this approach.

In this context, a recent English provision is of interest! :—-

(2) Subject to sub-section (3) below, in any proceed-
ings for an offence to which this section applied it shail be
a defence for the accused to prove that he neither knew of
nor suspected nor had reason to suspect the existence of
some fact alleged by the prosecution which it is necessary
for the prosecution to prove if he is to be convicted of the
offence charged.”

The effect of this provision is that, in the specified offence,
the prosecution are required to prove that the accused com-
mitted the actus reus of the particular offence. It is then for
the accused to prove that he committed the actus reus ‘inno-
cently’, This method of introducing an element of ‘fauit’ into
drugs offences was discussed in the House of Lords in two
cases, 2-3

7.12. In conformity with the aforesaid test, we shall suggest
suitable amendments to the relevant Acts wherever appropri-
ate’, From this amendment, however, we propose to exclude

1. Section 28(2), Misuse of Drugs Act, 1971 (०. 38).

2. Warner v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, (1969). 2 A.C. 256,
3. Sweet v. Parsley, (1970) A.C. 132; (1969) 1 AM E.R. 347.

4. Chapter 15, infra.


Quantum
of punish-
ment.

Principles
as to
grounds for
extra-
ordinary
punish-
ment,

48

the taxation laws, mainly for two reasons, first that they are
far too complex and complicated, and second that they are
changed frequently. After these laws become stable and sim-
ple, the matter may be examined.

7.13. In the United States, Mr. Justice Jackson, himself
once Chief Counsel for the Bureau of Internal Revenue, re-
ferred to federal taxation as “a field beset with invisible boom-
erangs”. Judge Learned Hand grieved that the provisions
of the income-tax statutes “dance before my eyes in a meaning-
Jess procession : cross-reference to cross-reference, exception
upon exception couched in abstract terms that offer oo handle
to seize hold of—leave in my mind only a confused sense of some
vitally important, but successfully concealed, purport, which
it is my duty to extract, but which is within my power, if at all,
only after the most inordinate expenditure of time.”!

Considerations such as these have weighed in our minds in
excluding for the present, tax laws from the operation of the
formula as to onus which we have suggested.

7.14, The question of the quantum of punishment for the
various offences has engaged our serious attention. The maxi-
mum period of imprisonment for an offence deserving condem-
nation could, in theory, be limitless (and so also could be the
lowest limit). The longest term is life imprisonment—though
not met with in the Acts with which we are concerned. So,
one could come downwards from life imprisonment to any
period, or go upwards from one day to any period. For practi-
cal reasons, however, such a wide range is not met with, Even
life imprisonment, when awarded, works out because of remis-
sions etc,, to eight to ten years. For the present purpose, the
possible range of imprisonment can, therefore, be taken as
6 months to ten years.

7.15. Now, the principles are not much in dispute. Ben-
tham has observed? :—

“11. As to the grounds upon which it may be proper
to have recourse to extraordinary punishment; these herein
before hinted at viz—1. any: extraordinary mischievousness
on the part of the offence, when it is so great as may make
it necessary and worthwhile to hazard an extraordinary
expense in point of punishment for the sake of purchasing
the better chance of combating it with effect ; 2. the defi-
ciency of the punishment in point of certainty as resulting
from the difficulty of detection : which difficulty depends
in gteat measure, as is evident, upon the nature of the
offence ; 3. the presumption which the offence may afford

1, Ernest J. Brown, “Tax decisions of Judge Magruder”, (1958-59), 71 Harvard 1...

Rev., 1225.

2, Bentham, Principles of Legislation, (1971), Chapter 17, page 212, paragraph 11.


49

of the offender’s having already been guilty of other offen-
ces of the like nature ; 4. the accidental advantage in point
of quality of punishment not strictly meted in point of quan-
tity; 5. the use of a punishment of a particular quality in
the character of a moral lesson; 6.an extraordinary want of
sensibility on the part of the offender to the force of such
standing tutelary motives as are opposed to the offence
whether on the part of the law itself, or on the part of the
other auxiliary sanctions.”

7.16. Controversies can arise in the practical application
of these principles. Such controversy could arise because of
the differences in the relative importance which one attaches
to the particular offence as well as because of difference as re-
gards the relative importance which one attaches to the various
objectives of punishment.

7.17. The most satisfactory course from the practical point
of view would be to see if the existing punishments compare
unfavourably with those for analogous offence, or are exces-
sively disproportionate to the permanent public resentment felt
at the particular offence, or reflect inadequately the gravity as
represented by the threat to public welfare.

7.18. Now, there is one important direction in which the
punishments under the various Acts require to be altered. At
Present, the punishments under most Acts (except the Customs
Act) are expressed in terms which uniformly apply to a con-
travention irrespective of the amount involved. For example,
the punishment for evasion of excise duty under section 9, Ex-
cise Act is the same whether the amount of the duty evaded is
one thousand rupees or one lakh of rupees. We are of the
view that there is a case for rationalisation in this respect.!
Since the object in punishing economic offences is to prevent
harm caused to the national economy, a pecuniary test would
be justifiable; and the severity of the maximum ~ punishment
could be made to depend on the relative seriousness of the
harm caused as expressed in monetary term. Of course, this
does not mean that in each individual case, the court should
have regard only to the pecuniary assessment of the damage
caused. Legislative prescription of maximum punishment,
and judicial dispensation of the sentence within that maximum
are not necessarily governed by the same considerations. The
former is general and abstract; the latter is particular and con-
crete; what we are dealing with at the moment is only the for-
mer.

7.19. Fortunately, there is, in this context, a provision avail-
able in the Customs Act? which with one modification, furni-
shes a useful precedent. Under that Act, the maximum

Importance
of various
objectives
of punish-
ment.

Compari-
son with

punish-

ment for
analogous
offences 4
desirable.

Maximum
pul
ment-

Recom-

pecuniary
test.

३. Actual amendments will be indicated later under each Act.
2 Section 135, Customs Act, 1962.


Importance
of reform

50

punishment is five years if the amount of duty evaded is Rs. one
बिता or more, and two years in other cases. The maximum of five
years should, we think be increased to seven years, and the maxi-
mum of two years should be increased to three years. In the
Penal Code, the maximum geierally met with are one, two, three,
seven, ten and fourteen years, The classification of offences
under the Second Schedule of the Criminal Procedure Code is
also framed with reference to the maxima of three years and
seven years. Further, in order that the maximum punishment
may find its reflection in the public mind, it is desirable that
the scheme should, as far as possible, be uniform. In the
present case, the increase from five years to seven years is not
likely to cause hardship, having regatd to the nature and gravity
of the harm caused.

7.20. We, therefore, propose to recommend the revision
of the maximum punishment on the above lines, where the
pecuniary test can be appropriately applied having regard to
the subject-matter of the enactment.

We are further of the view that in the case of a second or
subsequent conviction also, minimum punishment should be
provided for.

There is also a question regarding the minimum fine, to be
considered. It has been suggested to us during oral discussions
that where the offence results in ill-gotten gains on the part of
the offender, the minimum fine should be linked up with the
amount of the ill-gotten gains. We agree with this approach,
and recommend that the amount of 106 shall not be less than
the amount of such ill-gotten gains, except for reasons to be
recorded.

The actual amendment to be made in each individual Act,
in conformity with the above test, will be indicated later.1

7.21. The next important question of general significance
is of mandatory imprisonment and minimum term of imprison-
ment,

7.22, During recent times, thinking about sentencing has
assumed significance, and, though thought in this respect has
been devoted mainly to the traditional crimes, yet expression
of views about social and economic offences is not totally want-
ing. Realisation of the fact that these crimes affect the wel-
fare of the entire community, and though veiled ander the
garb of respectability, in truth reflect a dangerous mentality,
is met with in the judgement. of some of the appellate courts.

7.23, So far as traditional crimes are concerned, the values
of reform and rehabilitation are gathering increased importance.
With the acceptance of the view that environmental pressures

1, See Chapter 15, below,


3

or disordered states of mind might impede the offender's abi- and rehab
lity to calculate rationally the risks of pleasures and pain in- j2Gitonal
volved in criminal conduct, the judiciary hascome to recognise crimes.

varying degrees of guilt for the same offence.

7.24. But, in the field of anti-social crimes, the deterrent Importance
aspect has been given its due importance. The objective of deter:
sought need not be the same in the case of all offences,—this is aspect in
the assumption made by those who emphasise that the protec- anti-social
tion of society requires an assertion of the deterrent value of crimes.
punishment. .

As Judge William J. Campbell, an American federal court
judge, has pointed out,! where rehabilitation is the prime con-
cern, the treatment should be tailored to the individual; in
extreme cases of anti-social offenders, prolonged confinement
assures the protection of society, Where, however, the vio-
lation of law is a matter of principle,........ “there is
no qvestion of rehabilitation...... they (offenders) must
be sentenced as examples; otherwise, human nature being
what it is, we would most assuredly be faced with great num-
ber of less stable citizens seeking ways and means to avoid
military service.” Even retribution is allowed as an objective
of sentencing where the crime is ‘. -Tevolting and incom-
prehensible to the group.”?

7.25. At the same time, one has to bear in mind that each Each case
case depends on its own facts. There may be cases requiring | dependent
heavy punishment; there may be cases where a light punishment fon its
is enough. And there may be cases where practically no punish. / fts-
ment is merited. ~

7.26, Reported cases furnish examples of cach category. Recent
To notice a very recent English case ,> the convicted person, English
aged 67, had pleaded guilty to five counts for making false case as to
statements with intent Aaa defraud the revenue. He was a tra- false state.
velling salesman, an over a period ten years, misre- nt (०
presented his travelling expenses. He had underpaid £420 of defraud
tax. Now he had paid this tax, and had no previous con- revenue.
victions. He was in poor health, and had been supporting
an aged mother, and an invalid sister. Sentence of nine
months’ imprisonment was upheld, and it was also deter-
mined that suspension was not necessary.

1. Judge William J. Campbell, “Developing Systematic Sentencing Procedures”,
{September 1954), 18, Federal Probation, pages 3 to 9, cited in Green, Judicial Attitudes to
sentencing (1961), page 2.

2. Judge William J. Campbell. “Developing Systematic Sentencing Procedures”,
(September 1954), 18, Federal Probation pages 3 to 9, cited in Green Judicial Attitudes
to sentencing.

3. R. ४. Richardes, (1971) Cr. L.R. 176, cited in (1971) March Current Law, under
“Criminal Law” (Item 62).


English
case as to
export of
currency.

52

7.27. In another English case ,! the accused was convicted
of attempting to export Bank of England Notes with intend
to evade the prohibition on exportation imposed by. section
22 of the Exchange Control Act, 1947, contrary to section 56(2)
of the Customs and Excise Act, 1952, He had been caught
while attempting to export 30,000 pounds; and previously also
he had smuggled one lakh twenty thousand pounds out of the
country. He was sentenced to a term of imprisonment such
as would result in his immediate discharge, and to a fine of
25,000 pounds or 12 months’ imprisonment in default.

The Court of Appeal, refusing the application for leave to
appeal against sentence, concluded “This court has paid the
greatest attention to all these matters which have been so per-
suasively urged by counsel on behalf of the applicant. When
all is said and done, however, the offences to which this man
pleaded guilty are very grave offences carried out on a very
Jarge scale. He must have known the risks which he was run-
ning when he agreed to smuggle and did smuggle large quanti-
ties of currency out of England. He must have known that
offences of this kind are particularly grave from the public point
of view, because of the injury which they do to this country’s
economy, affecting every man, woman and child living there.
It is said that a large part of the money found its way back.
That may be so. £20,000 never left the country, because he
was caught. That may well be so. £68,750 of the amount
that he did take out has, however, never returned. These off-
ences where carried out over a long period and were all part
of a carefully prepared and daringly executed plan. In sen-
tencing the accused, the learned judge, after imposing the fine
of £25,000 said :

“This is done not only to hurt you, but as an example
to others who may be attempting to do the same thing and
who may well be doing the same thing, in an attempt to
dissuade them.

The learned judge imposed this sentence obviously as
a deterrent sentence. It seems to the court that no one can
criticise the learned judge for considering that offences of
this kind ought to be deterred by the severe sentences which,
in the view of this court, they richly merit.”

7.28. In another English case?, it was held that four years’
imprisonment was not an excessive sentence for a trafficker in
forged 10:55, nor was imprisonment for 18 months to two years
excessive for a person who utters one or two forged notes.

7.29. Borrowing what the Court of appeal,3 said in a case
Telating to an offence under the Official Secrets Act, one can

1, R. v. Goswami, (1962) 2 All. E.R. 24, 30,
2. R.v. Caugie, (1969) 3 All. E.R. 950.
3. R.¥. Britten (1968) 1 All. E.R. 517 (C.A.).


53

state that a person who commits many offences in pursuance
of a system or policy, deserves greater punishment than one
who commits only one offence. And further, as the dangers
of mass destruction increasc, so does the need for sentences
of deterrent length.

7.30. In an Andhra case,! the High Court, while allowing
the appeal against acquittal and finding the accused guilty under
section 16(1}(a)(i) and section 7 read with section 26) (a\(1) of
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, noted the contention
of the advocate for the accused that the accused was a very
poor man having only one buffalo, and was a petty milk ven-
dor who had no previous conviction. The High Court sen-
tenced him only to Rs. 100/- fine (in default, two months”
rigorous imprisonment).

7.31, In a Kerala case? relating to section 16(1)(a)(i), Pre-
vention of Food Adulteration Act, the Magistrate had, without
assigning any reasons, imposed a sentence below the minimum.
The High Court had to enhance the sentence in revision.

7.32. In an Orissa case> under section 701) (a) (ii) of the
Essential Commodities Act, the Magistrate had imposed a sen-
tence of fine only, stating—‘accused is Railway employee aged
55 years and is on verge of retirement and no previous convic-
tion alleged against him, a sentence of fine will meet ends of
justice.”

The High Court held that this was not a sufficient justification
for not awarding imprisonment.

However, as there was no notice for enhancement, the High
Court did not interfere with the sentence and impose a substantive
sentence of imprisonment. (But the High Court reduced the
fine from Rs. 500/- 10 Rs 200/- in default, simple imprisonment
for one month).

7.33. In 1960, the Supreme Court in a case under the Drugs
Act, 1940 observed that where large quantities of spurious drugs
had been manufactured by the accused and passed off as goods
manufactured by a firm of repute, he was guilty of an anti-social
act of a very serious nature, and the punishment of rigorous im-
prisonment for 3 months with a fine of Rs. 500/- was more
jenient than severe.4

7.34, Abhyankar, J. observed in a Bombay case5, under sec-
tion 5, Imports and Exports Control Act :

“A serious view must therefore be taken of such offences

which show a distressingly growing tendency. The argument

sentences
where
mass of
people
affected.

Andhra
case under
Prevention
of Food
Adultera-
tion Act.

Madras
case under
the same
Act.

Orissa case
under
Essential
Commo-
dities Act.

Supreme
Court case
under
Drugs Act.

Bombay
case under
Imports
Act.

1. Public Prosecutor v. K. N. Raju Matha Sashya, (1970) Cr.L.J. 393, 396, para. 10

{Annanthanarayana Ayyar, J.).
2, Subbayyan ४. State, A.L.R. 1968 Ker. 330.
3. Gurumurthy v. State, (1968) Cr-L.J. 533; A.LR. 1968 Orissa 72.
4. Chimanlal v. State of Maharashtra, A.LR. 1963 S.C. 665.
5. State v. Drupadi, AIR. 1965 Bom. 6, para 11.


Trivial

Madras
case under
Food Act.

34

that the accused comes from a respectable or high family
tather emphasises the seriousness of the malady. If mem-
bers belonging to high status in life should show scant regards.
for the laws of this country which are for public good, for
protecting our foreign trade or exchange position of currency
difficulties, the consequential punishment for the violation
of such laws must be equally deterrent. The offences against
Export and Import restrictions and customs are of the
species of ‘economic’ crimes which must be curbed effecti-
vely.””

7.35. Gn the other hand, there could be cases where the case
is so trivial as to justify no punishment.

7.36. Inan Andhra case! of sale of adulterated food to the
Food Inspector, the appeal against acquittal was accepted,
and the respondent was held guilty under section 1€(J) read with
section 7 and section 2(1) (a) and (1) of the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act. But the High Court passed a sentence only
of fine of Rs. 200/- {in default 3 months’ rigorous imprison-
ment), because the accused was a first offender and appeared to
be a petty milk vendor.

7.37. Ina Madras case?, under the Prevention of Food
Aduheration Act relating to an aerated water (the complaint
being that there was excess of saccharine), the excess was found
to be negligible. The High Court said—

“The learned Chief Presidency Magistrate, in relation
to the nature of the offence committed by the revision peti-
tioner, has observed as follows :—

“The accused must therefore be found guilty in

a purely technical sense, In my view this prosecution

has served no purpose and is in fact wholly unnecessary.

When the report of the Analyst disclosed nothing serious

at all, the samtioning authority at least could have ex-

ercised discretion properly and allowed the matter to
be dropped instead of launching on a prosecution which
is clearly pointless. | am afraid it is prosecutions such
as this that create an impression of harassment and con-
tribute to bringing the law into disrepute. It is whoily
unnecessary to impose any other puntshment, in the cir-
cumstances of this case, except to admonish the accured.
Admonished accordingly.”

“With these observations, the learned Chief Pre-
sidency Magistrate must have applied section 95, Indian
Penal Code, and acquitted the petitioner as, even though
it may be an offence, it cannot be deemed to be an offence

4. Public Prosecutor v. KN. Raju, (1970) Cr.L.J. 388, 393, para. 1 (Andbra Pradesh)
{Chinnappa Reddy, J.).
2, BK. Varma v. Corporntion of Madras, 1970) 1 M.L.J. 407, 409 (Krishnaswamy

Reddy, J).


55

under law by virtue of section 95, Indian Penal Code.
In the result, the conviction is set’ aside and the revision
petitioner is acquitted.”

7.38. In a Patna case,! an appeal had been preferred with Patna
special leave under section 417(3) of the Code of Criminal Pro- case under
cedure against the acquittal of the respondent, who was put on 7
trial for an offence under section 16(1) (a) of the Prevention of
Food Adulteration Act, 1954, The shopkeeper had been acquit-
ted by the Magistrate, but, on appeal the Patna High Court
convicted him. However, taking into consideration that it was
the respondent's first offence under the Act, and that more
than 3 1/2 years had elapsed since the date of occurrence, the
High Court imposed a fine of Rs. 250/-, in default three months’
simple imprisonment.

7.39. In Patna case,? under the Prevention of Food Adultera- Another

tion Act, there was an appeal by special leave under section Patna
417 (3) of the Criminal Procedure Code by the Chairman, ‘°*
Jugsalai Notified Area Committee, against a judgment and order
of a first class Magistrate acquitring the respondent of the charge
under section 16(1) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
1954, The accused was a tea vendor, and he had been charged
with selling adulterated milk. The Patna High Court set aside
the order of acquittal passed by the court below, and the respon-
dent was convicted under section 16 (1) (a)(i) of the Act. The
court observed that since the offence was technical in nature
a sentence of Rs. 5/- would meet the ends of justice, and in default
to undergo simple imprisonment for one week.

The court also observed that though the respondent had been
found guilty of an offence and convicted and sentenced, it
was not 2 case at all where the Food Inspector should have insis-
ted on taking a sample of milk from the respondent, or the
authorities of the Notified Area Committee should have sanc-
tioned the prosecution. It has resulted in nothing but waste of
court’s time and public money in the hands of the Committee.
The money in the hands of the Notified Area Committee being
public money should not be wasted in such a manner.

7,40. In a Madras case,3 the accused was running a grocery Madras
shop and was in possession of adulterated groundnut oil, which case under
the Food Inspector purchased from him. The trial court acquit- Feod Act.
ted him oa the ground that the prosecution had not proved that
the groundnut oil was kept as food intended for human consump-
tion. On appeal, the Madras High Court held that on the facts
it was intended to be sold for human consumption. So far as the
punishment was concerned, the respondent was fined Rs. 250/-

1. Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee v. Durga Prasad, (1969), Cr.L.J. 704 (Patoa)
(Case of first offence). » »

2, Jugsalai Municipality v. Mukhram. A.LR. 1969 Pat. 155, 160.
3. Public Prosecutor v. Mayakrishnan, (1970) 1 Mad. L.J. 275 (D.B.).


Applica~
tions for
enhance-
ment not
frequeht.

Public
welfare
prime
considera-
tion.

Protection
of the
community
requires
incarcera-
tion,

Proper
sentence a
compro-
mise.

56

in default to undergo simple imprisonment for six weeks, Time
for payment was fixed at three weeks.

.. 7Al. From the paucity of reported cases as to enhancement,
it would appear that applications for enhancement are not fre-
quent.

It may be noted that the Law Commission has, in its Report!
on the Criminal Procedure Code recommended a provision
for an appeal at the instance of the State Government (in case of
conviction) on the ground of inadequacy of sentence. One would
hope that the prosecuting agencies and the State Governments
will make increasing use of this provision when enacted.

7.42. The prime consideration in proper sentencing is the
public welfare. Two major problems that Yace the sentencing
Judge are—

(a) to what extent and for what time does the commu-
nity welfare require protection from the offender with respect
to the offence; and

(b) what sentence will permit the offender to take his
place in society as a useful citizen at the earliest time consis-
tent with protection of the public.

7.43. The protection of the community from confirmed and
habitual criminal] not reasonably suspectible or rehabilitation
as useful citizens requires the incarceration of such offenders for
maximum periods. The protection of the community also requires
that, to the extent a given sentence may be expected to serve
as an effective deterrent to the commission of similar offences
by others, this element should be given great weight in the de-
termination of the proper sentence. The public weifare also re-
quires, in general, the maximum use of probation and institu-
tionalised training in respect to offenders who are not confirmed
criminals and who manifest a capacity for probable return to the
community as useful citizens.

__ The sentencing judge must, therefore, determine the propor-
tionate worth, value and requirements of each of these elements
in imposing a sentence in each case.

7.44, A proper sentence is a composite of many factors, in-
cluding the nature of the offence, the circumstances—extenuat-
ing or aggravating—of the offence, the prior criminal record, if
any, of the offender, the age ot the offender, the professional
and social record of the offender, the background of the offender
with reference to education, home life, sobriety and social adjust-
ment, the emotional and mental condition of the offender, the
Prospects for the rehabilitation of the offender, the possibility
ofa return of the offender to a normal life in the community, the

1, 4st Report, Vol. 2, page 147, clause 387.


57

possibility of treatment or of training of the offender, the possi-
bility that the sentence may serve as a detertent to crime by this
offender, or by others, and the present community need, if any,
for such a deterrent in respect to the particular type of offence
involved.

7.45. The variables in each case, including the accused’s
priot criminal record, his background and the condition of his
health, the prospect of rehabilitation and many other factors are
unpredictable, and it is for this reason that a discretion should
preferably vest with the judicial officer.

7.46. Sentences which are merely mathematica'ly identical for
violations of the same statute are improper, unfair and undesira-
ble. Indeed, mathematically identical sentences may in subs-
tance be themselves disparate.

7.47, For these reasons, we do not think that the discretion of
the court to award a sentence below the minimum should be
totally abolished. In fact, even some of the officers concerned

- with enforcement of the Acts agreed that it was impossible to
conceive of every possible situation whickrmight operate in miti-
gation.

7.48. At the same time, and notwithstanding our hesitation to
introduce provisionas limiting the discretion of the court to
award a punishment below the minimum, we are constrained to
Tecommend provisions as to certain specific matters, having
regard to the general complaint voiced in that regard. It has been
represented to us, during the oral discussions which we have
held with responsible officers, that a very mild punishment is
awarded by the courts on the ground that—

(1) the case is one of first conviction, or

(2) that the matter has been already dealt with by severe
departmental penalty, or

(3) that the convicted person is a young man of, say,
twentyfive years, or

(4) that the offender is merely a carrier.

7.49, We are of the view that, by themselves whether singly
or together, none of these grounds should be regarded as _su-
fficient for awarding a punishment below the minimum. The
first ground!, namely, that the case is one of first conviction,
turns out to be unsatisfactory in the case of social and economic
offences, because what has been detected and brought before the
court is, more often than not, a surface manifestation of a poi-
sonous spring of habitual misconduct running underground.
Detection is particularly difficult ia the case of social and eco-
nomic offences. Gathering of information leading to prosecution
is equeily difficult, and conviction in much more so. Whatever
may be the position as regards conventional crimes, the odds

Factors
variable
and unpre-
dictable.

Mathe-
matical
identity

not
desirable
Discretion
10 be
retained.

Recom-
mendation
to exclude
certain
grounds of
mitigation.

1. Para. 7.48, supra.


58

here are that it was by sheer luck and the offender has escaped
detection for other crimes.

7.50, As regards the second ground prior award of depart-
mental penalties,-which is sometimes regarded as sufficient
in itself to justify a mild punishment in the criminal trial, we wish
to point out that the very object of a criminal prosecution is
to invoke punishments which could not have been imposed in
administrative adjudication. No doubt, successive imposition of
administrative penalties and criminal prosecutions may be found
to be unnecessary in many cases, and could even be avoided to
prevent hardship. But these matters would be taken note of by
the appropriate agency when initiating or sanctioning a prosecu-
tion. They should not weigh with the court in awarding punish-
ment.

7.51. The next ground of mitigation which requires to be
dealt with is that of youth of the offender. We have been told
that courts have regarded this as a mitigating factor even where
the accused-was aged 25 years or-so. We are of the view that this
ought not to be so. No doubt, where a case falls within the Pro-
bation of Offenders Act, 1958, the provisions of that Act are to
be complied with!. But, in cases outside the Act, there is
justification for treating the young of the convicted person as
in itself justifying a punishment defow the minimum.

7.51 A. We are also of the view that the minimum punishment
should not be relaxed merely on the ground that the offender is
merely a ‘cartier.’ Such a plea is often taken, and sucéeeds in
cases under the Customs Act and the like. While it could be
argued in general that a person whose contribution to an offence
is as an originator of the offence should receive a higher punish-
ment than a person who is a mere go-between, practical consi-
derations as well as the special nature of the offences in question,
require that even he should be given a substantial punishment.

7.52, There is another aspect to be discussed. Criminal
responsibility attracts “‘measures” to meet it. If the punishable
act has caused no harmful effects, punishment may be mild. If
it has caused some harm but the offender can repair the damage
done to society, probation would be appropriate. If the harm
is serious, imprisonment, would, of course, be tequired. These
considerations are implicit in most codes, and are stated ex-
plicitly in some of the foreign Codes?. In the present context,
it becomes desirab‘e to provide that if the harm is nominal, the
provision for minimum punishment should not be binding.

7,53. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend
the insertion of suitable Explanations on the following lines in the
relevant provision in the various Acts.

1, The question whether probation itself should be excluded is dealt with separately
(Chapter 10, infra).
2, 8.8. articles 25, 28, 33, 38 etc. of the G.D.R, Penal Code.


2

“Explanation'!_—The following are not, by themselves, special
and adequate reasons for awarding. & semtenoe of imprisonment
for fess than six monthe, namely,

(a) the fact that the acct has bee: ye) a convicted for
the first time of an offence nee this,Act, or ae

(७) the fact that in proceedings under (लिए Act other than
@ prosecution, the accused hab been ordered to pay a penalty
or his goods have béen ordered to He ceMfiscated or other penal
action has been taken against hint forthe sameé offence, or

(©) youth of the accused :

Provided that nothing in this Explanation shall be construed
as affecting in any way the provisions of the Probation of Offen-
ders Act, 1958, or of section 562 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure or of any enactment relating to children or any special
provision of law applicable 10 juvenile offénders.

Explanation 2—The fact that the offence has caused no
substantial harm to society or to any individual is a special and
adequate reason for awarding a sentence of itnprisonment less
than six months.”

7.54, The specific amendments which we'are recommending?
will meet a few situations. But we would'like to reiterate here
our grave concern at some of the grossly inadequate sentences
which we have come acros¢ in cases relating to economic offences.

7,55. It is unfortunately true that some courts do not appre-
ciate the gravity of economic crimes. We came across, for
example, a case decided by the Chief Presidency Magistrate of a
Presidency town, in which a leading businessman and two other
directors of a company were convicted, on a charge of violation
of the Provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947
and awarded a mild punishment.

The charge was of holding shares in a foreign company bet-
ween March 29, 1957 and July 31, 1959, without the nacessary
permission of the Reserve Bank. Each of them was sentenced
to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000 or, in default, to undergo regorous
imprisonment for three months. The company, which was
tried for the same offence, was also fined Rs. 1,000/-.

The Magistrate, while sentencing the accused, said that the
offence seemed to be rather technical in nature. He said that the
shares in question were acquired before the 1957 amendment to
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 which for the first
time introduced the provision about the Reserve Bank’s permis-
sion. The shares had not been dealt with or disposed of since
their acquisition, and their dividends were received through the

Imadequacy
of senten-
ces—Obser-
vations
regarding.

1, This form is suitable for a provision worded like section 135, Proviso (1). Customs.

Act. The form may require change in other cases.
2. Para. 7.53, supra.
1M of Law/72—5


wo
‘ On
Reserve Bank. The shares:in.
company.

Further, the defence advocate stated that the directors
failed to obtain the permission after the coming into force of the
amendment, as they were adyised py their solicitors that no per-

+ mission was necessary as the shapes had been acquired, before
the amendment. As the-shares bad aot been dealt with or dis-
posed for all these years, and as the agcused seem to have failed
to obtain the permission of the Reserve Bank of India on
account of erroneous legal belief, the offence was regarded as
technical.

7.56. We are, with respect, constrained to observe that the
reasons given for awarding ३ mild sentence in this case, disclose
a failure to appreciate adequately the adverse effect of the viola-
tions of the Foreign Exchange Act on the national economy,
The relevant statutory provision prohibits the acquisition, “hol-
ding” and disposal of shares in a foreign company, and’ there
was no basis for supposing that shares acquired before the amend-
ment were exempt from its operation. The fact that the divi-
9९105 were received through the Reserve Bank was also not
relevant to a charge of holding the shares without its permission,
and so were most of the other considerations relied on for awar-
ding a mild punishment.

gen deo nt
Quieaion were alvo of a subsidibry.


CHAPTER 8

CORPORATIONS AND THEIR OFFICERS

8.1. An important type of white-collar crime is that committed Corpora-

‘by Corporations. Since a Corporation has no physical body ४०७,
on which the pain of punishment could be inflicted, nor a mind

which can be guilty of a criminat intent, traditional punishments

prove ineffective, and new and different punishments have to

be devised. The reat penalty of a corporation is the diminu-

tion of respectability, that is, the stigma. It is now usual to

insert provisions to the effect that the Director or Manager

who has acted for the corporation shou'd be punished'. But

it is appropriate that the corporation itself, should be punished.

In the public mind, the offence should be linked with the name

of the corporation, and not merely with the name of the
Director or Manager, who may be a non-entity. Punishment

of fine in substitution of imprisonment in the case of a corpo-
ration could solve the problem in one aspect?; but, at the same,

it is necessary that there should be some procedure, like a
judgment of condemnation, available in the case of an anti-
social or economic offence committed by a corporation.

This will be analogous to the punishment of public censure
proposed for individuals3,

8.2. Of course, confiscation and similar penalties wil! con- Attach-
tinue. Acquisitive corporate crime, like acquisitive pe1sonal prent of
crime, will persist if the criminal 18 permitted to retain the fruits Viegal
of his illegal activity. The criminal law, therefore, generally
does not tolerate such retention. If acquisitive corporate
crime is to be deterred, the corporation, like any other acquisi-
tive criminal should be deprived of aif the fruits of its illegal
activity.

8.3. In many of the Acts relating to economic offences, Punish-
imprisonment is mandatory. Where the convicted person is ment of
a compe ration, this provision becomes unworkable, and it is jon
desirable to provide that in such cases, it shall be competent to °
the court to impose a fine. This difficulty can arise under
the Penal Code also‘, but it is likely to arise more frequently
in the case of economic laws. We, therefore, recommend

4, Para. 8.4, infra.
2. Para. 8.3, infra.
+ ३, Taxation laws are proposed to be excluded from this amendment.

4, See discussion in 41st Report of the Law Commission, (Code of Criminal Procedure),
Vol. 1, page 190-191, para. 24.7.

61


Liability

62

that the following provision should be inserted in the Penat
Code as, say, sectich 62:—

“(i) In every case in which the offence is punishable
with imprisonment only or with imprisonment and fine.
and the offender is a corporation, it shall be competent to
the court to sentence such offender to fine only.

(2) In every case in which the offence is punishable
with imprisonment and any other punishment not being
fine, and the offender is a corporation, it shall be competent
to the court to sentence such offender to fine.

(3) In this section, “serporation ‘ion’ means an incorpo~
rated company or other corporate, and includes a
firm and other association of individuals.”

8.4. The question of corporate liability has two aspects;

of principal the liability of the corporation itself and the liability of the

offenders.

yo

principal officers, such as Managing Direcfors. The latter
aspect will now be dealt with.

8.5. In England, two formulae have been adopted in this
respect. According to the first formula, any Director, Manager.
Secretary or other officer of the company with whose consent
or connivance the offence is committed, is declared to be im-
plicated in the offence. The burden of proof in this case lies
on the prosecution. In most casés, the officer is also made
responsible where the offence is attributable to, or facilitated
by his “negiect’” or “negligence” or “culpable neglect” “of
duty” or “reckless neglect of duty’!.

8.6. While, in the above formula, the burden lies with the
prosecution, the second formula shifts the burden to the officer,
to disprove his complicity. There has been some criticism of
English formula. For example, the Borrowing etc. Act? has
the following provision:—

“1} No proceedings for an offence under this Act
shall be instituted in England except by or with the consent
of the Director of Public Prosecutions......

(4) Where an offence under this 4 ct has been committed
by a body corporate (other than a authority), every person
who at the time of the Commission of the offence was a director,
general manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body
corporate, or was purporting to act in any such capacity shail
be deemed to be guilty of that offence, unless he proves that
the offence was committed without his consent or connivance
and that he exercised all such diligence to prevent the com-
mission of the offence as he ought to have exercised having
regard to the nature of his functions in that capacity and to
all the circumstances.”

1. The wording varies.
2. The Borrowing (Control and Guarantees) Act, 1946, Schedule, Paragraph 3.


63
This provision came in for the following judiciat comment! :--

“First of ali, E have to beat in mind that this is a penal
statute. it indeed, I suppose représents the high-water
mark of the Parliamentary mvasion of the traditional rights
of the subjects of this realm. Not only does it impose ~
upon offénders substantial penalties—no objection could
be taken to that—but what is so serious. from the point of
view of the subject is, that where a body corporate has
been found to be an offender, then every director. general
manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body हि
corporate, including a person who was purporting to ach}
in those capacities, is deemed to be guilty unless he proves| |]
that the offence was committed without his consent 01:
connivance, thereby reversing the usual and traditional
tute of English law that a man is innocerit until he is proved.
guilty. But not only that; for Proof that he is innocent
will not avail an accused person, because he must further
show that he exercised all such digs nce 10, prevent the
commission of the offence as he it to have exercised.
having regard to the nature of his functions in that capa-
city and in all the circumstance. However, that is what
Parliament had thought fit to enact, and I abide, of course.
by it. Nevertheless it is what Mr. Lindon described as
a highly penal statute.”

8.7. In the. Model Penal Code of the American Law Insti-
tute?, the wording employed covers (i) persons who “perform
or cause to be performed”, in the name of the corporation.
any conduct, as also (ii) “any agent” of the corporation having
“primary responsibility for the discharge of the duty imposed
by law upon a corporation”. In the former case, positive
conduct would be required, while in the latter case, it must be
a “reckless” omission to perform the required act. The rele-
vant provisions are as follows:—

“(4) As used in this Section:

(a) “corporation” does not inglude an entity
organised as or by a governmental agency for the
execution of a governmental programme;

(०) “agent” means any director. officer, servant.
employee or other person authorised to act in behalf
of the corporation or association and, in the case of
an unincorporated association, a member of such
asseciation;

(c) “high managorial agent” means an officer of
@ corporation or an umiacorpetated association or.
in the case of a partnership, a partner, or any other

1, London and Country Commercial Properties Investment Lid..x. Ainney General
(1953) | W.L.R. 312, 318 (Chancery Division) (Upjohn 3),

2. Section 2.07, sub-section (4) and (6), Model Penal Code, which are clevant to
Corporations.


64

agent of a corporation or association having duties or
such responsibility that his comduct may fairly be
assumed to represent the policy of the corporation or
association.

(6) (a) A person is legally accountable for any conduct
he performs or causes to be performed in the name of the
corporation or an unincorporated association or in its
behalf to the same extent as if it were performed in his own
name or behalf.

(b) Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon
a Corporation or an unincorporated association, any agent
of the corporation or association having primary respon-
sibility for the discharge of the duty is legally accountable
for a reckless omission to perform the required act to the
same extent as if the duty were imposed by law directly
upon himself. .

(c) When a person is convicted of an offence by reason
of his ‘egal accountability for the conduct of a corporation
or an unincorporated association, he is subject to the sentence
authorised by law when a natural person is convicted of an
offence of the grade and the degree involved.”

8.8. The legislative precedent currently adopted in India.
combines two different kinds of formulae. A recent example
is furnished by the provision in the Gold Control Act? quoted
below:—

“93. Offences by companies. (1) Where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was committed was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the,
conduct of the business 0] fehe company ag well as the company
shalt be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished ‘accordingly :

Provided that nothing ‘contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he
proves that the offence was committed without his know-
ledge or that he had exercised all duc diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything. contained in sub-section
(1), where any offence under this Act has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or commivance of, or is attri-
butable to, any neglect‘on tie past of, any director, manager,
Secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shalt be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly,”

1, Gold Control Act, 1968, Section 93,


65
. Explenation—For the purpase of. thig section:—~
(a) “company” meatis, any, body corporate: and
includes a firm or Other | associ of Tedividuals;
and ‘ .
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner
in the firm.”
8.9. At present, the position as to such provisions in the
major Acts with which this Report is concemed is as follows :--
(1) Central Excises Act. 1944, —No such provision.

(2) Foreign Exchange Regulation —Section 23-C. ~
Act, 1947,

(3) Prevention of Adulteration Act, —Section 17.
(4) Essential Commodities Act, —Section 10.
1955.

(5) Wealth Tax Act, 1957. —No such provision.
(6) Income-tax Act, 1961. —No such provision.
(7) Customs Act, 1962. —Section 140.
(8) Gold Controt Act, 1968. —Section 931.

8.10. A small point relating to the Imports and Exports
Act may be noted at this stage here. The Act is not one of
those listed above, but the Point was raleod during oral dis-
cussions, The Committee? on nm of Corruption
(Santhanam Committee) suggested the fétlowing amendments
to section 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 :--

_ (a) To make the offenders ligbl¢.to he Punished with
imprisonment for a term which 5५१ eaten to two years
and also with fine, with a further Pfov that the imprison-
ment shall in no case be for a Lease sf ae six months,
wi the court decides, for jal and [८ reasons
te be recorded in the judgment, te itupose a shorter term
of imprisonment; and

(0७) To make a separate py fgvision making principal
office-bearers also liable for offences. commitled by the
company or partnership concern or any other incorporated
body or association and to provide that the burden of Proving
the innocence shall be on them.

8.11, Action has already been taken on the first recommen-
dation.

Points
telating to
Imports and

Act,

J. See para. 8.8, supra. os ~
2. Report of the Santhanam Committee; (1963), past 65, para. 7.25.


‘Clause
Tecom-
mended.

Applica-
tion for
Jicense
signed by
Chairman
or Manag-
ing
Director—
Jiability of
these
officers,

6

8.12. As régards the sécbid recommendation, the necessary
amendment. has not:besn epagied. Presumably, it must have
been felt at that time thes the हक ९: /क हक may cause hardship,
since the day to day handling of imported goods is not necessarily
looked after by the principal officer. We, however, think
that it is necessary to have a fash look at the matter. Though
the absence of such a provision may not lead to any great
practical difficulty, because the director or other principal
officer would still be liable for abetment!, we are of the view
that to impress upon the divectors? the importance of complying
with the relevant Acts, a provision is needed and we recommend
an amendment accordingly:

8.13. We are: further of the view-ffat in the case of offences
under some of the Acts, namely the Foreign Exchange Regu-
lation Act, the Imports and लिंग बाख Control Act and the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act’ & licence or permission is
granted to a gorporation as a regult.of an application in writing
made on behalf of the corporation, it is desirable that the
Chairman or Managing Director of the corporation should
undertake criminal liability fur offénces connected’ with the
transaction to which the license ५ or permission, relates. Such
a provision might appear to be unusual. But we think that
it Is necessary in order to prevesit contraventions of the regu-
latory provisions of the Acts ynder which such licente or per-
mission is granted. noe
+ . 8.14. This could be achieved; by. inserting two conclusive

“presumptions. Under the. first,,it shall be presumed that
the offence was committed, with the, consent or connivance of
t irman or. Managing @irecipr, if he has signed
application for license or permission.

Under the second preéstimptton, even where the Chairman

or Managing hee aa ig not pone the application, he should
be‘deeied to have si it. | ' mes necessary to cover
Beenie the application is ; $4 by a lower officer of the
66 tion.

oP १6४ ६

8.15. We do riot think that'sudh presumptions would go
beyond the permissible limits:gadgr article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution, with respect to the right. of a person to carry on
a business etc, The Presumy though conclysive,. would.
we venture to suggest, as reasonable restrictions
in the interest of the 18९ tal aes ‘Within article 19(6) of the
Constitution. ' ‘

पर रु

Our attention was drawn,  थ this connection, to a judg-
ment of the Supreme Court, relating to a provision of the Gold
Control Act. .

3, Abdul Aziz v. State of Maharashtra, A.1.R. 1963 S:C. 1470; (1964) 1 S.C.R. 830
2. Amendment to be drafted.

3. The Imports etc. Act and the

pot 212: in che general ambit

Drugs ete. Act
of this Report. But this point is discussed ag bane be hhportance.


67

Section 88 of the Gold Control Actwaschallenged! in that
case. Section 88 read thus (at that’ time):

“(1) A dealer or refiner who knows or has reason to
believe that any provision of this Act or any rule or order
made thereunder has been or is being contravened, by any
person employed by him in the course of such employment,
shall be deemed to have abetted an offence against this
Act.

(2) Whoever abets, or is deemed. under sub-section
(1) to have abetted, an offence against this Act, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years and shall also be liable to fine.”

8.16. The Supreme Court observed :— o.

“This section extends the scope of the vicarious liability
of the dealer and makes him responsiblé for the contraven-
tion of any provision of the Act or rule or order by any
person employed by him inthe course of such employment.
The rational basis in faw for the imposition of vicarious
liabitity is that the person made responsible may prevent
commission of the crime and may help to bring the actual
Ofender to book. | हर one sense ( te dealer is punished for

sins commit y his employ here tt may perhaps be

Said if the dealer had been more d¥ert to see that the law

was observed the sin might not ‘have been committed.

But the section goes further and makes the dealer liabte for

any past contravantion perpetrated by the employces.

It is evident that the dealer ¢annot reasonably be made

liable for any past misconduct of his employee in the course

of’ the empo! iy ment and whom ' 12 reasonably be ex-
pected to influence or control. nfaxim qui facit per

alium facit per se (he who acts’ th nother acts vt h

himself) is not generally applia in criminal law,But

in section 88 it has been extended. beyond reaSonable
limits. We are, therefore, of opinion that section 88 imposes

‘an unreasonable restriction on the fandamental right of

the petitioners and is inconstitutional.””

,

8.17. In our opinion, the provision. whieh we are proposing”
is distinguishable, inasmuch as the Chairman or Managing
Director is not to be responsible for the past misconduct of
any other person.

8.18. Accordingly, we recommend that in the section relating |
to. liability of individual officers of corporation in the Foreign!) in the Foreign yy]

1, Harak Chand y. Union of India, A.1.R. 4970 8.C. 1453, 1466, pata. 21 (Ramaswami,
3).


63.

Exchange. Act and in the Dtugs - Act!,..two Explanations?
should be inserted, as follows:— -

Explanations to be inserted ia the Foreign Exchange Act
and the Drugs Cosmetics Act, 1946 in the section relating to
liability of officers of corporation.

“Explanation 2.—Where a person, being the Chairman
or Managing Director of a company has, on behaif of the
company, signed an application-for licence? under this
Act, any contravention of the conditions of that licence

* shall, so long as such person holds an office in the company.
be conclusively presumed to have been committed with his.
consent or connivance.

Explanation 3.—Where an application for licence under
this Act is signed by an officer of a company other than
the Chairman or Managing Director, it shall, for the purposes
of this section, be deemed to have been signed also by the
Chairman and the Managing Director of the Company.”

8.19. There is one point in. connection with the Directors of
Companies, on which a provision is required to be inserted.
Punishment of Directors under the usual provision making them
individually liable results in theit imprisonment or fine under
that provision. But, in addition, 10 should be permissible for
the Court to ordec that the person convicted shall be disqualified
from holding office as Director of the company, for a specified
period,

Asi tion to that effect was mad a during our oral discus-
sions, ant W we accept the suggestion. point was made with
teference to the Foreign Exchan; if Act and:the Imports and
Exports Control Act, but we think that the amendment could
usefully extend to all the major Acts with which this Repor ort is
concerned, besides the Imports and Exports Control

8.20. The Companies Act has a variaty of provisions dealing
with the disqualification imposed ened ts * on fom holdin, ng office
as a Director, on his being convieted by court of an offence*.
Further, under an amendment inserted in 1963, the Central
Government has power to make a reference to the High Court
of cases against managerial personnel im certain circumstances:
and one of the circumstances in which this power can be exer-
cised is the fact that the business of the company is conducted

1. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.

2. In the Imports Act, similar Explanations will, as recommended in para. 8.13, be
inserted while adding the new clause under para. 8.13

3. In the case of the Foreign Exchange Act, the word “permission” would be appro”
priate instead of “licence”.

4, Sections 203(1)(a), 267(c), 274(1)(d) & 0), 2836)(0), 33640) and 385(1Xc) of the
Companies Act, 1956.


69

and managed for a “fraudulent or unlawful purpose or in a manner
prejudicial to public interest”!. It should be noted that the pro-
visions as to disqualification fait broadly in three categories:
first, conviction of an offence in connection with the promotion,
formation or management of the company?; secondly, conviction
of an offence involving moral turpitude?; and thirdly, carrying on
the business of the company for an unlawful purpose‘.

8.21. It appears to us that for the present purpose, the most
appropriate provision is the one’ under which, where a person
is convicted of any offence in connection with the promotion,
formation or management of a co! 19, ‘the court’ may make
an order that that person shall not, without the leave of the court,
be a director or in any way, whether directly or indirectly, be
concerned or take part in the promotion, corm fion or manage-
ment ef a company, for such period not ling five years as
may be specified in the order. By definition, the expression ‘the
court’ includes the convicting court, as well as any court having
jurisdiction to wind up the company as respects which the offence
was committed. So far as the leave referred to in the section
is concerned, it is provided’ that the expression ‘court’ means any
court having jurisdiction to wind up the company as respects
which leave is sought. There are separate provisions* as to the
vacation of office held by the convicted person. In order that
all these detailed provisions could be availed of without repeating
them, it would be convenient if the case of a person convicted of
an offence under the various enactments with which this report
is concerned, is included in the main provision'® in the Companies
Act (which at present relates to conviction of an offence in con-
nection with the promotion, formation or management of a
company).

8.22. We, therefore, recommend that section 203(1)(a) of the
Companits Act shouid be amended by inserting, at the end of
clause (a) the following:—

“or of any offence under the following Acts punish-
able with imprisonment for more than three years,
namely.—

{The 8 major Acts and the Imports and Exports
Controt Act could be mentioned here.)”

1, Sectign 388B(1(d), Companies Act.
2. Section 203{1)(a), Companies Act.
3, Section 267(c), Companies Act.
4, Section 388B(1)(d), Companies Act.
5. Section 203(1 Ka), Companies Act.
6, Section 203(2), Companies Act.
7. Section 203{2)(b), Companies Act.
8. Section 274(1b) and sections 283(1)(j), Companies Act.
9 The Imports Act has also to be added.
10. Sections 203(1 a), Companies Act.


Tatroduc-
tory.

Judicial
attitudes.

CHAPTER 9

DEStRABILITY OF AMENDMENTS AS TO JURISDICTION, PROCEDURE
AND LimITATION

9.1. A study of the relevant material concerning the prosecu-
tion of persons for the economic offences in question, including
statistics of convictions and the judgments of the Courts, led us
to the tentative belief, even’ during our earliest deliberations.
that these offences could not be dealt with adequately except by
special courts constituted more of less exclusively for trying them.
A Judge entrusted with the हाथों जी offences generally, we felt.»
finds it difficult to see these offeriges in the proper perspective of
their impact on the nation’s life. Probably, while trying tradi-
tional offences against the person or against property, in the
discharge of his duties, when he cones to try an economic offence
which does not, after all, resuit in Narm to any specific individual
or his property, it is easy for hinl'to Idpse into a feeling that he
is not confronted with any’ serious offence or with one that
Tepresents a serious danger to the community.

9.2. That this has been $0, is amply ss demonstrated by the
way in which an otherwise*! ble leniency has often
been shown in sentencing pérsors*costvicted for these offences.
Even where the jaw has prééctibéd the minimum sentences for
imprisonment, to be waived’ only in exceptional circumstances
in the distretion of the Court, the accused have been let off on

. such grounds! e.g., that the accused ‘appears to be’ of young age,

the accused is only a carrier, this is only his first offence, the
accused is ah old man, the accused has iready been fined heavily
in the Departmental proceedings,‘the accused has made a con-
fession of his guilt, the accused has incurred considerable
expenditure in defending himself, the accused is a family-man.
and so on. It is hardly necessary to-@dd that these considera-
tions do not constitute judicially valid. grounds for not awarding

-the minimum sentence prescribed by law.

Tn the matter of conviction also, there has often been an unduly
excessive indulgence in favour of the accused. In one case where
the accused, notorious for hig record of economic offences, had
concealed and withheld from the Resezve Bank of India infor-
mation regarding his ownership of. in foreign companies
and thus committed the offence of.‘ okie such foreign shares
without the knowledge of the Reserve Bank, the Court treated
the offence as merely a technical and let him off with a fine
of Rs. 10,000, which, of course, for him ‘was as good as acquittal.

1. See Chapter 7, supra.

70


n

9.3. The appointment of special courts fox the trial of these
offences will not only enable the judges-who try these offences
to develop a sense of perspective and expestise but will also have
several additional advantages. The very apgointment of such
courts will highlight the social importance of such prosecutipus.
It will also enable the judiciary to develpp.a new perception and
a new and appropriate attitude of concern fer such offences.
And, above all. if properly armed with an expeditious procedure.
these special courts will be able to create the suitable social cli-
mate in which the reprehensible antisocial character of these off-
ences will be ae adequately brought home to both the general
public and fhe offenders themselves.

9.4. During our discussions with .members:of the public, the
Bar, and government officials, there was almost unanimous sup-
port for the general proposition that the economic offences in
question should be tried by special courts empowered to follow
a speciat speedy procedure. °

9.5. We examined various patterns for the establishment of
these special courts. One pattern is provided by special tri-
bunals which have been constituted from time to time for the
trial of terrorist crimes or other offences disturbing the security
of the country, like the one established under the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1908. Another is provided by the special
tribunals contemplated by the Defence of India Act. The
so-calied “section 30 Magistrates” {to be replaced by the Chief
Judicial Magistrates and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates
under the recent Cr. P.C. Bill’, afford yet another pattern of
courts specially empowered to try certain class or classes of
offences?. But neither of these patterns appeared to us to be
satisfactory for the present purpose.

9.6. We view the economic offences under consideration as
constituting a serious new challenge to the economic integrity
and well-being of society. We share the view of all those who
had to deal with these offences, that the existing legal weapons
as such are not adequate to protect society from those engaging
in their commission. We feel that new instruments and pro-

- cedure must inevitably be devised.

9.7. The new instrument which we propose is a special court
which wilt have exclusive jurisdiction to try these offences. In
order to be effective, the special court must not take up any
other work, and must develop perception and expertise in the
trial of these offences only. In order to be effective, its judgments
should be subject to not more than one appeal only, to the High
Court, both on questions of fact and on questions of law. The
court must have power not only to convict and punish an accused

Special
Coutts
Advantages
of.

Various
patterns
of special
courts
considered.

Economic
offences _
constituting
serious
threats.

New
Tnstrument
nevessary.

1. See—(a) the 41st Report of the Law Conmmissien.
(०) The Cr.P.C. Bill, 1970, Commission.

2, As to the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, see para. 9.8, infra.


Variety of
Provisions
needed.

Right of
accused

not
affected.

rR

person of the offence specificalty but also for an offence
uader an-Act dealing with ‘similar for which he has not
been specifically charged, provided that the rules of natural jus-
tice have been duly observed, and he isafforded a fair opportunity
to defend himself in respect of such charge. It should have power
to impose any punishments prescribed by law for the offences
of which the accused before it is found guilty.

9.7A. We suggest that these courts should be manned by
senior and experienced Judicial Officers of the rank of the Sessions
Judge. And, above all, it must follow a speci मु and speedy
procedure for the trial of these offences. ThisSprocedute, of
course, must satisfy the requirements of a fair and impartial trial.
But, subject (० this, it should be speaially devised to cut down
delays and various ingenious forensic stratagems to escape the
clutches of law and delay, if not frustrate, the administration of
justice. Thus, this procedure should avoid the cumbersome and
needlessly repetitive process of commital, and should permit
the special court to take cognizance of offences without commital.
Tn other words, the special court should follow substantially the
procedure for the trial of warrant cases. The procedure should
permit the transfer of cases from one special court to another,
and should provide that the special court to which a case is
transferred shall not be bound to resummon or re-hear witnesses
unless it is satisfied that such a course is necessary in the interests
of justice. It should have power to refuse to summon witnesses.
Provision should be made that it will not be bound to adjourn
a trial for any reason unless such adjournment is necessary in the
interests of justice. The special court should not be required to
adjourn proceedings for the purpose of securing the attendance
of a lega} practitioner if it is of the opinion that such adjourn-
ment would cause unreasonable delay. It should have powers
to deal with refractory accused, and ta proceed with the trial in
the absence of an accused who, by his voluntary act, renders him-
self incapable of appearing before the court or resists his produc-
tion before it or behaves before it in a persistently disorderly
manner. It should have power to refuse to’ summon any witness
if it is satisfied that the evidence of such witness will not be
materi

9.7B. The courts trying such offences should have power
to direct that proceedings be started against another person not
charged before it, if it is satisfied! that he is prima facie guilty of
any offence punishable under the act or acts in question, and
on such an order being passed, the person concerned will be tried
accordingly.

9.8. The above provisions, calculated to make enforcement of
law and justice more effective and speedy are, it will be noticed,
carefully drawn to steer clear of right of the accused to a
fair trial based upon a full opportunity of making his defence with
the help of a lawyer. This right is not only guaranteed to him in

“TL. This poiat is developed in Chapter 11, infra.


B

artiqle 22 of the Constitution, but is one that qught to be respoct-
ed in any civilised system of admiaistration of justice. . In fact,
the procedure outlined above is not novel, nor is it being suggested
for the first time. after the -commencement of the Constitution.
Many of its features are to be found in the Criminal Law Amend-
ment Act passed by Parliament for the trial of offences relating to
bribery and corruption!.

Again, a procedure with all these features had been adopted
by the various States for the speedy trial of certain offences in
certain cases, presumably because the State Governments felt
that there was an abnormal growth of incidence of certain offences
and failure to try them speedily and to punish them effectively
would shake the faith of the general public int the administration
of justice itself. It is true that the West Benga! Special Courts
Act, 1950, which laid down such a procedure, was struck down as
unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in Anwar Ali’s case?.
But, then, the ground on which the Court struck down the West
Bengal legislation was not that the procedure was unfair or other-
wise reprehensible, but on the ground that the impugned Act
authorised the State Government to pick and choose individuals
arbitrarily for trial by the special procedure. In later cases3
where no such arbitrary picking and choosing was involved, the
Supreme Court upheld such procedure. In fact, in Kedar Nath’s
case‘, the Supreme Court even permitted picking and choosing of
individuals and thus considerably watered down the authority
of the decision in Anwar Ali’s case, if not altogether destroyed it.

9.9. We, therefore, propose that Parliament should enact
a comprehensive law authorising the setting up of special courts
and laying down a special procedure for the effective and speedy
prosecution of ali the economic offences under reference on the
lines indicated above. The proposed law may conveniently be
drafted by adopting the pattern and the provisions of the West
Bengal. S| pecial Courts Act, 1950, mutatis mutandis, with the dif-
ference that the provisions struck down by the Supreme Court
in Anwar Ali's caseS authorising the picking up of individual
cases may be dropped, and necessary Tnodifea tions may be in-
troduced to carry out the suggestions regarding procedure made
elsewhere in this Report’. This law may be titled the Special
Courts (Economic Offences) Act, and may be left flexible enough
to permit additions to the list of the economic offences to be
tried by the Special Courts which it authorises to be set up.

It should apply to offences under all the major Acts with
which this Act is concerned,—except the Wealth Tax Act and
the Income-tax Act. When the taxation laws are simplified,

Recom-
mendation
Special
special
Courts.

1. The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, .

2, State of West Bengal v. Anwar Alt, A.LR. 1952 S.C. 75; (1952) S.C.R. 284.

3. Kathi Raning Rawat v. State of Saurashtra, A.ILR. 1952 5.0. 123,

4. Kedar Nath Bajoria v. The State of West Bengal, A.1.R. 1953 S.C. 404 to 407.
5. State of West Bengal ९. Anwar 4li, ALR. 1952 S.C. 75; (1952) S.C.R. 284.

6, See particularly remaining paragraphs of this Chapter and Chapter 11, infra.


Procedural
recom-
mendations
common to
various
Acts how
to be
imptemen-
ted.

Conse-
quential
amend~
ment in
provisions
as to
‘summary
trials

and other
Procedural
provisions.
Disclosure
of case by
the
accused.

ro)

they could be brought within the suepe of the new Act creating
Special Courts which we have recommended above.

9.9A. In our discussion of the amendments of a procedural
nature! which we have recommended at various places in this
Report, as amendments common to moré than ons Act, we have
stated that the necessary ions be ‘inserted in the relevant
Acts. But, if a Special is passed, as recommended
by us?, then that act will include those provisions.

9.9B. The recommendation for the trial of these offences by
special Judges appointed under the new Act, will render it necessary
to make consequentia) changes in a few procedural provi-
sions; in the various Acts,.and some of them—e.g., the provisions
as to summary trials—may even become totally obsolete, framed
as they are with reference to trials before Magistrates. It has
not been considered necessary to disouss all these changes in this
Report; but those will have to be carried out.

9.10. One special aspect in which we should like to go beyond
the scheme of the West Bengal Act? in order to secure effective
trial of the offences in question, may now be mentioned.

9.41. Under the existing procedure applicable to crimiaa!
trials. the prosecution is expected to disclose its case in detail
from the very outset,—as is evident from the elaborate legislative
provisions governing the form and content of the charge as con-
tained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, and from the right
conferred by that Code on the acctised to a copy of ali statements
and documents which led to the initiation of the proceedings.
But the accused is entitled to keep totally silent until he enters
on his defence. The statutory provision requiring the court to
question the accused for the purpose of explaining the evidence
against him4 does not operate unti] the examination of the pro-
secution witnesses is over. Whether this position in general
should be disturbed in ordinary criminal trials is not a matter
with which we are now concerned; but it is, in our opinion, neces-
sary to treat social and economic offences on a different footing.
Considerable amount of time, money and energy are usually spent
in the investigation and prosecution of these offences, and itis
but proper that the prosecution should know the essentials of
the case of the accused so that, if necessary, the prosecution can
prepare itself to meet the pleas raised by the accused. Fair trial
pre-supposes that both parties should be aware of the case which
they have to meet. We are not unawage of the balance of ad-
vantage which the State has against the accused.in a criminal
prosecution. Nor do we under-rate the importance of the

4. For a convenient collection, see Susamaty at the end of this Report, Part reh-
ting to Amendments common to more than one Act.

2. Para. 9.9, supra.
3, Para. 9.9, supra.
4. Section 342, Cr.P.C.


BS

constitutionally guaranteed privilege agai Spain, oo detesmination.
But we think that a provision calling epon the ‘qccused to make
a statement of his case after the charge is framed and copies of
the stavéments and documents supplied 10: Ming, would not be
repugnant to either of these two oqnsiderations. There will
be neither compulsion nor pressure cowands BGaciminalion.
disomic dete ta eer i 2६5८0 to make a
disctosure of his defence, at 4 stage eatlier (90 tit contemplated
by section 342, Code of Criminal Proce

9.12. It is of interest to note in this cofthettion that in En-
gland, the accused is now required to raise & plea of alibi at the
very outset},

9.13. The position in Scotland? is of-greaper imterest.

The defence is obliged to give notice He 1063 than two days
before the second diet (that is, the trial ) of any special de-
fence (alibi, self-defence, insanity, asleep when crime committed,
or cthme committed by another pérson dined and designed).
If the accused intends to attack the charaéter af a person whom
he is changed with injuring, say to atcuse of'infmorality a woman
whom he is alleged to have raped, or to accuse a person whom
he is said to have assaulted of quarrelaome dpe ition, he must
likewise give notice of this line pf defence, her, three days
before the trial the defence must provide particulars of witnesses
aad peoductions (other than those on thw: Crown list) on which
the defence intends to rely. Voce,

[The accused in Scotland: is cited to appear at two diets, the
first not less than six days afer service of the indictment, the
second not 1038 than nine days aftet the firs diet. The first diet,

_in any event, in solemn procedure isi abways-in the sheriff court
when the sheriff recoives the plea of the ॥ (or_aocuted).
A ples in bar of tcial should be stated वी ihe sheriff
notes the plea, recording any preliminary pleas, also whether
the accused pleads “‘guilty” or ee ilty”. If he pleads “guilty”
‘there may be resort to special

cae te passing s sen-
tence. The second diet, acco: ding to fity of the alleged
crime, takes Place either in the if yr before the High
Court; and if in the latter, the High tay review the pro-
ceedings of the first diet before sheriff .

9.20. Although what we are recommeriding goes further than
the English and the Scottish provisions, we betievethat is justified
‘on principle, having regard to the natwre of the offences under
inquiry and the magnitude of the danger posed to the national
economy by them.

1, Section 11, Crimina) Justice Act, 1967 (English).
2. 1.8. Smith, Scotland, The Development of itg Laws andConstitution (1962), p. 224.
३. 1.8. Smith Scotland, The Develogmeng, of its Laws and Cnostitution 1962 page 225°
4, Para. 9.18, supra,
5. Para. 9.19, supra.

M1 M of Law/72-6


76

dnsertion of: a provision on

“We, therefore, recommend tht"
the following iines:— vo

fone
0) In every trial fot-en offence under this Act, the court
shall, after the charge is framed

(a) direct the = or feed " Ke : z Fish to the accused
(or, where there are jnore. one, to each of
them separately), a eppy pf the charge and of the docu-

ments upon which the prosecution proposes to rely and
of which copies have not. been already furnished to the
accused, and

(b) for the purpose of ascertaining the case of the
accused, call upon the accused to make a statement
orally or in writing signed by hit, touching upon alt the
facts set out in the charge and ip the documents of which
copies have been furnished ta the accused:

Provided that where the court has dispensed with the
personal attendance of the, accused,.the court may permit him
to present a written statemenf, signed by him through his
pleaders,

(2) No oath shall be'administered to the accused when
he is examined under sub-section @.

(3) The accused shall not reader himself liable to
punishment by refusing to make such statement or by making
a false statement. -

(4) The statement made by the accused or the failure
to make a statment on all-or any of the matters referred to
‘sub-section (1) may be taken inte eonsideration in such trial
and put in evidence for or against him in any other inquiry
into, or trial for any other ¢ffence which such statement
may tend to show he has committed.

(5) Where the court has called pon the accused to make
a statement under this s¢ction, the provisions of section
342 of Code of Criminal Progedure, 1898, shall not apply,
except as regards matters which, in the opinion of the court,
had not been raised and communicated to the accused
previously and in respect of which the accused should be
allowed an opportunity to explain the circumstances appear-
ing against him.

(6) Where the accused has stated his case under this
section, he shall not ordinarily be allowed to go beyond
that case except with the leave of the court.

Review of 9.21. There is one important question now to be dealt with,
Judgment. namely, review. Because of the restriction contained in the
Criminal Procedure Code!, a criminal court cannot in general

1, Section 369, Code of Criminal Procedure.


77

review its judgment, except to correct a clerical error, Contro-
versies as to small details about the interpretation of the provision
containing the above restriction are not retevant for the present

purpose.

The law in England as to the review of criminal convictions
is not different in substance. Broadly, the position is that—

(3) A Court has always the power to alter a sentence
so Jong as the Court is in session!,

That is to say, at assizes, the Judge who has passed a sentence
may, at any subsequent date tilt the assizes are completed by
signing of a document delivered to the gaoler as recording
the sentence of the Court, alter the sentence either by reduce
ing or even increasing it. Similar power can be exercised
at Quarter Sessions.

(b) Once the judgment has been entered on the record,
no Court can alter it?,

9.22, We are of the view that this position requires to be
changed in relation to the offence under the major Acts with
which this Report is concerned. Whether the provision in the
Criminal Procedure Code barring review requires modification
in respect of other offences also, need not be discussed in the
present Report,

9.23. It may be of interest to note that the Supreme Court
has, under article 137 of the constitution and subject to the pro-
visions of any law passed by the Parliament or rules made under
article 1453, power to review “any judgement pronounced or
order made by it”4. In pursuance ‘of this article, the Supreme
Court had made the following 116 :--

“1. The Court may review its judgement or order, but no
application for review will be entertained in a civil proceeding
except on the ground mentioned in Order XLVII, rule |
of the Code, and in a criminal proceeding except on the ground
of an error apparent on the face of the record.”

It is to be noted that the application is competent only
to correct an error apparent on the face of the record. This
would take in only one of the various grounds of review men-
tioned in Order 47, rule | of the Code of Civil Procedure, which
deals generally with review by civil courts.

1. Archbold (1966), para, 633.

2, R. v. Casey, (1923) 23 Cr. App. Rep. 193,

3, See Article 145(1)(€) of the Constitution as to rules.
4, See ALR. 1957 S.C, 742,

5, Order 40, Rule 1, Supreme Court Rules, 1966.


5 of 1908,

Applica-
tion for
review of
judgment.

78

9.24. Order 47, Rule 1, Civil Procedure Code, 1908, is as
follows :—

“I. (1) Any person considering bimself aggrieved —
(3) by a decree or order from which an appeal is
allowed, but from which no. appeal has been preferred,

(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is
allowed, or

(०) by a decision on 3 reference from a Court of
Small Causes,

and who, from the discovery of new and important matters
of evidence which, after exptcisé ot due diligence, was
not within his knowledge vi ५०० mid nt hot be produced by him
at the time when the decree was or order made, or
on account of some mistake or errotapparent on the face of
the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to ob-
tain a review of the decree passed br order made against
him, may apply for a ceview of ivdament to the Court which
passed the decree or made the ordér.

(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order
may apply for a review of judgmopt notwithstanding the
pendency of an appeal. by.some other party except where
the ground of such appeal is commen to the applicant and
the appeilant, or when, being the reepondent, he can present
to the Appellate Court the case on which he applies for the
teview.”” .

9.25. It would also be of interest. to note that in the U.S.A.
a judgment of conviction rendered at the end of a criminal
trial does not necessarily dispose of the case. In addition to
permitting recourse to direct review of convictions for most offen-
ces, all American jurisdictions permit. the defendant to attack his
conviction by what have come to be known 85 “post-conviction”
remedies in some circumstances. Such attack may be by habeas
corpus, coram nobis, oc some §) special procedure created by
statute. In some cases, motions. for new trial on the discovery
of evidence or for correction of sentence, or to vacate judgment,
are available after the time limit for. appeal has expired.

9,26, While the general position as to the scope of review in
criminal cases is outside the ambit of this Report, we are of the
view that in respect of the of fences with which this Report is
concerned, there should be a power. of review, having regatd to
the impact of these offences on the welfare of the nation.

9.27. We recommend that a provision similar to Order 47,
Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure should be introduced to permit
review in respect of judgements in prosecutions under the Acts
with which this Report is concerned. In making this recommen-
dation, we do not wish to make a distinction between review
at the instance of the prosecution and review at the instance of
the accused.


i
The following section is suggested :—-
“(1) Any person considéring fimself aggrieved—

(a) by the judgement or order of a criminal court
in a prosecution under this Act from which an appeal
is allowed, but from which no sppeal has been pre-
ferred, or

(0) by a judgment in such prosecution from which
no appeal is allowed, and who, from the discovery of
new and important matters or evidence which, after the
exercise of due diligence, was not within his knowledge
or could not be produced by aim at the time when the
judgment was passed or order made, or on account of
some mistake or error apparent ७1 the face of the re-
cord, or for any other sufficient’ reason, desires to

* obtain a review of the judgment passed or order
made against him, may apply for @ review of judgement
to the Coust which passed the judgment or made the
order.

(2) A party who is not appeqling from a judgment or
order may apply for a review of + Judgment notwithstanding

the pendency of an appeal by some other party, except where
the ground of such appeal is common to the applicant and
the appellant, or when, being the respondent, he can
present to the Appellate Court the case on which he applies
lor the review.

_) The Court to rick an application is made for
review of judgment shall, giving the parties a _reason-
able opportunity of being heard, pass sch orders as it thinks
fit, and may, pending such heating, ttay execution of the
judgment or order on such tetm as it thinks just.”

{The subsequent procedure will, of course, be regulated by
provisions which will have to be drafted.)

9.28, While we are dealing with the question of procedural Period of
matters, we wish to refer to one point of limitation governing Bmitation
appeals against acquittals. Under the Criminal Procedure againee

ode, an appeal against acquittal can be filed— acquittals,
(1) by the Public Prosecutor at the instance of the State
Government! ;

(2) by the Public Prosecutor at the instance of the
Central Government, if the offence has been investigated
by the Delhi Special Police Estabtishment?;

(3) by the complainant with special leave of the High
Court3, .

1, Section 417(1), Criminal Procedure Code.

2, Section 417(2), Criminal Procedure Code.

3, Section 41703), Criminat Procedure Code.



{The provisions on the subject, contained in section 417,
Criminal Procedure Code, have been incorporated in the Cri-
minal Procedure Code Bill,1 without any modifications material
for the present purpose.)

9.29. While appeal in the first two cases.is as of right, appeal
in the third case is only by special leave. An application for
the grant of such special leave cannot be entertained by the
High Court after the expiry of sixty days from the date of the
order of acquittal.*

9.30. Now, this period of limitation (sixty days), while ade-
quate for private complaints, is, in practice, likely to be inade-
quate for complaints made by public servants in their official
capacity. Before a decision to make an application for leave
can be taken, a number of formalities has to be undergone, such
as, obtaining the administrative sanction of a higher authority,
consultation with other officers, re-examsination of the papers,
and the like. While it is not our intention that any delay in
these steps should be encouraged, we must recognise that realities
of official routine justify some relaxation of the ordinary periods
The problem does not arise where the State Government directs
an appeal—as in case (1) above?—or where the case was investi-
gated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment and the Central
Government directs an appeal—as in case (2) above.4 But there
are cases afising out of complaints filed by public officers, not
investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment, being
cases in which the State Government is not interested, where the
appeai against acquittal can be filed, if at all, under case (3)
above. It is in these cases that the present position causes
practical difficulty. We think that it would be better if the ordi-
nary period (sixty days) is doubled for such cases. Though
we are concerned with offences under specified Central
enactments, we think that the amendment in this respect could
usefully be made to cover all cases in which the complaint has
been made “by a public servant acting or purporting to act
in the discharge of his officiel duties>.”

9.31, Accordingly, we recommend that clause 388(4) of the
Criminal Procedure Code Bill should be revised, so as to read
as follows$ :—

“(4) No application under sub-section (3) for the grant
of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be
entertained by the High Court after the expiry of sixty days
from the date of that order of acquittal, or, if the order of

AY Aw Ne

. Clause 388, Criminal Proeedure Code Bill 1970.

. Section 417(4), Criminal Procedure Code.

. Para, 9.28, supra, .

. Para. 9.28, supra.

Cf. the words of section 200, proviso (aa), Criminal Procedure Code.
j To be carried out in the Criminal Procedure Code.


81
acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon a complaint
made by a public servant acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duties, then after the expiry of one
hundred and twenty days from the date of that order of
acquittal.” 7

9.32. It is needless to add that the period of limitation for
the appeal remains unaffected by the above recommendation.
The relevant provision! is as follows: —

Description of appeal Period Time from
of which period
limitation begins to run

114, Appeal from an order of acquittal
(a) under sub-section (1) or Ninety days The date of

sub-section (2) of sec- the order ap-
tion 417 of the Code of pealed from.
Criminal Procedure,
1898;
(0) under sub-section (3) of Thirty The date of the
section 417 of that Code. days. grant of Spe-
cial leave,

Under the Limitation Act?, the Court has power to con-
done the delay. The provision says—

“5, Any appeal or any application, other than an appli- Extension
cation under any of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code of pres-
of Civil Procedure, 1908, may be admitted after the prescribed Fetiod in
period if the appellant or the appticant satisfies the court certain
that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or cases,
making the application with such period.

Explanation—The fact that the appellant ot the appli-
cant was misled by any order, practice or judgment of the
High court in aszertaining or computing the prescribed
period may be sufficient cause within the meaning of this
section,”

9.33. The class of offences we are dealing with in this Report
are grave in themselves, and the Offenders involved are ordina-
rily influential persons who could, if enlarged on bail, interfere
with the investigation or could escape from the law. Therefore,
suggestions have been made for making these offences non-
bailable, which does not mean refusal of bail in all cases, but
grant of bail only at the discretion of the court.

1, Limitation Act, 1963, Article 114,
1, Section 5, Limitation Act, 1963.


Provision
as to bailin
major
Acts,

82

.9.34. Having due regard to the likelihood of the grant of
hajl defeating or delaying investi gat ‘ion or enabling the accused
to obliterate evidence or escape from the country, the proposal
to make these offences non-Bailablé appeared to us ta ‘be reason-
able. As we are recommending, in this Report, an increase
in the maximum punishment for the serious offences, they will
become non-bailable, and that will be a welcome change. We
are also recommending an amendinent in the Essential Commodi-
ties Act! to remove the present provision to the effect that the
offences under that Act shall be bailable.

9.35. We would also like to point out that the offenders
involved in socio-economic crime have a mobility which -beats
the law unless the machinery of investigation and the courts
are vigilant. It is. therefore, cesirable that the courts, when
granting bail to this class of offenders, should consider the im-
position of a condition that the accused shall not leave the country
and that his passport shall be impounded.? We are separately
recommending an amendment the effect of which will be that a
power will be vested in the passport authorities at the request
of higher officers to withhold the issuance of or impound the
existing passport of the accused.3 Provisions scmewhat on
these Jines now exist in sections 6, 10 and 12. of the Passports
Act, but those sections are restricted in their scope, and would
not cover the precise situations to which we have adverted.

9.36. For ready reference, we give below the provisions as
to bail as found in the major Acts:—

६1) Central Exeises Act, 1944.—Section 20 deals with the
procedure to be followed by the officer-in-charge of police
station. The officer-in-charge of a police station to whom
any person is forwarded under section 19 shall either admit
him to bai} to appear before the magistrate having jurisdic-
tion, or in default of bail forward him in custody to such
magistrate.

(2) Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947,—Under
section 19B(3), where any officer of Enforcerrent has arres-
ted any person under sub-section (1), he shall, tor the purpose
of releasing such rerson on bail or otherwise, have the same
powers, and be subject to the same provisions 2s the officer-
in-charge of a police station has, and is subject to, under the
Criminal Procedure Code.

_, @) Essential Commodities Act, 1955. —Section 10A pro-
vides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code

1, See para 15.52, infra.

2. A power to impose conditions while granting bail has been recommended in the
Law Coramission’s Report on sections 497-498, Cr.P.C. and also in its 4lst Report on the

3. Sec para 15.35, infra.


33

of Criminal Procedure, 1898. every offence punishable under
this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.!

(4), (5) and (6}—-The Income-tax Act, the Wealth Tax
Act, 1957 and the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
1954.—-These do not contain any specific provisions regarding
bail.

@)_ Customs Act, 1962.—Under section 104(3), where
any officer of customs has arrested any person under sub-
section (1), he shall, for the purpose of releasing such per-
son on bail or otherwise, have the same powers and the
subject to the same provisions as the officer-in-charge of
a police station has and is subject to under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898.

(8) Gold Control Act, 1968.—Under section 68(2) of
the Act, any officer who has arrested any person under
this section shall, for the purpose of releasing such person
on bail or otherwise, have the same powers and be subject
to the same provisions as the officer-in-charge of a police
station has, and is subject to, under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.

9.36A. We consider it necessary that in trials for these
offences, both the prosecution and the accused should be heard
as to the sentence to be passed. The Criminal Procedure Code
Bill? provides for hearing the accused; but the provision in
the present case should be as above.

9.37. The question of having a period of limitation for pro-
secutions for the offences in question has been raised by some
‘commercial bodies. The reasons in favour of and against
prescribing limitation for criminal prosecutions, are well known.
‘The Law Commission had also occasion} to consider the ques-
tion of limitation with reference to offences under the Penal
‘Code.

9.38. As one author has pointed out4, “at one time or an-
other, approximately 91 percent of the adult population have
committed crimes punishable with imprisonment. If they
have escaped being convicted, it is due partly to their good luck
and partly to other circumstances’. Tf, after a specified period,
they are immune from prosecution, they would have peace in
mind.

Parties to
be heard 48
to sentence.

Limitation
for, prose-
cutions,

infra.
2. CrP.C, Bill, 1970, ctauses 241(2) and 256(2).

3. Sec 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), page 341 et seq., Chapter 24.

4, James Brands ‘Criminal Law inthe Seventies—Some Suggestions”
‘New York State Bar Journal.

1. As to amendment of section 10A, Essential Commodities Act, see Chapter 15,

Gune 1970),


Tender of

84

The main reasons for the existence of law of prescription
for civil actions will apply with equal force for criminal proceed-

ings also.

The Law of limitation is essentially a law of peace and re-
pose. The person who has committed a crime and is not pro-

secuted for the crime for severa! years, must have mental peace

and repose and should not be under continuous apprehension

that at any time he may be criminally prosecuted. After some

time, evidence in support of defence may also be lost.

9,39. At present, none of the major Acts with which this
Report is concerned, contains a provision for limitation for

prosecutions. Provisions as in section 40(2) of the Central

Excise Act apply to ‘suits challenging action under the Act,
and not to prosecutions. The matters, however, is of some
difficulty, and could be considered better after a decision is
taken about amendment of the Penal Codet in this respect,

and after the working of the amended provisions is observed.

pardon procedural nature arise, which are discussed separately.?

and

probation.

I. See 42nd Report Indian Penal Code, page 341, et seq., Chapter 24.
2, (@) Probation, Chapter 10.

(8) Pardon, Chapter 13. .

(© Sanction or complaint, Chapter 11.

9.40. Besides the above points, a few other questions of a


CHAPTER 10

PROBATION

10.1. In this chapter we deal with some specific points
affecting punishment and liability.

10.2. There is a suggestion! that amendments should be
introduced either in each of the Acts—the Income-tax Act,
Wealth Tax Act, Gold Control Act, Customs Act, Excise Act—
of in the Probation of Offenders Act itself, to bar the application
of the Probation Act to the offenders under the above Acts.
‘A concession (it is stated) may be made only in regard to offen-
ders under 18 years of age, who may be allowed to be released
on probation on bond for three years, subject to the other
conditions in sections 4 and 6 of the Probation of Offenders
Act. Somewhat similar suggestion has been made regarding
the Foreign Exchange Act?

10.3. After carefui consideration we are satisfied that the
suggestion should be accepted and in our view the suggested
amendment is desirable in respect of offences under ail the Acts
with which this Report is concerned.

We appreciate that the suggested amendment would be in
apparent conflict with current trends in sentencing. But ulti-
mately, the justification of all sentencing is the protection of
society. There are occasions when an offender is so anti-social
that his immediate and sometimes prolonged confinement is
the best assurance of society’s protection. The consideration
of rehabilitation has to give way, because of the paramount
need fot the protection of society. We are, therefore, recom-
mending suitable amendment in all the Acts, to exclude probation
in the above cases.

“Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable
with imprisonment by a child under fifteen years of age, whe-
ther or not the offence is committed in consequence of the
abetment, shall be punished with imprisonment of any descrip-
tion provided for that offence for a term which may extend
to twice the longest term of imprisonment provided for that
offence and shall also be liable to fine.” |

We agree with the above recommendation, which is of
particular value in the context of economic offences,

Introduc-

tory.

1, Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.
2, Letter dated 28-12-1971.

85


86

10.4, Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the follow-
ing section in all the Acts :—

Amendment regarding Probation Act.
Section to be inserted’in all the Acts.

Section 6 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall,
in relation to offences under this Act, be read as if for the words
“twenty-one years of age”, the words “eighteen years of age”
were substituted.

10.5. In the Law Commission’s Report on the Indian लाश
Code}, there is a recommendation for the insertion of a new
section in the Code for dealing with abetment of offences by
phildren. The relevant section (as recommended) is as fol-
lows :--

wT, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code), page 123, paragraphs 5.23 and 5.24.


CHAPTER 11

REQUIREMENT AS TO SANCTION OR COMPLAINT

11.1. A study of the provisions! restricting the power of
the Court to take cognisance (or restricting the institution of
& prosecution) in the major Acts with which this Report is
concerned, shows that these provisions fall into the following
broad classes:—

(a) Provisions requiring the sanction of a specified
authority.

(0) Provisions requiring the complaint of (or a com-
plaint filed with the consent of) the specified authority?.

{c) Provisions requiring the “report” of a specified
authority4.

(0) Provisions requiring that the Court shall not take
cognizance or that a prosecution shall not be instituted
exeept with the consent of specified authority (or substanti-
ally to the same effect),

[Within each category, the provisions differ in matters of
detail; but we are, for the present, concerned with the broad
categories].

11.2. Now, the question whether a particular provision falls
in one or other of the above categories possesses some practical
importance. In cases under category (a), the procedure for
trial, once a valid sanction has been obtained, will depend on
the manner in which cognizance is taker by the court,—i.e.,
whether the cognizance was taken on a Police Report or other-
wise. The fact that a sanction is required before a prosecu-
tion can be instituted is of no consequence in this regard. On

Require-
ment as to
sanction,
complaint
or other
provisions.

Signifi-
cance of
difference
as to
various
require-
ment

for taking
cognizance.

+ Sec Chart—Para. 11.5, infra.

. (a) Section 12, Central Excise Act, read with the Customs Act.
(6) Section 23(3), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
(० Section 280(2), Income-tax Act.
(4) Section 137, Customs Act,

3. (०) Section 23(3)(a)(b), Foreign, Exchange Regulation Act.

(6) Section 97(1), Gold Control Act.

4, Section 11, Essential Commodities Act.

5. (@) Section 20, Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.

(6) Section 36(3), Wealth Tax Act,

(c) Section 2791), Income-tax Act.

87

te


88

the other hand, in cases in category (b), since a complaint is
required, the court obviously cannot take cognizance on a
police report, and the procedure at the trial will necessarily
be the more cumbersome one prescribed for cases instituted

otherwise than on a police report.

Position 11.3. What is stated above regarding cases in category (a)
where applies to category (c) also. except that, where the officer
report of who made the required ‘report’ is himself ॥ police officer, the
required. position could be different. When the report is of a police
officer made after investigation, and the court takes cognizance
thereon, then the procedure as for cases instituted on police

report can be followed!,

Position 11.4. In cases under category (d), the requirement is that
prosecu- the prosecution should be “at the instance of the specified autho-
tion tity”. This is usually complied with by filling a complaint made
required with the approval of the specified authority?. Whether the
fore. wording rules out @ report filed with sanction has not been de-
instances cided,

spatified As to the procedure that will govern the trial in cases under

authority,  (d), the matter will depend on the manner of taking cognizance.
But it should be noted that the manner of taking cognizance
is subject to one important limitation—(1) In the case of a non-
cognizable offence, the police cannot (without Magisterial or-
ders) investigate, and cannot therefore give a report to the co-
urt. Hence cognizance by the court would have to be on a
complaint. (2) In the case of a cognizable offence, cognizance

can be on a complaint as well as on a police report?.

Chart 11.5. The following chart may be of use in this connect-

showing
previous
sequire-
ment as to हि हे
sanction or in the major . Acts.
complaint.

ion :-—

Provision as to sanction or complaint and allied provisions

Act Section Sanction or

plaint required.

com-

1, Central Excises No specific pro- See second column.

and Salt Act, vision; but sect-

1944. ion 12 empowers
the Central Go-
vernment to
apply the Cus-
toms Act.

1, (9) State v. Rugha, ALR. 1970 Punj. 502, 505;
(89) Satyadeo v. State, ALR. 1970 Pat. 161;
(० State र. Munafka, A.L.R. 1968 Bom. 311.
2. See Balia v. Rangachari, ALR. 1969 S.C. 700, 701.

3. A Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence of his own, if vested with that

power, But this is a rare case, and can be left out for the present purpose.


89

Sanction or com-
plaint required.

Act Section
2. Foreign Ex 23 (3)
change Regu-
lation Act, 1947.
3, Prevention of 20
Food Adulter-
ation Act, 1954.
4. Essential Com- 1
moditiés Act,
1955.
5, Wealth Tax 36 (3)
Act, 1957.

(@ Complaint in writ-
ing of Director of
Enforcement is
required for of-
fences under section
23 (I).

Gi) Complaint in writ-
ing of Director or
authorised person
required for offence
under section 23
(14) or section
23F,

(iii) Previous sanction
required for
offence under
section 19-12).

Consent _of Central or
State Government or
a local authority
or 2 person, autho~
tised in this behalf
by general or special
order, required.
[४० prosecution
shall be instituted
except by or with
written consent of
the ....]

Report in writing
of a public servant
required, before a
Court can take
cognizance,

Commissioner, Wea-
ith Tax for an
offence under sec-
tion 36 (1, 36(2)
or 36(2A). [A
person shall not
be proceeded
against for an
offence . . except
at the instance of
the Commissioner].



Section

Act

90

Sanction or com-
plaint required.

6, Income-tax Act,
1963.

6. Income-tax Act,
1961 (contd.}.

7. Customs हल,
1962.

8. Gold Control
Act, 1968,

279 0)

280 (2)

137

9761)

Commissioner of
Income-tax for
offences under

sections 275A, 276
A, 276B, 277 or
278. [A person
shall not be pro-
ceeded against
for an offence
(under the  speci-
fied sections) ex-
cept at the instance
of the Commis-
sioner).

Previous sanction
of Central Go-
vernment required
for an offence un-
der section 280
(1. +

(a) Previous sanction
of Collector of
Customs required
for offences under
sections 132 to
135.

(0) Previous sanction of
customs Collector of
or Central Govern-
ment required for
offence under sec-
tion 136.

{i) Complaint in
writing of compe-
tent Gold Control
Officer required
generally.

(6) Complaint in
writing made with
previous sanction
of Central Govern-
ment required,
if the offence was
committed by a
Gold Control
Officer.



9

11.6. Provisions relating to sanction sometimes create
problems of procedure. This will be discussed under the re-
tevant Act! wherever the point is of importance.

11.7. It may not be out of place to refer to the English pra-
ctice. The follwoing is from a note published sometime ago
in the Law Times?:

“The Attorney-General (Sir Hartley Shawcross}, went
on to state in deciding whether or not to prosecute, the
ultimate question was : Would a prosecution be in the public
interest including in that phrase, of course. in the interests
of justice? Usually it was merely a question of examining
the evidence. since it was not in the public interest to put a
man on wial whatever the suspicions when the evidence was
insufficient to justify his conviction, or even to call upon
him for an explanation. In some cases wider considerations
were insolved. For example it was not always in the pub-
lic interest to go through the whole process of the criminal
Jaw if only a nominal penalty was likely to be imposed.
Sometimes the considerations were wider still. A prosecution
might involve a question of public policy, or national, or
sometimes international, concern. In such cases the At-
torney-General had not to make up his mind as a Party poli-
tician; he must in a quasi-judicial way consider the effect
of prosecution upon the administration of law and of g£0-
ernment in the abstract rather than in any party sense. [n
considering these matters he had the advice of the Director of
Public Prosecutions and very often of Treasury counsel! as well.
He had to acquaint himself with all the relevant facts includ-
आह the effect which a prosecution. if successful. would have
upon public morale and order, and with any other con-
siderations affecting public policy. The one consideration
which was altogether excluded was the repercussion of a
given decision upon the Attroney-General’s, or his party’s
or the Government's political fortunes. That was 2 con-
ideration which never entered into account. Moreover.
if the Attorney-General, the Director of Public Prosecutions.
and the police all neglected their duties and did not pros-
fecute where manifestly a prosecution should take place.
there was a safeguard in that any private citizen could set
the criminal law in motion.”*

11,8 The question which person should have the official
responsibility for invoking the criminal process. and what de-
gree of discretion should be given to him, and whether he should
have the exclusive right to initiate a Prosecution, is answered
in different ways in different countries. In India. the general
rule is that any person can make a complaint to the competent

1. E.g. see. as to Customs Act, paragraphs 15.84 (0 15.88, infra.
2. Note in(195t). 211 Law Times 71-72.
1M of Law72—7

Problems
of proce-
dure
crealed

by provi-
sions as to
sanction.
English
practice
as ६0
sanction of
prosecu-
tions

Dispensing
with
sanction
for prose-
cution,


1. Section 4(1)(h) and section 190, Criminal Procedure Code.
2. Chapter 15, sections 195 to 1998, Criminal Procedure Code.
3, Paragraphs 11.1 10 1.7, supra,

4. Section 537, Criminal Procedure Code.

92

court! in respect of an offence. This general rule is subject
10 exceptions in specified cases. For offences under the gen-
eral criminal law, (i.e., the Indian Penal Code). the exceptions
are mostly to be found in the Criminal Procedure Code?. For
offences under special laws, the exceptions are to be found in
the special laws3.

11,9. In England, private prosecutions are, as a cule, pzr-
missible. though recent trend is in the direction of an emphasis
on public prosecutions, On the continent, public prosecution
is the rule. and is indeed, in most cases, the only permissible
mode.

11.10. In theory, thus the Indian system, so far as the gen-
eral type of offences is concerned, is similar to the English
pattern. In so far as the specially excluded offences 36२ con-
cerned, it is nearer to the Continental pattern.

11.11. We are not, at the moment, concerned with the posi-
tion in general in this respect, either for offences under the
Penal Code or for offences under the mass of special laws. Even
as regards offences under the economic laws (with which this
Report is concerned), the provisions requiring sanction of a
specified authority are not intended to be disturbed. But the
question which has caused us some anxiety is, should the re-
quirement of sanction (whenever it exists) be an imperative,
indispensable one, non-compliance with which should invalidaie
the trial?

11.12. The present position is that the absence of the re-
quired sanction (or the complaint of the specified person er fail-
ure to comply with a similar requirement), vitiates the trial
whether or not a failure of justice has been occasioned thereby.
We think that such defect should be treated on the same level
as any other irregularily in the trial. Under the general pro-
vision in the Criminal Procedure Code‘, the finding, order or
sentence of a court of competent jurisdiction is not to be invalid
merely on the ground of an error, omission or irregularity
in the complaint, summons. charge etc. This provision should.
in our view, be made applicable to the absence of a sanction
for prosecution etc. We are aware that the present view is that
the general provision referred to above does not apply to the
absence of a sanction for prosecution etc. required by law, be-
cause the absence of a sanction takes away the very competence



93

of the Court!, We would, however, Tike the position in this
respect to be changed.

11.13. We, therefore, recommend that the following section
should be inserted in all the acts with which this Report is concer-
ned :—

Aew Section to he inserted in all the Acts.

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal] Procedure, 1898, no finding, sentence or order
passed by a Court shall be reversed or altered by a Court
of appeal, confirmation or revision on account of the absence
of, or any error, ommission or irregularity in, the sanction
of consent?, required for the prosecution for the offence
which is the subject matter of the inquiry, trial or other
proceedings under that Code for an offence under this Act,
uniess, in the opinion of that Court, a failure of justice has
in fact been occasioned thereby.

(2) In determining whether the absence of, or any error,
omission or irregularity in, such sanction has occasioned
a failure of justice the Court shall have regard to the fact
whether the objection could and should have been raised
at an carlier stage in the proceedings,

Explanation ;-—Reference in this section to a sanction
or consent required for prosecution includes reference to
any requirement that the prosecution shall be at the in-
stance of a specified authority, or that the complaint shall
be by a specified person or with the saaction of a specified
person or any requirement of a similar nature>,

11.14, We are also of the view that once a Court has taken Power
cognizance, it should have power to direct investigation against 1० direct
a_person who is not the original accused or to implicate him. 104 18
The absence of the requisite sanction as regards that accused impleate.
should not matter. We propose a provision which, of course, unother
will be confined to the offences with which this Report is con- petsen
cerned. The subsequent procedure will be governed by section

1. (0 ALR. 1955 5.2. 287, 292; 1955 S.CR. 1177,
(0) ALR, 1964 5.0. 221.
(0) A.LR. 1962 Bom, 263.

2, The words “Sanction * etc. may be suitably changed if the statutory requirement
is differently »orded.

_3. The Explanation will not bz needed in ail Acts, but will be needed in Acts in which
requirements of different types co-exist. See for example, the [ncome-tax Act.



94

351, Criminal Procedure Code. Accordingly, the following
section be inserted in the Acts concerned :—

Section to be inserted in all the Acts.

Power to direct investigation or implicate another person.

11) Where. in the course of an inquiry into or trial of
an offence under this Act, it appears from ‘the evidence that
any person not being the accused has committed any off-
ence for which such person could be tried together with the
accused, the Court may—

(a) proceed against such person for the offence
which he appears to have committed. notwithstanding
the absence of any sanction or consent for prosecution!
or Complaint required in respect of that person: and
the provisions of section 351 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. 1898. shall thereupon apply?: or

(0) direct an investigation into the guilt of such
other person by the competent officer, and thereupon
the officer directed by the Court shall proceed to investi-
gate into the matter. and shall, for the purpose. have
the same powers and follow the same procedure as he
had or followed for the investigation into the guilt of
the accused.

Explanation :—Reference in this section to a sanction
or consent for prosecution or complaint fequired includes
reference to any requirement that the prosecution shall be
at the instance of 2 specified authority. or that the comp-
faint shall be by a specified person of with the sanction of
4 specified person or any requirement of a similar nature.

1.15. With reference to the requirement of the sanction
of the Collector of Customs under section 137. Customs Act.
a Minister of the Union Government — has, during our oral
discussions with him, stated that the present rigi provision
causes difficulty in cases where the investigation is completed
by an officer of a department different from the department
whose officers are authorised to sanction the prosecution.
Tt was suggested that this difficulty should be removed by a
suitable amendment. Having regard to the high quarter
from which the suggestion came to us, we assume that the
Government would, as a matter of policy, be in agreement with
the suggestion. The object behind the suggestion could be
achieved by inserting at the end of section 137(L) of the Customs

1. Where the requirement is in terms of complaint etc.. the wording will be modified

2. Section 351, Criminal Procedure Code corresponds to Criminal Procedure Code
Bill, 1970, Clause 326.

3. The Explanation will not be needed ia all Acts, but will be needed in Acts in which
requir ements of different types co-exist.


95

Act, the words “or of any other officer authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf”, and we recommend accordingly.
After the amendment. the relevant provision will read as
Tollows? :--
“137(1). १३० court shall take cognizance of any offence
under section 132, section 133, section $34 or section 135,
except with the previous sanction of the Collector of Customs
or of any other officer authorised by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf.”


Introduce:
wry.

Use of
presume
tions
und
For
Excha
Act for
cases
under the
Customs
Act and
verse.

the

vi

Seizure
froma
person
ether tan
the
accused,

received
from a
place out-
side Indie

Insertion
of pre-
sumption
in Imports
and
Exports
“tried

1947.

CHAPTER 12

PRESUMPTION AND EVIDENCE

12.1, We have dealt with a few matters pertaining to evidence
in other Chapters!. Here. we propose to deal with the scope
of certain presumptions and the changes needed therein.

12.2. Both section 244, Foreign Exchange Act and section
139. Customs Act, enact a presumption as to the genuincness
of documents seized from the custody or control of a person.
But the presumption in respect of a document seized under
one Act cannot be availed of when the prosecution is under the
other Act. Since. in practice, the need for such use often
arises, we think that this gap should be removed. The presump-
lion could be made available to seizure under any other law.

12.3. Both in the Foreign Exchange Act and in the Customs
Act, it is also disirable that the presumption should be appli-
cable also where the documents are seized from a person other
than the accused. We accordingly recommend, an amendment.
lo widen the scope of the relevant sections in both the Acts, ia
this regard.

12.4. We are also of the view that these presumptions
sheuld apply also 10 documents received, from a place outside
India.

12.5. We are also of the view that in the Imports and Exports
(Contra!) Act, 1947, a provision similar to section 139, Customs
Act. as proposed to be revised in this Report should be inserted.

1, See Chapter 7 (Burden of disproving mens reay and Chapter 14 (Statements in ad
ministrative adjudications).

96


CHAPTER 13

TtNDER OF PARDON

13.1. A matier of Procedure relevant to the offences con- Tender af
cerned may be mentioned here, That is the question of tender pardon.
of pardon. -

The following extracts from the Report of the previous
Law Commission (on the Code of Criminal Procedure) would
be of interest! in this connection:-—

“In a recent case? which came up before the Supreme
Court in appeal, a woman who acted as a carrier in a con-
spiracy to smuggle gold into India had, in her statements
made (0 the customs officials investigating the case, admitted
her role as 4 participant in the crime. But instead uf being
included in the array of accused person and sent up for
tial, she was examined as a witness against her former
associates, The question arose whether she was a com-
Petent witness. While holding that she was, the Supreme
Court observed: --

“Tis, however, necessary to say that where section
37 or 338 of the Code applies, it ‘is always Proper to
invoke those sections and follow the Procedure there
laid down. Where these sections do not apply, there the
the procedure of withdrawal of the case against an acco-
mplice. To keep the sword hanging over the head ol
an accomplice and to examine him as a witness is to
cncourtge perjury. Perhaps it will be possible (0
enlarge section 337 to take in certain special laws
dealing with customs, foreign exchange etc. where
wecomplice testimony will always be useful and Wit
nesses will come forward because of the conditional
pardon offered to them,”

“We have given our respectful consideration 10 this
observation of the Supreme Court but it does not seem
practicable to select from among the large number of special
laws creating socio-economic offences those which are
siflicienily grave to be brought within the scope of section
337, The result of such inclusion will be that every case
pertaining to such an offence where tender of Pardon is

1, 4ist Report of the Law Commission (Criminat Procedure
24,17,

mint,

Codes, Vol. 1, pape 194,

Lavi'nat Chovacia ५, The State of Maharashtra, A.1.R. 196९ S.C. 938, 945; (1965)
TN (२, 124. 635.

97


98

made. will have to be tried by the Court of Session which
may not be feasible.”

13.2. We have examined this question carefully and have na-
turally given due weight to the views expressed by our predecessor
Commission. However we have, with respect, come to the
conclusion that in respect of the offences with which we are
concerned an amendment in this respect is called for. As a
matter of interest, we may note that such a provision has. so
far been made only in the Income-tax Act, and there too the
pardon is granted by the Government.

The relevant section is quoted below! :—

“291. (1) The Central Government if, it is of opinion
(the reasons for such opinion being recorded in writing)
that with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person
appearing to have been directly or indirectly converned in
or privy to the concealment of income or to the evasion
of payment of tax on income it is necessary or expedient
so to do. tender to such person immunity from prosecu-
tion for any offence under this Act or under the Indian
Penal Code or under any other Central Act fer the time
being in force and also from the imposition of any penalty
under this Act on condition of his making a full and true
disclosure of the whole circumstances relating to the con-
cealment of income or evasion of payment of tax on income.

(2) A tender of immunity made to, and accepted by.
the person concerned, shall, to the extent to which the
immunity extends, render him immune from prosecution
for any offence in respect of which the tender was made or
from the imposition of any penalty under this Act.

(3) If it appears to the Central Government that any
person to whom immunity has been tendered under this
section has not complied with the condition on which the
tender was made or is wilfully concealing anything or is
giving false evidence, the Central Government may record
a finding to that effect, and thereupon the immunity shall
be deemed to have been withdrawn, and any such person
may be tried for the offence in respect of which the tender
of immunity was made or for any other offence of which
he appears to have been guilty in connection with the same
matter and shall also become able to the imposition of any
penalty under this Act to which the would otherwise have
been 19016."

13.3. If our suggestion regarding trial by Special Judges
is accepted?. it will not be necessary to have an express provi-
sion as the Criminal Law Amendment Act? has an express
provision in this regard.

1. Section 291, 1
2. See para. 9.11, supra.
3. Section 8(2), Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952.


CHAPTER 14

ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATIONS.

14.1, Many of the Acts dealing with economic offences
empower the enforcement officers to summon and examine
witnesses. The statements made by these witnesses before
such officers are not, however, admissible in evidence in the
subsequent criminal prosecutions. We of the view that
these statements, if recorded by officers of sufficiently
high status, to be determined by the Government should be
admissible in such prosecutions, since they are very often the
earliest officially recorded version of the facts.

14.2. Certain conditions and safeguards will. no doubt,
be necessary. Reference in this connection may be made to
the Evidence Act, which has a provision relating to the admis-
sibility of a statement made ina previous judicial proceeding.

The relevant provision in the Evidence Act, is as follows :--

“33. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceed-
ing, or before any person authorised by law to take it. is
relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
Proceeding. or in a later stage of the same judicial pro-
ceeding, the truth of thefacts which it states, when the
witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving
evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or
if his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of
delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case.
the Court considers unreasonable :

Provided—

that the proceeding was between the same parties or
their representatives in interest:

that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the
right and opportunity to cross-examine;

that the questions in issue were substantially the
same in the first as in the second proceeding.

Explanation.~-A criminal trial or inquiry shall be
deemed to be a proceeding between the prosecutor and
the accused within the meaning of this section.”

" के Section 33, Evidence Ac

99

Statements
made in
administra-
tive adjudi-
cations.

Relevancy
of certain
evidence
for proving,
in subse-
quent pro-
ceeding,
the truth
of facts
ibere in
stated,


100

14.3. We think that the safeguards mentioned in the proviso
to section 33 need not appear in the new provision which we
contemplate. We are further of the view that the court should
have a discretion to admit the statement in evidence, if the cir-
cumstances of the case so require, even where the maker of the
Statement is a witness in the proceedings before the Court.

Though such a discretion is not very frequently met with
in Indian statute law, in this case it is necessary for obvious
reasons.

Twenty years ago. Stone stressed? the importance of excluding
similar conduct evidence (even though it is relevant otherwise
than via disposition), where its effect was too prejudicial, in
these words—“where the peg is so small and the linen so bulky
and dirty that a jury will never see the peg, but merely yield
to indignation at the dirt.” Somewhat similar considcrations
make it desirable that the court should have this power, since
the provision which we are recommending is itself new.

14.4. We, therefore. recommend that a provision on the Col-
lowing lines may be inserted in the relevant Acts -—

“A statement made and signed by a person in a pro-
ceeding under this Act before any officer authorised by law
to record it, being an officer of a rank notified by the
Central Government in this behalf, shall be relevant, for
the purpose of proving, in a prosecution for an offence
under this Act, the truth of the facts which it states, —

(a) when the person who made the statement is
dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving
evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse
party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without
an amount of delay or expense which, under the
circumstanees of the case, the Court considers
unreasonable: or

(0) when the person who made the statement is
examined as a witness in the case, and the Court. is
of opinion that having regard to the circumstances
of the case, the statement should be admitted in
evidence in the interests of justice.”

Appeals in 14.5, The Acts relating to economic offences confer quasi-
adi ॥$« judicial powers on departmental agencies. Whether these
311४

adjudica. Agencies are individual officers, Boards or Tribunals is a matter
tions. of detail; but it is obvious that important points of dispute between
the State and the citizen are decided by them. 1 is not our
intention ¢o go into the structure, powers and procedure of these
agencies: but there is one matter of relevance for the present

1, Stone, “Exclusion of Similar Fact Evidence, 46, Harvard Taw Review al ga
984,



101

ase which we should mention. It relates to appeals in

set of these adjudications. There are certain points of
artance which have emerged during our own consideration

he subject as a result of suggestions made at the discussion
tach we held. The first is that the hierarchy of appeals under
some of the Acts ts likely to cause delay in adjudication, thereby
also causing delay in any criminal prosecution that may ultimately
have to be initiated. Secondly, the status and composition of
the final appellate authority under some of the Acts is capable
of improvement. And, thirdly, the Central Government has
revisional powers under some of the Acts,—a position which is
not conducive to inspiring confidence in the public and which
does not appear to be inevitably required for the Proper ad-
ministration of these Acts. We are of the view that there is,
in these three respects, need to re-consider the present position.
In fact, the working of these agencies has received attention at
the hands of several committees. Working Groups, Study Teams
and the fike. What is required now is an attempt to implement
their recommendations.

14.6. To illustrate what we have stated above. we shall refer
to the position under the Customs Act.

(a) Appeals from the orders or decisions of the officers

below the rank of Collector of Customs go to an appellate
colector!.

(b) Appeals from the decisions or orders Passed by the

Collector of Customs tie to the Central Board of Customs
and Excises?,

tc) The Central Board of Customs and Excises may.
either on the application of the aggrieved person or suo
moty. call for and examine the records of any proceeding.
in which a customs officer has passed any decision or order.
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or
Propriety of any such decision or order, and may pass.
puch orders thereon as it deems fit. But no order Passed
on appeal can be revised by the Bourd4,

(9) Any order passed by an appellate officer in appeal.
any order passed in revision by the Board suo motu. and any
order passed in revision by the Board on the application of
the aggrieved party where the order envisages enhancement
of penalty. fine in tieu of confiscation of goods. or duty,
may be annulled or modified by the Central Government
on the application of the person agericveds. Penalty or

1. Section 1281, Customs Act
2. Section 128fa), Customs Act.
3. Section 13001), Customs Act.
4,
5.

. Section 130(1), Customs Act.
Section £31, Customs Act.



102

fine in tieu of confiscation of goods cannot. however.
enhanced by the Central Government in revision, if it
already enhanced on appeal or by way of revision!:
in any other case, unless the party affected has been gise
Notice to show cause against it within one year from the
date of the order sought to be annulled or modified2.

While the number of appeals as of right under the
above act is limited there is a multiplicity of proceedings
for revision.

14.7. There might be other Acts where there may be multi-
plicity in appeals, though the scope for revision is limited. We
do not go into a detailed examination of the scheme of each
Acts,

But we place it for the consideration of the Government
whether. in the interests of speedy disposal of these proceedings
and of effective and independent adjudication, a uniform scheme
should not be adopted whereunder there will be one appeal on
facts 10 an officer of sufficiently high status, with an application
for revision to an independent tribunal on a point of law. Where
the appeal on facts is itself to a Tribunal, the revision could lie
to the High Court. But the final revisional authority should,
in every case, be totally independent of the executive, and a
multiplicity of appeals should be avoided.

J
2. Section 131(4)(b), Customs Act.
3. Matter to be considered by Government.


CHAPTER 15

RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO INDIVIDUAL ACTS

15.1. We may now take up the major points relevant to
particulars Acts?.

It has been stated that? under the present Central Excise
Law, while unauthorised removal of excisable goods has to
be departmentally adjudicated, prosecution under section 9
can be resorted to only for evasion of duty. The suggestion is
to amend section 9 of the Central Excise and Salt Act. 10 provide
for prosecution in cases of unauthorised removals also.

We accept the principle of the suggestion and recommend
an amendment on the subject.

13.2. ki has been suggested? that the present punishment
of imprisonment for a term upto six months or fine or both
under section 9 of the Central Excise and Salt Act should be
enhanced to a maximum term of imprisonme.t of 3 years and
4 minimum term of imprisonment of 6 months. and also fine.
In cases in which the loss of duty is more than one lakh, a higher
minimum of one year with a maximum of 7 years’ imprisonment
is also proposed to be provided for. In the case of second or
subsequent convictions, higher minimum of two years is proposed.
The discretion of the court not to award at least the minimum
period of imprisonment will be limited to only such cases in
which special circumstances exist and for adequate reasons
to be recorded in writing,

We are separately recommending? an increase in the maxi-
mum punishment. which should suffice.

15.3. It has been suggestedS that a new section should be
inserted to the effect that confiscation or penalty imposed in
departmental proceedings under the Excise Act shall not prevent
the infliction of any other punishment to which the person
affected thereby is liable under the provisions of the Act. or
under any other law.

1. The Acts are discussed in chronological order.
2. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.
. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government ef India.
. See para, 15.5, infra.

5. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.

(03

Central
Excise

and Salt
Act—Addi-
tion of
offence

as to un-
authorised
removal.

Central
Excise
Act—
punish-
ment

Central
Excise
Act
provision
to save
power of
confiscation,


Conrad
Excise
Act—-
Public
Censure.

Amend-
meat of
ion 9.
Excise Act
aslo

Panish-
sent,

Section
relating

to burden
of prool
Tecom-
mended.
Conse-
guential
amend-
ment of
section 9
(७). Central

Excise
Act.

as to the
Foreign
Exchange
Aci.

ee # (२५७

. Para.

104

We have no objection to such a clarificationt,

{In this connection. it may be noted that under the existing
scheme, for a contravention of the provisions of the Customs
Act, punishments can be awarded in departmental adjudications
which entail confiscation of the offending goods etc. and im-
position of penalty on the persons concerned in the offence.
An addition, the accused can also be prosecuted in court. The
Customs Act specifically? lays down that the award of any
confiscation or penalty shall not prevent the infliction of any
punishment by the court}

15.4. It has been suggested? that a provision should be
introduced under section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt
Act. to provide specifically for making rules for giving publicity
to the names and other particulars of persons who are guilty
of contravention of the provisions of the Act, rules and other
orders. We accept the principle of the suggestion.

15.5. In accordance with our general recommendation for
increase in the maximum punishment‘. and provision for
minimum imprisonment and fine. it will be Recessary to revise
section 9 of the Central Excise 825,

15.6. In accordance with our general recommendation of
shifting the burden of proofs, it will be necessary to insert a
section in the Central Excise Act relating to burden of proof
of mens rea.

15.7. In_consequence of the above amendment?. ">> पता
9(c) of the Central Excise Act wilt require amendment, to remove
words which will become redundant. Our recommendation
therefore is—In section 9c) of the Central Excise and Salt
Act. 1944, the words “the burden of proving which shall be
upon him’, shall be omitted.

15.8, In the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, the following
provisions are absent from the penal and connected sections: —
(i) Modification of mens rea.
(ii) Mandatory imprisonment.
(iil) Minimum period of imprisonment.
(iv) Stoppage of business.
(v) Summary trial.

. Compare section 127, Customs Act.
. Section 127, Customs Act, 1962.

Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.
Chapter 7.20, supra.

Actual amendment will be indicated separately.
Para.§7.12, supra.

15.6, supra.


105

Of these. No. (i) has been covered by judicial interpretation’.
Nos. (ii) and (iii) will be dealt with later?.

Tt may also be stated that many cases under the Act are
dealt with by penalties imposed by the Director of Enforcement
or officers subordinate to him?.

As regards No. (iv}—Stoppage of business—the matter
will be discussed separately4. .

No, (v}—summary trial in the sense known to the Criminal
Procedure Code—may be inappropriate, as complicated ques-
tions of law or fact are often involved in prosecutions under
the Foreign Exchange Act. instead, the procedure which we
are recommending would serve the purpose of quick disposals.
Foreign

15.9. A few other points may also be dealt with. Section Lxchange

23, Foreign Exchange Act provides that if the case is adjudi- Regulation
cated by the Director of Enforcement, the maximum penalty Act, 1947-~
of 3 times the value of the foreign exchange involved or increase in

Rs. 5,000/-, whichever is morz, may be imposed, and that if

departmen-
tal penalty

the offender is prosecuted before a Court, the punishment that considered,

can be awarded is imprisonment upto a maximum of two years.
or fine, or both.

It has been suggestcd® that the punishment in the depart-
mental adjudication should be enhanced to a penalty upto
5 times the foreign exchange involved. Further. the section,
it has been suggested. should be reworded suitably so as to
provide for the imposition of a penalty of more than Rs. 5,000;
These provisions, it is further stated, should apply equaliy
even when the offence is detected in Indian currency.

We accept the suggestion in principle.

15.10. 11 has been stated? that in the case of offences under Foreign
the Foreign Exchange Act, tried by a Court, for serious offences Exchange
like over-invoicing and under-invoicing of goods, making or Ac!—
receiving compensatory payments, non-repatriation of foreign

exchange earned abroad. and maintaining of an account abroad nun,
without the Reserve Bank’s approval. there should be a minimum _ punish-
imprisonment of 6 months where the amount involved is Rs. ent con-
| lakh or more, with the proviso that a lesser punishment than Wed.
the minimum so prescribed could be awarded by the Court

where the Court is convinced that such action is necessary and

for reasons to be recorded in wi

1. See Stare of Maharashira ४. M.G. George, ALR. 1965 S.C. 722.
2. See paragraphs 15.10 and 15.33, irfra.

3, Section 23(1), Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.

4 See paragraph 15.21, infra.

5

Suggestion
for mini-

. We are separately recommending special courts, which will achieve the object of

speed without being unfair to the accused. (Paras, 9.9. and 9.10, supra).
Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India,
« Suggestion of a Minisiry of the Government of India.

fl

~



Observa-
tions af
Study
Team.

Foreign
Exchange
Act—
Conspiracy
and

Abetment,

1. Para. 15.33, im

106

We are separately proposing an increase in punishment under
the Act!, which will suffice.

15.11. The Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange?
has made certain observations relavant to prosecutions, which
we quote :--

“9.7, Under the provisions: of the Customs Act, a person
involved in under-invoicing of export goods is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years
or with fine or with both. (A higher punishment is pro-
vided for commodities which are notified under section 123
of the Customs Act but those commodities are not the one
which are exported). In the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act also the punishment provided is the same. Since the
maximum punishment is two years only, and no mini-
mum punishment is prescribed. (minimum punishment
is for commodities which are notified under section 123
of the customs Act), it has been noticed that offenders
are let off with imprisonment for a small period or with nomi-
nal fines. We would suggest that such offences should
be made punishable to sentence of imprisonment in all cases,
and any fine imposable by the court should be in addition to
imprisonment and not as an alternative to imprisonment.
For cases of under-invoicing/over-invoicing' involving loss
of foreign exchange of Rs. | lakh or more, a minimum sen-
tence of six months’ imprisonment should also be prescribed
and the maximum, we recommend, should be raised to five
years. In order to ensure that the persons are not prose-
cuted in petty cases or for offences of a technical nature, it
would be desirable for the Customs Department and the
Enforcement Directorate to lay down certain guidelines for
deciding as to the cases in which prosecution should be
launched.”

The question of laying guidelines for deciding as to the
cases in which prosecution should be launched, requires consi-
deration?. We think that the recommendation quoted above
is_a sensible one. and we would invite Government to give
effect to it.

15.12. Tt was stated4 in one of the suggestions made to us
that the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, at present, does
not take cognizance of the acts of conspiring, counselling or
procuring another person to contravene its provisions, and thus
leaves out the important category of professional racketeers
who are behind most of the offences committed. The suggestion.

2. Report of the Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange through Invoice
Manipulation (Ministry of Finance) (1971), page 95. para. 9.7.
3. The matter could be dealt with by administrative instructions.

4. Letter dated 28-12-1971.


107

therefore, is to amend the Act so as to make it an offence to
conspire. counsel or procure another petson for contravening
the provisions of the Act.

15.43. The position in this tespect has been examined by
us.

The main penal provision in the Foreign Exchange Act is
in section 23(1) and section 23 (1A), which punish contravention
of various provisions of the Act.

Acts amounting to conspiracy with, counselling, or procur-
ing another person to commit an offence. are not specifically
dealt with in the Foreign Exchange Act?,

15.14, But conduct in the nature of conspitacy, procuring
or counselling would almost invariably amount to abetment.

The abettor is liable to be punished under the Penal Code.
The relevant sections? of that Code are not confined to abet-
ment of offences under the Code; they are wide enough to apply
to abetment of offences under other laws also.

15.15, We do not, therefore, as at present advised, see any
serious lacuna even in the present law. Since the wording in
the Penal Code is clear, an amendment is not needed.

|, Position as to express provision regarding abetment in the major Acts is as below

(a) Central Excise Act प्‌ . . «Section Hal).
(6) Foreign Exchange Act . - . . Mil
(0 Prevention of Food Adulteration Act Nit

But section 16(1)(8) applies
whether the act is done
by @ person “himself of by
any other person”,

(d) Essential Commodities Act. =.=. Section 8.
(० Wealth Tax Act. पु पु + Section 36(2A) (Limited pro»
vision).
(1) Income-tax Act. . पु >3. 50010 287 (Limited provision).
(6) Customs Act पु . . . The main provision—section
ry 135{a) applies to a person

who is “in any way know-
ingly concerned in any fradu-
lent evasion or attempt at
evasion” ete,

(#) Gold Controt Act . . . - Section 88(2) (Limited pro-
vision).

2, Sections 109 and 116, Indian Penat Code.

3. Seedefinition of “offence” in section 40, Indian Penal Code.
1M of Law/?2—8


Prepara-
tion to
commit
certain
offences
under the
Foreign
Exchange
Act and
the Cus-
toms Act.

108

15.16. Another matter of substantive nature that requires
to be considered is that of preparation to commit certain offences.
In general, in countries which follow the Anglo-American system,
law does not punish preparation for an offence. An attempt
to commit an offence is punishable, but the attempt must be
sufficiently proximate to the crime intended, and this ‘proximity
rule’ finds its negative form in the rule that mere preparation
is not enough.

Authorities are, no doubt, not very clear as to what is an
attempt;! but it is not necessary for the present purpose to
pursue that matter.

15.17. The position taken in some foreign Codes is different
in this respect.

Jt would be of interest to refer to the provision in the Russian
Penal Code,? quoted below:—

“Article 15. Responsibility for preparation of crime
and for attempted crime.—Acquiring or atranging the means
or instruments, or other intentional creation of conditions
for the commission of a crime, shall be deemed preparation
of a crime.

An intentional action immediately directed toward
the commission of a erfme shail be deemed an attempted
crime, provided the crime is not brought to completion for
reasons independent of the will of the guilty person.

Punishment for preparation of crime and for attempted
crime shall be assigned in accordance with the article
of the Special Part of the present Code which provides for
responsibility for the given crime.

in assigning punishment the court shal) take into account
the character and degree of social danger of the actions
committed by the guilty person, the degree to which the
criminal intention is carried out, and the causes by reason
of which the crime is not brought to completion.”

15.18, Academic opinion on the question is conflicting. Some
writers support a provision punishing preparatory acts. On
the other hand, the remark of Holmes, J. is often emphasised,
namely, “As the aim of the law is not to punish sins, but to
prevent certain external results, the act must come pretty
near to accomplishing that result before fhe law will notice 113,"
And the query has been raised—“Is it not a cardinal principle
of our law that the successful criminal is always more severely

1, See the Law Commission of India, 42nd Report (Indian Penal Code),

pages 131 io

138, paras. 5.41 to 5.43.
2. Article 15, R.S.F.S.R. Penal Code.
3, Holmes J. quoted in Book review in (1954), 70 L.Q.R. 551.


109

punished than one who, equally guilty ethically, has failed in
his efforts? And, just as the completed crime merits a heavier
penalty, so an ‘attempter’ who has got beyond the stage of inci-
tement and mere preparation is regarded by the law as a worse
offender than one who has never been ‘on the job’ at allt.”

15.19. Whatever be the merits of the general rule, it seems
to us that in the context of some of the offences with which we
are concerned, the Jaw could make a departure from its general
approach.

Tn cases under the Customs Act and the Foreign Exchange
Act, having regard to the gravity of the harm, the adoption of
@ stringent approach is needed. “Where an act is done with the
fixed intention of committing a crime and by way of preparation
for it, it should be treated as criminal. For example,
where a person is about to leave the shores of India with
Indian currency in his pocket, with the definite object of
violating the Foreign Exchange Act, it is better that he is
stopped. An amendment punishing such acts would enable
the enforcement authorities to prevent crimes under these Acts
before its consummation.

15.20, Accordingly, we recommend that the following section
should be inserted in the Foreign Exchange Act and in the Cust-
oms Act:—

“If a person makes preparation to commit an offence
under this Act, and from the circumstances of the case it
may be reasonably inferred that if not prevented by circum-
stances independent of his will, he is determined’ to carry
out his intention to commit the offence he shall be punish-
able with imprisonment for three years, or with fine, or with

oth.”

15.21. Besides the punishments provided in the Foreign
Exchange Act, we think that the court should have power to
order stoppage of a particular business which facilitates viola-
tions of the Act.

We think that the power should be exercisable only on second
conviction. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the
following section in the Foreign Exchange Act :—

‘‘Where a person having been convicted of an offence
under this Act, is again convicted of another offence under
this Act, and the Court by which such person is convicted
is satisfied that in order to prevent repetition of the offence
by him such a direction is necessary, the Court may, in addi-
tion to any penalty which may be imposed on him under this
Act, by order direct that that person shall not carry on such

Foreign
Exchange
Act—
Stoppage
of business
recom:
mended.

1, Book review in (1954), 70 L.Q.R. 551.


Prosecue
tions as
well as
depart-
mental
proceed-
ings.

Foreiga
Exchange
Act—
Recovery
ए penal-
ties,

1, G& section 73). Essential Commoditi

110

business which is likely to necessitate or facilitate the com-
mission of an offence under this Act. for such period, not
exceeding three years as may be specified by the Court in
the order!.”

15.22. The above points relate to prosecutions proper. The
study Team on Leakage? of Foreign Exchange made the followieg
observations regarding adjudications and prosecutions under
te Foreign Exchange Act :—

“....fike the Customs Act, there should be a provision
that for an offence under the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act. both adjudication by the Director of Enforcement and
conviction by a court of law are possible. The two should
not be alternatives as at present. We would also suggest
that in more and more cases. prosecution should also be
launched apart from adjudication so as to have a deterrent
effect. At present, the Enforcement Directorate does
not have the necessary expertise and staff for pursuing pro-
secution cases. Organisational changes in this respect are
also therefore, necessary. While some important cases
calling for prosecution will get referred to the Economic
Offences Wing of the C.B.I., the Enforcement Directorate
itself should have the wherewithal to deal with the majority
of prosecution cases.”

We understand that this question? is being considered s¢-
parately, Moreover. we express our agreement with the above
Fevommendation.

15.23. It appears that some difficulty is felt in the realisation
oF penalties imposed in administrative adjudications under the
Foreign Exchange Act. The problem could arise under other
Acts also; but the power to confiscate goods is, in practice,
Sufficient for customs and excise cases, and the. Income-tax
Act has a self-contained schedule for recovery, so that the pro-
tiem would not be of a serious magnitude under that Act.

To meet any possible difficulty a suitable provision is needed
he the Foreign Exchange Act so that the amount ordered to be
aid as penalty shall, on an order made in that behalf by a
Magistrate on application made to him, be recoverable by the
raie as fine. We discuss below this question in some

15.24. Three principal types of provisions seem to have been
employed in State laws to achieve recovery of state or municipal
tunes (or penalties) through proceedings before magistrates.

Act, 1955.

2, Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange through Invoice Manipulatien
(Ministry of Finance) Report, (1971), page 97, para. 9.12.

3. Question of providing for simultaneous prosecution and departmental adjudi«
calive under the Foreign Exchange Act.


it

(1) General provision for recovery through Magistrate, (2)
Provision for recovery through Magistrate by a particular
mode, (3) order by Magistrate on conviction.

45.24-A. First. one finds a general provision underwh ich
the collecting officer has merely to apply to a magistrate, and the
magistrate has then to recover the tax or other amount duc
“as if it were a fine imposed by him”. An example of this is
furnished by section 13(3) of the Mysore Genéral Sales Tax
Act.

15.25. The second type may also be illustrated. While. i>
the provision of the first category, the process of recovery by
the magistrate is not limited to a particular mode, there is anothev
type of provision in which the magistrate, on an application
being made to him, has jurisdiction to take steps for recovery
but only by a particular process—e.g. distress and sale of immov-
able property. Thus. section 234 of the Ajmer Mewar Municipasi-
ties Regulation authorises a machinery to recover all taxcs
due to the Municipal Committee by an application made to
2 magistrate having jurisdiction, by distress and sale of any
immovable property within his jurisdiction? A provision for
distress and sale of movable property is found in section }61(2)
of the Bombay District Municipal Act3,

15.26. While. in the above two cases, it is not necessary that
there should be a prosecution before the magistrate. there is a
third type of provision which operates only when the magistrate
convicts a person for contravention of the provision of the parti-
cular Act, On such conviction, the Magistrate becomes com-
Petent to direct recovery of the tax, fee or other amount evade).
as fine.. Such a provision is contained in section 19(4) of the
Kerala General Sales Tax Act4. A similar provision is contained
in section 15(h) of the Madras General Ls ales Tax Act, 1939,
extracted 0९०५७ :—

“Any person who—

(8) fails to pay the amounts specified in sectioi
8B sub-section (2), within the prescribed time, or

(h) Wilfully acts in contravention of any of the
Provisions of this Act, shall, on conviction by a Presi-
dency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class,
be liable to a fine which may extend to one thousand
Tupees. and in the case of a conviction under clause
(b), (3). (f) or (g), the Magistrate shall specify in the
order the tax, fee or other amount, which the person

"1, See State ९. 6.6. Udavacar, (1963) 14 STC. 628,
2, See Dargha Committee ९. State of Rajasthan, A.U.R. 1962 S.C. 274.
3, See Inve Din Bui, ALR. 1919 Bom. 93,

4. See Subramaniam v. Commissioner of Police, AJR. 1964 Madras १85, 187,
Paragraph 5 (reviews cases).

5. P.V. Muhammed \. Collector of Palghat, AIR. 1967 Kerala 254, 235.



Benami
transfers.

Tender of
pardon
under
Foreign
Exchange
Act.

112

convicted has failed or evaded to pay or has wrong-
fully collected, and the tax, fee or amount so specified
shall be recoverable as if it were a fine.”

15.27. The first type of provision’ which is the most compre-
hensive would be useful in the present case. We, therefore,
recommend the insertion of a provision on the following lines,
in the Foreign “Exchange Act :—~

Section to be inserted in the Foreign Exchange Act

“Any tax assessed, penalty levied or any other amount due
under this Act from a person may, without prejudice to any
other mode of collection, be recovered, on application to any
Magistrate, by such Magistrate, as if it were a fine imposed by
him?,”

15,28. In order that the suggested remedy concerning reco-
very is not thwarted, it may become necessary to check transfers
of property benami, in anticipation of recovery proceedings.
We do not make any recommendations in this regard, as the sub-
ject requires separate study in relation to the entire field of taxa-
tion law.

15.29. The Study Team on the Leakage of Foreign Exchange
made the following recommendation? as to the tender of pardon
for offences under the Foreign Exchange Act :—

“9.14. Foreign Exchange contraventions _involvin:
invoice manipulations are serious offences, but है
to establish before a court of law. Quite often, in important
and big cases it is difficult to prosecute these cases success-
fully without the help of an accomplice who may not be
forthcoming to help the authorities, unless they are in a posi-
tion to tender pardon to the accomplice. Section 337 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, provides for tendering of pardon
in the case of any offence punishable with imprisonment
extending upto seven years and some of the offences under the
Indian Penal Code. Since the contravention of the Foreign
Exchange Law, or the Customs Act, do not fall in any of
these categories, this provision would not apply to them.
We suggest that in the interest of justice, and with a view to
making it possible to obtain the evidence of a person who is
supposed 10 have been directly or indirectly concerned in
or privy to the offence, power should be available for ten-
dering pardon. to such persons in court cases relating to
contravention of Customs and Foreign Exchange laws.
Since the Code of Criminal Procedure is otherwise applicable

1, Para. 15.24, supra.

2. This could be inserted as section 23FF, Foreign Exchange Act.
3. Report of the Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange through Invoice
9.14.

‘oreign
Manipulation (Ministry of Finance) (1971), page 98, para


1

to these proceedings, sect ons 337, 338, 339 and 339A may be
suitably amended for conferring this power ia relation to
customs and foreign exchange offences.”

We have discussed this question (tender of pardon) generally
separately!, and do not consider necessary to repeat what we
have stated already.

15.30. The Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange? Presump-
made the following recommendation as to documents :— tion On ing
Te;

“9.18. It has been noticed that in complicated and im- ‘ocuments.
portant cases where prosecutions are launched, documents
obtained from abroad from various sources are tendered as
evidence. These documents are vitat for proving the case.
However, according to the provisions of the Evidence Act.
the execution of the documents has to be proved first, before
these are admitted in evidence. For that purpose, it becomes
necessary tocall for witnesses from abroad, which, apart
from being disproportionately expensive, is alone not always
practicable. In the matter of establishing the offences of
under-invoicing and over-invoicing the evidence which can
be coliected from abroad will be of particular importance,
and if such evidence were to be shut out merely for technical
reasons of admissibility, it would make the task of the in-
vestigation agencies even more difficult. We, therefore,
Suggest that the provisions of the Customs Act and Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act should be suitably amended to
provide for admissibility, as evidence in court, of the docume-
nts received from abroad, and for raising similar presumption
in respect of them, as are now raised under section 139 of the
Customs Act and section 244 of the Foreign Exchange
Reguiation Actin respect of the documents which are either
produced before the Customs Officers or Enforcement Officers,
or are seized by them.”

The principle of the suggestion appeats to be acceptabie.
Further, the relevant section—section 24A,—should apply to
documents seized under other laws also3.

15.31, It has been stated¢ that Enforcement Officers under Foreign
the Foreign Exchange Act may be empowered to seize or con- Gaxchange
fiscate vehicles or containers except in cases where they have ‘Amend-
been used without the knowledge or fault of the owner or his ment
agent. We accept the suggestion, and recommend an amend- regarding
ment accordingly. seizure

recom-
mended.

1. Chapter 13, supra.

2. Report of th: Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange through Invoice Mani-
pulation (Ministry of Finance), 1971), page 99, para. 9.18.

3. See para. 12.2, supra.

4, Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.


4

Foreign 15,32. It has been suggested? that the Foreign Exchange

Exchange Act should be amended io provide for confiscation where the

Seagestion currency in respect of which an offence is committed has been

for confis- converted into, say, rupees. We accept the suggestions, which

cation appears to be a useful one?.

where

offence is

committed

in Indian

currency,

Amend- 15.33. In. accordance with our general recommendation

ment of for increase in the maximum punishment? (on the basis of the

Sa pecuniary test), and for minimum imprisonment and fine, it

Foreign wil! be necessary to revise section 23(1) of the Foreign Exchange

Exchange = Act. 4,

Act as to

punish-

ment. 15.34, We have made a general recommendation as to the

Mens rea burden of proofS regarding mens rea. There is some di-

and ficulty in giving effect to this recommendation in the Foreign

burden of Exchange Act, and it is necessary to examine the case law.

under It is generally assumed that offences under the Foreign Ex-

Foreign change Act do not require mens rea. There is a Supreme Court

Exchange judgment® dealing with the question how far ignorance of a

. notification under the Foreign Exchange Act. is a defence. The
accused in that case was charged with being in possession of
34 kilos of gold, which he had not declared as required by a
notification issued under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
The defence plea was that the accused could not have known
of the notification published in India three days before he left
urich,

Ayyangar. J.. speaking for the majority, felt that in the in-
terpretation of an Act intended to deal with a grave economic
situation, the object of the Act, viz., conservation of foreign
exchange, could not be overlooked. He was not Prepared to
read conditions in the Act if that would frustrate its Purpose.

The majority view? was thus elaborated.

“When one turns to the main provision whose contra-
vention is the subject of the penalty imposed by Section

23(1-A) viz., Section 8(1) in the present context, one reaches

the conclusion that there is no scope for the invocation of the

tule of mens rea. It lays an absolute embargo upon persons.
who without the special or general permission of the Re-
serve Bank and after satisfying the conditions, if any, prescri-
bed by the Bank, bring or send into India any gold etc.. the
absoluteness being emphasised, as we have already pointed

1. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.

2. Amendment to be drafted.

3, Para. 7.20, supra. —

4. Actual amendment will be indicated separately.

5. Para. 7.12, supra.

6, State v. M.H. George, A.1.R. 1965 S.C. 722, paras. 40, 41.

7. State v. M.H. George, - 1965 S.C. 722, para. 35.



115

out, by the terms of Section 241) of the Act. No doubt.
the very concept of “bringing” or “sending” would exclude
an involuntary bringing or an involuntary sending. Thus,
for instance, if without the knowledge of the person a packet
of gold was slipped into his pocket, it is possible to accept
the contention that such a person did not “bring” the gold
into India within the meaning of Section 8(1). Similar con-
siderations would apply to a case where the aircraft on a
through flight which did not include any landing in India
has to make a forced landing in India—owing, say. to engine
trouble, But if the brinigng into India was a conscious
act and was done with the intention of bringing
it into India, the mere bringing constitutes the offence and
there is no other ingredient that is necessary in order to con-
stitute a contravention of Section 8(1) than that conscious
physical act of bringing. If, then, under Section 8(1) the
conscious physical act of “bringing” constitutes the offence,
Section 2X(1-A) does not import any further condition for
the imposition of liability than what is provided for in Section
31). On the language, therefore, of Section 8(1) read with
Section 24(1) we are clearly of the opinion that there is no
scope for the invocation of the rule that besides the mete act
of voluntarily bringing gold into India any further mental
condition is postulated as necessary to constitute an offence
of the contravention referred to in Section 23(1-A).”

Subba Rao, J.. (in his dissenting judgment) seems to have
included within the concept of mens rea the ignorance of law.

It_was in the context of ignorance of the notification that the
question of wrens rea was at issue. But the observations in both
the majority and in the minority judgments go far, and deal
with the concept of mens rea in its generality. We ourselves
would read the majority judgment as excluding mens rea in its
generality, and we agree with it, That is why we do not think
it necessary to recommend any rule shifting the burden of proof

as to the absence of wens rea in respect of the Foreign Exchange
Act.

15.35. One of the suggestions? made to us with reference Foreign
to the Foreign Exchange Act related to cancellation of the pass- i change
Port of a person convicted of a serious offence under the Act—  Act-—
the intention. of course. being that such action could be appro- Cancella-
priately used where the offence is one who may repeat such tation of
offence if he is permitted to go out of India. Passports.

We found the suggestion to be of interest. The maticr,
however, does not involve an amendment of the Foreign Ex-
change Act. The Passports Act itself confers powers on the
Passport authority to revoke a passport in the specified circum-
stances. The relevant portion of the provision in the Pass-
ports Act is quoted below.?

1. Gral discussions with Shri Jethamalani, Bar Council of India (4-1-1972).
2. Section 10(3)cXd) and (०), Passports Act, 1967 (16 of 1967).


Canvella-
tion of
passport
daring
investt-
gation,

Section
19D, Fore-
ign Ex-

change Act.

né

“10. (3) The passport authority may impound or cause
to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel documents—

(c) if the passport awthority deems it necessary so to
do in the interests of the sovereignty and: integrity of
India, the security of India, friendly relations of India
with any foreign country, or in the iterests of the general
public;

(9) if the holder of the passport or travel docu-
ment has, at any time after the issue of the passport or
travel document, been convicted by a court in India
for any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced
in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than two
years;

(०) if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged
to have been committed by the holder of the passport or
travel document, are pending before a criminal court
in India.

_ We recommend that there should be no hesitation in exercis-
ing this power in suitable cases.

15.36. In one respect however, the power of cancellation
of passports must be augmented, Where the presence of the
accused is required for investigation for any offence, there
should be a power to cancel the passport.’ There should of
course, be a certificate to that effect by a senior officer, in order
to avoid harassment in small cases, We recommend the addi-
tion of the following clause in section 10(3), Passports Act to
achieve the above object :-+

“(ee) if an officer of such rank as the Central Government
may notify in this behalf certifies that an investigation in
respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the
holder of the passport or travel document is pending before
any authority in India and that the continued presence
in India of the holder of the passport or travel document
is necessary in the interest of the efficient conduct and
completion of the investigation.”

15.36-A. The Foreign Exchange Act, contains extensive
powers of search. We need not discuss them in detail, but some
points raised during oral discussions require consideration.

1. Position in England is controversial. See Ghani v. Jones, (1969), 3 All E.R. 1700
(CA).


7

First, we shall take up the section relating to power to search considered.
premises, which is as follows! :~

“19-D. Power to search premises—(1) If an Officer of
Enforcement, not below the rank of Assistant Director of
Enforcement, has reason to believe that any document which
in his opinion will be useful for or relevant to any proceeding
under this Act, are secreted in any place he may authorise
any Officer of Enforcement to search for and seize or
may himself search for and seize such documents.

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, relating to searches under this section subject to the
modification that sub-section (5) of section 165 of the said
Code shall have effect as if for the word ‘Magistrate’,
wherever it occurs, the words ‘Director of Enforcement or
other officer, exercising his powers” were substituted.”

15.36-B. Some difficulty, it seems, is caused by the
words ‘reason to believe’, which occur in sub-section (1) ; and
the question that has arisen is, how far the belief of the concer-
ned officer is subject to scrutiny by the courts. It has been
suggested that the wording should be changed so as to eliminate
such scrutiny.

+ 15.36-C. It must, however, be stated that questions
of constitutional validity of the power of search as granted by
provisions containing above expression are, by their nature,
difficult ones, This wilt be apparent from a study of—-

(1) the provisions as to searches in other Acts.

(2) Judicial decisions as to the validity of such provi-
sions in other Acts,

(3) The extent to which those decisions hinge on ex-
pressions such as ‘reason to believe’, ‘is of opinion’, ‘has
reasonable grounds for believing’ and the like.

(4) The extent to which safeguards provided in section
165, Cr. P.C. are to be read into those provisions.

(5) The situation in which and the purpose for which
the power of search under the particular provisions is to be
exercised.

15.36-D. We, therefore, examined a number of decisions
dealing with search. including :

(1) 47.0. ४७. Seth Brothers, 74 LT.R, 836; ALR.
1970 S.C. 292. (Section 132, Income-tax Act).

(2) Balwant Singh v. Director of Inspection, A.LR.
1969 Delhi 91, 103, 110.

(Section 132, Income-tax Act).

1, Section 19D, Foreign Exchange Act.


H18

(3) Gopikishan v. Assistant Collector, A.1.R.%1967 S.C,
1298, 1301, paras. 10-11 (Section 105, Customs Act).

(4) Pukhraj v. Kohli, AAR. 1962 S.C. 1559, (Section
178A, Sea Customs Act, 1878).

(5) State of Rajasthan vy. Rehman. A.A.R. 1960 S.C.
210 (Section 18, Central Excise Act).

(6) Durga Prasad v. Gomes, A..R. 1966 S.C. 1214,
(Gold Control Rules and Sections 105 and 110 of the Customs
Act).

(7) Board of Revenue v. R.S. Shaver, AA.R. 1968 S.C.
59 (Madras General Sales Tax Act).

(8) Bai Radha v. State of Gujrat. ALR. 1970 S.C. 1396
(Sestion 15. Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act).

(9) Nil Ratan v. Lakshmi Narayan, A.1.R. 1965 S.C. 1.
(Section 193), Foreign Exchange Act before amendments).

(10) _K.E. ४. Vimalbai Deshpande, 73 1.4. 144 (P.C.)
(Rule 1291). Defence of India Rules, 1939).

(EE) Hindustan Motors v. T.N. Kaul (decided on 25-3-7t)
(Unreported) (Calcutta High Court) (D.B.) (Section 19D.
Foreign Exchange Act).

(12) Chic Fashions (West Wales Lid. v. Jones, (1968)
2 QB. 299 (CA).

(13) Ghani & others v. Jones, (1969) 3 AIL E.R. 1700
(C.A.).

(4) ALCS. Mills C. v. Collector, Central Excise, ALR.
197E S.C. 454.

(Section 12. Central Excise, & Salt Act. 1944, and sections
105{1} and 11003) of Customs Act, 1962 in matters relating
to search of premises).

(15) G.L. Gupta v. Assistant Collector. Custons, AIR.
1971 S.C. 29. (Section 23-C(I), Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1947).

(16) Jayantlal v. Union of india, AAR. 1971 S.C. 1193.
{Sections 116(2), Gold (Control) Act. and rule 126(1) of the
Gold Control Rules, 1963.}

(17) Union of India v. Tara Chand Gupta & Bros.. 4.1.1.
197% S.C. 1559. (Section 3. Imports and Exports (Control)
Act, 1947).

(18) Dwarka Nath v. Dethi Municipality, AA.R. 1971
S.C. 1844. (Section 231) (c). (0) (8) and (h). Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act, 1954).


119

(19) Asstt. Collector of Customs v. Charan Das Malhotra.
1916) S.C.C. 697. (Sections 110 and 124 of Customs
Act, 1962).

(20) Badriprasad v. Collector of Central Excise. 1971
(2) SCC. 1.
(Sections 6. 8 and 16, Gold (Control) Act. 1968).

(21) PP. ६. Babulal ALR. 1971 A.P. 345.
(Section 135. Customs Act. 1962)

(22) M. Narayana v. S.H. Officer. AA.R. 1971 A.P.
29. {Sections 156. 41), 5(2) and 173, Criminal Procedure
Code. and section 7(1XaXii) and 0A. Essentiat Com-
modities Act, 1955).

(23) K. Lakshminarayanan v. Commissioner of Income-
tax, AJ.R. 1971 Mad. 192.

(Section 256(2), Income-tax Act, 1961).
(24) Mangilal v. Dy. Excise Officer. AA.R. 1971 Raj.
46.

(Section 256(2). Income-tax Act. 1961).

(25) T. Jacob ४. State, AAR. 1971 Ker. 166. (Sections
701), 8 and 2 (f), and section 15(1) of the Suppression of
Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act. 1956).

15.36-E. In England also. statutory powers to issue
search warrants differ markedly in the conduct which they
authorise. For examples, the Theft Act, 1968, enables a cons-
table to seize the articles specified in the warrant or any other
articles which he “reasonably believes to be stolen”. Similarly.
the Firearms Act, 1968, authorises the constable to whom it is
issued to seize and detain any firearm or ammunition which he may
find on. inter alia, the premises or place and in respect of which
be has ‘reasonable grounds for suspecting’ that a firearms
offence has been, is being, or is about to be committed. The
like wording is employed in legislation dealing with drugs, '
obscene publications?, explosives3, and official secrets.4

15.36-F, Writing in 1967, Mr. D.A. Thomas, concluded$
-.the law consists of a mass of statutory pro-
visions. 10 which judicial decisions add confusion rather than
clarity.” The decisions of the Court of Appeal in Chie Fashions

. Section 14, Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965.
. Section 3, Obscene Publications Act, 1959.
. (a) Section 73, Explosives Act, 1875.
(6) Section 55, Malicious Damage Act.
4. Section 9, Official Secrets Act, 1911.
5. D.A. Thomas, “The Law of Search and Seizure”, (1970) Crim. L.R. 6, cited in LH.

Leigh, “Recent Developments on the Law of Search and Seizure: (1970, May) 33
Modern Law Rev. 268,

wie


Foreign
Exchange
Act—Inter~
ception

of postal
articles.

120

(West Wales) Ltd. v. Jones! and Ghani and others v. Jones? have
tendered the law still less certain.

13.36-G. A study of decided cases shows that while
the position cannot be asserted definitely, one could venture
to put forth the following propositions as reflecting broadly the
view taken in most cases.

(a) The expression ‘reason to believe’, does not mean
purely the subjective satisfaction of the officer concerned.

(6) The existence of the belief and the existence of the
reasons for the belief are justiciable.

(०) The sufficiency of the reasons is not, however, jus-
ticiable.

There is no doubt, that in the interests of efficient in-
vestigation of these grave offences, the scope for such contro-
versies should be reduced to the minimum. Arbitrary, cap-
ricious or mala fide exercise of the power of search should not be
countenanced. At the same time, practical considerations
require that the power under the Foreign Exchange Act should
be couched in terms less rigid than at present. After careful
consideration, we have come to the conclusi.n that the words
‘honestly believes’ should be substituted in place of the words
‘has reason to believe’,

15.36-H. We have not overlooked the fact that an amend-
ment substituting a milder wording increases the vulnerability
of the provision from the point of view of conflict with the fun-
damental rights guaranteed by article 19(1) (f) and (g) of the
Constitution. But, having regard to the fact that the power
is vested in an officer not below the rank of Assistant Director
of Enforcement, we venture to take the view that the restriction
will continue to be regarded as reasonabie, even after the amend-
ment which we have recommended. The provision, more-
over, is linked up with usefulness or relevance of the document
to proceedings under the Act,--though that requirement is
itself indicated in terms which contemplate the subjective opinion
of the officer concerned.

We, therefore, recommend an amendment of section
19D, Foreign Exchange Act, accordingly.

15.36-. There is another question connected with the
powers of search under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. It
relates to postal and telegraphic articles. A point has been made
that the collection of important intelligence relating to illegal
transactions involving foreign exchange would be facilitated if
powers to intercept postal articles were available to senior
officers.

1. Chie Fashions (West Wales Lid. v. Jones, (1968) 2 Q.B. 229.

2. Ghani and others ४. Jones, (1968) 3 All E.R. 1700,


121

15.36-3. An examination of analogous provisions, in

other Acts furnishes two kinds of provisions, on the subject.
First, there are provisions conferring a power to intercept and
detain articles in the course of transmission by post or telegraph.
Secondly, there are provisions under which the competent
officer can require the postal or telegraph authorities to deliver,
to the specified officer, postal and telegraphic articles (meant
for particular persons).

of

15.36-K. In this connection, two sections of the Code
Criminal Procedure are quoted below! :—

“94, (1) Whenever any Court or in any place beyond
the limits of the towns of Calcutta and Bombay any officer
in charge of a police-station considers that the production
of any document or other thing is necessary or desirable for
the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other pro-
ceeding under this Code by or before such Court or officer,
such Court may issue a summons or such officer a written
order, to the person in whose possession or power such do-
cument or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend
and produce it. or to produce it, at the time and place stated
in the summons or order.

(2) Any person required under this section merely to
produce a document or other thing shall be deemed to have
complied with the requisition if he causes such document
or thing to be produced instead of attending personally to
produce the same.

(3) Nothing in this section shail be deemed to affect
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, sections 123 and 124, or to
apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document
or any parcel or thing in the custody of the Postal or Tele-
gfaph authorities.

95. (i) If any document, parcel or thing in such custody
is, in the opinion of any District Magistrate, Chief Presidency
Magistrate, High Court or Court of Session, wanted for the
Purpose of any investigation, inquiry. trial or other pro-
ceeding under this Code, such Magistrate or Court may
require the Postal or Telegraph authorities as the case may
be, to deliver such document, parcel or thing to such person
as such Magistrate or Court directs.

___(2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opi-
nion of any other Magistrate, or of any Commissioner of
Police or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any
such purpose, he may require the Postal or Telegraph
Department, as the case may be, to cause search to be made
for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the
orders of such District Magistrate, Chief Presidency Magistrate
of Court.”

Summons
to produce
document
or other
thing.

1 of 1872,

Procedure
as 10
letters
and
telegrams.

1, Sections 94-95, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.


Power to
intercept
notified
g00ds
during
transmis-
sion by
posi.

1, Section 25, Post Office Act, 1898.

122

15.36-L, The Post Office Act has a number of provisions
authorising interception. It is sufficient to quote onel,

“25. Where a notification has been published under
section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, in respect of any
80005 of any specified description or where the import or
export into or from India of goods of any specified descrip-
tion has been prohibited or restricted by or under any other
enactment for the time being in force, any officer of the Post
Office empowered in this behalf by the Central Government
may search or cause search to be made, for any such goods in co-
urse of transmission by post, and shail deliver all postal articles
reasonably believed or found to contain such goods to such
officer as the Central Government may appoint in this be-
half and such goods may be disposed of in such manner as
the Central Government may direct. In carrying out any
such search, such officer of the Post Office may open or un-
fasten, or cause to be opened or unfastened, any news-
paper or any book, pattern or sample packet in course of
transmission by post.”

15.36-M. The interception of articles whose import or export
is prohibited is thus covered by section 25, Post Office Act,
quoted above. But it does not, unlike the Cr. P.C.2, give power
to direct delivery of postal articles. Moreover, the power
thereunder does not vest in the Enforcement Officers acting
under the Foreign Exchange Act. If, therefore, it is considered
necessary that the Enforcement Officers should have the ini-
tiative and that the power should extend to directing deliver,
then a comprehensive and self-contained provision in the Foreign
Exchange Act would be needed.

15.36-N. We are, clearly, of the view that in the interests
of effective enforcement of this important Act. it is desirable to
confer this power on appropriate authority. We proceed to
discuss below a few salient features of the power that could be
conferred.

15.36-0. Any law-maker proposing a power of interception
has, in order to create a picture of his proposal, necessarily to
go into a few salient features, such as—

(2) the situation in which the power will be exercisable:

(6) the authority who will exercise the power, and the
question of subjective or objective satisfaction of that autho-
rity;

(० the duration for which the interception will operate:

(d) the other conditions governing the excercise of the
power; and

2. Section 95, Cr.P.C. (quoted supra). (page 3).


123
(©) the further disposition of the intercepted article.

These features have to be considered even where there is no
question of fundamental rights.

15.36-P. Further, in view of the fact that the power to intercept
letters and telegraphic messages may conceivably raise questions
of interference with the freedom of speech and expression, it is
advisable as a_ matter of abundant of caution to ensure that the
restrictions are reasonable and in the interest of one of the con-
siderations specified in article 192).

15.36-Q. It may be noted that section 25, Post Office Act,
18981, is connected with the restrictions under the Import and
Export (Control) Act, 1947 or under section 11, Customs Act,
1962 or under similar laws.

The last sentence of section 25 does authorise the opening
of many postal articles, but not letters. Hence, in practice,
its coming into conflict with the freedom of speech is not likely.
So far as the right to hold etc. property is concerned, most of
these other Acts would fall within the ambit of the words, ‘in
the interest of general public’ used in article 19(6) of the Cons-
titution. In case the restrictions imposed in those other Acts
are themselves held to be void, then section 25 of the Post Office
Act wilt be void in relation to those restrictions.

15.36-R. But we are now dealing with a power with a wider
ambit.

Since constitutional questions are bound to be raised, arti-
cle 19(2) of the Constitution has to be considered. Intercep-
tion of letters or telegrams at the instance of executive officers
could be constitutionally justified with reference to articie 192),
if it amounts to ‘incitement to an offence’. (There are other
permissible heads of restriction in article 192); but they are
not very appropriate for the present purpose).

15.36-S. As far as the reasonableness of the restriction is
concerned, a number of points have to be borne in mind in
connection with search, interception and similar powers. Chief
amongst these are—

(1) nexus between the purpose and object of the section,
and the exercise of the power thereunder ;

(2) indication as to when and in what circumstances
the power is to be exercised ;

(3) indication in respect of which persons and whose
premises the power in question is to be exercised ;

“TE. Section 25, Post Office Act is quoted supra. (page 4).
1 Mof Law/72-9


124

(4) principies, which, according to the Legislature,
afford a guidance for exercising the power by the executive ;

(5) opportunity to the persons affected or likely to be
affected, to contest the exercise of the power ;

(6) provision to, enable the aggrieved party to make
a representation ;

(7) provision for notice before the power is exercised!;

(8) provision for the return of articles seized, time fimit
set for any such return, and other connected safeguards,

15.36-T. Bearing these considerations in mind, we think
that while it is desirable in the iaterest of prompt and effective
investigation that the power to intercept postal and telegraphic
articles should be conferred, certain safeguards are necessary,
having regard to the constitutional provision and also having
regard to the need to avoid undue harassment. The safeguards
which we contemplate will be apparent from the very tentative
draft which we give below.

15.36-U. Accordingly, we recommend that the following
provision? be inserted in the Foreign Exchange Act :—

“(1) (f any document; parcel or thing in the custody
of the Postal or Telegraph authorities is, in the Opinion of
the Director of Enforcement or any officer not below the rank
of Assistant Director authorised by him, wanted for the
purpose of any investigation, inquiry or other proceeding
under this Act in respect of an offence relating to foreign
exchange the value whereof exceeds rupees one lakh or for
the detection of any such offence, such officer may-—

(a) require the Postal or Telegraph authorities,
as the case may be, to deliver such document, parcel
or thing to such person as such officer directs, or

(8) intercept, detain, open and examine any such
document, parcel or thing, pending a requisition by him
under clause (a). हु

(2) If the document consists of any message received
for transmission by telegraph by the telegraph authorities,
such officer may require the telegraph authorities not to
transmit the message to the person to whom it is addressed,
pending an order under sub-section 6).

(3) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opi-
nion of any other Enforcement officer, wanted for any such
purpose, he may require the Postal or Telegraph Depart-
ment, as the case may be, to cause search to be made for

1, tn the present case, No. (5), (6) and (7) would be impracticable. ~
2, This is a very tentative draft.


125

and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the
orders of any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section (1).

(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in
relation to any letter or telegram unless the letter or telegram
amounts to incitement to commit an offence under this
Act or constitutes evidence of such incitement.

(5) No document, parcel or thing shall be retained in
the custody of such officer for a Period exceeding fifteen

days {excluding holidays) unless he has obtained the approval
of the Director.”

15.37. In the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, the

Prevention

following provision is absent :-- ot Food
@) Summary trial. tion Act—

. . Summar;

In the absence of suggestions to that effect, a change is not Hua”

necessary. हे

15.38. A doubt has been raised whether sub-standard Sub-

foods} are covered by the definition of adulteration. The standard
Position, however, seems to be fairly clear. For example, in foods.
a Madras case?, there was deficiency in the ‘Reichert value’
of ghee (ie. value below a particular stipulated figure) i.e. the
ghee was of a sub-standard quality, and such sub-standard qua-
lity was by definition, an act of adulteration. It was held that
the Court cannot embark on an academic investigation about
the Reichert value and its bearing upon the quantum of fat in
ghee in different areas in the country. If the quality or purity
of ghee falls below the standard Prescribed by the rules, or if
its constituents are in excess of the prescribed limits of variabi-
Jity, then the ghee is deemed to be adulterated within the meaning
of section 2 of the Act. When the prescribed standard is not
attained, the statute treats such ghee. by fiction, as an adul-
terated food, though in fact it is not So.

15.39. The Supreme Court3, while dealing with a case of

मु Supreme
adulteration of butter observed 4:—

Court case.
“If the quality or purity of butter falls below the standard

prescribed by the rules or its constituents are in excess of the

prescribed limits of variability, it shall be deemed to be adul-

terated within the meaning of section 2 of the Act. If the

Prescribed standard is not attained, the statute treats such

butter, by fiction as an adulterated food, though in fact it

is not adulterated. To put it in other words, by reason of

the fiction, it is not permissible for an accused to prove

ets Article on Food Adulteration in Times Weekly, (28th November, 1971) by Bhishma
esab.

2. Corporation of Madras v. Arunughamn, A.ER. 1966 Mad. 194, 196, paragraphs. 67.
3. MY. Joshi v. M.U. Shimpi, ALR. 1961 5.0, 1494, 1496 (Subba Rao, 1),
4. See also Baborally Santar v. Corporation of Caleutia, AT.R. 1966 SC. 1569.


126

that though the standard prescribed is not attained, the ar-
ticle of food is in fact not adulterated. The non-oonformity
with the standard prescribed makes such butter an adultera-
ted food.”

Cases as to 15.40, The Bombay High Court!, in explaining the provision

sub- of section 20) (1), has also said that an article in respect of which

standard | any standard is prescribed or limits of variability of quantities

drugs. of its constituents are prescribed shall be deemed to be adul-
terated if it does not conform to the standard so prescribed.
Accordingly, butter containing more than 1632 of moisture
and less than 80% of milk fat as prescribed by the 101९5 was
deemed to be ‘adulterated’ within the meaning of the Act. In
Chimantal v. State of Maharashtra?, the Supreme Court held
that the appellant was guilty of an anti-social act of a very se-
rious nature in manufacturing sub-standard drugs, which was
against the object of the Drugs Act, 1940. We think that the
position is quite clear, ‘and needs no amendment.

Canned 15.41. A doubt has been raised3, as to the applicability

Foods of the Food Adulteration Act to canned or processed food.
But we regard the definition of “food” and the sub-standard
provisions as wide enough, to include canned and processed
foods. It may be noted that it has been held, that if ghee of
§.G. Mark Brand is sold from sealed tins, and the ghee is found
to be adulterated, the vendor is guilty of an offence under sec-
tion 7. That the vendor was ignorant about the quality of ghee
is no defence under section 1'

Supreme 15.42. In one case’, the Supreme Court held that the ac-

Court cused persons had stored for sale condensed milk which was

case adulterated and, therefore they were guilty under section 16(1)
(a) (i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, The
defence of the appellants was based upon section 19(2) of the
Act, namely that they had purchased the tins of condensed milk
from another firm (whose appearance could not be obtained
as they could not be traced), and that the goods were in the same
condition as when they purchased them. On analysis of the
contents of the condensed milk tins, it was found that it was
sub-standard, as the fat content was below the minimum pres-
cribed.

Therefore, the Court held that the condensed milk stored
by the appellants for sale was adulterated, and there was a

1, 639 at ५. Lingappa, A.LR. 1962 Bom. 104, 105.
2. Ciinantal v. State, (1952) 1 S.C.R. 344, 347, 348 (Case under the Drugs Act).
01 F994 Alatteration in Tim2s Weekly, November 28, 1971, by Bhishma

Desai.

1954) ४.९. Law Journal (Notes) 81, cited ia the Digest for 1951 to 1965, under

403 701), Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.

5, Barborally Sardar v. Corporation of Calcutta, A.LR. 1966 S.C. 1569, 1870, followed
in Silichar M rricipal Board v. Mukul Chandra, ALR. 1968 A & N 24, 26 (D.B.).



127

breach of the provisions of section 16(1MaXi). The Supreme
Court held! :—

“In view of the provisions of section 19(1), it was not
open to the appellants to contend that they were ignorant
of the nature, substance and quality of the condensed
milk sold by them. Sub-section (2) of section 19, however,
furnishes a defence to a vendor ignorant of the nature,
substance and quality of food sold by him provided he
satisfies the requirements of that provision.”

15.43 In this case, it was found that there was no warranty Madhya
in the prescribed form, and neither the label on the tins nor the Pradesh
cash-memo contained any warranty that the food was the same हु
in nature, substance and quality as demanded by the vendor.
and hence the accused has failed to establish the defence under
section 19(2) of the Act. The Supreme Court pointed out that
the fact that the vendors sold tins of condensed milk “‘in the same
state as they purchased them” was by itself not sufficient to ab-
solve them. Therefore, the conviction of the appellants under
section 16(1)(a) of the Act by the Calcutta High Court was

upheld.

In another case?, the facts were as follows :—

“The accused sold ghee of S.G. Mark Brand which,
on analysis was found to be adulterated. The plea of the
accused was that he gave to the Food Inspector ghee of the
very nature, substance and quality demanded by him, and
that the tin from which he supplied the ghee was a sealed tin
and he had no reason to think that the ghee contained in
the sealed tin was not of the S.G. Mark. The trial Magis-
trate found that the ghee was adulterated, but he took the
view that the ghee was not of the nature substance or quality
which it purported to be or was represented to be. On appeal,
the Madhya Pradesh High Court held that under section 2(i)
(1) of the Act, an article of food was deemed to be adulterated
“Gf the quality of purity of the article falls below the prescribed
Standard or the constituents are present in quantities which
are in excess of the prescribed limits of variability”, Further,
it was held that “the Act aimed at prohibition of sale of
adulterated food in larger interests of maintenance of public
health and with that aim prohibited totally, under section
7, the manufacture, sale, distribution or storage of any adul-
terated food...Section 19 of the Act laid down that it
would be no defence to allege merely that the vendor was
ignorant of the nature, substance or quality of the food sold
by him or that the purchaser was not prejudiced by the sale”.

1, Barborally Sardar v. Corporation of Calcutta, ALR. 1966 S.C. 1569, 1570.

2. Municipal Council, Durg v. Gujarmal, 1964 M.P.L.J., Note 81 (D.B.) cited in the
Yearly Digest.


‘Tinned
foods when
mis-
branded.

Maximum
punish-
iment
under the
Prevention
of Food
Adultera-
tion Act.

Burden of
proof of
ens rea.

Essential
Conunodi-
ties Act.

Mens rea
under
section 7
considered.

Bwpo

Para.

128

15.44 In addition to tinned foods being deemed ‘adulterated’
under section 2(i)(1). they can also be treated as misbranded
under section 2(ix){k). 1-2

15.45. The maximum punishment under the Prevention
of Food Adulteration Act does not require any radical change.
There may, however, be scope for rationalisation of the punish-
ment under the Act ; but such an inquiry would involve numerous
matters of detail outside the scope of this Report.

15.45A. We have recommended? in general the insertion
of a section relating to burden of proof. So far as the Preven-
tion of Food Adulteration Act is concerned, section 19 achieves
the object, and no further provision is needed.

15.46. So far as the Essential Commodities Act is concern-
ed. the following provisions found in several other enactments
dealing with social and economic offences are absent :—

(7) Minimum imprisonment on first conviction.
(ii) Public censure.

Both these raise questions of mens rea, and as the following
paragraphs‘ will show. the Act is very stringent in that respect
at present.

15.47. We now deal with the question of mens rea. After
the amendment of 1947, the penal provision in the Essential Com-
modities Act has acquired a different character, by the elimina-
tion of mens rea. The relevant portion of section 7(1), of that
Act, now reads—

“7. (1) If any person contravenes, whether knowingly,
intentionally or otherwise, any order made under section 3—

(a) he shall be punishable—

(7) in the case of an order made with reference
to clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-section (2) of that
section, with imprisonment for a term which may

extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine,
an

_ Gi) in the case of any other order, with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine ;

Provided that in the case of a first offence, if the
Court is of opinion that a sentence of fine only will meet

. Furma x. Corporation of Madras, (1970), 1 M.L.J. 407. 408.
. Jagneswar ¥. Gopal Chandra, A.L.R. 1961 Tripura. 18, 21.
. Para.

7.12, supra.
15.47, ef seq.


129

the ends of justice, it may, for reasons to be recorded,
refrain from imposing a sentence of imprisonment
and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, the
Court shall impose a sentence of imprisonment and such
imprisonment shall not be less.than one month ;”

[Clause (b) relates to forfeiture, and is not material
for the point under discussion.)

15.48, Even the existing provisions for mandatory imprison-
ment contained in the Act!, may prove to be harsh where the
particular contravention charged was not committed “intention-
ally or knowingly”, but was committed “otherwise2”, One
alternative to remedy this hardship would be to re-cast the penal
provision in section 7(1)(a) so as to make a distinction between
contraventions committed knowingly or intentionally (on the
one hand) and other contraventions, (on the other hand). In
the former, case, as mandatory imprisonment (as at present)
with a minimum term (to be added) would be appropriate, with
a relaxing power in the court to take care of exceptional cases.
In the latter case, neither mandatory nor minimum term of im-
prisonment would be called for.

15.49. However, we do not think it necessary to go to
that length at the present Stage. Experience of the working

of the new section can be awaited for a year or so.

15.50. But we should, at this stage, refer to our general re-
commendation for shifting the burden of proof}, and point
out that section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act goes beyond
merely throwing the burden of proof on accused, and practi-
cally eliminates mens rea. Government may consider whether
the section should not be brought into line with our general
tecommendation.

15.51. The maximum period of imprisonment under the
Essential Commodities Act requires increase from five to seven
years, Here, of course the pecuniary test cannot be applied.
But an increase is needed in view of the increased importance
of checking these offences. Of course, the structure of the rele-
vant section’ is capable of improvement in certain matters of
detail also ; but such an inquiry would take us far beyond the
scope of this Report,

We, therefore, recommend that in section 70)(8)6) of the
Essential Commodities Act, for the words “five years”, the words
“seven years” should be substituted.

Mens rea
under the
Essential
Commodi-
ties Act.

Maximum
punish-
ment
under the
Essential
Commodi-
fies Act.

1, Section 7, Essential Commodities Act.

2. Paragraph 15.47, supra.

3. Para. 7.12, supra.

4. Section 7, Essential Commodities Act, 1955.


Bailability
under
Essential
Commodi-
ties Act.

Abetment
in Wealth
Tax Act.

Recom-
mendation
as to
Income-
tax Act.

Income-tax
and Wealth
‘Tax Act—
Increase
in—
Punish-
ment
considered.

130

15.52. Under section 10A, Essential Commodities Act,
the offences under the Act are cognizable and bailable. This
provision was not found in the Act as originally enacted and
was inserted by a later amendment in 1967. We have not been
able to discover, either from the Statement of Objects and Reasons
to the Amending Bill of 1967 or from any other source, the reason
why a special provision as to bail was considered necessary.
Perhaps, it was thought that many offences under the Act would
be committed by persons who could be safely released on bail.
We are, however, of the view that the matter should be left to
be governed by the general provision in the relevant Schedule
to the Criminal Procedure Code under which, if the maximum
punishment exceeds three years, the offence is non-bailable.
We do not see any great hardship as likely to result from such
acourse,as the court has always a discretion to release the
accused on bail even if the offence is non-bailable. Accordingly,
we recommend that section 10A of the Essential Commodities
Act should be revised so as to delete the words “‘and bailable”.

15.53. As regards the Wealth Tax Act, we do not consider
it necessary to discuss the amendments in detail, as what we
are going to say regarding the Income-tax Act! is applicable to
the Wealth Tax Act also.

15.54. In the Income-tax Act, the following provisions are
absent :—

() Elimination or modification of mens rea :
(ii) Confiscation ;
(ii) Stoppage of business ;
(i) Higher powers of Magistrates ;
(v) Special rules of evidence.

As regards point (i), no change is proposed as to mens rea,?
of shifting the burden of proof, having regard to the complicated
nature of the offences under the Act. For the same reason,
provisions as to points (ii) to (v) would also not be appropriate
for these offences.

15.55. It has been stated3 that under the Income-tax Act
and the Wealth tax Act, the punishment: on prosecution for the
offence of tax evasion as also for abetment of tax evasion is, at
Present, rigorous imprisonment for a minimum of 6 months
and a maximum of two years, The punishment is less severe
for other offences under these Acts, such as, failure to furnish
the return of income or produce accounts and documents cated
for by notice, as also failure to deduct tax at source and pay it

4. See paragraphs 15.54 to 15.76, infra.
2. Para. 7.12, supra.
3. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of Indie.


131

to the credit of the Government. It has been suggested that
these provisions may be modified on the following lines :—

(७) For the offence of tax evasion and abetment of
tax evasion under the Income-tax Act and Wealth tax Act,
the minimum punishment may be raised to rigorous imprison-
ment for one year and the maximum be raised to rigorous
imprisonment for 7 years.

(6) For the offence of failure to furnish the return of
income or the return of net wealth, where called for by notice,
the minimum punishment may be raised to rigorous impri-
sonment for one year and the maximum to rigorous impri-
sonment for 7 years, It is further stated that in view of the
proposed increase in the term of imprisonment, there is no
need for continuing the existing provision for the levy of a
fine ranging from a minimum of Rs. 4/- to a maximum of
Rs. 10/- per day for the period of default. There exist
already provisions for penalty for late submission or non-
submission of returns.

(c) For the offence of failure to pay, to the Govern-
ment, the tax deducted at source under the Income-tax Act,
the suggestion made is that the minimum punishment may
similarly be increased to rigorous imprisonment for one year
and the maximum to rigorous imprisonement for 7 years.
The existing provision for fine at the rate of 15% per annum
on the amount of the tax for the period of the delay, need
not (if the suggestion is accepted) be continued, in view of
the suggested increase in the term of imprisonment. There
already exists provision for imposing interest at the rate of
9% and penalty.

15.56. As regards the first point!, it seems to have been Assump-
assumed that a person who makes a false statement in a return tion as to
of income-tax commits an offence under sections 191 to 193, applicabi-
Indian Penal Code. This however, requires examination. stations
While such a person can be prosecuted? under section 1773, 191-193,
Indian Penal Code, the position regarding section 191 is less 195.
certain.

3, Paragraph 15.55(a), supra,

2, See Baliak v. Rangachari, ALR. 1969 S.C. 701 (On appeal from A.LR. 1969
Mad. 145).

3. Section 177, Indian Penal Code reads as follows:—

“Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any subject to any
public servant, as such, “furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows
‘or has reason to believe to be false, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
@ term which may extend 10 six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand
tupees, or with both:

or, if the information which he is legaily bound to give respects the commission
of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an
offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

(Illustrations omitted).


132

Giving 15.57. Section 1911 of the Indian Penal Code applies only
false oe, . When there is an obligation to state the truth, imposed by law

or by oath or when a declaration is required by law. A verifica-
tion is not an oath, and the Income-tax Act does not contain a
provision requiring the assessee to state the truth in the return.
‘The Act, read with the rules, does require a verification, but
that is not enough to attract the first part of section 191. Of
course, if the assessee makes a false statement on oath before
the Income-tax Officer, sections 191-193 apply2._ If the verifica-
tion is false, the sanction provided in section 177, Indian Penal
Code also applies.

15.58. The latter part of section 191, which relates to 3
‘declaration’. may apply, though even here the position, is not
beyond controversy3.

Punish- 15.59, Even if section 191 applies, it is not clear which part
Men se of section 193 will apply to a false statement in a return¢.
evidence.

1. Section 191, Indian Penal Code reads as follows :—

“191. Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of
Jaw to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject,
makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false
‘oc does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence.

Explanation \.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether
it is made verbally or otherwise.

Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of thefperson attesting’is with-
in the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by
stating that he believes 4 thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating that
he knows a thing which he does not know.”

(Utustrations omitted).

2. Cf the discussion in Lalji Haridas v. State of Madras, A.1.R. 1964 S.C. 1154 (On
appeal from A.1.R. 1963 Bom. 70).

3. Cf. decisions as to verification of pleadings.

4, Section 193, Indian Penal Code reads as follows:—
93. Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a judicial pro-
cee fe or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a
judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for
‘a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;

and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case,

shail be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall aiso be liable to fine.

Explanation 1.—A tial before a Court-martial is a judicial proceeding.

Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceedin,
before a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation
may not take place before a Court of Justice.

(Illustration omitted).

Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court of Justice accordin;
jaw, and conducted under the authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a jud
proceedinr, though that investigation may not take place before a Court of Justice.’

(Illustcation omitted).



133

15.60. We have ourselves recommended! an increase in Recom-
punishment based on the pecuniary test {and also minimum mendation

हे : 3 justic to increase
Imprisonment), which will meet the fequirements of justice?. कै !

maximum
panish-
ment under
Income-
tax Act

15.61. We should also refer to the Report of the Working Restric-
Group on Direct Taxes} of the Administrative Reforms Com- tion on

६०७, inati 7 रे unneces-
mission as to unnecessary examination of tax-payers : sary exami-

«In this connection, a suggestion was made to us that moon of
a provision should be made in the Income-tax Act on the pavers,
lines of section 7605(b) of the internal Revenue Code of °*
1954 of the United States of America, reproduced below,

which fimits the number of times the account-books could be

called for and examined—

(6) Restrictions on Examination of Tax-payers. No
Tax-payer shall be subjected to unnecessary examination
of investigations, and only one inspection of a tax-payer’s
books of accounts shalt be made for each taxable year un-
fess the tax-payer requests otherwise or unless the Secretary
or his delegate, after javestigation, notifies the tax-payer in
writing that an additional inspection is necessary.”

We should like to express our agreement with this view.

15.62, [0 the Report of the Working Group? of the paucity of
Administrative Reforms Commission, the following observations _prosecu-
have been made as to prosecutions :— Uons.

“The performance of the Department has been so poor
that the Public Accounts Committee was compelled to re-

mark as follows in its 21st Report (1963-64)—Third Lok
Sabha—

In para 7.12. of its Report. the Direct Taxes Ad-
ministration Enquiry Committee observed that though
the Direct Taxes Acis provide for prosecution and impri-
sonment in the cases of concealment of income, not
a single person has been convicted for evasion during
the last ten years, and Tecommended that unless it was
brought home to the potential tax evader that attempts
at concealment of income would not only not pay him
but also actually land him in jail, there could be no

1, Para. 7.20, supra,
2. Amendment to be indicated Separately.
3. Report of the Working Group on Central Direct Taxes Administration (Adminis.

(rative Reforms Commission) Ganuary, 1968) (Pages 24, 25, Paragraph 2.25),

re ger of the Working Group on Central Direct Taxes Administration (Adminis.
trative Reforms Commission) Wanuary, 1968), pages 10-11



Fax laws—
abetment
by creating
false
vouchers.

Supply of
material
for com-
mitting a
crime how
far consti-
tutes
abetment,

134

effective check against evasion. The Committee are not
alittle surprised to find that even though this recommenda-
tion has been accepted, Government sent for prosecu-
tion not more than one person in whole of the country
during 1961-62 and that case too was compounded.”

We understand that the question has been actively taken
up and so we do not propose to say anything more about it.

15.63. It has been suggested that’ the scope of the term
‘abetment’ in tax matters should be widened to include the crea-
tion of false vouchers, accounts and other records which may
facilitate tax evasion by any other person.

We think that under the definition of ‘abetment?’ in the Penal
Code, such acts would be covered, provided, of course, it is prov-
ed that the person charged has thereby facilitated evasion.

15.64. The question is allied to the question how far supply
of tools or materials constitutes abetment of an offence. Though
it is not possible to make a very categorical statement of the
position in England about certain matters of detail, the case-
law? furnishes sufficient ground for putting forth a view that a
person who, with intent to facilitate a crime, supplies materials
or tools for the commission of the crime, ‘aids its commission’.
The distinction between misdemanour and felony has been abo-
lished in England4, and the provisions as to accessories before
the fact are of no legal significance now,

Assistance in the crime even at an earlier stage will suffice,
as where the accused assists someone who subsequently utters
forged cheques to open a bank account in a false name’. One
man may abet another by helping to set the stage even before
the victim has been found. “If a man helps another in prepara-
tion for crimes of a certain nature with the intention that the other
shall commit crimes of that nature, he may abet those crimes
when they come to be committed*”.

15.65. Whether a person who’ knowingly gives assistance,
but hopes that the crime will not be committed is guilty as an
abettor, is a question on which the authorities in England are
not easy to reconcile. But this much is clear, namely, that if
@ person intentionally supplies materials for the commission
of a crime, he aids and abets the crime.

1, Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.

2. Section 107, clause thirdly, Indian Penal Code,

3. See paragraphs 15.65 to 15.67, infra,

4. The Criminal Law Act, 1967 (Eng.).

5. Thambiah v. R. (1966) A.C. 37; (1965) 3 AIL E.R. 661, 665 (PC).
6. Thambiah v. R. (1966) A.C. 37; (1965) 3 All E.R. 661, 665 (P.C.).


135

As Devlin J. said’ in a case which is often cited :—

“A person who supplies the instruments for a crime
or anything essential to its commission aids in the commis-
sion of it, and if he does so knowingly, and with intent
to aid, he abets as well, and is therefore guilty of aiding and
abetting.”

15.66. 10 was observed 200 years 8202, that no man ought
to furnish another “with the means of transgressing the law,
Knowing that he intends to make that use of them’.

15.67. The controversy, at present, is only as to whether
knowingly facilitating the commission of a crime ought to be
sufficient for complicity, if a true purpose to advance the crimi-
nal end is absent. There has been a difference of opinion as to
the criteria that should measure ctimial liability in this respect.
According to one view, the abbettor must have “‘a stake in the
outcome”. According to another view, however, conduct
which knowingly facilitates the commission of crimes is the proper
object of preventive effort by the penal law (if there is no affir-
mative justification for that conduct).

15.68. The position in India, in this respect, should be re-
garded as more certain than in England, because the Indian
Penal Code not only provides> that a person who “intentionally
aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing” of anything, abets
it, but also* makes it clear that whoever “either prior to or,
at the time of commission of an act, does anything in order to
facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the
commission thereof”, is said to “aid the doing of that doing”.
The Code5 has, further, a specific provision that to constitute
the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act abetted
should be committed.

15.69. It is also relevant to refer to a Supreme Court 285९९
in that the point was considered how far the acquittal of a person
alleged to have committed the offence in consequence of abet-
ment bars the conviction of abettor. It was stated that it cannot
be held in law that a person cannot even be convicted of abett-
ing a certain offence when the person alleged to have committed
that offence in consequence of the abetment has been acquitted.
The question of the abettor's guilt depends on the nature of the
act abetted, and the manner in which the abetment was made.
The offence of abetment is complete when the aileged abettor
has institgated another, or engaged with another in a conspiracy
to commit the offence. It is not necessary for the offence of

Position in
India.

National Coal Board v. Gamble, (1959) 3 AILE. R. 200.
.. Lightfoot ९. Tenant, (1796) 126 E.R. 1059, 1062.

}. Section 107, clause thirdly, 1.P.C.

|. Section 107, Explanation 2, LP.C.

}. Section 107, Explanation, 2, I.P.C.

SYR

| Jamuna Singh v. State of Bihar, ALR. 1967 5.0. 553 (Raghubar Dayal, 3).


Failure to
pay tax-
punish-
ment
suggested.

136

abetment that the act abetted must be committed. It is only
in the case of a person abetting an offence by intentionally
aiding another to commit that offence that the charge of abet-
ment against him would be expected to fail when the person
alleged to have committed the is acquitted of that offence.
It is only in this narrow circumstance that the abettor can be
exempted from his guilt, otherwise, under the Indian law, for
an offence of abetment, it is not necessary that the offence should
have been committed.

15.70. A mere giving an aid by itself will not. of course.
constitute an abetment of an offence!, if the person who gave
the aid did not know that an offence was being committed or
contemplated. The intention should be to aid an offence or
to facilitate the commission of an offence?.

15.71. It may be stated that the word ‘offence’ (as defined
in section 40 of the Indian Penal Code) denotes a thing punish-
able under the Penal Code or under any special law or local
law. Therefore, in the absence of any special provision regard-
ing abetment in the special enactments, ia view of section 40 of
the Penal Code, the provisions of the Penal Code would apply.

15.72. We may now refer to another suggestion relevant
to taxation laws. It has been suggested that for the offence
of failure, wilfully or without reasonable cause, to pay taxes
which are assessed, provision may be made fora minimum punish-
ment by way of imprisonment of the defaulter. This provision
will (it is suggested) apply to all direct taxes except estate duty
(for which a special procedure for consultation with the States
will have to be undertaken according to the provisions of
the Constitution). We see no objection in prinicple to the
suggestion. But we do think that the provision should be con-
fined to cases where the failure is wilful and without reasonable
cause4-5. Further, we do not think that a minimum period of
imprisonment is desirable for this offence.

15.73. In a Madras case*, the following observations
relevant to section 23F, Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act. were made :—

“Whether section 23F can stand as it is in the Statute,
is not a question raised in this case. Zt may be that this pro-
vision which makes mere failure to pay a penalty an offence with-
out mens rea, (is) bad : but we are not concerned with it in these

1, Ram Nath v. King-Emperor, ALR. 1925 All. 230.

2. State v. Abdul Aziz, ALR. 1962 Bom. 243 (Case under the Import and Export
Control Act). {The case went on appeal to the Supreme Court. But this point was not

disputed).

3. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.
4. Amendment to be drafted.
5. See also para. 15.76, infra.

6. MLR. Pratap v. Director of Enforcement, (1969) Cr.L.J. 1582, 1589, para. 35. (Mad-


137

Petitions. The intention of the Legislature is clear, that a new
offence has been introduced under section 23F probably con-
sidering the gravity of the offences committed in res-
pect of foreign exchange. I am, therefore, of the view that
the nature and the characteristic of proceedings provided
under sections 23(1)(a) and 23D are civil proceedings, and
that their nature and character were not changed by virtue
of the introduction of section 23F of the Act and section
23(1{a) does not become a criminal proceeding.”

15.74. We have examined the matter at some length. A
proposal that default in payment of tax should be treated as a cri-
minal offence, does not, in our opinion, hit any particular pro-
visions of the Constitution.

15.75. We have considered the position with reference to
article 14 of the Constitution also, Though the Proposed pro-
vision will put Government dues in a preferred position, the
classification would appear to be reasonable, it being in the pub-
fic interest to secure due payment of taxes. It is true that the
legislation at issue in State of Rajasthan v. Mukan Chand', while
providing for the reduction of the Jagirdat’s debts {in view of
the inability of the Jagirdar to pay debts in full after resumption)
had made the provisions inapplicable to certain categories of
debts due from the Jagirdars including debts due to the govern-
ment or local authority. The court struck down the provision
with regard to the exclusion of certain debts, as based on a dis-
crimination not supported by any intelligible point.

15.76. But the position here is different. Decisions uphold-
ing the application of a special for the recovery of
government dues are weli-known?. Prima facie, a provision
by which non-payment of the State dues alone is made a criminal
offence, could, we think, be defended, with some force in the
Present state of the case-law.

The proposed provision should not, however, treat ali de-
fauiters alike, It would be difficult to justify the equal treatment
of those who have deliberately refused to pay their tax-dues and
those who, owing to misfortune, are unable to pay it.

We are accordingly recommending a provision penalising
deliberate defaulters.

15.77, We may now take up the Customs Act. It has
been stated> that section 135, Customs Act, whieh provides
for punishment by the court for offences of fraudulent evasion
of duty or of any prohibition, has two parts :--

(a) for offences relating to goods to which section 123
applies such as gold, watches, diamonds, the punishment

Customs,
Act, sec-
tion 135.

“1. “State of Rajustiian v. Mukan Chand, ALR. 1964 S.C. 1633

2. Munna Lai ¥. Callector of Thalawar, (1961), 2 S.C.R. 962, A.LR. 1961 S.C. 803.

3. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.


138

provided, in section 135(1) is a minimum of six months’
imprisonment and a maximum of 5 years, and fine, when
the value of such goods involved in the case exceeds Rupees
onelakh, The Court has discretion to award a lesser sentence
than the prescribed minimum, for special and adequate
reasons to be recorded in writing;

(6) for other offences, the punishment provided in section
135i) is imprisonment extending upto two years or fine or both.
Now, it has been suggested that the section should be amended
as follows :—

“For offences punishable under section 135(i), the maxi-
mum period of imprisonment be raised from 5 years to 7
years, and the minimum from 6 months to one year.

(ii) For offences punishable under section 13500), the
maximum period of imprisonment be raised from two years
to three years, and it may also be provided that the fine, if
any, imposed by the Court shall be in addition to the sentence
of imprisonment and not as an alternative to it. The Court
will have the discretion not to award the sentence of imprison-
ment, if it considers proper.

(iii) In addition, it is proposed to provide for longer
period of imprisonment for second and subseqeunt offences
under the Customs Act on the following tines :—-

When a person who is prosecuted for an offence
punishable under section 1350) has been convicted earlier
whether under section 1350) or 135(ii), then the minimum
sentence of imprisonment shall be for two years instead
of one year,

When a person, who is prosecuted for an offence punish-
able under section कर ; has been convicted earlier
whether under section 135(/) or section 13500), there
will be minimum sentence of imprisonment of 6 months.

In both these cases, the Court will have the discretion
to order imprisonment for a lesser period than the prescribed
minimum, but only in special circumstances and for adequate
Teasons to be recorded.

Amend: 15.78. 10 accordance with our general recommendation!
section for increase in the maximum punishment and for minimum
135, Cuse imprisonment, it will be necessary to revise section 135 of the
toms Act Customs Act.
asto
punish- is. j ‘ ‘i
erent, That is, in our view, sufficient.

1. Para. 7.20, supra.


139

15.79. It has been suggested! that section 156, Customs
Act, should be amended to provided for making rules for giving
publicity to the names and other particutars of persons who are
guilty of contraventions of the provisions of the Customs Act
ov of any rule or order or directions made thereunder, be intro-
duced. Such a provision would be on the same'lines as in section
27(2\(c) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. This
provision (it is stated) will put beyond doubt the authority al-
ready exercised on executive basis, by which the field formations
have been instructed to give publicity to offences, including the
names and particulars of offenders.

15.80. The Study Team on Leakage? of Foreign Exchange
has made the following suggestion :—

“9.17. In the fight against fiscal and economic offences,
it is not enough that the methods and machinery for detection
of such offences should be improved and the punishment for
proved cases made deterrent; it is' also necessary that
there is greater social awareness of the evils of such crimes,
and as much social stigma attaches to them as to other crimes
against society. The names of the persons who are proved
to be guilty of under-invoicing/over-invoicing should be
widely publicised. In the sphere of foreign exchange, by
virtue of the powers conferred under section 27 of the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, the Government have published
rules which are called the Foreign Bachange Regulation
(Publication of Names) Rules, 1970. These rules provide
that the Director shall cause to be published in the official
gazette the names and addresses and other particulars of
persons of certain categories mentioned in the rules. These
include persons who have been convicted by a court for
contravention of any of the provisions specified in sub-section
(1) of section 23, and also persons who have been adjudged
by the Director for contravention of these provisions, pro-
vided the exchange involved is Rs. 10,000/- or more, or there
has bevn a previous adjudication by the Director or conviction
by a court in respect of the same person. In addition, the
Government has been empowered to ० publish the names of
any other persons who have been found guilty of any contra-
ventions of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act or of any rule, order or direction made thereunder. if it
is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public
interestso to do. We recommend that similarly rules
should also be framed for publication of the names of offenders
in customs cases relating to under-invoicing or over-invoicing
ia imports and exports. Further, we are also of the view
that such persons should be debarred, for a specified period,
from getting any facilities or concessions which are given

Customs

Act—

Suggestion
about
public
censure,

1. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.

2. Report of the Study Team on Leakage of Foreign Exchange through Fnvoice Mani-
17,

pulation, Ministry of Finance, (1971), page 99, Para.
1M of Lawj72—10


Recom-
mendation
to add
public
censure.
Prepara-
tion in
certain
eases
under the
Customs
Act to be

an offence.

Recom-
mendation
regarding
section
123, Cus-
toms Act.

Burden of
proof of
mnens rea
under
Customs
Act.
Procedure
for triat
under Cus-
toms Act.

140

to importers or exporters ander certain Schemes, such as
those relating to export cash assistance, and import entitlements
under the Registered Exporters scheme.” .

13.81. An amendment to the Customs Act of a general
nature may be inserted to provide for public censure!. .

15.82, We have already recommended? the insertion of a
provision punishing preparation to commit an offence under
the Customs Act in certain cases.

15.83. We wish to refer to a smail point concerning section
12361), Customs Act, which throws on the accused the burden
of proving that goods seized froma hime are. not smuggled goods.
We wish to point out that it does not cover cases where goods
are not seized from the possession of a person, though they
ate proved to have been in his possession previously. We
think that such a situation should also be covered because the
Principle behind the existing provision is equally applicable.

We, therefore, recommend that section 123(1), Customs
Act, should be revised as follows :-—

“123. (1) Where any goods to which this section applies—
(व) are seized under this Act in the reasonable
belief that they are smuggted goods; or
(6) are proved to have been in the possession of
any person before such seizure, पु
the burden of proving that they are not smuggled
goods shall be on the person from whose possession the
goods were seized or in whose possession they are proved
to have been before the seizure, as the case may be.”

15.83A. As recommended already>, a provision shifting
the burden of proof may be inserted in the Customs Act. This
will be in addition to section 123.

15.84. We shall now refer to a few procedural points rele-
vant to the Customs Act. Cognizance in Customs Cases is taken
on complaint. As the Supreme Court has observed4:—

“The Customs Act (52 of 1962) invests the Custom
Officer with the power to search premises, to stop and search
conveyances and to examine persons, and also with the power

५ Amendment to be drafted.

}
2. Para. 15.20, supra.
3. Para. 7.12, supra.
4. Ramesh Chandra v. U.P. State, AIR. 1970 $.C. 940, para. 24.


का

to summon persons, to give evidence and to produce docu-
ments and (sic) seizure of goods, documents and things
which are liable for confiscation. He is also invested with
the power to release a person on bail. He is entitled to
order confiscation of smuggled goods and impose penalty
on persons proved to be guilty. of infringing the provisions
of section 137...the proceedings before a Magistrate can
only be commenced by way of a complaint and not on a
Teport made by a Customs Officer.”

15.85. A suggestiont made with reference to the Customs
Act states thai even where a regular trial has to be adopted, the
law should be simplified as is done in the cases reported by the
police where the trial starts with the filing of the charge-sheet,
Under the Customs Act evidence has to be led before a Magistrate.
before the charges are framed. This itself takes a pretty tong
time, which should be changed by change of procedure suggested
above.

A somewhat similar point was made by an Inspector-General
of Police. during oral discussions?.

The matter may, therefore, be dealt with at some length.

15,86. Under the Criminal Procedure Code (as amended
in 1955), two different procedures are provided for cases
instituted“on police report (on the one hand) and other
casess {on the other hand). In the Report of the Law
Commission on the Code of Criminal Procedure.
a change has been proposed in the definition of ‘complaint’
in section 4(1)(h) of the Code, by Proposing substitution
of the words ‘police report’ for the words ‘the Teport
of a police officer’, and a definition of ‘police report” has been
Proposed to be added as ‘the report made by the police officer
under section 173 (of the Code)’. This change has been proposed
in order to dispel the existing confusion in Tespect of those
reports which the police officers have submitted in cases of wn-
authorised investigation (e.g. on non-cognizable offences). But
this would not alter the status of complaints made by public
servants.

15.87. For reports submitted to courts under section 173
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, there is a shorter procedure
df trial, According to it, the court is authorised to frame a
charge immediately on the basis of the ‘report’ made to it under
section 173, after examination of the documents submitted the re-
with. The reasoning behind this is that in such cases, after

1, Coltector of Customs, Madras (Letter dated 17-1 (+1971).

4

3. Contrast section 251A with sections 252 to 259, Criminal Procedure Code.
4. dist R eport of the Law Commission (Criminal Procedure Code), Vol. 1,

2. Discussions at Madras with the Inspector General of Police, Madras (November .
1971).


Amend-
ment of
section

139,

142

the rigorous investigation and Tecording of statements by the

police, there is little necessity of examining witnesses before
the charge.

There are many departments of the Government apart from
the police having powers of search and seizure, powers of record-
ing statements and investigation as have been conferred upon
the police under the Code of Criminal Procedure. Under
some Acis like the Customs Act, the powers of the departmental
officers are even wider. But, if a Prosecution is launched by
them in respect of any offence under the respective Acts, the
procedure of trial applicable to cases instituted on their ‘com-
laint’ (a departmental ‘challan’, as it is called) is the longer and
more elaborate one given in sections 252 to 259 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. This procedure is much elaborate, as the
court cannot frame charges in such cases unless witnesses are
examined whose evidence, if not rebutted, would otherwise -
be sufficient to warrant a conviction to the accused. There
is no doubt some justification for treating these complaints ona
different footing from those filed by private individuals. They
are more akin to the police “challans” under section 173
of the Code. Having been made after Proper investigation by
the public servants concerned—public servants exercising the
same powers as the police—they can, with some justification,
be treated as police reports, and the procedural advantage of
section 251A should be made available to them. At the same
time . the proposed change! might involve numerous consequen-
tial changes in the Criminal Procedure Code and cannot be con-
veniently drafted in this Report.

15.88. One practical aspect deserves to be considered, that
Statements made to such public servants may (if the complaints
are treated as police reports) come to be regarded as ‘confession
to a police officer’ within section 25, Evidence Act. It is to be
noted that judicial decision on section 25, Evidence Act, have,
while holding that confessions made to Customs Officers or
Excise Officers, are not made to a police officer, telied, inter alia,
on the fact that the concerned officers have no power to submit
4 report on which the Court can take cognizance. That. how-

ever, is a_ matter to be considered separately under the Evidence
Act?,

15.89. As already stated3, it is desirable to introduce a pre-
sumption as to foreign documents. This affects section 139 of
the Customs Act. The section should apply to documents
under other laws also‘,

1. Department can raise the point separately,

2, To be considered under section 25, Evidence Act.
3, Para. 15.30, supra,
See para, 12.3, supra.


143

15.90. It has been suggested! that tampering with documents
which are relevant to evidene under the Customs Act should be
made a specific offence under the law. It appears that one
of the sub-clauses of clause (72) of section 167 of the Sea Customs
Act, 1878, specifically dealt with counterfeiting, falsifying,
fraudulently a ‘tering or destroying any document, or any seal,
signature or initials or other marks made or impressed by any
officer of Customs in the transaction of any business relating
to customs.

Section 132 of the Customs Act, 1962 has replaced the first
sub-clause of clause (72) of section 167 of the 8९8 Customs Act,
1878 (with some modifications). Section 132 makes a false dec-
Jaration, false statement or filing false documents or a betment
thereof, an offence.

It is, however, seen that the previous provision relating to
fraudulent alteration etc. has been dropped under the Act of
1962.

15.91. Jt is understood? that the relevant sub-clauses of
section 167, clause (72) were deleted, as they were considered
to be offences under the general provision in the Penal Code.

15.92. The law with regard to tampering with documents
is contained in the Penal Code?. The definition of ‘forgery’
in the Code covers all possible situations. Further, the punish-
ment in respect of forgery has, in the Law Commission’s Report
on the revision of the Penal Code, been proposed to be raised to
three years’ imprisonment or fine or both. In the circumstances,
there is no need to make any provision in the Customs Act as
to tampering with documents.

15.93. The Gold (Control) Act is the last of the Acts with
which this Report is concerned. It has been statedS that sec-
tion 85 of the Gold (Control) Act covers a wide range of offences
punishable with imprisonment of a minimum of six months and
maximum of 3 years, and also with fine. It has been suggested
that this section should be split up. and for offenes relating to
the manufacture, possession, acquisition and sale of primary
gold punishable under section 859) to (ir), enhanced minimum
and maximum punishments on the lines proposed for section 135
of the Customs Act, where the value of the primary gold involved
is Rs. one lakh or more, should be provided. The punishment
in those cases would be minimum of one year and maximum of
7 years’ imprisonment, and also fine. Likewise, it has been sug-
gested that the punishment for contravention of section 53(3)

Tampering
with Cus-
toms docu-
ments.

Gold
(Control)
Act, 196
Punish-
sent.

+ Collector of Customs, Madras. (Letter dated 17-11-1971).
2, Customs Bill (No. 56 of 1962)—Notes 05 Clauses.
3. Chapter 18, section 463, ef. seq., Indian Penal Code.

1
4 487 Report of the Law Commission (Indian Penal Code), Chapter 18 under section

5. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Goverament of India.


Amend-
ment of
section 85,

0)
(Control)
Act as to
punish.
ment.
Amend:
ment of

burden of
proof.

Gold
(Control)
Aci—

Publicity.

False
statements
in appficae
tions etc.

144

[which enjoins that no licensed dealer, refiner or goldsmith,
shall own or possess any gold, (primary gold, articles; ornaments
which have not been included in the prescribed account) should
be stepped up. The suggested enhanced punishment is minimum
imprisonment of one year and maximum of 7 years” imprison-
ment when the value of such unaccounted gold is Rs. one
lakh or more.

15.94. We think that it would be enough if, in accordance
with our general recommendation for increase in the maximum
punishment!, (and for minimum imprisonment and fine ) section
85 is amended.

15.95. In accordance with our general recommendation?
for shifting the burden of proof as to mens rea, it will be neces-
sary 10 insert a section in the Gold (Control) Act relating to the
burden of proof of mens rea.

15.96. It has been suggested? that a provision be introduced
under section 114 of the Gold (Control) Act for giving publicity
to names and other particulars of persons found guilty of the
contravention of the provisions of the Act, on the fines proposed
under section 156 of the Customs Act, 1952.

We accept the principle of the suggestion4.

15.97. With reference to the making of false statements
in an application. it was suggested during our otal discussions
that it should be convenient if a specific provision on the subject
is made in the Imports and Exports Control Act, instead of leaving
the matter to be regulated by the relevant provision in the Indian
Penal Code. We do not see any objection 10 such a provision.
It may be stated that such a provision occurs in many Acts, though
the maximum punishment varies from Act to Act. We list
below a few of the pertinent provisions :--

Section 9%c). Central Excises Act. 1944—Supplying
false information—six months,

Section 22 read with section 23(1A). Foreign Exchange
Act—two years.

Section 16(1Xg). Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act—False warranty.

Section 9, Essential Commodities Aci—five years,

4. Para,

7.20. supra.

2, Para. 7.12, supra.
3. Suggestion of a Ministry of the Government of India.
4. Amendment is indicated separately.


145
Section 277, Income-tax Act.!
Section 132, Customs Act.
Sections 86 and 87, Gold (Control) Act.

We recommend the insertion of a suitable provision on the
subject. in the Imports and Exports (Control) Act.

1, See para. 15.60, supra.



Introduc-
tory.

Desirabi-
lity of pre-
ventive
detention.

Preventive
detention
and the
rules of
Jaw.

CHAPTER 16

PREVENTIVE DETENTION

16.) We now proceed to consider a politically and consti-
tutionally sensitive subject which has been referred to us by
Government. It relates to the problem of invoking the Preventive
Detention Act against persons guilty of social and economic
offences

16.2. Government have from time to time considered the
desirability of subjecting to preventive detention persons habi-
tually engaged in offences against the laws relating to customs,
excise and foreign exchange. It has been realised, and rightly
in our opinion, that the Preventive Detention Act, as it now stands,
may not justify the detention of such persons. “Maintenance
of supplies and services essential to the community” may not
cover the cases of such persons unless a ‘proximate relation’
were to be established to the satisfaction of the court between
the maintenance of such supplies and services on the one hand
and the activities of these persons, say, for instance. smuggling,
on the other. A further problem that has caused anxiety
from time to time has been whether an amendment of the Pre-
ventive Detention Act will be sufficient for the purpose or whether
nothing short of a constitutional amendment will suffice.

16.3. We believe that preventive detention is an anachro-
nism in a democratic society like ours, based on the principle
of the rule of law. The detention of individuals without trial
for any length of time, howsoever short, is thoroughly inconsis-
tent with the basic ideals of our Government. The Constitution
indeed does not countenance any general power of preventive
detention and both the Union and the State Governments
have been empowered to make laws authorising such detention
only for specified purposes. These powers have been given by
way of necessity because it was felt that, howsoever repugnant
the idea of preventive detention may be, in certain situations
and for certain purposes it was advisable to resort to this extreme
power rather than take the grave risks which the State will have
to face in the absence of such power. We would naturally be re-
luctant to recommend extension of that power to any new areas.
But, after careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion
that, if preventive detention were ever justified, it would be for
the purpose of preventing some of the offences under considera-
tion, namely, offences against the regulations of foreign exchange.
excise and customs. These offences acquire an ominous character

146


147

because of the immense impact they have on the well-being of
the entire nation by virtue of their pernicious effect on vital
national policies. In times of war and other emergencies they
acquire a further and even more dangerous dimension because
of the usual association of smuggling with espionage. We are,
therefore, satisfied that the Union Government should not be
without power to detain preventively hardened offenders against
the laws of customs, excise and foreign exchange.

16.4. The'next question is whether any statutory or con-
stitutional amendment is required to give the Central Govern-
ment such power. We are of opinion that the Preventive Deten-
tion Act as it now stands will be inadequate to cover the detention
of such offenders. Obviously, such persons are not covered
under the rubrics of defence, foreign affairs, security of india,
security of State, maintenance of public order or the maintenance
of supplies and services essential to the community. Although
activities like smuggling may have an indirect impact on any or
some of these matters, it is difficult to see how such relation can
be regarded a direct and proximate relation in terms of the judicial
standard laid down in Rex v. Basudev' and subsequent cases.
The Preventive Detention Act, therefore, may have to be amended
in order to give express authority for the detention of persons
habitually engaged in anti-social activities in violation of the taws
of customs, imports and exports, foreign exchange and the like.

16.5. That raises the further question about the legislative
competence of Parliament to make such an amendment. Before
the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v.
HS. Dhillon, doubts would have been entertained about the
competence of Parliament to extend preventive detention beyond
the categories enumerated in Item 9 of List I and Item 3 of
List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. It could
have been argued that no such power could be read into entry
97 of List I, relating to residuary power, and clause (2) of article
248 relating to the same power. It could also have been ar-
gued that the residuary power does not cover preventive deten-
tion, inasmuch as the subject has been dealt with in express items
in the two aforesaid entries.

16.6. However the majority opinion in the Supreme Court
decision, above referred (०३ makes that argument untenable since
it lays down the proposition that item 97 of List I and article 248
cover not only those powers which are not expressly included in
the Second and Third Lists, but also powers which are either
not stated in any of the three Lists, or, even those which have
been expressly withheld from items in List 1 but not conferred
in Lists वा and III. Thus, the Court has held that the power to

Need for
constitu-
tional
amend-
ment,

Legislative
compe-
tence,

Judgement
in Union of
India v.
AS.

Dhillon,

1, Rex ९. Basudev, A.LR. 1950 F.C. 67; (1949) F.C.R. 657.
2. Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon, (4973) 2 $.C.C. 779.
3. Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon, (supra).


Majority
view
analysed.

Opposite
view
consideed,

148

impose a tax on the capital value of agricultural land is avail-
able to Parliament as a residuary power, although, entry 86 of
List t expressly excludes such power from the grant it makes to
Parliament. The Court has also held that, since the power to
impose a tax on agricultural land is not conferred in either List
[1 or in List 11. it must be read in the residuary power, notwith-
standing the fact that Item 86 of List I expressly withholds it
from the grant it makes.

The basic philosophy of the majority opinion is that there
can be no vacuum of legislative power. and therefore any power
not covered by all the three Lists taken together must be found
in item 97 of List } as a residuary power. We are in general
agreement with this philosophy of interpretation of the provi-
sions of the Constitution dealing with the federal distribution
of powers. There is ample support for it, as the majority opi-
nion itself has pointed out, in the precedents of the other Common-
wealth countries.

16.7, This decision would apparentiy lend support to the
view that Pasliament, under its residuary powers, may
authorise preventive detention for reason not enumerated
in item 9 of List I and [tem 3 of List IL In
fact. the majority opinion has illustrated its point directly with
the help of the provisions relating to preventive detention, and
has expressed the opinion that entry 9 of List | and entry 3 of
List H1 do not exhaust the legislative power over the subject
of preventive detention. The Court has observed:

“We may illustrate this point with reference to some
other entries. In Entry9, List {, ‘Preventive Detention for
reasonsconnected with defence. foreign affairs or the security
of India’ the matter is not Preventive Detehtion but the
whole entry. Similarly, in Entry 3 , List Hf. “Preventive De-
tention for reasons connected with the security of the State,
the maintenance of public order or the maintenance of supplies
and services essential to the community” the matter is not
Preventive Detention but the whole entry. It would be
erroneous to say that Entry 9. List I and Entry 3, List Il
deal with the same matter.”

16.8. There would, thus, seem to be basis in the majority
opinion for the view that Parliament has the legislative compe-
tence to legislate on preventive detention for reasons not indicat-
ed in Item 9 of List I and tem 3 of List वा.

16.9. [tis possible, however. to argue that there is a radical
difference between wealth tax on agricultural land and preventive
detention for smuggling. Taxation is a normal power inherent
in Governments and it may be legitimately read as a residuary
power : and that is what the majority decision in Dhillon’s case
has done. Ifthe minority decision in the said case were accepted,
it would iead to the constitutionally anomalous position that
the power of taxation. which is inherent in every sovereign state.


149

is aot available to Parliament or the State Legislatures in respect
of income on agricultural land and the said income would stand
outside the reach of the legislative power of Indian Republic.
That clearly is an untenable position. That is why we are in
agreement with the majority view.

16.10. But, preventive detention is not a power of that
Kind; in view of the provisions of clauses (1) and (2) of Article.
22, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State would have
any power to legislate on preventive detention but for the ex-
press provisions in the respective entries in the Seventh Sche-
dule. Whereas, even if there had been no express entries about
the wealth tax, the power to legislative on wealth tax could be
legitimately read in the residuary power. Such an interpretation
of a residuary power in respect of preventive detention is. in our
opinion. impermissible. because preventive detention attributable
10 Entry 97 would directly violate clauses (1) and (2) of Article

22 and these clauses represent fundamental tights guaranteed
to the citizens of India.

10.11... In fairness to the majority decision, we ought to
add that the observations from the majority judgment. which
we have quoted above. are obiter dicta, and the constitutional
aspect of the matter pertaining to preventive detention does
nol appear to have been brought io the notice of the Court and
has, therefore. not been considered. Thus, in our view, the
position with regard to the power to legislate on preventive de-

tention is substantially and radically different from the power
to lewy wealth tax.

16.12. We have carefully considered this question and have
given due consideration to the general tenor of the majority de-
cisicn in Dhillon's Case and the obiter observations made by
Chief Justice Sikri who spoke for the majority in the said case.
Gur considered opinion is that. on the whole, it would be advis-
able for the Government to secure a constitutional amendment
enlarging the contents of item 9 in List 1 of the Seventh Schedule.
We accordingly suggest that Item 9 of List I may be amended
so as to read as follows :—

“Preventive Detention for reaons connected with Defences.
Foreign Affairs, the security of India, the effectve realisation
of duties of Customs and Excise. or the conservation of
Foreign Exchange; persons subjected to such detentioz.~

Recom-
mendaiior


Tatroduc~
tory.

Categories
of orders.

CHAPTER 17

INTERFERENCE BY WRITS WITH INVESTIGATION

17.1. In some of the replies to the Questionnaire issued by
the Commission, as also during oral discussions with some offi-
cers, it was stated that the investigation of economic offences
is sometimes hampered by writs issued by the High Courts which
stay the proceedings of the investigating agencies until the
matter is disposed of.

17.2. A study of summaries of sample cases forwarded by
some of the officers at the request of the Commission, as alse
of a few reported decisions, relevant to the subject. shows that
orders of Courts which were supposed to hamper investigation
fell into the following main categories :—

(a) orders passed by the High Courts or Courts of Ses-
sion on an interlocutory revision ;

(6) writs issued by the High Courts under article 226,
not staying investigation as such, but restraining the executive
officers from taking certain steps, such as search and the like:

(c)_ writs issued by the High Courts restraining the entire
process of investigation ;

(d)_ orders issued by the tcial court itself, staying the
trial until decision of some question of law in the High Court,
being a question which would affect the proceedings in
the trial court itself.

17.3. So far as category (a) is concerned, it should be stated
that the question does not pertain to economic offences alone,
but to the entire field of criminal procedure. It may be of in-
terest to note that in the recent Bili on Criminal Procedure Code!
there is a proposal to~ bar revision in respect of interlocutory
orders.

So far as category (b) is concerned, the usual type of case
presented is a petition questioning the legtity of search. Since
seizure of a document or other property and search of premises
frequently involves questions of fundamental rights, it has been
possible for the pacties affected by the seizure or search to app-
roach the High Court for the issue of appropriate writs on the
basis of violation of this or that fundamental! right.

1. Criminal Procedure Code Bill. 1970, Clause 407(1).

150


131

Interierence with the whole Process of investigation—cate-
gory (c) above—one should thiak, should bea very rare situation,
The situation has, however, arisen in one or two cases, not
yet finally decided, and the following Patagraphs seek to deal
with the legal position in brief.

[Catecory (d) need not be discussed in detaif.]

17.4. Attempts made in the Past to invoke interference by
the Court with the Process of investigation by the police have not
usually succeeded.

Rulings! under Chapter 14 of the Criminat Procedure Code—
particularly. section 159—have made it clear that the court cannot
control or interfere with investigation by the Police,

Same has been the fate of attempts to invoke the inherent
power? of the court (section 5614, Criminal Procedure Code).

17.5. However, it is pertainent to refer to a recent Supreme
Court judgement}, The actuat decision was concerned with
section 259, Criminal Procedure Code and was as follows :—

“The scheme of these sections‘... clearly is that the
power of the police to investigate any cognizable offence
is uncontrolled by the Magistrate, and it is only in cases
where the the police decides not to investigate the case that
the Magistrate can intervene and either direct the investi-

But, dealing with the mata fide exercise of the Power by the
Police, the Supreme Court made the following observations
ohiter—

“It appears to us that, though the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure gives to the Police unfettered powers to investigate
all cases where they suspect that a cognizable offence has
been committed, in appropriate cases an aggrived person
can always seek a remedy by invoking the power of the High

if the power of investigation has been exercised by a police
Officer mala fide, the High Court can always issue a writ
of mandamus restraining the police officer from misusing
his legal powers.”

Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, AAR. 1945 P.C, 18.

Khwaja Nazir Alnad, ALR. 1945 P.C. 18,

SN. Sharma y, Bipin Kumar ALR. 1970 S.C. 786, 788, 789,
. Sections 156, 157 and 159, Criminal Proced 3 re Code.

po

BY

Tater.
ference
with
investiga-
tion,


Case-haw
examined.

Acnend-
ment not
recom

mended.

Need for
bearing in
mind
importance
of

economic
offences.

1, ta) AOR. 1966 5.

152
The Court added—

~The fact that the Code does not comain any other
provision giving power to a Magistrate to stop investigation
by the police cannot be a ground for holding that such a
power must be read in sectidn 159 of the Code.”

17.6. We have also examined a number of decisions w
relaie to writs issued in connection with steps taken towards
invetigation or administrative adjudication. These decisions
relate to search and seizure’, admissibility of certain statements2.
custody of documents? or extension of time‘.

17.7. In almost ail these cases, writs were applied or issued
on the ground that some fundamental right or other of the pe-
titioner was violated or threatened to be violated. The writ
was not directed at the process af investigation as such, but at
particular steps forming part of the process. No doubt, the
blocking of one step blocks the prompt completion of the in-
vestigation, But in a Constitution which gurantees fundamental
rights, such situations are unavoidable. We do not think that
a constitutional amendment to prohibit the issue of writs in
such cases is called for.

17.8. Nevertheless, we must note that there is a complaint
that the issue of writs prohibiting the taking or continuance
of some steps necessary for completion of the investigatory pro-
cess hampers investigation. We are free to confess that this
complaint cannot be regarded as baseless. 1t is not for us to
comment on the legality or propriety of the judicial orders passed
in such cases, But we hope that while exercising their extraordi-
nary jurisdiction to issue writs in these cases. courts will not over-
look the need for speedy and unhampered investigation of these
offences which cause grave harm to the whole nation. We
would also like to emphasise that, in dealing with proceedings
initiated before them by parties mainly not solely for stalling or
delaying the investigation of offences alleged to have been com-
mitted by them, courts should bear in mind what the Privy
Council laid down in a very pithy and emphatic manner when
it observed that the function of the courts begins after the
investigation is completes.

209;

(by AVR. 1967 S.C. 1298;
fer (1967) 71 Cal, W.N. 814;
td) &.1.8. 1970 Cat. 212.

2. (a) ALR. 1970 S.C. 1065;

(h) ALR, 1970 S.C. 940.

» AER. 1962 S.C. 759.

4. A.LR. 1968 Mysore 39.
5, Nazir Ahmed’s case,


CHAPTER 18

MISCELLANEOUS

18.1. We have now come to the end of our Report. and
shall mention a few miscellaneous matters,

18.2. Suggestions are often made that in order that the lower
Magistracy may realise the seriousness of some of the social
and economic offences. some method should be evolved of mak-
ing the judiciary conscious of the grave damage caused 10 the
country’s economy and health by such anti-social crimes. The
frequency and emphasis with which these suggestions have been
made, and the support which they have réceived from very high
officers has caused some anxiety to us. But we hope that the
higher courts are fully alive to the harm, and we have no doubt
that on appropriate occasions, suchas, judicial conferences, the
subject will receive attention. It is of utmost importance that
all State instrumentalities involved in the investigation, prosecu-
tion and trial of these offences must be oriented to the philosophy
which treats these economic offences as a source of grave challenge
to the material wealth of the nation.

18.3. We hope we shall not be misunderstood if we suggest
that even the holding of periodical meetings on sentencing may
be beneficial, not in the context of economic offences only, but
in the evolution of a rational and consistent policy of sentencing.
Experience of England is, by now, familiar to those interested
in the subject.

A meeting of over 100 judges was held in the Royal Courts
of Justice in London on January 7-8, 1965 to take part in exer-
cises designed to increase the ‘uniformity of sentencing. The
Lord Chief Justice expressed the hope that the meeting would
be a model for similar ones throughout the country?.

Conferences between judges, magistrates and penal adminis-
trators are, in England. organised with increasing frequency in
many parts of the country with an annual conference in London
for judges of the Supreme Courts?.

18.4, Besides holding councils on sentencing. it may be
worthwhile to hold ‘workshops’ which would be less formal
but equally useful and likely to give concrete results. Such
workshops could, for example, be attended by all Special Judges
or other officers concerned with economic offences.

Conclu-
sion.

Sentencing
conferen-
es,

1. Graham Parker, “Education of the Sentencing Judge™. (1965) 15 1.C.L.Q. 206, 251.

>

153

2. Mclean and Wood, Criminal Justice and the Treatment of Offenders. (1969), page 90.


Publicity.

Other sister
Acts.

Appendi-
ces,

1x

18.5. We need not emphasise that ultimately, the success
of enforcement depends on the intergrity and efficiency of the
staff employed for the purpose. In making these observations
we are stating the obvious. But we have gathered an impression
that the number of officers in charge of enforcement of some of
the laws in question is not adequate. Financial considerations,
no doubt, come in the way, but increased expenditure in the
direction of augmentation of the quality and number of the
staff is likely to repay itself, if not likely to bring greater returns.
In any case, as an experienmental measure, it is worth trying in
selected areas where, the enforcement staff is found to be in-
adequate. Besides, for detecting offences of smuggling, parti-
cularly in the coastal areas and border areas, the Administration
must employ more efficient and modern methods.

18.6. Since some of the amendments which we are propos-
ing (८, 8. the amendment in relation to recovery of penalities
under the Foreign Exchange Act)! will involve additional
administrative work, it is destrable that the strength of the staff
at the appropriate level should be augmented, so that the
reforms In the law may be adequately implemented.

18.7. Publicity is also of importance. To quote from ‘the
Report of a Working Groups?— ‘

“apart from the integrity of officials entrusted with the
responsibility of taking decisions in such matters as the grant
of a permit to travel etc. the best safeguard against harass
ment, patronage and corruption, we feel, is inadequate
publicity being given to the rules, regulations and procedure
as also to the decisions taken both to grant and to reject. It
is not enough to give fair decisions but it is equally necessary
that the fairness of the decisions should be made well known
and acknowledged. We recommend, therefore, that a satis-
factory scheme for the publicity to the general rules and pro-
cedures and to individual decisions in this field should be
worked out and adopted.”

18.8. Qur recommendations and discussions have been
confined to the major Acts, and we have not dealt with sister
Acts rélating to subjects allied to these major Acts. It is needless
to say that much of what we have said above could apply to
them, We do not consider it necessary how far the other Acts
could be amended on the lings of the amendments suggested by
us in the major Acts. Wherever necessary, that question can
be dealt with by the Ministry concerned.

18.9. The Appendices to this Report contain detailed data
on various aspects.

1. Para. 15.27, supra,

2, Report of the Working Groay of the Administrative Reforms Commission on

Customs & Excise Ada
3. One of the And

stratioa, (1968), (October), page 74, para. 12.14.
s shows our recommendations in the form of draft amendments.

These are very tentative,


155
SUMMARY OF MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS

1. Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944.

(1) Section 9 should be amended to increase the punishment.
There should be a provision for minimum imprisoment! and
minimum fine.

(2) A new section—section 9A—should be inserted to punish
the unauthorised removal of excisable goods?.

(3) Another section—section 9B—should be inserted lo
make it clear that confiscation shall not prevent punishment.

(4) A new section section—10A--should be inserted to pro-
vide for public censure4.

2. Foreign Exchange Regu'ation Act, 1947.

(1) In section 19 (1) of the Act. for the words ‘has reason
to believe’ the words ‘honestly believes’ should be substituted’.

(2) A new section should be inserted in the Act to provide
interception of postal articles and telegraphs.¢

(3) By inserting section 19DD, power to seize containers?
should be provided for.

(4) In section 23(1), punishment should be increased.*
There should be a provision for minimum imprisonment, and
minimum fine.

(5) By adding an Explanation under section 23C, a provision
should be inserted to make the Chairman and Managing Direc-
tor of a company criminally liable for transactions connected with
a permission under the Act. applied for and obtained in the name
of the Company.>

(6) A_ new section—section 23CC—should be inserted to
provide for public condemnation of corporations convicted of
offences under the Act.'°

. Paras. 15.5 and 15.7.

Para. 15.1.

Para, 15.3. -
Para, 15.4.

tween


156

(7) The departmental penalties under section 23(1) should be
increased to five times the amount of foreign exchange involved
{instead of three times, as at present).1

(8) Another new section—section 23CCC—should be in-
creased to give the court power to order the stoppage of a parti-
cular business on second conviction.2

(9) Another new section—section 23FF—should be inserted
to provide that any tax, penalty etc. due under the Act may be
recovered by a Magistrate as if it was a fine imposed by him.

(10) Under another new section—section 23FFF—prepara-
tion to commit an offence under the Act should be punished
in certaion circumstances.

(11) Section 246 of the Act should be extended to foreign
documents and to documents seized under other laws, and to
cases where the document was seized from a person other than the
accused. 5

(12) Guide-lines should be laid down as to the cases in which
Prosecutions may be instituted under the Foreign Exchange
Act.

(13) There should be no hesitation in exercising the powe
impound or revoke a passport under section 10(3), Passports
Act,” in serious cases under the Foreign Exchange Act.

वा. Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954

(1)_A new section—section 21B—should be inserted to pro-
vide for public condemnation of corporations convicted of
offences under the Act.8

IV. Essential Commodities Act, 1955

(1) The maximum term of imprisonment under section 76019)
(ii)should be increased from five to seven years.?

(2) In section 10A, the words ‘‘and bailable” shoutd be pro-
vided. 19

(3) A new section—section 10B—should be inserted to pro-

vide for the public condemnation of corporations convicted of
offences under the Act.11

1. Para.
2. Para.

Mara

15.9.
15.21.
15.27,

* 15.30.