LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT

ON

SOME QUESTIONS UNDER THE
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
BILL, 1970

Joly 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDTA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


REPORT ON SOME QUESTIONS UNDER THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE BILL, (970

CONTENTS
Pare Subject-matter Page
1 Intreductory. 1
2 Poinis referred to the present Commission. 12
3 Additional pojnrs deal: with in chis report. 2
4 Points considered. 2
S~7_Poim ii) Proposal to confer jurisdiction on the C.B.L.to make 2-३
investigation in respect of certain oences felating to the
Union List.
8 Recommendation for creation ef courts under Union 3
legistation.

9—22.--Poing (७) Proposal to make confessions made to senior palice 3—7
officers admissible in evidence subject to certain safe-
guards,

23—28—-Point (iii) The exteat of legal aid to ‘ne poor which may be pro- = 8-9
vided for in the Code.

29--Point (iv) Suggest ions for improving the existing law contained 9
in Sections 161 and 162 relating 10 stalements mad: (6
the police during investigation.

39—Poine (५) Propusal to take away powers of wevision agaiast inter. 9-10
locatory orders,
3t— Point एक) Provision for grant of anticipatory bait. Ww

32 -34—Point (vit) Questions wheiher maintenance under section 488 can be 10-2!
Provided for in respect of inctigent parents.

35—Point (viii) Provision for fling written arguments, 11

36--Point एफ Suggestions for improvements in other respects witha li
view 10 curtai] delays in investigation, trial or appeal.

av Additional points, di

33 and 39-—Point (3) Provision relating to “appointment” of Sessions Judges 11--13
and other officers. .


40—Point (xi)
4l—Point (xii)
42—43—Point (xiii)
44—Point (xiv)
45—Point (xv)
46—47-—Point (xvi)

48-—58—Puint (xvii)
59—Point (xviii)
60—Point (xix)

हा

62

63
64—Point (०0
65
66

Design to commit an offence.

Admissibility of statements recorded by Magistrate.

Abolition of commitment proceedings,

Examination of the accused,

Sentencing.

Consultation by the Government with the Court, before
exercising powers of pardon etc,

Appeals against acquittals.

Appeals under articles 134 of the Constitution.

Maintenance—other points,

Wife divorced extra judicially.

Scope of section 488 co be extended, to mother oF illegi
mate child and girl rendered pregnant,

Legal aid in proceedings for maintenance

Cancellation of maintenance.

Draft amendments not annexed.

Summary of conclusions and reeommendations.



LAW COMMISSION,
“A? Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-1.

July 25, 1972.

P, B. GAJENDRAGADKAR,
CHAIRMAN

व्‌ am forwarding herewith the Forty-eighth Report of the Law
Commission on some questions under the Code of Criminal
Procedure Bill, 1970.

The circumstances under which these questions came to be
considered by the Commission and the scope of the Report have
been explained in the first paragraph of the Report. As the
Report points out, we thought it necessary to consider some other
points which, in our opinion, were important enough to invite
our recommendations suo motu.

As you are aware, the present reference was made at the
instance of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and we understand that
the Joint Committee of Parliament is dealing with the Bill per-
taining to the reform of the Code of Criminal Procedure clause
by clause, I am, therefore, sending another copy to you to
enable you to forward it to the Ministry of Home Affairs, for
their information and suitable action.

With personal regards,

Yours Sincerely,
P. 8, GATIENDRAGADKAR.

Hon’ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law and Justice,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi-1.


REPORT ON SOME QUESTIONS UNDER THE
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE BILL, 1970

1. This Report deals with a few important points relating
to the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is necessary to give briefly
the genesis of the present Report, in order to understand its
limited scope,

2. The previous Law Commission submitted, some time ago,
a Report? on the entire Code of Criminal Procedure. Govern-
ment have thereafter introduced the Criminal Procedure Cods
Bill, 1970, which is, at present, pending before a Joint Committee
ot both the Houses. In the meantime, Government decided to
seek the opinion? of the present Commission on a few points,
the reasons for which have been stated as follows:

“As there are divergent opinions on certain points
which are being considered by the Joint Committee in res-
pect of the said Bill, the Government would like to have the
considered opinion of the present Law Commission on cer-
tain specific points hereinafter mentioned. As the considc-
ration of the Bill, clause by clause, has already been taken
up by the Joint Committee of Parliament, it would not be
necessary to refer the whole Bill for the opinion of the Law
Commission afresh. But the Government would very much
like to have the considered opinion of the Commission on a
few specific vital points which have arisen for consideration.”

These points are—
Gi) Proposal to confer jurisdiction on the C.B.I. to

make investigations in respect of certain offences relating to
the Union List;

(ii) Proposal to make confessions made to senior police
officers admissible in evidence subject to certain safeguards;

(iii) The extent of legal aid to the poor which may be
provided for in the Code;

(iv) Suggestions for improving the existing law contained
in sections 161 and 162 relating to statements made to the
police during investigation;

_ (¥) Proposal to take away powers of revision against
interlocutory orders;

(vi) Provision for grant of anticipatory bail;

1 418 Report of the Law Commission. _ —
2 Letter of the Law Minister to the Chairman, Law Commission.
dated 1st July, 1972.

Tntroduc-
tory.

Points
referred
to the
Present
Commis-
sion.


2

(vii) Question whether maintenance under section 488
can be provided for in respect of indigent parents;

(viii) Provision for filing written arguments; and

(ix) Suggestions for improvements in other respects with
a view to curtail delays in investigation, trial or appeal.

Additional 3, Besides these points, we considered it desirable ‘to take
poinis ‘the opportunity of expressing our views on the following addi-
wi in tional points:

this .

Report. Point (x)—Power of “appointment” of Sessions Judges

. » apd other officers.
Point (xi) —Design to commit offences.
Point (xi) —Statements recorded by Magistrates.
Point (xiii) —Commitment proceedings.
Point (xiv) —Examinalion of the accused.
Point (xv) —Sentencing.
Point (xvi) —Consultation by the Government with the
Court, before pardon, remission etc.

Point. (xvii)—Appeals against acquittal.

_ Point (xviil)—-Appeals under article 134 of the Consti-

tution.

Point (xix)-—Maintenance (other points).

Point 05) —Cancellation of maintenance orders.

‘That is the genesis and the scope of the present Report.

Points 4, We shall now deal with the points listed above’, one by
considered. one,

(i)—Propo- 5. There is, it appears, a proposal to confer jurisdiction on
sal fe to the Central Bureau of Investigation to conduct investigation in
forisdiction eSpect of certain offences relating to subjects mentioned in the
on the Union List. This question has two aspects, namely, the consti-
C.B.L to tutional aspect, and the practical aspect. So far as the constitu-

make inves: tional aspect is concerned, a view seems to prevail in some

‘erent quarters that since the subject of ‘police’ is mentioned in the State
certain i7, it is beyond the competence of Parliament to make a pro-

offences vision for the investigation of offences by the Central Bureau
relating fo of Invéstigation,—excepting under special legislative entries—
List. e.g. the special entry relating to extension of the powers and

jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any State

to any area outside the State’.

6. We do not share this view. The Central Bureau of
Intelligence and Investigation are subjects mentioned in the Union
List*. The power to investigate offences against laws with res-

1 Para. 2---3, supra,

2 State List.” Entry 2.
3 Union List, Entry 80,
4 Union List, Entry 8.


3

pect to any of the matters in the Union List, could be attributed
either to the enry relating to such offences’, or to the entry rela-
ting to criminal procedure?, or, in the Jast report, to the residuary
power. It is, in our opinion, not correct to assume that because
“police” is a State subject, and because investigation of offences
is ordinarily done by the police, it is incompetent for Parliament
to confer such power on any other agency.

7. We agree with the proposal in principle. We think it
desirable from many points of view, and so we suggest that the
investigation and prosecution of offences under the principal
Central enactments be included within the scope of the jurisdic-
tion of the Central Bureau of Investigation. The various offences
to be brought within the proposals have not been specified, and
we do not go into those details. We should also, add, that for
settling any conflict of jurisdiction between the Central Bureau
of Investigation and other investigating agencies that may arise,
some suitable machinery should be provided for. Further, we
are anxious that the Central Bureau of Investigation should not be
denied jurisdiction under the proposed provision to investigate
an offence merely because, on the facts under investigation, com-
mission of another offence is disclosed which falis within the pro-
vince of a State investigating agency. .

We may point out that a very substantial increase will be
necessary in the strength of investigating officers of the Central
Bureau of Investigation, if the above change is to produce the
desired results.

8. It also appears to us that it would be desirable to create Recom-
a separate hierarchy of courts for the trial of these offences? peadation
Since the power to investigate the offences is being given to ation of
Central agency, it would be appropriate to create separate courts courts
functioning under Union legislation for the trial of those offences, under
Expertise and speed are important in the disposal of these cases, Uri i"
and our recommendation will be a step in that direction. Thetioa.
structure and procedure of these courts will, of course, require
detailed consideration. The subject has, to an extent, been
touched upon in our Report on social and economic offences*.

9. Another proposal relates to confessions. The proposal Proposal
to make confessions made to senior police officers admissible in contes.
evidence (subject to certain safeguards), has a long history. Insions
recent ycars, the question fell to be considered by the Law made

Commission. In its Report on the Reform of Judicial Adminis-{¢, f°"

tration®, while adopting a cautious approach, the ommission officers
जज जा - _-. admi
ee fe int

1 Union List, Entry 93. evidence
2 Concurrent List, Entry 2. subject

3 GF, article 247 of the Constitution, read with Union List, entries 0 certain
95 and 97, sufe-
4 47th Report of the Law Commission. guards,

5 14th Report, Vol. 2, page 748, para. 38 and 39.
13 M of Law—2


4

suggested, as an experimental measure, an amendment of a very
limited character, to the effect that confessions made to senior
police officers in selected areas {mainly, Presidency Towns),
should be admissible, thus overriding the bar laid down in section
25 of the Evidence Act. Since then, this question has been
mooted at almost all discussions where criminal procedure in
general and the powers of the police in particular have come up
for consideration, (The suggestion made in the 14th Report
of the Commission! was that as the superior officers
of the police are today recruited from the same social
strata as officers of other departments, confessions made to the
officers of the status of the Deputy Superintendent of Police and
above should be acceptable in evidence, the relaxation being
restricted to cases which such officers themselves investigate and
being introduced as an experimental measure only in the Presi-
dency towns or places of like importance where investigation can
be conducted by superior police officers and where the average
citizen would be more educated and conscious of his rights. The
change, it was suggested, should be introduced in the thrce
Presidency towns, because the magistracy there is directly under
the control of the High Court; as regards the introduction of the
change in other areas, it was observed, it should be preceded by
the separation of the judiciary from the executive).

10. Tt appears to us that it would be desirable to deal with
several aspects of the problem; and we proceed to discuss the
matter in some detail, bearing in mind that separation of the
executive and the judiciary has been effected in most of the States.

11. Interrogation as a method of investigating violations of
the law has a long history. Within the first few pages of the
Old Testament*, Adam “is asked “Hast thou eaten of the
tree... ?"; to the demand “where is Abel thy brother?” Cain
replies with an evasive “Am 1 my brother's keeper?”

But, as is well known, official interrogation of those sus-
pected of crime, has been regarded with deep suspicion in Anglo-
American legal systems. In England, this distruct was engen-
dered by the inquisitorial practices of the Prerogative courts of
Star Chamber and High Commission. In the U.S.A., 8 host of
exclusionary rules have taken birth as a result of the involvement
of the courts in this problem...

Police interrogation for the purpose of obtaining confessions
from suspects has been a subject of special concern in India for
more than a century.

12, Under the Indian Evidence Act, the admissibility of

3 14th Report, Reform of Judicial Administration, Vol. 2, page 748,
Paragraphs 38 and 39.

2 Genesis 3:11, 4:9—10, quoted in Note “Developments in the
Law Confessions”, (1965) 79 Harvard Law Review 925, 936,


3

confessions is regulated by several provisions’. The prosecution’s
ability to use confessions is severely limited. Section 24 adopts
the English rule that a confession is inadmissible if induced by
fear of prejudice or hope of advantage held out by a person in
authority. Section 25 states broadly that ‘no confession made
ta a police officer shall be proved as against a person accused of
any offence.’ Section 26 further provides that all confessions
made in custody of a police officer are inadmissible unless made
“mn the immediate presence of a Magistrate’. There is an excep-
tion in section 27, not material for our purpose.

13. The stringent provision in the Evidence Act was adopted
as a response to legislative findings that:?

“(Despite provisions in the Bengal Code for preve
ting any species of compulsion or maltreatment with a view
to extort a confession....(C)onfessions are frequertly
extorted or fabricated. A Police-officer,. ..failing to clis-
cover the perpetrators of the offence, often endeavours to
secure himself against any charge of supincness or neglect by
getting up a case against parties whose circumstances or
character are such as are likely to obtain credit for an
accusation of any kind against them.”

14. The prescnt position is the result of a competition bet-
ween many sets of conflicting values. On the one hand, for the
proper investigation of offences, subjection of the accused person
to questioning is regarded as inevitable. It is believed, that law
enforcement 1s unduly hampered by artificial rules restricting the
admissibility of material obtained ‘during the investigation. On
the other hand, society apprehends that the zeal and power of
Jaw enforcement officers may outrun their self-restraint and
wisdom. The philosophy behind the almost categorical vule
enacted in section 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act*, is that these
safeguards are indispensable to provide against the possibility of
extorted confessions. The secrecy in which syst¢matic police
questioning is usually carried on, and the protracted questioning
which bas to be resorted to, have been considered as sufficient _
justifications for the present strict rules, Nevertheless, it is
desirable that the present artificial rules should be teplaced by
more rational principles—if such principles can be devised.

15. It appears to us that without sacrificing the essential
requirement of Voluntariness, it is possible to improve upon the
present rule by adding certain safeguards. A sensible Iegislative
approach could lessen some of the obvious dangers of coercion,
reduce disputes about the wording of the confession and maintain
general fairness in questioning, without unduly hampering investi-

5 Seations 24 1९ 26, Evidence Act.

2 jiag ‘w Commissioners, First Report, refer to ii Fiel

५ phaw of Evidence in British India (1928), page 197,” व The
° Pare, 13, supers.


6

gation. We have devoted some thought to the matter. We
proceed to deal with the safeguards which we would add. With
the addition of these safeguards, the present rigid. rule ccald be
modified.

16. The first safeguard is that the officer concerned must
be an investigating officer. Jf the police officer to whom the
confession is made is not investigating the offence, the accused
can and ought to be sent to a Magistrate.

17. The second safcguard is that the accused must be
informed of his right to consult? a legal practitioner of his
choice, and the accused must also be given an opportunity to
consult such a legal practitioner before making the confession.
Both these safeguards must be applicable whatever the rank of
the police officer.

18, The third safeguard, which we have in mind, is the
presence of counsel. Here, a distinction could justiftatly be
made between senior police officers-—Superintendent of Police
and above—or the onc hand, and the lower police officers, on
the other. In the case of senior police officers, it should suiiice if
the counsel of the accused is allowed to remain present when
the confession is recorded. If the accused has no counsel, or
if bis counsel does not wish to remain present, this requircment
will not apply. In the case of lower police officers, counsel must
be present always; and if the accused kas no counsel, or if the
counsel cannot remain present, the accused can and ought to be
forwarded to a Magistrate, who can then record his ‘confession
under section 164,

19, The fourth safeguard, which appears to be necessary,
is that the accused must be warned that he is not bound to
make 2 confession, and that the confession, if made, would be
used in evidence against him. Further, the fact of such warning
having been given must be recorded, and the confession should
be accurately taken down. Section 164 of the Code makes a
provision with regard to these matters in detail (when confessions
are recorded by Magistrates}, and it is reasonable to provide that
the safeguards should be followed by police officers of whatever
rank, when they record confessions under the new procedure.
This safeguard must be followed, whether or not a counsel is
present.

20. Fifthty, the police officer must record that he bas
followed the safeguards detailed above, The value of such a
requirement is obvious,

21. Our recommendations as to confessions can be thus
statcd in the form of propositions.

1 Article 22(1) of the Constitution.


7

(1) In the case of a confession recorded by a Superintendent
of Police or higher officer, the confession should be admissible
in the sense that the bar under sections 25—26, Evidence Act,
should not apply if the following conditions are satisfied:—

(a) the said police officer must be concerned in invest.-
gation of the offence;

(b) he must inform the accused of his right to consult
a legal practitioner of bis choicc, and he must further give
the accused an opportunity to consult such legal practitioner
before the confession is recorded;

(c) at the time of the making and recording of the
confession, the counsel for the accused, if he has a counsel,
must be allowed to remain present. If the accused has no
counsel or if his counsel does not wish to remain presen:,
this requirement will not apply;

(9) the police officer must follow all the safeguards as
are now provided for by section 164, Cr.P.C. in relation
to confessions recorded by Magistratcs. These must be
followed whether or not a counsel is present:

(९) the police officer must record that he has followet
the safeguards at (b), (०) and (d) above.

(2) In the case of a confession recorded by an officer lower
than a Superintendent of Police, the confession should be admissi-
ble in the above sense if the following conditions are satisfied:—

(a) the police officer-must be concerned in investigation
of the offence;

(b) he must inform the accused of his right to. consult
a legal practitioner of his choice, and he must further give
the accused an opportunity to consult such 10841 practitioner
before the confession is recorded;

(c) at the time of the making and recording of the
confession, tlic counsel for the accused must be present. If
the accused has no counsel or if his counsel does not wish
to remain present, the confession should not be recorded;

(d) the police officer must fotlow all the safeguards as
are now provided for by section 164, Cr.P.C. in relation to
confessions recorded by Magistrates.

(e) the police officer must record that he has followed
the safeguards at (b), (c) and (d) above,

_ 22. The above amendments should apply to the whole of
India. We recommend an amendment of the Evidence Act and
of sections 162 and 164, Cr.P.C. on the above lines?.

a

To be implemented with reference to the Evidence Ac! clause
हे nd ere BAL vidence Act and clause



8

Point (jii)— 23. We now come to a matter which is of vital interest in
Theextent connection with the subject of law and poverty. That relates to
Satcihe legal aid to the poor.

| Which .
may. ‘pe Providing equal justice for the poor and the rich, the week
provided and the powerful alike is an age-old problem. The needs of
ia th the poor for justice had moved poet Ovid to write—“Curia

हु pauperibus clausc.est’ (The courts are closed to the poor)".

In part, the royal concessions of Magna Charta in 1215,
dealt with the same problem “To no one will we see to no one
will We refuse, or delay, right of justice. .....”°

24. The last two decades are of significance in this respect,
inasmuch as the matter is no longer considered as one of charity
or benevolence, but as one of civil right, and the legal machinery
itself is now expected to deal specifically with it. This change of
thinking has been lucidly expressed in the statement—

“If the law is to be open to everyone on the same terms,
the law must be the guardian of its own gates.”*

25. The Cr.P.C. Bill does contain a provision for legal aid
to the poor in criminal cases. The provision proposed* in this
respect requires that where, in a trial before the court of Session,
the accused is not represented by a pleader, the court shall assign
a pleader for his defence at the expe 8९ of the State. The State
Government is given power to ¢ this provision applicable in
relation to any class of trials before other courts in the State.
it may be noted that the provision in the Bill follows, in sub-
stance, the recommendation made by the previous Commission®
on the subject.

26. We are of the view that defence of the indigent accused
by a pleader assigned by the State should be made available to
every person accused of an offence, i.e. in all criminal trials, so
that mere poverty may not stand in the way of adequate defence
in a proceeding which may result in the deprivation of liberty or
property or loss of reputation.

Jn our view, representation by counsel is so basic an in-
gredient oa criminal trial, that the law should go as far as possi-
ble in seeking that this requirement is not absent.

The assistance of counsel is required at every step in the
proceedings and irrespective of the nature of the offence under
1181.

1 Ovid. TIL, Amores viii, line 55, cited by Cappalleti and Gordley,
SLegat Aid” (lanuary, 1972) 28 Stanford Law Review 347,

2 Magna Carta, clanse 40. है

2 Cappallelti and Gordley. “Legal aid” (lanuary, 1972) 24 Stun-
ford Law Rey, 347, 363.

4 Cr. PC. Bill, Clause 311.

5 dist Report, Vol. 1, pages

202-203, para. 24.34 to 24.59.


9

27. In making this recommendation,’ we do not pause to
consider the technical question whether a literal interpretation of
the language of article 14 and 22(1) of the Constitution requires
that the State should arrange for counsel in particular classes of
cases. The philosophy underlying the Constitution, reflected in
the provisions for equal protection of laws and in the chapter on
directive principles, shows that the Constitution is inbued with
respect for human rights. That philosophy is sufficient to furnish
inspiration for a provision that will put an end to the individious
discrimination that otherwise arises between person and person
because of poverty. Where a poor man has to defend himself
without counsel, there is lacking that equality which is demanded
by the spirit of the Constitution. Denial to the indigent of the
benefit of counsel’s examination of the record, and marshalling of
arguments on his behalf, is nothing less than denial of justice.
“The indigent, where the record is unclear or the errors are
hidden, has only, the right to a meaningless ritual.”*

28. It is in this spirit that we are recommending a wide
provision. We hoy pe that legal practitioners will also appreciate
the spirit in which we are making this recommendation, and
will readily come forward to defend poor persons who cannot
afford to pay. The scheme can be worked successfully if the
members of the bar, including senior members, co-operate in
its working.

29. With reference to the law contained in existing sections Point (iv)—
161 and 162 relating to statements made to the police during Suseestions
investigation, the Bill®, broadly speaking, follows the recommen- {07 nProv-
dations made by the provious Commission’. Apparently, sug- existing law
gestions for improving the present law dealing with matters not contained
considered in the previous Commission’s Report, have been in sections
made. In the absence of details of those suggestions, we cannot 161 and 162
express our views on the further change, if any, needed in the statements
relevant sections. made to
the police
during
30. The छाए has a proposal to take away the po wers of Uvestigation,
revision against interlocutory orders. No such amendment was Bint (yo
recommended by the, previous Commission’. We consider this take away
change made in the Bill to be desirable one, and in general, we powers of
agree with the reasons given’ in the Statement of Objects and गया
Reasons in support thereof. We may also add that the power {#inst |
of the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution remainsorders. ory
unaffected, and where the interlocutory order is important enough

1 As to legal aid in maintenance proceedings, see para. 63, infra.

See Douglas v. California, (1963) 9 L. Fd. 2nd 811.
Cr PC. Bill, -flauses 164 and 165. |
st Report, Vol. I, page 73, para. 14.13.
Cn PC Bill, Clause 407,
4ist Report, Vol. 1, page 287, pars. 32.8.
Cr, P.C. Bil, Statement of Objects and Reasons, page 253, dis-
cussion relating to clauses 407 to 415.

anes


10

to justify intervention by the High Court, the constitutional pro-
vision can be invoked.

Point (i= 31. The Bill? introduces a provision for the grant of anti-
Provision CPatory bail. This is substantially in accordance with the
for grant  Tecommiendation made by the previous Commission*. We agree
of anticipa- that this would be a useful addition, though we must add that
tory bail, it is in very exceptional cases that such a power should be exer-

cised.

We are further of the view that in order to ensure that the
provision is not put to abuse at the instance of unscrupulous
petitioners, the final order should be made only after notice to
the Public Prosecutor. ‘The initial order should cnly be an
interim one. Further, the relevant section should make it clear
that the direction can be issued only for reasons to be recorded,
and if the court is satisfied that such a direction is necessary in
the interests of justice.

It will also be convenient to provide that notice of the
interim order as well as of the final orders will be given to the
Superintendent of Police forthwith.

7 " 32, Section 488 of the Code, dealing with maintenance,
pant go does not, at present cover indigent parents. Apparently, this
ether question has been raised, though ne proposal on the subject has
ixintenance been made in the Bill’, The point was considered by the pre-
les vious Commission, but the Commission did not favour any
ion 488 amendment?
canbe .
prov
prosided for The Commission felt that it would not fit in with the
ofindigent scheme of the section, and also pointed out that in summary
parents, proceedings of the nature contemplated in section 488, it may
be difficult to decide questions of the proportion of the amount
10 be paid by each child.

33. While we appreciate the difficulties pointed out in the
cartier Report, we should emphasise that the object of section
488. (to prevent vagrancy) is relevant in this case also, and the
need for an‘ adequate remedy to clieck vagrancy in the case of
parents cannot be reasonably disputed. ‘The practical difliculiies
pointed out in the Report of the previous Commission should,
we venture to suggest, not prove to be insurmountable. The

“principle of section 488 is essentially one of socialism, and ought
to be given a wide scope. We therefore, recommend that the
scope of section 488 should be expanded so as to authorise
proceedings for the maintenance of indigent parents who are
unable to maintain themselves. We do not enter into the detailed
changes that will be necessary to achieve this object.

2 लू PC. Bi ease 447, 20-321 9
ist Report, Vo! pages 3: 321, para. 39.9,
oor Pe ill, clause 128,

4 41st Repost, Vol. J, page 304, para, 36.4.


11

34. We may note that under the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act!, a Hindu is bound to maintain his or Aer
aged or infirm parents so far as the parent is unable to maintain
himself or herself out of his or her own earnings or other pro-
perty.

Under the Muslim law? also, there is an obligation to main-
tain one’s ‘necessitous parents’, if, one has the means, and this
obligation rests in equal shares upon children of both sexes.
Hence the proposed amendment will not cast any new obligation,
We may add that the proposed amendment docs not imply that
the parents will have a right to separate maintenance. Whether
there is sufficient reason for a claim for separate maintenance by
the wife is cven now determined by the Court, and the same
will be the position as regards the tight of the parents,

35. The Bill has a provision for filing written arguments*.
This matter was not raised before the previous Commission, but
we agree that such a provision might be uselul; though we
should add that its utility as a measure for reducing delay should
not be over-cstimated. We should also like to add that tae
object of the proposed provision will be successfully achieved
only if the Judges and the Bar co-operate in working the new
provision in its true spirit,

36. One of the points referred to us is “suggestions for
improvements in other respects with a view to curtail(ing) delays
in investigation, trial or appeal”. This is obviously a very wide
issue, and we do not think it possible to make any well consi-
dered suggestion in this regard without a study in depth, ard
that is not possible within the short time available to us,

37. We shall now deal with a few points which, though
not referred to us, appeared to us to be important and to require
consideration.

38. Section 9 of the Code deals with the “appointment” cf
Sessions Judges, Having regard to a judgment of the Supreme
Court on the subjectt, (relating to transfer of Sessions Judges)
previous Commissions considered it necessary®-° 16 provide that
the “appointment” of a Sessions Judge under section 9, which

Maintenance Aci, 1956

3 Tyubji, Mustim Law (1958), page 279, para. 330.

| Cr. PC. Bill, clause 321.

4 State of Assam ए. Runga Muhamad, A.LR. 1967 S.C. 903,

* 32nd Report of the Law Commission.

6 Atst Report of the Law Commission, pages 19—20, para, 2.17
to 2.21, .

1 Section 20, Hindu Adoptions and (78 of
1956).

Point (viii)—
Provision

for filing
written
arguments.

Point (ix)—
Suggestions
for improve-
ments in
other res-
pects with

a view to
curtail
delays in
investiga-
tion, tral
or appeal.

Additional
points,

Point (४)--
Provision
relating to
“Appoint-
ment of
Sessions
Judges”
and other
officers.


12

really is not_a first appointment to the cadre but is a process
which may be called assignment to a particular court after
appointment in the cadre,- should be done by the High Court,
and not by the State Government as is required by the existing
section 9(1). Though the judgment of the Supreme Court case
related to the transfer of a Sessions Judge, the position as regards
assignment of a person to a particular court of Session, would
not be different, according to the view of two previous Com-
missions, .

To achieve this object, a re-draft of section 9 was suggested
in the previous Reports!-- and the Cr. P.C. Bill also, while
accepting the recommendation in substance, secks to replace
section 9 by a new clause*, which is as follows:—

“9. (1) The State Government shall establish a court
of Session for every sessions division.

(2) Every court of Session shall be presided over by
a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court.

(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Scs-
sions Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges to exercise
jurisdiction in a Court of Session.

(4) The Sessions Judge of onc sessions division may
be appointed by the High Court to be also an Additional
Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case he
may sit for the disposal of cases at such place or places in
another division as the High Court may direct.

(Sub-Clause (5) not material].

Explanation:—Iin this section, and in sections 11, 12,
17 and 18, “appointment with its grammatical variations
and cognate expressions means postings by the High Court
after the first appointment of a person by the State Govern-
ment to the cadre of Sessions Judge, Additional Sessions
Judge, Assistant Sessions Judge, Sudicial Magistrate or
Metropolitan Megistrate, as the case may be.”

The Explanation, it may be noted, did not occur in the
draft suggested by the previous Commissions,

39. While we appreciate the reasoning behind the recom-
mendations of the previous Commissions and with the substance
of the relevant clause in the Bill, we have a suggestion to make
with reference to the wording of the clause. In our view, the
word “appoint” should, in this context, be avoided. The appoint-
ment, posting and transfer mentioned in article 233 of the
Constitution are different from the appointment contemplated by
section 9, and in order to maintain that distinction, it will be
better to avoid the word “appoint”,

1 32nd Report, Appendix 2.
2 41st Report, Vol. 2, Clause 9.
8 Clause 9, Cr. P.C. Bill.


13

We are of the view that in clause 9(1) of the Bill, the
word “appoint” should not be used, but the word “assign” be
used. The Explanation to clause 9 makes the same clarification,
but we think that the word “appoint” should be avoided, as it
is not desirable to use that word in a sense inconsistant with
article 233. This will affect some other sections of the Code
and also necessitate consequantial change in the Explanation to
clause 9, Wherever the “appoint” in the Code occurs in the
sense of assignment to a particular post, it should be modified
as above.

40, Under a provision of the Bill‘ corresponding to an Point (xij—
existing section?, a police officer knowing of a design to commit Desisa to
any cogaizable offence may arrest, without orders from a Magis- Grane.”
trate and without a warrant, the person so designing, if it appears
to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be
otherwise prevented.

Since this power affects personal liberty and is exercisable
by any police officer, there is, in our view, need for some safe-
guards. We recommend the following safeguards:—

(1) For arrest under this provision, reasons should
be recorded by the police officer before arrest.

(2) If the matter is of urgency, reasons should be re-
corded immediately after arrest.

(3) In either case, the police officer should comnmni-
cate the reasons to the Magistrate competent to try the
offence.

41. Statements recorded by a Magistrate during investiga- poing (xij,
tion under the existing section 164, are not substantive evidence, Admissihi.
obviously because the accused is not present; and has no right lity of

to cross-examination. statements
recorded

We are of the view that section 164 should provide that by Magis:

where thc accused is present, he should have the right to cross-
examination.

With such a provision, statements recorded under the sec-
tion should be admissible at the trial subject to all just exceptions.
In drafting the provision to be inserted, assistance could be
taken from the present provision as to statements before the
committing Magistrates*,

42. The previous Commission recommended the abolition Point (xiti)—

of commitment proceedings. ‘The reasons for recommending abolition of

oo we ment pros

dings. +
1 Clause 154, Cr, P.C. Bill. feeaine:
2 Section 151, Cr.
8 Section 288, Cr.



Point (xiv]—

Esamini-

tion of the
guctsed,

14

abolition, which weighed with the Commission, can be bus
summarised:

(a) The main object of screening the material was not
attained in practice’-*.

(b) Changes made in England by the Criminal Justice
Act of 19673, absence of commitment proceedings in the
Scottish procedure’, the procedure in Israel®, and the pro-
cedure in some Australian Provinces*, permitting proof by
affidavits as a substitute for commitment, were noted. Com-
anittal, proceedings were not essential for a fair trial", as
was shown by t ee limited abolition of commitment in the
countries mentioned above.

(c) In India also, committal proceedings had किला
dispensed with by law, in certain cases*.

(d) There was no cfiective screening of flimsy cases*,
even under the present Code.

{e) Committal proceedings were not essential for
giving the accused a clear picture of the ९85००, Such a
picture could be obtained in a fair measure from the copies
of papers supplied to the accused also.

43. This recommendation has been incorporated in the Lill.
We wish to add that we agree with this recommendaiion, In
addition to the reasons given by the previous Commission, we
would like to add that in practice, as a result of judicial decisions
on the subject, committing Magistrates do not and cannot judi-
cially weigh the cvidence produced before them, with the’ result
that consideration of the question whether a prima facie case
is made out for committing invariably tends to be mechan:cal
rather than judicial.

We thercfore express our concurrence with the recommen-
dation to abolish commitment proceedings. We hope shat 2s a
result of this change the total pericd from the date of commence-
ment of investigation to the completion of the trial before the
Court of Session will not, ordinarily, exceed six months

c 44, In the Report on Social and Economic Offences, the
‘omission, having regard to the mature of offences under in-
quiry and the magnitude of the danger posed to the national

41st Repost, para. 18.19. 7
4lst Report, page 142, para, 18,2,

418 Report, page 145, para. 18.8 and 18.9.

4ist Report, page 146, para, 18.10.

4st Report, page 147, para. 18.11.

lst Report, page 147, para. 18.12,

lst Report, page 147, pura. 18.23.

41st Report, paze 147, para. 18.14,

4tst Report, page 148, para. 18.16.

4st Report, pege 149, para. 18.17.

हु

नाक छा के मे 15

Sex


15

economy, recommended the insertion of a provision on the
following linest:—

(1) In every trial for an offence under this Act, the
Court shall, after the charge is framed,—

(a) direct the prosecution to furnish to the
accused (or, where there are more accused than onc,
to each of them separately), a copy of the charge and
of the documents upon which the prosecution proposes
to rely and of which copies. have not been already
furnished to the accused, and

(b) for the purpose of ascertaining the case of
the accused, call upon the accused to make a statc~
ment orally or in writing signed by him, touching upon
all the facts set out in the charge and in the documents
of which copies have been furnished to the accused:

Provided that where the court has dispensed with the
personal attendance of the accused, the court may permit
him to present a written statement signed by him through
his pleader.

(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused
when he is examined under sub-section (1).

(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to
punishment by refusing to make such statement or by
making a false statement.

(4) The statement made by the accused or the failure
to make a statement on alt or any of the matters referred
to in sub-section (1) may be taken into consideration in
such trial, and put in evidence for or against him in any
other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which such
statement may tend to show he has committed.

(5) Where the court has called upon the accused to
make a statement under this section, the provisions of sec-
tion 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall
not apply, except as regards matters which, ia the opinion
of the court, had not been raised and communicated to
the accused previously and in respect of which the accused
should be allowed an opportunity to explain the circum-
stances appearing against.

(6) Where the accused has stated his case under this
section, he shall not ordinarily be allowed to go beyond that
case except with the leave of court.

it appears to us that such a provision should be extended
to all trials. We may note that this is not a totally new approach,

1 47th Report (Social and Economic Offences), para. 9.20.



I IC,

16

as even now the Code empowers the Court! to examine the
accused before the commencement of evidence.

The comparative position in other countries on this point,
and the possible constitutional objections and other related
matters, were dealt with in our Report on Social and Economic
Offences?, When considering the matter for the purposes of
that Report, we were concerned with offences of anti-social
nature or offences against the economy of the country. We
have considered the question whether such a provision should
be inserted for offences in general, and it appears to us that the
provision which we Prop osed in that Report could, with advan-
tage, be extended to offences. Though the general run of
offences may not present a danger of the same magnitude or
nature as social and economic offences, it cannot be ‘Genicd that
the course of criminal trials could be made more smooth if the
accused is required to disclose his case at the outset, and we
do not think that this should cause any injustice or harassment
to him.

soit Guy — 45. It is now being increasingly recognised that a rational
and consistent sentencing policy requires the removal of several
deficiencies in the present system. One such deficiency is a
lack of comprehensive information as to the characteristics and
background of the offender.

The aims of sentencing—themselves obscure—become all
the more so in the absence of comprehensive information on
which the correctional process is to operate. The public as well
as the courts themselves are in the dark about judicial approach
in this regard.

We are of the view that the taking of evidence as to the
circumstances relevant to sentencing should be encouraged, and
both the prosecution and the accused should be allowed to coope-
rate in the process.

The Bill does provide for hearing the accused as to scn-
tence®, but does not contain a specific provision as to evidence.
But, in our opinion,—

(i) both the parties should be heard, as to sentence,
and

(ii) and if a request is made in that behalf by either
the prosecution or the accused, an opportunity for leading
evidence on the question should be given,

We recommend accordingly.
We are aware that a provision for an opportunity to give

4 Section 251-A(2), Cr. P.C.
2 47th Report, Paragraph 9.10 to 9.20.
2 Cr P.C. Bill, 1970, Clause 241(2) and Clause 256(2).



17

evidence in this respect may necessitate an adjournment; and to
avoid delay, adjournment for the purpose should, ordinarily, be
for not more than 14 days. It may be so provided in the relevant
clause.

46. Under the Constitution and under the Criminal Proce- Point (xvij—
dure Code, Government has got a power to grant pardons, to Consulta-
remit or commute sentence and various other powers of a similar tion by
nature. ‘The question of requiring consultation with the Court ment with
before the exercise of these powers by the Government, has the Court
received our attention, We may refer in this connection to the before,
present provision’ authorising such consultation, though not powers of
requiring it and to the discussion in the previous Commission's pardon
Report?, as to consultation before the grant of a free pardon, ete.

47. It is our view that in order to avoid any appearance of
arbitrary action, to remove any suspicions of political considera-
tions and othcrwise in the interests of justice, such consultation
should, by a statutory provision, be made compulsory in the case
of all powers exercised under the cxisting sections’. Of course,
these sections do not affect the powers conferred by the Constitu-
tion, and the exercise of the constitutional powers cannot be
legally regulated by a statutory procedure. But it is in our view
desirable that the same practice should be adopted for exercising
similar powers even under the Constitution.

48. We have, next, to deal with appeals against acquittals!. Point (xviij-
There is an important point which, though not referred to us, acquittals.
requires, in our view, to be considered. The Report of the Appedls
previous Commission® dealt with a few points relating to appeals
against acquittals but did not suggest any radical modifications,

In our view the matter requires further consideration.

49. Section 417 of the Code deals with appeals in case of
acquittal. Sub-section (1) of the section gives the State Govern-
ment an unrestricted right of appeal against any order of acquittal
(whether original or appelate), and a similar right is given to
the Central Government by sub-section (2) in cases investigated
by the Delhi Special Police Establishment. Sub-section (3) per-
mits a private complainant, in a case instituted on complaint, to
appeal against the acquittal, but only after obtaining special leave
from the High Court. Jn India, a Government appeal against an
acquittal has been regarded® as “a necessary part of public

50. It is true that the provision for appeals against acquittal

7 (a) Section 401(2), Cr. P.C.
(७) Clause 44102), Cr-P.C. Bill.
2 dist Report, Vol. I, page 249, para, 284,
3 Clause's’ 441, 442, Cr. P.C. Bill.
+ Clause 388, Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970.
5 41st Report, Vol. I, pages 262-263, para. 31.17.
6 Emp. v. Sheo Janak, AJR. 1934 All. 27.31 (order of reference).


18

in appropriate case may be necessary to avoid miscarriage of
justice.

But we are not convinced that it is in general desirable to
encourage such appeals. The general theory is that in criminal
proceedings the State should not recognize any interest except
that of the public. To this theory, the Code recognizes a few
exceptions, first, by requiring that in certain cases only the
person aggrieved ‘can initiate proceedings’, and secondly, by
permitting the complainant to appeal against an acquittal with
special leave of the High Court.

51. The question to be considered is, whether the general
and unlimited right conferred on the Government to file such
appeal deserves to be retained. We must note that such a right
is unusual, and is not found in most common law jurisdictions.

In most common taw countries, the general rule is not to
allow an appeal against acquittal. While a limited right of
appeal against acquittal has been given in England in respect of
an appellate judgement of acquittal, the general rule mentioned
above is still adhered to. Under the Administration of Justice
Act, 1960°,— .

“Subject to the provisions of this section an appeal shall
lic to the House of Lords, at the instance of the defendant
or the prosecutor,

(a) from any decision of a Divisional Court of the
Queen’s Bench Division in a Criminal Cause or matter;

(b) from any decision of the Court of Crimina!
Appeal? on an appeal to that court.”

It was, however, further enacted that no appeal should lie,
except with the leave of the court below or of the House of Lords
and that such leave shall not be granted unless it is certified by
the court below, that a point of law of general public impcrtance
is involved in the decision and it appears to that court or to the
House of Lords, as the case may be, that the point is one which
ought to be considered by that House.

It has been stated’ that the right to a further appeal in these
cases is important for the general administration and develop-
ment of the criminal law. Whereas an improper ruling by a
trial judge will not bind other judges to follow the ruling, a wrong
decision by an appellate court will affcct the subsequent rulings of
all lower courts; and without, a Crown appeal, a ruling against
the Crown, if the trial judges abide by the rules of stare decisis,

1 Scction 194 to 196 and 198 et sea Cr. P.C.

2 Section 1, Administration of Justice Act, 1960 (Eng.).
3 Now the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division.

4 Friedland, Double Jeopardy, (1969), page 293.


19

cannot directly come before the Court of Criminal Appeal a
second time for reconsideration.

52. Canada has introduced a provision’ giving the right to
appeal on a point of law to the Court of Appeal from an
acquittal for an indictable offence®. Similar provision exists in
New Zealand’.

New South Wales (Australia) permits “moot appeals’*.
‘the provision in Tasmania® is as follows:—-
“(2) The Attorney General may appeal to the Court—
(a) against an order arresing judgment;

(0) by leave of the Court upon the certificate of
the judge of the Court of trial that it is a fit case for
appeal, against an acquittal on a question of law alone,
or

(c) by leave of the Court, against. the sentences.”
As to this provision, Dixon C.J. observed*—

“It is evident that the policy which guided the legisla-
ture was rather concern in the application of criminal law

than of correcting verdicts of acquittal to which the crown
objected.”

53. In some of the American jurisdictions, a limited right of
appeal against an appellate order of acquittal is provided. For
example, in the New York State’, upon the determination of an
appeal, by the appellate division or a country court, an appeal
may be taken by any party aggrieved to the court of appeal in
certain cases, provided such party obtains a certificate granting
permission to appeal. One such case is appeal from a judgment
or order affirming or reversing a judgment of conviction, includ-
ing an order granting a new trial.

Connecticut allows an appeal to the State equal to that

given to the accused. A statute in that State provides as
follows®._—

“Appeals from the rulings and decisions of superior

Section 584, Canadian Criminal Code.

For working of the Canadian Section, see (1966) 9 Can. Bar

Journal 168, 173.

Section 380—382, Crimes Act, 1961 (New Zealand).

Friedland, Double Jeopardy, (1969), pages 281 and 299,

Section 401(2), Criminal Code of Tesmania.

Vailance (1961) 35 A.LILR. 182, 183,

Hewitt (Editor) Administration of Criminal Justice in New York

(1967), page 298.

8 Connecticut General Statutes, article 8312 (Revised 1949), cited
in Mereland, Criminal Procedure (1959), page 278.

Aeon


20

court or of the court of common pleas, upon all questions of
law arising on the trial of criminal cases, may be taken by
the State, with the permission of the presiding judge, to the
Supreme Court of errors, in the same manner and to the
same effect as if made by the accused.”

54. The federal policy against a government appeal from
an acquittal is almost as strong in the U.S.A. as in England. But
the government can appeal to the Supreme Court from a federal
appellate decision reversing a conviction?.

55, In France, the Cr. P.C. provides?—

“Decrees of acquittal pronounced by the felony court
may be made the object of a petition of teview only in the
interest of the law and without prejudice to the party
acquitted.”

56, An unlimited and general right given as in Indja in
respect of appeals against acquittals is, thus, rare in the Anglo-
American countries. It is for this reason that a re-examination
of the subject appeared necessary. While one may grant that
cases of unmerited acquittals do arise in practice, there must be
some limit as to the nature of cases in which the right should be
available. For, in our view, proper regard should be had to the
need for putting reasonable limits on the period for which the
anxiety and tension of a criminal prosecution should be allowed
to torment the mind of the accused. There is a qualitative
distinction between conviction and acquittal, and appeals against
acquittals should not be allowed in the same unrestricted manner
as appeals against convictions.

No doubt, guilty, persons should be punished. But when a
competent court, manned by trained judicial officer, has held a
person to be innocent, the matter should ordinarily end there.
‘The initial presumption of innocence is strengthened in such cases
by a judicial verdict, and interference with that verdict should
require special reasons.

57. With these considerations in view, we recommend that
appeals against acquittals under section 417, even at the instance
of the Central Government or the State Government, should be
allowed only if the High Court grants special leave.

[t may be pointed out that cven now the High Court can
summarily dismiss an appeal® against an ecquittal, or for that
matter, any criminal appeal.

1 feg—Foreman v. US, (1960) 361 US. 416; 4 & 5, L. Ed, 2d. 412,

2 Article 572, French Cr. P.C.
3 Section 422, Cr. P.C.


श्र

‘Therefore, the amendmsnt which we are recommending will
not be so yadical a departure as may appear at the first sight.
Jt will piace the State and the private complainant on an equal
footing. Besides this, we ought to add that under section 422
of the Code, it is at present competent to the appellate court to
dismiss the appeal both of the State and of complainant against
acquittal at the preliminary hearing.

58. We should, however, make it clear that if the right of
appeal against acquittal is itself. retained, then the right te be
given to a private party should not be abolished. And logically
the law should cover cases not instituted on complaint. ~ The
right of a private party was introduced in 1955. And, though 2
rceent Committee’ has recommended its abotition in order to
reduce the arrears in High Courts, we do not, with respect. share
that approach. Extreme cases of manifest injustice, where the
Government fails to act, and the party aggrieved has a strong
feeling that the matter requires further consideration, should not,
in our view, be left to the mercy of the Government. To inspire
and maintain confidence in the administration of justice, the
limited right of appeal with leave given to a private party should
be retaincd, and should embrace cases jnitiated on private com-
plaint or otherwise at the instance of an aggrieved person.

59. In this connection, we may incidentally mention that in
due course we propose to take up the question of limiting appeals
to the Supreme Court under article 134 of the Constitution, on
considerations similar to those which were dealt with in our
Report relating to Civil Appeals” to the Supreme Court under
article £33 of the Constitution.

60. Regarding section 488 of the Code*, which deals with
the maintenance of wives and children’ there are several points
which we would like to discuss.

61. The first relates to the wife divorced extra-judiciaily.

At present, section 488 is confined to a wife or legitimate
or. illegitimate child unable to maintain herself or itself. A wife
who bas been divorced cannot proceed under this section. Where
she is divorced extra judicially, this pesition causes hardship.
Such women mostly become destitutes and their grievance needs
immediate redress. We are of the view that where the divorce
is effected extra-judicially, such right should be available to the
wife until re-marrizge, in order to prevent vagrancy and other
evils which section 488 is designed to check. We have included
extra-judicial divorce, because in such cases the divorced woman

7 High Court Arrears Committee, Report (1972), Volume
Chapter 5, para, 90.

2 45th Report.

3 Cr. B.C Bill, clause 123,

+ See aiso para, 32 ta 35, supra.

Point (xviii)
‘Limiting
appeals under

acticle 134
of the consti-
{ution

Point (xix
Mainte-
mance—
(Other
points).

wife divorced
extta judsei-
ally.


22

is unable to maintain herself, while, in case of a judicial divarce,
alimony is provided for by an order of the Court.

It is not necessary to create a specific exception for cases
where the divorce, though granted by the husband, was necessi-
tated by the wife’s fault, If, for cxample,—the ex-wife is staying
with a paramour, the court will have a discretion to refuse

maintenance}.

We should also point out here that if our recommendation
to extend section 488 to a wife divorced extra-judicially is
accepted, it will be neccessary to make a change in one clause of
the Bill?. Clause 128(5) should be revised to read:

“128(5). On proof that any wife in whose favour an
order has been made under this section is living ia adultery,
or that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her
husband. ..... 8 or that they are living separately by mutual
consent, the Magistrate shall cancel the order.”

62. One of the anomalies of section 488 is that while the

Scope of
section mother of an illegitimate child is entitled to take proceedings for
488 to be maintenance, for the benefit of the child, there is no independent
fatengeg, fight vested in her to take proceedings for her own maintenance.
of iflegi- Moreover, a girl who has been seduced by a male and is subse-
timate quently left by the male cannot claim maintenance fer herself,
child and even if pregnancy follows. Such cascs, fortunately rare so far,
Sivjered ate bound to increase with growing urbanisation and changes in
pregnant. social structure. If there is justification for an illegitimate child
being allowed to proceed under section 488, there is greater
justification for allowing the seduced girl who has been rendered
pregnant'. The additional condition that pregnancy rust have
followed is suggested mainly as an evidentiary safeguard. We
therefore recommend that the scope of section 488 should be
extended to the two cases mentioned just now, namely (ij) mother
of an illegitimate child and (ii) an unmarried girl wita whom a
male has had intercourse leading to pregnancy.
Legal aid in 63. It remains now to deal with the question of legal aid

proceedings
for main-
tenance,

in proceedings under section 488. There is, in the section, no
mention of the right to legal aid of the person claiming mainte-
nance, and many deserving cases are left out simply because of
want of counsel. Ordinarily, the opposite party is rich enough
to engage a counsel, and the applicant has, therefore, to fight an
uneven battle. Having regard to the beneficial object of section

1 See (a) Clause 128(4), Cr. P.C. Bill.
(b) Section 488(4), CoP.C,

2 Clause 128(5), Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970.

3 The words “or that she has been jawfully divorced by her husband
otherwise than hy a decree or order of a Court having jurisdiction
in the matter” newly inserted by the Cr. P.C. Bill, 1970, should be
deleted.

4 The question of criminal liability is considered in 42nd Report

(Penal Code), page 328, para, 20.23. .


23

488—an object which secks to introduce a modicum of socialism
in the sphere of family law—it is desirable that Jegal aid should
be available in proceedings under section 488. In order that
such an amendment may not work to the disadvantage of an
indigent respondent,—such a situation could pe contemplated. —
it will be necessary to extend the right to legal aid to parties
to such proceedings,

Jt may be noted that the Kerala rule? as to legal aid makes
a specific provision covering such proceedings. Point ¢xa)

64. There is also a small point relating to cancellation of Cancellation
orders for maintenance?. of mainte-

nance,

There had been, in the past, some uncertainty as to whether
the words of section 4890) of the Code® are comprehensive
enough te take in an application to cancel an order of mainte-
nance on the ground of change of status of the party entitled
to maintenance. The controversy arose in the context of divorce.
The view that prevails at present seems to be, that the Words
“change in the circumstances” and “alteration in the allowance”
are wide enough to take in, without doing violence to the lan-
guage, “divorce” and “cancellation of allowance’-*.”

We are not now concerned with extra-judicial divorce as
such, since, according to our recommendation® (Paragraph 61),
it should not now make a difference. But the wider question of
change of status remains. We are of the view that such a power——
ie, power to cancel an order for maintenance on change of status—
should be expressly provided for, in order to make the provision
self-contained; and we, therefore, recommend that change of
status of the person entitled to maintenance should be.covered in
the clause of the Bill corresponding to section 489,

65. This finishes consideration of the various points specifi- Draft
cally referred to us, as well as of the points on which we amendments
considered it necessary to express cur views suo motu. In view annexed.
of the stage at which the matter stands’, we are not annexing a
draft of the amendments which will be required if our recommen-
dations are accepted.

66. Our conclusions and recommendations are summarised Summary
below:— of conciu-
मु sions anu

(i) The proposal to confer jurisdiction on the Centra] Te¢ommen-

_ = ia dations.
+ Role 4, Kerala Legal Aid Ruies, 1958.
2 (a) Section 489(2}, Cr. P. c”
(0) Clause 130(2), CrP.c. Bill,
3 Clause 1300), Cr. PC. Bilt.
+ @ Mabammed Ismail v. Sarmmranl, A.ILR, 1960 Ker. 282 (Anna
y 1).
@ ere uhaminad Rabimollah A,1.R. 1947 Mad, 461 {reviews
(5
3 Clause 12805), Cr. PC.
4 Para, 61, Supra.
Para. 1 to 4, Supra.



24

Bureau of Investigation to make investigation in respect of

certain offences relating to matters in the Union List, is
approved in principle. A recommendation is also made for
the creation of Courts ander Union Legislation for the trial
of such offences*.

(ii) Confessions made to police officers should be
exempt from the bar imposed by sections 25 and 26
Evidence Act, if certain conditions are satisfied?.

(ii) Ali accused persons must be furnished with counsel
for their defence at the State expense®.

iv) As to improving the existing law contained ini sec-
tions 161 and 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
relating to statements made to the police during iavestiga-
tion, no further recommendations have been made*.

(५) The proposal in the Bill to take away powers of
revision against interlocutory orders is approved in
principle’.

(vi} The propased provision for grant of anticipatory
bail is accepted, with certain modifications requiring notice
before the final order is passed and intimation to the police
after passing the interim or final order®.

{vii) Proceedings for maintenance under section 488
should cover claims of indigent parents’ also*.

(viii) The proposed provision for filing written arguments
jis approved in principle’.

(ix) No further suggestions for improvements in other
respects with a view to curtailing delays in ‘investigation,
trial or appeal are made, owing to the very limited time
available’?.

(x) In the proposed provision as to the power of
“appointment” of Sessions Judges and other officers, drafting
changes are recommended?!

(xt) The power to arrest a person for a design to commit
offences should be coupled with certain safeguards, namely,

Para, 3
Para. 9 2.

Para, 23 to 28.

Para. 29.

Para. 30,

Para. 31.

Para. 32 to 34.

See also item (xix) below.
9 Para. 35.

19 Para, 36.

वा Para, 38—39.

आने के एव के $म ६३15


25

the recording of reasons by the police officer and communi-
cation of the same to the nearest Magistrate’.

(xii) Statements recorded by Magistrates during the
course of investigation should be admissible, if the accused
was present and had the right and opportunity to cross-
examine the witness”.

(xiii) Commitment proceedings should be abolished, as
already recommended by the previous Commission’.

(xiv) Examination of the accused to elicit his case is
recommended, in all trials*.

_(xv) Both partics should be heard® as to the appropriate
sentence to be passed, and should be given an opportunity
to Icad evidence on the subject.

(xvi) The Government should, before granting pardon,
remission etc.® in respect of sentences, consult the Court by
which the sentence was passed or confirmed.

(xvii) Appeals against acquittal, whether by the Govern-
ment or by a private party, should be allowed only if the
High Court grants special leave’.

(xviii) Appeals under article 134 of the Constitution will
be dealt with in a separate report®.

(xix) (a) The scope of proceedings for maintenance,
under section 488 should be expanded, so as to cover claim
by a wife divorced extra-judicially and untill re-marriage®.
Consequentially, clause 128(5) of the Cr.P.C. Bill, 1970,
will also need modification’.

(b) The section should also cover claims for maintenance
by the mother of the illegitimate child or by an unmarried
woman rendered pregnant",

(c) Legal aid should be provided in proceedings under
this section’,

(xx) Power of cancellation of an order for maintenance
on a change in status, should be expressly provided for’.

® Para. 61. Sce also item (iii), above.

10 To be carried out under clause 128(5), Cr. P.C, Bill, 1970.
1! para, 62.

12 Para, 63.

13 Para. 64,


26

Before we part with this Report, we ought to put on record
our warm appreciation of the assistance receiver by us from
our Secretary, Shri P. M. Bakshi. In this case, a formal
teference to the Commission was made on 1st July, 1972. There-
after, at short notice, Shri Bakshi prepared a Working Paper on
the questions referred to us. We considered the said draft as
well as some other points which we thought were important
enough to invite our recommendations suo mot, After we
reached our conclusions on all these points, Shri Bakshi prepared
a final draft for our discussion and approval. In the whole of
this process, Shri Bakshi’s assistance has been very valuable to
us.

P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman,

V.-R. Krishna Iyer {

P. K. Tripathi Members

S. S. Dhavan

P. M. Bakshi Secretary.
New Delhi,

The 25th July, 1972.

MGIPRRND—Sec, VI—13 M. of Law—27-12-72—2,000,