LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FORTY-NINTH REPORT
ON

THE PROPOSAL FOR INCLUSION OF AGRICULTURAL
INCOME IN THE TOTAL INCOME FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING THE RATE OF

TAX UNDER THE INCOME-FAX ACT, 1961

AUGUST, 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


CHAIRMAN,

LAW COMMISSION,
‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi-1.

August 28, 1972,

Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law and Justice,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINISTER,

I am forwarding herewith the Forty-ninth Report of the Law Com-
mission on the proposal for inclusion of agricultural income in the total
income for the purpose of determining the rate of tax under the Income-tax
Act, 1961,

2. The circumstances under which this quesiion came to be considered
by the Commission and the scope'of the Report have been explained in the
first paragraph of the Report. After the subject was taken up, a preliminary
study was made, and a draft Report on the subject prepared. The draft
Report was discussed, and revised in accordance with the conclusions
reached. by the Commission, and finalised.

3. As you are aware, the reference to the Commission was made at
the instance of the Committee on Taxation of Agricultural Income and
Wealth. As that Committee made a request that the Report of this Commis-
sion should be given urgently and as the nature of the subject matter also
required that it should be kept confidential, no press communique was issued
for inviting views on the subject.

4, 1 am sending an extra copy of the Report io you, to enable you to
forward it to the Chairman of the above tioned Committee.

With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,

P.B. GAJENDRAGADKAR.



PARAGRAPH

t

era aw

9-10

1A

12
13
कद
15
16
17
18
19

हर ॥
21-A

23

25—26
शा

28

30

CONTENTS:

Supiecr - Marrer

Introductory

Scope of the Report and questions for consideration

Constitutional provisions as to income-tax—Matters within the com-

pretence of the Union

Constitutional provisions as to income-tax—Matters within the

competence of States

Dichotomy between agricultural income and other income .

Fifect of the proposal on the character of tax

Distinction between taxable income and rate of tax
Inclusion for purpose of rate a mere question of method
Legislation how far authorised by enumerated powers—Tests applied
Pith and substance of proposed legislation

Position under the proposal different from countries levying tax on

agricultural income

Rules as to interpretation of legislative entries

Wide interpretation

Competence to devise machinery पु
Cases relating to the entry “income” and other laws
Construction placed on the expression “‘income’
Power to take into account other income included in power to tax
Judicial decisions as to enforcement

Atiabari case
Khyberbari case
Rai Ramkrishna case .

Srinivasan’s case

Provision in the Estate Duty Act

Law Ministry’s Advice on the Estate Duty Bill
Provision in the Estate Duty Act not challenged
Presumption in favour of validity

No serious risk of proposal being challenged as attempt at indirect
Iegislation on a matter outside competence

Points summed up. .
Answer to the first question

‘Second question does not arise

Pace

N

wk ee फ

wom ee

sonrte

43

1s
15
16


1. This Report is concerned with a question of importance to
the national economy, involving a constitutional issue of some
difficulty, and it has arisen out of a reference made by the Union
Government? at the instance of the Committee on the Taxation
of Agricultural Wealth and Income. One of the proposals which
the Committee referred to above had under contemplation, was
to the effect that for the purpose of determining the rate of
income-tax under the (Central) Income-tax Act, 191, the
agricultural income of the assessee should be taken into account.
This proposal had been made in the context of the need to remove
various deficiencies of the existing system, namely,—{i) the
inequity arising at present by the fact that the rates of agricultural
income-tax vary from State to State, so that persons with the
same income have to pay different amounts of tax, depending
on the source of income, and (ii) the evasion of income-tax by
assessees who show their non-agricultural income as agricultural
income, thereby evading the tax legitimately payable on non-
agricultural income.

Broadly stated, the proposal is that it should be permissible
for Parliament to provide that for the purpose of calculating the
rate of income-tax on non-agricultural income, the agricultural
income of an assessee should be included in his total income.
Once the rate is so determined, the rate will be applied only to
the non-agricultural income of the assessee. The question which
we have been asked to consider is?, whether this can be done
uader the present constitutional provisions, or whether an amend-
ment of the Constitution will be required,.and if so what should
be the lines on which the constitutional amendment should be
made.

2. It should be made clear at the outset that the scope of the
present Report is limited. The Report is not concerned with

1, Letter of the Law Minister to the Chairman, Law Commission,
dated 9th August, 1972,

2. Asto the precise questions, see paragraph 2, infra,

Iniroduc-
tory.

Scope of
the Report
and “pee


questions
for consi-
deration.

Constitu-
tional pro
visions as.
to income-
Matters
within
competen-
ce of the
Union.

2

the merits of the proposal referred to above,’ nor with the
details of the legislation which will have to be undertaken to
give legislative effect to the séheme of taxation which would be
made permissible by the proposal. To be precise, the questions
which we consider in this Report are:— .

(1) Whether under the Constitution, as it stands now,
it is permissible for Parliament to amend the Income-tax
Act, 1961, to provide that “total income” as defined in that
Act will include “agricultural income” for the purpose of -
computing the rate of tax though no tax will be levied by the
Centre on agricultural income.

(2) If the answer to the first question is in the negative,
on what lines the Constitution would need to be amended
to secure for the Parliament, without abridging the taxation
powers of the State legislatures in respect of agricultural
income, a limited power to legislate only for the aggregation
of agricultural income with income on which tax is leviable
under the Central Income-tax Act for the purpose of deter-
mining the appropriate rate of tax on non-agricultural income.

3. For a consideration of the first question,? it is necessary
to deal with the relevant provisions of the Constitution.

“Agricultural income”, as defined by the Constitution?
means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of. the
enactments relating to Indian income-tax. The Income-tax Act*
has an elaborate definition of “agricultural income”, but it is
not necessary to quote it here. Taxes on income other than
agricultural income are within the exclusive competence of
Partiament,’ and Parliament has 3150 the residuary power of
taxation, ie., the power to levy any tax not mentioned in the
State or the Concurrent List.

1, Paragraph 1, supra.
2, Paragraph 2, supra.

3. Article 36601) of the Constitution. Aiso see article 274,
4. Section 2(1), Incometax Act, 1961. Also see section 145,
5. Constitution, Union List, entry 82.

6. Ibid., entry 97.


Taxes on income other than agricultural income are, under
the scheme of distribution of revenues between the Union and
the States! to be levied and collected by the Government of
India and distributed between the Union and the States, in the
manner provided in article 270(2). For this purpose, “taxes on
income” does not include a Corporation tax.?

Parliament has a power to impose surcharge on certain
taxes, including a surcharge on the tax on income other than
agricultural income.?

4, While the above provisions are strictly confined to a tax
on income other than agricultural income, there is, as regards
tax on agricultural income, a specific entry,# assigning to the
States the power to legislate on “Taxes on agricultural income”.
There is 3180, 5 in the State List, an entry relating to land revenue,
which, however, is not very material for the present purpose.

5, It is thus obvious that there is, in the constitutional scheme,
a tigid dichotomy between agricultural income and other income,
for the purpose of taxation. This dichotomy has, in legislative
practice in India also, a very long history, and it is axiomatic
that agricultural income cannot be taxed by the Centre.

When the income-tax was levied in India in 1860, income was
taxable* under four schedules, viz., (1) income from landed
property, which included income from land (agricultural income)
and from house property; (2) income from Professions and
Trades; (3) income from Securities (annuities and dividends
included); and (4) income from Salaries and Pensions. But,
since 1886, agricultural income has been excluded.

The whole question now is, whether the proposal to take
into account agricultural income for the Aimited purpose of
determining the rate of tax would change the character of the

1. Constitution, Article 270(1).

2, Ibid. Article 2704)(9).

3, Article 271.

4, Constitution, State List, entry 46.
5. Ibid., entry 45.

6. 0. P. Chawla, “Development of the concept of Income under
the Indian Income-tax Laws"? (1968) 22 Bulletin for International Fiscal
Documentation, 341, 342.



Effect of
the pro-
posal on
the cha-
acter of
tax,

Distinc-
tion
taxable
income
and rate
of tax.

Inclusion
for
purpose of
tale a
mere ques~
tion of
method.

4

tax and take it on the other side of the dichotomy, or whether
the tax will still remain on this side of the dichotomy, that is to
say, within the competenca of the Union.

6. It may be argued that the proposal in question would amount
to levying a tax on agricultural income though in an indirect
form; and prima facie the argument may appear plausible. But,
on a clase examination of the problem, we have come to con-
clusion that this argument is not well-founded or sound. We
shall deal with the possible arguments on both the sides, in due

course.

7. We must, first, refer to the abstract proposition that there
is a distinction between income (or, for that matter, any other
subject matter), on which tax is levied (on the one hand), and
the rate of tax (on the other hand). In iegislative practice in
the field of income-tax, the distinction is well known. For
example, the tax is on the total income? of the assessee, but the
assessee is entitled to a deduction from tax in respect of interest
on certain securities declared income-tax free.? Such interest
is included in the total income of the assessee. But the assessee
is entitled to a “deduction from the amount of income-tax
with which he is chargeable on his total income, of an amount
equal to the income-tax calculated on the amount so included,
at the average rate of income-tax or at the rate of twenty-seven
and a half per cent, whichever is less”.

The expression “average rate of income-tax” is defined? as
meaning the rate arrived at by dividing the amount of income-
tax calculated on the total income by such total income.

True, the income for which the above provision is made,
is undoubtedly within the taxing power of the Union, and there
is no doubt that the Union can tax it fully, if it so chooses. But
we are citing this example only to illustrate the abstract proposi-
tion mentioned. at the opening of this paragraph.

8. In our view, the inclusion of agricultural income within
the scope of total income for the limited purpose of computing
the rate of tax, is only a method of computation of tax, and

1. Section 4, Income-tax Act, 1961.
2, Section 86-A, ibid.
3. Section 201), ibid.


5

does not amount to the levying of a tax on the income so
included. What is constitutionally pertinent is the power to
tax end not the manner of its exercise.

9. The essential problem of judicial review, under a written
constitutional system where powers are distributed by reference
to the subject matter, does sometimes present cousiderable
difficulty. For the purpose cf considering whether particular
legislation ig authorised by one or more of the enumerated
powers, several tests have been applied. But these tests, though
worded differently, yield substantially the same result. For
example, it js stated that in considering the validity of any pro-
vision adopted in the supposed exercise of a Hmited power of
legislative nature, the first and often the most decisive step is
to ascertain the true scope of the meastire impugned and the

. Jegal effect of its provisions. Again, the “pith and substance”

doctrine had been evoived by the Privy Council 28 a necessary
consequence of the double enumeration of powers, frequently
overlapping, in the Canadian Constitution.

10. It has also been stated? that in every case, “the true nature
and character of the legislation. - its ground and design and
the primary matter dealt with its object and scope” are to be
determined.?

11. We think that ihe pith and substance of the proposed
legislation or its true scope, or true nature and character, falls
within “tax on income other than agricultural income”. The
taxable corpus under ihe proposal will continue to be non-
agricultural income as heretofore.

Ta the judgment upholding the Gift-tax Act. the Supreme
Court held,? that Parliament had power to impose gift-tax
on lands and buildings. The pith and substance of the Gift-
tax Act was to place the tax on the gift on property, which may
jnclude lands and buildings. It is not a tax imposed directly
upon lands and buildings, but is a tax upon the value of the tata!
gifts made in an year which is above the exempted limit.

1, Russel v. The Queen (1882) 7 App. Cas., 829, 833-40.

2. Other cases are reviewed by Bailey in 25 Anstealian Law Journal
at page 332.

3, Second Gift Fax Officer ९० Magarata, (1971) 1 8.6.3.1, 4, paragraph 11,

Legislation
how far
apthorised
by enume-
sated
Powers—
Tests
applied.


Position
under the
proposal
different
from
countries
Tevying tax

There is no tax upon lands or buildings as units of taxation.
The value of the lands and buildings is only the measure of the
value of the gift, Somewhat similar reasoning could apply in
the present context. There is no tax upon agricultural income.
The unit of tax is other income. The taxation of agriculture
was, in an academic discussion,’ defined to include:—

(a) taxation of agricultural land;
(4) taxation of agricultural produce; and
(c) taxation af incame from agricultural land.

The present proposal falls within none of the above three cate-
gories.

Merely because the amount of agricultural income becomes
relevant in determining the rate, it cannot be regarded as an
essential element of the tax, for the tax still remains a tax on
the non-agricultural income.

1L-A. The position under the proposal will be essentially dif-
ferent from the position that prevails in some countries Gncluding
a few federations),? where agricultural income is braught within
the direct purview of the law imposing a tax on income.3

For example, in Uruguay (which has a quasi-federal consti-
tution), income is, for the purposes of the individual income-tax,
classified in five categories, according to the “prevailing factor
of production”, and these categories are:—

[-—“Real Estate Category” (income derived from the

16896 of real estate and similar situations). है

IL—“Chattel” (interest and other income derived from
credits, intangible assets, royalties etc.).

on_ Agricultural Taxation and Economic Development,
Harvard Law School, (1954), page 269.

2 (a) Tax on Trade Guide—Chile (Arthur Anderson & Co, Chicago,
U.S.A.) (1966);
(8) Raynard M. Sommerfeld, Tax Reform and the Alliance of Progress
(Universit; Texas Press, Austin):
«) Wgwtighs of Taxation in Mexico (Arthur Anderson & Co. Chicago)

3. See ४, P, Gandhi, “Taxation of Agricultural Income unde Central
Income-tax” Ganuary 10 March, 1969) 24 Indian Journal of Agricultural
Economics 29, 36, 37,

4. Rosello, “Taxation in Uruguay” (1968) 22 Bulletin of
International Fiscal Documentation 291 रु


TIl— Industry and Commerce” (income from commer-
cial and industrial activities).

1V-—“Agriculture” (income from agricultural activities).

V—Personal” (salaries and fees earned by employees,
professional men, etc.).

The prevailing factor of production in categories I and I
is capital; in category ¥V work; and in categories वा and IV the
union of both the elements.

Again for example, in Chile,‘ income derived from real estate
(urban or agricultural), investments (except dividends), commer-
cial, industrial or similar activities, is taxed under the first cate-
gory of income-tax.

12. Of the cules which apply to the interpretation of the legisla-
tive entries, it is relevant to draw attention to the rule of pith
and substance;? to the rule that each entry is to be interpreted
liberally; and to the tule that a power to make law conferred
by an entry includes all incidental and ancillary powers.

13. The principle of broad interpretation of the entry conferring
a power! has been followed in a number of cases concerning
various taxes.
By way of example, we may refer to judicial decisions relating
to:i—
(i) excise duty and sales tax;5-6
(ii) income-tax?; and
(iif) tax on goods and passengers, carried by road or
internal waterways.

1. Ehrique Piedra, “Taxation in Chile” (1968) 22 Bulletin of Interna-
tional Fiscak Documentation 319, 320.
2. Paragraph 10, supra.
3. (को Baldev Singh v. C.LT., ALR. 1961 S.C. 736;
(0) Balaji ९. L7.0., ALR. 1962 $.0. 123,

4, Paragraph 12, supra.

5. Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1962 8.0. 1006.
6, (a) इन & Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, ALR, 1958

(b) 7. मे, Jute Mills Co. v. State of U.P., ALR. 1961 S.C, 1534,
7. See paragraph 16, infra.
8, See paragraph 19 to 20, infra,

Rules as to
interpeeta-
legislative
entries.

‘Wide inter-
pretation.


Compe-
tence to
devise

machinery.

Cases re-
lating to
the eniry
“income”
and other
laws.

Construc-

8

14. Another important consideration which should be borne
in mind is that of enforcement. A legislature levying a tax is
competent to devise a machinery for preventing its evasion,
and to make provision for recovery and effective collection of
the tax in question and for preventing its evasion.”

This is on the principle that so tong as the character of the

tax is not lost, an entry delineating a Icgislative field has to
be widely and liberally construed, provided there is a reasonable
nexus between the item taxed and the field so delineated.?

15. The principle? which is of general application, has been
applied in several cases relating to the entry conferring on Par-
tiament the power to tax income (other than agricultural income)
and other entries relating to tax.

16, For example a wide construction has been placed on the

tion placed exprssion “income” (in the Union List, entry 82), so as to enable

on the

expression
“income”.

the legislature to provide, by law, for the prevention of evasion
of income-tax. 4-S-6-7

Thus, the validity of section 23A, Income-tax Act, 1922,

which provided for super tax on the undistributed income of
certain companies, * has been upheld.?

The validity of sections 2(6-A) (६) and 12(1-B) of the Income-

tax Act, 1922, treating as a “dividend” any payment
by a company, (not being a company in which the public
was substantially interested), of any sum by way of advance
or loan!® was upheld. The provision was designed to prevent
evasion of Income-tax.

1. See paragraph 15, infra.
2. (a) Punjab 0. Industries v. LT. Commr., A.1.R. 1965 S.C, 1862;

(3) Navnit Lal ५. App. Asst. Comimr., 5.1, 8, 1965 $.C. 1375,
3. Paragraph 14, supra. :
4, Navnit Laly, A.A.S., ALR, 1965 8.0, 1375, 1376;(1965) 1 S.C.R. 909.
5, Balaji v. 1.T.O., ALR. 1962 5.0. 123, 125, 126; (1962) 2 $.C.R. 983.
6, Baldeo Singh ¥. ८.7), ALR. 1961 S.C, 736, 743; (1961) 1 S.C.R. 482.
7. C.K. Deverajulu v. I. A.LR. 1963 Mad. 183, 185, Paragraph 8-9,
8. Baldeo Singh v. 1.7.C,, ALR. 1961 8.C. 736.
9, Section 23-A has been replaced with some changes ‘by sections 104—

109, -Income-tax Act, 1961.

10. (@) Navnit Lat v. Appellate Assistant Commissioner, ALR. 1965
S.C. 1375; -

{b) Punjab Distilling Industries Lid. v. C.1.7. Punjab, ALR. 1965
S.C, 1865,


17, In our view, the power of the Union to tax non-agricul-
tural income includes the power fo take into account agricultural
income for the purpose of determining the rate of tax, if it is found
to be necessary for the efficient exercise of that power.

Tt has been stated that" to the extent the present exclusion
of the agricultural income has acted as a loophole in the existing
central income-tax, it has provided an avenue for unaccounted
money with its undesirable economic effects on the economy.
it has further been stated that? “there is scope for unaccounted
money masquerading as agricultural income”. The proposal
could, toa certain extent, reduce the effect of unaccounted money
derived from non-agricultural income masquerading as agri-
cultural income,

18. It would be convenient to refer, at this stage, to a few other
judicial decisions which are relevant to the question of inter-
pretation of the taxing power, and, in particular, to the com-
petence of the legislature concerned to choose the appropriate
machinery for enforcement. Many of these relate to taxes on
the transport of passengers and goods,
19. The following discussion in the Atiabari case} is pettinent :—
‘Having thus disposed of the main ground of attack
against the constitutionality of the Act based on Article
301 of the Constitution, it is necessary to advert to the other
contentions raised on behalt of the appellants. It has been
contended that the Act is beyond the legislative competence
of the Assam Legislature. We have, therefore, to address
ourselves to the question whether or not it is covered by any
of the entries in List IL of the Seventh Schedule. Entry
56, in its very terms, “Taxes on goods and passengers carried
by rail or on inland waterways,” completely covers the im-
pugned Act, There is no occasion in this case to take
recourse to the doctrine of pith and substance, inasmuch
as the Act is a simple piece of taxing statute meant to tax
transport of goods, in this case jute and tea, by road or on
inland waterways. In my opinion, it is a very simple case

1, ५. ए. Gandhi, Some Aspects of India’s Tax Structure, (1970), page

172,

2, §. Bhoothalingam, Final Report on Rationalisation and simplifica-
tion of the tax structure, (1968), (Ministry of Finance, 1968}, page 48.

3, Atiabari Tea Co. ५. State of Assam, A.LR. 1961 S.C, 232, 243, para 20.

Power to
take into
account
other
income
included
in power
to tax.

Judicial
decisions
as to en-
forcement,

Atiabart

case.


10

of taxation completely covered by entry 56, but the argu-
ment against the competence of the Assam Legislature has
been sought to be supported by the subsidiary contention
that though in form it is a tax on the transport of goods
within the terms of entry 56, in substance it is an imposition
of excise duty within the meaning of entry 84 in List 1 of the
Seventh Schedule, but, in my opinion, there is no substance
in this contention for the simple reason that so long as jute or
tea is nat sought to be transported from one place to another,
within the State or outside the State, no tax is sought to be levied
by the Act. Yt is only when those goods are put ona motor
truck or a boat or a steamer or other modes of transport
contemplated by the Act, that the occasion for the payment
of tax arises. A similar argument was advanced in the case.
of Tata iron and Steel and Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar,’ and
Das, C.J., delivering the majority judgment of the Court,
disposed of the argument that the tax in that case was not
on sale of goods, but was, in substance, a duty of excise,
in these terms :

This argument, however, overlooks the fact that under
clause (ii) the producer or manufacturer became liable to
pay the tax not because he produced or manufactured the
goods, but because he sold the goods. In other words the tax
was laid on the producer or manufacturer only qua seller
and not qua manufacturer or producer as pointed out in
Province of Madras v. Boddu Paidanna and Sons.2 In the
words of their Lordships of the Judicial Committee in
Governor-General ¥. Province of Madras,+ a duty of excise
is primarily a duty levied on a manufacturer or producer in
respect of the commodity manufactured or produced. It is a
tax on goods not on sales or the proceeds of sale of goods.
Jf the goods produced or manufuctured in Bihar were
destroyed by fire before sale the manufacturer or producer
would not have been liable to pay any tax under s, 4(1)

1, Tata Iron and Steel Co. Lid., v. State of Bihar, (1958) S.C.R. 1353;
A.LR. 1988, $.C. 452.

2, Province of Madras v. Bosd Paidanna and Sons, ALR. 1942 F.C, 33;
(1942) F.C.R. 90.

3. Gavernor-Goneral v. Province of Madras, A.LR. 1945 P.C. 98, 101.


read with s. 2(g), second proviso. As Gwyer, C.J, said in
Boddu Paidanna’s case, the manufacturer or producer would
be “liable, if at all, to a sales tax because he sells and not
because he manufactures or produces; and he would be
free from liability if he chose to give away everything
which came from his factory.”

The observations quoted above completely cover the
present controversy. The Legislature has chosen the dealer
or the producer as the convenient agency for collection of the
tax imposed by section 3, but the occasion for the imposi-
tion of the tax is not the production or the dealing, but the
transport of those goods. It must, therefore, he held that
the Act does what it sets out to do, namely, to impose a tax
on goods carried by road or on inland waterways.”

20. Another case illustrating the proposition that it is open
to the Legislature to prescribe the machinery for recovering the
tax may be usefully referred to. It has been held! that a tax
levied by a State on goods carried, even though the tax has been
made payable by the producer of goods and not by the carrier,
is valid. The Supreme Court refused-to read, in the State List,
entry 56, any restriction to the effect that the tax on goods’
carried should be levied only against the owner of the goods that
are carried or against the persons who carry them.

21. As was observed in a case? rejating to the Bihar Taxation
on Passengers etc, Act, while discussing the question whether
certain provisions violated the test of reasonableness—

“The objects to be taxed so long as they happen to be
within the legislative competence of the Legislature can be
taxed by the Legislature according to the exigencies of its
needs, because there can be no doubt thai the State is entitled
to raise revenue by taxation. The quantum of tax levied by
the taxing statute, the conditions subject to which it is levied,

1, Khyberbari Tea Co. v. State of Assam, A.LR. 1964 8.C. 925.

2, Rat Ramkrishna v, State of Bikar, ALR. 0. 7 .
ean of 1963 S.C. 1667, 1673, para-

Rhyberbart
case.

Rai Ram-
krista

caxe.


Sriniva-
san's case.

12

the manner in which it is sought to be recovered, are all
matters within the competence of the Legislature, and in
dealing with the contention raised by a citizen that the taxing
statute contravenes Article 19, Courts would naturally be
circumspect and cautious. Where for instance it appears
thal the taxing statute is plainly discriminatory, or provides
no procedural machinery for assessment and Jevy of the tax,
or that it is confiscatory, Courts, would be justified in striking
down the impugned statute as unconstitutional. In such
case, the character of the material provisions of the impugned
statute is such that the Court would feel justified in taking
the view that, in substance, the taxing statute is a cloak
adopted by the Legislature for achieving its confiscatory
pruposes. This is illustrated by the decision of this Court
in the case of Munnathat Thatunnai Moonil Nair v. State of
Kerala, AR. 1961 8.C. 552 where a taxing statute was
struck down because it suffered from several fatal infirmi-
ties. On the other hand, we may refer to the case of
Jagannath Baksh Singh y. State of Utter Pradesh,) where
a challenge to the taxing statute on the ground that its provi-
sions were unreasonable was rejected and it was observed
that unless the infirmities in the impugned statute were of
such a serious nature as to justify its description as a coloura-
Ble exercise of legislative power the Court would uphold a tax-
ing statute.”

21-A. The principle of the Supreme Court decision which
emphasised? the aspect of evasion was reaffirmed by the Supreme
Court in a subsequent case,? holding that the provision in the
Income-tax Act for tagging of income arising to a wife or a minor
child from a partaership in which the husband or father is also
@ partner, was justified mainly on the consideration that such a
provision was necessary to achieve the object of preventing tax
evasion,

22. So much as regards provisions for proper enforcement.
We should, next refer to a provision in the Estate Duty Act,

~ 1, ALR, 1962 5,0, 1563.

Paragraph 16, supra.
3. S. Srinivasan v. Commissioner of Income-tax, (1967) 63 LT.R. 273


13

which is very pertinent in the present context, and which! we
quote below? :—

Section 34(2).

“(2) Where any such estate as is referred to in sub-
section (1) includes any property exempt from estate duty,
the estate duty leviable on the poperty not so exempt
shall be an amount bearing to the total amount of duty
which would have been payable on the whole estate had no
part of it been so exempt, the same proportion as the valuc
of the property not so exempt bears to the value of the whole
estate.

Explanation.—Fot the purposes of this sub-section,
“property exempt from estate duty” means —

(i} any property which is exempt from estate duty
under section 33;

ii) any agricultural land situate in any State not
specified in the First Schedule ;

(iii) the interests of all coparceners other than the
deceased in the joint family property of a Hindu family
governed by the Mitakshara, Marumakkattayam or
Aliyasantana Law.”

23. Tt appears that the validity of this provision was doubted Law 1

by the late Dr. Alladi Keishnaswami lyer,? and the Ministry Mists,

of Finance consulted‘ the Ministry of Law on the subject when pee

the Bill was under discussion, हु
The gist of the advice given by the Ministry of Law was as

follows* :—

“A question has been raised as to whether the aggrega-
tion of agricultural land in a non-scheduled State would be

1. Section 342), Estate Duty Act, 1952.

2. As to the constitutional position with reference to estate duty, see -—
(७) Article ३6600);

(6) Union List, entries 87-88;

(c) State List, entries 47-48 ,

(d) Article 269 (1) (b).

3, As a Member of the Rajya Sabha.

4, Lok Sabha Debates, 8th September, 1953.

5, Lok Sabha Debates, 8th September, 1953.


Provision
in the
Estate Duty
Aci not
challenged.

Presump-
tion in
favour of
validity.

constitutional, A further contention may also be raised that
as the Parliament is acting as an agent of the Scheduled
States, the agricultural lands in these States should be treated
as separate estates. The doubt arises from the fact that the
States which have not agreed may pass their own legislation
to assess an estate duty on such lands, and further because
in the Income-tax Act the agricultural income arising in a
State which is exempted from income-tax is not included for
that purpose. The power given to the Parliament to legislate
on the subject of estate duty in respect of property other than
agricultural land should necessarily be construed in its widest
amplitude and it would be open to Parliament to adopt any
method by which property within its jurisdiction are assessed
to estate duty.”

24, The fact that the provision’ in the Estate Duty Act has
stood for about twenty years without challenge, can be said to
lend support to the view that it does not suffer from any serious
constitutional infirmity. No doubt, this factor is not conclusive
on the point. But it is very unlikely that those who have had
to pay estate duty on the basis of the provision, and who had
competent legal advice at their disposal would have refrained
from challenging it, unless the legal fraternity took the view
that it was valid.

With reference to this aspect, we cannot do better than quote
the observations of Dixon J. (as he then was). He said—
“_...time does not run in favour of legislation,
If it is ultra vires, it cannot gain legal strength from jong
failure on the part of lawyers to perceive and set up its invalidity.
Albeit, lateness in an attack upon the constitutionality of a
statute is but a reason for exercising special caution in exami-
ning the arguments by which the attack is supported.?”

25. Finally, we may also refer here to what is commonly known
as the presumption in favour of validity of legislation.

1. Paragraph 22-23, supra.
2. Grace Bros. Pvt. Ltd.¥v.,The Com 3 onweatth, (1946) 72 C.L.R. at p. 289.



26. Where the constitutional validity of an enactment is in
issue, the Court will not hold it to be ultra vires unless the invali-
dity is clear beyond all doubt. As Dixon J. observed-—-

“In discharging our duty of passing upon the validity
of an enactment, we should make every reasonable intend-
ment in its favour, We should give to the powers conferred
upon the Parliament as ample an application as the expressed

«intention and the recognized implications of the Constitution
will allow. We should interpret the enactment, so far as its
language permits, 50 as to bring it within the application
of those powers and we should not, unless the intention is
clear, read it as exceeding them!.”

27. For the reasons stated above, we are of the view that
implementation of the proposal in question by legislation (without
amendment of the Constitution) does not run a serious risk of
being regarded as an attempt to do indirectly? what cannot
be done directly3,—a doctrine which expresses judicial attitude
towards “colourable legislation?.”

The inclusion of agricultural income in “total income”
assessed under the Central Income-tax Act would not amount
tothe imposition of a basic liability to tax on agricultural income,
as no tax is actually required to be paid on it.

28. To summarise what we have stated above, the proposal
in question can be implemented without constitutional amend-
ment, for the following reasons :—

(i) The proposed legislation falls, in pith and substance,
within the Union List, entry 82, and is therefore within the
competence of Parliament5.

(ii) A wide interpretation should be placed on the legis-
lative entries, including those relating to taxation®,

26" Attorney-General (Vic.) ¥. The Commonwealth, (1945) 71 C.L.R. 237,

2, See the point in paragraph 6, supra.
3, As to this maxim, see— Anderson, “Essence, Lacidence and Device”,
(1960) 34 Australian Law Journal

4, Gujapati Narayan Deo v. The State, (1934) $.C-R. 1, 12, followed in
Sonapur Tea Co., AAR. 1962 S.C. 137, 141

» Paragraphs 9 to 11, supra. हि
6. Paragraphs 12-13, supra. .

No serious
risk of
proposal
being chal-
lenged as
attempt

at indirect
iegislation
on a mat-
ter outside
competence,

Points
summed
up.


Answer to
the first
question.

Second
uestion
Joes not

16

(ii) The power to enact a law levying a tax includes the
power to enact provisions for the effective enforcement of
the law. The judicial decisions as to taxation Laws are
instructive in this context?.

{iv) The fact that the provision in the Estate Duty Act,
section 34(2), has stood unchallenged for twenty years, lends
further support to a view favouring validity of the proposal?.

{v) Any doubt regarding the validity of a law should be
settled in favour of its validity, unless there are strong reasons
to the contrary3.

29. In the light of the above discussion, we would answer the
first question? in the affirmative.

Parliament may, in a law levying a tax on income other
than agricultural income, provide for taking into account agrti-
cultural income for the purpose of determining the rate of such
tax on income other than agricultural income.

30. In view of our answer to the first question’, the second
question does not arise.

1, Paragraphs 14 to 21, supra.
2, Paragraphs 22 to 24, supra.
3, Paragraph 25, supra.

4, Paragraphs 2-3, supra,

5, Pazagtaph 29, supre.



17

Before we part with this Report, it is our pleasant duty to
place on record our warm appreciation of the assistance we have
received from Mr, Bakshi, Secretary of the Commission, in dealing
with the problem covered by the Report. As usual, Mr. Bakshi
first prepared a draft which was treated as the Working Paper.
The draft was considered by the Commission point by point
and its conclusions recorded and, in the light of the decisions,
Mr. Bakshi prepared a final draft for consideration and approval.
At all stages of the study of this problem, Mr. Bakshi took an
active part in our deliberations and has rendered very valuable
assistance to the Commission.

P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR oe a Chairman
२. R. KRISHNA IYER }

९. ६. TRIPATHI oo oo Members
5. 5. DHAVAN |

P.M. BAKSHI os we we Secretary
New Datu;

The 28th August, 1972.