LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
Se

FIFTIETH REPORT

THE PROPOSAL TO INCLUDE PERSONS CONNECTED
WITH PUBLIC EXAMINATIONS WITH THE
DEFINITION OF “PUBLIC SERVANT” IN
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE

AUGUST, 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR
CHAIRMAN

SHRI H. R. GOKHALE,
Minister of Law & Justice,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINIsTER,

LAW COMMISSION
‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi-1

August 28, 1972

I am forwarding herewith the Fiftieth Report of the Law Commission
on the proposal to include persons connected with public examinations
within the definition of “public servant” in the Indian Penal Code.

The circumstances under which this question came to be considered
by the Commission, and the scope of the Report, have been explained in
the first paragraph of the Report. Having regard to the nature of the subject,
no press communique was issued inviting the view of the public. But, after
a preliminary study, a draft Report on the subject was prepared and discus-
sed. After discussion, it was revised, considered again, and finalised.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

P. 8, GAJENDRAGADKAR.


CONTENTS

PARAGRAPH ‘SUBJECT-MATTER
1 Introduction ©. eg,
2 Importance of th: definition of “Public servant” in the Penal
3and 4 Analysis of the definition of “public servant” . .
5 Supreme Courtcase .  . ॥*#५ see
6 Section 21, Clause ninth, before 1864 . . .
7 Section 21, Clause twelfth, before 1964 . . . .
8—10 View taken in the Supreme Court case . . . .
Nn Amendment of section 21, Clause twelfth, in 1964 a.
12 Amendment recommended in 42nd Report . . . .
13 Public duty not enough =. . . . . . .
14 Need for amendment in respect of University and other putjic
examinations cee +»- +ल- - :
15 Recommendation in 42nd Report as to Private employees.
16 Persons employed in connection with examinations held by
the Government . . . . . . .
17 Recommendation .  .  . . «+ soe
18 Honestyadebttotheprofession. . . . . -

APPENDIX 1—Selected Central Acts relating to bodies authorised to hold
examinations or to recognise or approve degrees and acade-
micdistinctions . . . . . . .

APPENDIX 2—Reference in a few recent Central Acts to treat certain officers

as public servants within the meaning of section 21, Indian
Penal Code . . . . . . . . .

Gi)

PAGE

Sand 4

4and 5

Sand6

6and7

72०१ 8
Sard 9

11 to 14

15 and 16


REPORT OF THE PROPOSAL TO INCLUDE

PERSONS CONNECTED WITH PUBLIC

EXAMINATIONS WITHIN THE DEFINITION

OF “PUBLIC SERVANT” IN THE INDIAN
PENAL CODE

1, This report deals with a question concerning the. definition
of the expression “public servant” in the Penal Code. An
important judgment of the Supreme Court! has brought to light
a defect in the scope of the present definition, and we have
considered it desirable to examine the matter, and give a report
suo motu. We shall explain, in detail, the question which is the
subject-matter of this report.

2. As is well known, there are numerous sections of the Penal
Code where the expression “public servant” occurs, and the
distinction between public servants and other persons is material
for various purposes under the Code. Broadly speaking, the
distinction becomes important in respect of the following classes
of offences:—

@ offences which can be committed only by public
servants ;2

(ii) offences which can be aggravated when committed
by public servants;3

(ii) offences which can be committed only against
public servants ;4 ‘

(iv) offences which are aggravated when committed
against public servants;5 ‘

(0) offences committed in relation to public servants
or their authority, or otherwise connected with them in
one way or another.®

3. Having regard to the importance of the expression “public
servant ”,7 the Penal Code, in section 21, contains an elaborate
definition, making a lengthy enumeration of various categories

1, See paragraph 5, infra.

2. E.g. Chapter 9, (sections 161 to 171 and sections 217 to 225).
3, E.g. section 409,

4, Eg. section 186,

5. Eg. section 353.

6, E.g. Chapter 10 (sections 172—190).

7, Paragraph 2, supra.

Introduc-
tion,

Importance
of the
definition
of “public
servant”

in the
Penal Code.

Analysis
of the
definition
of “public
servant”.


2

of public servants, and the categories are mainly (though not
exclusively) based on the function discharged by the person
concerned.

4. The enumeration in the first eleven clauses of section 21

covers the following functions discharged by the public servant
concerned :—

(i) functions connected with defence;!

(ii) judicial or semi-judicial functions or other functions
in connection with the administration of justices;?
(iii) functiqns connected with the prevention of offences
and the maintenance of law and order;3

(iv) functions connected with the proprietory or financial
interests of the state4 and

(0 functions connected with elections.5

The last clause® of the section is residuary. It will require detailed
discussion later.”

Supreme 5. The judgment® which has led to the consideration of the
problem covered by the present Report may now be dealt with.
In that case, the question arose whether a University Examiner
is a public servant. The accused in that case was, at the material
time, a Senior Lecturer in a Government College in the State
of Gujarat. In April, 1964, the accused was appointed Examiner
for Physics Practical fof Ist year B.Sc. for the Gujarat Univer-
sity. It was alleged that he had accepted Rs. 500/- for showing
favour to a candidate, by giving the candidate more marks than
he deserved.

The Gujarat High Court held that the accused was not a

“public servant”, and the Supreme Court dismissed the appeal
of the State against the judgment of the High Court.

1, Section 21, clause second.

2, Section 21, clauses third, fourth, fifth and sixth.

3, Section 21, clauses seventh and eighth.

4, Section 21, clauses ninth and tenth.

5, Section 21, clause eleventh,

6, Section 21, clause twelfth.

7, See paragraphs 7 and 11, infra.

8, State of Gujarat vy. Manshankar Dwivedi, (1972), 2S.C.W.R. 13
(13 July, 1972).


3

We shall deal here only with the points material for the pur-
pose of the present Report. For that purpose, it is necessary
to refer to the statutory provisions that came up for considera-
tion.

6. Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (as it stood at the
material time, and before the amendments which were made
later), contained several clauses. The ninth clause was in the
following terms:-—

“Ninth.—Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer
to take, receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of
the Government or to make any survey, assessment or
contract on behalf of the Government or to execute any
Teyenue process or to investigate, or to report on any matter
affecting the pecuniary interests of the Government or to
make, authenticate or keep any document relating
to the pecuniary interests of the Government or, to prevent
the infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary
interests of the Government and every officer in the service
or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or com-
mission for the performance of any public duty.”

7. The twelfth clause of section 21 at the time covered every
officer in the service or pay of a local authority of corporation
engaged in any trade or industry established by the Central,
Provincial or State Government or a Government company.

8. The Gujarat High Court held that the context of the whole
of the ninth clause! indicated that a connection with the Govern-
ment was necessary, in respect of the performance of a public
duty. In this case, though the accused happened to be a Govern-
ment servant, the particular work in connection with which he
accepted the money was not done by him in that capacity. The
Supreme Court found no “infirmity” in this reasoning of the
High Court.

9. Clause nine of section 21 referred to an “officer”, and the
Person who is to be regarded as an “officer” must hold some
office. The holding of “office” implied charge of a duty attached

4, Paragraph 6, supra.

Section 21,
clause
ninth, be-
fore 1964.

Section 21,
clause
twelfth, be-
fore 1964.

View take
in the Sup-
reme Court
case.


Amend-
ment of
section 21,
clause
twelfth

in 1964.

Amend-
ment recom-
mended in
42nd Re-
port.

4

to that office. The person who was remunerated by fee or com-
mission must be an “officer”. Therefore, the High Court said,
the use of the word “officer”, read in the context of the words
immediately preceding the last part of clause nine, would indicate
that the remuneration contemplated was remuneration by the
Government. In this case, that was not the position. The Supreme
Court expressly approved of this reasoning of the Gujarat
High Court. The Supreme Court added—

“A University Examiner cannot be considered to hold
an office in the sense in which that word has been under-
stood and employed in the Ninth clause. It is clear from the
provisions of the Gujarat University Act, 1949, that there
is no such condition that only that person can be appointed
as Examiner who is the holder of an office”.

10. As regards the twelfth clause of section 21 (as it then stood)
also, the decision! that the accused was not holding an office,
was conclusive. In the course of the discussion, the Supreme
Court also stated that it was a moot point whether a University
was a “local authority” as defined in the General Clauses Act.?

11. In 1964, the twelfth clause of section 21 was recast, and the
new provision was in these terms:—
“Twelfth—Every person—

(a) in the service or pay of the Government or
remunerated by fees or commission for the performance
of any public duty by the Government;

(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a
corporation established by or under a Central, Provin-
cial or State Act or a Government company as defined
in section 601 of the Companies Act, 1956.”

But this amendment would not make a difference as to the
position applicable to a University Examiner, because he does
not fall either under (a) or (6) of the above clause.

12, In the draft section recommended in the previous Com-
mission’s Report on the Penal Code,3 an attempt had been made
to make several improvements in the present definition; but
the problem with which this report is concerned, would survive

1, Paragraph 9, supra.
2, Section 3(31), General Clauses Act, 1897.
3, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n).


5

even under the revised definition given in that Report. Broadly
speaking, the principal criteria regarded as relevant for the pur-
poses of the revised definition of “public servant” are :—

(a) being in the service or pay of the Government,! a
local authority,? a public corporation, or a Government
company3;

(b) being remunerated by the Government by fees

* or commission for the performance of any public duty‘;

(c) holding certain offices, which may be legislative,’
sub-legislative,6 judicial? (or ancillary to judicial)® or
electoral? ;

(d) holding an office authorising or requiring the office
holder by law to perform a public duty.1® —.

13. It would be noticed, that the mere performance of a “public
duty” is not regarded as the sole criterion, even under the revised
definition.!! Though a public duty could be regarded as implicit
in categories (a) and (c) above, and is expressed in categories
(6) and (d) above, certain other conditions are also indicated.
This is because the expression “public duty” is itself imprecise.'?

14. This being the position, it is obvious that ifthe case of a
University Examiner to be covered, an amendment would be
needed. The question, therefore, to be considered is, whether
such an amendment is required on the merits. We are inclined
to answer this question in the affirmative. We would add that
in case of examiners at other public examinations’? also the posi-
tion should be the same.

1, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(a) (
2, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n) (iii), latter half.
|. 42nd Report, page 414, clause 700) (iv).

4, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n) (ii), latter half.
5, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7000
6, 42nd Report, 0228० 414, clause 700)
1
8
9,

', 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n) (v).
. 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n) (vi
,, 42nd Report, page 414,-clause 7(n) (vi
10, 42nd Report, page 414, clause 7(n) (ix).
11, Paragraph 12, supra.
12, See discussion in the 42nd Report, page 23, paragraph 2.33.
‘See paragraph 17, infra for the suggested clause.

and 7 (n) (vii).

Public
duty not
enough.

Need for
amend-

ment in

respect of
University
and other
public exa-
minations.


Recom-
mendation
in 42nd
Report as
to private

employees.

6 °

Excellence ought to be the criterion for success in public
examinations;! and mercenary or other extraneous considera-
tions should not be allowed to operate. Further, a person who
undertakes work connected with such examinations, is expected
to maintain the purest standard of integrity, and if he has failed
to do so, the State is justified in applying the sanctions of the
criminal law against him. Otherwise, those who can afford to
pay and who have no scruples will have a lead over others.

It is irrelevant that the examinations are conducted by bodies
which do not form part of Government hierarchy. In the duties
which such bodies perform, at least in respect of public examina-
tions, the public is as much interested as it is in the duties per-
formed by the normal run of Government servants. Not much
argument, we hope, is needed to support the point that public
confidence in the purity of standards in these examinations should
be maintained, and, if necessary, the criminal law ought to be
invoked for the purpose,

It is obvious that public examinations affect a large number
of persons, both as examinees and as examiners. Success or
failure in the examination may influence the whole career of a
man, not only in the initial profession which he takes up, but
also, at later stages, in a profession or service which he has
already entered. Complaints are often voiced about corrupt
practices indulged in by examiners at such examination, and
the law should be made comprehensive enough to enable action
to be taken if the complaints are found to be true. The stakes
are large. Welfare of a substantial section of the community, is
at issue. Hence, the matter ought to be provided for by approp-
riate provision in the general criminal law of the country.

15. We may, in this connection, note that the Law Commission
has, in its Report on the Code,? already recommended the
insertion of a provision. punishing private employees who take
bribes. Now that the question has arisen as regards persons who
are not in “employment”, we think that opportunity should be
taken to extend the law to them also.

1, For an illustrative list of relevant Central Acts, see Appendix 1.

2, 42nd Report (Penal Code), page 300, paragraph 17.54 and page 486,
suggested new section 4208.


7

The new section recommended as to private employees in
tbat Report is as follows:—

‘420B, Employee taking bribe in respect of employer's
affairs or business.—Whosoever, being employed by another,
accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain,
from any person, for himself or for any other person, any
gratification, other than legal remuneration, as a motive,or
Teward—

(a) for doing or forbearing to do any act in rela-
tion to his employer’s affairs or business; or

(0) for showing or forbearing to show, in the
exercise of his functions, favour or disfavour to any
person in relation to is employer’s affairs or business,

shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.

Explanations.—(1) The word “gratification” is not res-
tricted to pecuniary gratification, or to gratifications estimable
in money.

(2) The words “legal remuneration” are not restricted
to remuneration which any employee can lawfully demand,
but include all remuneration which he is permitted by his
employer to accept.

(3) “A motive or reward for doing’.—A person who
receives a gratification as a motive or reward for doing what
he does not intend or is not in a position to do or has notidone,
comes within these words.

Exception—This provision does not extend to a case
in which the employee is a public servant acting as such.’. an

16. We are, further, of the view that opportynity should be taken Pepe i
to insert a specific provision as to persons employed in connec- in connec
tion with examinations held by the Government, if remunerated. tions held
If they are not full time Governmet servants, a question may arise Govern-
whether they are doing a “public duty” and. it is better to aveid | ment.
doubts on the subject. i

17. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the Recom-
following clauses and Explanations should be inserted in seotign ™mendation,


8

21 of the Indian Penal Code.' The new clauses could be inser-
ted before the last clause ;

“(viii-a) any person in the service or pay of a public
“body which holds an examination for the purpose of granting
any degree, or any person remunerated by such a public body
for the performance of any work in connection with any
“such ¢xamination;

(viii-b) any person in the service or pay of a private body
which holds an examination for the purpose of granting
any degree, being a degree approved or recognised by the
Government or by a public body, or any person remunerated
by such a private body for the performance of any work in
connection with any such examination;

जा (viii-c) any person remunerated by the Government
for the performance of any work in connection withany
examination held in connection with employment in a public
post or for the purpose of grant of any certificate.

Explanation: |.+-The expression “public body” includes—

(a) a University, a Board of Education or other
' body. established under a Central, State or Provincial
Act or constituted by the Government;

(9) a local ‘authority.

Explanation 2.—The expression “degree” includes a
diploma, certificate or other academic distinction or title,
or any document entitling the holder thereof to practice any
-profession. “

Explanation 3.—The expression “private body” means

body which is not a public body.’.
Honesty 1 18. We should conclude by quoting the fine Elizabethan language
Srofesstan, ‘ with’ which Francis Bacon begins his preface to his Maxim of
the Law2—“I hold every man a debter to his profession; from

1, The numering of the clauses and Explanations will have to be changed
to का with settion 21 as ulimately revised in the Bill that may be intro-
duced to implement the 42nd Report of. the Law Commission.

2, Bacon, Preface to Maxims of the Law, quoted by Sir Owen Dixon,
3५ ‘Préfessidtial Conduct” (Inaugural lecture to the Law Students of the Univer-
+ "sity 'f Melbourne‘in 1953), The Jesting Pilate, 129-134.



9 पु

which as men of course do seek to receive countenance and profit,
so ought they of duty to endeavour themselves, by way of amends,
to be a help and ornament thereunto. This is performed in some
degree by the honest and liberal practice of a profession when
men shall carry a respect not to descend into any course that is
corrupt and unworthy thereof, and preserve themselves free
from the abuses wherewith the same profession is noted to be
infected; but much more is this performed if a man be able to
visit and strengthen the roots and foundation of the science
itself; thereby not only gracing it in reputation and dignity but
also amplifying it in perfection and substance”.

Before we part with this Report, it is our pleasant duty to
place on record our warm appreciation of the assistance we have
received from Mr. Bakshi, Secretary of the Commission, in
dealing with the problem covered by the Report. As usual, Mr.
Bakshi first prepared a draft which was treated as the Working
Paper. The draft was considered by the Commission point by
point and its conclusions recorded and, in the light of the deci-
sions, Mr. Bakshi prepared a final draft for consideration and
approval. At all stages of the study of this problem, Mr. Bakshi
took an active part in our deliberations and has rendered very
valuable assistance to the Commission.

P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR Chairman

V. R. KRISHNA IYER }

P. K. TRIPATHI 1 Members

S. S. DHAVAN j

P. M. BAKSHI . Secretary
NEW DELHI;

The 28th August, 1972


APPENDIX—1

Selected Central Acts relating to bodies authorised to hold
examinations or to recognise or approve degrees and other
academic distinctions.

. 1. THe Apvocates Act, 1961

Section 7.—The functions of the Bar Council of India shall
be:

(0) to recognise Universities whose degree in law will be
a qualification for enrolment as an advocate and for that pur-
pose to visit and inspect Universities.

Section 24 (1) (d) (v).—Provides that a person shail be
qualified to be admitted as an advocate if he fulfils the following
conditions :—

(v) any other class of persons who by reason of their legal
training or experience are declared by the Bar Council of India
to be exempt from the provisions of this clause.

Section 25—An application for admission as an advocate
is to be made to the State Bar Council within whose jurisdiction
the applicant proposes to practise.

Section 26.—The State BarjCouncil refers every application
for admission as an advocate to its enrolment committee.
2. THe INDIAN MeEpIcAL CounciL Act, 1956
Sections 11 and 12.—Provide for recognition of medical
qualifications granted by Universities of medical institutions
in India or in countries with which there is a scheme of reciprocity
provides in the schedules.
Sections 13 and 14.—Provide for recognition of medical quali-
fications in some other special cases.
3. THE Post-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH, ACT, 1966
Section 23.—The Institute has power to grant medical degrees,
diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this
Act. हु

u


12

Section 24.—Recognition of medical qualifications granted
by statute under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.

4. Tue Dentists’ Act, 1948

Section 11.—This section provides that an application to the
council for recognition of qualifications by an authority which
grants such qualifications, the Council after enquiry may declare
that such qualification shall be recognised dental hygiene
qualification for the purposes of the Act.

Section 12.—The Council may prescribe the period and nature
of an apprenticeship or training and other necessary conditions
before a person can be registcze! <s a dental mechanic under
this Act.1

5. THe PHarmacy Act, 1948

Section 12.—The Central Council has to approve the courses
of study and examinations which is conducted by any authority
in a State.

6. THE BANARAS HINDU Universiry Act, 1915

Section 11—The Academic Council shall be the academic
body of the University and subject to the Act, statutes and
ordinances shall have charge of the ofganisation of instruction
in the University and the Colleges, the courses of study and the
examination and discipline of students and the conferment of
ordinary and honorary degrees.

7. THE ALIGARH Mustim University Act, 1920

Section 25(1).—The Academic Council shall be the academic
body of the University and shall, subject to the Act, statutes
and ordinances have the control and general regulation of and
be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction
and for the education, examination, discipline and health of
students and for the conferment of degrees (other than hono-
rary).

1, The Rajya Sabha has recently passed the Dentists’ (Amendment) Bill,
1972, which secks to vest in the Union Government the power to recognise
dental qualifications and to provide for the appointment of visitors for the
inspection of dental institutions, and to empower the Dental Council of
India to prescribe standards of professional conduct, etiquette andacode
of ethics for dentists in order to bring about uniformity in these rules.


13,

a

8. THe Detn University Act, 1922

Section 23—The Academic Council shall be the academic
body of the University and shall, subject to the Act, Statutes
and Ordinances, have the control and general regulation and
be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction,
education and examination with the University, and shall exer-
cise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be
conferred or enforced by the Statutes. It can advise the executive
council on all academic matters.

9. THe Visva Buarati Act, 1951

Section 24—The Shiksha Samiti (Academic Council)....
shall have control and general regulation and be responsible
for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and
examination within the Court, and shall have such other duties
as conferred or imposed by the Statutes and has the right to
advise the executive council on all academic matters.

10. THE INDIAN SratisTICAL INstITUTE AcT, 1959

Section 4.—The Institute may hold such examinations and
grant such degrees and diplomas in statistics as may be deter-
mined by the Institute from time to time-

11. Tue Instirure or TECHNOLOGY 50०, 1961

Section 15.—Subject to this Act, Statutes and Ordinances
and Senate of an Institute shall have the control and general
regulation and be responsible for the maintenance of standards
of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and
shall exercise such other duties as are conferred or imposed by
the Statutes.

12. THe HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES
Acr, 1970

Section 23.—The Academic Council shall be in charge of the
academic affairs of the University and shall...... superintend,
direct and control and be responsible for the maintenance of
standards of instruction, education and examinations and other
matters connected with the obtaining of degrees and shall exer-
cise such other duties as may be prescribed.


14

13. THe MERCHANT SHIPPING Act, 1958

Section 79(1).—The Central Government or a person duly
authorised by it in this behalf shall appoint persons for the pur-
Poses of examining the qualifications of persons desirous of
obtaining certificates of competency under section 78 which
Provides for various grades of certificates of competency.

Section 79(2).—The Central Government or the authorised
person shall grant to every applicant who is duly reported by the
examiners to have passed the examination satisfactorily and to
have given satisfactory evidence of his sobriety, experience and
ability and general good conduct of beard ship, such certificate
of competency as the case requires:

Provided that where the Central Government has reason to
believe that the report has been unduly made, it can require a
re-examination of the applicant or a further inquiry into his
testimonial and character.

14. CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS ACT, 1949
Section 15.—The duties of the Council include :

(a) the examination of candidates for enrolment and
prescribing of fees;

(5) the regulation of the engagement and training of
articled and audit clerks;

(०) the prescribing and qualifications for entry in the
Register;

() the recognition of foreign qualifications and training
for purposes of enrolment;

(0) the granting or refusal of certificates of practice
under the Act; and

(f) the removal or restoration to the Register of names.


APPENDIX—2

Reference in a few recent Central Acts to treat certain officers
as public servants within the meaning of section 21, Indian Penal
Code.

1, Tae Textite Committee Act, 1963

Section 16.—Officers and employees of the Committee to

be public servants.

2. THe Gop ContROL Act, 1965

Section 35.—The Administrator and any person authorised
by him or the Central Government and performing any func-
tions in the implementation of this Act shall be deemed to be
public servants. This Act is repealed by the Gold (Control)
Act, 1968 (Section 116).

3. Tue PAYMENT OF Bonus Act, 1965
Section 27(3).—Every inspector shall be deemed to be a
public servant.
4. Te Press Councit Act, 1965
Section 21.—Every member of the Council and every officer
appointed by the council shall be deemed to be public servants.
5. Toe ऋछा AND CIGAR WoRKERS (CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1966
Section 6(3).—Every chief inspector and inspector shall be
deemed to be public servants.
6. THE Civit Derence Act, 1968
Section 19.—Authorised persons and members of the corps
to be public servants.
7. Tue 60.0 Controt Act, 1968

Section 7.—Provides that the Administrator, a Gold Control
Officer and any person authorised by the Administrator or the
Central Government and performing any functions under this
Act shall be deemed to be public servants.

15


16

8. THe INsEcTicIDEs Act, 1968
Section 20(2).—Every Insecticide Inspector shall be deemed
to be a public servant.
9. THe REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS ACT, 1969.

Section 26.—All Registrars and Sub-Registrars shall while
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of this Act be deemed
to be public servants.

10. Te KHUDA BaksH ORIENTAL PuBLic Liprary ACT, 1969

Section 25.—Officers and employees of the Board to be public
servants.

11. THe Monopolies AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES
Act, 1969

Section 63.—Every member of the Commission, the Director
and the Registrar and every member of the staff of the Com-
mission to be public servants.

12. THE BANKING ComPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER
OF UNDERTAKING) AcT, 1970

Section 14.—Every custodian of a corresponding new bank
deemed to be a public servant.