aRTTA

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
COMPENSATION FOR INJURIES CAUSED
By AUTGMOBILES IN HIT-AND-RUN CASES

September, 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


COMPENSATION FOR INJURIES CAUSED BY AUTOMOBILES

PARAGRAPH.
No.

R

wea nwa w

19-—20
2b
22-25

27

2932

HIT-AND-RUN CASES

CONTEN
Supsecr
Introductory . . . . .
Dissatisfaction felt as to position regarding infury caused by auto-
mobiles. . . . . . .
Economic distress . पु . . .

Directive principle as to public assistance. "1
‘Compensation plans. . . मु .
Categories of systems of compensation .
Category (०) (Liability for tort at common law
‘Category (a) (}—Campensation without fault
Position under the English Bill of 1934. .

Category (b}—Provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act .

Category (c)—Compensation by the State or by an agency

or recognised by the State, .

‘Category (¢)—Compensation by the insurer of the victim
Points raised in letter of Kerala Road Safety Association

(0) Driver not traceable oe ek
(i) Driver notlicomsed . , ww,
Five principal situations not covered at present
Situation required urgent remedy .
Position in hit-and-run cases examined in detail

Statistics of Motor accidents .  . .
Comparative study . . . .
Positionin England = 6 ww.

Position in New Zealand and New South Wales.
Positionin France. =.) wg,
Position in Soviet Russia rs
Tort liability in Soviet Russia . . . .

Pace

Veen के के Ee ee

Sat nannee nay


PARAGRAPH
No.

Supnct

Social insurance ia Soviet Russia : पु : . .
Summing up as to comparative survey
Need for amendment. - +

ralysis of comments on draft Report. . पु .
(1) Comments ia favour of the proposed amendment . .
(2) Comments in favour, but with modification of substance
(3) Coniments in favour, but with minoc modification .
(4) Comments taking the view that the proposal should be more

comprehensive Se -.«. - -

(65). Comments opposed on ground of priorities. . . .
(6) Comments opposed for financial reasons. . .
(7) Commeats suggesting even a wider amendment. . .
Conclusion on points rained inthe commants 6.
Risk of abuse considered - . . पु . . पु
Argument as Lo limited scope of the remedy considered .

Liabilily of the Slate Government. eee

Leuistative competence gee

Amaunt recoverable from another person . . . . .

Recommendation . . . ete + . .

Dil

culty of establishing negligence not within scope of the Repeit

14
15
16
7
17
18
18.
19
9
19
19
20


CHAIRMAN
Law Commission,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-i
September 15, 1972.
Shri H. हरि, Gokhale,
Minister of Law & Justice,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINISIER,

1 am fowarding herewith Filty-firse Report of the Law Com-
mission on compensation for injury caused by automobiles in hit-
and-run cases,

The circumstances under which this question came to be con-
sidered by the Commission, have been stated in the first para-
graph of the Report. After a preliminary study of the subject, a
draft Report was prepared, and the Ministries concerned were re-
quested to give their comments on the draft Report. State Gov-
ernments, High Courts, and interested persons and bedies were
also asked to give their comments. Further, a press communique
was also issued, inviting the public 10 give their comments on the
draft Report. The comments received were duly considered by
the Commission, and the Report finaliscd.

With kind regards,
Yours Sincerely,

P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR.

Gii)


1. A short but important question relating to compensation Introduction.
for accidents caused by automobiles, in what are popularly
known as “hit-and-run” cases, is the subject-matter of this
Report. The subject has been taken up by the Law Commission,
having regard to the fact that it is a legal question of general
application and importance, and also because an amendment of
the law appeared to be necessary in the interests of social
justice.

2. For some time past, there has been considerable dis-
satisfaction regarding the position as to compensation for perso- felt 88
nal injuries caused by automobiles. This dissatisfaction can be eg?
attributed partly to defects in the law, and partly to the inherent hey”
nature of the situation. Remedies sugested for removing this caused
dissatisfaction have been of various kinds,—extension of com- by au-
mon law liability, insurance for liability, and social security,— biles
or variants or combination of one er more of these three.

Dissatis-
faction

3. As the brief survey given below will show, economic dis- Economic
tress resulting from the present gaps has, in some countries, been “te
attempted to be remedied by the State directly or indirectly
undertaking to secure payment of compensation. That is how
the subject-matter of the present Report fails within social secu-
rity.

4. Under the Constitution! “The State shall within the pirective
limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective Principle
provision for securing the right to public assistance in cases public
of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in tance.
other cases of undeserved want.” It may not be inappropriate
to extend the principle underlying this article to the subject-
matter of the present inquiry.

5. Compensation plans for the victims of road accidents are Compen-
not new. The first major proposal came as early as 1932, plans.

1, Article 41 of the Constitution.


Catego-
ries of
systems

of compen:
sation

Category
—
bi-
lity for
fort at
common
few

Category
aki
Compen-
sation
without
fault,

1. Columbia Study of Compensation for “Automobile Accidents (1932).

2

with the CCoiuntbia Report in the U.S.A.," but, in recent years,
as ever-increatsing road accidents have made the problem more
alive, there has been a marked intcnsification of proposals. One
of the best known proposals is that of Professors Keeton and
O’Connell*, but there are many others. It is not necessary for our
purpose to go into these details.

6. A brief survey of the systems of compensation for acci-
dents caused by automobiles shows that these fall under one or
other of the following categories:—

(4) () Compensation by the person who, by his fault,
causes the accident (such person may be briefly called the
“person responsible for the accident”).

(a) (ii) Such compensation by the person responsible
for the accident, irrespective of fault.

(5) Compensation by the insurer of the person respon-
sible for the accident.

(c) Compensation by the State or by an agency set
up or recognised by the State, compensation being payable
irrespective of fault.

(4) Compensation by the insurer of the victim.

7. Category (६) (i) above* is the familiar one of liability
fer tort at common law. When it becomes difficult to prove who
was responsible for the accident, or to prove his fault, hardship
arises. Hardship can similarly arise when the person responsible
for the accident, though known and proved to be at fault, is not
financially sound,

One of the solutions suggested to alleviate the hardship in
such cases is to dispense with the requirement of fault, and this
gives rise to category (a) (i).

8. Category (व) (६) has been suggested in several countties,
but adopted only in very few, The main argument in support of
the catefory is that the requirement of fault is out of date, and
there is not injustice in awarding compensation against the per-
son who caused the accident even if he is not at fault, because,

2. Keeton and O'Connell, Basic Protection for the Traffic Victim: A Bluepriot for
3. Paragraph 6,supra.

4. Ave also paragraph TF

जि

A.
Reforming Traffic Accidents (1965).


3

in most cases, he cun get reimbursement from the insurer, ‘The
main object of tre law (it has been stated), is compensate the in-
jured person, and not to penalise the person causiag the accident,
Hence, it is not necessary to retain the traditional requirement of
faule.

9. In England,’ a Bill! which would have made motorists Position
strictly liable to edestrians, without proof of fault, was, in fact, the
given a third reading by the House of the Lords in 1934, though Enalish
it was aot proceeded wiih in the House of Commons.? ९७५.

10. Category (b)* is illusteated by the provisions of the Category
Motor Vehicles Act® which enable the injured person to recover Prove
compensation from the insurer of the person responsible for the $0" of
accident. There are certain conditions and restrictions imposed Motot

ehich
in this behalf, which are, of course, matters of detail. Aa. “s

11. Category (८०) does not cxist in the ficid of compensation Category
for automobile accidents in India. But proposals for reforms of Compen-
the law, which have been made (or even enacted) elsewhere, IGN
from time to time, emphasise that instead of requiring the victim State
to prove fault, he should be entitled to compensation, on mere oe by an
proof of injury. The compensation, (it is further urged) could ही 8p
be paid from-a fund to be established for the purpose. Details cogni-
of the matter cannot be conveniently discussed at the present sed है
stage. It is sufficient to slate that the increasing use of automo- 317०
biles -has led many persons to believe that the common law re-
quirement of fauit is out of date.® It should be noted, however,
that there is a strong section of opinion which still maintains
that the only satisfactory basis of liability is fault, and that the

requirement of fault should not be dispensed with.

1. ‘As lo present position, see paragraph 22, supra.

2. Material as to the English Bill is iaken from Davglas Paynes, “Compensating
the Accident Victim”, (1960) 13 Current Legal Problems, 85, 93, 94.

3. ‘The Rond ‘Traiic (Compensation for Accidents) Bill. Introduced by Lord
Danesfort on ibree successive occasions, it was finally given a Third Reading
on June 26, 1934; for the numerous debates on the Rill, see 84 H. L. Deb.
55, cols. 543-584, 86 H. 1, Deb. cols, 1041-1076, 88 H. L. Deb. cols. 1035-
1079; 92 H. L. Deb. cals. 925-950, 93 H, 1... Deb. cols. 144-165.

4. Paragraph 6, supra.
5. Section 96, Motor Vehicles Act, 1939,
6. See also par:

“aph 8, supra.


Category

Compen-
sation
by the
insurer

victim.

Gi) Driver
pot
licensed.

4

12. Finally, as regards category (d}, it is of interest to note
that there could be a school of view that all citizens should com-
pulsorily insure themselves against automobile accidents. So far as
owners figuring as authors of the accident are concerned, that
is the law even now, under the Chapter on compulsory third party
insurance, in the Motor Vehicles Act. But we are, at the moment,
concerned with victims injured by an accident. Traffic rules impos-
ing obligations on pedestrians for their own safety, and punishing
them for breaking those obligations, are now familiar to every
urban citizen, and it is not inconceivable that legislation may be
passed requiring the residents of big cities to insure themselves
compulsorily against injury by automobile accidents upto a certain
amount.

13. Two situations have been referred to, in a letter received
by us.! First, where the offending vehicle is not traceable, and
secondly, where the driver of the offending vehicle is not licensed.

14, In the first situation,? non-recoverability of compensation
is not due to any defect in the chapter of the Motor Vehicles Act
dealing with Third Party Insurance. The whole scheme of the
Motor Vehicles Act shows that it falls under category (b)
above.’ If the legislature wishes to provide for the situation where
the offending vehicle is not traceable, it has to take the next step
and adopt category (c). This would be a progressive step; but
numerous connected questions will have to be worked out. Should
the State undertake the liability in this case? What will be the
financial repercussions? Should other cases where category (b)
does not apply be covered? And so on. By undertaking the duty
of compensation in such cases, the State virtualiy becomes an in-
surer. The most interesting question that presents itself is, whether
the State should not undertake the duty to compensate also in
other cases of injury by tort, ¢.g., accidents caused otherwise than
by automobiles.

15. The second situation mentioned in the letter? is of a sim-
pler character. Where the driver is not licensed, it is the positive
provision in the Motor Vehicle Act* which constitutes the impedi-

1. Letter of the Kerala Read Safety Association.
2° paragraph 13,supra.
3. Paragraphs 6 and 10, supra.

4, Section 96 (2)(6)(i), Motor Vehicles Act.


5

ment to recovery. The supposed rationable behind the present
situation appears to be that if the driver was not licensed, (i) the
_ accident cannot be attributed to any fault as could have been done

if the driver was licensed, and (ii) 1: is unfair to expect the insu-
rer to pay, when such an obvious precaution as that of engaging a
competent driver was oot taken by the owner. Such a situation is
not likely to occur frequently; but when it occurs, the possible re-
medy (at present) is to sue the owner of the vehicle himself —
category (a) above. If this remedy is considered insufficient, then
the other alternative would be to remove the present restriction
in the Motor Vehicles Act, and thereby make category (b) above
applicable. If even that is considered inadequate, category (c)
could be thought of.

16. The above resume will show that there are five principal Fiye
situations which are, at present, not covered in respect of com Spal

pensation for an accident caused by an automobile: — ions not
८0
(1) Where there is no fault, so that no one is liable. at
present.

(2) Where there is fault, and therefore liability of the
person responsible for the accident exists, but there is no in-
surer who is liable, because of non-compliance with the rele-
vant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act,—for example, a
policy is not taken out, though required by the Act.?

(3) Where there is liability and also insurance, but the
beneficial provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act do not apply
(e.g., because the driver has no licence), so that though the
person responsible for the accident can be sued, the insurer
is not liable*

(4) Where the driver of the vehicle cannot be traced,
so that a suit against the person responsible for the accident
or the insurer is not possible.

(5) Where the person responsible for the accident and
the insurer are not solvent, though liable.

1. Paragraph 7, supra. a या
2. Paragraph 10, supra.

3. Paragraph 15, supra.

4. Paragraphs 1 and 14, supra.

1, Paragraph 7, supra.


Situation
requir-
ing
urgent
remedy.

Position
in hit-
ind-ren

Statistics
of motor
Jecidents,

6

The first, the fourth and the last may be called cases of total
misfortune. The second and the third are cases of partial misfor-
tune, because at least the person responsible for the accident can
be sucd in these cases.

17. The next question is, in what cases, if at all, the situation
required remedy. The answer to this question depends on how pro-
gressive a view one takes of social security, and also on how large
are the financial resources of the State. In theory, one could sug-
gest that the State shoukl undertake to compensate in all cases,
and should act as the insurer of the citizens against any misery
caused by total or partial misfortune. But considerations of finan-
cial nature, coupled with the fact that where there is some. private
person who is liable and who, being solvent, can meet the liability,
the State should not be made to pay, suggest that the remedy
should be entirely against the private person.

If the above reasoning is accepted, then only cases under cate-
gories (1), (4) and (5) above need' be seriously considered.
Further, one does not know what could be the possible repercus-
sions if category (1) is brought within the ficld of the State liabi-
lity,-—it is likely that a very large number of cascs would be ficti-
tiously made to fall within category (1). Lastly, category (5) is
not of much importance after nationalisation of the business of
general insurance,

18. The rest of this Report will, therefore, concern itself with
the position in respect of category (4),—that is to say, hit-and-
Tun cases.

19. The figures of total number of accidents caused by motor
vehicles in India during the years 1968-1970 are given below?:—

1968 we 28,837
1969 we 31,329
1970 see 33,017

Statistics as to the precise number of persons injured or killed

y “hit-and-run” drivers are not available. But the number of such
Persons is bound to increase with growing urbanisation. Common
experience would justify the assumption that the cases are not so
infrequent that they should go totally unnoticed.

1) Paragraph 16, supre

.. Statistics iaken from the Government of India, Ministry of Shipping & Trans-
port (Transport Wing). O.M. No. Dy. No.

72, dated the एज Febru-

ury. 1972, addressed to the Law Commission.


7

20. It is stated! that the number of persons killed per 1,000
motor vehicles in India is as high as eight, as against 0.5 to 2 in
European countries. In Madras, pedestrians formed the bulk of
those hulled in road accidents (104 out of 184 in the city).

25. A brief comparative study would be useful. This study
will be confined ta countries where either hit-and-run cases are
eat with by a specitic provision, or the general position is wide
enough to embrace them,

22. We may first discuss the position in England. England has,
for some time past, a scheme whereunder the Motor Insurance
Bureau accepts liability to compensate for automobile accideuts, in
eerlain cases of unsatisfied judgment. The English scheme is
non-statutory, but still of interest,

The scheme originated in an agreement. On June 17, 1946,
the Motor Insurance Bureau’ entered into an agreement with
the Minister of Transport to give effect to the principle recom-
mended in July, 1937, by a departmental committce under the
chairmanship of the late Sir Fellix Cassel—

“to secure compensation to third party victims of
Road accidents in cases where, notwithstanding the provi-
sions of the Road Traffic Acts relating to compulsory in-
surance, the victim is deprived of compensation by the ab-
sence of insurance, or effective insurance.”.

23. The English scheme is described in a white paper as a
memorandum or agreement made on June 17, 1946, between the
Minister and Motor [Insurance Bureau, supplemental to the prin-
cipal agreement made on December 31, 1945, between the
Minister of War Transport and the insurers. Its principal provi-
sion, clause 1, is thus:—

“If judgment in respect of any liability which is requir-
ed ta be covered by a policy of insurance or a security......
under Part 2 of the Road Traffic Act, 1930 is obtained
against any person or persons in any court in Great Britain

1.

nar on Tratlic Enforcement and Kayiromnent, Madras.

Compara-
tive
study.

Position
in
England.

he Hindw, 2561 April, 1972, reporting the proceedings of the National Semi-

है, See Fire em. insurance Co, v. Greene (1964) 2 All E.R. 761, 764 (Stephen-

son, J.).


whether or not such person or persons be in fact covered by
a contract of insurance...... and any such judgment is not
satisfied in full within seven days from the date on which the
person or persons in whose favour the judgement was given
became...... entitled to enforce it, then Motor Insurance
Bureau will, subject to the provisions of clause 5 and clause
6 of these presents, pay or satisfy or cause to be paid or
satisfied to or to the satisfaction of the person or persons
in whose favour the judgment was given any sum payable
or remaining payable thereunder in respect of the aforesaid
libility including taxed costs. . . whatever may be the cause of
the failure of the judgement debtor to satisfy the judgement.”

24, The English scheme does not cover injury caused by an
unidentified, or “hit-and-run” driver, because an  unsatished
judgment is a pre-condition of the Motor Insurance Bureau's
liability under the scheme.

25. The question of untraced drivers was considered in
detail in England, and we quote from a fairly recent study’—

‘It sometimes happens that a road victim is injured by
a motorist who cannot be traced. There is no question of
any individual insurer being liable, so all that the victim
can hope for is that the Motor Insurers’ Bureau will com-
pensate him.

Whether he should be given a right to compensation
was considered as long ago as 1937 by the Cassel Commit-
tee, which stated in their report that “we have not found it
possible to deal with the case of a third party injured by a
motorist who cannot be traced. In such a case it is impos-
sible to establish a claim against anyone and, in our opinion,
the grant of a right against the Central Fund would be cal-
culated to lead to such abuses as to render such a course
totally unsuitable.’

In 1946, the Central Fund referred to in the Report
became the Fund voluntarily contributed to by those indi-

1. Hardy Tvamy, “Law of Motor Insurance”, (1966), 19, Current Legal Prob-
lems, 128, 139 to 141,


9

vidual insurance companies which ace members of the

Motor Insurers’ Bureau. This Fund is used solely to further

The objects of the Bureau, and to satisfy in satisfied judg-

ments in favour of third parties, without profit to its mem-
4९ मु

The explanatory notes to the Motor Insurers’ Bureau
Agreement state that “ the liability of the Bureau does not
extend to the compensation of any person who may suffer
personal damage resulting from the use on a road of a vehi-
cle, the owner of driver of which cannot be traced. The
Bureau will not however, necessarily refuse to act in these
cases. Where in its view, there is reasonable certainty that a
Motor-vehicle was involved and that except for the fact
that the vehicle, owner or driver cannot be traced, a claim
would lie, the Bureau will give sympathetic consideration
to the making of an ex gratia payment to the victim, or his
dependents”.

This absolute discretion was strongly criticised by
Sachs J., in Adams v. Andrews, where the negligence of an
untraced motor-cyclist caused the driver of a car, in which
the plaintiff was travelling as a passenger, td serve and
overtum.

His Lordship said that the situation was as illogical
as it was unjust. In cases where the ability of a driver was
under the Road Traffic Acts “required to be covered by a
policy of insurance”, either the driver of the hit-and-run
car was insured as by law required—in which case one of
the member companies of the Bureau would normally have
to pay any damages awarded by the Court—or else he was
not insured—in which case the Bureau would likewise have
to pay, if he had been found and judgment entered against
him. That the injured person could not recover as of right
merely because he could not secure a judgment as the dri-
ver had successfully evaded identification was lamentable.
It only provided for insurance companies as a whole a poten-
tial avenue of escape from liabilities which in principle they
had accepted. He who had to go cap-in-hand for an ex
gratia payment was always at a disadvantage.

The learned judge then went on to say that whatever
might be the Bureau’s practice, it was important that it


Position
in New
Zealand
and New
South
‘Wales.

Position
in
France.

Position

in
Soviet
Russia.

J. Hamish R. Grav

10

ought not to be in a position wholly to decline liability
simply because some other motorist or some other person,
who was under no duty to insure against the particular
risk, was also partly to blame. Moreover, if there were
cases which were to be left to the discretion of the Bureau,
it was worthy of consideration whether it was right for
claims important to the individual claimant to be turned
down by unnamed administrators against whose decision no
appeal would lie.

26. 16 appears that in New Zealand the counterpart of the
Motor Insurers’ Bureau will pay upto £7,500 to any one victim
of an unidentified driver and upto £ 75,000 for any one such ac-
cident. In New South Wales, the unidentified driver is represent-
ed for the purposes of trial by an official called the Nominal
Defendant, and the insurers pay out a claim on the basis of a
judgement obtained against the Nominal Defendant (though here
a plaintiff must show affirmatively what efforts have been made
to trace the real driver and that these efforts have been unsuc-
cessful).1 Several other developments have taken place in New
Zealand, but they are not specially relevant to hit-and-run cases.

27. In France, social security, together with other collective
schemes of security, is the second source of indemnification for
traflic accident victims. When indemnification comes from these
sources, it is granted without regard to any possible fault of the
victim, so long as the victim has not voluntarily injured himself.

Presently, sacial security in France covers, in one form or
another, 85 per cent of the entire French population. It is not
cusy, however, to specify the extent of this coverage. If the vic-
jim of a traffic accident was on his way to or from his place of
employment or was acting in the course of his employment, he is
entitled to compensation for all his medical bills. Otherwise, he
is entitled to only four-fifths of his bills.?

28. ‘Position in Soviet Russia may now be examined. This

iability foc Highway Accidents", (1964) 17 Current

Legal Probicms, 127, 139, 140.
2. Andre Tue., “Trafic Accident Compensation in France” (1965), 79, Harv
L. Review 1409, 1413, 1414. .


11

will have to be dealt with under two heads,—Tort liability and
Social Insurance.
29. In the Civil Code of the RS.F.S.R.. 1964, Article 444, कक
teads—t Hability
“444. General ground of liability for — causing of Soviet
harm.—Harm caused to the person or property of a citizen,
as well as harm caused to an organisation, is subject to
compensation im fully by the person who has caused such
harm.

A person who has caused harm is relieved of the duty
to make compensation if he proves that the harni was not
caused through his fault.

Harm caused by lawful acts is subject to conpensation
only in cases provided for by law.”

30. Article 454 of the R.S.F.S.R., Civil Code, 1964, (re-
placing Article 404 of the old Code and basing -itself on
Article 90 of the Fundamental Principles of 1961), reads :

“454. Liability for harm caused by a source of increa-
sed danger—Organisations and citizens whose activity in-
volves increased danger for those in the vicinity (transport
organisations, industrial enterprises, building projects, pos-
sessors of motor cars, etc.) must make good the harm
caused by the source of incrcased danger unless they prove
that the harm arose in consequence of irresistible force or
as a result of the intention of the victim.”*

31. An important ruling of the Supreme Court of the

ULS.S.R. in 1963१ spelled our clearly what had been the domi-
nant line :

“Possessors of a source of increased danger are to be
understood as organisations or citizens carrying out the
exploitation of the source of increased danger by virtue of
their having the right of ownership or by virtue of opera-
tional management, as well as on other bases (eg., in

1, Article 444, KS.F. Civil Code, quoted by Alice Jay. “Princip les of Li-
ability in Soviet Law or Tors”, (1969) 18. International and Comparative
Law Quarterly, 424, 42

2, Article 434 cited in Alice Jay, “Principles of Liability in Soviet Laws of Torts’,
(1969) 18 LC.L.Q, 424,

३, Ruling of October 23, 1963, Na 16 cited in Alice Fay, “Principles of Li-
ability in Soviet Laws of Torts”, (1969) 18 1C.L.Q. 424, 444,

20 M of Law/72—2



12

virtue of a contract of lease, hire or trust, and also, on the
basis of administrative decision of ihe competent organs,
handing over the source of increased danger to the terupo-
rary use of the organisation) .”

32, Specific rules have been worked out in the U.S.S.R. as
to liability for accidents caused by motor cars, and it appears!
that they fall under the general treatment of motor-cars as
“sources of increased danger™.*

Social 33. So much as regards tort liability in the USS.R*
InSowst Social Insurance in the U.S.S.R. may now be bricfly discussed.
Russia.

कल

1. Slice Jay, “Principles of Liabil

34. The scheme! of social insurance in the U.S.S.R. cover
almost ali employees (including most of the women in the
Union—48 per cent. of the labour force is female) and payments
are made by the employer.

(i) Temporary disability —Industrial and professional em-
ployees (but not collective farm workers) are entited to ten-
porary disability payments. If the injury is caused through the
employinert, full wages are paid, if not, the amount depends on
(a) whether the victim is a trade unionist; and (6) how long as
he has been in employment. At the top rate he can get 90 per
cent of (basic) wages.

(i) Fermanent disability-—The degree of disability is
determined by a board of medical and labour experts. If the
disability was caused by industrial or professional injury and is
total, the pension will amount to just over half the average
wage; for partial disability, fess is payable. In the case of dis-
ability from other causes, the proportions are lower and depend
on length of service.

(iti) Loss of bveadwinner— Pensions are payable to depen-
dant and vary according to whether or not the death was caused
by occupational injury.

ity in Soviet Law of Torts) (98) HEL
424, 446.
Paragraph 30, supa.

. See also paragraph 35, सकी,

Alec Sumucls, “Damages in Personal: Injury: Cases”, (1968) 17 LC.LQ. 443,
461, 462.


13

As the social security paymeats rarely equal previous eara-
jags, there is still room lor the Jaw of tor:

5. From the pursly Jormal point of view, the Soviet law
ted. Tt rests on two principles: (1 A
persea who injures anot! ble unless he proves that he
was not at fault, (ii The owner of @ source of “increased
hazard” is liable fer harm caused by it unless he proves that the
dam. wes caused nsuperable fercse or the victim's act.
The car and the factory machine fall ander rule (i).

The दिए of insucatce 15, however, used to limit these rules.
i the defendant is payiug cial insuraace contributions for the
plaintilf fas will be the care for every employer), he is liable
is established.

of tort is quite sophist

ier is

ef de

4४20०, the “‘inereased hazard” rule has little application in the
factory. It applics, of course. to cars; but the owner is forbidden
te lnsere his Ushility. The resull, is, that the factory, but not the
rist, cau bay cover against pure accident,

Sums
26, 4. erature on the subject of injuries caused by automo- pp rae

tos is vast;' the above comparative survey is confined to the! com-

1430 point? that is dealt with in this Report. tive
survey.

37. Having considered the various aspects discussed above, Need
A हु j 4 or
we are of the view that cases in which the accident is caused by amend-

a vehicle where the person responsible cannot be traced—popu- ™*
. larly known as hit-and-run cases—should be provided for, and
that the State should take over the liability in such cases, There
being ro question ef recovery from the tort-feasor or his insurer,

the harm suffered goes uncompensated for, Social justice requires
that the State should take over the liability.

38. The draft Report which the Commission had prepared Analysis
on the subject had been circulated for comments to State Govern- ments
ments, High Courts, Bat Associations and other interested per- 97 the
sons and bodies for comments,. The comments received can be Report.

classified into several groups.

agraph 5, supra,
2. See paragraph 21, supre.
20°M of Law /72—3


(1) Com-
ments in
favour of
the pro-
‘posed
amend-
ment,

(2) Com-
ments in
favour,
but with
modifi-
cation of

substance,

(3) Com-
ments in
favour
but with
sainor
modifi-
cation.

(4) Com-
ments
taking the
view

that the

proposal
should be
more
compre-
hensive.

4

39. A very large number of comments favour the pro. ay
for amendment of the law, mooted in the draft Report,+

40. Some of the comments? fayour the proposal circulated in ©
the draft Report, with a modification of substance. One District
Bar Association? suggests that a new sub-section (28) after sub-
section (24) should be added to section 96 of the Motor Vehic-
les Act, in the following terms:—

“(3B). (1) Where an accident involving the death of
or bodily injury 10 a person caused by of arising out of the
use of a motor vehicle occurs, and (7) a claim for compen-
sation in respect of such accident cannot be ascertained
after reasonable effort or (di) a judgment in respect of the
liability for such compensation in respect of such accident
js obtained against any person but the same cannot, with
the exercise of reasonable diligence, be satisfted by the per-
son or his insurer within six months of the award, then the
person entitled te such compensation shall be entitled to
receive it from the respective Zonal Insurance Corporation
under the territorial jutisdiction of which the accident
occurred. .

(2) Any such judgment under sub-section (1) shall
not include any amount of compensation which has been
realised or is realisable from a person other than the driver
or owner of the motor vehicle.”,

41. Some comments‘ on the draft Report favour the propo-
sal with minor or verbal modifications,

42. Some of the comments emphasise that the proposal
Should be made more comprehensive.

Thus, one High Court Judge® has stated:—

“Whether any State will agree for a discriminatory
treatment to this kind of compensation cases alone has to

1. (a) 5. No. 30 (Ministry of Shipping & Transport);
(४) $. No. 18 (One Advocate);
(०) $. No. 20 (One State Government};
{d) 5. No. 26 (Two High Court Judges);
fe) 8. No. 28 (Most Judgea of one High Court).
2. 9, No. 32 (A District Bar Association).

3. 8.
A.

. No, 32
(a) S. No, 19 (One Bar Association);

(0) §. No. 34 (One Union Tersitory Administration).
5. S, No. 26 (One High Court Judge}.


15

be ascertained. In other kinds of torts also, very often,
compensation cannot be realised for various reasons. A wel-
fare state trying to build up a socialistic pattern of society
should undertake the duty to compensate in all cases of in-
jury by tort, i.e., accidents caused otherwise than by auto-
mobiles also. A comprehensive legislation requiring each
citizen to insure against this risk, making the State as the
insurer, may have to be brought at an carly date. This may
be a hope only now and a distant reality, As a beginning
towards that, the proposed legislation is welcome.”

Another High Court Judge! has stated:—

“The attempt to codify law on ‘tort’ has its difficulties
also, a Bill codifying the liability of State, is, if 1 remem-
ber correct, pending before Parliament. This is yet another
attempt to codify another branch of the law. I wish, a com-
prehensive legislation is ventured in this respect”.

43. A High Court Judge? has given an elaborate comment, Comments
which seems to show that he is opposed to the proposed amend- opposed
ment on the ground of priorities (as also on other grounds). He ground
has observed — of

Priori-
tes.
“The spirit of social justice eloquently enshirined in

Article 41 of the Constitution and which professedly has
animated the Law Commission in framing the report and
preparing the draft provisions for incorporation in the
Motor Vehicles Act, is indeed Jaudable; but, in my opinion,
it has a touch, taint and savour of Utopia, I am not sure
if the State facing mighty economic problems arising out
of spiralling prices can shoulder the proposed financial bur-
den, which, in course of time, might assume alarming pro-
portions; nor am I convinced that. the category of social
justice meant to be secured has that claim to priority which
is assumed for it. The States are already up against more
mighty challenges, ¢.g., provision for housing in rural areas,
employment for millions who in a way are already a bur-
den on the earth, removal of illiteracy and introduction of

1, 5. No. 26.
2, $. 1४०. 27.


16

compulsory education, medical aid and other health ser-
vices, road construction, ctc.

Slow and lingering death arising out of want of basic
human requirements should, [ believe, give a bigger folting
to sensitive enlightened conscience than a stray gory occu-
trence on a non-frequented rural road or an urban Jane,
if only because the first mentioned malady has victims

galore compared to the letter.”

He has further stated—

“Apart from theoretical objections afore-mentioned, 1
think from purely practical standpoint the experiment con-
templated may prove more costly than envisaged at present,
especially in the Indian Context. All of a sudden, I believe,
the hit and run cases will multiply manifold immediately
the. proposed measure takes a legal shape. Unscrupulous
drivers and owners of automobiles involved in the occurren-
ces would manage to enter into some arrangement with the
victim or his heirs in case of his death, settling the deal
clandestincly at a price much tower than the law demands
and pass the buck to the State Government on the repre-
sentation that the culprit could not be identified. We know
it too well that the manner in which the cases are fought
in courts on behalf of the Government has never received
universal approbation, and the new glut of cases, arising
out of proposed amendment of Motor Vehicles Act, might
prove the proverbial straw on the camel's back.

For the reasons stated, I cannot endorse the proposed
changes in Jaw, though they are of a salutary nature, untii
at least the resources of the States show up and the normal
citizen exhibits more sense of virtuosity than is evident at

present.”.

(6) (com: 44, Some of the comments! express opposition to the pro-
opnosed posal on financial grounds. Thus, one High Court Judge? has
10 ial stated that there are many other needs of society which require

to be atended to. Further, the basic question is, whether or not

reasons,
the financial resources of the State permit such a legislation.

1. 8. No. 28 (One High Court Judge).
2. $. No, 28.


17

“Y have na doubt that there would he a large number
of false and fictitious cases where people would claim com-
pensation for injuries or deaths, even though not caused by
automobiles but in some other manner, by setting up false
witnesses to prove that the injuries or deaths had been caus-
ed by automobiles. We cannot Jose sight of the fact that
wherever the State gives any financial assistance to the
citizens, in the majority of cases they are reccived by people
who do not deserve them. It is also the tendency in this
country of the officials of the State to care the least to find
out whether assistance goes to the right person or the wrong
person. What is Government money is considered to be no-
body’s money, and is squandered away.”

He has also stressed the need for preventive action to check
accidents by vigilant action in directing traffic on the road and
for licensing motor vehicles. Further, he adds—

“In my view, it will be a pre-mature legislation and
putting unnecessary burden on the State, when the country
requires financial resources of the State to be utilised for
much more important things than providing for compensa-
tion to the victims of accidents in cases of hit and run.”.

<5, Sonre comments’ favcur a wider amendment, and would ) Som

like to go further than what has been propased. Thus, one High suggest-

Court Judge has stated’— a wider

amend.
“In my opinion, there should be also a law for pay- 7?!
ment of some ex grefid amount io the victim, in case of
axwation (1), when the injury is serious. The Motor Vehi-
eles Act also may be suitably amended so as to make the
insurer Hable to pay corigensation to the third party victim
in situaiiom No. (3).”.

46. We shall now express briefly our conclusion on the Conclusion
points raised in the comments. on points
in the
We are happy to note that the proposal for amendment of Comments.
the law which we had circulated has been favoured by a large

majority of the comments on the draft Report.

1. 5. No. 28 (One High Court Fudge).



Risk of
abuse

consi-
dered.

Amendment
as to limited
Scope of the
remedy
considered,

18

As regards those comments which raised the question of
financial resources of the State, we do appreciate that the pro-
posal which we are making will involve some expenditure from
the State Funds. But, if, the goal of social and justice is to be
reached, a beginning has to be made. The problem with which
we are dealing is a real one, and is bound to require attention as
urbanisation progresses in the country. That one accident to the
bread-winner of the family could cause prolonged economic
strain to the family cannot be denied. And, if, as we propose,*
the State is, by an amendment of the law, made liable in the
limited number of cases where compensation is not recoverable
from any other sources, the amendment would be worthwhile;
and the situation could, with some justification, be regarded as
one in which the demands of social justice should override finan-
cial considerations.

47. We are fully conscious of the risk of abuse of the pro-
posed provision, That a few unjustified claims for compensation
will be made, cannot be ruled out. But it should be noted, that
the claimant will have to prove—

(é) that death or bodily inury has been caused by an
accident involving a motor vehicle;

(ii) that he has suffered loss in consequence;

(i) that the person responsible for the accident is
not traceable; and
(iv) that he cannot recover adequate compensation
from any other source.
These being the conditions precedent to recovery, the risk of
totally false claims getting paid is not very large.

48. We should also mention here, that the limited scope of
the amendment which we propose may give rise to the objection
being advanced that the amendment is not worth the trouble.
Now, we are not unaware that the problems—legal and others—
that have to be solved for achieving the objective of removal of
poverty and undeserved want, are many and various. We are not

1. Paragraph 52, infra.


19

blind to their magnitude, either. Nevertheless, such relief as the
reform of the law could afford, has to be initiated, step by step.
The citadel of poverty cannot be destroyed in one day. Let this
be the first knock on its gates.

49. The liability which will be imposed under the provision
which we contemplate, will be of the State Government, Before
the necessary legislation is introduced, the State Governments
will, of course, have to be consulted.

50. Legislative competence of Parliament on the subject Is
derived from concurrent lst,} entries 8 and 35, respectively,
quoted below—

“8. Actionable wrongs.”
“35, Mechanically propelled Vehicles including the
Principles on which taxes on such vehicles are to be levied,”,

51. It is, of course, fair to provide that where, in respect of
any accident, the plaintiff has received, or is entitled to receive,
any sum as compensation or indemnity from any person other
than the driver or owner of the motor vehicle which occasioned
the death or bodily injury, the amount to be awarded to the plain-
tiff against the State under the proposed provision should be re-
duced by that sum.

52 We accordingly recommend the following legislative pro-

Liability
of the
State
Govern:
ment.

Legislative
competence,

Amoont
recoverable
from the
another
person

to be

set off.

Recom-
menda-

vision, which could be inserted as a section in the Motor Vehicles tion.

Act?:—

“L09(A), (7) Where an accident, involving the death
of or bodily injury to a person caused by or arising out of
the use of a motor vehicle occurs, and it is proved that a
claim for compensation in respect of such accident cannot
be made because the person liable to pay such compensa-
tion or his whereabouts cannot be ascertained after reason-
able effort*, the person entitled to such compensation shall
be entitled to receive it from the State.

(2) Where, in respect of any accident, any claim is
made under sub-section (7) and it is found that the clai-

1. Concurrent List, entries है and 35.
2. Tentatively it could be placed as section 109A,
3. Paragraph 16(4), supra,


Difficulty
b-

negligence
not

Report.

20

mant hay received, or is entitled 10 receive, any sum as com-
jemnity from any person other than the dri-
vor or ewrer of the morur vehicle which occasioned the
death or badily injury. the amour: to be awarded to the
ate under sub-section (7) shall be

pensation,

tet Uae
sum.

claimant

reduced by

53. We mas make it clear that we are net concerned here
with the diteusivs of cstablishing negligence—a difficulty which
has been judicially adverted tot

Before we part with this Report, it is our pleasant duty to

place on record our arm appreciation he assistance we have
veevived from Mr. Bakshi, Secretary of the Commission, in deal-
ing with the problem covered by the Report. As usual, Mr.
Bakshi first prepared a draft which was treated as the Working
Paper, The draft was considered by the Commission point by
point and its conclusions recorded and, in the light of the deci-
sions, Mr. Bakshi prepared a final draft for consideration and
approval. At all stages of the study of this problem, Mr. Bakshi
took an active part i our deliberations and hay rendered very
valuable assistance to the Commission.

PB. GAJSENDRAGSOKAR.-—Chefrmat
9. ३, Krishna Tver. 5
P. K. Tripathi. b Members.

5. $. Dhavan. d

P.M. Bakshi—Seeretary,
New DELHI;
The 15h Seprenmber, 1972.

' “State Tosurance Officer, (971) KILT. 380, 382.
20 M of Law/72—3-1-73--2,000.