LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-SECOND REPORT

ESTATE DUTY ON PROPERTY
ACQUIRED AFTER DEATH

DECEMBER, 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


(COPY)
D.O, No. F.5(2)/72-L.C.
९, 8, GasENDRAGADKAR
CHAIRMAN

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

NEW DELHI—110001
December 4th, 1972.

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the 52nd Report of the Law Commission on
Estate Duty on Property Acquired After Death, This Report is made by the
Commission swo mote by virtue of its terms of reference, particularly those
in clauses 2 and 8,

__ The Commission believes that the recommendations made in its Report
are non-controversial and will receive universal acceptance, and hopes that

the Union Government will implement the same at an early date by suitable
legislation.

Yours sincerely,

(P. B. Gajendragadkar)

Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of India,

NEW DELHI.


Para. No.

a a
&
a

2

CONTENTS

Subject matter
Introductory . . . . .
Point for consideration
General principle as to the date of valuation
Hardship resulting from present rigid provision
Theoretical principle about estaic duly
Position in England
Change in the law needed

Case of destruction by fire ete.

Recommendation

Page

wn ke w २ -+

a


Intro-
ductory.

Point for
considera-
tion.

1, This Report deals with a question which has
been raised with reference to the valuation of property
for the purposes of the Estate Duty Act, 1953. The
question appeared important enough to require
urgent consideration, and has, therefore, been taken
by the Law Commission suo motu. The point was
taised in a letter received from a Member of the Bar,t
and a study of the law on the subject disclosed that
the present statutory provision could cause serious
hardship in certain situations, to be discussed ia
detail later, Hence this Report. .

Before arriving at our final conclusions, we had
put our tentative proposals in the form of a draft
Report, a copy of which had been circulated to the
Ministry concerned.2 The Ministry broadly agreed
with our proposal, but remarked that it was not
aware of any enactment providing for acquisition
without compensation.

We may, with reference to the above comment,
point out that it is not inconceivable that an enact~
ment providing for acquisition of property without
compensation may be passed. In fact, we gather
that in Kerala, an Act providing for the acquisition
of forest lands without compensation was recently
passed. It is understood that the Act was declared
to be void by the High Court; but it is also under-
stood that an appeal against the judgment of the
High Court is pending before the Supreme Court.

2. The point to be considered relates to the date
of valuation under the Estate Duty Act with respect
to property compulsorily acquired. It is well known
that estate duty is leviable on property passing on
death. As regards computing the value for the
purposes of this duty, the principal provision? in the
Estate Duty Act provides—

“36. Principal value how to be estimated-—

(1) The principal value of any property shall be
estimated to be the price which, in the opinion

—T Til No. F. S@/72L.C, Serial No. 1 7 7
2. Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue & Insurance,
3. Section 36(1), Estate Duty Act, 1953.


General
principle as
to the date
of = valua-
tion.

2

of the Controller, it would fetch if sold in the
open market at the time of the deceased’s death” 4

(Rest of the section is not material for purposes
of this Report).

Now, hardship may resull in cases where the
property subject to duty is compulsorily acquired
without compensation, or for inadequate compen-
sation, after it has passed on death to the person
accountable. The person accountable for the duty
under the Act has, notwithstanding such acquisition,
to pay duty on the full value of the property, though
he has virtually obtained nothing or has obtained
something less than the full value.

We may note that the Ministry? concerned is
broadly in agreement with the idea underlying the
suggestion for the amendment of the Estate Duty
Act made in the draft Report. It has, however,
mentioned that it is not aware of any enactment
whereunder any propetty cam be acquired without
compensation.

3. The general principle followed in the Act in
this respect may first be examined. The principle
seems to be that the law of estate duty treats as irre-
Jevant cvents in relation to the property subsequent
ta the passing of the property on death. Thus, even
if the value of the property has gone up very high
soon after the death, the duty is chargeable only on
the basis of the market value of the property on the
date of death. Conversely, if, after death of the own-
er, the property is desiroyed by fire or earthquake,
the duty has still to be paid on the basis of the property
as in existence at the time of death. Any sudden
depreciation in value immediately after the death
has also to be disregarded. All this, no doubt, is
subject to the power of the Central Government to
grant reductions or remissions in respect of any
class of persons or properties for sufficient reasons,?

1. Emphasis supplied.

2, Government of India, Ministry of Finance, (Depart-
mont of Revenue & Insurance), File No. 134(18)/72-TPL.

3. Section 33(2), Estate Duty Act, 1953,


Hardship
resulting
from present
tigid provi-
sion.

Theoretical
principle
about estate
duly,

3

4. Nevertheless, the hardship experienced in the
case of acquisition without compensation deserves
special treatment. Acquisition without compen-
sation is an act of the sovereign which, without any
fault of the person accountable, creates a situation
where 8 person is virtually made to pay out of his
pocket. The passing of an estate to a person should
not become a source of Joss 10 him: and, if the abs-
tract principle! that the date of death is the date of
valuation is adhered to in ail its rigidity, hardship
does arise,

The situation where some compensation is paid,
but the amount is less than the market value, is also
somewhat similar.

5. One need not, for the present purpose,
question the theoretical principle that estate duty
represents a duty due from the estate to the State.
In England, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir
William Harcourt, when introducing the estate duty
in 1894, observed in his Budget Speech2—

“The title of the State to a share of the
accumulated property of the deceased is ante-
rior to that of the interest to be taken by those
who are to share in it.”

Theoretically, it may also be suggested that estate
duty is ‘back tax’. As Mr. Courtney said in the
Parliamentary Debates in England in 1894 on the
Finance Bill

“The income tax in its present form in-
volved the necessity of taking all income at the
. same rate; The rich man who died was, there-
fore, in debt to the state. There was an accu-
mulated deficiency in his contributions to direct
taxation, and the simple defence of the....
estate duty....was....that it was a debt due
from the estate of the deceased to the state in
_ omsequence of the deficiency of his contri-

1. Para, 3, supra.

2, The Times, Parliamentary Reports, April 17, 1894, quoted
by Sendford, Taxing Personal Wealth (Allen and Unwin)
(1970), page 45.


Position in
England,

4

butions during his life.... The duty was के
debt which must be paid out of the dead man’s
effects before they could be distributed.”"!

6. But the point that requires to be emphasised.
is, that this theory leads to unnecessary hardship in a
situation of the nature mentioned above,2 because
the person accountable is, in effect, taxed “‘not ac-
cording to his own wealth, but according to his
father’s wealth.”3

As Professor Kaldor# has observed—

“The legal notion that the estate duty is a
tax on the deceased is really somsensical—tho-
ugh it may have had rather more justification in
the old days when people saved specially during
their lifetime to cover death duty liabilities on
their decease. Uf the incidence of estate duty is
really om the legatee and not the testator, the
sensible thing is to recognise this and to impose
a tex on the receipient.”

7. Tt may be noted that in England, allowance
was, for some time, made for acquisition of property*
Where an interest in land, after bearing estate duty,
was acquired under compulsory powers (or by agree-
ment where compulsory powers were available)
aflex 17th November, 1944 and before ist January,
1954, and the compensation was Jess than the value
on which duty was paid, the duty on that interest was
subject to revision9.

1. Parliamentary Debates, (Finance Bill in Committee)
May 29, 1894. Sandford, Taxation of Personal Wealth
(1970), page 45.

2. Para. 4, supra,

3. This was one of the points made in the general discus-
sion in 1894 in Parliament on the relative merits of estate
duty and inheritance tax. See Mr, Balfour's Speech,
Hansard, May £0,51894, cited in Sandford, Taxing Per-
sonal Wealth £1970), page 47.

4, Nicholas Kaidor, "The Refornt of Personal Taxation":
Essays on Economic Policy, Vol. 1, Duckworth (1964),
pp, 212-213; cited in Sandford, Taxing Personal Wealth
(1970), pp. 152-153.

5. Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 15, page $6, para. 110.

6. Finance (No: 2), Act, 1945 (9 and 10 Geo. 6 ०. 13), $, 57.
Finance Act, 1949 (12, 13 and 14 Geo. 6 ०. 7), $. 32.


Change in
the oF ave
needed.

Case of
destruction
by fire ete.

5

8. We are, therefore, of the view that relief
should be granted in the following situations :—

(1) Whete it is proved to the satisfaction of the
Controller that the property has, within
six months of the deceased’s death, been
acquired without compensation under any
law. The value of such property should
not be taken into account for the purposes
of the Act, in such cases.

(2) Whereit is proved to the satisfaction of the
Controller that the property has, within
six months of the deceased’s death, been
acquired by or under any Jaw which pro-
vides for. compensation. The amount of
such compensation should be substituted
for the value of the property for the pur-
Pose of this Act. In such cases, there will
be no total exemption, but only substitn-
tion of the amount for another, for the
purpose of valuation,

As to the period of six months mentioned in our
proposal above, a few words are in order. A query
could be raised why property acquired after the
expiry of six months from the date of death, should
not enjoy the proposed relief, merely because a period
of six months has elapsed. Such queries can be
answered only by stating that any time-limit in this.
regard is bound to be arbitrary, and that position
would remain valid even if the period is to me, say,
one year.

But we would like to add that, where acquisition
without compensation or acquisition for inadequate
compensation, takes place after the expiry of the
proposed period of six months, it would be proper if
the Government examines the question whether, in
the circumstances of the particular case, relief by an
order passed under the Act, should not be granted.

9. During our consideration of the subject, we
considered the question whether cases of destruction:
of the property after death by fire, earthquake, war
or riot, should be treated on the same footing as the

1, Section 33(2).


R
dation.

6

case of property acquired after death. It is true that
the theory of estate duty-is, that the property had
come by windfall, and without any effort on the part
of the heir, and that the theory breaks down in case
it is found that the property is destroyed after death
before the person accountable is called up to pay
duty. It is also true that if there is no insurance of
the property against fire, earthquake etc.,! the ac-
countable person gains nothing and yet has to pay the
duty. The ‘gain’ on the date of death and before
destruction of the property, is gain only on paper,
or, in any case, for a very short time.

But we do not think that we should recommend a
statutory provision for such cases; we apprehend that
these will be few, and they can be left to be dealt
with under the specific provision in the Act, autho-
rising the granting of relief by the Government.
Suitable action can be taken under that provision, if
considered appropriate in the circumstances of the
particular case.

10. We accordingly rccommend that the follow-
ing section should be inserted? in the Estate Duty
Act, 1953—

“36-A. (1) Where it is proved to the
satisfaction of the Controller that the property
has, within six months of the deceased's death,
been acquired without compensation under
any law, the value of such property shall not
be taken into account for the purposes of this
Act.

(2) Where it is proved to the satisfaction
of the Controller that the property has, within
six months of the deceased’s death, been ac-
quired by or under any law which provides for
compensation, the amount of such compen-
sation shall be substituted for the value of the
property for the purpose of this Act.”

1. See paragraph 3, supra.

2. Section 33(2).

3, This is a very tentative draft. It can be put as section
36-A.


7

We should, before we part with this Report,
place on record our warm appreciation of the assis-
tance we have received from Mr. Bakshi, Secretary
of the Commission, in dealing with the problem
covered by the Report. As usual, Mr. Bakshi first
prepared a draft which was treated as the Working
Paper. The draft was considered by the Commission
point by point, and, in the light of the decisions taken
tentatively by the Commission, Mr. Bakshi prepared
a final draft for consideration and approval by the
Commission. Throughout the study of this problem,
Mr. Bakshi took an active part in our deliberations,
and has rendered very valuable assistance to the
Commission.

P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman
¥. R. Krishna fyer Member
P. K. Tripathi Member
8. 8. Dhavan Member
P. M. Bakshi Secretary

Dated : New Delhi.
the 4th December, 1972.

1009 Law/72