: aad
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT

EFFECT OF THE PENSIONS ACT,
1871 ON THE RIGHT TO SUE
FOR PENSIONS OF RETIRED
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC

SERVICES

DECEMBER, 1972

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE


(COPY)
D.O. No, F.1(1)/72-L,C.

P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR
CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

NEW DELHI-110001
December 4th, 1972.

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the 53rd Report of the Law Commission on
the effect of the Pensions Act, 1871, om the right to sue for pensions of
retired members of the public services. This Report is made by the
Commission sue motu by virtue of its terms of reference, particularly those
in clauses 2 and 8.

The Commission believes that the recommendations made in its Report
are ron-controversial and will receive universal acceptance, and hopes that
the Union Government will implement the same at an carly date by suitable
legislation.

Yours sincerely,

(P, B. Gajendragadkar)

Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister for Law & Justice,
Government of India,

NEW DELHI.


Para. Ne.

6&7.
8 & 9.
10.

11.

42,

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22,

23.

CONTENTS

Subject matter
Introductory
Genesis of the Report
Legislative competence .
Existing laws relating to pensions .
Scheme of the Pensions Act 1871 .
Section 4 considered in detail

Proceedings of the Governor-General-ineCouncil

Justifiability of the rule cons’
Possible origin of the rule + . .
Criticism in England

Position as Lo superannuation in England .
Rule an anachronism +

Whether pension is property .

Judgment of the Supreme Court +

Decisions of High Courts

Points summarised .

Private Member's Biti : पु .
Provision in the Civi

vs Regulations
Need for change
Recommendation ,

Other points not considered .

Page

eC OO mW MINA AH + ७ NN ee न +

Se eee
Boss os


Introductory

Genesis of
the Report.

Legislative
Competence

1, This Report deals with a matter arising under
a Central Act which, though not so well known, is
of considerable importance, namely,—the Pensions
Act, 1871, An examination of the Act revealed that
one provision of the Act required amendment,
because of a fundamental defect in the principle
behind it.

2. The subject has been taken up by the Law
Commission as a part of its general function of the
revision of Central Acts, first, because the Pensions
Act is an Act of general application and importance,
and secondly, because the continuance of some of its
provisions in the form in which they now exist,
appeared to amount to perpetuation of serious injustice
and to defeat fundamental rights guaranteed by the
Constitution. The nature and extent of the injustice
and the effect on fundamental rights will be dealt
with in this Report, at the appropriate place.1 It
may be also stated that the Commission received a
tequest from the Maharashtra Pensioners’ Association
to consider reform of the Act having regard to the
fact that its provisions were based on no principle.

Before finally coming to our conclusions, we had
put our proposals in the form of a draft Report.
The draft Report had been circulated to the Min-
istries concerned? for comments with a request to
send their comments by a specified date.

No comments have been received so far from
those Ministries, presumably because they do not
see any serious objection to the substance of the
amendment proposed.

3. Before we proceed to discuss the Act in detail,
we should indicate that the application of the Act
is excluded from areas formerly comprised in Part
B States. This is presumably because of the fact
that while “Union pensions”—i.c, pensions payable
by the Government of India or out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of India—are within the competence of
Parliament3, the subject of “State pensions”—i.c.
pensions payable by a State or out of the Consoli-
dated Fund of a State—is within the exclusive ccmpe-
tence of the States.+

1, See para. 8, infra.

2, Ministry of Finance, (Department of Expenditure) and
Department of Personnel.

3, Constitution of India, Seventh Schedule, Union List,
Entry 71.

4, Constitution of India, Seventh Schedule, State List,
Entry 42.


Para, 3
(contd)

Existing laws
relating to
pensions,

Scheme of
the Pensions
Act, 1871.

2

It is not very clear why the application of the
Act to Part B States in respect of Union pensions was
not decided upon. One possible reason might
haye been that this would have made the extent
clause of the Act, rather complicated, and the dis-
Unction, though theoretically justified, would have
looked inelegant. It is needless to say that even as
regards areas to which the Act extends at present,
any amendment now to be made in the Act will be
inapplicable to State pensions, because of the rele-
vant legislative entry.2

4. The scheme of the Pensions Act, 1871, will
be examined in detail later.2 But it would be of
interest to refer to two small statutory provisions
relevant to pensions, One is to be found in the
Transfer of Property Act,3 which enacts that a pen-
sion cannot be transferred by an act of purties. The
other is to be found in the Code of Civil Procedure,4
whereunder a pension cannot be attached in execu-
tion of a decree,

The eligibility Cor, pension, its amount, the condi-
tions for its availability and various other matters
of detail are so far as pensions of retired public officers
are concerned, regulated by rules made or continued
under the Constitution, supplemented in a few cases
passed after the commencement of the Consti-
This Report is primarily concerned with the
effect of the Pensions Act, 1871, on the right to sue
for a pension for which retired members of the public
serviczs (or members of their family) are eligible
(though, of course, the Act takes within its sweep
various other types of pensions also). We now
prota to examine the scheme of the Act, as such
examination is necessary for a proper understanding
of the provision to be altered,

3. The Pensions Act, 1871, has 14 sections.
Section | states that the Act extends to the whole of
India cxcept areas comprised in Part B States.5
Section 2 has been repealed. Section 3 defines “grant
of money ete.” Tt is not material for the present
purpose.

Section 4 is the most important section of the Act,
and bars suits relating to pensions, grants of money
or fand revenue. conferred or made by the Govern-
ment—whatever may have been the consideration

1. State List, entry 42,

2, See para, 5, infra.

3, Section 6(g), Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

4, Section 60(1)(g), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
5, See para, 3, supra.


3

for such pension or grant, and whatever may have
been the nature of the payment, claim or right for
which such pension or right may have been substi-
tuted. We propose to consider this section at some
Jength, iater.t

Under section 5, claims regarding pensicn etc.,
are 10 be made to the Collector छा other authorised
officer. If che claim is certified by him, then under
section 6, the civil court is empowered to take cogni-
zance of the claim.

Section 7 deals with pensiens for lands held under
grants in perpetuity. Section है provides for payment
to be made by the Collector or other authorised offi-
cer, ction 9 saves the rights of grantees of land-
revenues. Section 10 refates to the commutation of
pensions. Section 11 provides for exemption of pen-
sions frem allachment. Section 12 provides that
assignments, etc., in anticipation of pensions are
void. Section 13 provides for reward to informers
in certain cases. Section [4 confers power to make
tules. .

6, The above analysis of the Act? shows that
the important provisions are sections 4 and 11. The
other provisions of the Act are mostly consequential,
or are in the nature of machinery. Wile section [1
is a bencticial provision saving the pensions and
gramts mentioned in the section from attachment,
section 4 is a disabling provision. We quote it
below —

“4, Except as hereinafter provided. no
ii} Court shall entertain eny suit relating to
Pension or grant of money or land-revenue
conferred or made by the Government or by
any former Government, whatever muy have
been the consideration for any such pension or
grant. and whatever may have been the nature
of the payment, claim or right for which srch
Pension or grant may have been substituted.”

The section, thus, bars suits relating to-
(a) any pension conferred by the Government
or any former Government;
(8) any grant of money made by the Govern-
sent or by any former Government; or
{c) any grant of land revenue so made.

These three types of claims are barred, whatever
may have been the consideration for the pension
or grant. And they are barred, whatever may have

1, See para. 6, infra.
2, Para. 5, supra,


Propesdings

ofthe Gove~
mor-Gener-
aiin -Covn-
ail,

4

been the value of the payment, claim or right for
wich such pension or grant may have beer subs-
tituted.

2. We are not, in this Report, concerned with
the second and third types of claims. But the bar
ig respect of claims under category (a) creates hard-
ship, in so far as pensions of retired public employees
are concerned. On first principles, it may sound ano-
malous that with all the elaborate provisions found
in the service rules 38 to eligibitity for pension and
other connected matters, the person eligivie is to be
basred from suing in couzt in “a matter relating to
any pension conferred by the Government” —as is
provided by section 4. Ne doubt, the next section—
section S—provides 4 procedure whereunder he can
apply to the Collector (or other competent officer),
for the grant of a certificate, and, if such certificate is
prasted, a कमी is permissible. But such a provision,
aving the cight to sue to the discretion of an exeru-
tive officer, should require strong reasons 10 justify
its existence.

8. We made an effort (० find out if the proceed-
ings at the thng when the Peusions Bill was intro-
duced jx the Council of the Governor-General tn
india disclose any such reasons. The proceedings
have been thus recorded? —

“PENSIONS ACT, 1971
SEPTEMBER 1871

The Hon'ble Mr. Cockerell moved for leave to
introduce 4 Bill to consolidate and amend the faw
relating to pensions. He said that there was on the
Statmie-bock atthe present time a considerable
number of cegulations and Acts relating to this sub-
ject, These enactments contained much that was
now obsolete, and much in the gature of adminis-
trative rules and instructions as to the mode of dis-
bursing pensions, which would be more conveniently
and appropriately की to be pnt in operation by
means of executive orders,

“The leading principle af the main provisions of
the law was, that as the bestowel of pensions aud simitar
allowances was an act of grace or State policy on the
part of the ruling power, the Government reserved to
ieself the determination of all questions affecting the
grant oy continuance of these allowances/3 and the

1, Para, 6, supra, categories (6) & (ch

2, Logisiative Department, Progeedings of the Council of
ibe Governor-General of india, asembied for the pur-
pose of making Laws and Regulations ste, Punsions Bilt
(Nationas Archives).

3. Eraphasis supptiad.


5

Para. 8 cognizance of claims relating thereto by the Courts
contd.) of Judicature was, as between the grantor and grantee,
absolutely barred.

“This principle governed claims against the Gov-
ernment by virtue of laws which applied specifically
10 the Regulation Provinces of the Bengal and Madras
Presidencies, and which was also practically in force
in the Non-Regulation Provinces. [n some parts
of the Bombay Presidency also, namely, the Dekhan.
Khandeish and Southern Maharatta Divisions,
claims against the Government in the matter of the
pensionary grants and allowances were declared to be
not within the cognizance of the ordinary Courts of
Judicature; but in other parts of that Presidency, in
the absence of any such legal restrictions, the Courts
had assumed a jurisdiction expressly denicd to them
throughout the rest of British India.

“it was thought that this state of things should
not be allowed to continue, and that it was expedient
to assimilate the law as regards this portion of the
Bombay Presidency to that which prevailed in all
other parts of the Empire. There were no exceptional
circumstances which called for the exercise by the
Civil Courts, in any particular province or provinces,
of a jurisdiction which, under the operation .of a
principle of universal application, was not accorded
to them elsewhere.

“The object of the present Bill, therefore, was to-
re-enact, in a consolidated form, the operative provi-
sions of the law in regard to the grant of pensions and
similar allowances, and to apply the consolidated
enactments to the whole of British India”.

“The motion was put and agreed to,”

9. The later discussion in the Council is not
material for the present purpose.
Justifiabilit: 10. Thus, the Pensions Bill, apart from imple-

ftherale” menting the objective of simplification and consoli-
considered. dation of pre-existing Acts, was based on the leading

principle! —

(i) that the bestowal of such pensions was an
act of grace or State policy on the part of
the ruling power; and

(i) that the Government reserved to_ itself
the determination of all questions affecting
the grant or continuance.

Now, whatever be the merits of such a principle
as regards pensions granted on political grounds or in
view of loyalty to the Government and similar consi-

1. Para. 8, supra,


Para. 10
(contd.

Possible ori-
gin of the
le,

Criticism in
England.

6

derations, the principle fails to impress one as a just
one when applied to pensions of retired public ser-
vants.

To call the provision for such pensions “an act
of grace or State policy”, is hardly in conformity
with the accepted understanding on the subject. A
public servant, while in employment, looks forward
to his pension us a legitimate and well-earned remu-
neration for his service, and, indeed, he regards it
as part of bis emoluments, though payable in future.
He does not view it as an act of grace. In fact, even
though by way of precaution the rules regulating
his service may empower the Government to with-
hold pension, such withdrawal is rarely, if ever,
ordered.

In any case, it is One thing to give a power of with-
holding peasion in extra-ordinary circumstances and
ans ch are relevant in a particular
different matter to bar a suit by a general
and drastic provision of the nature referred to in
seclion 4 of the Act.l Broadly stated. the trus consti
tuticaal position appears to be that a person becomes
entitled 10 receive the pension prescribed by the rules
provided he has performed service for the requisite
period.

11. Tt may be that the provision in the present
Act (and its predecessors) was suggested by the general
rule of the common law that a civil servant cannot
sue the Crown for pay?

Once engaged, in Jaw, the civil servant holds his
position ui pleasure? The legal nature of the civil
Servant’s engagement is ambiguous.4

Tt may be thal to some extemt Lhe English rule was
derived from the immunity of the Crown front pro-
ceedings in Court (as it existed before the Crown
Proceedings Act, 1947),

12. The propriety -and even the correctness—
of the English rule as to disabilities of civil servants
has been criticised in modern times. The view that a

1. Para. 6, supra.

2. Richardson, “Incidents of the Crown Servants Relation-
ship", (1955) 33 Can. Bar Rev. 459.

3. Riordan v. The War Office, (1959) 3 All. E.R. 552; (1960)
3 All. BR. 7741. (CA), noted by Grunfield in (1960)
23 Modern Law Review 194.

4, (a) ERC. ५. Hambrook, (1956) 2 Q.B, 641, and the cases
there cited,

(b) Marks v. The Commonwealth, (1964) 111 C.L.R.
549; and Blair in (1958) 21 M.L.R. 26:


Para 12
(contd.)

Position as
to superan-
uation in
England.

civil servant has no enforceable right to salary for
vices rendered, has been stated to be “contrary to
pcinciple and against the weight of anthorily.

A leading text book on English Constitutional
law? after noting that it has been held that no debt
is awed by the Crown to a civil servant in respect of
his salary? observes—-

But it is hard fo see why this need be so,
and in one House of Lords ‘case4 petition of
right proceediags to determine the entitlement
of a former civil servant to supplementary pay-
yaents was successful.”

AS hus been pointed out,’ the denial at law of a

right to sue for his salary does not represent the true
position of the civil servant.

13, As regards claims based on supsranayation,
it appears that in England, a suit by a civil servant for
claims based on superannuation is not maintainable.6
The civil servant in England enjoys no legal right to
stperannuation.? Tn numerous decisions, this has
been held® to be the correct interpretation of section
30 of the Superannuation Act® of 1934, taken together
with szetion 2 of the Sumerannuation Act!®-11 of 1859.

1, D.W, Logan, “The Civil Servant and his pay", (1945),
61, L.Q.R, 240, 258, Proposition—C.

2, Wade and Bradley, English Constitutional Law, (1970),
page 682.

3. 117४ v. Lucas and High Commissioner for india, (1943),

4, Sutton ¥, Attorney-General, (1923), 39, T.L.R, 294. (LLY

5, Mitchell, Constitutional Law, (1968), pages 211-213.

6. Nixon v. 4.0. (1931), A.C. 184 (ILL).

7. In preparing the discussion as to the position as to super-
annuation in England, assistance has been taken from
18० Blair, “The Civil Servant” (1958) Public Law 32,

8. Bug, (०) Edimunds v, Att-Gen,, (1878) 47 L.J. Ch.
(8) Cooper ४. R., (1880) 14 Ch. D. 311;
(2) Yorke v. R., (1915) 1 K.B, 852;
(2) Re Transferred Civil Servants, Ureland) Compensation,
(1929) A.C. 242;
(०) Nixon v, Ait-Gen. (931), A.C, 184.

9, *. nothing im this Act shall extend or be construed to
extend to give any person an absolute right to compen-
sation for past services, or to any superannuation or
retiring allowance under this Act, orto deprive the
Commissioners of His Majesty’s Treasury, and the heads.
or principal officers oF the respective departments
of पाला power to dismiss any person from the public
setvice without compensation”. (Section 30, Super-
annuation Act, 1834).

10. “The decision of the Treasury on any question which arises.
as to the application of any section of this Act... shal]:
be final,”

11, See also (a) Section 9, Superannuation Act, 1887, and.

(® Section 4, Superannuation Act, 1909.



Role था
-anachro:

nism

“Whether
‘Pension is
“property”.

8

14. But the rule is an anachronism so far as
India is concerned. A suit 10 recover arrears of pay
of a civil servant is maintainable in India,! and it is
hardly logical to continue the bar in respect of suits
for pensions. Considerations of State policy may
justify the rule that (subject to certain reservations)

ublic servant holds office at the pleasure of the head
of the State. But such considerations do mot justify
a general bar against suits for pensions.

In the discussion on the Pensions Bill, Mr. Cocker
ell observed—“the fundamental principle of the
Bill”, (which in this respect was, as regards its appli-
cation to the whole of British India, with the exception
of a portion of the Bombay Presidency, a mere re-
capitulation of the existing law), was that “as the besto-
wal of pensions, money-grants or assignments of land-
revenue Was a pore act of grace on the part of the
ruling power, so the latter justly and wecessarily
reserved to itself absolute freedom, of action in regard
to the disposal of all claims respecting such allo-
wances; hence no power could be left to the Civil
Courts to act adversely to the interests or policy of the
Government in such matters”.

Today this principle cannot be accepted as sound.

15. In fact, decisions on the question whether
the pension granted to a public servant is “property”
thereby attracting Article 31(1) of the Constitution,
afford ample evidence of the judicial attitude in this
matter. The question came up for consideration
before the Punjab High Court in Bhagwat Singh v.
Union of India’ Tt was held that a right to pension
constitutes “property”, and any interference with it
will be a breach of Article 31(1) of the Constitution.
It was further held that the State cannot, by an execu-
tive order, curtail or abolish altogether the right of the
public servant to receive pension. On a Letters
Patent Appeal,4 the Bench approved the decision
that the pension granted to a public servant on his
retirement is “property” within the meaning of
Article 31[1) of the Constitution and he could be
deprived of the same only by an authority of law and
that pension does not cease to be property on the
mere denial or cancellation of it. Tt was further
held that the character of pension as ‘‘property’
cannot possibly undergo such mutation at the whim
of a particular person or authority,

1. State of Bihar v. Abdul Majid, A.LR. 1954 5.0. 245.

2. Mr. Cockerell in Proceedings of the Governor~Gencrale
in-Council, 80 August, 1871.

3. ALR. 1962 Punj. 503.
A, Yalan of India v, Bhagwat Singh, LL.R. (1965) 2 Punjab


Para. 15
(contd)

Decisions of
High Courts

Points sumé
marised.

9

The matter again came up before a Full Bench
of the Punjab and Haryana High Court! and the
majority took the same view.

16. The Supreme Court has recently held? that
a pension is not a bounty payable at the pleasure of
the Government, but on the contrary, the right to
pension is a valuable right vesting in a Government
servant,

Further, the right to receive pension is property
under Article 311) ०1 the Constitution, and the State
has no power by a mere executive order to withhold
the same. Similarly, the said claim is also property
under Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution. Accord-
ingly, though a Civil Court may be barred from enter-
taining a suit with reference to the matters mentioned
in section 4, such bar does not stand in the way of the
issue of a writ of mandamus to the State to consider
a claim for pension, according to law.

17. We ought to emphasise that the relevant
reasoning adopted in the judgment indicates that the
Supreme Court assumed that a suit for the recovery
of pension may be barred under section 4 of the
Pensions Act. The assumption thus made by the
Supreme Court is fully justified by the fact that High
Courts have unanimously construed section 4 as
referring not only to political pensions, but also to
pensions of retired Government servants, and have,
on this basis, refused to entertain suits even by retired
Government servants, in respect of pensions,3

18. In our view, therefore, the present provi-
sion in section 4 is—

(a) unjust on principle 4

(6) based apparently on a common law rule
which itself is of doubtful validity ;5

(2) anachronistic;é

(d) unrealistic ;7 and

(e) inconsistent with the basic legal character
of the pensioner’s right, and, in that sense,
opposed to Article 19{1)(f) of the Consti-
tutien’.

1, K. R. Evry २. The State of Punjab, 1.L.R. (1967) 1 Punj.
& Har, 278 (F.B.).

2. Deoki Nandan Prasad v. The State of Bihar, ALR. 1971
5,C. 1409, 1420, Paragraphs 32 and 34 (July issue),

3. (a) Shaukat Hussain v. Stata, AIR 1959 All. 769;
(8). Baidea Jha, v. Ganga Prasad ALR, 1959 Pat, 17;
(०) ¥._K, Namboodri ¥.Union of India, ALR. 1966 Ker.

185 Goseph & Raghavan JJ.) (reviews cases),

(d) Udho Ram v. Secretary of State A.LLR. 1936 Lah, 853
(e) Sajjanam v. State, ALR. 1963 Mad, 49.

4. Para, 10, supra.

3. Para. 11 and 12, supra.

© Para. 14, supra.

7, Para. 16, supra.



Private Me-
mber’s Bill.

Provision in
Civil Service
Regulations,

Need for
change,

Recommend-
ation,

10

19, Tt may be of interest to note thal a few years
ago, a Bi! to consolidate and amend the law relating
to the grant of pensions elc.,! payable by the Central
Government, was introduced in Parifament, il also
provided for repeal of the Pensions Act. But the
Bill did not became law.

20, It is refreshing to find the correct position
2

recorded in the Civil Service Regulations
“Pensions are not in the nacure of rewards,
bul there is u oinding obligation on the Govern-
ment which can be claimed as a right. Their
forfeiture is only on resignation, removal or
dismissal from Before a pension is
sanctioned. the sanctioning authority can re-
duce the amount due under article 470 of the
Civil Service Regulations, and after if is sanct-
ioned its continuance depends on future good
conduct vide Article 351 C.S.R.. but it cunnot
be stopped fcr other reasens.”

हि

21. For the above reasons, the drasiie prevision
excluding the right of suit, contained in scction 4 of
the Pensions Act,3 sheuld nor apply to pensions of
yetired employees of the Government, and a change
in the law squired in the interests of social justice
and in view of the constitutional status of the right to
pension? under Article 19(1)1) of the Constitution.

22. We, therefore, recommend thal the follow-
ing Exception she be added to section 4 cf the
Pensions Act, 187] :—

“Exception. Nothing in this section app-
ties 10 @ pension payable to or in respect of any
petsons appointed 10 @ public service or post in
coniectioa with the affairs of the Unien.”

Having regard to the position as to legislative
competence,6 State pensions cannot, of course, be
brought within the purview of the proposed change,—
though we do recommend that the Union Govern-
ment should draw the attention of State Gavernments

|. The Indian Pensions Bill, 1968 (No. 32 of 1968) (Lok
Sabha) (11 April, 1968), (Sbri Chaudhary Nitiraj Singh,
then Member of Parliament).

2. Government of India, Ministry of Finance, 0.0. No.
19. 2776-E.¥, $2 dated the 8th May, 1952, printed as a
Government of India’s decision below Article 351, Civil
Service Regulations,

3, Para, 6, supra.

4, Para. 18(f), supra.

5, Cf. article 366(17) of the Constitution, as to the words

“to or in respect of.

6, Para. 3, supra.


ii है

to the constitutional statns of the right to pension and
impress upon them the desirability of passing legis-s
jation similar to that proposed in this Report.

‘Other poiats 23. Tn making 00 receummtendation ay to section
nat, 0 - 4, we have sot thaughi मे necessary 18 consider whe-

cred

ther the other provisions of the Pensions Act need
modificaties or repeal. छिप limited object in making
this report is to reamave the exisling apomaly as
regards the right to sue in respect of pe stons earned
by public servants in the cruploy af Gov mment.

We should, before we pact wlih this Report,
place on record our warm appreciation of (18 asst
lance we have received Cram Mr, Bakshi, Secretary of
the Commission, in dealing with the problem covered
by the Repart, As usual, Me. Bakshi ficst prepared
a dealt which was irculed as the Working Paper.
The dealt was considered by the Commission point by
point, and, iy the light of the decisions taken temta~
tively by the Commission, Mr. Bakshi prepared 8
final draft for consideration and approval by Lhe
Commission. Throughout the study of this prob-
fom, Mr. Bakshi took an active part in our debby
sations, and has rendered very valuable assistance te
the Commission.

P. 8, Gajeadragadkar Chairman
V. 8. Krishna iyer Member
PK. Tripathi Member
8. $. Dhavan. Member
P.M. Bakshi Secretary

Dated : New Delbi.
the 4th December, 1972.

SOBLaw/72