«

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIETY-FOURTH REPORT
ON

THE CODE OF CIVIL
PROCEDURE, 1908

FEBRUARY, 1078


D.O. No. F.2(1)/71-L.C.

P, 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR

CHAIRMAN

LAW COMMISSION
Shastri Bhavan

New Delhi—110091

February 6, 1975

My dear Minister,

1 am forwarding herewith the Fifty-fourth Report of the Law
Commission on the Gode of Civil Procedure, 1908. The circum-
stances in. which the subject was taker! up by the Commission and
the procedure adopted by it are described in the first few para-
graphs of the Report.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR-
Hon'ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law & Justice, —
Government of India,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi.

LBD) stoMofLFaba—2(0)


CONTENTS

Chapter 1—Intreductory तन ve . -
Chupter 1-4-—Main Objectives of the Reform = ..~ . .
Chapter 1-8—Our approseh and principal recammendations 7

Chapter 1-C—Extunt of und application of the Code and other preliminary
matters on नर “.

Chapter 1-D—Suite in general. . .
Chapter 1@—Execution ५५ a” मर . न

Chapter I-F-—Incidental Proaeedinga ..
Chapter 1-G—Suits in puctioular sagen ..

Chapter 1-H—Special proceedings

Chapter 1-I—Supplomental proveedings .. न - न न
Chapter 1-J—-A ppeals-—First and scaond appeals . . कि
Chaptor 1-K—Appeals— Miscellaneous चर व . व
Chaptor 1-L—Roferenve, Review and Rovision कब न ”

to rode
Ohapter 1-M—H; iat eo visions relating to ight mot being the Court
phe peal pe one eget te ighGemrenot beng ike 0०५

Chapter I-N-—-Bulea *., ”

Chapter 1-0O—Miseallaqeous —.. es . .
Chaptor 1-P—Partics to a suit ना ue “ oe _
Chapter 2—Frame of the suit a . . न
Chapter 3—Recognised Agonts and Planders mo . ”
Chaptér 4-—Institution of auite न मु . न “
Chapter 5—Issue and service of summons - on न

‘Chapter 6—Ptendings बन . ” ” न
Chapter 7—Plaint . बन ve ae on बन
Chapter 8—Written statement and act-off न न बन

Chapter 9—Appoarance of parties and consequenoos bf non-appearanve
Chapter 10—Examination of perties by the Court बन or
Chapter 11—Disoovery and inspection 6... a . .

Chapter 12—Admissions 7 न

100
114
ne
120
122

126
126
132
1%
M41
a2
us


Chapter 13—Production of Documents . . -
Chapter 14--Tasuez.. न बल बन os बन
Chapter 16—Disposal of the suit at the First देवरा ड़ =

Chapter 16—Sarnmoning and attendance of artneeses .. कि
‘Chapter 17—Adjournments ., हब - नल हु a

Chapter 18—-Hearing of the suit and examination of witnesses =.

Chapter 19_Affidavits न ” बन व न
Chapter 20—Judgment and Deoree -. न न च
Osapter 21-—Execation - मर चर i .

L
Chapter 22Death, marriage and inaolvemey ofparties न
Chapter 23—Withirawal and adjustment of suife

Obapter 24—Payment into Court
Chapter 26-—Security for costs ea कि .
Chapter 26—-Oommissions issaed by Coutts, sso “

Chapter 27—Suita by or against Gpremmant —.. . o
Chapter 27A Suita invari sabfantnldoetian oflew os to the intarprote
Chapter 38—Saits by or against Sdidiewsede, 9. '., .
Ohaptor 29—Suits by and against Gorporations .. ५ .
Chapter 30-—Suite by or agaigat fms .. >. . o
‘Chapter 81—Saits by aid against Trustees|and Bxecutors a
Chapter 32—Snits by and against gainors a a a
Chapter 32-4 Suita concerning thé family ° ५1 o सु
‘Chapter 83—Suita by indigent perspna os ar जन न्न
Cheptor 34—Suite on Mortgages कि विद

Chapter 35-—Interpleader suits a न चर
Chapter 36—Statement of 08९6 wot न न
Obaptor 37—Summacy procedure ” न . न

Ghaptor 38- Arrest and attachment befogejudgment. दि
Chapter 39—Injunctions and otherlinterlooktogy orders. बन
Chapter 40—Resoivers . . eon .
Ghapter 41—Appesis from originelleeress wk

Pages

an

3 a8 EER EWE RES

178


Chapter 42Appesla from appellate decrees
Chapter 43—Appeals from orders on
‘Chapter 44—Appeals by indigent persons
Chapter 45—Appeala to the Supreme Court
Ohapter 46—-Reference . 7
Chapter 47—Beview ..

Chapter 48—Miscellancous

Chapter 49--Chartercd High Gourts

Chaptor 60—Provinoial Courta of Small Causes

Chapter 51—Prasidency Courts of Small Cannes ..

Chapter 52—Forms

Chapter 53—Noed for National Academy for Fudiojel Training

Chapter 64—Conelusion .

APPENDIX

Append}s—Questionnaire issued by the Lat ia चर

Pacis

$8

a
316
37
320

1८. |
am
$27
437

330


Cuaprer 1

INTRODUCTION

1.1. This Report deals with some aspects of revision of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908. The subject was considered at length by
one of the previous Commissions, which duly forwarded to Govern-
ment a detailed Report on the code.’ In that Report,* the Commission
considered the Code at length, and‘the mass of case-law that had
accumulated around the previous Code during half a century of its
life, the local amendments made in various provisions of the Code,
as well as the reforms introduced in other Countries,—including, in
particular, the changes made in England in 1962 by way of revision
of the Rules of the Supreme Court,

It also took into account the re¢ommendations relevant to the
Code made in the Report on the Reforms of Judicial Administration.’

12. A Bill intended to implement this Report was duly intro-
duced in Parliament but the Bill 1 d. When the question of re-
introduction of the Bill arose, the ‘Government of India considered
it proper to request the present Commission to examine the Code
afresh from the “basic angle of minimising costs and avoiding de-
lays in litigation and taking into aceount its revised terms of refe-
rence’,

Scope of the Report _f
1.3. Accordingly, in this Report, we Propose tp examine the Code
from the angle of— us i
(1) minimising costs; oo +
(2) avoiding delays in litigatipn; and _
(3) the revised terms of reference of this Commission, the
most important of such térms being the implementation
of the directive principles.

14. In this Report, we have not considered it necessary to deal
again with the matters dealt .withiin the . earlier Report, except
where we disagreed with ie recqmmendations in the earlier Report
or considered it necessary reifergfe and emphasise particular re-
commendations made thertin. ee ter of fact, even the ques-
tion of costs and delay.wag co d by the Commission at that
time also; however. as that Repost it
as we have .been specificallfr regi | ‘
are needed to avoid delay :and thinimise costs in civil proceed-
ings. हु 1
1, 27th Report of the Law Commibion, :

2. It in hereafter referred tome thd carlior'code;

3, 14th Report of the Law Commi’ ion,’ t
4, Low Miniater’s latter No. F. 40(0)/79-J, dated 14.2-1972 to the Chairman of the Law
i

t

Com



Radical amendments needed

1.5. At the outset, we should make it clear that in our view, at
least in certain respects, radical changes <re required in the Code
in principle,

poe

In the earlier Report,’ it has beet mentioned that, on the
whole, the Code has worked smogthiy ‘and satisfactorily, and the
Commission there had added that it had been ‘very cautious’ in
proposing radical changes. Na doubt, daution has to be exercised
before disturbing statutory provistons of long standing. But we
think that caution should not ‘act as a tonstraint where the expen-
ses of procedure and the necessities ofi the times require radical
changes.

Litigation when causing burden
1.6. As the Supreme Court has obsayved*—

“The principal function of counts and tribunals is to settle the
dispute between the parties ‘ad thereby give a quietus to
the social frictions generated by the unresolved disputes.
As long as a litigation lests,:the tension continues and
useful energies will be wasted. This is not all. Every
litigation means heavy financi#d] burden to the parties,”

Obviously, an expensive procedural system is @ self-defeating
instrument of justice. _

Reforms needed to be considerba

1.7, If, therefore, reforms ip boi be appear to be needed to
reduce the burden on parties, a trusted with the business
of law reform need not hesitate t their suitability.

Conrse adopted with reference [६० catldy.Code

1.8. The course which we have’ gdotted with reference to the
recommendations made in the earli
First, where we ‘agree with the feooin
Report, we have not considered) १ it n
except as stated below. Seeondiy,
recommendations, and also pongider

’ have’ made a brief referencé to it i’
disagree with eri earlier recemnge!
a modification, we have natira u this Report, and indi-
cated our own ८ cari Report. sri eo Fourthly, on matters not
considered in the earlier Repo: ired to be discussed, we
have expressed our views an additionat. amendments
wherever we thought necessary}

1. शक्ष Report, page 4, para 6.
2. Proshavati-v, Pritam Keur, A.1.R, 19726,0. 4010, | 9३2, (Hegde J.1,

eudations made in the earlier
ary to deal with the matter,

erm we agree with the earlier
if ngessary to emphasise it, we
rt. Thirdly, where we
ee agree with it subject to



3°

1,9. Thus the position is that on matters falling within the first
and second categories referred to above, the recommendations in
the earlier Report should be consulted. On matters falling within
the third category, the earlier recommendations should be taken as
superseded or modified (as the case may require) by our recom~
mendations. And, on matters falling within the fourth category, cur
recommendations should be taken as supplementing those made in
the earlier Report.

Questionnaire * ! mat

1.10. We may mention here that when the subject was referred
to us, we had, in order to dlicit oe inion on same of the impoytant
questions which required consideration, issued a questionnaire, we
are grateful to all those who have:favoured us with their views in
response to the questionnaire, We have, wherever we consider it
necessary, referred in this Report; to the views expressed on the
relevant questions; but it is needlesp to add that the replies on every
question have received our most careful consideration.

1. The Questionnaire wae Feupinieis in pees, तक,



Carter 1-A.
MAIN OBJECTIVES OF REFORM

Introductory

1-A.1. We deal in this Chapter with the main objectives. af te
form of the Code as.envisaged in thig Report. ~

Stages of procedure and cases of delay
1.A.2, We refer first to delay. The:stages of procedure as provid-
ed in the Code are not numerous. But sage y could occur because—
(i) the interval between the stages becomes very long in a
particular case, or
(ii) a particular stage of procedure itself consumes excessive
tizne, or
(iii) extraneous factors prevent a particular stage irom being
reached—for example, where thé suit has to await its turn
for a long period because of tha heavy file of the court.

1.A.3, Examples of all these. three’ types of delay could be fur-
nished. For example, if, between the issue of a summons to the de-
fendant and his actual appearance in Courtian interval of two months
elapses because of obstacles in the service'of summons, delay of the
first type occurs, हु

Same is the case where frequent ad pe ie itn are granted
without justification, Delay of the se¢ond is illustrated by the
parties producing too many witnesses, or seounsels unduly prolong-
ing the cross-examination of 2 pe rtenlay witness, An illustration
of the third type of delay is furnjshed ie: e farniliar situation of a
revision against an interlocutory’ ordet, lereby the next stage in
the logical sequence of the case is prevehted trom being reached.

1.44, It will be our endeavour to bear in mind these three as-
pects, while making concrete recommendations for amendment of

ie vy

Expenses
1.4.5. We refer next to expense. The principal expenses of a
civil litigant in India are made up of—
(1) court fees;
(2) counsel’s fee;
(3) expenses on witnesses; j
(4) expenses for obtaining copies of: documents,
(5) personal expenses for attending tourt consulting counsel,
and the like;
(6) costs, when directed to be paid tp the opposite party,
a . लव ‘


Various heads of expense

1.4.6, None of these items is governed by the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure. The first of them—court fees—is regulated by the Covrt
Fees Act, (or by the corresponding State law where a full-fiedged
state law has been enacted).

The second item is not, as between party and counsel, regulat-
ed by law. :

The Third and fourth items are regulated by rules made. by”
the High Courts.

The fifth is, in its very nature, elastic. So also is the sixth,“

Court fees पु

1.4.7. These items of expenditure are, thus, outside the Code,
but we think it proper to-deal here with the first item—Court fees—
since the matter is of great importance. This we have chosen to do
notwithstanding the fact that Parliament's legislative. competence
to. legislate on court fees, is limited to Union Territories, ag the
subject falls in the State’ List.’

1.4.7. We may in this confection mention that in one of the
Reports of a previous Commis¢ion, the question of court fees has
been considered at length.

1.4.8. ‘The recommendations ix that Report regarding court
fees may be summarised ‘es follows.’

(1) It is one of the primary duties of the State to provide. the
machinery for the admiriistration of justice and on principle it ia
not proper for the State to charge fees from suitors in courts.

(2) Even if court fees are charged, the revenue derived from
em should not @xceed and cost of the administration of civil
justice, है
(3) The making of a profit by the State from the administration
of justice is not justified.

(4) Steps should be taken to reduce court fees so that the reve-
nue from it is sufficient to cover the cost of the civil judicial estab-
lishment. Principles analogous to those applied in England should
be applied to measure the cost of such establishment. The salaries
of judicial officers should be a charge on the general tax-payer.

(5) There should be a broad measure of equality in the scales
of court fees all over the country. There should also be a fixed
maximum to the fee chargeable.

(6) The rates of court fees. on. petitions under Articles 32 and
226 of the Constitution should be very low, if not nominal,

(7) The fees which are now levied at various sti
the stamp to be affixed on certified copies and exhibits and eae
should be abolished.

1. Constitution, Seventh Schedules, State List, Ttam 3 “...... ken courts: .
the Supreme Conrt,”* “ * ‘eee taken Uo al szoept

2 140 Report, Vol 40040 pam i.



6

(8) When & case is disposed of or is compromised before the
actual hearing, half the court fee should be refunded to the
plaintiff.

{9} The Court fee payabie in an appeal should be half the
amount levied in the trial court,

1.A9. We would like to express here our broad agreement with
the approach adopted in the Report in respect of court fees, and
with the recommendations set out above.

Directive principles

1.4.10, Our revised terms of reference require us to consider
the changes needed to bring laws in harmony with directive princi-
ples. Of the articles in the Constitution dealing with directive prin-
ciples, the article most relevant to the sphere of civil procedure is
that relating to social order,’ which is as follows:—

“38. State to secure a social order i”, the promotion of welfare
of the people—The State shall strive to promote the wel-
fare of the people by securing and protecting as effec-
tively as it may, a social order in which justice, social,
economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of
the national life.”

We have kept this in mind in making our recommendations in this
port,

1, Article 38 of the Constitution.


CuaptEr 1-B
OUR APPROACH AND PBINCIPAL EECOMMENDATIONS

Main objectives

1-B.1. Our main objectives in this Report, as already stated,‘
will be two-fold—

{a) to consider the need for such major changes as could cut
down the delay; and expense of civil procedure, of course, to the
extent to which the delay or expense could be attributed to defects
in or deficiencies of the provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure.

(9) to consider the need for such changes as are desirable in
order to implement the directive principles in Part 4 of the Con-
stitution.

Procedure, a means to justice

1.B2, Any system of procedure must subserve the ends of Jus-
tice. Procedure is a means, and not an end. When the means assume
undue prominence, and the end is lost sight of, or even sometimes
apt to be defeated in the process, citizens affected have a legitimate
right to complain. And it is the duty of the State to see that its
legal system does not leave scope for processes which are likely to
hinder or defeat justice. 1

Overhauling of entire procedure mot required

1.B.3. This does not, of course, mean that a total replacement of
the existing system of procedure by a new one, or such a radical
overhay] as would change: its face entirely, is necessarily required.

1-B.4. As Lord Kilbrandon has observed—

“The ship is well designed, fundamentally sound, and is for
most of the time on a correct course; what is wanted is an
overhaul and modernisation of the navigational instru-
ments, so that she is more! easily kept on that course. And
some of the officers are getting a bit elderly—This will
always be trve’?

Means must be effective

1-B.5. Since procedure is a means, and justice the end, the
means must be effective for realising the end. This requires that the
procedure must be simple. fair, effective, speedy and inexpensive
To spell out these requirements, we need; (a) an adequate organi-
sation of the courts’ for the efficient distribution and despatch of
business; (requirements 01 effectiveness); (b) freedom from mere

1. See Chapter 1, Supra. :
2, Lord Kilbrandon, other People’s Law, (1966) pages 3-4.

aj


technicalities at all stages (requirement of simplicity and speed);
(९०) clear definition of issues (requirement of fairness); (d) wherever
possible, the elimination of any element of surprise at the trial (re-
quirement of fairness); (e) control and supervision by the court of
the progress of the proceedings (effectiveness of the trial); (g)
effective methods of execution (ultimate effectiveness of the trial);
and (h) a speedy and authoritative system of appeal (requirement
of fairness, and substantia] justice in the end).

Impediments to justice not to be multiplied

1-B.46, As Cardozo observed,’ “a. system of procedure is pervert-
ed from its proper function when it multiplies impediments to
justice without the Warrant of clear necessity.”

The same idea has been expressed more recently by Chief Jus-
tice Warren,’ who aptly stated that—

“the orderly and expeditious processing of litigation is a right
which each of us should be able to ask of our judicial
system, no matter what our status in life or how meagre
or non-existent our resources may be. In the name of
human dignity we can ask no less, yet we must admit
that we are falling far short of our goal.”

Secondary objectives of procedure

B.7. Procedure, thus, exists for the sake of something else, for
the sake of the substantive law.’ This is its primary objective. But
procedure has many secondary objectives. It must give the parties
a feeling that they are being dealt with fairly. It must serve the
cause of efficiency. And it must yield fihal and lasting adjudication.

Ideal system of procedure ड़

1-B.8. These objectives may sometimes come into conflict with
each other.” In an imperfect world, limits have to be put on the
length and amplitude of an inquiry inte truth. An ideal system of
procedure would be one which could achieve these objectives to
the maximum extent practicable, and harmonise them to the extent
possible.

Importance of procedure to ordinary citizen
1-B.9. The importance of procedure to the ordinary man must
also be pointed out. As has been observed,‘—

“It is from the practice and procedure of the courts—that is,
the way in which a case is conducted, the facts discovered
from examination and cross-examination and the like—
that the ordinary citizen, as litigant, witness, or even

1, Cardozo J, dissenting in Read ० Aen, (1982) 286 ए.8. 190, 200,
2, Quoted in Sutherland, The Path of the Law from 1967 (1988), page 216.

3. Hepburn, The Historical Development of Code Pleading, (1897), pages 19-30, oited in
Fleming, Civil Procedure (1965) page 2.

4. Fleming, Civil Procedure, (1986) page. 2.
5, २९६४.
6. Final Report of the Evershed Committee on Practice and Procedure, (1953), pera 2.



! a

spectator, obtains hig experience of our legal system; and
on that evidence he is likely to form his judgment on the
claim commonly made by Englishmen to excellence in
the administration of Justice.”

Importance of Procedure

1-B.10. Long ago, a writer, emphasising the importance of ad-
jective law, observed.—

“Procedure should always be indeed the “handmaiden of
justice’, its motto should be that of the Prince of Wales,
ich dien, This cardinal fact is widely, admitted, but has
often been overlooked in practice.”

But, to recognize that procedure exists primarily to implement
Substantive right, does not detract from its importance. In an
ideal world where every one obeyed implicitly. the commands af
substantive law, procedure would possess no importance? Nor
would it be of much value where the time and the means and
the will oa get the bottom of every dispute and grievance were all
unlimited,

1-B-Il. At the same time, as an American writer has observed’—
of life, and limitations on the amount of human energy worth
spending on this one phase of human activity, ali conspire to make
procedure of very great importance and also to give it functions
beyond that of serving substantive law’*

Need for improvement

1-B.11. At the same time, as an American writer has bserved’—
“The need for procedural improvement in the civil courts is
a subject of much current interest and effort on the part
of the organised American bar, as well as of the judicial
and other official agencies, It ig fair to state that a steady
progress in the improvement in civil procedure 18 bein,
made, It ig doubtful, however, whether any efforts a
reform, no matter how sincere or how long continued, can
reduce our civil procedure to that degree of simplicity
which the layman is likely to think it ought to have. The
situations which rules. of .procedure are designed to meet
are in many cases rather complicated; and the framing of
‘simple’ rules to control complicated situations too often
results not in simplicity, but rather in uncertainty and
ambiguity, the resolving of .which in turn entails the
exercise of uncontrolled, and in procedural matters vir-
tually, unreviewable, discretion by the judge.”

1-B12. These ave the principles which have guided our ap-
proach.

1. Hepburn, the Historical Pevstopmsnie of the Code Pleading, (1807), 20, 20,
cited in Fleming, Civil Procedure, (1965) page 2.

¥. Seo Floming, Civil Procedure, (1965) page 2.
४. Mayers, the American Logal Bystom, (1960), page 242.
L/B(D)230Mof Lt &O4—3

wee


10

Important recommendation

1-B.13. We shall now refer to some of the important matters in
respect of which we have recommended an amendment of the law.

Res Judicata :

1-B.14. One of the significant provisions of the Code’ relates. to
res judicata, The provision in the Code on subject is, however, not
comprehensive enough to cover a few proceedings, and we have
considered it necessary to suggest am amendment in order to
extend its scope by an express provision to certain proceedings.

Further, the present requirement that the court whose judg-
ment is sought to be set up as res judicata in the later suit should
have been competent to try the subsequent suit, creates difficulties
when a question which was decided by the previous court comes
up for decision before a later court of higher jurisdiction. We are
therefore recommending an amendment in the procedure in this
regard, under which a court of lower jurisdiction will, when such
a question comes up incidentally, be expected to refer the matter
to the District Court, so that the trial of the entire litigation before
a more competent court can be arranged. These amendments should
not be regarded as merely technical, because it is well-known that
the doctrine of res judicata is based on the principles that there
ought to be a finality in litigation and that a person ought not to
be vexed with the same controversy twice.

Suits relating to public matters

1-B.15. While our recommendation regarding res judicata and
certain other matters is intended to reduce delay, there is another
ébject of law reform which we have sought to achieve, namely,
modernisation and simplification’af the law, in proposing expansion
of the scope of suits relating to public matters. In the Code, there
are, at present, two main provisions’ covering suits relating to public
matters, namely, section 91 which deals with suits relating to public
nuisances, and section 92 which deals with suits relating to public
trusts. As society advances and the Hfe of the community becomes
more complex, importance of injuries to the public (as contrasted
with injuries to private individuals) increases, The relevance of
these phenomena is seen not only in the criminal law—we
occasion to deal with this aspect in the field of criminal law in one
of our Reports,*—but also in the field of civil law. Public nuisances
are familiar and well undérstood types of injuries to the public;
but there are other injuries to the public, and there ought to exist
a provision for enabling responsible persons to file suits for the re-
moval of public injuries of other kinds. It is from this point of
view that we are recommending an amendment of section 91, which
will widen its scope so as to cover all" injuries to the public.

1-B-16. We need not deal slaborately with the scope of injuries
to the public that will be.ecovered by the amended section, but we
may state, by way of illustration, that in the case of big frauds on

1. Section 11.
2, Sections 91-82. j
3. 47th Report (Social and Eoonomic Offenicee).


il

consumers, whether they be consumers of goods, services or other
objects of consumption, it will be possible, under the amended
section, to bring a suit on behalf of the consuming body. Such a
suit could appropriately be for declaration or for injunction. It is
exiomatic that the existence of a suitable procedure facilitates the
pursuit of appropriate remedies, and this, in turn, also helps in the
clarification of substantive rules of law relating to the matters
which are the subject-matter of the remedies pursued, It could
even pave the way for legislative action. As an American writer’
has pointed out, constitutional litigation, even where unsuccessful
in the courts, may stimulate,the legislature te action. “All the major
social changes which have made America a finer place to live have
their basis in fundamental constitutional litigation. Somebody had
to sue somebody before the legislature took long overdue action”.

1-B.17. In respect of the right of second appeal, we recommend
an amendment which will reduce both expense and dela: La The in-
creasing number of second appeals in the High Courts has added
to the arrears of the High Courts, with the resuit that appeals which
are more than five years old, come up for hearing today; but quite
apart from this aspect, the jurisdiction of the High Courts in second
appeal has, to a jarge extent, been wrongly invoked in order to seek
interference at the hands of the High Courts in respect of questions
which are really questions of fact. Questions of law are the only
questions which ought to be dealt with in second appeal. The role
of the High Court, as we conceive it, is not that of correcting
errors of fact in matters which come. before it. Its proper role is of
maintaining and re-establishing 1 लक प्रा in matters of law, and
re-introducing certrainty, where mt , and of keeping the con-
tent of the law intelligible: and accessible by means of a binding
precedent, This is our approach, and consistently with this approach,
we are recommendirg an amendment of section 100 which will
permit second appeals only on substantial questions of law, We have
dealt with the broad features of our approach in the relevant chapter,
where we consider the question of amending section 100.

Revision

___1-B.18, Analogous to the topic of second appeals is that of reyi-
sional jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115 of the Code,
Controversies galore have, from time to time, arisen ag to the exact
scope of this jurisdiction; and it is well-known that some of the ex+
pressions which occur in the section,’ such as “case decided”, “mate-
vial irregularity” and the like, have offered a fertile field for the
exercise of legal ingenuity. But these expressions have also been the
cause of considerable delay in the administration of justice, and of
avoidable suffering to litigants. °

1, Yannacone, “A Lawyer answers the ‘Technocrata” (August-September, 1969) 5 Trial
ot ld-15 cited in “The New Pablio Intarest Lawyers” (1970) Yale Lew Journal, 1080:

2 -Yanuacone, quoted in Reogit in, All He Wants to Save is the World, Sports Thustrated
Feb. 3,96, at 24, cited in “The New Publio Interest Lawyeva” (1970) Yale Law Journal

3. Section 118.

- L{B(D)2{29MofLIgCa —3(a)



2

1-B-19, As Rangnekar, J. observed! with reference to section 115—

“Here a professional lawycr is sorely perplexed and bewildered by
the conflict of judicial decisions as to what is the meaning of the
expression “case which has been decided” in 5, 115, Civil] FP. C. and
what is the meaning of Cl. (c) in that section when it is said that
the Court has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction “‘illegally or
with material irregularity”, and one can only express a pious hope
that the legislature may step in and say precisely what it means
and fix the limits of revisional jurisdiction of the High Courts, in
a manner intelligible even to a layman.”

The first two clauses (a} and (b) of 8. 115 do not present any
difficulty; it is the last clause that does.

1-B.20. We have, after careful consideration, come to the con-
¢elusicn that revisional jurisdiction exists solely for the purpose of
correcting manifest and serious injustice; and the correction of such
injustice ig amply taken care of by the powers of High Courts under
section 227 of the Constitution. Any other matters decided by lower
courts—eyen though the decision may appear to be erroneous—
should not be taken to the High Court in revision. On this principle,
we are recommending the deletion of section 115.

Written Statements

1-B.21, Litigation cannot be properly conducted if the points
for determination are not properly presented to the Court, And, the
ints for determination cannot be pyoperly presented if the court ~
bas not, before it, the case of each party in a precise and concise
form, It is'on this philosophy that procedural codes require the
parties to file pleadings, and lay down elaborate requirements as to
the form and contents of pleadings. This may sound elementary;
but we are constrained to refer to these aspects, because we fin
that the rule which deals with the written statement (defence) of
the defendant,’ leaves it to the discretion of the court to require the
defendant to file his defence. We are of the view that it should, in
every case, be obligatory for the defendant to file a written state-
ment, and that failure to do so should empower the court to pro-
nounce judgement against him. There are provisions on the subject
in the Code—0.8, r. 1 to 0.8 1. 10, but they are either incomplete
in their scope cr defective in their expression. We are recommend.
ing amendments to remove these defects.

Disposal of ease on preliminary issues

1-B.22. Considerable delay is often caused by the tendency of
courts to avoid the decision of all the matters in issue in a suit,
on the ground that the suit could be disposed of on a preliminary
point. In such cases, when the decision of the trial court on the pre-
liminary point is reversed in appeal, the matier has ordinarily to
be remitted to the trial court again, with the result that the inquiry

1. Bai Chandat ५. Ciholalal, AIR. 1932 Bomimy 08३, 696.
2 Order 8, Rale 1.


13

into other issues commences after the expiry of a long period of time,
when documents might have been lost, the memory of witnesses
might have faded, and, in general, the grip of the judge over the
litigation would have been lessened.

We think this should be avoided, and we are, therefore recom-
mending an amendment of the relevant rules, under which it would
be obligatory for the court to decide all issues, subject to certain
specified exceptions relating to jurisdiction and bar of suit,

Suits concerning the family

1-B.23, Litigation in the past, in India, has revolved mainly round
questions of property, Even where questions concerning personal
law and allied branches of the law were at issue, the indirect objec-
tive of the litigation was, in many cases, the establishment of pro-
prictary rights, for example, in suits for adoption and proceedings
as to guardianship. Litigation in future, is, however, likely to gain
new dimension, By way of this illustration, we may state that dis-
putes concerning the family will be brought with increasing fre-
quency into the arena of litigation,

1-B.24, In her remarkable work, The Century of the Child, Ellen
Key’ quotes a dramatic work called The Lion’s Whelp;

“The next century will be the century of the child, just as
this century has been the woman’s century. When the
child gets his rights, morality will be perfected. ‘Then
every man will know that he is bound to the life which
he has produced with other bounds, than those imposed
by society and the laws. You understand that man can-
not be Telessed from his duty as father even if he travels
around the world; a kingdom can be given and taken
awey, but not fatherhood”,

1-B.25. We do not, in this Re sport, pause to consider whether
the traditional judicial machinery is an ideal system for the resolu-
tion of such disputes; but, so long as it remaing the only machinery
available for the purpose, it should be so moulded as to enable and
encourage the judge, to perform more satisfactorily the duty of
adjudicating on these new types of disputes, This basic considera-
tion has encouraged us in recommending the insertion of a set of
new provisions’ to deal with litigation involving matters concerning
the family,

1-B.26. When courts encounter problems concerning the famil m4
in the context of conventional litigation, they tend to deal wit
them in a conventional way. This 18 understandable, “The judge is,
above all, a skilled lawyer; a-lifetime lived in the law has inculcated
in his its promises, its analytical techniques, its principles”, To
correct this attitude in so far as litigation concerning the family is
concerned, a few amendments would, we think, be: desirable.

1-B.27. The law is never more nobly applied then when St is
for the alleviation of the economic suffering of those who approach
है 1." Ellen Key, The Century of the Child, (1000), page 45, oitad in Graham Parker, “Century
[PMG of the Child” (1967) 35 Canadian Bar Review, 741, 745.

2, Order 32-4 (proposed).
“3. FLW, Arthar, “Developing Industrial Citizenship, (1867) 20 Can, Bor Rev. 786, .BH5,

’



14

its portals. The Code has a Chapter‘ dealing with suits by paupers.
We are recommending certain changes in this respect, which will,
we hope, improve its utility as a weapon in the fight against poverty.
We may add that the question of the impact of law on poverty
deserves to be considered in a comprehensive manner.

1-B.28. A few other matters relevant to poverty—the question
of legal aid and the question of court fees—are outside the scope
of the Code. The former is being considered by a separate Com-
mittee,? We have not, therefore, gone into these two aspects at length,
put even so, wherever a point concerning legal aid or court tees
required serious attention, we have thought it appropriate to refer
to it, and are making appropriate recommendations in the matter,
in the hope that the Union Government will be able to persuade
the State Governments to adopt these recommendations.

1-B-28-A. At present, in suits on mortgages, the Code" makes it
compulsory to have two decrees—preliminary and final—whether the
suit be for foreclosure, redemption or sale. This makes the proce-
dure cumbersome, and almost invariably if two appeals are filed
against two decrees in the same suit. We think that the procedure
could be made simpler by substituting one decree (corresponding,
broadly, to the present preliminary decree), and the rest of the
proceedings could be relegated to execution. Following this ap-
proach, we are recommending a reca$ting of the relevant provision
of order 34.

Summary procedure

1-B.28-B. To prevent unreasonable obstruction of a suit by a
defendant who has no defends the Coie* has a Chapter providing for
summary procedure. The utility of this Chapter is obvious. The ap-
plication of this Chapter is, however, Himited to certain specified
‘courts and to particular हनन of sqjits. In order that greater use
may be made of this useful cr, we are Tecommending certain
amendments in the relevant rules. =
Delay caused by stay orders seo :

1-B-29. The chronology of ltlga under the Code is, in its
bare essentials, fairly simple. But it ge ets clogged by a variety of
hindrances, Examples of such hindrances are furnished, at the stage
of trial of a suit, by appeals and revisions against what have come
to be known as ‘interlocutory orders’. At the stage of execution,
obstacles abound owing to Btay ore obtained on one ground or
another by taking recourse fo mise cous appeals or appeals from
orders or revisional appli To minimise the delay caused by
such obstacles, we are recofamending certain amendments in the
relevant rules.’ We hope, that they will advance the cause of expe-
dition, without unduc hardship to ati agen eae मे सके

1. Order 33.

2. Logel Aid Committee.

8. Order 34.

4. Order 37.

3. (a) Order 41, rule 5;

6) Order 21, rule 29;

(गे Ordor"89, rule 1.



15

1-B-30, In one of the Chapters appearing towards the end of our
Report, we have thought it necessary to discuss the problem of
training our junior judicial officers and to make some important and
radical suggestions in that behalf. We ought to add that, though the
subject-matier of this Chapter is technically outside scope of
our present inquiry and report, we are satisfied that it is our duty
with all the emphasis we can command, te carnestly appeal to the
Union Government to request the State Governments to take imme-
diate and suitable action in terms of our recommendations. We are
quite clear in our minds that the terms of service under which
junior judicial officers are employed and the fringe benefits and
general amenities which are made available to them are wholly
unsatisfactory and meagre to a degres, and that they need to be
immediately improved if competent and capable lawyers have to be
attracted to the judicial career, It must be borne in mind that the
work which these junior judicial officers discharge in their respec-
tive courts in smal] taluk towns is, in substance the foundation of
what is described as the Rule of Law. As Justice Holmes once ob-
served, the basis of the rule of law is laid down not necessarily in
important and sensational constitutional cases, but in small ‘and
bumble disputes between litigants who bring their causes to the
courts,

1-B-31. For efficient, satisfactory and expeditious administra-
tion of justice which would command public confidence and
enjoy public respect, an enlightened, speedy, fair and — pro-
gressive procedure is no doubt, essential; and that is
what we have attempted to do in aur present report. But pro-
cedure alone will not solve the problem of accumulating arrears
which have assumed alarming proportions in all the courts in our
country. Procedure can hope to succeed in attacking this problem,
provided the Judges who preside over the courts are conscious of
their obligations to the community at large and exercise their Bo
wers and discharge their functions determined to remove from the
administration of justice the widely spread and somewhat justified
complaint of delay, costs and unpredictability. It is our confident be-
lief that, in the context of today, and having regard to the hope 8 and
aspirations of the common men and women in this country, the judi-
ciary can no longer be content to play merely the role of an umpire
ang allow the adversary character of our litigation to proceed unin-
terrupted by the wise and judicious interventions from the judges
from time to time, Since, in our view, the junior judiciary hag to
pley a major role in the conduct of the causes which are filed be-
fore them, we think it is of utmast importance to initiate them into
the philosophy of law and its major role in relation to the changing
society. Besides, it is hardly necessaty to emphasise that, in course
of time, District Judges and some of the High Court Judges are
drawn from this class of junior judicial officers. That is why we
have set out our thoughts in the last chapter and made recommen.
dations which we think might serve the purpose we have in mind.

1, 86० Chapter 53, °

वी eepentien


16

1-B.32. “Training” has been described’ as the “process of develop-
ing skills, habits, knowledge and attitudes in employées for the pur-
pose of increasing the effectiveness of employees in their present
positions, as well as preparing employees for future Govern-
ment positions”. Judicial officers have responsible and varied fune-
tions to perform, and should receive adequate training before they
enter on their office. We have not in ming merely the inculcation of
professional skill! and knowledge. Training must also aim at broaden-
ing the mental horizons, values and attitudes® of the officers, by in-
stilling the right mental attitudes on the question of judicial conduct.
This becomes relevant because the judge holds a pivotal position,
and has a vast variety of discretionary functions which are vital in
the effective working of the law as an instrument of social justice.

1-B.33. In every organisation, the training of employees, which
sets the tone and quality of the organisation, is useful. It is more
so in a career service,’ with opportunities for successive promotions
to higher grades.

1-B.34. The detailed recommendations on the subject* will show
that when we speak of “training” we do not have in mind the argani-
sation of mere lectures. What we have in mind is the introduction of
judicial training at the initial stage. Case studies on particular events
in the life of litigation, which illustrate typical situations, would be
eminently suitable, because “a generalised understanding must
emerge from experience of the particular.”

1, William G, Torpey, Publi Personnel Mansgement, New York, (70, Van Nostrand 000-
pany, Ino.) (1953), page 254.

2, Of. HV. Kemath, Principles and Techniques of Administration, Bharatiya Vidys Bhavan,
Bombay-7. (1871) page 19.

8, Avasthi and Msheahwari, Public Administration (1966), Chapter 17, Education and

‘Training, pagee 511--825.

1. See Chapter 63.

6; OM. Chadwick, “Administrative Traini ini Notes of Syllabus”. Journal of Administra.
tion Overneas (London), ४०1 5, No. 3, July 1964, pages 167176, Abstracted in Indian
Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, Publio Adminitraton Abstracts
(Jonuary 1987), pages 6-6.


Cuaprer 1-C

TENT OF AND APPLICATION OF THE CODE AND OTHER
= PRELIMINARY MATTERS

Introductory

1-C.1. The extent and application of the Code and other preli- ‘

minary matters are dealt with in sections 1 to 8 in the body of the
Code.

Section 1 and Laceadive Islands

10.2. There is one point to be considered regarding the territorial
extent of the Code. This relates to the Laccadive Islands.

In the earlier Report? it was stated—

“Incidentally, it may be addded that the Administrator of
the Laceadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands has, in his
suggestion relating to the Civil Procedure Code sent to the
Commission, suggested that sections 36 to 43 should, for
uniformity, extend also to Laccadive and Minicoy Islands.
(At present, they extend only to Amindivi Islands), This
has been accepted, and Order 34 also proposed to be ex-
tended to those Islands”.

1-C.3. This was a very limited suggestion. we find , however, that
by a Regulation," practically the whole le Code of Civil Procedure has
been extended to those Islands, Having regard to the rather unde-
veloped condition of those islands, we suggest that Government
should reconsider the question how far the Code of Civil Procedure
should extend to these Islands,

1-C.4, From @ letter which the Commission has received from
the Member of Parliament representing the Islands,

it would appear
that there are no lawyers in the Islands, and English knowing

eople are few. Facilities for prompt movement are also not availa-
1९, and a so iphisticated Code of may not be quite ap
propriate for these areas.

Similar observations were made in a ent of
High Court. judgment of the Kerala

We express no opinion on the Point; but recommend that the
Government may have this aspect examined, after inquiring into

1. 27th Report, page 80, note om Seotion. 1, paragraph (vi).
2. Regalation 8 of 1088, effective from Ist October, 1967.
8. Letter of Shri P.M. Bayeed,"M.P, to'the Law Commission, dated 20th April, 1972,

4. MEP, Aita Kona v. N.&. Kooa Phangal and others, Becond
ded on'23ed ‘October, 1970 ‘(Rerala). Appeal No. 1210 of 1000 deei-

१०५


Carter 1-D

SUITS IN GENERAL
Introduction

1-D.1. Part I of the Code deals with litigation in the simplest
case, from the time the plaintiff decides to sue and has to select his
forum, to the time, when, having obtained a decree, he proceeds to
execute it. It assumes that the plaintiff is sane and adult, and neither
an indigent person, nor a soldier etc. It also assumes that the defen- है
dant is, similarly, sane and adult, and is not an indigent Person, a
soldier etc, Further, it assumes that the suit is not compromised,
and that, in the course of the litigation, neither party dies, becomes
insolvent, or otherwise assigns his interest in the subject matter of
the suit; and, most important of all, it assumes that the suit is not
delayed by reason of interlocutory appeals.

1-D.2, These assumptions explain the apparent simplicity of
sections 9 to 35-A, contained in this part of the Code. Moreover, most
of the important stages of the trial are left to be dealt with by rules
in the Orders contained in the First Schedule.

Section 2—Definition of “decree”

1-D.3, Section 2(2) defines the expression “decree”, In the Com-
mission’s earlier Report’ the: question ‘whether an order rejecting a
memorandum of appeal on the groundiof deficit in court-fees should
be treated as a “decree”, was considered, The Commission t
that it would‘ not be convenient to insert a provision on the eau ject
in the definition of “decree”, as there 18 no specific provision in the
body of the Code or in the rules, relating to 704 jection of a memoran-
dum of appeal (except Order 41, rule 3 ६) and (2) which deal with
rejection on the ground of éertain fotmal defects),

Recommendation

1-D.4. We appreciate the difficulty felt by the previous Com-

mission, and have, after some discussion, come to the same con-
clusion, :

Section 9

1-D.5. With reference toi section 9%, the previous Commission*
had in the earlier Report, orcasioh consider a question oleting

to religious offices. Reviewing the ¢ law, on the subject, it sta
the position as follows:— roy

y

“(i) Suits relating to religious offices to which fees are attached.
Such suits reise no difficulty.

1 27th Report, page 89, note on seetion 2).
2 ‘27th Report, pages 90.91, note om sectiong . -



19

(ii) Suits relating to religious offices to which fees are not at-
tached. These can be classified into:—

(a) offices which are attached to a sacred spot;
(b) offices which are not 39 attached,

(2) The Bombay High Court seems to have recognised a
distinction between {a) and (9) above, and the majo-
rity of the decisions’ of the High Court allow a suit for
an office under (a) above but not for an office under
(b) above.

(3) The other High Courts do not seem to recognise this
distinction”.
1-D.6. Its principal conclusion was thus expressed:
“Since the distinction made between cases (a) and (b) is

not recognised by the majority of the High Courts, it is
unnecessary to amend the section”.

1-D.7. It appears to us, however, that opportunity should be
taken of clarifying the position on the particular point about which
the Bombay view differs with that of other High Courts,

1-D.8. The general propositions stated below are not in doubt—

(1) A suit fer a declaration of religious honours and privileges
simpliciter' will not lie in-a civil court.

(2) But a suit to establish one’s right to an office in a temple,
and to honours and privileg es attached to the said office ag
its remuneration or perquisites, is maintainable in a civil
court.

(3) The essential condition for the existence of an office is that
the holder of the alleged office shall be under a legal cb-
ligation to discharge the duties attached to the said office
and for the non-obseryande of which he may be visited
with penalties.

1-B.9. The controversy is only in relation to an office not at-
tached toa sacred spat and not carrying any fees, We may illustrate
e controversy referring td a Bémbay case,” where it was held
that a suit to establish a claim to petform the Urs ceremonies as
manage the offerings can be entertained in a civil court, because,
though the offerings may be uncertain and voluntary, still, when
they are made to a particular deity, they are the property of the
temple (or shrine) concerned, and can be the subiostonather of a
civil suit. One of the reasons which the court gave in its judgment
is relevant to the present point, and may be quoted—

“Again, it is not in respect of what may be called an ‘itine-
rary’, right over a certain territory, such as formed the

है, A munber of casos were cited,
3. Kasam Khan y Rafi 7168 ALR, 1926 Bom. 161.


subjects of the suits in Madhusudan Parvat vy Shan-
karuchkarya and Sayad Nurudin v. Abas, The present
suit is in regard to a religious office attached to a shrine,
and if the distinction suggested by Mr. Mulla at page 22
of his commentary for reconciling the decisions of — this
High Court is justified, the suit is not barred”.

1-D.10. This distinction, however, does not appear to have found
favour with the other High Courts.’ In our view, the distinction is
unnecessary, and the law should be clarified so as to override the
distinction made in some of the Bombay cases.

Though the controversy relates to religious offices, the clarifica-
tion has to apply to all offices, in order to avoid the argument that
other offices are governed by any other rule.

1-D.11, Accordingly, we recommend that the following Explana-
tion should be inserted* below section 9:—

“Explanation 2.—For the purposes of explanation 1, it ig im-
material whether fees are attached to the office or not,
and whether the office is attached to a particular place
or not”.

Section 11 whether requires amendment in consequence of recom-
mendation for trial of all issues

1-D.12, It is being recommended’ that a Court must decide all
issues, even if the case can be disposed of on a preliminary point.
This necessitates a change in the provisions as to appeal. Where
the decision on the preliminary issue is favourable to the defen-
dant, and the other issues are decided againstthe defendant, then,
at present, he cannot appeal. This position is now proposed to be
changed.‘ It would appear that an express amendment of section
11 is not necessary on this point, .

1-D.18. With reference to the principle of res judicata (section
11), the Commssion in its earlier Report’ proposed its extension
to execution. Further, it stated’—

“A suggestion has been made, that an express provision
should be inserted extending: the principle of res judicata
not only to execution proceedings but to all independent
proceedings, It is considered unnecessary to make any spe-
cific provision of this nature and that, the matter should

* be left to be dealt with by the Court”.

1. Gee references in 27th Report, pages 90-01.
2, Section 9, of Explonation, to be numbered aa Explanation 1,
8, Seo discussion relating to Order 16, rule 2A.
4, See amendment ६० proposed section 90.

है. 27th Report, amendment proposed ६० 8. 47 7

6. 27th Beport, page 91, note on a. 2.


2i

1-D.14. The Commission referred to another question in these’
words—"The question whether an express provision should be made
to lay down the rule applicable in cases where cross-suits have been
filed between the same parties and have been disposed of by two
judgments, has been examined. The point is, whether, if an appeal
is filed from one judgment and is not filed from the other judgment,
the matters decided in the other judgment become res judicata, It
has been considered unnecessary to make a specific provision on this
point, as the matter should be dealt with by the courts according
to the facts of each case.”*

1-D.15. As regards the first point (applicability of section 11 to
execution and independent proceedings), we are of the view that an
express provision is desirable. As regards the second point, there
is some uncertainty. We shall deal with it later.‘

1-D.16. We recommend, therefore, that the principle of res judi-
cata should be applied to the situations of proceedings in execution
and independent proceedings, a

Recommendation to insert new section LIA

1-D.17. Accordingly, the toliowing new section is recommended—
“11A. The provisions of section 11 apply, as far as may be, to—
{a) proceeding in execution, and
(9) civil proceedings other than suits.”

Section 11 and competeace to try subsequent suit

1-D.18. Under Section 14, one of the conditions precedent for ~

applying the bar of res judicata against the trial of any suit or issue
is that the previous court must have been competent to try the
subsequent suit or the suit in which the issue is now raised. The
existence of this condition, to a certain extent, detracts from the
finality of judgments, and gives rise to a certain amount of multi-
plicity of proceedings. No doubt, the principle behind this condition
ig a sound one, namely, that the decision of a court of limited juris-
diction ought not to be final and binding on a court of unlimited
jurisdiction, in the circumstances in which the condition applies.
evertheless, it is true that if some method could be devised of
avoiding such multiplicity, the attempt would be worth the trouble.
We, therefore, set before ourselyes the task of devising such a solu-,
tion. The result of our study and discussions is given below:—

3 1-D.19. An Allahabad’ case of civil revision is: illustrative.

“The question for consideration before the High Court was
whether the decision given by a Court of Small Causes in

2Gth Report, page 91, note on tection LL.
‘ov & review of the case law, see Ast, Lackhmi v, Mr, Bgulli, ALR, 1997 Lah. 989 FB,
Warhari ¥. Shankar, (1950) 1 8.C.R. 754; ALR. 1053 8,0, 419.

. See discussion as ta 0. 41, R. 33.

Mansursl Hag v. Hakim» गज, ALR. 1990 All, 604 608 (FB. (Case Inw reviewed)

PRES RE


22

a suit for arrears of rent will operate as res judicata in a
suit filed later in the court of Munsif for the recovery of
arrears of rent for a different period and for ejectment.

1-D.20. The Court of Small Causes had no jurisdiction to enter-
tein the suit for ejectment and therefore, the latter suit had to be
filed in the Court of Munsif. The dispute between the parties in the
Court of Small Causes was about the rate of rent, whether it was
Rs. 15 or Rs, 10 per month. The Judge fixed it as Rs. 10 only. In the
subsequent suit, the plaintiff, while praying for ejectment, claimed
rent for the period preceding the second suit at Ks. 15 per month.
Therefore, the question arose whether the decision given by the
Judge of the Small Causes Court about the rate of rent will operate
as res judicata, Khare J. delivering the majority judgment, said that
one of the conditions under section 11 was that the former suit
should have been decided by a.Court competent to try such subse-

ent suit. This condition has not been satisfied as the Court of
mall Causes is not competent to try a suit for ejectment. It was
contended by counsel for the applicants that the Court of Small
Causes is a court of exclusive jurisdiction and, therefore, the gene-
ral principles of res judicata will apply. It was also further contend-
ed that when general principles of res judicata will apply, the con-
dition that the court deciding the former proceeding must also be
competent to decide the subsequent syit has to be waived*

1-D.21. It was held that the Court of Small Causes was not to
be a Court of exclusive jurisdiction, but merely a court of preferen-
tial jurisdiction, in view of the scheme of the Provincial Small
Causes Courts Act and section 15, C.PC. In the absence of a Court
of Small Causes, the Court of Munsif*hes the jurisdiction to enter-
tain and decide suits for the recovery. of rent. Therefore, the deci-
sion of the Small Causes Court will not bar re-agitation of the same
question in the subsequent suit, which the court of Small Causes
was not competent to try.

1-D.22. Tripathi J. in his dissénting judgment, held that the
Court of Small Causes exercises exclusive jurisdiction. Following a
Supreme Court case, he helé that जा the general principles of res
judicata, a previous decision on a majter in controversy, decided
after full contest, will operate as res jtidicata in a subsequent regu
lar suit irrespective of the fact whether the Court deciding the matter
formerly had or had not been competent to decide the subsequent
suit, Therefore, Tripathi J. held that the decision of the Judge of
Small Causes Court operated as res judicata.

1-D.23. The Supreme Court’ has cotsidered the question whether
the word “suit” in section 11 ¢an be liberally construed to mean even
a part of the suit. It was urged that if the competence of the earlier
court is going to be judged by reference to its competence to try
the entire suit as subsequently instituted, then in many cases where

1, Raj Latshmni Desi v. Banamali See, A.LR. 1953 83.0. 38, relied on.
2. Gulab Chand Chhote Lal v. State of Gujarat, ALR. 1965 8.0, 1158,
9. Gulab Bai v Manphool Bai, ALB, 102.500. के, बात,


98

the matter directly and substantially in issue had been tried bet-
ween the parties by the earlier court, it may have to be tried again
in 8 subsequent suit, because the earlier court had no jurisdiction
to tr ythe subsequent suit havng regard to its pecuniary jurdisdic-
tion and that this wohld be anomaolus. It was held—“The world
‘suit? has mot been defined in the Code; but there can be little
doubt that in the context the plain and grammatical meaning of
the word would include the whole of the suit and not a part of the
suit, so that giving the word ‘suit’ its ordinary meaning it would
be difficult to accept the argument that a part of the suit or an issue
in a suit is intended to be covered by the said word in the material
clavse. The argument that there should be finality of decisions and
that a person should not be vexed twice over with the same cause
can have no material bearing on the construction of the word ‘suit’.
Besides, if considerations of anomaly are relevant it may be urged

in support of the literal construction of the word ‘suit’ that the *

finding recorded on a material issue by the court of the lowest
jurisdiction is intended not to bar the trial of the same issue in a
subsequent suit filed before a court of unlimited jurisdiction, To
hold otherwise would itself introduce another kind of anomaly.”

1-D.24. Therefore, ihe suggestion that the word ‘suit’ should be
liberally construed was not accepted, In other words, it is the whole
of the suit which snould be within the competence of the court at
the earlier time, and not a part of it,

1-D.25. Of course, if the earlier court was a court of exclusive
jurisdiction-~such as, a revenue court on matters within its compe
tence—its decision would be res judicata.’

1-D.26. The position is substantially the same in England in
this respect,

1.D.27. Diplock L. J. explained the doctrine of res judicate* in
these terms—

“The doctrine ot issue estoppel in civil proceedings is of
fairly recent and sporadic. development, though none the
worse for that. Although Hoystead v. Taxation Commissio-
ner did not purport to break new ground, it can be re-
garded as the starting poiut of the modern common law
doctrine, the application of which to different kinds of
civil actions is currently being worked out in the courts.
This doctrine, so far as it affects civil proceedings, may
be stated thus: a:party to eivil proceedings is not entitled
to make, as against the other party, an assertion whether
of fact or of the legal consequences of facts, the correct-
nesg of which is avi essential element in his cause of action
or defence, if the same assertion was an essential element
in hig previous cause of action or defence in previous civil
proceedings between the same parties or their predeces-
sors in title and was found by a court of competent juris-
diction in such previous civil proceedings to be incorrect,

1, Bahoant Singh v, Sqravij, A... 1927 All. 7 pee B.
2, Mille v. Cooper (1967) 2 AL TAR. 108, ae



44

Ee Bes
unless further material which is relevant to the correet-
ness or incorrectness of the assertion and could not by
reasonable diligence have been adduced by that party in
the previous proceedings has since become available nite
him. Whatever may be said of other rules of law to which
the label of ‘estoppel’ is attached, ‘issue estoppel’ is not a
tule of evidence. True, subject to the qualification which I
have stated, it has the effect of preventing the party ‘es-
topped’ from calling evidence to show that the assertion
which is the subject of the ‘issue estoppel’ is incorrect,
but this is because the existence of the issue estoppel re-
sults in there being no issue in the subsequent civil pro-
ceedings to which such evidence would be relevant, Issue
estoppel is a particular application of the general rule of
public policy that there should be finality in litigation.”
1-D.28. In the leading case uf Duchess of Kingston', Degrey, C. J.
observed—

“From the variety of cases relative to judgments being given
in evidence in civil suits, these two deductions seem to
follow as generally true; first, that the judgment of a
court of concurrent jurisdiction directly upon this point
is as a plea, a bar or as evidence, conclusive, between the
same parties upon the same matter, directly in question
in another court; secondly, that the judgment of a court
of exclusive jurisdiction directly upon the point is in like
manner, conclusive upon the same matter, betwfen the
same parties, coming in incidentally in question in ano-
ther court for a different purpose. But neither judgment
of a tribunal of concurrent or exclusive jurisdiction is
evidence of any matter which came collecterally in ques-
tion, though within their jurisdiction, nor of any matter
incidentally cognizable, nor of any matter to be inferred
by argument from ‘the judgment”.

Lack of jurisdiction

_,/-D.29, In order that estoppel by record may arise out of a4 En-
glish judgment, the court which pronounced the judgment must
have had jcrisdiction to do so." The lack of jurisdiction deprives the
judgment cf any effect, whether by estoppel or otherwise.* Thus, a
magistrate hearing a summons' for the expenses of making up a new
street,’ or for trespass to land,* and having jurisdiction for that pur-
pose, may dismiss the summons on the express ground {in the one
ह tase) that the street was repairable by the inhabitants, or (in the other

1. ‘The Duchess of Kingslon'a case, (1776) 168° E.R. 1760, Cookley ढक aad छा, 1780; Cookle, Cases and Statutes
Evidenno, (1963), pages 129, 180,
. Of. Rorenfeld ¥. Newman, (1983) 2 All E.R. 885 (C.A.).
+ (a) Rogers v. wood, (1831), 2 B. & Ad. 245,
(0) Archbishop of Dublin v. Lord Trimleston, (1849), 12 I, Eq. R. 152.
4, Under the Pablic Health Act, 1875.

a fee से, wv. Hudehings, (1881) 6 Q.B.D. 300 (0.4.); followed in Scoot v. Lowe, (1902) $6 L.T.

6, A.G. for Trinidad and Tabago y. Brieka, (L848) A.O. 818 (P.C.),

हा]


25

that the defendant had established a title to the praperty; but
though such a finding is embodied in the order as drawn up, it
creates no estoppel between the parties, for it relates to a matter
which the magistrate had no jurisdiction directly and immediate-
ly to adjudicate upon, being at most incidentally cognizable, so
far only as necessary to his decision on the actual question sub-
mitted’.

1-D.30. It appears that the problem is one which is inherent
in the co-existence of courts of limited and unlimited jurisdiction.
The problem, however, can be solved if a court of limited jurisdic-
tion is required to submit the case to the district court—which is
a court of unlimited jurisdiction—whenever the former is satisfied
that the suit involves a question of such a nature that if a suit had
been brought for relief based principally on that question, the court
would have been incompetent to try the suit. What we have stated
above may appear to be rather abstract, and we shall, therefore,
deal with the matter more elaborately.

1-D.31. H, for example, a court ef Munsiff or a Junior Civil
Judge trying a suit for rent is faced with the question of title,
which, having regard to the value of the immovable Property is
beyond his pecuniary jurisdiction, then he should stay the trial,
and refer the case to the district court, which will transfer the suit
to another court competent to decide the question of title

Recommendation

न
1-D.32. In the light of what is stated above, we recommend the
insertion of a new section as follows:—

To insert new section 23 A.

“RBA. (1) Where any court subordinate to the district Court
is satisfied that a suit pending before it and within its
jurisdiction involves a question of the nature referred
to in sub-section (2), the determination of which is neces-
sary for the disposal of the case, the Court shall stay the
proceedings and submit the case, with a brief report ex-
plaining its nature, to the district Court,
The question referred to in sub-section (1) is a question of
such 9 nature that if a suit had been brought for relief
based principally on that question, the Court would have
been incompetent to try the suit.
(3) Where a case is submitted under sub-section 1) te e
district Court, the district Court shall, after notice to the

parties and after hearing such of them as desire to be
heard—

(a) transfer the suit for trial to any Court subordinat
to it and competent to tty the suit referred to in sub-
section (2), or

(b) withdraw the suit to itself and try it,

1. Cf. Dover v. Child, (1876), 1 Ex, D.12 (magutsates real गया ,
goods ig under the Metrapolitan Police Courts Act, 1839 (2 anda Vice, wen पम्प न
adjudication om title which ho las no juristiction to make); Ke क्र आल पद
(1882) 2. ९.8 S87 CLA. एल of roveiving order no adjudication on the Gekan og ied
in King v. Henderson, (1998) A.C. 720, 9.0, at page 740, 7 aPP
LBD) 220MofLISCA

(2



26

(4) Where any svit has been transferred or withdrawn under
sub-section (3), the Court which thereafter tries such
suit may, subject to any special direction in the case of
an order of transfer, either-re-try it or proceed from the
point at which it was transferred or withdrawn.

(5) For the purposes or this section, courts of Additional and
Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to
the district Court. .

(6) The Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under
this section from a Court of Small Causes shall, for the
punposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small
Causes,

(7) The district Court shall cause a copy of such order to be
sent to the court by which the case is submitted”,

5
Section 11—Explanation 2 ‘
1-D.33. According to the Explanation 2 to section 11, for the pur-
poses of this section, the competence of a court shall be determined
irrespective of any provisions as to a right of appeal from the deci-
sion of such Court. It is necessary to examine the back-ground of
this Explanation.

1-D.34, The reasons why the judgment of a court of record acts
as an ostop pel are, that it is against public policy and oppresive
on the individual to re-agitate disputes which have been litigated
once for all to finish.’

1-D.35. It has been stated in England’ that ‘matrimonial cases
apart, a decision of an inferior court: will operate as an estoppel in
the High Court but the decision must be one from which there was
an appeal, i

1,.D.36. Again, it was stated by Savigny* that “everything that
should have the authority of res judiogta is, and ought to be, subject
to appeal." and reciprocally in appeal tis not admissible on any point
not having the authority of res judicata”.

1-D.37. The history. of the second Explanation to séction 11 is
interesting. Before 1908, there was a‘ conflict of views in India on
the question whether a judgment from which no second appeal lay
to the High Court was res judicata, Spme High Courts held that the.
earlier suit operates as ves judicata, op the ground that requirement
of the section was satisfied when the: Court deciding the first. suit
was competent to try the subsequent shit, irrespective of the question
whether the earlier decision was ८2५4 as not subject ta the same
appeal as the decision in the subse suit would be, and that @
dferent interpretation would be straining the language of the le
gislature. Some High Courts, on the bther hand, took the opposite

1. Spencer Bower, Res Judicots, page 2 cited in Phipson, Maat of Law of Evidence, (1959)

page 84, 89,
. (22206 ¥. doncha, [1896] 11 App. 058. 541 referred to in Croae on Hvidence (1987),
5.

27

A Saviguy, System, sectiva 203, cited in Answtahen v. Satharom, (1888) LL.
$64, 468 (West, ०). “ee 1868) LL-R. 7 Bom



27

view, and considered that the words “or jurisdiction...competent”
in the section admitted of the provisions of law relating to appelabi-
lity being considered in giving effect to the principle of estoppel
which the section is intended te enforce; and that, having regard
to the difference in the grades of the Courts administering justice
in this country and the qualifications of Judges which differ greatly
it was better not to tie down, as far as possible, a court of -higher
jurisdiction by the decisions of inferior Courts.’

1-D.38_ The legislature, when it revised the Code in 1908, inserted
the second Explanation in section 11, and, in effect, adopted the wider
view,

1-D.39, The second Explanation was, thus, intended to remove
doubts arising in a particular class of cases as to the applicability
of the section, when judgment had been given in a suit against
which no appeal or no second appeal lay, and the question arose
whether such judgment could operate as rés judicata,

1-D.40, The effect of the change made in 1908 is illustrated
by post 1908 cases, It is sufficient to refer to one case.

1-D.41. In an Allahabad case,’ a suit had been brought to recover
damages on account of the fruit of a grove. The suit was dismissed
on the ground that the plaintiff had failed to prove his title to the
grove, There was no second appe: peal in the case, as the suit was one
of-a nature cognizable by a t of Small Causes,

It was held that a subsequent suit between the same parties for
the recovery of possession of the grove and damages was barred by
reg judicata, The fact that the previous decision was not subject to
second appeal was immaterial, in view of second Explanation to sec-
ion 11,

Recommendation

1-D.42, In view of the above background of the second Explana-
tion to.section 11, the Explanation should be retained,

Section 15A (proposed)--Objections as to the pecuniary jurisdiction

1-D.424, It often happens that the judgment of a Court which
has tried a suit is challenged in apy or revision on the ground that
the Court had no चमक 4 गा ८14 न that is to say, the Court
wag not competent to try the » waiving regard to the value of the
subject matter of the suit. (The limits of pecuniary jurisdiction of
various courts are set out in the Civil Courts Act of the State con-
cerned). We are of the view that im! the interests of expedition the
Code of Civil Procedure should ¢onthin a provision, similar to that
contained in the section’ relating to ‘objections as to place of suing,
to the effect that objections as tegards pecuniary jurisdiction should
be raised at the earliest opportunity, and (even if so, taken) should
not prove fatal unless there has been!a consequent failure of justice,

1. Bee Avanasi Goundes v. Nachaminal, (1908) ILL.R. 29 Mad. 195-199 (reviews 0७४९४),
2, Musaddi Lely. Jwala Prasad, 16 1,0, 406 (Allshabad) (Chamier, dy.
3 Section 21.

LjB(D)MofLI&04


as

While we recognise that there is a distinction between territorial
competence and pecuniary competence, we have, iter some discus-
sion, come ta the conclusion that any theoretical basis tnt may exist
for the present position should be regarded as over-tidden by the
paramount consideration of avoiding delay.

Recommendation

1-D.42B. Accordingly, we recommend that the following section
should be inserted after section 15:—

“454. No objection as to the competence of a court with refe-
rence to the pecuniary limits of its jurisdiction shall be
allowed by any. appellate or revisional court unless such
abjection was taken in the court of first instance at the
earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues
are settled af or before such settlement and unless there
has been a consequent failure of justice”.

Section 20 and suits against the Government

1-D.43, The next section which we have to discuss is section 20,
which deals with forum. In connection with suits against the Gov-
ernment, questions of forum sometimes present difficulty, because the
Government has no “residence”, and the question how far the Gov-
ernment can be said to “carry on, kusiness” is one which, for a long
time, engaged the attention of courts.’ It will be more convenient,
from the practical point of view, if the place of the plaintiff's resi-
dence is treated as a proper forum, in case cf suits against the Gov-
ernment, in addition to the forum permitted under the existing
provisions. There will be no hardship to the Government.

1-0.44. In connection with the forum fer suits against the Gov-
ernment, it would be of interest to note that in the. U.S.A, the pleia-
tiffs residence constitutes the forum, The relevant provision’ is
as follows:— ‘ .

“g, 1402, United States as defendant—

(a) Any civil action against’ the! United States under sub-sec-
tion (8) of section 1346 of this title’ may be prosecuted only
in the judicial district where the plaintiff resides,

(b) Any civil action on a tort claim agains: the United States
“un der sub-section (9) of section 1346 of this title' may be
prosecuted only in the judicial district where the plaintiff
resides or wherein the act or omission complained of

occurred.” np ,

1. 27th Report, pages 94-06, note on acotion.20, and anita against the Governnient.

2, 28 0.8, Code, 1402. . , . .

3, Title 28, 5. 1346 (a) of U.S. Coderelates to vaflour‘suits in the district nourts of the US.
against the Government for monay wrongfully collected as tax eto. The jurisdiction is
gancarront with the Court of Claims.

4, Title 24, a. 1346 (b) of U.S, Code relates to Civil Claims against the United States in the
district Conrt not exceeding 10,000 dollars, founded upon the Constitution, federal iaw.
ov regulation, contract ete, . .



29

Recommendation

1-D.45. While it is not necessary to confine the forum only to
the plaintiff's residence (as has been done in the rule in the U.S.A.
quoted above), that should constitute an additional forum. We,
therefore, recommend that the following clause should be inserted
in section 2

“(bb) or, in the case of a suit against the Government, the
plaintiff, or any of the plaintiffs, if there be more than
one, resides, carries on business or personally works for
gain.”

Section 20—Explanations

1-D.46. There is another point concerning Section’ 20 (forum for
suits other than those relating to immovable property). Broadly
speaking, under the section, the forum is the place where the defen-
dant actually and voluntarily resides, carrics on business or per-
sonally works for gain, or where the cause of action arises in whole
or in part. There are two Explanations annexed to the section, quoted
below:

“Explanation I—Where a person has permanent dwelling at
ove place, and also a temporary residence at another place.
he shall be deemed to reside at both places in respect of
any cause of action arising at the place where he has
Such temporary residence,

Explanation IIZ—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on
business at its sole or principal office in India or, in res-
pect of any cause of action arising at any place where it
has also a subordinate office, at such place.”

1-D.47, Both the Explanations prima facie appear fo be obscure
and redundant, and one of them suffers from a drafting flaw algo,
2s is.shown below,

1-D.48. First. we discuss Explanation I. If a person has a perma-
nent dwelling and a temporary résidence-at different places, the first
Explanation provides that he shatl be deemed ‘to reside’ at both
places, in respect of any cause of action arising at the temporary
residence, Now, it is not clear whether this Explanation is intended
to expand the scope of the main part of the section or to limit the
scope of the main part of the section. Under the main part, a suit
can be filed either where the defendant “actually and voluntarily"
resides or carries: on business. or perspnally works for gain, or where
the cause of action arises in whole or in part. If the object of the
Explanation is to indicate that temporary residence is enough to give
jurisdiction. then the further requirement as to the cause of action
is not intelligible, because the place where the cause of action arises
is the proper forum even under the main part, and the Explanation
gives no additional forum. Tf, on the other hand. the object of the
Explanation is to give jurisdiction to the court of permanent dwell-
ing, even then the requirement as to cause of action renders the
Explenation useless, st



Bo

1-D.49. There is also a drafting flaw, imasmuch as while the main
part of the section is in terms of “actually and voluntarily resides”,
the fiction created by the Explanation extends only to “resides”. In
other words, the Explanation is not in total harmony with the main
part,

1-D.50. If the object of the Explanation is to limit the operation -

of the main part as regards a place of temporary residence, then the
Explanation fails to carry out that object clearl¥ for, under the main
part, even a temporary residence would sufficé, and the 1 पट
does not indicate in definite terms that a temporary qpsidence shall
not suffice. an

1-D.51. The Explanation could, no doubt, be made more intelli.
gible by removing the requirement of the cause of action, and by
providing that the place of permanent dwelling is also a place where
the defendant is deemed to “actually end voluntarily” reside etc.,
notwithstanding that the permanent dwelling place is not his actual
residence. But, as a matter of policy, this is to be avoided. If the
permanent dwelling is an abandoned home and is a “dwelling” only in
name, there is no reason why it should constitute a possible forum.
The only course left, therefore, is to delete the first Explanation,
because it is redundant as it stands now, and cannot, by any modi-
fication, be made to perform a useful function.

1-D.52. We now turn to the secand Explanation. The first part
of the Explanation is, no doubt, useful, since, where a corporation
has its main office at any place (in India), it is to be deemed to
carry on its business there, irmespective (0 of the nature of the work
that is actually carried on there. But thle latter part of the second
Explanation is otiose. Tf no part of the cause of action arises at the
place of the branch office, the corporation « cannot, as the wording now
stands, be said to transact busihess at the place.' In the presence of
clause (c), the purpose of the se¢ond pf Explanation 2 is obscure."
Where the suit is instituted at a pl Wee where a_ corporation has a
subordinate office, the court cannot nse with the requirement
that the cause of action must arise ce ch a place.” If no part of
the cause of action arises at a branch: 0] of the corporation, a suit
is not maintainable in the court of that place.‘ The latter part of the
second Explanation, therefore, serves no useful purpose.

1-D.53. The matter was discussed at length in the earlier Report*
also, but no change in the wortling df the section was suggested.

1-D.54. We are of the view that: as!regards Explanation 2, the
latter half should be deleted. There Pie ip our view, a case for pro-
viding, as a forum, the place ‘wher¢ re is a subordinate office,
irrespective of the question whether it istalso the place of accrual of
1, Bhola Nath v. Empire of India Life Inanwtce Co, ALB. 1948 Lah, 56, 57, paragraph

16 (reviews casea).
2. Bharat Fasurater Co. v. Wasudeo, A.LR. 1966 Nag 203, 204, para 7 (reviews 0४७९४).
3. Biarat Insuvatce Co, v. Wasudeo, ALB. 1966 Nog 203, 204, pare 8.
4. Nadungati Bank Lid. २. Coral Bank of India 212, 4 TR. 1961 Ker. 50.
5. 27th Report, pages 92 to 94. note orf Beoti@as i

=
mormon


3l

the couse of action. The present restriction, as was stated in the
Nagpur case.’ causes hardship. (That case related to the business of
insurance, but the hardship is common to all cases dealing with
corporations).

1-D.55. It was stated in the Nagpur case—

“Tt is much to be regretted that an insurance company should
not be amenable to the jurisdiction of the court at the
place where it maintains a subordinate office irrespective
of any question about the accrual of cause of action. But
few policy holders realise the implications of the forms of
the contract prepared by the insurance companies which,
though operating all over the country by receiving pro-
posals and premiums through their various subordinate
offices, carefully undertake to pay only at the head office
situated in many cases far away from the policy holder
or his assignee or nominee.”

1-D.56. The observations, though made with reference to insu-
rance business, apply equally to corporations carrying on other busi-
ness also,

1-D.57. It may be noted that in the U.S.A. the rule applicable
(in federal courts) as to venue generally.’ after providing that the
defendant's residence constitutes the forum in “non-diversity” cases,
oes on to enact as follows: — “

“(c) A corporation may be sued in any judicial district in
which it is incorporated or licensed to do business, and
such judicial district shall be regarded as the residence of
such corporation for venue purposes.

(d) An alien may be sued in any district.”

1-D.58. The suggestion made above would not, therefore, be
novel, -

‘ 1-D.59. The amendment suggested may appear to be giving a
very wide forum. But, in practice, the suit will be fled only where
some relationship exists between the subordinate office and the
plaintiff.

Recommendation
1-D.60, In the result, our recommendation is as follows—
(a) the first Explanation to section 20 should be deleted;

(b) the second Explanation should be modified so as to read
as follows:—
“Explanation—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on husi-

ness at its sole or principal office in India and also at any place in
India where it hos a subordinate office.”

"1, Biarnt Invuratee Co. ¥. Wasudeo, ALR.
2. 38 ए,8. Code 1931. i



32

Section 20(c) and proposed Explanation 3

1-D.61. Under section 20(c), a suit can be filed where the cause
of action arises wholly or in part. As a general rule, it is well settled
that in the case of a suit on contract the cause of action arises in
part where the contract is to be performed. The place of performance
of a contract depends on the terms of the contract. The contract Act
has only une provision’ as to place of performance which, however,
does ust solye the problem of forum.

1-D.62. Now, in respect of payment of debts, a controversy as
to the place where the debt is to be repaid has arisen. So far as the
Code of Civil Procedure is concerned, this controversy has assumed
this form, namely—how far is the English rule that the debtor must
find the creditor, to be invoked for the purpose of giving competence
३0 a court having jurisdiction at the place where the creditor resides
or carries on business?

1-D.63. The Calcutta® view is, that the English rule on the subject
{referred to above) applies to determine the forum. The Bombay
view also is that the English rule applies.

1-D.64. The Punjab yview* is that it does not.

1-D.65. The Madras High Court’ has held that the English maxim
has to be applied with the modifications pointed out judicially in
several cases.

1-D.66. In this state of case-law, it would be desirable to make
a Clarification to the effect that. in the absence of a term in the
contract to the contrary. in a suit fot recovery of money the cause
of action should be deemed to arise in part at the place where the
person to whom the money is due resides.

Recommendation

1-D.67. Accordingly. we recommend that the following Explane-
tion should be added as Explanation 3 to section 20—

“Explanation 3—In a suit for recovery -of money, based on
contract, the cause of action ghall, in the absence of a
term in the contract tothe contrary, be deemed to arise
in nart at the vlace where the person to whom the money
is due ordinarily resides, carries on business or personally
works for, gain.”

1, Section 48, Indian Contract Act, 1872.
2. (a) State of Punjod v, A.N. Raha, ALR, 1964 Cal, 418,
By 8, छ,0, Engineering Co. v. Union of Indta, A.T.R. 1966 8.0. 259, 244, para 9.
3. Bharwmal v. Sakbawatmeal, 41.8. 1956 Bom. 111, 112, para 3, (00820 C.J. and Dixit J.),
4. Hizalal Girdharilal v, Baijrath, ALR. 1960 Punj. 450 (F-B,).
8. 6. Venbatesha v. M's. Kamlapat, ATR, 1987 Mad. 201, 206.

Perens


33

Section 21 and execution

1-D.68. Al present, section 21, which saves irregularities as to
iocal jurisdiction, deals only with objections as to the place of suing.
The section does not apply to execution proceedings, that is lo say,
where an attack is sought to be made on the validity of the execulion
proceedings themseives on the ground that they had been held in
the wreng court.

1-D.69. Now, the principle on which section 21 is based, namely,
that no objection as to the local jurisdiction of a court can be raised
except as provided in the section, has been held to apply to execu-
tion proceedings in a number of decisions. Thus, as has been noted
in the earlier Report,’ it has been held thet the defect of jurisdic
tion arising by reason of the transfer of an area pending execution
proceedings, does not vitiate those proceedings. It has also been
held, that after sale, an application to set aside the sale on the
ground that the court had lost territorial jurisdiction. could not be
made, and that such objection, if not taken at the earliest oppor-
tunity, cannot be raised subsequently. t

1-D.70. The Commission, in its Report on the Code, also noted
that the only case taking an apparently contrary view was a Madras
one. The Commission, however, did not recommend any amend-
ment on the point, as it considered that no express provision was
necessary and that in most cases. courts would apply the principle
of section 21 to execution also.

Recommendation

1-D.71. We have corisidered this question, and are of the view
that in order to avoid delay in execution, objections as to the terri-
torial competence of a court executing a decree, shoutd be dis-
allowed. and that to achieve this purpose an express provision on
the subject should be inserted. Such an amendment would avoid
the possibility of such objections being raised unnecessarily. The
following new section is accordingly recommended:

“293A. No objection as to the competence of the executing court
with reference to the local limits of its jurisdiction shall be allowed
by any appellate or revisional court unless such objection was taken
in the executing court at the earliest possible opportunity and un-
less there has been a consequent failure of justice.”

Section 23-A New

1-D.72, We have suggested separately? a rew section requiring
a court with limited jurisdiction te refer the case to the district
court in certain situations.

Accordingly, a new section as recommended there, may be in-
serted.

Section 24 and transfer from court not competent
1-D.73. On the suestion whether scction 24 anplies where the

transfer is from an incompetent court, a conflict of decisions has
arisen.

1. 27th Report, pages 05-96, Note an Section 21 and execution.
2. See diseuseion relating to aection 11,



34

1D.74, This is illustrated by a recent Andhra case’ The suit
was for a permanent injunction restraining the several defendants
from interfering with the plaintiff's enjoyment of properties men-
tioned in Schedules A, B & C of the plaint. The ‘A’ Schedule pro-
perties were in the Nizamabad District, while ‘B’ and 'C’ Schedules
properties were in the Guntur District. Defendants 1 to 4 were
resident in the Nizamabad District, while defendants 5 to 6 in the
Guntur District. A single suit was laid against all the defendants.
Defendant 4 filed this application under section 24, for transfer of
this suit from the Guntur court to the Nizamabad court, alleging
that the suit had been laid at Guntur with the only object of
harassing the defendant. Counsel for the plaintiff raised a prelimi-
nary objection that the application under section 24 was not main-
tainable, as the petitioner had raised an objection, regarding the
jurisdiction of the Court at Guntur. He contended that section 24
authorised transfer of a case from one competent court to another
competent Court, but not from a Court which had no jurisdiction
to entertain it. ,

It was held by the Andhra Pradesh High Court that “The lan-
guage of section 24, Civil Procedure Code is very wide, and there
are no restrictions or impediments in the way of the High Court
exercising the power of transfer merely because there is a dispute
regarding jurisdiction.”

1-D.75, A similar view has been taken by some other High

Courts,’ while some High Courts have taken a contrary view.’

1-D.76, It is obviously desirable to flarify the position. In our
opinion, it is better to adopt the wider view, in the interests of
expedition, ‘

-

Recommendation

1-D.77. Accordingly, we recommend that the following Explana-
tion should be added to section 24—
“Explanation—A case may be transferred under this section
from a Court which has no jurisdiction to try it.”

Section 24 and execution proceedings

1-D.78. Section’ 24 deals with the transfer of cases. With refe-
rence to the applicability of this section to execution proceedings,
there is a controversy, which was cdnsidered in the earlier Report
on the Code The Commission ‘noted’ ver Caleutta High Court
had taken the view that execution pri lings are not covered,’

7, वा, Reddy र. M. Rao and offers, A.LR. 1970 4.2, 104,
2, (a) Dafiry v. Duia, ALR. 1055 Nog. 44,
() Narain Dns र. Rhunné Lal, ALR. 1934 All. 562.
3. (a) (Gangumal v. Neniaram, A.LR. 1932 Bind 215;
(6) Krishaaji Rao v. Cokuldas, A..1.R. 1955 Mys. 115.
4. 27th Report, pages 98-99, note on section 24 and gxeoution proceedings,
8. Ranjit Kumar v. Gaur Hori Nether, ALR: 1988 Cal, 17,



35

by section 24. But other courts had taken a different view,’ as the
Commission added.

1-D.79. The Commission, however, considered a clarification un-
necessary, in view of the decisions of other High Courts.

1-D.80. We have, after a fresh examination of the subject, come
to the conclusion that 8 clarification is useful. We therefore, recom-
mend that the foilowing explanation* should be added to section
24(1): — हर

“Explanation—in this section, ‘proceeding’ includes a proceed-
ing’ for @xecution.”

Section 28 and summons sent to another court in another State.

1-D.81. In its earlier Report,’ the Commission noted that a sug-
gestion had been made that when a summon is sent for execution to
a court in another State, the return thereon should be. made or trans-
lated in English, so that the Court which issued the summons may
be able to understand the action taken on the summons. The Com-
mission was of the view that this matter could be dealt with by
appropriate provision in the General Civil Rules and Orders in
force in each State, without any amendment of the Civil Procedure

ode.

Recommendation

1-D.82. We, however, think it desirable to make a provision of
the above nature. Its utility is obvious. Accordingly, we recommend
that the following sub-section should be added in section 28—~

4(3) Where the ianguage of the summons is different from the
language of the record refetred to in subsection (2), a
translation of the record in English shall also be sent to-
gether with the record sent under that sub-section.”

Section 35-B (New) (Costs for delay oecasioned by party)

1-D.83, It often happens that a party. though successful in the
event, has been responsible for undue delay in respect of
particular stages of litigation. It is but fair that such delay should
be taken into account while awarding césts. In order to elicit opinion
on the subject, we had put a question‘ in the Questionnaire as
follow ; —

“1. Would you favour the insertion of a provision to the effect
that the court shall, while passtng an order for costs, make
the party responsible for delay with reference to any step
in the litigation, pay the cost proportionate to that delay,
whatever may be the ultimate event of the suit.”

1a) Mohammad Habibullah प्र. Tikam Chand, A.LB. 1925 All. 276.
(b) Nasservanji ५. Kharaedji, LL.B, 22 Bom. 778.
te) Rajagopaia २. Turuphiia, LIK. 49 Mad. 748; A.1.R. 1926 Mad, 421
(48) Fielding v. Jankidas & Sons, A.1.R. 1926, Lah, 4659

2. This is apart from the provision in sections 38, 39.

3. 27th Report, page 99 note on section 28,

4. Qssetion 1.



36

1-D.84. This question has led to a sharp difference of opinion.
The replies received could be classified into three broad categories,
namely, (i) those favouring the suggested amendment, (ii) those op
posed to it, and (iii) those accepting it in a modified form, e.g. those
which would leave the matter to the discretion of the court rather
than insert a mandatory provision.

1-D.85. Opinion is almost equally divided between the first two
categories, only a few repiies fayouring an amendment with a modi-
fication. Those who are in favour of the amendment posed in the
question, regard it as a desirable one in order to check dilatory tac-
tics. It has been stated that solvent partics often resort to that dila-
tory tactics to cripple the opposite party, or a party with a bad case
tries to delay the matter." It has further been pointed out that a good
slice of litigation is aimcd at delaying the relief to which the oppo-
site party is entitled.* One of the replies adds that the payment of
costs of adjournment should be made a condition precedent to the
teking of the next step in the litigation, i.e. the step for the purpose
of which the adjournment has been granted to the party against
whom the costs are awarded.

1-D.86. The replies which are opposed to the suggested provision
base their opposition on a variety of grounds; for example, it has
been stated that such a provision would be unworkable and would
create confusion, and much time will be spent in assessing who was
responsible for a particular delay.’ It is also stated that since ad-
jovrnments are granted by a judicial order, it would not be correct
to make a mandatory provision of the nature contemplated.’ One
of the replies adds’ that the court hrs, even nnw, a power to award
costs where the delay is due to frivolous application or due to a
deliberate omission 07 negligence in the prosecution of the action.
Lastly, it has been suggested that such 8 provision will not reduce
delay, Delay, it is stated, is caused by applications for adjournment
or applications for time to file affidavits and the like etc., and these
applications are dealt with by the court and separately provided for.

1-D.87. Some of the replies favour a modified amendment which
would, while drawing the attention of the court to the need to con«
sider this aspect, leave the matter to the discretion of the Court"

1-D.88, The above general difference of opinion is reflected in
the replies received from the High Courts. Thus, some High Courts
favour the suggested amendment,” some are opposed to it, while
in some of the High Courts, there is a difference of opinion among
the ind‘vidual jndges" of that High Court.

1. 8. No. 10 (A State Government).
2, 9. No. 25 (A Hizh Court Judge).
3. 8. Nn, 28 (4 High Court Judge).
4. 3. २०. 28 (A High Court Judge),
5S.
6.
7.

LT (A High Court Judge).
16 (A High Court Judge).

8 No. 12 (A High Court Judge).

8, 8. No, 24 (A few Hich Court Judges),
9, 8. Nos, Sand 25,

10, 8, Nox. 11, 12 and 15.

17, 8, Nos, 16 and 23.



है

37

1.D.89. We have taken into consideration the opinions expres-
sed. We have come to the conclusion that while it may not be wise
to have a rigid provision, it would be useful to give a discretion to
the court to take into account such delay. This should at least have
the utility of focussing attention on this_ aspect.

Recommendation
1-D.90, Accordingiy we recommend that the following. section
should be inserted in the Code—

“95-B, The Court may, while passing an order fer cosis, make
the party responsible for delay with rejerence to any step
in the litigation, poy the costs proportionate to that delay,
whatever may be the ultimate event of the suit.”


Cuaprer 1-E
EXECUTION

Introductory

1-E.1. In the body of the Code, sections 36 to 74 deal with the
subject of execution of decrees and orders. Here again, the detailed
provisions are left to the rules. The important matters dealt with
in the body of the Code are:—

the Courts by which decrees will be executed, questions for
the court executing the decree, the modes of executing
decrees, conditions for arrest, the liability of legal repre-
sentatives, property exempt from attachment, and com-
petition between rival decree-holders (rateable distribu-
tion),

Section 51 (c) Arrest in execution

1-E.2. Section 91(८) of the, Code of Civil Procedure authorises
execution of a decree “by arrest and detention in prison”. There are
certain limitations, however, on this mode of execution imposed
by several provisions, to be presently noticed. The question to be
considered is, whether this mode of execution should be retained
on the statute book, particularly in view of the provision in the In-
ternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights prohibiting
imprisonment for a mere non-performance of contract.

Limitation on arrest in execation

1-E.3. The existing limitations applicable to execution by arrest
must be stated at the outset—

(a) First, a woman cannot be arrested in execution of a decree
for the payment of money.*

(b) Secondly, even in the case of men, where the decree is
for the payment of money, its execution by detention in
prison is subject to important substantive safeguards.’

The proviso to section 51 is as follows: —

“Provided that, where the decree is for the payment of money,
execution by detention in prison shall not be ordered unless, after
giving the Judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why
he should not be committed to~prigson, the Court, for reasons record-
ed in writing is satisfted—

{a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of
obstructing or delaying the execution of the decree—
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the

jurisdiction of the Court, or

1, Bection 56.
2. Seation 51, proviso.

~~


(ii) has, after the institution cf the suit in which the
decree was passed dishonestly transferred, conceal-
ed, or removed any part of his property, or commit-
ted any other act of bad faith in relation to his
property or

(9) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date
of the decree, means to pay the amount of the decree or
some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or
has refused or negiected to pay the same, or

(०) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment-
debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to account.

“Explanation—In the calculation of the means of the judgment-
debtor for the purposes of clause (0), there shall be left out of ac-
count ay property which, by or under any law or custom having
the force of law for the time being in force, is exempt from attach-
ment in execution of the decree.”

The proviso (with the Explanation) was inserted by the amend-
ment of 1936, Detention in civil prison cannot now be ordered as a
matter of course, but only on fulfilment of the conditions in the
Proviso, The object behind the amendment, it has been stated, is
to protect indigent but honest debtors.‘ Corresponding alterations
in procedure were made (in 195), 409 Order 21, Rules 37 and 40.

(c) Thirdly, there is a procedural safeguard constituted by
the elaborate previsions as to notice and hearing.”

(५) Finally, in certain special situations,’ release of the judg-
ment-debtor already arrested can be ordered,

1-E.4. Besides decrees for the payment of money‘ (including a
decree for payment of money as an alternative to some other relief),’
a decree for specific moveable property," a decree for specific per-
formance,’ and a decree for restitution conjugal rights or injune-
tion’ can also be executed by arrest.”

1-E5. There are not many restrictions of importance applicable
to imprisonment in execution of decrees other than those for
money.

1, Detailed history of the Proviso is given later.
. Order 21, Rales 37 to 40,

. Bections 55.58.

Order 21, Bule 90.

Order 21, Rule 80,

Order 21, Rule 31 {1).

Order 21, Bale 31(1).

. Order 21, Rule 31{1),

. Order 21, Rule $2(1).

PPR eh इक हुए



40

History of the 1936 Amendment

1-E6. History of the amendment of 1936 could be stated in
greater detail, The Bill was originally intended to protect indus-
trial workers on receipt of wages less than Rs. 100 a month from
arrest and imprisonment for a debt, as a result of the recommenda-
tions of the Royal Commission on Labour in India. But the Legis-
lature thought that the protection should be applied to all persons.
The statement of Objects and Reasons says':—

“The Bill is the outcome of the recommendations of the
Royal Commission on Lahour in India to the effect that
in’ the case of industrial workers in receipt of wages
less than Rs. 100 a month arrest and imprisonment for
debt should be abolished except where the debtor has
been proved to be able and unwilling to pay.

The bill seeks to amend the Civil Procedure Code of 1908
so as to protect honest debtors of all classes, and not of
the industriai worker class only. from detention in a
civil prison and to confine such detention te debtors prov-
ed to be recalcitrant or fraudulent. It provides inter alia
that no order for execution by detention in prison shall
pe issued unless the debtor has been given opportunity
of showing cause why he should not be committed to
prison, and the Court is satisfied for the reasons recorded
in writing that (1) the debtor is likely to leave the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or has after the
institution of the suit fradulently disposed of his property,
and (1) that he is able to pay the amount of the decree
otherwise than from protected assets. (2) The Bill apy plies
to all judgment-débtors. After condultation with cal
Government, the Government of India decided that in
this matter there was no sufficient reason for restricting
the protection to small debtors.”,

Provision in International Covenant on Civil and Political rights

1-E.7. The question to be considered is whether any change is
needed in the present position. The first point is, whether the
vision in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which provides*“No one shall be imprisoned merely on the ground
of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation” is violated by section
51.

1-E.8. This question was discussed in a Kerala case, where it
was held’ that the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights does not have the force of Civil law. Individual citizens can-
not, therefore, complain about breach in Municipal Courts. It was
also held, that section 51(c) does not violate the above article.

1, Statement of Objects and Reasons, 0.P.C. Amendment Bill, 1985 (February, 1935).
2, International Covenant on Civil and Politioal Righta, Article 11,

8, 0.7, Zavier v. Canara Bank Ld., Ernakulam, (1969) Ker. L.T. 827, 952, (1969) हू ७०.1...
961.

$


Me
Jee

41

The High Court observed—

“As already indicated by me, this provision (provision in the
International Covenant} only imterdicts imprisonment if
that is sought sclely on the ground of inability to fulfil
the obligation.

“Section 51 also declares that if the debtor has no means to
pay, he cannot be arrested and detained. If he has, and
still refuses or neglects to honour his obligation, or if he
commits acts of bad faith, he incurs the liability to im-
prisonment under section 51 of the Code, but this does
not violate the mandate of Article 11. However, if he once
had the means but now has not, or if he has money now
on which there are other pressing claims, it is violative of
the spirit of Article 11 to arrest and confine him in jail
so as to coerce him into payment. The construction of the
proyiso to section 51 C.P.C. suggested by the Division
Bench of this Court in Francis y. Palai Central Bank
Lid.’ harmonises the noble objective of the International
Covenant and the provision in the Civil Procedure
Code.”

We agree with this view.
Whether arrest should be abolished
1-E.8. The next question is, whether there is a case apart from the

provision in the International Covenant for abolishing arrest in
execution of a decree.

Position in England

1-E.10, In England. committal to prison for failure to pay a debt
ordered or adjudged to be paid hes recently been abolished,* sub-
ject to some exceptions. The exceptions include all maintenance
orders and the specified Crown debts (income-tax, corporation tax,
capital gain tax, selective employment tax, national insurance, na-
tional health and industrial injuries contributions and Redundancy
Pund contributions). Even in these cases. the court may make an
attachment of earnings order. instead of an order for committal to
prison.

Position in the U.S.A.
1-E.11. The position in the U.S.A. has been thus' stated (while
discussing recovery of damages):

“Tn some of the States, in a very limited class of actions for
damages (of which the action for damages for personal in-
jury is the chief), the money judgment resulting may be

1. Francie v, Palai Central Bank Léd., (1959) K.L.S. 1036.
2. Seetions 11 and 12 read with 4th Schedule, Administration of Justice Act, 1970 (Chapter
}s
3. Sections 14(4) and 14(4), Administration of Justice Act, 1970.
4. Muyers, The Amorican Legal System (1964), page 168,
LB(D)229MofLJufCS—(5)



42

enforced, if proceedings aga.nst the property of the debtor
are ineffective, by the arrest and imprisonment of the
judgment-debter for « iimiied period. In practice, owing
to technical provisions which cannot here be set forth,
the net effect of this remedy is .o require the debtor to
furnish a pend that he will not, for the period mentioned,
Jeave the country; ard unless he does so, and the judg-
ment creditor Giscovers the fact and succeeds in serving
certain papers upon the bandsm before the debtor _te-
turns to the country, the टाश्व "जा gains nothirg. This
remedy is termed ‘execution against the person’ and
is popularly known as ‘body execution’.”

Situation in section 5160)

1-B.12. Perhaps, it could be argued that imprisonment of the
judgment-debtor # situation in section 51, proviso, clause (b)
causes hardship. clause aoples where ihe jvdgment-debtor
(i) has the means. and refy or neglects to pay. or (ii) has had the
means, and has refused neglected. to vay. The essentiz] condi-
tion in either case is the possession of means, coupled with con-
temporaneous failure of neglect to pay. Imprisonment, if it follows
in such cases, is not based on mere non-pryment, nor on mere पान
ability to pay, but is confined to cases where a person is able to pay
and dishonestly makes default in payment.

1-E.13. It will, thus. be seen that the provisions as to arrest do
not violate the provision in the Internatianal Covenant, as they
are not based on mere acn-fulilment of a contract. Further, even
apart from their consistency wi'h the Covenant, they are justifiable
on principle, because the condrct which attracts their operation is
dishonest. Technically. no erime is committed, as there is no bodily
harm to the decree-holder or direct harm to society. But, to deprive
another person of his lawful dues when one has the means to pa
is. in the special situations to which section 51. proviso, is confine ef
ultimately causing harm to society, which suffers if an individual
member suffers by reason of the dishonest conduct of another mem-
ber, ’

Present law sufficiently restrictive

1E.14. We are. therefore. of the view that so far as the cases in
which arvest may he ordered are concerned, the law in India is
sufficiently restrictive. except in two respects. which we shal! pre-
sently discuss. This mode of cxecution should not. thzrefore, be
totally abolished

The situations mentinned in the proviso to section 51. -which
is the section dealing with arrest in execution of deerres for pay-
ment of money—are those which indicate fraud or clandestine de-
signs on the part of the judgment-debtor, Mere inability to per-
form the obligation 10 repay a lean (or other monetary obligation)
does net result in imprisonment. '

a


4

1.E.15. Imprisonment is not to be ordered merely because, like
Shylock, the creditor says':

“I erave the law, the penalty and forfeit of my bond.”

The law does recognise the principle that “Mercy is season-
able in the time of affliction, es clouds of rain in the time of
draught”

Two minor points concerning section 51

1-E.16. There are, however, two minor points concerning section
51 on which a clavification is needed.

Section 51, Proviso {a) and (b)

1.17. With reference to clause (a) of the proviso to section 51,
the words “or effect” (of obstructing or delaying execution) require
consideration, as they could be construed as preventing a departure
by the judgement-debtor from the local limits of the court even
for honest purposes. Removal of those words would increase the
burden of proof on the decree-holder, One suggestion placed be-
fore us was to make the provision conditional on likelihood as to
obstruction cte., so as to reduce the apparent harshness of the
present provision. This is on the assumption that in the context in
which the words “object or effect” occur, mens rea with reference
to “obstructing or delaying execution” is required We have, after
gome discussion, decided that in clause (a). the words “without
latsful excuse” should be inserted before the words “leave the
local limits”. This will protect genuine cases of departure for
honest purposes, In section 51, proviso (b) also, before the words
“has refused or neglected”, we recommend insertion of the words
“svithout lawful excuse”. so as to avoid hardship in cases where @
person has spent up his money in bona fide lawful objects and
therefore, could not pey the debt at the time when the refusal or
neglect is alleged to have occurred.

Recommendaticn

1-B.18. Accordingly, we recommend that section 51, proviso,
clavses (a) and (9) should be revised as follows: —

“(a) that the judgment-debtor. with the object or effect of
obstructing or delaying the execution of the decree—

(i) is likely to abscond or is without lawful excuse, likely
to leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
Court, or

(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which the de
cree was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed,
ar removed any part of his property, or committed
any other act of bad faith in relation to his property,
or

1, Merchant of Venice, Act 4, Scene 1.
2, Koolesiasticus, 25, 20.


44

(9) that the judgmént-debtor has. or has had since the date
of the decree. means tc pay the amount of the decree or
some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or
has without lawful excuse refused or neglected to pay
the same, or”.

Section 60(1)--property attachab’e oy exempt from attachment

1-E.19. Section 6011) authorises, subject to certain exceptions,
the attachment and sale of the property of the judgment-debtor. In
the main paragraph of this subsection, after enumerating property
liable 10 attachment. a general principle is enunciated, where-
under, broadly speaking, saleable property which belongs to the
judgment-debior or over which he has a disposing power exercis-
able for his own benefit. is attachable.

The proviso to section 0(1) enumerates certain properties as
exempt from attachment.

The exemptions are, for our surposes, more important, and the
recommendations which we make for amendment of the law are
aimed primarily at the exemptions. Before dealing seriatim with
the exemptions, we think it necessary to corsider the rationale of
the exemptions, such examination will helo in determining the
area where an addition to, or expansion of, the present exemptions
is called for.

Principles behind the exceptions

1-E-19A, What may. at first s'ght, appear to be a heterogeneous
collection of exemptions, enumerated in an haphazard fashion in the
proviso te section 60(1), could b= more easily understood if it is
orne in mind that the exemptions are attributable to one or more
of the following broad principles: —

(1) The principle of necessity~The item mentioned in
elause (a) of the proviso is based 00 this principle.

(2) The principle of protecting the means of livelihood—This
justifies the exemptions in clause (b), clause (c)' and
clause (d)

(3) The principle of leavine money required for subsistence—
This explains clauses (#), (h), (i). (ia), and (1) and (1).

{4) The principle of thrift—That the State should encourage
thrift is the principle behind clause (0).

(5) The orinciple of non-ransferability of the property—
Property which is not transferable by act of parties
should also not be attachable under legal process. This
principle justifies the exemptions in clauses (६), (f), (m)
and (n). 1

(6) The principle of harmony with other laws—This  princi-
ple ts for the exemptions in clauses (c) and (p).

Ty See Badri 61

wooly


“f

Ye

45

We shali now proceed to consider the amendments needed
in the proviso.

Section 60(1) and houses of labourers and domestic servants

1-F.20. In our view, houses and buildings of labourers and do-
mestic servants should be exempt from attachment,’ on the princi-
ple of necessity.

Recommendation as to section 60(1), proviso clause (0)

1-E20A. Accordingly, we recommend that section 60(1), pro-
viso, clause (c) should be revised as follows :—

“(¢) houses and other buildings (with the materials and the
sites thereof and the land immediately appurtenant
thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to
an agriculturist, a labourer or a domestic servani, and
occupied by him.”

Section 60(1) Proviso clause (i)

1-E.20B. Under section 60(1), proviso, clause (i), “salary to the
extent of the first two hundred rupees”, and one-half of the remain-
der in execution of any decree other than a “decree for mainte
nance”, is exempt from attachment. There is a proviso which runs
as follows:—

“Provided that where such salary is salary of a servant of
the Government or a servant of railway company or
local authority, and the whole or any part of the portion
of such salary liable to attachment has been under
attachment, whether continuously or intermittently, for
a total period of twenty-four months, such portion shall
pe exempt from attachment until the expiry of a further
period of twelve months and, where such attachment has
been made in execution of one-and the same decree, shall
be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that
lecree.

1-E.21. Two points were raised during our discussion on this
clause; First. whether the limit of rupees two hundred should be
increased in view of the fall in the value of the rupee; and, second-
ly, whether the proviso should continue.

1-E.22. The first question requires a consideration of the his-
tory of the clause. The second requires an examination of the prin-
ciple behind the proviso.

1-E,23. As regards the first question, it may be stated that the
amount originally exempt was twenty rupees. In 1923, it was rais-
ed to forty rup2es.* Certain changes were made* in 1937, by which
the salary of private employees was exempted to the extent of first

1. Compare section 6801), proviau (0).
2. Amendment Act of 1923,
३. Code of Cis Prncedura (Second Amendment) Aot 9 of 1937,


46

hundred rupees and one half the remainder; and as regards public
officers ete. the same exemption was given, and in addition, a pro-
viso was added.

Clause (h) and (i), as they stood before the amendment of
1937, exempted—

(४७) allowances (being less than salary) of any public officer
or of eny servant of a Railway Company or local autho-
rity while absent from duty:

(i) The salary, or allowance equal to salary. of any such
public officer or servant as is referred to in clause (h)
while on duty. to the extent of forty rupees monthly
where the sulary exceeded forty rupees, and did not ex-
ceed eighty rupees monthly. The benefit of the clause
was not available to a private employee.

1-E.24. In 1937. for clauses (h) and (i), the following clauses
were substituted —

“(h) the wages of labourers or domestic servants, whether
payable in money or in kind, and salary. to the extent of
the first hucdred rupees and one-half the remainder of
such salar

of any public officer or of any servant of a

yay cumpany or loca] authority to the extent of
the first hundred rupees and one-half the remainder
of such salary:

Provided that, where the whole or any part of the portion of
such salary liable to attachment has been under attach-
ment whether continuously or intermittently for a total
period of twenty-four months, such portion shall be
exempt from attachment rntil the expiry of a further

riod of twelve months and, where such attachment
Pos been made in execution of one and the same decree,
shall be finally exempt from attachment in execution of
that decree.”

tage Some drafting changes were made in the clauses in

1-£.26. The amount exempted from attachment was ra‘sed in
1963 to two hundred rupees.” in view of the merger of dearness
allowance in pay after the Report of the Second Pay Commission.

1-E.27. We are of the view that the minimum emount exempt
should now he further increased. in view of the fall in the value
of the rupee.

Recommendation to increase the amonnt in clause (i)

1-E.27. Accordingly, we recommend that the amount should be
raised to two hundred and fifty rupees: The net result will be. that

1. Amendment Act 3 of 1943.
2, Code of Cieil Proosdare (Amencment) Act (28 of 1863).

he

-F

2



.
3

in case of persons wha have a basie pay of rupees two hundred end
fifty or less, the salary will be totaly exemyt, while, in other cases,
the exemption also extetd to one-nalf 01 the remainder.

L-E.28 50 far as the second guesitun is concerned, apparently,
the principie underlying the proviso scerns to be that persons con-
cerned with the scvereign tunctions of the State should receive
special protecuon from attacnment, so that the interests of the
State do not suffer. While tne principle was understandable at a
time when the number of Government servants was small and the
activitics of the Slate were also iimited, its continuance in this
form at the present day is an anomaly,

Recommendation to delete the proviso, clause (i)
1-£.29. We, therefore, recommend that the proviso to clause (i)
should be deleted.

1-E.30. On the question whether the exemption from attachment
of wages includes bonus, recent case-law throws some light.

LE.31, An earle:
c exempt, A contra
And, in two recent

case cook the view’ that bonus is not

ew was taken by the Mysure High Court
Gras c:ses~' also, bonus has been held ta be
exempt. In the Madras T had attached the bonus
of the defendant, in exvevtion of a money devrec. The High Court
reversed this decision, hulding thet bonus should form part of the
wages.”

In this case, it was also contended that the petitioner was a
mechanic, and therefore not a “labourer” within section 60(1), pro-
visu, Civil Procedure Code. As the question whether he was a
mechsnie or a labourer had not been gone into by the Court below,
the case was remunded to the Munsiff's Court, for fresh disposal.

1-H-32. Though the case-law, as it stands at present, does not
reveal a serious conflict, we think that it is better to clarify the
position.

Recommendation

1-£.32. Accordingly. we recOMmand the addition of the following
Explanation below section 60(1), Proviso*—

“Explanation—"“Wages” includes bonus.”

“Exploiation-—“Labourer” includes a skilled or semi-skilled
|sbourer.”

1. Mannnawan’ v. Visknane'h, 4.1.8, 1957
2. P, Nathanul. v, Dasorath, ALR.”
8, Krishna Kav ४. Thins'erak rthat, 41.1 , 1:
4. Caiapath! हिट 5, Sioa wathan iad 3. 116 .1919 Mod, 440,
5. Krishon Hon ५ ० लैस, 3 EM 1

Svramiinotiian ALR. 1969 Mad,
6, Suitable numbers will have to be given s tre Explunations, पु

Bo fafa

1. (-४४7फका4 Bills ५,



48

Earlier recommendation as to section 60(1), Proviso (i)

1-E.33. The earlier Report’ propcsed amendment to section
60(1), proviso, clause (i), to extend the existing proviso to private
salaries also. It was considered that there is no reason why the
exemption from repeated attachment, embodied in the proviso,
should not extendto private salaries. ~

But in view of the reasons which we have stated above, it is
better to delete the proviso.

Section 60 and Policy of Life Insurance

1-E.34. An interesting point which fell to be considered’ by
the previous Commission, in the earlier Report, related to grant-
ing exemption from attachment to policies of insurance. We quote
the relevant discussion from the Report—

“In the Law Commission’s Report on Insolyency Laws; in
the clause dealing with description of property of the
insolvent divisible amongst his creditors, a provision has
been proposed that policies of life insurance, ete. in
respect of the insolvent’s own life shall not be comprised
in the property of the insolvent divisible among his credi-
tors (except to the extent of a charge on the policies in
respect of the amount of the premium paid on the poli-
eies during the two years preceding the insolvency). The
question whether an exemption from attachment in res-
pect of insurance policies should be given, either absolu-
tely or subject to a certain maximum, has been consider-
ed. It has been decided not to recommend any such
change. There are certain points of difference between
insolyency on the one hand and execution by a single
decree-holder on the other. In insolvency, the hypothesis
is that the debtor has not sufficient assets for meeting his
debts, and therefore (apart from the property SP ecifically
exempted), everything else goes for the satisfaction of
the creditors. Secondly, in insolvency the law has to

strike a balance between the debtor's needs and the.

claims of the whole body of creditors, while that is not
so in the case of execution of a single decree. Thirdly, in
insolvency, the carrying on of business, the acquisition of
property and other economie activities by the insolvent
are subject to the control of the court, which is not the
case in execution.”

1-E.35. We have reconsidered the matter. This is not because
we found the reasoning given on the Report on the Code defectiye—
we regard it as cogent so far as it goes—but because the changed
social and political climate appeared to justify a re-thinking on the
subject. In order to encourage thrift, the habit of life insurance
should be encouraged, and that consideration, in its SO STORENG, SNC That consideration, in its turn, justifies justifies

1, 27th Report, page 108, note on section 60, para 2.

2. 27th Report, page 112, note on aeetion 86 and policies of insurance.

$. 26th Report (Insolvency Laws), app. I, ०७७७७ 48(1)(0).

4“

ज्क


°

49

a more liberal approach as regards exemption of policies of life
insurance from attachment. No doubt, considerations justifying an
exemption have to be balanced against the legitimate claims of a
creditor who has taken all the trouble of obtaining a decree, and who
is engaged in the still more troublesome venture of execvting it.
The less obstacles are placed in his way, the better, Nevertheless,
on the same principle on which moneys in certain provident funds
are exempt [rom attachment’, there is a case for the exemplion of
moneys due on a policy of life insurance. Further, we. do not think
that there should be any limit as to the. maximum that is to be
exempt out of the amount due on the policy.

Recommendation to insert new clause (ka)

1E.36. We, accordingiy, recommend that the following clause
should be added in the proviso to section 60(1).—

“(ka) money payable under ६ policy of life insurance.”
Section 60{1} Proviso and contreHed tenancies

1-£.37. The question whether tenancies to which the Rent Con-
trol Act in force in the State concerned applies, should be exempt
from attachment, was considered by the previous Commission.: A
provision exempting them from vesting in the Official Assignee on
insolvency had been proposed in the Law Commission’s Report on
insolvency.” But, as regards exemption from attachment, the Com-
mission took the view that the case’ stood on a different footing,
and no change was, therefore, considered necessary on this point.

1-E.38. We have considered the matter further. By virtue of
provisions in the Rent Control laws, such tenancies usually become
incapable of assignment except under certain restrictions, The Bom-
bay Rent Control Act,’ for example, provides: —

“15, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, (but
subject to any contract to the contrary) it shall not be
lawful after the coming into operation of this Act for
any tenant to sub-let the whole or any part of the pre-
mises let to him or to assign or transfer in any other
manner his interest therein: —

(Provided that the State Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, permit in any area the trans-
fer of interest in premises held under such leases or
class of leases and to such extent as may be speci-
fied in the notifications).”

1.E.39. We think that in order to prevent harassment to tenants,
an amendment in section 60 also is called for in this respect, so as
to make them exempt.

1, Bection 60 (1), Proviso clanse (k).

2, 27th Report, page 112, nate on section 60 and tensnciee.
3. 26th Report, (Intolvency Taws), App. 1, olanse 48 (1),
4. Section 15 (1), Bombay Renta eta. Contrel Act, 1947.


bu.
Recemniendation to insert clause (kb)
1-E4U. Aecurdingly. we recommend inat the iollowing clause
shoula be added in the proviso to section 60(1j—
“(kb} the interes. of 6 lessee of a residentut build.ng to which

the provisions of the एक rei@ting to control ef rents and
accummodalion for the time being ix force applies.”

Section 66(1) and agricultural labourers
1-E.41, The excmption conferred on agriculturists by the sec-

iion leg. section 6 L)(c)], should in our view, be extended to
agricultural labourers (६.६, landless labourers) a:so.

Recommendation to insert Explanation

1-8.4:. Accordingiy, we recommend that the following Expla-
natia hould be inserted below section 60(1), proviso:
“Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the word
‘agricuizwist’ shail tnelude every person who depends
for his livelihood mainly on income from agricultural
land, whether as owner, tenant, partner or agricuitural
labourer.”

Sectian 66(1) and waiver of the exemption

1-E.43. Waiver of the right conferred by section 60 should, in
our view, be made inoperative. On this point, we are departing
from the appreach adopted in the earlier Report.’

Recommendation to insert new sub-section (1A)

1-E.44. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the follow-
ing sub-section, as sub section (1A), in section 60:—

“(LA) Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in
force, an agreement by which a person agrees to waive
the benest of any exemption under this section shall be
void”.

Section a3—Property attached in execution of decrees of several
Courts

1-E.45. Section 63 is as follows: —

“63. (1) Where property not in the custody of any Court is
under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts
than one, the Covri which shall receive or realise such
property and shall determine any claim thereto and any
objection to the attachment thereof shall be the Court of
highest grade, or, where there is no difference in grade
between such Courts. the Court under whose decree the
property was first attached, .

पु

] are ta he given co the Explanation,

8. ५

(एक mimbee il

7th Report, page 11.

anh


51>

(2) Nothing in this section shali be deemed to invalidate
any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such
decrees.”

1-E.46. In the earlier Report.’ the Commission had to consider
the question as to the effect of section 63(2), (which provides that
nothing in the section shall be deemed to invalidate any “proceed-
ing taken by a court’ executing one of the several decrees refer-
red ta in the section), on an order allowing a set-cff to a decree-
holder avction-purchaser. Does the expression “proceeding taken by
a Court” exciude the amount sc allowed to be set off from rateable
distribution? The Commission noted that most High Courts’ “**
had answered the question in ihe negative, though the Calcutta
High Court* had taken a contrary view.

The Cummission took the view that the expression “proceeding”
does not include such order, but did not consider a clarification to
be necessary.

Recommendation
1LE.47, We agre: with the interpretation placed by the previous
Commission; but are of the view that a clarification is desirable,
in order to settle the controversy. We recommend that the following
Explanation should be added below section 63(2)—
“Explanation—In_ sub-section (2} the expression ‘proceeding’
taken by a Court does not include oa order allowing, to
@ decree-holder who has purchased property at sale held
in execution of a decree set off for the purchase price
payable by him.”
Section 64 ह
1-E.48. Section 64 is as 010 छ5:--

“64. Where an attachment has been made, any private trans-
fer or delivery of the property attached or of any inte-
rest therein and any payment to the Judgment-dehtor
of any debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such
attachment, shall be void as against all claims enforce-
able under the attachment.

Explanation—For the purpose of this section, claims enforce-
able under an attachment include claims for the rateable
distribution of assets.” -

There has been a conflict of decisions on the question whether
a transfer made after attendance in pursuance of an agreement
entered into before altachment is void. The Commission in its
Report on the Code,’ considered this conflict; but was not inclined

1. 27th Report, page 112, ७०६७ on section 63,

. Megraj ¥. Corporation uf Madras, A.1.R. 1936 Mad. 797, 798,
3. Thaanull v. Krishnaswomy, ALR. 1935 Mad. 988, 984,

|. Ram Chandra v. Digambar, T.L.R. 1830 Bom. 8, ALR, 108, Bem, 230 (F.B,),
5. Fishaw Rem v! Phe Bank of Bikar, ALT. 1946 AU, 291

hina ¥. Nepal Chandra, A.I.R. 1037 Cal. 56, 56.

ith Report, pages 112-113 ,aete on eaction 64.

son NS

me



52

to suggest a change. It noted that in the draft Report which had
been circulated (to State Governments, High Courts etc.) for com-
menis, an exception was proposed to section 64 to the effect that
“Nothing in this section applies to any private transfer or delivery
of the property attached or of any interest therein, made in execu-
tion of any contract for such transfer or delivery entered into be-
fore the aitachment.” But, after careful consideration, the Commis-
sion decided not to make. any such exception. The principal con-
sideration which weighed with the Commission was thus stated—

“A sweeping provision of this kind might be abused, and the
practice of bringing into existence agreements which are
really executed after attachment but are ante-dated to an
earlier date, might be encouraged by such exception.”

The Commission also added—

“The decision as to how far such a transfer should be recog-
nised as valid by the Covrt would seem often to depend
on the equities of each case. Some of the decisions are
based on the specific provisions of Order 38, rule 10; a
few exhibit special features arising out of the passing of
a decree for specific performance. So far as other situa-
tions are concerned, the equities of the case should, it is
considered be taken by the court into account.”

1-E.49. We have carefully considered the matter, We agree that
a sweeping provision saving every transfer made in pursuance of
a pre-attachment agreement, might lead to fictitious claims, as was
noted by the previous Commission. But we think that a provision
of a limited character, applicable only where the agreement itself
is registered before the attachment, would be harmless. A transfer
in pursuance of such agreement should override the attachment, if
the agreement precedes the attachment.

Recommendation .

1-E.50. We therefore, recommend that the following Exception
be added below section 64:—

‘Exception—Nothing in this section applies to ony private
transfer or delivery of the property attacked or of any
interest therein, made in execution of any contract for
such transfer or delivery entered into and registered be-
fore the attachment.”

Section 66
1-E.51. Section 86 is as follows:—

“66. (1) No svit shall be maintained against any person claim-
ing title under a purchase certified by the Court in such
manner as may be prescribed on the ground that the
purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on be-
half of someone through whom the plaintiff claims.

s
ut

c J



(2) Nothing in this section shall ber a suit to obtain a dec-
Jaration that the name of any purchaser certified as
aforesaid was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or
without the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with
the right of a third person to proceed against that property,
though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the
ground that it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third
person against the real owner.

1.5.52. The earlier Report on the Code’ contains this discussion
as to this section— पु

“A suggestion to the effect that a “Defence” based on Benami
should also be barred (just as a_svit based on benami is
barred) where the name of the Benamindar is entered in
the sale “certificate” has been considered, According to
this suggestion, where the real owner is in possession, and
the Benamidar whose name is entered in the sale certi-
ficate sues him for possession, the real owner should be
barred from raising a defence that the plaintiff was only
a nominal purchaser. It has, however, been decided not
to extend section 66 to such cases.”

Recommendation for amending section 66

1E.53. We have considered this question carefully, and have
come to a different conclusion. In our opinion, it would be more
consistent with recent trends to bar such defence also. According-
19, we recommend that in section 66(1), the following words should
be added at the end—

“and in any suit by a person claiming title wnder a purchase
so certified, no defence shall be pleaded on the ground
that the purchase was made on behalf of the defendant
or on behalf of someone through whom the defendant
claims.”

Section 73

1-E.54. With reference to section 73 of the Code, the case-law
as to the meaning of the expression “same judgment-debtor’, was
examined in the earlier Report.’ and the result of the examination
revealed no need for amendment. We have examined the later
eases on the subject and, in our view also, there is no need to
amend te it.

1, 27th Report, page 113.
2. 27th Report, pagey 113, 114, note on sevtian 73.



Carta 1-7
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS

Introductory

1-F-1. Part 3, in the body of the Code (sections 73 to 78), deals
with “incidental proceedings”.
Section 75

1-F.2. Section 75 deals with the issue of Commissions. We notice
that one matter relating to the section was discussed in the Report on
the Code,’ namely—whether the court has power to issue a commis-
sion for making inventories of account books and other articles. We
ste no reason why the Court should not have this power. In fact,
we would go further, and invest the Court with a general power to
issue commissions for the performance of all ministerial acts.

Apart from this general power, we are of the view that there
should be a specific provision empowering the court to issue com-
missions for conducting scientific inquiries, when such an inquiry
is needed Jor determination of any issue before the court. There
should also be a power to appoint commissioners to hold sales (other-
wise than in execution).

Recommendation
1-F.24. To achieve the above object, we recommend—
(i) an amendment of section 75, and
{ii} insertion of new* rules in Order 26.

The amendments will be as follows: —

Clauses (bb), (bbb) and (bbbb) may be inserted in section 75.
The section will then read as follows: —

“Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed, the Court may issue a commission—(a)
and (०); ......;

(bb) to hold a scientific investigation:

(bbb) to conduct sales of property which is in the custody
of the court pending the determination of the suit
and which cannot be conveniently, preserved:

(bbbb) to perform any ministeriral act;

(ce)

(93)

1. 27h Report. paga 115, note on seetion 75,
2 Order 26, Bu'e 10A and 1.

ot


53
Order 26, Rule 10A te 16C (groposed)

1-F.8. ty 1-F.5. We also recommend that the f. llow:ng new rues
may be inserted in Order 26—

“10A. (1) Where any question arising in a suit involves any
scientific investigation, which cannot in the opinion of the
court, conveniently be conducted before the court, the
Court may, if it thinks it necess; or expedient in the
interest of justice issue a commission to such person as
it thinks fit, directing him tu inquire into such question
and report thereon to the court.

(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall. as far as
mav be, apply in relation to a commissioner appcinied
under this rule, as they apply in relation to a commis-
sioner appointed under rule 9.

108, (1) Where any question. ng in a suit invelves the
performance of any ministerial act which cannot, in the
opinion of the court, conveniently be performed before
the court. the court may. if it thinks it necessary or ¢x-
pedient in the interest of justice for reasons to be recorded,
issue a commission ta such person as it thinks fit, direct-
ing him to perform that act and report thereon to the

‘ourt.

(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as
may be! apply in relation to a commissioner appointed
under this rule, as they apply in relation to a commis-
sioner appointed under rule 9.

100. (1) Where, in any suit. it becomes necessary to sell any
movable property which is in the custody of the court
pending the determination of the suit aid which cannot
be conveniently preserved, the court may, if it thinks it
necessary or expedient in the interest of justice, for rea-
sons to be recorded, issue a commission to such person
as it thinks fit. directing him to corduct such sale, ard
report thereon to the court.

(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall, as far as
may be.’ apply in relation to a commissioner appninted
under this rule. as it applies in relation to a Commissioner
appointed* under rule 9.

(3) Every such sale shall be held. as far as mav be. in ace
cordance with the procedure onrescribed for sales of
movab'e property in execution of a decree.”

annexed fo: Oder

Bale? may be wanecessary in regird to the new rale.

2. Seation 75 to be amerobedl seperately.


CuarTser 1-G
SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES

Tatroduction
1-G-1, Part 4 of the Code, sections 79 to 88, deals with “suits
in particular cases". These comprise—
(a) suits by or against the Government or public officers in
their official capacity {sections 79 to 82);
(b) suits by aliens and by or against foreign rulers, ambassa-
dors and envoys (sections 83 to 87A);
(९) suits against Rulers of former Indian States (section
87B);
(d) interpleader suits (section 88), We shall deal with only
such of the provisions in this group as require change.

Section 80

J-G-2. One of the most important sections in this part is sec-
tion 80. We fully concur with the recommendation made in the
earlier Report; for the repeal of section 80,

Section 82

1-G-3. The previous Commission” considered section 82 at length
It noted that section 82, as it stands at present, prescribes an elabo-
rate procedure which has to be followed before execution of a
decree can be ordered against the Government or a public servant
ete, The section contemplates the following stages :—

(i) A time has to be specified in the decree itself for its
satisfaction;

(ii) If a decree remains unsatisfied for the time specified, a
report has to be made by the court to the State Government;

(iii) After the report, the court must wait for a further period
of 3 months, and can issue execution only if the decree remains
unsatisfied for a further perio of 3 months.

1-G-4, The previous Commission considered, that this elaborate
procedure is not necessary, and causes delay. The intermediate
report to the Government by the court is a formality which should
lay down the period of waiting, instead of requiring the court to
fix the period in cach case. Power should be given to the court to
fix a period in q particular case. Necessary changes had been pro-
posed.

1, 27th Report, pages 21-22 amd 114-115.
2, 27th Report, page 115, note on seation 82.
56

4


87

1-G-5. A power to extend the period was also considered de-
sirable, and provided for.

1-G-6. The Commission also. noted that the words “such act
as aforesaid” in section 82 refer to an act purporting to be done by
a public officer in his official capacity. That was made clear.

1-G-7. We agree with the above recommendations, but would like
40 add one minor provision to the effect that the court will, within
3 months, send notice to the Government of the passing of the
decree. This is in our view desirable in order to give the Govern-
ment an opportunity to satisfy the decree, This requirement need
not, of course, delay execution, as non-compliance with it, would
not effect the validity of the execution,

Reommendation

1-5-8. Accordingly, we recommend that section 82 should be
revised as follows :—
Execution of decree against Government or public officer—
“g2, (1) Where, in a suit by or against the Government, or

by or against a public officer in respect of any act’
purporting to be done by him in his official capacity, a
decree is passed against the Union of India or a State, or
as the case may be, the public officer......
“execution shall nor be issued on the decree unless it
remains unsatisfied for a period three months, or such
other period as the Court in a particular case,
computed from the date of the decree,

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in relation
to an order or award zs they apply in relation to a dec-
ree, if the order or award—

(a) is passed or made against the Union of India or a
public officer in respect of any such act as aforesaid,
whether by a Court or by any other authority, and

(b) is capable of being executed under the provisions of
this Code or of any other law for the time being in
force as if it were a decree,

“(3) The Court may, im its discretion from time to time,

- enlarge the period specified in sub-section (1) or fixed by
Court under that sub-section, even though the period so
specified or fixed may have expired’.

“(4) Where a Court आर any such decree as is referred to
in sub-section {1} it shall, within a period of three
months from the date on which the decree is passed, send
an intimation to the Government pleader thereof of the
passing of the decree, but failure to give such intimation
shall not affect the execution of the decree.”

1. Cf Seotion 82(1) and $2(2),
2. Of. Section 148, C.P.C.
TjBD220Mof LIECA—6


58

Section 86

1-G-9. Under section 86, a suit cannot be instituted against the
‘Ruler of a foreign State’ without the consent of the Central
Government. We have had this section examined in detail, in view
of its importance and in view of the de ppmenis that have teken

ce in spect of immunity of sovereign s. A detailed study

was undert but here we shall include only a brief summary
of the results of the study.
Principles

is that the Ruler of one State bis he privilege to enter another
State, a privilege based on the existerice of an immunity from the
jurisdiction of local courts.” The immunity is syggested ve
een based on several principles

(i) Par in parem non habet imperium—One sovereign wer
cannot exercise jurisdiction over another sovergign powér, bit only
over inferiors,

(ii) Reciprocity, or comity—in return for a concession of immu-
nity, other States make mutual concession of immunity within
their territory.

(Gili) Unenforceadility—-A judgment of a municipal court cannot
be eriforced ‘against a foreign’ State or its Sovereign.

(iv} An implication from the cirewmstances—The permission to
a foreign State to function within a State or a foreign Sovereign to
ist, signifies a concession of immunity* from the jurisdiction of the
al i
(v) Policy—The merits of a dispute involving the transactions
or policy of a foreign goyernment ought not to be canvassed in the
domestic courts of another cbun'

1-G-1L. In a Bombay. case‘ while considering the
provisions of section 433 of the ms 1882 (which corresponds to

1-G-10. The principle of ae ne ie law relevant to section 86

६ section 86), said that thi “the dig mity
and independence 6६ the का
ing any person to sue ‘anid the po! 1०5] [ए७-
प्राशाल९ and complications which: would result”, This view has been
approved by the Supreme Court’. 1

1. Brownlie, Public International Law, (1968), page 274, See algo Shooter Fackange rv.
Me Paddo®, (1812) 7 Cranch 116,

2. Starks, Intarnational Law, (1979), p. 258

8. Lond Porter, hia et ड़ mnrmity of a State:
Gri Si etm Trace. ane: Say toe ea and Bonk of Zagland,

4. Jordan, O.,, has dosoribad it majlind मुकाम not to decogste from ९”.
Weight. Oavirel, (1943) 44 8.85. ‘om

6, Por Lord Dennitig i Rahimtoola y, Nizam of Hyteradad 6 (1957) 3.41 8, 8, 441,

6, Chandulal Khushaiji v. 4४७७, 21 Bom. 251, 71g 272.

1. Ali Atbor v. U.AR., ALB, 1966 8.0, ३90.

&

oe.


Re

59

Position in England

14G-12. The position in England on the subject has been stated
as follows:

“In aceordance with the maxim per in parem non habet im-
perium, the English Courts are fully committed to the
view that they will not exercise jurisdiction over the
person or the property of a foreign sovereign state unless
it is willing to submit to ptocess.”*

However, from time to time. proposals have been made for the
reform of the existing rules? :

Practice in other countries—countzies favouring restrictive dimmunity

1-G-13, The practice in other countries also varies, Some States
make a distinction between acts in the exercise of the sovereign
power, ie, jure imperii, and acts like a private person, he. jure
gestionis.» The immunity is allowed in the former case, but sot in
the latter. Examples of States which follow such practice are Austria,
Belgium, Egypt, France, Greece, Gertnan Democratic Republic, Italy
and Switzerland. In ‘Canada, however, so far as non-commercial acts
are concerned, the English rule is followed. The position regarding
commercial activities is undesided‘

Soviet practice ‘

1-G-14, The position in Soviet Russia, as provided in’ Fundamen-
tals of Soviet Civil Procedure,’ is:that a suit canbe filed against a
foreign country only with the ¢ohsent of the country concerned, Re-
garding diplomatic representatives, they are subject to-the jurisdiction
of Soviet courts in civil cages within).the limits determined by the
rules of international law ‘or -agreerments with: the: countries. con-
cerned. The principle of reciprocity is also followed.

For commercial activities, extept, maritime commerce, through
a number of agreements, tHe Soviet Union has submitted its trade
transactions to foreign jurigdiction, Tike 4 private merchant.

1-G-15, In the U.S.A, a distinctidn is made between ‘sovereign
or public acts’ and ‘private acts'. Immunity as of right is evailable
only. in the former case.

1. Cheshire, Private International Law, 218 age 96, 869 also the Christina, (1988) A.C,
498, and the dratttcaau Mend, (1939) 1 ADEA. 719,

2, Lanterpacht, “Jurisdictional Igmunitios of Foralgn Btates”, (1951) 28 #.¥,B.11J220.
‘Lyons in (1956) 42 Grotius Botiaty, 61. “

3, Mann in (1964) 27 Mod. LR, 81.

4, Reference re. powers of City of Oxawa, (1043) 3.0.8, 268 (Canada)! Flats Maritime Brown-
ing de Ouba BA v. The Repablia of 070 (7969) ROR, 696, 608-5. (Catada).

5. Beution G1, Fundamental of Soviet Civil Protedure, See ols Graybowabt Boviet Public
International Law (1970), p. 222.

6. Cardozo, ‘Soveraign Immunity’, (1944) 87 Hpev. L. B, 808,

LpBtwyaveMotLaCk—iay 11 Ue a


60

1-G-15A. In a statement of the policy’ of the United States State
Department, limiting sovereign immunity in a far more sweeping
manner than ever before attempted, Frofessor Jack Bernard Tate,”
Acting Legal Adviser to the Department of State, wrote:

“The Department of State has for some time had under con-
sideration the only question whether the practice of the
Government in granting immunity from suit to forei;
Governments made parties defendant in the Courts of t
United States without their consent should not be chang-
ed, The Department has now reached the conclusion that
such immunity should no longer be granted in certain
types of cases......"*

The type of cases excluded from immunity mainly concerned
commercial transactions.

1-G-15B. It may be noted that a few years ago, the subject of
immunity of foreign States was fully discussed, and a project for
its reform prepared, by the Institute of International law.

1-G.16. With reference to their attitude in respect t of the immu-
nity of foreign States, the various countries may be broadly classi-
fied as follows—

(i) Countries accepting the classical or virtually absolute
theory of sovereign immunity—The classical or virtually
absolute theory (of immunity) has generally. been followed
by most countries of the British Commonwealth, Czechos-
lovakia, Estonia and probably Foland.* Aj ently, the de-
cisions of the courts of Brazil, Chile, Chino, lungary,
Japan, Luxem! Norway and Portugal may also be
deemed to pri the classical theory of immuni tye
but the decisions aré scanty, and are anterior to the
velopment of the restrictive theory.

ii) Countries probably accepting absolute immunity—In
6 Netherlands, Sweden and mtina, constant reference
to the distinction between Ans lic and private acts of the
State indicate an intention to leave the way open for a
ssible application of the restrictive theory of immunity’

if and when cecasion arises.

(iiiy Countries adopting the restrictive theory—Presently, the res-
trictive theory (resting on the distinction between
sovereign acts and other acts) is followed in Austria,
Belgium, Egypt, France, Greece, Italy and Switzerland.

1. Letter of May 6, 1952, popularly Ya ide tho “Tate letter”.

2. Jack B. Tate, (Associate Detn of Yole University Law Sohool), Department of 8५. Bull.
Vol. 28, p. 15 Fane 93, 1952, a 0 to the Acting Attomoy y, Depart .
3. See 6180 ०७४७३ referred to in Starke, International Law, (1972), page 288, foot note 8,

and in Greig, International Law (1970), page 196, foot notes 7-3.

4. Seo also William W. Bishop Jv. “New United States Poltoy Limiting Sovereign Immuzity”
(1958) 47 ALLL. pp. 93 « seg. Tmmuzity
5, Annuaire de 1* Institute de droid International (1982), Vol 1, pp. 1186 ibid, (1983),

pp. 112, 321. (Sir प्र, Lanter, pact).
6. Greig, International Lew, (1972), pages $18, 219...

4


61

(iy) Countries where position is fluid—The position in England
appears to be fluid.

Lauterpacht’s view

1-G.17. Lauterpacht has made certain suggestions,’ for reform
of the law. According to him, “In the first instance, immunity must
remain the rule with respect of the legislative acts of a sovereign
State and of measures taken in pursuance thereof”. “Secondly, there
must be immunity from jurisdiction in respect of the executive and
administrative acts of the foreign State within its territory”. “Third-
ly, the principle of immunity must continue with respect to contracts
made with or by the foreign State extept those concluded in the
U.K.” “Fourthly, no action should lie or execution be levied against
a foreign State contrary to the accepted principles of international
law in the matter of diplomatic immunities”.

Arguments against absolute immunity—The arguments advanced
in support of restricted immunity are that the sovereign who en-
gages in ordinary commerce should be held to have waived his im-
munity, and that the tendency in municipal law is to Place the
State and State corporations on an equal footing with other lega!
persons.

Decision involving change of poltcy to be avoided

1-G.18. A decision to alter the scope of immunity involves de-
licate matters of policy, and we do not think it proper to make re-
commendations altering its scope.

Moreover, it is not posible to Py with certainty how far the
restrictive immunity will be adopted (in substitution of unqualified
immunity), in the near future, In this state of affairs, an alteration
in the policy behind these sections is not easy to recommend.

Recommendation for change in terminology

1-G.19. But one defect of section 86 should be remedied. THis
defect lies in its over emphasis on the con of the “Ruler” of a
foreign State. Primarily, it is the State which ought to be immune;
the personnal immunity of the Ruler, if any, ought to be secondary,
at least in modern times.

The Supreme Court has held that section 86 applies to all foreign
States*-whether the form of Government be monarchial or not. And
this interpr etation should now be carried out by primarily making
“foreign States” immune. The imrhunity “for Rulers” may be, ०1
course, preserved for exceptional cases.

1, Lauterpacht, “Jurisdictional Immunities" (1961) B.Y.B. 1. L. 220, 237, 288,
2 Ali Abbor v, 0.4.2. , 4.1.8. 1986 8.0. 280,

anne


Recommendation relating to execution

1-G.20, Another point relates to section 86(3} which prohibits
execution, against the property of the Ruler of a foreign State. The
Supreme Court has, with reference to this provision, abserved'—

“The provision that a decree passed against the Ruler of a
foreign State shalt net be executed against the property
of such Ruler, rather tebde te show that what is exempted
is the separate meoperty of tl tuler himself and not the
property of the Ruler as the head of the State. A distinc-
tion is made between the. property belonging to the State
of which the Ruler is reco; ised to be the head, and the
property belonging to the ler individually”.

@n this point also; opportunity may. be taken to make the sec-

tion more comprehensive, se as to exempt the property of
the. State 6750. पु

Exerutiqn—Present practice .

1-G.21. It may be stated that immunity’ is conceded by the majo-
rity of States’ with sespect to meagilres ‘of execution directed against
the property of foreign states.‘

Position in England as to execution.

1,G.22, In the ‘Cristina’ the Heuspof Lords ruled that a writ in

ranp issued in Admiralty against a 11% एक सच the contzel of a foreign
te; public: PUTROSSS;. a Process again: ie the. pos-
sessory. rights of a. oneal In: spvargign. lover condition. ०: taining im-
munity, it is sufficient if the aoe oyornment roduces evidence
showing “that its claim is not esory, nor ‘founthd’ on title,

manifestly defective” ‘-", It. js not, bound ive a complete f of
its, proprietary or possesiory te : Pave a complete Proo

ane er फ्”त“/त“त/५त५___ह8 तन... -
1. AM Abbar 7. U:AR. ATE. 1046 5.0, 30, आह
pier ia nocally stated as one of i ४०५६, “The Problema of juris:

immunity; दा. Leni
पंथ of Roralga Staton’, (0४) 28 BY.BIS. 220, 243,

Seo— . i He
> Oop ach, “The Peal Rrsblmyot J ‘ Immunitiga of Parvign States"
1 | ee eS a Btadive $20, oe aa 25000, 272. है 30०7 (1081)
(8) The country-by-country sia oF te 2 ‘caches of the. vari ix ction
sovereign immunity in Suokaritke), Stety Eamanflioe aro ‘Teuling Activity (T0561
pages 162-250,
(s) Boowntle, Public Internationa! Law, (2986), page 286. ‘

4. Sorensen, Hague Racweit (1 IIT, 1797 vémaiders that the practice ix suffiient!
usr to mippoct « surtaawey Sule pence nob eufidently

8. ‘The Obristina, (1938) A.C. 485.

6. See Juan Yesmail & Co. 71 . Government of Re hic nionesia,
bse Fert a fa. #. of Republic of Indonesia, (1968) 8.0, 74

7... Of Republin of Masico x. Haffestn (1948) 344 0.8. 30,

|

टिा

अननकिननना carne =


3

Position iti sothe other countries as to éxecation

1-G.23. But a few countries apply the doctrine of restricted immu-
nity' for acts jure gestionis at the stage of execution also." Also there
is acute controversy as to the exentption of foreign trading vessels.

Recotimendation regarding notice to prospective plaintiff

1G.24. A suggestion made with the U.S.A in mind may also
be noted"—

“Now that the Department will have to make factual deter-
minations in almost all cases, to decide whether the acti-
vity is ‘sovereign’ or ‘private’, in nature, it will have to
establish some procedure! for resolving these. issues. All
government procedure affecting private interests should
provide for notice to the plaintiff and a chance to be heard,
at least trough a a written argument, The need would be
filled if the, ment, after receiving a request for a
suggestion from’ an appropriate representative of the
foreign governntént; ot for & ruling from the judge himself
after determining that immunity was prime facia justified,
sent a registered letter to counsel for the other side. The
letter should adyise him of the request and offer him a
chance t appear in ‘person or to fe a brief within a limi-

ed time”,

This appears to be a useful’ suggestion, and may be adopted, of
couirse' in’ a’ simpler 1000.
Hievotarnbadlttont

1-G:25; The following edreft of section 86 is recormmi¢nded, in
order to carry out the limited amendments indicated above.

Suggested: re-draft of section 86—

86.00) ख० foreign State may’ be sued in’ any Court otherwise com-
petenit' to-try: the ‘suit exept with the consent of the Central Govern-
ment-cerfified in writing by a Seerttary to that Governihent:

. हर i ideal
Provided that a person as, a,tenant of immovable property,
sue without such consent no aforesnidia foreign State: from Shek he
holds or claims to hold the property. है

ro, OO OE
x sae alent a aha le
(क्रम Kall, Int. .( D . " Tae (3058), ४

4.
(0) Resolution in Annusire de 1, Inst. 1954 ][, 288, Art. 5; and Weimann tind Bc. 00009
(0) Resohaton in Aen te ee MERE Sopp ४१७४7. २७७७

2 eee 2, Balen davision : Hocobel vi Gretk' State, Int. L.R, 18 (1051), ३७. 2 79 IDL

३. Michael Hi, Cardone, “Boveqaign ६७५७३”, (1064) 67 Harv, 1. Rev
! ~N



64

(2) Such consent may he given with respect to a specified suit or
to several specified suits or with respect to all suits of any specified
class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of
suits, the Court in which the foreign Siete may be sued; but it
shall not be given, unless it appears to the Central Government
that the foreign State—

(a) has instituted a svit in the court against the person de-
siring to sue it, or

(9) by itsel7 or another, trades within the local limits of the
jurisdiction of the court, or

(0) is in possession of immovable property situated within
those limits and is to be sued with reference to such pro-

. perty or for money charged thereon, or

(d) has expressly or impliedly waived the privilege accorded
to it by this section,

“(3) Except with the consent of the Central Government certified
in writing by a Secretary to the Government no decree shall be exe-
cuted against the property of any foreign State.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply. in
relation to—

(a) any Ruler of a foreign State:

(b) any ambassador or envoy of a foreign State:

(९) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; and

(d) any such member of the staff or retinue of a foreign State
or of the Ruler, ambassador or envoy of a foreign State or
of the High Commissioner‘ot a Commonwealth country as
the Central Government may, by general or special order,
Ra city in this behalf, as they apply in relation to a foreign

‘ate,

&) The following persons shall not be arrested under this Code,
namely— हि

(a) any Ruler of a foreign State;

(b) any ambassador or envoy of a foreign State;

(c) any High Commissioner of a cormmonwealth country;

(9) any such member of the staff of retinue of a foreign State or
of the Ruler, ambassador or envoy of a fore ign State or
of the High Gommissioner of 2 Commonweal country as

ie Central Government may, eral or special order,
specify in this behalf. ¥ Be ,

(6) Where a request is made to the Central Government for the
grant of si, consent under this section, the Central Government shall,
before refusing to accept the request in whole or in part, give the
person making the request a reasonable opportunity of being heard”.
Section 87-B

1-G.9. Section 87B hes been already amended! very recently, and
is now confined to a cause of action arising beft : A
ment of the Constitution. a है before the commence-

1, The Bulors of Indian States (Abolition of Privféges) Act, 1972.


Carre 1-H
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS

Introduction

1-H. Part of the Code, sections 89 to 93, deal with special pro-
ceedings. .

Section 91(1)

1-H.2. Section 961) authorises the filing of a suit in respect of
a public nuisance by the Advocate-General, or by two or more per-
sons who have obtained the written consent of the Advocate-Gene-
ral. It appears to us that the Advocate-General should not be troubl-
ed with such questions. It is enough if the leave of the court is ob-
tained.' In the comin, years, P roblems of pollution of water and air
and the emergence of new unknown hazards to health are likely
to require considerable attention. And, until a full-fledged environ-
mental law takes shape, section 91 could serve a nese purpose in
combating these kinds of nuisance.

1-H.3. It also appears to us that the procedure allowed under this
section could be usefully extended to wrongful acts other than pub-
lic nuisance which zftect the pu blic. As illustrations of such wrong-
ful acts, we may refer to fraudulent practices of traders, which harm
consumers in general,

Recommenation
1-H.4. Accordingly, we recommend that section 91 should be
revised as follows:—

“(1) In the case of & public nuisance, or of any other wrongful
act affecting the public, two or more persons, having ob-
tained the leave of the court, may institute a suit, though
no special damage has been caused, for a declaration and
injunction or for such other relief 'as may be appropriate
to the circumstances of the case”.

Section 92

1-H.5. In the earlier Report, attention was drawn to the legisla-
tion regarding cy, pes undertaken in England, and to the he ee
provisions in the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 (Bombay ree 99
of 1950), (which have been oes, by certain other States also),
Some difficulties were felt in. ‘by virtue of the limited scope
of the cy pres doctrine, under whith the court had power to direct
the application of the income to another purpose only in certain spe-
cified cases, for example, where the original object had failed.

1. Aa to appeal against an order under section 91, see diseussion relating to seoticn 104
para 1K. 7. Infra. =
2. 27th Report, pages 118 to 120 , note on section 92.


हद

1-H.6. Now, there might be cases where it would be desirable to”

alter the very purpose of application as mentioned in the trust instru-
ments, because the original ‘sijeuts lavve been adequately provided

for by other means, or have ceased to provid le a suitable method of
using the proper ‘Weed ‘or useless or prejudicial
to the public we: are or are not substantially beneficial to the cl

of persons for whom the endowment was intended origttsihy.

1-H.7. In England, the Nathan Committee’ went into great detail
in this question. The Committee was satisfied that the most urgent
need was to enable the Charity Commissioners to give timely assis-
tance to those trustees who were administering trusts “no longer
adagt ted to ‘modern conditipna”, Studs the alteration of the’ objects

arities (where the objects cart stilf be exetuted) could only be

fone by a statutory power; the Curninittee recommended. suitable
lation regarding cy' pres.

LH. ie Charities Act,’ hed catried out, to a large extent, the
revo tions" ‘of the Ni Committee. Briefly under
section 18 of that Act, the original sarpose of a charitable gift cam be
alteted to allow the' prépetty to be Pres, where the origi-
nal purpose has been fulfilled or oat ‘be cuiried out ‘acuprding:
paly of the pe and the gp! tat) or provides we quze for part

e property, or erty able by 4
gift.and' other. pr aperty ape 7118! t be
conjunction, or where the ith re
an area which has ceased ६0 be a unit .of persons which has
ceased to be suitable or where the original purposes“have been ade-
quately provided for by other means or ceased (as bettan teulexy’ or
‘harmful'to the community) oe किक, ia. ey gheritable or ceased to pro-
vide a suitable and effective method ७ _property- available
by virtue of the gift, Thus, a failure of the original purpose is not,
now, the 'oflly 10४00 for thy “pid.

-  A-Hi®, Attention, ae to settion 56 read with sec-
58-of the ome whereunder, on an appli-
‘the: court can’ sanction an

ao
alteration of the original.ol = Rublic trust. It provides
if the court is of opinion 112 ; ‘out cf mae

object is not wholly or gan मे
wocessary: op proper in the the-court mm nay direct the
. RRQpeEty: of income: of fe pot ‘Or any portion: toe
sapped: eg-prea te amy or elisfous’ patpose: :
1-8: Thé previous Cémutitedtont sttited—

“The. matter.can be cbniaored hatdetail- when the Law of pab-
eS Sa NRC RESCUER EEE Ens Mmmm Soe cameramen cet ee
ae paragraph 20, O16 60, age mating to 1068) Ont

2: Obaritios Act, 1666 (8 & 9 Elid., 2 ¢ 58), section 13.
& Bombay Public Trusts Ast, 1959...

YE porn 20 hoffe reouumehded edf ping of seston 1800 4:25, 18४



67

LHL The doctrine of oy pres can, even non Se appear
suits: under section 92. Bet itp scope, will, 17173] bh
by the rules of the English Law, as unmodified by sbstute,

1-H... We agree wittt ‘thei 890४6 racommendation.. However, it
appears to-us that it wouldibe desitzble-to + make the. amendment
regarding: the’ 80098 of cy! pres: without whiting for revision of the
law of public trusts. .

1 1 be fabs हे

क-ह.3, We are, furthet, जे the Vidw jfhe pruvision ision requiring
leave of thie Advocate-Gereral shoul? be rep! by. a provision
requiring leave of the Cobrt, Obteiting the leave of the Advocate-
General takes time, dnd the tdnsidefdtions which" he: takes into
gecount can be taken 1700 3९८७७; By the Court as wel Since juris-
diction under the section 8 ए:#४वत का tie principal eivil‘court of ori-
ginal jurisdiction, it can be expected that the discretion td-grant leave
under the amended section will ke exercised in a responsible
manner.’ ” ° st

1-114. 'We notice ‘thaf’in ith dppletion to pulllie’ truste( falling
within special laws or governed by local. Laws; चछ€ laws contain
provisions substituting a; deffeyent; ure regardin, rape a hele An
example in. point is the provision if, Re ‘Wakfs* Act, 4४००0 below:—

“55. @ A suit to obinin any ‘of the reliets, mentioned ek sec
४ 14 of the: 829० किक पास ket,
1893) and in, section $2 of the Code of Civil Procedtre, 1908
(Act ¥ 0 a), rélating ६8 say -wakt thay, notrithstanding
anything to the gon “eit obi in. 8, be insti-
tuted by the Board, ob Sing’ the feave or consent
teferred to % Goes .
२ ३ (6780. . feo
(2) No suit to-obtein-any ‘of she. maiots referred to in sub-sec-
on (कम shan the Boer: withowt the coment प
2 1. gray है iH wit
it ‘writheg of the: Bosth. है ia mt in ‘
ot 19.3!

Provided that: inp stich फू “के ४310811%6 required for -
bation tc be done by ite मिल स्का any to a
rules'or orders ‘tiatld tnmwenn der, 1 "*

ar Sees mate ie ee ch

section'$2, Med!in respect of

mréltistespett in section 92

1-H.15. While. the procedure
need not be disturbed, it ds our in!
section: 92)" shotled apply 10 Leute!
suck. trivita also: An
doesnot; kawever, dtipear te”

a tt ge ee ए७ररआ्ऋ >>

+ pagent

1. Ste Mabthedrish&ns प- Heasabaniies; eX: 1919: Nelgeese 6४) OBR saab dg Alyyar J,
2. As to nppoal,fese seotion 108 and ioctl AIL Bar dhe Paresh 1-1-7, tae.
3. galt 56, (कण raphe? wed CFs Soe ६



Eeoommendation

1-H.16. Accordingly, we recommend that section 92(1) should be
revised as follows:—

“(1) In the case of any alleged breach of any expréss or con-

है > gractive trust created for public urposes af a charitable

or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is

deemed necessary for the administration of any such trust,

५ .. two or more persons haying an interest in the trust

and having obtained the leave of the Court, may institute

a suit, whether contentious or not, in the principal Civil

Court of orginal jurisdiction.or in any other Court em-

powered in that behalf by the State Government within

the local limits of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part

of the subject-matter of the trust is situate, to obtain a
decree.

[Rest as in existing section 92(1)].

1-11.17. We further recommend the insertion of the following new
sub-section in section 92:—

“(3) The circumstances in which the original purposes of a
charitable gift can be altered to allow the property given
or part of it to be applied cy pres shall be as follows: —

(a) where the original purposes, in whole or in part—
. G) have been as far as may be fulfilled; or

(ii) cannot be carried out, or according to the directi
) given and to the spirits of the gift; or eerons

“(b) where the original purposes provide a use for part only of
the property available by virtue ¢ of the gift; or ® y

(९) where the Property | available by virtue of the gift and other
pro] perky applicabi for similar purposes can be more effec-
tively used in conjunction, and to that end can suitably, re-
gard being had to the spirit of gift, be made applicable
to common purposes; or १

(०) where the original pprposes were laid down—

(i) by reference to an area which then was but has since
teased to be a uttit for some other purpose, or

(ii) by reference to a class of persons or to an area which
has, for any reagon, since ceased to be suitable, regard
being had to the spirit of the gift, or to be practicable
in administering the gift; or

(९) where the original purposes, in whole or i have,
they were laid down, — ¥ or in part, , wince

(3) been adequately proyided, for by other means; or

कि ७०-००१ ०-००


“Gi) ceased, as being useless or harmful to the community
or for other reasons, to be in law charitable. or
(iii) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and
effective method of using the property available by
yatue of the gift, regard being had to the spirit of
je gift”.

Section 93

1-H.18. Section 93 provides for the exercise outside Presidency
towns of powers conferred by sections 91-92 on the Advocate-Gene-
ral. In view of our recommendation to substitute, in sections 91 and
92, the leave of the court in place of the sanction of the Advocate-Ge-
neral, section 93 becomes unnecessary.

Recommendation

1-H.19, We, therefore, recommend that section 93 should be
deleted.

tes
1. See Gisonasion as to sestion @1 and भी.


Cuarrer: Li
SUPELEMESTAL PROCKEDINGS

introductory
1-11, Part 6, sections 94 and 95, in the body of the Code, deals
cwith what has been described as “supplemental proceedings”. These
proceedings are mainly concerned with temporary relief. No change
Is needéd-in thig Part. +
‘

PB bes 18५०१. eal oe

pee


ay

Chapter 1-5

APPEALS—FIRST. AND SECOND APPEALS
Introductory

1-J.l. Part 7 of the Code, sections 96 to 112, deal with pepeals
With certain exceptions of a minor character, one appeal on atts ag
well as on law is allowed as a generaf rule, and a further appeal, on
questions of law and on certain other questions is also allowed. In
the case of first appeal, the forum of Appeal is left to be dealt with
by the Civil Courts Act of each State. second appeal lies al-
ways to the High Court. The Code mainly creates the right of

appeal, deals with the j isdigtion of ellate Court, and pro-
vies for appellate procedure, if Pe, ape is dealt with in the
body of the Code (Pert 7), ad id the ९१०३ and pracedure of the ap-
pellate courts are dealt with in the. a . .

Section 96(1)

1-J.2. We are recommending' the insertion of a provision to the
effect that (with certain exceptions) a court must decide all issues,

. even if the suit can be disposed of ona preliminary point, Where, in

conformity with such a provision the qqurt decides all issues, and the
decree is in favour of a person but the finding on some of the issues
is adverse to him, he cannot, as the law stands at present, appeal
against thé adverse finding (ie. the finding on the iseserdesided
against him), and the fon this not res fidicata at least according
ta the view ysgally taken. This, posit as how’ to bé. changed,

Recommendation

14.3. We rec पा ,, therefore, -the following E: iT
should be inserted jow sechion Beye ollowing Explanation

“Explanation—A party. oad by @ findiny rt incor:

Explanation A Ba ag from the 01078 30 Sar
as it relates to that findings notwithstanding that by teseon
of the fading oh ce Cee on a की other issue which is
sufficient for, dacisien 6; 80९९, - ew in
part is के favour of tbet party”. 2060

Section 968 (New)

_ 1.4. Appeals in petty cases was the silbjoct-matter of a quéstion™
in qur Questionnaire, as follqws:

“2, There is a suggestion that from the judgments. )'
courts of first instance, an 563 भर a ey OX 1111 yrs
eases; 589, cdses of a nature bate tae 1
the point of view of subject-matter, w! ‘amount of value fom
TR ae «wc bemeieben naan see

1, See diseuusion relating to Order a es :

2, Question 72, है



72

subject-matter of the dispute in the court of first instance and still in
dispute on appeal was and is not more than three thousand rupees (or
such other sum as may he considered proper), and the decree or order
does not involve directly or indirectly some claim or question respect-
ing property of an amount or value, exceeding three thousand rupees
(or such other sum as may be considered proper).

“The proposal is that in these petty cases, the first appeal should
be allowed only if the appeal court certifies that a question of law is
involved, and the issue of such certificate should be decided either in
chambers or in open court as the appeal court may think proper.

What are your views in the matter? Would you agree with the
suggestion?”. हु

1

1J.5. The majority of the replies on the question are opposed to
the suggested restriction, but a minority favour it. After giving due
weight to the views received, we have come to the conclusion that
no first appeal should lie in any suit of the nature cognizable by
courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject-
matter of the suit does not exceed three thousand rupees, except on
3 question of law. Our object in making this recommendation is to
reduce appeals on facts in petty cases. In our opinion, some such
restrictions are necessary in the interests of litigants themselves.
They should not be encouraged to appea) on facts in petty cases of
the nature mentioned above.

Recommendation है

1.3.6. Accordingly, we recommend that the following sub-sec-
tion should be inserted in section 96—

“(4), No appeal shall le in any suit of the nature cognizable
by Courte of Small’ Causes, when the amount or value of
the subject-matter of the suit does not exceed three thou-
sandg rupees, etcent on a question of law.” .

Section 99

1J.7. Section 99, which, inter alia, saves irregularity in respect
of misjoinder of parties or causes of action, does not apply to non-
joinder, In the earlier rt, the Commission examined the. ques-
tion whether “non-join should be added in the section, as in
Order 1, Rule 9. It, however, considered it unnecessary to do so, as—

(a) non-joinder of an essential party should be regarded as a
fatal defect, and

(b) non-joinder of a proper, party would not, even now, entail
variation, etc., of a decree,

1-38. We agree that the correct lega! position is as was stated
in the above Report. . fy दि a .

व, भक्त Report, page 192, note on section कं...

er a

rn कण

eee,


be

73

1J.9. As was stated in a Madras case,’ objections as to non-
joinder, if taken at the earliest opportunity under Order 1, rule 13,
fall under two classes.

“1. If it is absolutely necessary to have the absent party, he
ought to be added unless the plaintiff refuses to add him when the
suit should he dismissed. If the trial Court erroneously proceeds with
the suit, without following either of these courses, the objection can
be repeated in appeal, when again it may be disposed of only in
the above said two ways. The present appeal falls under this heading.

2. If it is not a case of imperative necessity but only a matter
of convenience or expediency, either the absent party may be added
or the suit may be tried without him (Order 1, Rule 9). In such a
case, the objection, if repeated in appeal, may be dealt with simi-
larly.”

1-7.10, In a later Madras case,? non-joinder of an essential party
was, on the facts of the case, regarded as going to the jurisdiction
of the Court, and the suit was dismissed. The earlier Madras case
was not, however, cited," and the dismissal was ordered even though
R. objection to non-joinder had not been taken in the trial court.

is was because it was found that the suit could not effectively
proceed in the absence of the parties who were not joined.
Recommendation

1-J.11. We are of the view that an express provision on the
subject of non-joinder is desirable, and the position should be the
same as in the case of mis-joinder. At the same time, non-joinder of
essential parties should not be included. Accordingly, we recommend
that section 99 should be revised,’ so as to read as follows: —

“99. No decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor
shall any case be remanded in appeal, on account of any
mis~joinder or non-joinder of parties or cause of action or
any error, defect or irregularity in any proceeding in the
suit not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction
of the court.

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to non-joinder
Of a necessary party.”

Section 99A

1-J.12. As regards appeals against final orders under section 47,
we had included a question’ in the Questionnaire as to adoption of

the principle that “no such order shall be reversed or substantially -

carried, nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal on account of any
error, defect or irregularity in any proceedings not affecting the
merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court.”

1. Shanmuga v, Subboya, 3.1, छ., 1028 Mad. 31% 320 (Ramesam J.).
2. Amirchoad Nagindar v. Raoji Bhat, ATR. 1980 Mad. 714,718. *
3. Shanmuga एन Subbayya, ATR. 1982, Mad. 817 (eupra).
4, Similar amendment would be desirable In Order 1, Rule 9,
5, Question 10
‘LjB(D)220Mof Ly¢0A—7


4

1-J-13. Replies on this question generally favour the proposal,
and we have come to the conclusion thet it is desirable.

1-J.14. We, therefore, favour a provision of the nature suggested
in the question referred to above, but after some discussion, we have
decided to employ the wording “unless it has prejudicially affected
the decision of the case.” We further think that want of jurisdiction
should also not matter, in this context.

1J.15. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of a new sec-
tion.as follows:—

“983A. No order under section 47 shall be reversed or substan-
tiolly varied, nor shall any cese relating to sueh order be
remanded, in appeal on account of any error, defect or
irregularity in any proceedings relating to such order,
unless such error, defect or irregularity has prejudicially
affected the decision of the case”.

Section 100—Right of second apptal

1-J.16. We now come to a very important question, which per-
tains not to mere procedure but to a substantive right, This is the
right of second appeal conferred by section 100.

1-J.16A. Any rational system of administration of civil law should
recognise—and it always does—that litigation in civil causes (as
described in section 9 of the Code) should have two hearings on
facts—one by the trial Court and one by the Court of Appeal. That,
mp fact, has been the scheme of the Code of Civil Procedure ever
since .

According to recognised principles of administration of civil
law, every litigant is entitled to take his cause before a second appel-
late Court on a question of law, and this right also has always been
recognised in our country. The two relevant provisions in which this
right is recognised are section 100 of the Code and a Article 133 of
the Constitution’.

Two categories of civil litigation

1-J.17. Traditionally, civil litigation has been placed in two cate-.
gories in our country. For convenience, we may refer to the two
categories as ‘minor’ and ‘major’, In our country, there is a hierarchy
of the judiciary. beginning with Munsifs. or Civil Judges, Junior
Division, followed by the Civil Judges or Civil Judges Senior Divi-
sion, (or corresponding officers) and district Judges and, above them,
is the High Court. Formerly, above the High Courts in Indias, there
used to be the Privy Council, but,,in 1947, the Federal Court took
the place of the Privy Council and, since 1950, the Supreme Court
is the highest Court in the country.

1, Article 182 haa been racantly amended.


15

Chronology of litigation instituted in lowest court

1-J.18. The Code of Civil Procedure requires that all civil litiga-
tion must be instituted in the court of the lowest jurisdiction. In-
evitably, minor litigation begins its career in the Court of the Munsif
or the Civil Judge, Junior Division. After he pronounces his judg:
ment and a decree is drawn, an appeal lies either to the District
Court or the Civil Judge (Senior Division) on whom appellate power
has been conferred. The appeal to this Court is filed under Order
XLI. After the decision of the first appellate Court is pronounced and
an appellate decree is drawn, the aggrieved party moves the High
Court under section 100 of the Code and, broadly stated, such an
appeal has to be within the terms of clauses (a), (b) and (c) of section

1-J.19. Major litigation begins its. career in the Court of the
Civil Judge or the Civil Judge (Senior Division) and, after the trial
Court has pronounced its judgment and a decree has been drawn,
the aggrieved party goes to the High Court in first appeal under
Order XLI. After the High Court has pronounced its judgment and
an appellate decree-has been drawn up, the appeal used to go to the
Privy Council, then to the Federal Court and now it goes to the
Supreme Court under Article 133 or with a certificate under Article
136 of the Constitution. That, broedly stated, is the position of the
hierarchy of the judiciary and, if we may say so, the hierarchy of
appeals contemplated by the procedural law.

Kecommendation im Report on Article 133

1-J.20, Before we proceed to consider the changes which we wish
. to recommend in amending 5. 100 of the Code, we ought to indicate
briefly the reasons why we recommended to the Union Government
the amendment of Article 133 of the Constitution by our Report on
the subject. The Union Government has accepted our Report and
Article 133 has accordingly been amended. The philogop! hy of this
amendment is that High Courts in our country should ordinarily
decide all questions of law pertaining to the interpretation of State
legislation and their decisions on such points shoul fa be final. If any
of the provisions of State legislation use material expressions or
clauses which are common ६0 other State legislations and there
appears to be conflict in the views taken by different High Courts in
regard to the interpretation-of such expressions or clauses, the matter
can legitimately be taken before the Supreme Court for resolving
such conflict. Subject to such. cases, ina federal structure, it is legi-
timate and natural that High Courts of the State should be regarded
as final Courts of Appeal so far as the interpretation of State statutes
is concerned.

14.21. In regard to the interpretation of Central statutes, how-
ever, the position is different. A party aggrieved by the decision of
the High Court in respect of any provision of the Central statute
may be entitled to move the Supreme Court. provided the matter
sought to be raised by him is not already concluded by a decision

1, 4th Report.
LyB(D)220Mof LIZCA—H(a)



76

of the Supreme Court. In regard to the interpretation of provisions
of Central statutes, if there is a difference a? opinion amongst High
Courts, the case for moving the Supreme Court for resolving such
a dispute is all the stronger. It is in the light of this approach that
we recommended to the Union Government to amend Article 133 in
a radical way; and, in doing so, we had emphasised the fact that
the test of pecuniary valuation, which had been prescribed by the
erstwhile Article 133, had no relevance to our approach in this
matter. The reference to the pecuniary valuation having now been
deleted, it is conceivable that, even in regard to a case falling under
the minor litigation, 2 party may be entitled to go to the Supreme
Court, provided, of course, the test prescribed by the amended Article
133 is satisfied. The words used in Article 133 of the Constitution re-
quire that the point raised by the appellant should be a substantial
point of general importance which, aecording to the High Court, it
is necessary for the Supreme Court to decide,

Commission’s approach to proper scope of second appeal

1.J.22. Tt is in the light of the amended Article 133 that we pro-
pose to approach the question about the scope of section 100 of the
Code as it should be after it is amended. It would be noticed that
clauses (a), (b) and (९) of section 100 to which we will presently
tefer, are, in a sense, very wide in effect. In fact. as we will have
occasion to point cut, clauses (9) and (९) have led to a plethora of
conflicting judgments and it may be safely stated that ingenuity of
the lawyers determined to seek adinission for second appeals of their
clients in the High Court. coupled with judicial subtlety which gene-
rally believes that even an erroneous finding of fact does, on the
ultimate analysis, lead to injustice. has unduly and unreasonably

widened the horizon of section 100. 1६ is easy enough to understand -

what a point of law is; but in dealing with second appeals, courts
have devised and successfully adopted several other concepts. such
as a mixed question of fact and law, a legal inference te be drawn
from facts proved, and even the point that the case has not been
‘properly approached by the courts below. This has created confu-
sion in the minds of the public as to the legitimate scope of the
second appeal under section 100 and has burdened the High Courts
with an unnecessarily large number af second appeals.

Approach of High Court to second appeal

1-J.23. The approsch to second appeals has traditionally differed
from High Court to Hieh Court. and from Judge to Judge even in
the same Hieh Court. The Kerala High Court, for instance admits
second avpesls, where the avpellate court has reversed the findings
of fact recorded by the trial court'; this position is prima facie
difficult* to reconcile with the plain provisions of section 100, Even.
where such a position does not exist. it is not uncommon that judges
are more lenient in admitting <econd avveals where the courts below
have recorded conflicting findings of fact.

7. See Kerala amendment to section 100.
2. Seo 27th Report, para 123 and 1400 Report Vol. 1 pages 377, 378, para 25, 26.°


ty

ve]

This aspect of the matter has been noticed by several Committees
and Commissions which dealt with the question of the growing
arrears in the High Courts. substantially because of the indiscrimi-
nate admission of second appeals and civil revision applications, and
we will have to say something very radical later on. To anticipate
our recommenadtion. we might say at this stage that we are recom-
mending’ that section 115 of the Code, relating to revision, should
be deleted.

Discussion in 14th Report

1-J.24. The Law Commission, in its Fourteenth Report.’ referred
to the problem posed by the unduly lenient admission of second
appeals and observed that “having regard to the terms of section
100, an appeal should not be admitted merely because the appellant
has shown that an arguable or prima facie valid point of law arises
in the appeal, but that the Court has to be satisfied that the decision
of the lower appellate Court on a point of law was erroneous and
that in order to do justice between the appellant and the respondent,
it is essential that a further hearing should be given to both the
parties”. The Commission thought that the existing alarming position
of arrears could be met if it was recommended that the High Court
should adopt the practice of “circulating the papers relating to second
appeal to a judge outside the Court hours for the purpose of en-
abling him to determine whether it should be admitted straight-
away and notice issued to the respondent or whether the appeal
should be posted for a preliminary hearing under Order XLI rule
11.” The Commission further recommended that such a scrutiny
should be made by a senior and experienced Judge.

1-J-25. The Commission also thought that a statutory require-
ment should be made providing that the Judge admitting the second
appeal should state the point or points of law which arise for con-
sideration and enabling the High Court to admit a second appeal
on specified points only and it should be provided by rules that
where a second appeal is filed, certified copies of the judgments of
oth the Courts below should aceompany the memorandum of
appeal and, if in any such appeal the appellant proposes to raise
any question of the construction of 2 document, a true translation
af the document should also be filed along with the memorandum
of appeal

Arrears in High Courts

1-J-26. These recommendations, however, do not appear to have
been implemented and the position of the arrears pending in the
High Court, partly because of indiscriminate admission of second
appeals and civil rei on ce, plication, grew from bad to worse. The
Shah Committee, which ‘t with this problem in 1972, has obsery-
ed that “it ig necessary-to provide for a stricter and better scrutiny
of second appeals and they should be made subject to special leave,

1. Seo recommendation relating to section 115.
2. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 300, para 12,
4


73

imstead of giving an absolute right of appeal limiting it to question
oi law.” It veiterated the observations made by the Law Commis-
sion in its Fourteenth Report, and repeated its recommendation that
the second appeals should be circulated to the Judges for reading
outside the working hours of the court Zor determining the question
whether the second appeals should be admitted straightaway and
notice issued to the respondents or whether they should be placed
for preliminary hearing under Order 41, rule 11.

View of High Court Arrears Committee

1-J-27. The High Court Arrears Committee was quite clear in
its view that the primary cause of the accumulation of arrears in
the High Courts is the laxity with which second appeals are ad-
mitted without serious scrutiny in the light of the provisions of
section 100 of the Code.

View of some Judges
1-J.28. As we have already indicated’, some Judges in the High
Courts honestly believe that, if they are satisfied that, in any second

appeal brought before them evidence has been grossly misapy preciated .

cither by the lower appellate court or by both the Courts below, it is
their duty to interfere, because they seem to feel that a decree follow-
ing upon a gross misappreciation of evidence involves injustice and it
is the duty of the High Court to redres# such injustice. However laud-
able and commendable such an approach may ethically claim to be, it
overlooks the fact that courts administer justice according to law;
and. where limits have been prescribed for the exercise of the High
Court’s powers under section 100, ‘in trying to redress injustice by
interfering with questions of fact, the Court, in effect, is violating
the express provisions of seetion 100 ‘itself. In this connection, we
may quote two judgments of the Sy, Court where this aspect
of the matter hes been cmphatically poms, out.

Privy Council case
1-J-28A. Before doing so, however, it would be relevant to recall
that, as carly as 1890, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council*

stated that there is no jurisdiction to entertain a second appeal on |

the ground of an erreneoug finding of fact, however gross or inexcus-
able the error may seem to be, and they added a note of warn-
ing that no Court’in India has power fo add to, or enlarge, the
grounds specified in section 100. हे

Supreme Court cases

1-J-29. Reverting, then, tq the two judgments of the Supreme
Court, in M. Remappa v. M. Boijjapaa’, the Su: Hae’ Court was deal-
ing with an appeal by special leave whefe the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh had interfered with the finding’ of fact recorded by the ap-
pellate Court which, in turn, had itself reversed the trial Court's

1, Para, 15.28, supra.
2. Mat. Durga Ohowdheain v. Jawahar Singh, (1890) 17 1.4. 122 (P.0.).

3. Mf. Ramappa v. M. Bojjappa, (1963) &O.B. 613.


‘y

9

finding on the same question of fact. In setting aside the decree of
the second appellate Court, the Supreme Court observed :
“It may be that in some cases, the High Court dealing with
the second appeal is inclined to take the view that what
३६ regards to be justice or equity of the case has not besr
served by the findings of fact recorded by courts of fact,
but on such occasions it is necessary to remember that
what is admunistered in courts is justice according to law
and considerations of fair play and equity however im-
portant they may be, must yield to clear and express
provisions of the law. If in reaching its decisions in second
appeals, the High Court contravenes the express provi-
siong of section 100, it would inevitably introduce ,in such
decisions an element of disconcertin, unpredictability)
which is usually associated with gambling; and that is a
reproach which judicial process must constantly and
scrupulously endeavour to avoid”.

1-J-30. Similarly in Deity Pattebhiramaswamy v. 8. Hanymayya
and others, the Supreme Court was dealing with an appeal by
special leave against the judgmént and cecree of the High Court of
Madras set'ing aside the judgment and decree of the District Judgz,
Guntur, which had confirmed the judgment and decree of the Sub-
ordinate Jidge, Guntur, Reversing the decision of the High Court,
the Supreme Court observed that; notwithstanding the clear and
authoritative pronouncement of the Privy Council on the limits and
the scope of the High Court’s jurisdiction under section 100, Civil
Frocedure Code, “some learned Judges of the High Courts are dispos-
ing of Second Appeals as it they were first appeals. This introduces,
apart from the fact that the ‘igh Court assumes and exercises 8
jurisdiction which it does not possess, a gambling element in the liti-
gation and confusion in the mind of the litigant public. This case
affords a typical illustration of such interference by a Judge of the
High Court in excess of his jurisdiction under s. 100, Civil Proce-
dure Code, We have, therefore, noi alternative but to set aside the
learned Judge of the High Court had no jurisdiction to interfere in
second appeal with the findings of fact given by the first appellate
Court based upon an appreciation of the relevant evidence.

We have deliberately ‘referred to these two decisions of the
Supreme Court to emphasise the point that, notwithstanding the
recommendations made by the Committees and Commissions in the
ast, and notwithstanding the words of caution and warning au-
horitatively pronounced ‘by the Supreme Court, High Courts do
sometimes unwittingiy cr even re rately enlarge the scope of their
jurisdiction under section 100 in ance of what they honestly
regard as “the requirements of j ice”,

Search for absolute truth to be Lienited

1-J-31. At this stage, it may be permissible to point out that a

search for absolute truth in the administration of justice, however

laudable, must in the very nature. of things be put under some
veasonable restraint. In other words, a search for truth has to be

1. Deity Patiabhisamaswamy ¥. S. Hanymagys, जा... 1950 8.0. 67.


80

reconciled with the doctrine of finality. Cynics have sometimes said
that, if appeals are provided against the Judgments pronounced by
the highest Court ir the country, a fair percentage of the decisions
cf the highest Court may be reversed. Indeed, some critics, embit-
tered by their experience in litigation, have gone to the extent of
suggesting that. if the same appeal is placed before two different
Benches of the same High Court or the Supreme Court, it is not
altogether impossihic that different verdicts may be rendered. That
is what has given rise to the saying which is current at the Bar
that the currect judgment is one against which no appeal lies,

1-J-32. We are referring to this aspect of the matter only to
emphasise the point that, in the interests of the litigants themsel ives,
it may not be unreasonable to draw a line in respect of the two
Gifierent categories of litigation whore procedure will Say ata
certain stage that questions of fact have been decided by lower courts
and the matter shouid be allowed to rest where it lies without any
further appel, This may sound somewhat harsh to an individual
litigant; but, in the larger interest of the administration of justice,
this view seers to us to be juristically sound and Pragmatically
wise. It is in the light of this basic approach that we will now
proceed to consider the three clauses of section 100 and deal elabo-
rately with all the point which ultimately lead to the recommenda-
tion which we propose to’make to amend section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure in a radical way.

Average litigant usually exhausted by the stage of first appeal

1.J-33. The average litigant is exhausted by the time he has
travelled to the court of first appeal, and too often a wealthy liti-
gant, (such as, a Corporation), may well be in a position to carry
appeals to a point where the financial resources of the oj ite
party are practically exhausted, No one can deny that courts Mould
be readily accessible to the people; and when litigation is embarked
upon, there should be u remedy against erroneous decisions, But this
right of appeal should be within a reasonable limit, and within the
control of the resources of the litigants.

Preseng law considered in detail

1-J-34. Bearing in mind these brogd principles we proceed to
consider in detail the present,Jaw on the subject of second appeals.

Section 166

1-J-35. The reievant section’ of the Code provides—

“100. Second eppeai—(1) Save where otherwise 6: ‘essly pro-
vided in the hody of this Code or by an: othe er law for
the time keb.g in force, an appeal shalt Tie to the High
Court from every. decree in appeal any
Court subordinate to a High ater on any of the follow-
ing grounds, namely;

(a) the decision being contrary to law or to some usage
having the force of law;

1. Section 100.

+

epee nen


A

my

81

(b) the decision having failed to deterrsine some material
issue of law or usage having the 1066 of law,

(०) a substantial error or defect in the procedure provided
by this Code or by any other law for the time being
in force, which may possibly haye preduced error or
defect in the decision of the case upon the merits.”

(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate
decree passed ex parte.

Main principle—Finality of decision on facts

1-J-36. This section was enacted for the express purpose of
securing some measure of finality in cases where the balance of evi-
dence—verbal and documentary—arose for decision.' It is, therefore,
appropriate to consider how far the section (as interpreted judicially)
is faithful to this object.

Clause (a) and (b}—Meaning of ‘law’

1-J-37. Clauses (a) and (b) of the section are simple in appear-
ance, A second appeal lies under clause (8) where the decision of
the lower appellate court is “contrary to law”, The term ‘law’ in
clause (a), of course, is not limited in its meaning to statute law;
it means general law?

As regards, clause (9), which is not often invoked. the position
would be the same.

1-J-38. But the simplicity of these clauses is deceptive, as will
be apparent from the cases whith we shall discuss later,

Clause (९)

1-J-39. As regards clause (c), the Privy Counci] found it as “not
perhaps altogether happily expressed.”" Read widely, it may con-
vert the High Court into a Court of first appeal, because al] that
it requires is a substantial error or defect in procedure which might
possib ly have affected the decision on merits.

Case law on interpretation of section 100—What are questions of law

1-J-40. We shall first take up the meaning of the phrase ‘law’
in clauses (a) and (8). The flood of case-law on what are questions
of fact open to interference in second appeal, shows that many
questions of fact have heen held to be questions of law. At one
extreme are cases which hold that the question whether a transac-
tion is ‘benami’ or fictitious or bona fide, or was vitiated by undue
influence; or whether there was reasonable and probable cause for
8 prosecution; or whether there was negligence; or whether there
was partition; is a question of fact.

1, Nafur Chandra Pai v. Shukur, (1918) 46 LA. 188; 1.L.R, 46 Cal. 189 (P.C,)
2. Ram Gopal v. Shakshaton, (1893) L1..R. 20 Cal. 93 (P.C.)

3. Durga Chowdkrani v. Javwahir Siagh, (1801) LL.B, 18 Cal. 23, 30 (P.C.) (Lord
‘Macnaghten.)


82

1-J-41. These rulings emphasise that a court of second appeal
is not competent to entertain questions as to the soundness of a
finding of facts by the courts below.’ A second appeal can only lie
on vue or other of the grounds specified in the present section,
and emphasis on this fundamental principle has brought out several
aspects. 7

1-J-42. For example, a Judge io whom a memorandum of second
appeal is presented fcr admission is entitled to consider whether any
of the grounds specified in this section exist and apply to the case,
and if they do not, to reject the appeal summarily.” The limitations
as to the power of the court imposed by sections 100 and 101 in a
second appeal ought to be attended to, and an appellant ought not
to be allowed to question the finding of the first appellate court
upon a matter of fact.‘ Nothing can be clearer than the declaration
in the Civil Procedure Code that no second appeal will lie except
on the grounds specified in section 100. There is no jurisdiction to
entertain a second appeal on the ground of an erroneous finding of
fact, however gross or :nexcusable the error may seem to be?

Cases where “no evidence” raise questions of law

1-J48. But, at the other end, are cases which hold that a second
appeal will lie where there is, as an English lawyer would express
it, “no evidence to go to the jury”, because “that would not raise a
question of fact such as arisés upon the issue itself, but a question
of law for the consideration of the Judge.’*

1-J-44. Thus, where the question in a suit was whether the de-
fendant was bound by a mortgage executed by his mother, and it
was held that he was, the Privy Council held that the finding was
substantially one of law, and that it was, therefore, open to question
in second appeal. The Privy Council observed—

“the facts found (by the lower appellate court) need not be
questioned. It is the soundness of the conclusions from them
that is in question, and this is a matter of law.’?

1-J-45. As stated by the Privy Council] in another case? “the
proper legal effect of a proved fact is essentially a question of law”,
and the igh Court is, therefore, entitled to interfere in second
appeal,

1, Bem Gopal v, Shakshetom, (1902) 1.L.R. £0 081. 93, 99-100 (P.0,).
2, Lachman v, Pune, (1889) LL.B, 16 Cal. 783, (PC).
8. Rudr Prasad v. Baij Nath (1698) LR. 16 All. 367.

4. १७५९ Chuader भ. Mokendranath, (1800) LLB. 17 Cal. 291, 298, (ए.0.) (Bir Bichard
ach).
5. Durga Chowdhrani v. Jewohir Singh, (1891) LL.B. 18 Cal. 23, 30 (P.C.) (Lord Machagh-
ten}. ‘
6, Anangamanjari v. Tripura Swadari, (1887) LL.B. 17 081, 740, 747 (2,0.) (Lord Watson),
7. Ham Gopal v. Shakehtow, (1898) LL.B, 20 Cal. 98, 98, 19 LA. 228, 288 (P.C,)
8. (a) Nofar Qhandra Pal v. Shubur, (1918) 45 1A. 183, 187; LL.R.-46 Cal. 189, 195; ALR.
1918 P.O. 92;
(b) Dianna? v. Moti Segar, (1927), 54 1. 3. 178, ALR. 2927 7.0. 102;
(० Gufarat Ginning ee, Go. v. Motilal Hirabhai de. Co. (1098) 63 LA. 140; AR 1958
"0. Te

*


“sy

wm

83

Mixed questions of fact and law

1-J-46. No doubt, discussing the true scope of the above observa-
tions, the Supreme Court has pointed णाए that there is a distinction
between a pure question of fact, गाए a mixed question of law and
fact, and the observations aforesaid had reference to the latter, and
not to the former.’

1-J-47. But even that leaves ample scope for interference, For
example, it has been held by the Supreme Court’ that whether the
dedication of a temple is to the public or is private is a mixed
question of law and fact, because its decision must “depend on the
application of legal concepts of a public and private endowment to
the facts found.”

1-J-48. So also, the question whether a property is ancestral or
not,‘ or the question whether, when a raiyat purchased the interest
of the proprietor, there is a merger of the two interests,’ is a mixed
one of fact and law. Though a second appeal does not lie from a
finding of fact, yet where a lega}) conclusion is drawn from the find-
ing, a second appeal will lie on the ground that the legal conclusion
was erroneous.

1-J-49. Thus, the question whether possession is adverse or not
is often one of simple fact, but it may also be a question of law
or a mixed question of law and fact. Where the question of adverse
possession is one of simple fact, no second appea} will lie; but a
second appeal will lie from a finding as to adverse possession when
such fin Ging is a mixed question of law and fect, depending upon
fhe proper legal conclusion to be drawn from the findings as to simple
facts.

Concurrent findings of faet

1-J.50. In general, concurrent findings of fact are not disturbed
by the High Court in second appeal. But this rule is sujbect to the
operation of the express groun as of second appeal enumerated in
section 100, ¢

1. Shei Meanakshi Mille v, C.L.7'. (1958) 8.0.R. 691; ALR. 1957 8.0. 49, 63, 64, Para. 18,
19, 20 (Case under the Income-tex Act).

2. See also Walt Mohammad v. Md. Baksh, A.LR. 1930 P.O. 91, 93, (reviews canea on 8. 100 *
(Sir Benode Bitter}.

3. Deoki Nandan v. Muralidéar (1956), CR. 758; AIR. 1067 8,0, 133, 186, para 4.
4. Gopal Singh v. Ujagar Singh, (1956), 18.0.R. 86; ALR. 1954 8.0. 679, 680, pars. 7.
5. Jyotish Phatur v. Tasakant Sho, A.LR. 1983 8.0. 608, 610, para 22.
6. (a) Lacmeskioar v. Manowar, (1892) LLB. 19 Cal, 253, 19 LA. 48; (P.0,)

(b) Ralram ¥. Syama Charan, ALB. 1022 Cal. 84,

(c) Rom Chandra v. dea Ram, AIR. 1937 All. 429;

(@) Janakeroma v. Appdlastoami, ATR. 1054 Mad. 772, 779, Para 28;

(०) State of AP. v. K. Faken Bi, ALB. 1962 AP. 518.

sf



Basic Principle departed from

1-J-51. It appears to us that the wide language of section 100,
and the somewhat liberal interpretation placed judicially on it, have
practically resulted in giving a goodbye to the basic principle’ that
on questions of fact, decisions of the Courts of first instance should

pe final, subject to one appeal.

Proper role of High Court

1-J-52. This situation necessitates a restatement of the proper role
of the High Court, We state below what, in our view, is its proper
role,

High Court not an ordinary Court of last resort

J-J-53, Standing as it does at the apex of a hierarchy, the High
Court is no ordinary court of last resort. Its special position does
not fit easily into the well-worn epigram that jrial courts search for
truth and appellate courts search for error.

4-J-54. This is our basic approach to the role of the High Court.
We do not conceive of second appeals as “yet another dice in the
gamble.”

1-J-55. There should be one authoritative and dignified tribunal
in various appellate matters’ to give decisions which are recognised
ag binding all over the State, and which keep alive the immense
unity of the law.

Litigants to be discouraged from persistent appeals

1-56, The question could perhaps k be asked, why the tigant who
wishes to have justice from the highest Court of the State should be
denied the opportunity to do so, at least where there is a flaw in the
conclusion on facts reached by the trial Court or by the Court of
first appeal. हु

1-7567, Our answer to this would be, that even litigants have to
be protected against too persistent a pursuit of their goal of perfectly
satisfactory justice. An unqualified right of first appeal may be neces-
sary for the satisfaction of the defeated litigant; but a wide right
of second appeal is more in the nature of a luxury.

1-J.58. The rationale behind allowing 2 second appeal on a ques-
tion of law is, that there ought to be some tribunal having a jurisdic-
tion that will enable it to maintain, and, where necessary, re-establish,
uniformity throughout the State on important legal issues, so that
within the area of the State, the law, in so far as itis not enacted
law, should be laid down, or capable of being laid down, by one
court whose rulings will be binding on all courts, tribunals and
authorities within the area over which it has jurisdiction. This is
implicit in any legal system where the higher courts have authority
to make binding decisions on question of law.

1. Hee “Main principle, ete.” supra.
2. ef, Lord Bickenhead’s description of the Privy Council, (1927) 63 LJ. 304,


85

Justification for appeal on question of law

4-J.59. When a case involves a substantial point of law, the ge
neral intcrest of society in the predictability of the law clearly neces-
sitates a system of appeals from courts of first instance to a central
appeal court. S

As has been observed,' “The real justification for appeals on ques-
tions of this sort is not so much that the law laid down by the appeal
court is likely to be superior to that laid down by a lower court as
that there should be a fnal tule laid down which binds all future
courts and so facilitates the prediction of the law. In such a case the
individual litigants are sacrificed, with some justification, on the
altar of law-making, and must find such consolation as they can in
the monument of a leading case”.

1-1.60. There is, in our view, no justification for allowing second
appezl on question of fact. and we should specifically state that pro-
cedural defects of the nature mentioned in clause (¢) of section 100
cannot constitute a sufficient basis for invoking appellate jurisdiction
in second appeal, unless they raise substantial questions of law.

View of previous Commissions and of High Court Arrears Committee

1-J.61. We are aware that in 1958, a previous Law Commission
examined? the matter in detail, and, after weighing the arguments ad-
vanced in favour of curtailment of the right, did not recommend any
restriction on the right to file a second appeal under section 100. The
matter was again considered in ‘the earlier Report on the Code.® In
that Report, agreement was expressed with the previous Commis-
sion's conclusion that “considering the conditions in this country,
there is not much scope for curtailing the right of appeal”.

1-J.62. We are also conscious that recently the High Courts’
Cormittee,* which analysed in detail the causes of arrears (includ-
ing arrears of second appeals). did not recommend any change in
the scope of second appeal. It observed that “the primary cause of
the accumulation is the laxity with which second appeals are admit-
ted without scrutiny in the light of the provisions of section 100,
Civil Procedure Code”.

Re-examination of position necessary |

1-J.63. We do not mean any disrespect to these bodies when we
say that the matter requires re-examination, and that there is justi-
fication for considering the scope for modification of the right of se-
cond appeal. This justification is derived not only from the spectacle
of mounting arrears in the High Courts, but also from certain basic
issues. which we shall discuss in due course. In that discussion, expe-
rience of the practical operation of the various clauses of section 100
will naturally occupy an important place.

1, Douglas Payne, “Appeals on Questions of Fact.” (1958) Current Loval Problem 181
188.
2, 14th Report (1158).

8. 27th Report (1963).

4. Report of the High Court's Arrears Committe#1972,


86

Question included in the Questionnaire .

1J.64, Having regard to the above considerations it appeared to
us when we made a preliminary study of the subject that there should
be some limitation on the right of second appeal to the High Court,

1-J.65 In order to elicit informed opinion on the subject, we
had, in our questionnaire on the Code, put a2 question’ as follows:—

*8, Do you agree that a second appeal should be allowed only
if a substantial question of law is involved?”

Replies on the Questionnaire analysed

1-J.66, The suggestion put forth in the query has received mixed
reception. Some of the High Courts* and some of the individual
Judges of two High Courts,” have favoured it, as also one State Gov-
ernment’ and one member of the Bar.* On the other hand, some High
Courts* and individual Jud of few Courts,’ have opposed it. Al-
most all Bar Associations tl hat have replied to this question, are
against’ it.

1-J.67. The replies favouring the amendment have not consi-
dered it necessary to give explicit reasons.

1-J.88, In the replies opposing it, various reasons have been ad-
vanced. It has been stated, for example’ that gross misappreciation
of evidence ought to be provided for. One High Court” which has
opposed the suggested amendment, has stated that the expression
“substantial” will raise controversy. A Judge of another High Court"
has stated, that ordinarily, a second appeal is admitted only if the
question is not decided at the highest, and has been wrongly decided
by the first appellate court

1J.69. Another High Court Judge,** who is also opposed to any
amendment, has stated that the law should be uniform in all dis-
ricts, ना

1. Question 8.
2. 6. No, 5; 8. No. 11; 8, No, 12; 8, No. 25.
3. 8, No, 28 and 8. No, 16,
4.8, No. 10,
5.8. Nv. 19.
6. है. No, 14.
4. (a) & No. 16:
(6) S.No. 16:
(८) S.No. 28.
8, (a) 8. No. 1;
0) 8. No.
(०) 8. No. 21
9. S. No.2 (An Advocate}.
10, 8, No. 14,
11, 8. No. 15.
12. 8. No. 25, ~

~

Drevin aur


awh

87

1-1 70. One Tfigh Cour: Judge’ favours total abolition of second
appeals, with enlargement of revisional jurisdiction to correct errors
uf Jaw.

Commissign’s conclusions arrived at after considering the replies

1-J.71. It is needless to state that in coming to our final conclu-
sions on the subject, we have given the utmost consideration to the
replies received on the Questionnaire.

Limitations on scope of second appeal] desirable

1-J.72. Having considered the matter in all its aspects, we have
come to the conclusion that the right of second appeal should be con-
fined to cases where—

(i) a question of law is involved: and
(ii) the question of law so involved is substantial.

1-J.73. The mere fact that a question of fact has been wrongly de-
cided by the Court of first appeal, should not, in our view, constitute
y ground for second appeal* The justification for second appeal is tv
rest solely on the criteria which we have just now referred to.

Again, the mere fact that a finding of fact is supposed to be per-
verse or manifestly unjust, will not,’ under our proposal justify ad-
mission of a second appeal. But the appeal would be admissible if a
question of lay—whether the question relates to substance, procedure
or evidence—has been wrongly decided.

Status and calibre of final Court of appeal a vital consideration

143.74, Since we are retaining the right of second appeal with
the above modification. the query may be raised why the litigant
who, before coming to the High Court, has had one right of an ap-
peal before a subordinate court), should have the right of two ap-
peals on questions of law. In other words, why a multiplicity of ap-

eals should be allowed. Now. it is to be remembered that in any
legal system which reccgnises the binding force of precedent, ihe
status and calibre of the final appellate court on questions of law
is vital. This consideration over-balances the consideration of mul-
tiplicity of appeals.

1६ is obvious that the numerous subordinate courts in the dis-
triets cannot be final arbiters on questions of law. If the law is to be
uniformly interpreted and applied, questions of law must be de-
cided by the highest Court in the State whose decisions are binding
on all subordinate courts,

If the right of second appeal is so abridged as to remove ques-‘

tions of law from the High Court. it would create a situation where-
in 8 number of subordinate courts will decide differently questions
of law, and their decisions will stand. Such a situation would be un-
satisfactory.

2, This ia with reference to the point raised in 8. No. 15.
3, This is with reference to the point raised in है; No, 17 and 8, No. 28.



88

1-J.75. The subordinate appellate courts functioning in the dis-
tricts are not superior courts of record, and their interpretations of
law are not binding on other courts. In fact, ordinarily, subordinate
courts in one district are not even aware of the pronouncements of
other courts in other districts (except when a point of law is declared
by the High Court in appeal). It is section 100 which enables the High
Court to function as the author, distributor and clearing house of pro-
nouncements of law for the benefit of all subordinate courts.

The interpretation of the Jaw by the High Court is (subject to
the law declared by the Supreme Court) binding on all subordinate
courts, It is, therefore, essential for uniformity that every error of
law, raising a substantial question is promptly rectified by the High
Court by a correct pronouncement of the law.

Some points raised in the replies considered

1-J.76. In one of the replies’ received on our questionnaire, an
apprehension has been expressed that the use of the expression
“substantial” (with reference to the question of law) will equate
the right of appeal to the High Court to that of appeal to the Sup-
reme Court. We shall deal with this point later.”

Nature of the question of law regarded as appropriate for second
appeal

1-J.77. We shall indicate very broadly the nature of the ques-
tions of law which we regard as appropriate for submission to the
High Court under section 100 as we propose to revise.

First--and the most important of all is the consideration of uni-
formity throughout the State. It is obvious that on questions of law
uniformity must be maintained. In so far as interpretation of enacted
laws having State-wise importance is concerned, it is the task of the
judiciary to maintain the unity and the High Court, as the highest
tribunal at the State level, should continue to have the ultimate
authority to establish unity by resolving or avoiding the possibility
of different views in lower courts.

Secondly, apart from questions of interpretation of enacted law
which falls in the category mentioned above, there arise other
questions of law. The uncodified law constitutes a fertile ground for
such questions, as also genera] principles of construction of statutes.
The law of torts, and so much of the personal law as has not yet been
codified, furnish examples.

Thirdly, there may be points already decided by the High Court
which may, nevertheless, appear to require further consi St coast
Not unoften, on a question ni law on which there has already been a
pronouncement by the High Court, one comes to take the view that
the matter is capable of further consideration at the hands of the
High Court, To illustrate the cases which may fall in this category,
there may be a judgment of the High Court which contains observa-
tions that are ambiguous, and the ambiguity should be removed by
clarification. There may be conflicting decisions of Divisions Benches



ees

a -५०-#फनानना कक

89

of the High Court which

of a High Court, There may be a decision
ot subsequent proneun-

seerns to require re-considcration, in view
cements of the Supreme Court.

4-J.73. An analogous situation would arise when there has been
a dilference of opinion among the judges of the High Court Bench
on a question of law, and the usual avenues of settling the differen-
ces within the High Court have not been exhausted, so that the ques-
tion is one of such difficulty that it ought to be allowed to be submit-
ted for decision by a iuller Bench.

1-J,79. Lastly, even apart from questions falling within the speci-
fic categories enumerated above. there remain questions of law of
which the High Court should take cognizance, questions falling
within this residuary category, though not easy of definition in the
abstract, can be recognised when they arise in practice.

Wide scope for appellate jurisdiction not contemplated

1-3.80. We should add that we do not visualise such a wide scope
for the jurisdiction of the High Court as would embrace every ques-
tion as to which a party is aggrieved. Being essentially the highest
court at the State level which declares the law which is binding, the
High Court should not ordinarily engage itself in settling merely
factual controversies, however great the stakes may be.

Formula indicated

1-J,21, To formulate in precise language a test which, while exclu-
ding the questions to he excluded from the purview of the High Court
will include all questions to be included in its purview in contor-
mity with what we have stated above, is not easy. After eareful con-
sideration, we have come to the conclusion that in respect of second
appeals to the High Court, it is necessary that the question involved
must be a question of law and that it must be a substantial question.

1-J.82. It is needless to add that the extraordinary jurisdiction
of the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution—jurisdiction
which is admittedly not subject to any rigid limitation pertaining to
courts, proceedings or questions is not intended to be affected by
our recommendation or by the preceding discussion,

Distinction between scope of appeal to the Supreme Court and scope
of appeal to the High Court.

1-1.83, We should make it clear that the formulae which we pro-
pose will not equate the scope of appeal to the High Court to that of
appeal to the Supreme Court, Although the question of law,
both in the case of the Supreme Court (under article 133 of the Con-
stitution) and in the case of the High Court( under our proposal) is
described as ‘substantial’, there is a further aspect which makes all
the difference, In the former case, the question must be one which
meeds to be decided by the Supreme Court and must be of general
importance, while in the latter case, there is no such restriction. The
Supreme Court. broadly speaking. will concentrate on questions
possessing country-wide importance while the High Court will be
free to deal with a wider range of questions. For example, a ques-
tion whether the purpose for which an institution provided in a
Ly BID) 220Mof LIZCA—S


90

remote village is charitable in the lega! sense, will hardly, if ever,
be dealt with by the Supreme Court. But the High Court may deal
with it. Similarly. a question of law on which other High Courts have
consistently taken one view, while Benches of the particular Hig h
Court have given conflicting decisions, can be re-considered by the
particular High Court. but the question may not necessarily
be fit for cansideration by the Supreme Court.

1-J.84. At the same time, it should be clarified that the question
ot law can relate to orocedure, e.g. improper rejection of evidence or
improper admission of evidence—in which case correction by the High
Court should be available if the question is substantial.

Question need not be of general importance

1-J,85. It should be noted that we are not limiting the scope of
second appeal to the questions of law of general importance. If the
law has been clearly laid down by the High Court, and
the decision vf the subordinate court is in clear violation of the law
as pronounced by the High Court, the power of the High Court to
correct it should be left intact, This situation will net be covered
if the limitation of general importance is inserted.

Historical aspect considered.

1-J.86. We are aware that in making a recommendation for eut-
ting down the scope of second appeals to substantial questions of
law as above, we are making a departure from a position which has
held the field for a century. Even then, we may note that the pro-
gress of law has been towerds reduction of the scope of second ape
peal. .

1-J.87, The predecessors of the High Courts in their Civil ap-
pellate jurisdiction were the Sadar Divani Adalats. The right of
appeal to the Sadar Divani Adalat was very wide initially, but came
to he sovevely curtailed in the course of time. The | “Conwallis
Scheme”, for cxample. made provision for two appeals in every cate-
gory of cases, irrespective of its value, By 1814, this was reduced to
one appeal only. Only in s of Rs. 5,000 or over. there could be
two appeals: une to the Provincial Court of Appeal and second to the
Sadar Divani Adalat. As Lord Hastings observed,—

“The lacility uF appeal is founded on a most Iaudable principle
of securing, by double end treble checks, the proper deci-
sion of al] suits; but the utopian idea, in its attemy pt to pre-
vent individual injury from a wrong decision. has been pro-
ductive of general injustice by withholding redress, and
general inconvenience, by. perpetuating litigation”.

Provisions in Codes of 1859 and 2882 .
1-J.88. There is another aspect of the matter, Section 100 of the’
present Code is the successor of section 584 ‘of the 1882 Code),

which in its turn corresponded ta section 372 of the old Cade? (Act
8 of 1859).

1. Tn between 1859 arc 1582, theca wae the Corde of 1877, but ite provisions were almost
110 satno as those of the Cole of 1858

pone

ee


91

1-J.89. When the Code of Civil Procedure was revised in 1882,
only a slight change was made in clause (९०), Clause (c) in the 1882
Code laid down that a second appeal would lie on the ground of “a
substantial error or defect in the procedure as prescribed by this
Code or any other law, which may possibly have produced error or
defect in the decision of the case upon the merits”. The correspond-
ing part of section 372 of the Code of 1859 gave a right of second
appeal on the ground “of a substantial error or defect in law in the
procedure or investigation of the case which may have produced
error or defect in the decision of the case upon the merits”.

The absence of the phrase “investigation of the case”, in section
584 of the 1882 Code (and also in present section 100) might lead to
the inference that the right of second appeal wes intended to be
more restricted than it was under the 1859 Code; but, on the other
hand, the insertion of the word ‘possibly’ would lead to the contrary
inference. On the whole, however, the change of language in 1882 in-
troduced no material alteration in the law.

1-J.90, As was observed’ in an Allahabad case—

“Investigation simply means the process by which conclusion
as to the merits of the case are arrived at; procedure
means the rules by which that process is to be guided.
The one is the subject of the other, and the law will
presume that, where there is no defect of procedure
there is no defect of investigation. It follows therefore
that the omission of the phrase “investigation of the
case” in sections 584 implied no intention on the part of
the Legislature to restrict the right of second appeal by
rendering it narrower than what it was under the Code of
1859, On the other hand, the introduction of the word “pos.
fibly”, does not go far to show that the present Code in-
tended to extend the right of second appeal”.

Direction of historical evolution हैं

10.91, It would, thus, be seen that the direction of historical
evolution is towards gradualiy narrowing down the scope of second
appeal tu the Sadar Divani Adalat and later to the High Court. We
can, therefore. legitimately claim that having regard to the social
needs of today, we are attempting to hasten the process to narrow-
ing down the scope of second appeals.

1-J.92. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that
section 100 should be revised as follows: —

Re-draft of section 100

“100. Second appeal—(1) Save where otherwise expressly pro-
vided in the body of this Code or by any other law for the time
being in force. an appeal shall lie to the High Court from every de-
eree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate to a High Court’ if
the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial question
of law.

| 1, Bee Nivat Singh v. Bhekki Singh, (1889) 3.1... 7 All. 649, 657 (por Mabmood J.)
LjB(D)2293fUF LIRCA—B{a) है \



92.

(14) In an appeal under this section the memorandum of appeal
Shall precisely state the substantial question of law on which admis:
ston of the appeal is sought.

(1B) Where the High Court certijies thai a substantiai question
ए law is su iavotved, it shall, at the time of admission of the appeal.

(8) formulate that question;
(0) state its reasons for so certifying; and

(c) specify any other points that were raised at the time of
the heuring prior to the admission, but not accepied as
raising svdstantial questions of law.

(10) The appeal shali be heard only on the question so certified,
and the respondent shall. ot the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to
argue that the case does not involve such question:

Provided that 6 question not so certified and not raised prior to
the admission of the appeal may, if the High Court considers proper,
be argued on such terms as to costs or otherwise as the High Court
orders, after hearing the opposite party as to whether such order
ought to be passed.

Main points summarised

1-J.93. It may be convenient to summarise the main points re-
garding section 100, as made in the above discussion: —

(9) Reasonable limitations are desirable on this right, in the
interest of the public and in the interest of the litigants
themselves.

(ii) The basic principle, even behind the present section, is
that decisions of the first Court of appeal on facts should
be final.

(iii) Clause (a) and clause (b) of section 100 purport to be
faithful to this basic principle; clause (९) goes beyond it.

(iv) Even as regards clavse (a) and clause (b). decitied cases
as to what are questions of fact and questions of law (in-
eluding decisions wh'ch allow second appeal where there
is no evidence) and also dezided cases dealing with mixed
questions of fact and law. show that in actual practice, the
asic principle referr2d to above has been departed from.

() The question what is the proper scope of the right of
second appeal is linked up with the proper role of the
High Court. The prcper role of the High Court, in the
Commission's view is to introduce and. re-introduce uni-
formity in the State, on stbstantial questions of law.

The High Court is not an ordinary court of appeal, to be in-
voked for correcting the errors of subordinate courts en
all conceivable questions,

fees


93

(vi) The rationale behind the right of second appeal being as
stated above, only substantial questions of law should be
agitated in second appeal. *

(vii) Limitations on the right of second appeal are, therefore,
desirable. Replies to the Questionnaire having been con-
sidered, the Commission has come to the conclusion that
a second appeal should be allowed only where the case
involves a substantial question of law

(viii) Nature of the questions of law that would fal] within the
above formula is then indicated.

{ix) It is also made clear, that a wide scope is not contemplat-
ed for the jurisdiction of the High Court.

{x) The formula indicated is illustrated in its application.

(xi) The proposed amendment does not go against the trend of
history, as is shown by the evolution of section 100,



Cnaprer 1-K
APPEALS—MISCELLANEOUS

Introductory

1841. The principal provisions as to first and second appeals
have been already discussed. A few miscellaneous provisions as to
appeals are contained in Sections 101 to 112 in the body of the Code!

Section 102

1-K.2. In the earlier Report? on the Code, the Commission, after
taking into account the recommendation in the 14th Report.!
xecommended an increase of the amount mentioned in section 102
from Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 3,000.

Recommendation

1-K.3. We agree and recommend that section 102 should be re-
vised as follows: —

“No second appeal shall lie in any suit of the nature cogniz-
able by Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value
of the subject-matter of the original suit does not exceed
three thousand rupees,”

Section 108

1K. In view of the change‘ proposed in Section 100, the last
few words of section 103, which refer to the illegality, error ete..
mentioned in section 100, require change. Further, it appears desir-
able to make it clear that section 103 applies also where the failure
to decide a question occurred not only in the lower appellate court
but also in the trial court.

Recommendation

1-K.5. Accordingly, we recommend that section 103 should be

revised as follows :—

“103. In any second appeal, the High Court may, if the evidence
on the record is sufficient, determine any issue of fact
necessary for the disposal of the appeal—

(a) which has not been determined by the lower appellate
court or by the court of first instance and the lower
appellate court, or

(b) which has been wrongly determined by such court
or courts by reason of a decision on such question of
law as is referred to in section 100.”

See discussion a8 to ssotions 98 to 100, Supra.
. 27th Repart. page 123—Note on section KS.
. 14th Report, Val. 1, page 877, 378, para, 25-26,
. See d'sonation as to seotion 100,

Pete

a4

i
1
;
Bh


85

Section 104 (if) to be inserted to deal with order under sections 91-
92, as proposed to be amended
1-K.6. We have recommended separately that where the Court
refuses leave to institute a suit of the nature referred to in section
91 or section 92 (as proposed to be amended), the order of refusal
should be appealable. This necessitates an addition to the jist of ap-
pealable orders as given in section 104.

Recommendation

1-K.7. Aceordingly. we recommend that the following clause
should be inserted in section 104:—
माफ!) an order under section 91 or section 92, refusing leave
to instisute a suit of the nature referred Lo im section 91
or 92, as the case may be”.

1-K.8. Sections 109 and 110 of the code deal with appeals to the
Supreme Court. Since the subject is also dealt within Article 133
of the Constitution, we considered the question whether these sec-
tions should be retained.

1-K.9. We have, after some discussion, come to the conclusion
that since these provisions pertain to procedure, they should con-
tinue in the Code. It is appropriate that the Code should, as far as
possible, be exhaustive on matters of procedure. We should, however.
state? here that these provisions should be brought into line with
the recent amendment of article 133 of the Constitution.’

3, See discussion as to section 91 and section 92,
3, Amendment not drafted.
3, Of Constitution (30th Amendment) Bill,



Craprer 1-L
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION

Iatroductory

1-L. We now come to a group of sections dealing with refe-
rence, review und revision. While an appeal is taken to a superior
court by a party, in pursuance of the right given by the law and on
questions permitted to be reagitated by the law, there are other pro-
visions for modification or reversal of judicial decisions by the same
court or by a higher court. Reference to the High Court, and revi-
sion of decisions of subordinate courts by the High Court, are, there
fore, provided for, and review of its own judgments by the court
itself is also dealt with. Sections 113 to 115 of the Code relate to
these matters, and, in this group, the section which has created the
largest amount of controversy is section 115 (which deals with revi-
gion), We shall discuss this section presently.

Section 115

1-L2. Section 115 deals with the High Court's power of revi-
sion. Briefly sneaking. in a case not subject to appeal. it empowers
the High Court to call for the records of a case decided by an in-
ferior court, and if the inferior court has exercised a jurisdiction not
vested in it by law or failed to exercise jurisdiction vested by law
or acted with material irreguiarity etc, in the exercise of its juris-
diction, the High Court can interfere.

1-L.3. Experience shows that often the cause of delay in the
trial of suits is the entertainment of petitions for revision against
interlocutory orders which invariably result in stay of proceed-
ings. In fact, in many cases. the object of the parties in moving the
High Courts under s. 115 of C.P.C. may be to delay the progress of
the proceedings.

1-L4. This question has been considered in the past more than
once.’ We had in our Questionnaire issued on the Code* put a ques-
tion as to whether the present powers should not be abolished or
drastically curtailed.

1-L.5. Most of the replies to the above questions de not favour

a change in the law. But having considered the matter carefully,
we have come to the conclusion that the provision in the Code as
to revision should be deleted. The discretion of the court in grant-
ing adjcurnments. in granting amendment of the pleadings, in issue
ing or refusing to issue commissions, and with regard to many more
miscellaneous matters, should not be open to revision under section
5,

1, See 27th Report, pages 23, 27, para. 34, ७0.

2, Question 13
oo

S

4+-40%6-+-:--


i

97

It is against such orders that revisions are generally filed. result-
ing in a stay of the proceedings and consequent delay in the dis-
posal of cases.

1-L.6. We may note that serious cases of injustice can be dealt
with under article 227 of the Constitution.

11..7. Having regard to the above position, and to the fact that
where injustice has resulted, cdequate remedy is provided for by
article 227 of the Constitution for correcting cases of excess of juris-
diction or non-exercise of jurisdiction, or illegality in the exercise
of jurisdiction, we are of the view that it is no longer necessary to
retain section 115. Article 227, we are sure, will cover every case
of serious injustice: and, in that sense, that article is wider than
section 115.

Recommendation

1-L.8. We, therefore, recommend that section 115 should be
deleted.


Cuapten 1-M
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE HIGH COURTS NOT
BEING THE COURT OF a JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER
introduetory
1-M.i. Part 9 of the Code, Sections 118 to 120, contains special

provisions relating to High Courts which are not Courts of Judicial
Commissioners. We do not recommend any change in this Part,


100 / ५८८): 1-N

RULES
Introductory

1-N.1. Part 10, sections 121 to 131 in the body of the Code, deals
with rules. Section 122 empowers the High Courts to make rules re-
lating the procedure of civil courts subject to their superinten-
dence, as well as rules regulating their own procedure. These rules
must not be inconsistent with the body of the Code. But they can
amend or add 10 rules in the First Sehedule to the Code

Under section 129, rujes can alse be made by High Courts other
than Courts of Judicial Commissioners, to regulate their original
eivil procedure. These rules can be inconsistent with, the Code. but
not with the Letters Patent or similar law or order establishing the
particular High Court.

The two sections—sections 122 and 129—overlap to some extent,
that is to say. so far as the original civil procedure of High Courts
18 concerned.’ However, that does not cause any practical problems,
The rest of the sections in this Part deal with the Rule—Committee
and other matters of detai]

Section 128(3) and (4)

17.2. Under section 123(3) and 123(4), members of the Rules
Committee are appointed by the Chief Justice. In our view, members
of the Rules Committee should be appointed by the High Court,*
and not by the Chief Justice. This, we believe, would be in accor
dance with the sentiments of an overwhelming majority of High
Court Judges.

Recommendation
1-N.3. Accordingly, we recommend that in section 123(3)_ and

123(4), for the words “Chief Justice”, the words “High Court” should
be substituted.

1, See Sheveram v. Indian Oi Corporation, A.LR. 1969 Bom. 117, 118, paragraph 3.
2. See Shevaram ए- Indian 09 Corpuration, ATR, 1969 Bem, 117, 119, paragraph 4,
3. Of, article 227(2) of the Constitution,

39


Cuaprer 1-0
MISCELLANEOUS

Intreduetory

1-0.1, Part 11 of the Code, sections 132 to 158, contains various
miscellaneous provisions. Though entitied “Miscellaneous”, some of
these provisions are of practical interest, the most important being,
of course, section 151, which deals with the inherent power of the
Court

Section 132

1-0.2. Section 132{1) provides that women who, “according te
the customs and manners of the country ought not to be compelled
10 appear in public shall be exempt from personal appearance in
court", Sub-section (2) of the section saves provisions for arrest.

1-0.3. We are of the view that section 132 is an anachronism.
The law should not, in such cases. encourage exemption from perso-
nal appearance in court. Even where the women do not appear in
public according to the “customs and manner of the country”
there should, in our opinion, be no exemption from attendance in
court. No serious hardship is likely to be caused by the removal wf
the present exemption, as social conditions have considerably
changed, and this practice is getting obsolete.

1-0.34. Today; the seclusion of women is completely inconsis-
tent with the social philosophy on which our Constitution is found-
ed. Section 132 is not to be treated as a concession to some aristo-
cratic families, but is a recognition of a universally observed custom.
Hence, customs and manners of the country prevailing at the present
time should be the criteria, and not the customs and manners which
might have prevailed years ago.*

1-0.3B, Moreover, the paramount task of deciding cases* on the
oral evidence of an important party involves the personalised pro-
cess of the Judge seeing the witness at first hand, “instead of pour-
ing over the prolix pages of a Commissioner's record”, The judge
must have the advantage of observing the demeanour, or at least
the manner of delivery, of the witness, if he is to assess her credi-
bility justly.

Recammendatioa to delete section 132

1.0.4. For the reasons stated above, we recommend that section
132 should be deleted.

1, Cf, Basai v. Hasan Race Khan, ALR. 1963 All. 340.
2, Of Kunlit Mokammet ९. Unma Haji Varna, (1969) Ker. L.T. 418, 421-423.
है, Kunin Mohexvand तर. Umma Haji Uma, (1069) Ker. L.T. 418, 421,

100

~”~

~~


ca

idl

Sectien 133

1-0.5. Under section 133, certain high dignitaries of State and
persons holding exalted judicial offices are exempted from personal
atlendance in court, During our consideration of the Code, a point
was raised whether such special privileges are consistent with
equality before the law, and whether the list of persons so exempted
should he curtailed .

We have, therefore. considered this point at length.

Analysis ef exemption

1-0-5A. Under the section, the persons enumerated in the seetion
are entitled to exemption from personal a2pearance in court, The
list of such persons, as given in the section is long consisting of
11 items, but. in order to facilitate discussion, the persons enumerat-
ed could be grouped into four groups. as follows:—

(i) The President and Governors; (The exemption here is
obviously because of their position as the head of the State);

(9 The Vice-President, the speaker of the House of People.
the Speakers of State Legislative Assemblies and the
Chairman of State Legislative Councils: (The exemption
in this case is based on office held as the presiding officer
of the Legislature);

(iti) Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts;
(iv) Ministers.’
Justification

1-0-5B. The exemptions provided for in section 133 could be
justifed on one or other of the following principles, namely ;—-

(3) That enforcing the personal appearance of the persons
exempt would be derogatory to their status; or

(ii) that forcing their personal appearance would hinder the
efficient pert formance of important public business, whether
legislative, executive or judicial,

In all the cases mentioned in section 133, one or other of these
principles would apply. For example. Ministers have important
duties to perform, and their being summoned in Court might inter-
fere with the discharge of their important functions, In sore cases,
both the principles mentioned above may apply. For example, sum~-
moning the President of India in court, may be dero; Aatory to his
position as the head of the State, and may also cause hindrance to
public business, Again, it may be derogatory to the position of a

‘igh Court Judge to be required to appear personally in a subordi-
nate court over whose judgments he might have occasion to hear
appeals. It could also, interfere with his judicial business.

TY. Section 568 Cr. P.C. ia narrower,

2, Section 188(1}(xi), relating ta Rulers of former Indian States, may be dimegarded for
the present parpeve,


102

Rules of law as contrasted with public policy

1-0-5C. We are aware that in a democratic country, such exemp-
tions should be confined to the minimum. The rule of law postulates
that no individual enjoys, by virtue of his pusition or office, any
special privilege in contrast with an ordinary citizen. But compelling
considerations or public policy may justify qualitications to this
abstract rule and it is on this assumption that the section provides
a departure from the abstract rule.

Position in England

1-0-5D. We may briefly deal with the position in England. In
En: id, the sovereign in her private capacity is not subject to the
jur ‘tion of fhe courts This position continuss even after the
passing of the legistation abolishing several of the immunities of the
Crown’ [rom litigation. It has been held that a writ of execution
cannot he executed within the precincts of any palace, which is used
as a residence of the sovereign, without her permission, This was
held not to apply to the Hampton Court Palace, on the ground that
it was not a residence of the Sovereign*

English law does not seem to provide for a general exemption
from personal appearance in Courts as regards Ministers or Judges,
or even as regards presiding officers of the Houses of Parliament.
It should, of cou be added that there is immunity from liability
in the case of judges, by reason of special rules of law. Any Parlia-
mentary privilege may restrict the operation of. the, general
power of the court to enforce the attendance of witnesses. But there is
no general exemption from personal appearance as is conferred by
section 133,

No change in law recommended

1-0-6. We have given thought to the matter since, at first sight,
the privilege may not seem to accord with the spirit of the Constitu-
tion. We are reluctant to recommend any change in the law; but,
at the same time, we do express the hope that those who have occa-
sion to claim thie privilege will, before asserting it, consider
whether it is absolutely necessary to do so in the particular case.
In this connection, we must refer to the salutary example, which
was set recently by the President, who, when it became necessary
for the Supreme Court to examine him as a witness, insisted on
attending that court in person.

Section 133(1), item (x1)

1-0-7. In section 133(1), item (xi) relates to persons to whom
section 87B applies. We may note that section 87B has been now
confined to pre-Constitution ceuses of action.”

1, The Crown Prucaedings Act, 1947,

3. 4. (१ ४, Dakin, (1870) 13 WB. 111, (0. 4.) citad in Anmnl Practice, under Order 43,
rule 3, ~ .

2. See discussion aa to section S7B.


Y

103
Section 1354

1-0-8. Section 135A, broadly speaking. confers exemption from
arrest on Members of Parliament and of State Legislatures, for the
period of the legislative session and foy a further period of 14 days
before and after each session.

1-0-9. In the earlier Report’ the following recommendation was
made with reference to this section: —

“Tt is considered desirable to increase the period from 14 to 40
days, in conformity with the position obtaining in England in rela-
tion to Members of the House of Commons.—see Article 105 of the
Constitution also. It is also considered, that this amendment should
apply to Members of State Legislatures also. The view that the sub-
ject-matter (so far as concerns such Members) falis within the com-
petence of State Legislatures, under article 194(3) of the Constitu-
tion, has not been accepted, Tt is felt, that the matter falls within
entry 13, Concurrent List,—Civil Procedure ineluding al] matters
dealt with in the Code of Civil Procedure at the commencement of
the Constitution’.”

Recommendation

1-0-10. We have, after some consideration, come to the same
view, and recommend that section 185A should be amended ag re-
commended in the earlier Report. We a: Bree with the previous Com-
mission in its view that the matter falls within the entry relating
to civil procedure.”

Section 139

ott Section 139 deals with persons who can administer
oaths.

“Notaries” have power to administer oath under the Notaries
Act! The question of adding “notaries” in section 139 was considered
in detail in the earlier Report‘ on the Code, with reference to the
suggestions to that effect, received through the Ministry of Law. These
suggestions stated that in the absence of a provision, the courts re-
fused to accept the affidavits sworn before notaries. The vious
Commission was of the view that’ instead of amending the code. the
matter should be left to the rules of court.

Recommendation

1-0-12. We are, however. of the view that a specific pr rision
would be useful.

1, 27th Repart, page 124, Note on Section 138A.
2, Conewrrent List, Entry 13.

8. Section 8(1)(8) Notaries Aet, 1952.

4. 27th Report, page 125, note on acotion 139,



104

1-0-124. Aecordingly, we recommend that sectiom 139 should be
amended by inserting a new clause (sa). The section will then read
ag follows:—

“199. In the case of any affidavit under this Code—
(a) ......
(aa) Any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952.
(b) and (०)
may administgr the oath to the deponent,”
Section 141

1-0-13. The applicability of section 141 to various types of pro-
ceedings has been the subject of controversy. The principal proceed-
ings with reference to which the ques! rigeg may be msu-
tioned :

(1) Proceedings under the C.P.C.

(a) Execution.
(0) Others.

(2) Proceedings under other Acts—
(a) Where a specific provision deals with the matter;
(b) Where no specific provision deals with the matter.

(3) Proceedings under the Constitution.
(4) Other proceedings.

Section 141,—spplicability to execution proceedings

1-0-14. The case-law is not uniform as to the applicability of
section 141 to execution proceedings: for example, do Order 9,
rule 8 and Order 9. rule 9, apply to execution proceedings? The
position is not very clear on the point. We have considered the
question whether section 141 shor wuld’ be extended to execution pro-
ceedings. It is not, however, feasible to extend section 141 to pro-
ceedings in execution, Such an omnibus provision would cause
hardship, There may be rules—e.g. Order 9, rule 9,—which ought
not to apply, in all their rigour, to execution. We have, however.
considered the utility of applying specific provisions! of the Code
to execution and, wherever necessary made recommendations in that
regard.

Section 141 and Order 9, rule $

1-0-15, The applicability of section 141 to proceedings under
Order 9 is itself a matter of debate. Under Order 9, various kinds of
ordery and proceedings—e.g. ex parte proceedings and orders of
dismissal for default—can be set aside (for sufficient cause). But,
where an application for obtaining such relief is itself dismissed
for default or decided ex parte, whet is the position?
3. See for exarayle, diaeussion aa to Order 9, Order 21, rulet 104-106, Order 98, 7७1९ 1,

Order 26 १14.

क्ढ

aren

eins

ee आ बम


Does section 141 apply so as to bring into application the bene-
ficent provisions of Order 9 itself? That is the question that has
arisen; and it appears that three different views have been express-
ed on the point,

(i) The High Court uf Bombay has held that section 151
applies in such cases, and not section 141. Reference was
first made to a Privy Council case,? in which it was held
that—

“Vos, the proceedings spoken in section 647 (of the
1882 Code of Civil Procedure which corresponds to
section 14] of the present code), include original
matters in the nature of suits, such as proceedings in
Probates, guardianships end so forth, and de not in-
clude executions.” 1 ’

1-0-16. The Bombay High Court toak the view that the remarks
of the Privy Council and the expression “sc forth” must be taken
as referring to applications which are,.ejusdem. generis with - pro-
ceedings in probates, fuardianships and go forth, that is to say, they
do not refer to interlocutery applications or applications. which.
arise out of other proceedings as but which in themselves
indicate a lis, Hence, section 141 did not: apply to the instant case.

10-17. Further it was pointed opt that the instant case related”
to an ppplication to restore a suit to file which had been dismissed
for default, and not to a case. where an ex parte order was issued.
ore corn distinguished a Supreme cont case’ which was copper
ed with an ex parte ree Ered ५ Aummary suit under rv
87 of the Civil. Procedure , There, the question was whethe:
such.a decree could be set-aside under section 151. The Supreme
Court pointed out that Order 37, rule 4 expressly gave power to
the Court to set aside an ex parte degyee passed under the provi-
sions of that Order, and there was therefore no scope for resort
to section 151 for setting aside the decree. The present case did
not relate to any such question.

1-0-18. Accordingly, it was held that the further plication to
restore the applicatign under Order 9, rule 9, to the file could be
considered uni ti the inherent powers of the court under section
151; and the case was sent back to the trial court, for disposal in
conformity with this decision.

1.0-19. In an Orissa case,‘ it was held that Order 9 has no ap-
plication to a proceeding under Ordar9, iteelf, bub that section 151
ean be applied. Apparently, section 141 was regarded as inapplicable
to such a case. ५

Same is the Caleutta view."

1. Lazmi Eavertment Co. ४. Tarachand, A.LR, 1968 Bom. 260, 253 (0. 8.).

2. Thakur Prasad ५. Fakirwllak. (1805) T0.8, 17 All. 106 (PC.

3. Remainrandas v. Phagadnas, A.LB. 1966 8.0. 1164.

4. Kun} Bikari Dus v, Ohaachla Das. §.1.B., 1986 Qrima 24 (0.8. thera, 0.)

3. Sarat Keighna Bors v. Biskwesar Mitre. ATR. 127 Cal. 3% (DB).
L/B(D)220Mof 10&04--.9


106

1-0-20, The Andhra view is that section 141 applies? Saine is the
Madras view.’ है

1-0-21. The Patna view’ is that section 141 does not apply in
the absence of special circumstances and section 151 alsa does nat
apply. The applicant can, however, ‘appeal under Order 43, Rule
1(e){d). हु हा

Recommendation as to section 141 and Order 9

1-0-22. There is no great reabon why such applications should
not be dealt with under settion 141.'A Clarification on the subject
is desirable. : हा :

Other proceedings under other Acts

1-0-23. As regards other proceedings under other Acts, the
question has mainly arisen with respect ‘to references under section
146, Criminal Procedure Code. :

Section 141, C.P.C. and referprice undér s, 146, Cr. B.C.

1-0-24, On the point whether the: provisions of. section 141, Civil ‘

Procedure Code, are attracted to a reference made by the Criminal
Court under section 146 Code of Criminal Procedure to a civil ‘court,
there was previously a confict of decisions, In an Andhra Pradesh

case proceedings were instituted under section 145, Ct, PC. The:

Criminal court made a refetencé ‘under section 146, Cr-P.C. to a civil

court for a decision of the question ‘of possession. The court of.

first instance came to the conclusion that the provisions of section
141, C.P.C. applied to suck a referemes, a¢ it was nota pl

4
before a civil court within the meaning of section 141, C.P.C. Against *

this order, a revision was filed.’

It was held by the High Court that: since a reference under

section 146, Cr.P.C, was not a “Proceeding” within the meaning of
section 141, C.P.C., the provisions of thal t section were not attracted
to such ‘a reference. Hence, the ९ was justified ‘in ‘rejecting an
application under Order 19, ‘Rule 1, ©P.C. mate in such 'a reference.
Such ‘an application was hot maintainable: ‘

The contrary view? had been taken by the Allahabad High

Court.

Amendment as to proceedings under section 146, Cr P.C. not needed’

1-0-24A. Now, however. tHe Siipreme Court has held' that
section 141 applies to such cases, Hence, no amendment is required.

1. Raj Appa Rao ¥. हलक Raghava, ALR. 1966 AP. 268.
2, (a) Fenkatawarasionba Roo v, Stranarayaty ATR: 1026 Mad, 826:
है Kaliatkat x. Palom Goinda, A.LR, 1926 Med. 654.

3. Doma Choudhary v. Ram Naroth Lat, ALB. 1959 Pat. 121 (F.B.)
4. Jonga Reidy v. Hofextrmisa Begum, ACLB, 1966 AP. 17.

5, Rom Chandra v. State of UP. A.LB.'1985 All 446, £49.

6. ALB. 1968 8.0. 1888, 1891; (1908) B.O-R. 39,



107
Section 141 and proceedings under the Constitution

1-0-25. The question whether an application under article 226
of the Constitution is a “proceeding in a court of civil jurisdiction”
within the contemplation of section 141, has been the subject-matter
of controversy.

1-0-26. The Andhra High Court, for cxample, holds that sec-
tion 141 applies to such proceedings.' The Calcutta High Court? takes
a different view, .

10-27. The Madras High Court’ holds that Order 1 of the C.P.C.
cannot be applied to proceedings under Article 226, as section 141 is
not attracted. ‘

1-0-28. The Allahabad High Court‘ has also held that Order 2,
rule 3, C.P.C, does not apply to writ proceedings, and that section
141 cannot be invoked for the purpose.

1-0-29. The Punjab High’ Court in a 1968 case,’ held that
section 141 does not apply. It expressed itself thus—

“What is provided in section 141 is that the procedure laid
down in the Code in regard to. suits is to be followed sc
far as it can be, in all proceedings’ in any court of civil
jurisdiction. A High Court when it, exercizes extraordinary.
jurisdiction under Article the Constitution, cannot
be said to be a court of civil jurisdiction. This special
jurisdiction of a High Court.aims at securing a very speedy
and efficacious remedy, to a person whose legal or consti.
tutional right has been infringed, If all the elaborate and
technical rules of Civil Procedure laid down in the Code,
were to be importéd through section. 141 of the Code into
these writ proceedings, thei very purpose is likely to be
defeated by their becoming bogged down in. procedural
delays, In ‘short, the provisions of the Code of ‘Civil Pro-
cedure do not, ini terms, govern writ proceedings under
Article 226 of the Constitution.”

1-0-30. However, it was held that the court will, in appropriate
cases, apply the principles (as distinguished from the technical py 10-
visions) of Order 22, rules 3 and 4-0 the C.P.C. in the exercise of its
discretion on the grounds of justice, equity and good conscience, In
this particular case, the court refused to exercise its discretion in
fayour of the petitioners, as the petitioners had delayed their appli-
cations for substitution without any “explanation ,worth the name"

1. Aueain Adsinucaya v. Sate of Andira Pradesh, ALR. 1968 AP, 16,
2, Bharat Board Mills Ltd., v. Begiohod Provident Fund Commissioner, A.LR. 1961 Cal. 708,

8. Manages of Rainbow Dyeing Factory, Salems v. Industrial Tribunad, ALR. 1959,
Madcus 137, 141, para 32,

4. (a) Uma Shankar Rot vy. Divl Superintendent, N. ity, ALR. 1960 All. 366,

(8) Khurjawala Buckles Mawtfactsring Ce.,v. Commissioner, Sales Tax, U.P, ALR.

1968 AML 517, 519, paras 4 and 8 (Dowel C.J. and K.S. Pathak J.)
5, Bhosuan singh v. Addl, Director, Conaobiddation, AIR. 1968 Panj. 360.
TBD)220M of LTaCA—0(a)


108

Recommendation as to proceedings under article 226

10-31. It is desirable to exclude the applicability of section 141
(by suitable amendment) in respect of proceedings under Article 226
of the Constitution.

Amendment of section 142

1-0-32. In the light of the above discussion it is desirable that
an express amendment’ should be made in section 141—
(a) to include in its scope, proceedings under Order 9;
(09) to exclude from its seope, proceedings under article 226 of
the Constitution,

Amendment of section 141

1-0-32. We, therefore, recommend that an Explanation should
be inserted in section 141 as follows:— .
“Explanation—in this rule, the expression “proceeding” in-
cludes proceedings under Order 9, but does not include
proceedings under Article 224 of the Constitution.”

Section 145

1-0-33. Section 145 was considered in the earlier Report,’ and an
amendment recommended, We agree with the earlier Report,

Section 148 and Order 21, Rule 16

1-0-34. The £0 neral principle that a transferee succeeds to ‘the
right of his: 2 lecessor, is to’ be found: in section 146 of the Cade,
which is as follows:— : “

“146, Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any law
for the time being in force, where any proceeding may be
taken. or ap application made by or against any. pergon, then
the proceedings may be Beis or the application may be
made by or against any ao claiming under. him,”

‘The special provision as to’ the execution éf decrees by assi, 8
of the decree is contained in Order‘ 2k, rule 16, which provides that
a decree may be executed by assignees, if there is an assignment of
the decree in writing.

The question has arisen whether; a person who does not have a
written assignment of the decree assigned {Order 21, rule 6), but
who hes succeeded to the decree holder's right, is entitled to’ exe-
cute the decree under section 146.

A conflict of decisions

10-35. A Madras case’ illustrates the conflict. In that case P
(through her attorney, the contest respondent) filed a suit in
Madurai against 29 defendants, ae 8 livery of possession of certain

1, Amendment not drafted.

2, 27th Report, page 126, note on’ section 146,

3. Ponniok Pitiai 5. Natarajo, AIR, 1968 Mad: 190 (Kaflasam J.).



we

108

property. A decree was passed in 1944. Pending the appeal, P transfer-
red ail her rights in the property in favour of the respondent, N. for
a certain sum of money, Later, P died, ang N was brought on record
in the appeal. N sought to execute the decree by filing Execution Peti-
tion 373 of 1950. This petition was opposed by one L, who claimed
that he was the legal representative of the deceased P. L. contested
the right of N. to execute the decree, and the executing court found
that the dispute between N and L quid not be gone into urder
section 47, C.P.C. It was held that N was not an assignee decrec-
holder, and could not execute the decree. .

NV then filed a suit for the declaration that he was entitled ito
execute the decree; the suit was dismissed by the subordinate court.
On appeal to the High Court, the a was compromised, and a
compromise decree was passed in w: peat N’s right to execute the
decree was recognised. Subsequently, an execution petition was filed
by N which was dismissed. Subsequently, another Execution..Peti-
tion 209 of 1957 was filed, out of which the present, second appeal
arose. है

A number of questions were raised, but only one, is Pisterial for
the present purpose. It was contended that N could not' be said to
be an assignee decree-holder, and therefore could not avail himself
of Order 21, rule 15, C.P.C. and that, as the transfer of the property
by the decree-holder was made after the decree was passed, he could
not maintain an execution petition: even under ‘section 146, CPC.

‘Tt was held that this was not a transfer of the rights, of ‘the

decree in writing as required pode Order 21, rule 16, C.P.C, but was
a transfer of property after ree was passed without. tranefer-
ring the rights in the decree, was made to a Supreme Court

case! in which it had been held that:

“Either the respondent company are transferesgaof ithe: decree
by an assignment in writing 0५0, operation of law, in
which ‘case they fall within r 21, Rule 16, CPC. or
they are not such transferees, in which case even they may
avail themselves of the -préeisions of section 146, if the
other condition is fulfilled.” :

Following this Supreme Court judgment, it was held in the
Madras case that transferees; if they do not fall within the provi-
sions of Order 21, rule 16; ava} msetves of the. provisions of
section 146. Further, it was held that at would also include a trans
feree of the property after the decree is

And, Kailasam J. in the Madras cate referred to above,’ did not
accept the interpretation put by Jagadisan, J. in an earlier case’ on
the 1955 Supreme Court case. In thaticase it had been held by
Jagadisan J. the true principle is, that a decree cannot be executed

1. Sugalkishore Saraf प. Raw Ooito® Ca., ALR. 1055 8.C. 376,
2. Ponniah Pilla’ v. Natarajan, 4.L.R. 1968 Mad. 190 (Keilosam J.).
3. Sampath Mudatiar v. Sakuntalammal, (1944), 3. 36, LJ. 668 (Jagudisan J,)


110

by anybody other than the decree-holder, except by an assignee who
satisfies the requirements of Order 21, rule 16 and that section 146,
on fe anal have the effect of overriding the provisions of Order 21,
rule

The result was, that the contention that N being an assignee of
the property after the decree was passed was not entitled to main-
tain था execution petition, was not accepted,

1-0-36. The later Madras view is in accord with the view of the
Andhra Pradesh,' Patna’ and’ Kerala’ High Courts.

Recommendation as to Order 21 Rule 16

1-0-37. In the 890५6 state of the egse-law, it appears to be desir-
able to amend Order 21, Rule 16, fe make it‘ clear that it does not
affect the provisions of section 148, and a transferee’ of rights can
ghiain execution of the decree without a seperate assignment of the

ree,

Section 148

1-0-38. With reference to section 148, we have taken the oppor-
tunity of studying judicial decisions during the last ten years, includ-
ing a judgment of the Supreme Court," but we do not see need for
any amendment.

Section 148A (New) (Caveat) ,

1-0-39. In order that a party who! wishes to indicate his intention
to have notice of an inten i app lication by an adverse party may
be authorised to do so, a provision for caveat may be, in our view,
useful, ‘The relevant provision‘ in the Supr eme Court Rules’ is intend-
ed for cases where no appeal is pending, but a similar provision,
modified so as to be applicable to 8 whete a sult is pending as
well as to those where # suit is al me [४ to be instituted, would be

elpful.

Recommendation

1-0-40. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of thie follow-
ing new section in the Code:— to
“148-A. (1) Where an application is expected to be made, or has
ern made, in g suit ingeltuted or abow t to berdnetifed. sm
@ court, a son claiming @ right to appear before the
“court on the Hearing of such 22000 may lodge a caveat
in respect thereof, and shalt thereupon be entitled—
“(ay to receive from the' Court notice of making of the ap-
plication, if at the time of the lodging of the caveat
such application has kot yet been made; and

 Satyanarayana v. drut Maik. ALR. 1968 AP. 81.
Ramnath v. Anarde? Devi, AIR. 1964 Pat, $11.

1

2

3. Mant Dawasia v. Varkey Searia, (1960), Ker. L.Y. 1077.

4. To be carried out onder Order 21, Rule 16.

है, Mokant Ram v. Ganga Das, &.1-R. 1961, 8.0. 882.

6, Order 19, role 2, Supreme Court Rules.

7. Of, igh Court Acreare Committes Report (1972), Vol. 1, pege 80, Chapter 6, para 28.


li

x

(9) if and when the application has been made, to require

the applicant to serve him with copy of the

application

and to furnish him, at his own expense, with copies
of any papers filed: by the applicant in support of his

application.

(2) The caveator shali. forthwith,
give notice thereof io the appl
been made.”

Section 152

after lodging his caveat,
licant, if the application has <

10-41, Section 152 was considered in the earlier Report; but no
amendment recommended, We agree with the earlier Report.

Section 153A (Proposed) | -

1-0-42. Sections 152 and 153 authorise the correction of mistakes
in judgments ete, ‘in specified'#4ses.: THY inherent power’ urider_sec-

tion 151 could also be resorted to, for the purpose.

question which

has arisen with reference to these provisions is, whether, when an
appeal has been summarily dismissed under Order 41, rule 11, an
application for amendment of the decree should be made to the
appellate court, or, whether it should be to the court which passed

the substantive decree,

4-043. The Bombay” and Patna’ view is, that it is the original
Court which must be approached for the purpose, the reason being
that when an appeal is summarily dismissed, the original decree is
neither reversed nor varied, and is left:untouched, (The Bombay case
presents complicated facts but the Principle applied was as stated

above).

1-0-44. But the Allahabad* and Andhra‘ view is that there is no

difference in essence between, a judg!
tt

Order 41, cule 11, Civil Procedure.
41, rule 27. Civil Procedure Code, In b

dismissing an appeal under
oath Sade ander Order
oth. the cases, the judgment

of the appellate court adjudicates upon the rights of the parties,
though in ‘one case, the’ manner of Gishosdl is concise and speedy. and
in the other it takes a mort elaborate form and longer time. Whether
the appeal is dismtsstd'in tinine ‘agaltist the ex parte respondent or

dismissed after hearing the respon
1818 court that governs the rights of

ib tt is the

cree of the appel-
parties. PP

As the appellate decree is the final decree and the decreé of ‘the’
lower court merges with it, it fallows, fhat the apphication for amend-

ment of the decree should be made 40 the apne

ate court. The doc-

trine of merger applies even when a second 3) 1 hag been dismissed
by the High Court summarily under Order 41, rule 11, Civil Procedure

Code.

1. 27th Report, page 126, Note on section 163.
2, Husrain Sah v, Sitaram, ALR. 1053 Bont. 122

(Chagls C..).

8, Batu Prasad ४. Ambikd Pramd, ALR. 1939 Pat. 288.
A, Durga Yingh v. Wahid Raja, ALR. 1965 All. 226 (D.B.).
3. Ramona y. Sreeramulu, ALR. 1988 AP, 768 (D.B.).


2

1-0-45. and 1-046. Having regard to the conffict of decisions on
the subject, a clarification is needed. It ig suggested that the Bombay
view should be adopted. No doubt a decision under Order 41, rule li,
is also a determination of the appeal, but, since the decree of the
lower court is,-for all practical purposes left unteuched, it is not im-
Proper to give power to amend the decree to the original court. [t
may be convenient to have a separate ‘section, —say, as section 153A—
on the following lines :—

“153:A. Where an appeal from the decree or order of a court
has been dismissed by the appellate court without hearing
the respondent, the power of the court to amend the decree
or order or other Proceeding ing in Case may be exercised
by the court which the decree or order, notwith-
standing that the dismissal of the appeal has the effect, of
confirming the decree or order?

Section 1538 (New) (Duty of the Ceust to asuist litigants)

1-0-47. It is common expericnge litigants who have not
previously been to court fe t int aes and not being familiar
with procedural rules, often do not rpelise the consequences of this
or that default, Some provision drawing the attention of the court
to its duty in such cases would be useful.

1-0-48. In the Fundamentals of Soviet Civil Procedure,' there is an
interesting provision :—

“It shajl be the duty af the court, without confining itself to

the pleadings and imaterials.. ‘submitted, to all the

“Tt shall be the duty df a ae, ‘to explain to the litigants
their rights and duties to them of the consequences
of procedural acts o 8, and to help litigants in
the exercise of theit “ pit

1-0-59. The carlier halt of the soy ig not appropriate
for cur system. But the latter ae apr roti gion which. cou
be inserted in the Code, at Tepst for ce M4 Togs not
represented by counsel. When legal था ॥ comprehensive scale bes
comes feasible, it could be deleted... '

Recommendation .
1-0-0. It is believed that # provisicr on the following lines would
not impose too heavy a burden on’ the ‘presiding officers— ‘
“133-B, Where a pny pe asad not, represented by pleader,
the court shat} in to party his rig hts and duties
in_ relation to the precedure in the suit, and acquaine him
with the significance of evety material step necessay for

the progress of the suit”-

We recommend the insertion of such a provision,
1 Avtlote 18, Fundamentals of Sevipt Civil Progedare,



113

Section 153C (New) (Proceedings in Camera)

1-0-51. The Code of Civil Procedure has, at present, no provision
as to holding the proceedings in open court and as to the power of
the Court to hold proceedings in camere. At present, the matter is
dealt with under section 151, It would be appropriate to haye an
express provision on the subject. The matter pertains to “civil proce-
dure” and should present no difficulty as to legislative competence of,
Parliament,

1-0-52. The Supreme Court has claborately considered, in
Naresh’s case, the importance of public trial, and the necessary excep-
tions, The Supreme Court stated that the primary function of the
judiciary to do justice between the parties, is not to be overlooked.
If the primary function of the Court is to do justice in causes brought
before it, then on princi, ple, | (the court stated) it is difficult to accede
to the proposition that can be no exception to the rule that all
causes must be tried in open court.

It was held that the High Court has inherent jurisdiction under
section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code, to held a trial in camera, if
the ends of justice clearly and necessarily require the adoption of
such. a course; the High Court has also j jurisdiction to prohibit
excessive publication of 2 part of the py ings at such trial.

1-0-53, It may be noted that the Code of Criminal Procedure
has an express provision’ on the subject.

Recommendation

1-0-54. छा view of what is stated above, we recommend the in-
sertion of a new section as follows :—

“253-C. The place in which any civil Court is held for the
purpose of trying any suit shall be deemed an open Court,
to which the public generally may have access, so far as
the same can conveniently contain them:

“Provided that the presiding Officer may, if he thinks fit, order
at any stage of any inquiry into, or trial of, any particular
case, that the public generally, or any partioldar person,’
shall not have access to, or, be or remain in, the room or
building used by the court.”

1. Naresh Mirajkar v. State of Mak«ruabira, S1.R. 1967 8.0. 1.
2. Section 352, Cr, 2.0.



CuarTeR 1-P
PARTIES TO A SUIT

Introductory

1-P.1. The first question for a person seeking judicial relief is
whether a suit is competent. This is dealt with in the body of the
Code. When this question is answered in the affirmative, the second
question for the person seeking ‘judicial relief is, to which court he
cught to resort. This question is also answered in the body of the
Code, by a set of provisions dealing mainly with the competence of
courts with reference to pecuniary value of the subject-matter and
the place of suing. Having ascertained the court to which he must
resort, the third question for the person seeking judicial relief is,
for and against what parties such relief must be claimed. This is
dealt with in Order 1. :

1P.2. In general, a wide ‘latitude is. given, in this respect. to
the plaintiff, as is evidenced by various permissive words, such as,
“may”, “may be joined”, “it shali not be necessary”, “the plaintiff
may at his option join” and “where the plaintiff is in doubt”, which
oceur in various rules in Order व.

To avoid conflicting decisions and multiplicity. af proceedings,
there is a provision under which one person may, with the pemis-
sion of the court, sue or defend on behalf of numerous persons hav-
ing the same interest in one suit. a पु

Mis-joinder and non-joinder of parties, in general, would not
affect a suit, except where a necessary party is omitted to be joined.

This, in brief, is the scheme of Order 1. While the first seven
yules do not seem to have much scope for improvement, rule 8 and
some of the subsequent rules ‘require discussion.

Order 1, role 8 and numerotds parties

1-P.4. Order 1, rule 8 deals with what are known as ‘represen-
tative suits’. Under this rule, where there are numerous persons
having the ‘same interest’ in one suit, one or more of them may,
with the permission of the court, sue or be sued or defend in such
suit, on behalf of all of them. The other persons have, of course, to
be notified, and can apply to be made & party to the suit.

14-75, Now, a question which presents some difficulty is, what
is meant by the expression ‘‘same interest”, It is not necessary te
go into the cases on the subject. But, in one respect, a clarification
is needed. The impression seems to prevail that the party represent-
ing and the parties represented should have the same cause of action.
This is not. in our view, Necessary: nor is there any reason why it
should be 50. What is more important is community of interest. If,
for example, A sues one hundred persons who have, in pursuance of

4


115

a conspiracy, irespassed on his land, or have wrongfully confined
him, and A asks for declaratory relief, the Court should have power
to permit him to sue, say, three of the opponents as representatives
of all the hundred, previded there is community of interest among
them. Such community of interest can, ordinarily, be said to exist
where there is concerted action or a common object. The cause of
action against each trespasser is separate. But. if their interests are
common, one suit should be permissible. of course withthe leave of
the court.

Recommendation

1-P.6. We, therefore, recommend that the following Explanation
should be inverted below Order 1, Rule 3:—

“Explanation—it is not necessary thet the person who sue or
are sued or defend should have the same cause of action
as the persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit they
sue or are sued or defend, as the oase may be.”

Order 1, rule 8 and execution

1-P.7. The Commission, in its earlier Report on the Code,’ pro-
posed some changes in Order 1. rule 8 regarding execution. The main
change to which it drew attention was the proposed provision to
the effect, that while a judgment under this rule should be binding
on all persons on whose behalf the suit is brought or is defended,
it shall not, except with the leave of the court, be executed against
any such person who is not actually.a party to the suit. In suggest:
ing this amendment, the Commission followed the provisions of
Order 15, rvle 12(2), of the Revised Supreme Court Rules of England.

1-P.8. The relevant provisions as formulated in the Appendix to
the Report* are as follows

“(8) A decree. passed in a suit under this rule shall be bind-
ing on al] persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit
the suit is instituted or defended, as the case may be; but
such decree shal] not be executed by or against any per-
son not a party to the suit except with the leave of the
court.

“(7) Notice of an application for the grant of leave under svb-
rule (6) shall be'served on the person against whom the
decree is sought to be executed in the manner provided
in this 'Code for the Service of a summons.

(8) Notwithstanding that a decree to which any application
for the grant of leave under sub-rule (6) relates is bind-
ing on the person against whom the application is made,
that person may dispute liability to have the decree exe-
cuted against him on the ground that by reason of facts
and matters peculiar to his case he is entitled to be
exempted from such liability.

1. 37th Report, paze 28,

2. 27% Report, Appendix showing the draft amendments, Order 1, role 8, Proposed’ sub.
rules [f) to (8) .



116

Recommendation

1-P.9. We have carefully considered this particular puint, and we
think that such a restriction is unnecessary. We, therefore, recom-
mend that: while carrying' out the amendment in Order 1, rule 8, as
proposed in the earlier Report on the Code, the restriction as to
execution without leave need not be incorporated

Order 1, role 8A (New)

1-P.10. The Code has, at present, no provision for permitting the
jeinder of an organisation interested in the legal issues in a suit,
Le. an organisation which, though not concerned with the narrow
questions of fect arising between the parties, has a view to offer on
some broader issues.

19.11. It may be noted. in tais connection, that in Soviet
Russia, there is a provision for participation, in the trial by organs
of State administration, trade unions, establishments, enterprises,
organisations and citizens in defence of the rights of others. The
Fundamentals of Soviet Civil Legislation porvide as follow’: -..

“In the cases provided for by law, organs of State administra-
tion, trade unions, state establishments, enterprises, kol-
khozes and other co-operative and mass organisations or
citizens may take action in defence of the rights and
lawful interests of others.

“Organs of State administration, in the cases provided for by
aw. may be caused by the court to join the suit on thir
own motion to present their “opinion on the case in
order to perform their duties or to act in defence of the
rights of citizens or interests .of the state,

“The organs of state administration, establishments, enterpri-
ses and organisations enumerated in the present Article,
through their representatives, and citizens may acquaint
themselves with the, materials of the case. make challen-
ges, deliver pleadings, susmit evidence, take part in the
examination of evidence, file petitions, and also perform
other procedural acts provided for by law.”

1-P.12. It has been stated? that in the U.S.S.R., social organisa
tions are drawn into civil proceedings just 88 they are drawn into
criminal proceedngs.' A civil case may be initiated on the petition
of a social organisation.” The Court may “permit representatives of
social organisation...............t0 participate in the trial" “in order
to present the court with the opinions of authorised Persons of
their organisations +. concerning the case under consideration

|. To be borne ia mind while amanding Onder 1, rule 8, ६४ per 27th eport,
2. Article 39, Fundamentals of Soviet Civil Legislation and Civil Procedure.

3, See Harold Berman, “Educative Role of Soviet Court” (January, 1972) 20, LO.L.Q,
81 86,

4, Apparently, the referenos ix to section 250, R.SIP.S.R. Ur.
5. RSFSR. Code of Civil Procedure, Ark “4.
8, RS. Gode of Civil Procedure, Art. 141(6),

*

eae Samet


ab

U7

by the court”, Representatives of social organisations appearing in
civil cases have the same rights as counsel for the parties’, “In
practice, sovial organisations do frequently participate in civil cases—
especially in housing disputes, labour and family law”.

1-P.13. Some svech provision—suitably adapted, of course, so as
to suit Indian conditions—would be useful. It is true that it may
not be in harmony with the adversary system on which our proce-
dure is based. Some safeguards may also be required, in order to
prevent busy bodies from interfering with private disputes.

Nevertheless, it would be worthwhile inserting a provision which
could be pressed into service in suitable cases.

Recommendation
1-P.14. The provision could be somewhat on the following lines
and tind a place in Order 1:

“8A. The court may, if satisfied that a person or body of per-
sons is interested in any question of law in issue in the suit,
and that it is in the public interest to allow that person or
body io present its opinion, permit thet person or body to
take such part in the proceedings as the court may specify.”

1-P.15. This will not be exactly the same as the practice of ap-
pointing an amicus curiae, because the organisation concerned would
have its own views to present, and its role would not be confined to
assisting the court, though its participation may help the court in
elucidation of some of the issues. -

Order 1, rule 9
1-P.16, Order 1, rwe 9, which deals with the effect of misjoinder
and non-joinder of parties, provides as follows: --

“No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non
joinder of parties and the court may in every suit deal
with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights
and interests of the parties actually before it.”

Recommendation .

1-P.17. We are uf the view that non-joinder of essential arties
should be excluded from the scope of this rule. Accordingly, we
recommend the insertion of the tollowing proviso:

“Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to non-joinder
of a necessary party”.

Order 1, rule 10(2)

1-P.18, The following changes were proposed in Order 1, rule
10(2), in the earlier Report on the Code. in order to make the rule
comprehensive ; —

(a) A power to strike off the name of any person who has. for

any reason, ceased to be a proper or necessary party,
should be added.

॥ Procedure Art. 147,
Prooociuve, Art, 147.

3%. Cf. diacumion as to section 99.

4, 27th Report, page 128, note on Order 1, rule 10(2).

AR, Code of Ci
५ Cale af Ci



118

(0) A power to remove any person who has been unnecessarily
joined, should be added.

While we sec the utility of such an amendment, it appears to
us that the proposed amendment wili inevitably give rise to the
questiva whether the party struck off under the rule (as proposed
to be amended) should be given a right of appeal against any deter-
tuination of a question which might have been rendered befure he
ceased to be a party. Jt becomes necessary io consider this aspect, be-
cause such 2 person would not be a party on record when the suit
is finally disposed of and the decree is passed.

1-P.19. The right of appeal against an original deerce is govern-
ed by section 96, which is silent as to the person who can a eal,
Courts have, in gencral, taken a wide view in this respect,' and,
without confining the right to the parties on record, they have en-
tertained an appeal by a person whose rights are affected by a decree,
even where he was never a party.

L-P.20, Even then, a controversy could arise as to whether the
person whose name is struck off can be recognised as having a right
of appeal against the decree that may be ultimately passed after he
has ceased to be a party, if the decree aifects his interest.

Recommendation in earlier Report not to be carried out

1-P.21. In the circumstances, we have come to the conclusion
that the recommendation in the carlier Report as to Order 1, rule
K10(2) should not be carried out. .

Order 1, rule LOA (New)

1-P.22 The Code contains no express provision, empowering
the court to ask counsel (not appearing in the case) to assist the
court by agreements. Such a practice is common. It may be desir-
able to give legislative recognition 10 this practice.

Recommendation

1-P.23. Accordingly, we recommend that the following new rule
should be inserted in Order 10: --

“LOA. The Court_may, in its discretion, request any pleader to
address the Court as to any interest which is likely to be
affected by the decision of the matters in issue and which
is not represented.”

1, Surendra Das v. Bholu Prasad, 4.1.8. 1950 Assam 92 (Cane-law reviewed),


ra

CHAPTER 2
FRAME OF THE SUIT

Introductory हि

2.1. Order 2 deals with the frame of the suit, and the dominant
rule here is that. as far as practicable, every suit shall be so framed
ss 10 afford ground for final decision upon the subjects in disptte and
lo prevent further litigation concerning them. With this end in view,
the Code provides that every suit shall include the whole of the
claim which the plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause
of action, and, similarly, he must claim all the reliefs which he is
entitled to, in respect of the same cause of action.

2.2. As has been observed.

“Were the rule otherwise, a man might be sued, repeatedly in.
respect of the same matter, and conflicting judgments
might be pronounced regarding sevarate portions of the
same property, included in the same cause of action.

“And as the value of the property claimed by the plaint deter-
mines the class of judges by which a suit is cognisable and the reme-
dies of the partics in an appeal, a suit might be split up, so that each
branch of it should be decided by 2 judge of a lower class than that
by which, with reference to the value of the whole property in
litigation, it ought to be decided, and the right of the parties to
appeal would be unfairly limited”.

23, The Code also encourages the plaintiff to unite, in the same
suit, several causes of action against the same defendant jointly,—
the object here again also being. to avoid numerous proceedings, Of
course, where there are several defendants or plaintifs, and several
causes of action, and one or more of the plaintiffs or defendants are
not interested in one or more of the causes of action, the nice ques-
tion of “multifariousness” arises, The Code expressly provides that
objections on the grounds of mis-joinder of causes of action must
be taken at the earliest possible stage.

We do not recommend any changes in this Order.

Order 2, rule 2 and Execution Proceedings

2.4, Since the provisions of 0.2, 7.2 do not apply to execution
proceedings. it has been held’ that an application to enforce one
yelief will not be a bar to a subsequent application to enforce the
other relief. though both the reliefs were awarded by one and the
same decree.’ We do not think that a specific provision is necessary
in this respect. हैं

2, Radka Kishen v. Radka Parshad, (1891) LER. 18 Cal. 615.
119


CuarTer 3
RECOGNISED AGENTS AND PLEADERS
Introductory

3.1, Order 3 deals with recognised agents and pleaders. Recognis-
ed agents are persons who do not belong to the profession of law-
yers, while pleaders so belong. There are rules for appearance.
application and acts to be done by the recognised agents and
pleaders, and for the service of process on them. Pleaders who act
or plead for a party, have to file in court a document or memoran-
dum,

There are a few points which require discussion in this Order.

Order 3, rule 4

3.2. Order 3. rule 4(1), prohibits a pleader from acting for any
person in any court, unless he has been “appointed” for the pur-
pose by a document in writing. Order 3. rule 4(2) and rule 4(3)
contain provisions as to the duration for which such appointment
“shall be deemed to be in force". At first sight, the wording of sub-
rules (2) and (3) of rule 4 may create an impression that they apply
so as to regulate, as a matter of law, the duration of the professional
relationship (of counsel and client), created by a contract. But on
a close reading, this impression is dispelled. Sub-rule (2) is to be
read as relevant only for the purpose of the prohibition in sub-
rule (1),

We have examined the matter at some length, and have come
to the above conclusion, But a clarification on the point is desirable.

Recommendation
3.3. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 3, rules 4(2) and
4(3) should be revised as follows: —

“(2) Every such appointment shall be filed in Court and shall,
for the purposes of sub-rule (1). be deemed to be in force until

determined with the leave of the Court by a writing signed by .

the client or the pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court, or
until the client or the pleader dies or until all proceedings in the
suit are ended so far as regards the client.

Explanation—For the purposes. of this sub-ruie, the following
shall be deemed to be proceedings in the suit: —

(a) an application for review of judgment,
५ (b) an application under section 144 or section 152 of this Code,

{cl any appeal from any decree or order in suit, and
120

x,

|


~ers ::

121

(8) any application or act for the purpose of obtaining copies
of documents or return of documents produced or filed in
the suit or of obtaining refund of monies paid into the
Court in connection with’ the suit.

“(3) Nothing in sub-rule (2) shall be construed—

(a) as extending a3 between the pieader and his client,
the duration for which the pleader is engaged, or

*(b) as authorising service on the pleader of any docu-
ment issued by any court other then the court for the
purposes far which the pleader was engaged, except
where the client has otherwise expressly agreed in the
ducument referred to in sub-rule (1).”

M/B(D)220Mof LJ&CA—10 ~



CHAPTER 4
INSTITUTION OF SUITS

Introductory

4.1, Order 4 deals with the mode of institution of a suit. A suit,
it says, is to be instituted by presenting a plaint to the court or its
authorised official. This Ogder must be read with section 26, which
provides that every svit shall be instituted by the presentation of
a plaint or in such other manner es may be prescribed. Particulars
of a suit presented are to be entered in the register of suits. Detail-
ed rules as to pleadings in general end plaints in particular are
contained in Orders 6 and 7.

We do not recommend any changes in this Order.

cae ee


ay

Cuaprer 5
ISSUE AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS

Introductory

5.1, When the plaint has been registered, ४ summons may be
issued.to the deiendart, or to each defendant where there are more
defendants than one, It is for the court to decide whether the sum-
mons shali be for the settlement of issues only, or for the final dis-
posal of the su‘t. Elaborate proyisions as to the mode of service of
summonses are contained in the various rules of Order 5, the object
being to make sure, as far as possible, that the summons comes
to the knowledge of the defendant.

5.2. Since a considerable proportion of suits are decided ex parte
owing to the defendant's failure to appear the importance of these
rules is obvious. Rules as to the effect of appearance and non-appea-
ranee of the defendant are separately provided for in Order 9
(which also deals with the consequences af non-appearance of the
parties). Most of the rules in Order 5 relate to ministerial acts.
We shall discuss only a few rules of importance.

Order 5, Rule 15 -

5.3. Where, in any suit, the defendant cannot be found, service
of the summons can be made on any adult male member of the
family of the defendant who resides with him, under Order 5, rule

5. .

In the earlier Report,' the previous Commission noted that the
word “male” had been omitted by local amendment in Kerala. The
previous Commission, however. thought that the amendment may
not be suitable for adoption for the whole of India.

Recommendation

5.4. We have considered the matter again, and are of the view
that the word “male” should be dropped. Having regard to the in-
crease in literacy and status of women during the last few years,
this change could safely be made. for the whole of India, We. there.
fore. recommend that in Order 5, rule 15, the word “male” should

e dropped.

Order 5, rule 20(1)

5.5. Order 5, rule 20 deals with “Substituted service”. The rule
provides that such service can (besides affixation of the summons}
be ordered in such other manner as the Court may direct. The usual
mode of service ordered is by publication in the newspaper, We con-
sidered the question whether. besides publication in the newspaper,

1. 27th Report, page 136, Note un Order 5, rule 15,
138

‘Lj B(D)229Muf LI&CA—10{a)


124

the court should have power to direct that the substance of the sum-
mons should be read out by means of announcement on the radio.
But, on inquiry being made from the Department concerned. we
understand that, that would not be feasible.

5.8. We, therefore, recommend no change in this respect.
Postal Service

5.7. A recommendation for service of summons by post along
with personal service has been made in the earlier Report,’ and we
wish to record that we are in full agreement with it.

¢

1, 27th Report, pages 136, 137, nete ०७ Order $; rule 19.


Crater 6
PLEADINGS

Introductery

6.1. The provisions in Order 6 relating to pleadings in general
are taken mainly from the English rules. The fundamental rule is
that only facts, and only material facts, shall be stated in the plead-
ings, but not the evidence, and the statement of facts should be
concise, The whole purpose of the system of pleadings is to narrow
down the dispute between the parties to definite issues, and thereby
to diminish expense and delay, especially as regards the amount of
testimony required on either side at the hearing.’ From this funde-
mental rule follow the detailed guidelines given in the Order; and
the philosophy of the Code towards encouraging amendments which
are necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in
controversy tween the parties, is given expression in rule 17 of
this ler.

We do not consider any changes in this Order to be necessary.

1, Therp v. Heldaworth, (1878) 3 Ch. 0, 637, 638, 639. (Jessel MLR.)
18


CHAPTER 7
FLAINT
lntroductory

7.1. Detailed provisions as to the particulars to be conta'ned in
the plaint are dealt with in the first eight rules of Order 7. Where a
plaint is presented. it may either be admitted (rule 9), réturned, if
the court has no jurisdiction (rule 10), or rejected for certain
grounds (rules 1] to 13). Each of these three possible alternatives is
of importance.

7.2. Since, usually. the plaintiff sues or relies upon a document
in support of his case. ruies 14 to 18 in Order 7 contain detailed pro-
visions as to listing and preduction-of such documents at the time
when the plaint is presented.

Order 7, rule 2

7.3. Order 7, rule 2 provides that in a suit for recovery of
money, the plaint shall state the precise amount claimed, Under the
Punjab Amendment to Order 7, rule 2, where the suit is for mov-
able property in the possession of the defendant or for a debt of
which the value cannot be estimated, the plaint shall state approxi-
mately the amount or value.

74. Iu the earlier Report: it was considered unnecessary to
adopt such a provision But. we think, that it would be useful

Recommendation
7.6. Accordingly, we recommend the following re-draft of Order
7, rule 2:—

“2. Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint
shall state the precise amount claimed. But where the plaintiff sues
for—

{a) Mesne pvofits, or

(>) for an amount which wil] be found dve to him on taking
unsettled accuunts between him and the defendant. or

(९) for movables in the possession of the defendant, or

(a) for debts of which the value he cannot, after fhe exercise
of reasonable diligence, estimate, the plaint shall state
approximately the amount or value sued for.”

Urder 7, rule 6

7.6. Order 7. rule 6. requires that a ground of exemption from
limitation should be specifically pleeded in the vlaint.

¥. 27th Report. page (कि, छताह on Oiler 7, cule 2.

126


127

7.7. Where the ground of exemption from limitation is not
stated in the plaint, the question arises whether it can be raised
later (without amendment of the pleading). The earlier Report dis-
cussed the controversy,’ on this point.

7.8, Another question is whether, when the ground of exemption
from fimitation is stated, the plaintiff can take another ground,
which is new but is consistent with the ailegations in the pleading.
The controversy on this point wes also discussed in the earlier
Report?

7.9. A third question is, whether a new and inconsistent ground
can be pleaded? It was noted in the earlier Report’ that a a erical
error in a Bombay Judgment had misled some courts inte thinking
that even an inconsistent plea can be taken for claiming exemption
from limitation.

7.10. To summarise the position, as was stated in that Report,—

(i) the strict provision embodied in Order 7, rule 6 has been
administered liberally by most High Courts (excepting
the Madras High Court)’;

(ii) there is some confusion about whether the extra grounds
which can be set up, should be “consistent”, with the
earlier ground as set out in the pleadings.

7.11, In view of the majority view, it was stated in the earlier
Report, that an amendment was not necessary.

Recommendation

7.12. But we think that it is desirable that the position should be
clarified, There should be no objection to the court being given a
power to permit the plaintiff to rely on a new ground of exemp-
tion, so long as that ground is not inconsistent with the allegations
in the plaint. The insertion of the following proviso at the end of
Order 7, rule 8, is, therefore, recommended: —

“Provided that the court may permit the plaintiff to claim
exemption from such law on any ground not shown in the
plaint, if the ground is not inconsistent with the allega-
tions im the plaint.”

Order 7, rule 16

7.13. Order 7, rule 10 provides that the plaint shall, “at any
stage of the suit”, be returned to the plaintiff. for presentation to
the court in which the suit should have been instituted, if the
court has no jurisdiction to try the suit. The words ‘at any stage
of the suit’? have raised one question. Where the suit has been
already tried and a judgment delivered, can the plaint be returned?

1. th Report, pp. 145-146, Note on Order 7, rale 6.

2% 27th Report, pp. 145-146, Note on Order 7, rule 6.

$॥ 21७ Report, pp. 148-148, Note on Order 7, rule 6.

4, The tater decision in 8.2f. Minimal v. K, Radhakrishnan 4.1.R, 1072 Mad. 108 (D.B,)
does not seam to make ६ differenos, .



128

Does the “stage of suit” still continue? When, for example, it is
found either in appeal or in revision that the decree was without
jurisdiction, can the appellate or revisional court return the plaint,
on the theory that an appeal or revision is a kind of continuation of
the suit? The authorities are conflicting on the point.

7.14 In a Calcutta case’, the plaintiff sought for a return of the
plaint in similiar circumstances, But, the respondent’s counsel argued
that where there had been a trial and a judgment on a plaint, the
plaint could no longer be returned, The Court held that the plaint
could no longer be returned.

7.15, In an earlier Calcutta decision’, it had been observed that
the plaint had already merged in a decree, and “it is inconceivable
how it struck the munsiff that the plaint could be returned at that
stage”, That was a suit for partition. The property was valued at a
certain figure, and a preliminary decree was passed. But, thereafter,
it was found, at the time of the fina} decree, that the suit was under-
valued. On those facts, it was held that it was not open to the Court,
if the value of the property exceeded the pecuniary limits of the
jurisdiction of the court, to declare the preliminary decree a nul-
lity and to return the plaint for presentation to the competent court.

7.16. It was urged in the later Calcutta case that where the plaint
(or rather, the cause of action)has merged in a judgment or decree,
the appeal court (or the revisional court) can always make an order
setting aside the judgment and directing the plaint to be presented
to the proper court. But it was held that normally, having regard to
the context and juxtaposition of Order 7, rule 10, the question of
return of plaint should be considered at a stage where the judgm ent
has not been delivered, It is at the stage where the plaint is filed, and
before the summons in the suit had issued, that the plaint is nor-

mally returned. In fact, Order 7, dealing with the plaint, contextually .

comes before Order 8. which deals with the written statement. Sub-
rule (2) of Order 7; rule 10. would also seem to indicate that it is
the initial stage that is being considered under this provision, and
not the stage when the suit proceeded to a trial and the judgment
already delivered

7.17. It was observed further, that the words “presentation”,
“return” and “endorsement” of the reasons as envisaged under Order
7, rule 10(2) seem to indicate that the legislature is contemplating
the stage of such return long before the trial of the plaint and before
the delivery of the judgment on such a plaint. The small causes court
judge should have acted under Order 7, rule 10 on this plaint when
it was presented to him, and should have returned it for presentation
to the proper court. The appropriate course for the High Court should
96 to set aside the judgment, and not te order return of the plaint for
aresentation to the proper court.

1, Gopt Krishna x. AniT Bose, ALR. 1985 Cal. 68.
2. Ratikanta Myore v. Sansian Baidya, ALR. 1990 Cal. 147 (8.8. Ghosh and 8.K. Ghooe 0).

1०७७०


an”

129

7.18. Some: other High Courts assume’ that a wider interpreta-
tion is the correct one.

7.19. In the above state of the case-law, a clarification is desir-
able, Dismissal of the suit for want of jurisdiction, though an easier
course, is bound to lead to hardship in respect of covrt-fees and
limitation. It will be more convenient if a provision is added to the
effect that the power under Order 7, rule 10, can be exercised by
the Appellate Court or by the Revisional Court.

As regards the situation where a preliminary decree has already
been passed, we do not think that it would be appropriate to provide
for return of the plaint by the court of first instance.

Recommendation to amend 0,7, r. 100)

7.20. Accordingly, we recommend that the following Explanation
should be inserted below Order 7, rule 10(1):—
“Explanation—A Court of appeal or revision may direct the
return of a plaint under this rule, notwithstanding that a
decree had been passed in the suit.”

Recommendation to insert 0.7, r. 105, ete.

4 7.21 and 7.22. We are, further, of the view that in order to avoid
lelay, the court returning the plaint should fix a date for the appear-
ance of the parties in the new court. We recommend the insertion of
following rules for this purpose:—

“10-4. (1) Where, in any suit, after the defendant has ap-
peared, the court is of the view that the plaint should be
returned under rule 10, it shall. before doing so, inform
the plaintiff, and the plaintiff shall thereupon he entitled
to make an application to the Court—

(a) intimating that, on return of the plaint, he proposes
to present it to the court in which it should have been
instituted, to be specified in the application;

(9) praying that the court may fix a date for the appear-
ance of the parties in the said court; and

(ce) requesting that notice of the date so fixed may be
given to him and to the defendant.

(2) Where an application is made under subrule (1), the
eourt shall, before returning the plaint—
(a) fix a date for the purpose mentioned in clause (b) of
that sub-rule; and
(b) give to the plaintiff and to the defendant such notice
as is referred to in clause (c) of that sub-rule; and
where such notice is given.
(i) it shall not be necessary for the Court specified
in the application, on presentation of the plaint
1 (a) Btrase Products’ ud. v. Bhopal Municipatity, A.LR. 1959 M.P. 253, 258, pare. 17
(t) Rem Adhin v, Gulzari Singh AIR, 1946 Ondh 11€, 118.



lay

in that Ceurt, to serve the defendant with a sum-
Mong for appearance in the suit -instituted by
presenting that plaint, unless that court, for
reasons tu be recorded, otherwise directs; and

(ii) the said notice shall be deemed to be a summons
for appearance of the defendant on the date se
fixed in the court mentioned in the notice.

(8) Where the plaintiff has made an application under sub-

rule (1) and the application has been granted, he shall
not be entitled to appeal against the order returning the
plaint

10-B. (1) Where an order directing that a plaint should be

returned under rule 10 is proposed to be confirmed by =
court in appeal, or where a court hearing an appeal is of
the view that the plaint should be returned under rule
10. the court (hereinafter referred to as the court of ap-
peal) shall, before passing a final order, inform the plain-
tiff, and the plaintiff shall thereupon be entitled to make
an application to the covrt—

{a) requesting that instead of the plaint being returned,
suit may be transferred to the court in which it should
have been instituted (hereinafter referred to as “the
proper court”), whether within or without the

ate:

(b) praying that the court may fix a date for the appear-
ance of the parties in the said court; and

<3) requesting that notice of the date so fixed may be
given to him and to the defendant.

Where an application is made under sub-rule (1), the court
of appeal shall, instead of returning the plaint,—

(a) transfer the suit to the proper court;

(9) fix a date for the purpose mentioned in clause (b) of
that sub-rule; and

(९) give to the plaintiff and the defendant such notice as
is referred to in clause {c) of that sub-rule
and where such notice is given—

(

(i) it shall not be necessary for the court to which

the suit is transferred to serve the defendant with

a summons for appearance in the suit, unless that

court, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise
directs; and

(ii) the said notice shall be deemed to be a summons
for appearance of the defendant in that court on
the date so fixed.

मिनी 1३५४


. 131

7.23. Order 7, rule 11(¢). provides that the plaint shall be rejected
where the relief claimed is properly valued but the plaint is written
upon paper insvfiicientiy stamped and the plaintiff, on being required
by the court to supply the requisite stamp-paper within a time ta
be fixed by the Court, fails to do so. Some controversy-seems’ to exist
on whether granting of time under this rule is manda-
tory. One view is, that the matter falis outside section 149, and ig
entirely governed by Order 7, rule 11, which is a special provision;
and. therefore. the party is entitled to demand some time for making
good the deficiency. Another view is, that the grant of time is dis-
eretionary, on the ground that the authority to grant time is in sec-
tion 149. and not in Order 7, rule 11, which is a disebling provision.

7.24. The Madras High Court has made an express amendment
to this rule which, in substance, provides that the grant of time is
a matter of discretion. The question whether the Madras amend-
ment should be adupted was considered in the earlier Report*, but
it was felt unnecessary to insert any such provision.

Recommendation

7.25. We are of the view that the Madras amendment should not
be edopted, as it would be too harsh, At the seme time. we are of
the view that once time is given, it should not be extended, and
section 148 should not apply to such cases.

Recommendation

7.26. Accordingly, we recommend that present Order 7. rule 11.
should be re-numbered as sub-rule (1), and sub-rule (2) should be
inserted in that rule as follows: —~

“(2) Where a plaint is liable to be rejected under clause (9)
or clause (c) of sub-rule (1). the court shail grant time to
the plaintiff to correct the valuation of or to supply the
requisite stamp paper, as the case may be: but, notwith-
standing anything contained in section 148. time so granted
shall not be extended”,

1, (6) Radha Kanto v. Debenira Narayan. LIB. 49 Cal, 880; ATR, 1922 Cal, 500, 598
(Mookerjre and Crming IS).

(8) Subbe Reddy v. Venkatanarasimka Reddy. ATR. 1937 Mat. 268,

fe) Rea ¥. Achoteomava, STR. १988 Mad, 542-543, right hand (Venkatasubba
0 J.).

14) Achwt Ramehairs v. Nagappr, ALR, 1914 Bom, 249, 250 (Batchelor an‘ Shah
JT) (Traces hisiory of the rile).

(e) Baijnath ९, Gincahoor, ATR 1987, Pat. 560 (FB),

(f) Shiv (Baran v. Behari Lal, ATR. 1941 Oudh 39.

(9) Ram Kishan ए. Nutho, ATR. 1959 Bom, १6 Mioaholkar J, Reviews cxvelaw
2. 27th Report, page, 137, note on Order 7, rule 11.
Order 7, rile 1118) stands on the same footing as Order 7, rule 11०).

»


Cuartm 8

WRITTEN STATEMENT AND SET-OFF

Introductory

8.1. The reply of the defendant, to the plaint, which is called
“written statement of his defence”, is dealt with in Order 8. A
written statement may be filed; but, if the court so requires, it must
be filed within the time permitted by the court. Order 8, rule 1 so
provides.

8.2. The mode of denial of allegations in the vleint occupies
rules 2 to 5 of this Order; set-off is dealt with in rules 6 and 7, and
rule 8 permits the defendant to take any new ground of defence
at a later stage. Ordinarily, the plaint and the statement of defénca
ave the only pleadings allowed; but relaxation of this rule is per-
missible under rule 9, The procedvre to be adopted when a party
fails to present a written statement before the court, is dealt in
rule 102 rule which has created some controversy.

Order 8, rule 1 and obligatory written statements

8.3. It was noted in the earlier Report' that a recommendation
had been made in the Report on the reform of judicial administra-
tion to make the filing of the written statement obligatory. The
Commission, however. thought that this might work hardship.

Recommendation

8.4, We have re-examined the matter, and are of the view that
such a provision should be inserted. In the absence of a proper
pleading by the defendant. it is difficult to proceed with the suit, and
in fact. the whole scheme of the Code postulates that there should
be a written statement which constitutes the foundation of the de-
fence, if the defendant chooses to participate in the proceedings. The
time has now come when a written statement should be obligatory,
and we recommend accordingly, that Order 8, rule 1, should be re-
vised as follows:

“The defendant ...... shall, at or before the first hearing or
within such time as the Court may permit, present a
written statement of his defence.”

Order 8, rule 5

8.5, Under Order 8, rule 5, an allegation of a fact made in the
plaint, if not denied, or not stated to be not admitted in the pleading
of the defendant, is to be taken as admitted. Whether this rule ap
plies in a case where the defendant-has not filed a pleading at all

1, 27th Repart, pages 147-148, not ou Order 8, ruls 1 and obligatory written statement,

2. Mth Report, Vol. 1, page 302, para 12.
188



od

yw

133

is a question that was considered in the earlier Reports. No amend-
ment to the rule was, however, proposed. as it was felt that on the
language of the rule. it should not apply to such cases.

8.6. However, we are taking a different view on the subject, and
are of opinion that such a provision should be made. If the defen-
dant does not file a pleading. the court should have a discretion to
treat the allegations in the plaint as admitted. This is necessary in
the interests of expedition, and should net. in our view, cause any
serious hardship, Since the present position* is that Order 8, rule 5,
dogg not apply.where there is no written statement, an amendment
is necessary if effect is to be given to our view. At the same time,
we would like to emphasise that the covrt should, in exercising its
discretion, consider whether the defendant has engaged counsel or.
could have engaged counsel.

Recommendation

8.7. We, therefore, recommend that Order 8, rule 5, should be
re-numbered as sub-rule (1), and the following sub-rules should be
added in Order 8, ruie §:—

(2) Where the defendant has not filed ६ pleading, it shall be
tawful for the court te pass a judgment on the basis of
the ailegations of fact in the plaint, except as against a
person under disadility; but the court may, in its discre-
tion, require any such allegations of fact to be proved,

(3) In exercising its discretion under the proviso to sub-rule
(1) or under sub-rule (2), the court shall have due regard
to the fact whether the defendant couid have or has en-
gaged a pleader.

{4) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a
decree shall be drawn up in accordance with such judg-
ment bearing the same date as the day on which the
judgment was pronounced”.

Order 8, rule 8A (New) (Production of document)

8.8. Order 7, rule 14 provides that where 8 plaintiff sues upon a
document _in his possession or power. he shall produce the docu-
ment in Court when the plaint is presented. Where the plaintiff
relies on any other documents (whether in his possession or power
or not), as evidence in support of his claim, he has to enter such
documents in a list to be added or annexed to the plaint. The
Fourteenth Report’ recommended, that a similar provision should
be made in the case of a defendant.

8.9. This _recommendation, however, was not agreed in by the
Commission in tke Report? on the Code. The Commission felt that
the distinction between a document upon which the plaintiff sues

1. 27th Report, page 150, Nete on Order 8, rule 5.

2, Rardayal Chaman Lal ५. Taian of Indio, ALR. 1968 Panj, 320 (reviews snsea),
$. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 814, pera. 32.

4. 21th Report, page 13, para. 28,



334

and a document upen which he relies, cannot properly be made in
the case of written statement. “The only manner in which such a
distinction can be made is between documents on which a defen-
dant buses his delence and other decuments on which he relies as
evidence in support of his defence. In our upinion such a distinction
would be unreaiistic and impractical. A written statement merely
answers the claim made in the plaint. In practice, it would be diffi
cult ६० distinguish between documents on which the defence ‘
based” from other dacuments of purely evidentiary vaiue. We, how-
ever, think that a defendant should enter in a list to be added or
annexed io the written statement all documents on which he relies
in support of his defence”.

Recommendation

8.10. We have carefully examined the matter, and have come to
the conclusion that the recommendation made in the 14th Report
should be carried out. Barring very few cases, the distinction between

the basic documents, and other documents should, we think, pre--

sent no difficulty even in respect of the defence. We recommend there-
tore that a suitable amerdment should be made as above. To achieve
thar object, the following rule shduld be inserted in Order 8—

“BA, (1)* Where a defendant buses his defence upon a docu
ment in his possession or power, he shall produce it in
court when the written statement is presented, and shall,
at the same time, deliver ihe document or a copy thereof
to be filed with the written statement.

(2) A document which ought to be produced in court by the
defendent under this rule, but is not so produced, shall
not, without the leave of the Court, be received in evi-
dence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit,

Nothing in this rule applies to docwments produced for
cross-eramination of the plaintif’s witnesses, or in answer
to any case set up by the plaintiff subsequently to the
filing of the plaint, or handed to a witness merely to re-
fresh his memory.’

8.11. Order 8, rule 10, deals with the procedure to be followed
when a party fails to present a written statement called for by the
eourt. This rule begins thus:

\
“Where any party fram whom a written statement is so re:
quired, fails to present the same .... a”

Now, the word ‘so’ has heen construed as limi ing the operation
of the rule to failure to file a written statement that was demanded
under the preceding rule. (Order 8, rule 9), and not as covering the
more frequent case of a written statement demanded under Order
8, rule 1.

8.12, In the eartier Report', this lacuna was discussed, and an
amendment was also proposed to remove this lacuna,

(c

1, 27th Report, peye 161, note on Order 8, rule 10.

a


yf

kee

185

8.13, We agree with this recommendation for amendment. We
are also of the view that it should be oebligatory on the Court to
pronounce judgment when rwie 10 applies, that is to say. when a
party fails to file 2 written statement required by law.

Recommendation
8.14. Accordingly, we recommend that Order § rule 10 should
be revised as follows:—

“10, Where any party from whom a written statement is ré-
quired under rule 1 or rule 9 fails to present the same
within the time permitted or fixed by the court. as the
case may be, the court shal? pronounce judgment against

him...


CuaPTen 9
APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCES OF NON-
APPEARANCE

Introductory

9.1. Order 9 jays down the rules of procedure applicable to va-
rious situations concerned with the appearance of parties, namely,
cases where both parties attend; where the summons has not been
served in consequence of the plaintiffs failure to pay the fees for
serving; when neither party appears; when the plaintiff only appears;
and when the defendant only appears. Failvre to appear attracts
certain consequences, Broadly speaking, from the point of view of
the plaintiff, the most important is the provision which makes dis-
missal of the suit for default of the plaintiff mandatory; and, fram
the context of the defendant, the most important is the provisicn
authorising the court to proceed ex parte, if the defendant does not
appear.

Ti the defendant does not file a written statement, certain ac-
tion can be taken against him under rule 10,—a rule which appears
to have caused a considerable amount of uncertainty, owing to its
somewhat ambiguovs wording. Since non-appearance of a party
may be involuntary or otherwise for sufficient cause, there have to
be provisions for setting aside dismissal of the suit or ex parte
order, as the case may be.

Order $, rule 5(1)

9.2. Order 9, rule 5(1) provides that where a plaintiff fails to
apply for a fresh summons (after the summons on the defendant is
returned unseryed), the Court shall dismiss the suit (except in
certain cases). The period prescribed for the application for a fresh
summons is three months under the present rule. The original
period was for one year, but it was changed to three months later!.
The period has been changed into two months by local Amendments
by the High Courts of Bombay and Gujarat and one month = in

rala, The proposed amendment in the earlier Report* reduced it
to two months. We think that it should be reduced to one month,
in order to expedite progress of the case.

Recommendation
9.3. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 9, rule 5(1), should
be revised as follows: —
“(1) Where, after a summons has been issued to the defendant,
or to one of several defendants, and returned unserved,
the plaintiff fails, for a period of one month from the date

1. Code of Civil Procedure Amendment 4०६ (24 of 1930).
2, 2ith Report, page 152, note on 0-9, F-6{i),
136


137

of the return made to the Court by the officer ordinarily
certifying to the Court returns made by the serving, off-
cers, to apply for the issue of a fresh summons the Court
shall make an order that the suit be dismissed as against
such defendants, unless the plaintiff has within the said
period satisfied the Court that—

{a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to dis-
cover the residence of the defendant who has not
been served, or

(b) such defendant is avoiding service of process, or

(c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the
time, in which case the Court may extend the time
for making such application for such period as it
thinks fit.”

Order 9, rule 6 and Order 9, rule 7

9.4. In the earlier Report’, two points were considered with
reference to Order 9, rule 6.

9.5, The first question was, whether the court should have power
to pass a dercee, if it thinks fit, om the basis of a pleading without
formal evidence, where the case pro gees ex parte. As pleadings are
not required to be on oath?, it was considered unnecessary to make
such a change.

9.6. We are, however, of the view that such a provision would
be useful. Having regard to the paramount need to reduce delay, it
is, in our view, justified even in the absence of cath.

9.7. Secondly, the previous Commission noted that it had been
held by the Supreme’ Court, that even when the defendant against
whom a case has proceeded ex parte does not assign good cause for
his previous nor-appearance, -h he has a right to participate from the
stage at which he appears. The decision of Wallace, J. in a Madras
case* on the subject was approved by the Supreme Court. The under-
mentioned decisions’ were mentioned by the previous Commission
as illustrating the application of the rule enunciated by the Supreme

ourt.

9.8. The Commission considered it unnecessary to codify the
proposition laid down by the Suprerne Court.

1, 27th Report, page 152, note om Order 9, rule 6.
2. Order 6, vale 15.
3. Sangram Singh v, Election Tribunal, Kovah, (1055) 2 8.0.R. 1; ATR. 1988 8.0, 426,
431, para, 28.
4, This polut really concerns Order 9, Tule 7.
6. Venknasubbiak v. Lakehins, ATR. 1936 Mad, 1274,
6, (a) Binds Prasad v. United Bank, AIR. 1909 Pat, 152.
(0) Hahawt Ranji Das v, Bhupinder Singh, ALR, 1962 Pun, 443, ,
() Kumara v, Thomas, ALR. 1901 Ker, 287.
T/BD)220MofLI&CA—IL


9.9. We have considered the matter, and are of the view that
what the Supreme Court laid down should be codified, We appreciate
the difficulty of the subject, and the desirability of balancing consi-
derations of justice (on the one hand) against the need for expedi-
tion (on the other hand). But, in this case, there can be no other
alternative.

9.10. At the same time, while inserting the rule that the defen-
dant can join from the stage at which he appears, a clarification on
one point would be desirable, namely, that past stages of the trial
should not be re-opened. If the defendant, for example, has not
filed a written statement, and the case has proceeded almost to the
stage of judgment, the defendant cannot insist that he should be
allowed te file it. It should, therefere, be ensured that the amended
rule will not affect O. 8, r. 5 and 0. 8, r. 10.

Recommendation

9.11. We, therefore, recommend that Order 9, rule 6, clausé (a);
should be revised as follows: —

Revised Order $, rule 6, clause (a)

“(1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does not
appear when the swit is called on for hearing, then—

{a) if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the
court may make an order that the suit be heard' ex
parte; and may, if it thinks fit, give a judgment on the
basis : that the allegations on fact made in the pleadings
are true;

[Rest as in the present rule}.
(0) Order 9, rule 7, should be replaced by the following
: [8 ;--

“7. Where the Court hes: adjourned the hearing of the
suit after making an order that it be heard ex parte
and—

(9) the defendant appears and assigns good cause for
his previous non-appearance, the Court may, upon
such terms as it directs as to costs or otherwise,
set aside the order for the hearing of the guit ex
parte and hear the defendant in answer to the suit
as if he had appeared on the day fixed for his
appearance.

{b) if the deferdant appears but does not assign good
cause for his previous non-appearance as aforesaid,
the Court shall, upon such terms as to costs or
otherwise as the court directs, permit the defen.
dant to take part in the trial of the suit from the
stage at which ha appears; but the proceedings ale
ready taken shall not be re-opened, and, in parti-
cular, where the dejendant had jailed to file a

1, Compare 0.9, +. 7,

¥

कस ली जन

an cee “3५...


a

188

written statement, before he appecrs, he shall not
be allowed to do se after his appeatance, and the
provisions of Order 8, rule 5 and Order 8, rule 16,
shall apply in retation to bie failure to file it, not-
withstanding the permission granted under this
clause.”

Order 9, rule 13 and “duly served”

9.12. Under Order 9, rule 13, if the court is satisfied either that the
summons has not been served, or that the defendant was prevented
by sufficient cause from appearing, ete., the ex parte decree should be
set aside. The two branches of the rule are distinctive, and the defen-
dant, whatever his position may be in respect of one branch, is entitl-
ed to benefit of the other branch, if he satisfies the court that he has
made good his contention in respeet of the other -branch:;

9.13. In the earlier Report’, several points were considered with
reference to this rule, and amendmente suggested on one: point,—the
broad object being to ensure that a decree shall not be set aside mere-
ly on the ground of irregularity im’ service, if the defendant had
knowledge of the decree. After consideration of the points discussed
in the earlier Report, we have reached the same conclusion.

4

Onder 9, rule 13 and Order 41, rale 11

9.14. Order 9, rule 13 empowers a court to set aside an ex parte
decree. Whether an application for setting aside an ex parte decree
can be entertained by the trial court, after an appeal against the ex
parte decree has been dismissed summarily by the appellate court,
is a matter on which there ig difference of opinion.

9.15. The Bombay High Court’, after stating that the majority of
the High Courts" were of the view that as the decree of the trial court
merges with the decree of dismissal of appeal, the trial court can
have no jurisdiction to deal with the decree, expressed its agreement
with the majority view.

9.16. It was held that an appeal was always treated as a re-hearing
of the suit, and it makes no difference Smother the appeal had been
dismissed under Order 41, rule 11, or d of after issuing notice
to the respondent,

9.17, The court, after referring to a Supreme Court case cited
before it, said‘ that that case did not lay down that the decree of the
trial court does not merge in the decree of the appellate court even
for the purposes of review of the judgment of the trial court.

1. 27th Repurt, pp. 163-154, noteon Order 9, rule 13.and‘*daly sorvod"’.
2. Kantilals y. Chiba Bava, 4.1K. 1987 Bom 310 (reviews cases).
3. ०४५ (a) Dhoni v, Torakunath, 12 Cal. L. 3. 581:

(8) Kalainuddin v. Hsakabuddin, AT.R. 1924 Cal. 830;

[ये Allianines v, Ouseph, (1964) Ker. 1. Times, 322:

(4) Gauri Shankar v. Jaga Narain, A.B. 1034 All. 134.

4. State of U.P. ५. Muhanad Noor, (1950), 8.C.B. 595,



140

9.18. A contrary view has been takgn by some High Courts’. Some
of the decisions make a distinction between cases where the applicant
was a party to the appeal and other cases.

9.19, To settle the conflict of detisinns on the subject, an amend-
ment is desirable. The Bombay view is, in our opinion, logical, and
should be adopted.

Recommendation

9.20, We recommend; therefore, that thé following Explanation
should be added to Order 9, rule 13—

“Explanation—Where there hes been -an appeal against the
decree passed in the absetioe of' the! defendant, enil the
appeal has been disposed of, ॥० application undes: this rule
shall he in respect of that decree.”

Order 9 and execution proceedings ||’

9.21. The question how far Order 9 applies to. execution proceed:
ings is not free from: doubt’. The general trend of opinion 18: that
Order 9, rule 9 cannot be extended to exeeution cases with the help

ड़ oo हि re

: of section 141, and that section 151 can be and should be invoked in

execution cases in appropriate cases; We are; however, dealing with’
the question of appearance at hearings in_ execution, by apeci! fe pro-

yisions®,

1. (a) Inve Vemkatesubbaram, ATR. 1946 Mad. 576 (Kappuswarai Ayyor J.).

(3) Inve Ram Rokhan, ALR. 1945 All. $8. 7
2. Sve, for example, Nemi Chand v. Umed Mat, ALB, 1962 Roj. 107.
3. See diseuasion aa to 0, 2) rules 104-108 (Mite).


के

Cuaprer 10

EXAMINATION OF PARFIES BY. THE COURT
Introductory baovs

10.1. Examination of parties by the, court at the first hearing or a’
subsequent hearings is dealt with in Or 10. The main, object
of examination at the first hearing is to ascertain how far the allega~
tions made in the pleadiugs of ००६ party are admitted or denied by
the other. The object of this examination is not to elicit admissions
or to bring into being evidence. but to ascertain what 18 the matter
in dispute between the parties, Statements made at thé examination
are distinct from evidence given in « trial of fact. Nevertheless, if
used properly, thia examination is of the greatest importance in
avoiding delay at later stages. हर

Harlier recommendation for examination at first hearing

10:2, The earlier Report ade a uséful recommendation’ as to
examination at the first hea ‘being 71266: compulsory. We agree,
and would add that efforts at settlément should also be made’ at the
first'hearing, But only one ajourriment for the purpose of effecting
such settlement should be granted. No statutory provision in this
respect (for encouraging settlement) is required for: suit iW in general,
but we hope that judicial officers will not lose sight of this aspect.



Cnartzr 11

DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION
Introductory

11.1. Discovery and inspection are dealt with in Order 11, which,
unfortunately, is one of the least used Orders in the Code. The object
of what is called “discovery” is to secure, if possible, am adrnission
of facts in aid of proof, to supply the want of it and to avoid expense."
Discovery of facts is obtained usually by interrogatories. But discovery
is not confined to facts, but extends ६6 documents, and could be sup-
plemented by orders for the inspection and production of documents.

11.2, Non-compliance with an order to answer interrogatories or
to discover facts, or an order for the discovery and inspection of
documents, can be visited with fatal consequences under rule 11.
the order for discovery has’ been ‘complied with, naturally answer
given by the Party in response to the interrogatories can be used in
evidence and if the discovery relates to documents, the documents
disclosed if proved, should be valuable as evidence. It may be noted,

, that tae ultimate source of the practice of putting interrogatories is
civil law’. :
Order 11, rule 14

11.3. Order 11, rule 14 provides that it shall be lawful for the
court at any time during the pendency of any suit to order the pro-
duction by any party, upon oath, of all documents in his possession,
etc. One small question was considered in the earlier Report’ with
reference to this rule. The Cornmission examined the question whether
an order under this rule can be passed before an application for dis-
covery 18 made under Order 11, rule 12. The majority yiew*-’-', the
Commission noted, was, that it can be ordered. This view is based
on the words ‘at any time’ which occur in this rule. But a contrary
view, that Commission noted, also seems to have been taken in one
case’. In view of the majority opinion, the previous Commission
thought that a change was not needed.

11.4. In this context, we have considered the question of adding
an Explanation to Order 11, rule 14, as follows:—
“Explanation—An order under this rule may be passed before
any application fo discovery is made under rule 12 of
this Order.”
1. Wigram’s Points in the Law of Discovery, paragraph 2, cited in Stokes’ Anglo.Indion
Coder, Vol. 2, page 401.
2. Story, Pleadings, parograph 39, cited in Stoke's dnglo-Indian Codea, Vol. 2., page
402,

3. 27th Report, page 106, note on Order 11, tule 14.
Ram Hari v. Nivanjan, 50 C.W.N. 845.
Sriniwas v. Kisction Tribunal, Lucknow, A.LR. 1056 All. 251.
20, Veraikshamamma v. P. Bala, ALR, 1988 A.P. 157.
Batdyanath v. Bholanath, A.1.B. 1923 Pat, 837, 338.

143

rs


ae

143

11.5. However, we have ultimately come to the conclusion that

no such change is needed, as the present language Is sufficiently wide
and clear to cover the point.

Order 11, rule 14 +

11.6. With reference to Order 11, rule 14, two points were con-
sidered in the earlier Report’; but, after an exarnination of the poai-
tion, the Commission considered an amendment unnecessary. We.
agree with the view taken jin the earlier Report. aa

Order 11, role 21

11.7. Under Order 11, rule 21, where any party fails to comply
with any order to answer interrogatories. or for discovey or inspec-
tion of documents, he shall, if a plaintift, be Hable to have his suit
dismissed for want of prosecution, and if a defendant, to have his
defence, if any struck out and to be placed in the same position as
if he had not defended. The rule further provides that a party inter-
rogating or seeking discovery or inspection may apply to the Court
for an order to that effect, and an order may be made on such appli-
cation accordingly.

11.8. We are of the view that a fresh suit should be barred when
a suit is dismissed under this ruk*.

11.9, Tt is also desirable to provide that an order under this rule
can be made only after hearing the other side.

Recommendation
11.10. Accordingly, we recommend that 0. 11, rule 21 should be
revised as follows: —

“21. (1) Where any party fails to comply with any order to
answer “interrogatories, or for discovery or inspection of
documents, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have his
suit dismissed for want of prosecution, and, if a defen-
dant, to have his defence, if any, struck out and to be
placed in the same position as if he had not defended, and
the party interrogating or seeking discovery or inspection
may apply to the Court for an order to that effect. and
an order may be made on such application accordingly
after notice to the parties and after giving them a reason-
able opporiunity of being heard.

(2) Where an order under sub-rule (1) is passed dismissin,
the suit, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a
fresh suit on the same cause of action.”

Order 12, rule 2A (New)
11.11. The earlier Report? noted that a rocemmendation had been

made in the Fourteenth Report! to empower the Court to award
penal costs against a party unreasonably neglecting or refusing to

1. 27th Report, page 158, note on Order 11, rule 14,
2, Compare Order 9, rule 9.

3. 27th Report, page 158, note on Order 12, rule 2.
4, 14th Roport, Vol. 1, pages 314-317, para 32.


14¢

admit documents (Such costs will be in addition to the costs awarded
at present under this rule). After some consideration, however, it
was decided by the previous Commission not to make this change,
as the Commission felt that the existing provision is adequate.

11.12, We, however, think that such a provision is desirable.
Further, we think that if a document is not denied, it should be
taken as admitted, unless the Court otherwise direct’.

Hecommendation

11.13. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the following
new rule in Order 12— ‘

“2A(1) Every document which a party is calied upon to admit,
tf not denied specifically or by necessary implication, or
stated to be not admitted in the pleading of that party or
in its reply to “to the notice to admit documents, shatl 96
taken to be admiited, except as against a person under
disability. °

Provided that the Court may, in its discretion for and reasons
to be recorded require any document so admitted to be
proved otherwise than by such admission,

(2) Where a perty unreasonably neglects or refuses to admit
a document, the Court may also award against him penal
costs, to be paid to the o; ite party”,

1. Of. Order 8, rule 8.

settee


er

Carrer 12

ADMISSIONS

Introductory

12,1, As an alternative to interrogatories and discovery of docu-
ments, a party can avail himself of the procedure prescribed in Order
12, of calling upon the other party by notice to admit facts or docu-
ments. Notice to admit facts would, in many cases, supersede in-
terrogatories, and thus save expense and delay. Notice to admit do-
cuments could similarly save expense and delay of proving the
documents if the documents are admitted in response to the notice.

Order 12, rule 6

12,2. Where a claim is admitted, 2 court has jurisdiction: under
Order 12, rule 6 to enter a judgment for the plaintiff, and to pass a
decree on the admitted claim (with liberty to the plaintiff to proceed
with the suit in the ordinary way as to the remainder of the claim).

12.3. The object of the rule is to enable a party to obtain speedy
judgment, at least to the extent of the relief to which, accerding to
the admission of the defendant, the plaintiff is entitled’.

12.4. The rule has been held to be wide enough to cover oral
admissions, The use of the words “or otherwise” in rule 6, without
the words “in writing” which are used in rule 1 of Order 12, shows
that a judgment may be given even on an oral admission’. It is desir-
able to codify this interpretation.

12.5, It may be noted that under the present rule, a judgment on
admissions can be passed only on an application. According to a
local amendment’; the Court may, on the application of any party or
of its own motion, make such order or give such judgment. This is a
useful amendment, and should be adopted.

126. In our view, it is also desirable to provide that a decree
shall follow on a judgment on admissions.

Recommendation

at. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 12, rule 6, should be
revi as follows:—

“6. (1) ...... Where admissions of fact have been made either
on the pleading or otherwise ‘and either orally or in writ-
ing, the Court may, at any stage of a suit, on the applica-
tion of any party or of its own motion, without waitleg for
the determination of any other question between the
parties, make such order or give such judgment as it may
think just having regard to such admissions.

Wherever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a
decree shall be drawn up in accordance with such judg-
ment bearing the same date as the day on which the judg-
tment was pronounced”, ‘
1.” 1970 Raj. LW, 549, rofecred toia the Quinqueanial Digest, (1001030) the Quinquennisl Digest, (1966-1970),
2, 1970 Raj. L. W. 549, referred to in Quingueonial Digest (1986-1970).
2. Sea the Patna Amendment to Order 12, rale 6.

148

(2



Cuarter 13
PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS

Tatroductory
13.1, Detailed rules as to production, impounding and return of
documents are contained in Order 23, These rules apply also to the
material objects other than documents, by virtue of rule 11. The
principal provision is in rule 1, the substance of it being that decu-
entary evidence must be produced at the first hearing. The main
oD ject of this provision is to prevent fraud by the party relying on
the document and also to prevent surprise to the opposite party arid
to give to the court a clear picture of the case of the party concerned
with the documents. A specific provision deals with the effect of non-
production of documents, and the court is empowered to reject irre-
jevant or inadmissible documentary evidence. The rest of the provi-
sions in this Order really pertain to ministerial acts, such as, filing
the documents, numbering them and the like.

Order 13, tule 1

43.2. Under Order 13, rule 1, the parties or their pleaders must
produce “at the first hearing” the decumentary evidence on which
they intend to rely and which is in their possession or power and
which has not already been filed in court, as also all documents
which the court has ordered to be produced. The expression “first
hearing” in this rule has led to some controversy. It has been held
by the Calcutta High Court’ that this does not mean the first hearing
for appearance of the defendants, but it means the hearing after
the pleadings are completed and before the issues are framed.

13.3. The Madras view* is that it means the hearing at which
issues are framed. The Madras High Court’ observed that parties are
not bound to produce the documents, until the issues ave framed.

13.4, The Madras case‘ of 1926 points out that the reason for
having all documents produced when issues are framed is to
fabrication to suit the issues. 1६ has also been pointed out that it is
only after the issues are framed that the parties can decide what is
essential, “Unessential documents filed in a case are a nuisance to
all concerned”.

13.5. It may be noted that the Patna and Orissa High Courts have
added the following words after the words “at the first hearing’—

“or where issues are framed, on, the day when issues are fram:
ed, or within such further ie as the Court may permit”.

1. Ashoka Marketing v. Rothas Kumar, AI. B. 1986 Cal. 691, 594, para 18.
(BX. Bannerjee, J
2. Chidambaram v. Parcathi, A.1.R. 1926 Mad, 347, 348 (Jackson, J.).
3. Lakskiminarcyanmoorthi ¥. Sunduram, AIR. 1935 Mad, 261 (Walah, J,) (Obiter).
4. Chidambaram v, Parcathi, ALR. 1926 Mad, 847., 348.
146

*

के



wt ett

147

13.6. The Bombay High Court has substituted the following rule:

“1. Documentary evidence to be produced at ar before the settie-

‘ment of issues—(1) The parties or their pleaders shall pro-

duce ai or before the settlement of issues all the documen-

tary evidence of every description in their possession or

power on which they intend to rely and which has not al-

ready been filed in the Court, and all documents which the
Court has ordered to be produced.

(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced:

Provided that they are accompanied by an accurate list thereof
prepared in such form as the High Court directs”,

Recommendation

_ 13,7. It appears to be desirable to adopt the Bombay Amendment,
in erder to make the provision more explicit’.

1, Amendment uot drafted.



Cuaprar 14
“Iss

Introdactory

14.1. In order that the material points in controversy may be
rightly decided, and there may be finality in litigation, it is. essential
that those points should be properly formulated; and Order 14 provi-
des all that a law can provide to ensure the “the meterial propositions
of fact or law affirmed by one party and denied by the other” are
presented to the court in a precise form; these propositions are given
the name of issues, These material propositions are td “be fe
not merely from the pleadings byt ajso from the examination of
the parties, {for example, where the facts are not sufficiently stated
in the plaint), and from answers to interrogatories, and the contents
of documents produced by the parties. As has been stated’, ‘in the
course of administering justice between litigants, there are two suc-
cessive objects,—to ascertain the subjects for decisions and to decide”.
Tt has therefore been emphasised, on several occasions, in decisions
of the highest courts in India, that the duty of framing proper issues
rests upon the judge himself.

Order 14, rale 2

14.2. Order 14, rule 2 is as follows: —

“2. Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit,
and the Court is of opinion that the case of any part thereof
may be “disposed of on the issues of law only, it shall try
those issues first, and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit,
postpone the settlement of the issues of fact until after the
issues of law have been determined”.

14.3. This rule has led to one difficulty. Where a case can be dis-
posed of on a preliminary point (issue) of law, often the courts do
not inquire into the merits, with the result that when, on an appeal
against the finding on the preliminary issue the decision of the court
on that issue is reversed, the case has to be remanded to the court of
first instance for trial on the other issues. This causes delay. It is
considered thet this delay should be eliminated, by providing that a
Court must Rive judgment on all issues, excepting, of course, where
the court finds that it has no jurisdiction or where the suit is barred
by any law for the time being in force.

Recommendation
14.4. We, therefore, recommend that Order 14, rule 2 should be
revised as follows: —
“2. (1) Nothwithstanding that a case can be disposed of on a pre-
liminary issue, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-rule (2), pronounce judgment on ali issues,

1. Stephon, Principles of pleadings, (7th edition), page 1.
148

¢
1


148

(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit,
and the Court is of opinion that the case or any part thereof
may be disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that
issue first if the issue relates to—

(a) ‘the jurisdiction ofthe Cdurt, ‘dt ' * *
(b} a bar to suit created by any law for the time being in
force.

and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settle-

ment of the other issves until after that issue hes been

determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with the
decision on that issue.”


CuapTer 15

DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING
Introductory

15.1. If, at the first hearing, it appears that the parties are not
at issue on any question of law or fact, the court is, under Order
15, authorised to pronounce judgment at once. If any of the several
defendants is net at issue, the court has a similar power, in respect
of that defendant. Sometimes, it appears that an issue of fact or law
is such that the evidence bearing on it can be immediately produced,
The court is empowered to determine that issue, and to pronounce
judgment under certain circumstences.

Order 15, rule 2

15.2. As regards Order 15, rule 2, under which judgment is pro-
nounced if the parties are not at issue, local amendments made by
Madras, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala High Courts provide that
whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall
01109.

15.3. We consider it proper to insert such a provision, Here, we
depart from the view taken in the earlier Report’ where section 33
was regarded as adequate for the purpose.

Recommendation

15.4. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 15, rule 2 should
be renumbered as sub-rule (1), and the following subrule should be
inserted as sub-rule (2):

“(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a
decree shall be drawn up in accordance with such judg-
ment bearing the same date as the day on which the
judgment was pronounced.”

1, 27th Raport, page 160, note on Order 15, Tale 3,
19

face tragentnne


jo

Mey

CHAPTER 16
SUMMONING AND ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES

Introductory '

16.1. After the defendant has been served, and the pleadings
filed, and the issue framed, evidence will have to be led (unless the
case is disposed of without issues). For that purpose, it becomes neces-
sary to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses, This is
dealt with in Order 16, the provisions whereof are ultimately de-
rived from an Act of 1853.' The body of the Code* exempts certain
persons from being summoned to attend.

16.2. As a matter of historical interest, it may be noted that a
Central Act of 1855° provided that a person known to be of unsound
mind should not be summoned as a witness without the previous
consent of the court. This provision was repealed when the Evidence
Act of 1872 came into force. Since such a person is not a competent
witness under the Evidence Act, a party would not find it useful to
summon him.

16.24. Most of the provisions in Order 16 deal with matters of
detail. We shall deal with such of them as require consideration.

Order 16, rule 1

16.3. Under Order 16, rule 1, at any time after the suit is insti-
tuted, the parties may obtain, on application to the court, or to
such officer as it appoints in this behalf, summonses to persons whose
attendance is required either to give evidence or to produce docu-
ments. The words “may obtain” seem to have led to an argument
to the effect that if a party applies for a summons, the court is
bound to issue it irrespective of any other considerations, The argu-
ment has not been accepted in the categorical form stated above.
Since it has been stated in some suggestions made to the Commis-
sion that the court should have discretion to refuse to issue & sum-
mons, the case law on the subject has been examined.

-» 16.4. The case law on the subject shows that the position, is
broadly speaking, as follows': —

(a) It is the duty of the Court* to summon the witnesses for

whose attendance an application is made by a party, and

a court cannot reject such an application on the ground

that it has been made too late. It would be open to the

court in such a case, if it finds that the application has

been made late, not to adjourn the hearing of the case on

the date fired for the hearing, even though the witnesses

1, Section 12, Act 19 of 1863.
2, Scotion 132 et aag.
3. Act 2 of 1855, section 14.
4, Aatifanniva ¥, Alinuedls, AUR. 1022 Pat. 622.
है, (a) Seibai Govind v. Balakvishna, ATR. 1925 Bem 368.
(8) Sardart Lat vy. Mekar Singk, AR. 1025 1.50.8 7
कहा



152

may not be present in court, But it is not within the pro- .

vince of the court to refuse to summon the witnesses for,
summoning whom an application has been made before the
court,

(b) But, if the application is not a bona fide one, the court
may not issue a Summons.

16.5, The position was dealt with at length in a Punjab case+
The High Court cbserved “Order 16, rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure,
entitles the parties at any time after the suit is instituted to obtain
on an application to the court or to such other officers at it appoints
in this behalf, summonses to persons whose attendance is required
either to give evidence or to produce documents. According to the
proviso added by this High Court, no party who has begun to call
his witnesses is entitled to obtain process to enforce the attendance
of any witness against whom process has not previously issued, or
to produce any witness not named in a list, which must be filed in
court on or before the date on which the hearing of evidence in
this behalf commences and before the actual commencement of the
hearing of such evidence, without an order of the court made in
writing and stating the reasons therefor. Ignoring, for the moment,
the proviso added by this court, it would seem clear that a party
is, generally speaking, entitled as of right to summonses to witnesses,
and if an application is made for the purpose, the court has to issue
the summonses, though of course if the application is belated and
the witnesses are for this reason not present, the court is fully com-
petent to decline to adjourn the case for their attendance." It may
be conceded as held that if the application is not bona fide and is
an abuse of the process of the court, then the court may be held
to be possessed of inherent power to refuse to summon the witnesses.

“ df @ party’s 088९ 15 not covered by the proviso to rule 1,
Order 16 and ४ Fere ig no want of Bona fide and no abuse of ‘the
process of the court, then the court would not be justified in refus-
ing to a suitor process for his witnesses, whom otherwise the court
is competent to summon: indeed, it is generally speaking a suitor’s
right to obtain such process and the court is expected to render in
the normal course reasonable assistance in effecting service.”

16.6. No amendment on this particular point is required, in view
of the position stated above.

Purpose of calling witnesses to be stated

16.7. There is, however, one matter on which an amendment is
needed. We think that the purpose of calling a witness should be
stated in an application under Order 16, rule 1.

1. Jagir Singh ¥. Surjun Singh, LL.B. (2985) 2 Punj. 504, 509, (Dua J.).
2. Case references cited in the judgment are omitted here.



ramets

emer

oe

ape rere ee

=e

4

Recommendation

16.8. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of. the following
sub-rule in Order 16, rule 1 (after renumbering rule 1 as sub-rule (1)
of rule 1).

*(2) The purpose of sumthoning 6 witness shall be stated in
the application under this rule”.

Order 16, rule 14

16.9. Order 16. rule 14 provides that where the court at any
time thinks it necessary to examine any person other than a pariy
to the suit and not called as a witness by a. party to the suit, the
Court may, on its own motion, cause such person to be summoned
as a witness to give evidence, or to produce any document in his
possession, on a day to be appointed, and may examine him as 2
witness or require him to produce such document,

There is no power under this rule to summon a party as a
witness. No doubt, the court can always examine a party present in
Court, and recall any witness already examined,’ The Court can
3150, while issuing a summons, direct that the defendant shall appear
personally.” But there is, in our view, need for a direct provision
enabling the Court to summon a party for giving evidence as a
witness. This will to a great extent, help in stopping the malprac-
tice of a party not appearing as a witness and forcing the other
party to call him as a witness.

Recommendation

16.10, We, therefore, recommend that in Order 16, rule 14, the
words “other than a party to the suit” should be replaced by the
words “inciuding a party to the guit”.

Order. 16, Mule 19, and Order 26, Rule 4—witnesses beyond juris-
cl

16.11. Order 16, Rule 19, provides that a witness shall not be
compelled to attend a court in person unless he resides—

(a) within the jurisdiction of the Court. or

(०) outside the jurisdiction but within the specified distance
(roughly, iess than fifty miles) or, if there is an establish-
ed public conveyance for five-sixth of the distance, then
less than two hundred miles from the court house.

Thvs, a witness Jiving outside the jurisdiction and beyond the
specified distance cannot be compelled to attend a court in person.
For the examination of such persons, the Code provides for the
issue of a commission under Order 26, Rule 4. But the word used
in Order 26, Rule 4. is “may”.
1, Oeler 10, ele 2, road with Order
3. Order 18, rule 15.
3. Order है. वाह 8 .
L/B(D)S3MofLI&CA. -14 .



154

16.12. Now, it is obvious that where the witness is beyond the
specified distance, and yet is one whose evidence is essential, the

only possible mode of examination is py commission, having regard |

to the restriction in Order 16, rule 19 against compelling him
attend in person

The common understanding of tke position is reflected in a
Madras case'—

“A party to suit has a right to ask for the issue of a commission
to examine a witness beyond the prescribed distance. The same prin-
ciple applies even in the case of an expert witness. In Sitammea v-
Subraya, 21 ML.J. 889 at 9. 890: (12 LC. 74), Abdur Rahim and
Sundara Aiyar JJ. recognised that principle and stated that the
defendants were entitled as of rigit to the issue of commission apart
from the question whether they would have ultimately benefited by
it. The same principle is followed and applied in Jagannediia Sastry
v. Sarathambal Ammal, 46 Mad. 574: [A.LR. 10) 1923 Mad. 321].
Wallace J. after considering the various decisions cited before him
expressed his conclusion as follows:

The balance of authority is in favour of the view that (1)
ordinarily, in the case of a witness not under the control of the
party asking for the commission who resides beyond the limit fixed
under Order 16, Rule 19(b), Civil Procedure Ccde, a commission
should issue as a matter of right, unless the Court is satisfled that
a party is merely abusing its authority to issue process and (2) that
it ig not for the Court to decide whether the party will be benefited
thereby oy not, that is a matter entirely for the party”.

Recommendation as to 0. 26, rule 4

16.13. It would, therefore, be better if the issue of a commission
under Order 26, Rule 4 is made obligatory" in such cases, ie. in the
case of a witness residing beyond the limit fixed in Order 16, rule
19, if the evidence of the witness is essential in the interest of
justice. Such an amendment will give a more correct picture of
what the law contemplates.

Distance mention im 0. 16, 1, 18

16.14. The next question is, whether the distance specified in
Order 16, Rule 19, should now be increased, in view of improved
facilities for transport, and, in particular, having regard to the
availability of transport by air.

The existing words “established public conveyance” are, perhaps,
wide enough to cover transport by air, but the question of distance
applicable to air travel remains. It could be provided in Order 16,
rule 19. that (i) where transport by air is available between the
place of headquarters of the Court and the place where the witness
resides, and (ii) the distance between the two places does not ex-
ceed. say. eight hundred miles (1200 kms.) and (iii) the witness is
paid the fare by air, he may be summoned to attend personally.

1, ALR. 149 Mad. 408, paw 2. Subba Rue 1.).
2, Buint concerning Oiler 26, Rule 4.



155 .

16.15, The last question concerns the distance mentioned in the
rule, as applicable to journeys otherwise than by air. Some High
Courts have, by local amendments, changed the provision in _ this
respect, and some of the amendments are useful. It may be desir-
able, for example, to increase the distance (at present two hunderd
miles) to three hundred miles.‘

The Jocal amendmenis relevant to the question of distance under
Order 16, Rule 19 are quoted below:—

Allehabad:
In order 16, Rule 19(b}:
(i) insert the words “or private conveyances 107 for hire”
- between the words “public conveyance” and “for five-
sixth”, and
(ii) substitute the word “three” for the word “two”,
[441959]

Bombay: Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
For rule 19 substitute the following: —

19. No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless resident
within certain limits—

No one shzll be ordered to attend in person te give evi
dence unless he resides—

{a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary origi-
nal jurisdiction, or

{b) without such limits but at a place less than one
hundred or (where there is a railway or steamer com-
munication or other established public conveyance
for five-sixths of the distance between the place
where he resides and the place where the Court is
situated) less than five hundred kilometres distance
from the court-house.
(1-11-1966).

Gujarat

In order 16, rule 19(b), for the words “two hundred”, substi-
tute the words “three hundred”. (17-8-1961).

Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh

Add the following proviso to Rule 19(b):

“Provided that eny Court situate in the State of Punjab may

require the personal attendance of any witness residing
in the Punjab or Delhi State”)

1, @f. The Allehabad and Gujarat amendmeats tu Order 16, Rule 19 (substituting 300
miles for 200 miles).

2. €f. The Bombay amendment to Order 16, rule 19.


156

Distance to be expressed in kilometres

16.154. Lastly, opportunity could be taken to express the dis-
tance in terms of kilometres, instead of in miles as at present.

Commission te be issued in other eases

16.15B. No doubt, even after the above amendments, a commis
sion will have to be issued in cases where the witness resides be-
yond the revised distance. Though the functions of the Commissioner
are of very limited character, nevertheless, he can make observa-
tions as to the demeanour of witness.’ Hence, where the witness to
be examined is an expert or his evidence is otherwise likely to be
of importance, it is desirable that the court should take care that
the Commissioner to be appointed by it will be able to discharge
his functions efficiently. This, of course, is a matter for the Court to
consider when making the appointment of the Commissioner, and
need not be dealt with by an express provision.

Recommendation as to Order 16, rule 18

16.16. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that
Order 16, Rule 19, should be re-drafted* ag follows: —

“19. No one shall be ordered to attend in person to give evi-
dence unless he resides—

(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original
jurisdiction, or

(७) without such limits but at a place less than one
hundred or (where there is a railway or steamer com-
munication or other “gigitablished public conveyance
for fiye-sixth of the distance between the place where
he resides and the place where the Court is situated)
less than five hundred kilometres distance from the
court house.

Provided thet—

{i) where transport by air is available between the two
places mentioned above, and ©

(ii) the distance between the two places does not exceed
one thousand and two pundred kilometres, and

Gii) the witness is paid the fare by air, he may be ordered

to attend in person.
1... Kakshet Amoa ys. Karena Kurang, (1970), KT.
2 Aste amendmeny ol Order 26, rule c, ace para 16,13, eapra,

a


wt

Cuapren 17
ADIOURNMENTS

Inireductory

17.L Under Order 17, rule 1, the court may, if sufficient cause
be shown, at any stage of the suit, grant time to the parties or any
of them, and may, from time to time. adjourn the hearing of the
suit. There is a proviso, now almost a century old,’ under which,
once the hearing of witnesses comme-ices, it should continue (except
for reasons to be recorded) from day-to-day, until all the witnesses
in attendance have been examined. lf one object of this proviso is

- to avoid delay, expense and inconvenience, there is a larger cbject,

namely, to avoid opportunities for perjury and attempts to win over
witnesses,

17.2. In general, rules appiicable to the first hearing apply to
every adjourned hearing—though the relevant rule’ is not well
drafted, and will require detailed consideration at the appropriate
place.

Order 17, rule 1

17.8. Frequent adjournments of case pose serious problems. As
an ideal, the great majority of cases should be disposed of on the
day originally fixed for hearing. But this ideal is rarely achieved.
Several factors necessitate adjournments. It is not necessary to go
into those factors here. From the legal point of view, the broad
situations are the following :—

{a) Where more than the average number of cases set down
for trial on a day proves to be effective and to require
trial, some of them have normally to be given later trial
dates. Such adjournments should not be long. The fact
that on a particular day a number of cases have to be ad-
journed shows lack of cere in the organisation of the
business of the court.

Sometimes, the court has time to iry the case, but the
parties themselves desire adjournment. Such adjourn-
ments with consent can be avoided. if the members of the
Bar cooperate with the court in the efficient and expeditious
disposal of business.

Sometimes, a case is substantially heard, and then ad-
journed at the end of the day. Adjournments may be un-
avoidable in such situations, and all that can be suggested
is that the time likely to be taken should be estimated
as accurately as possible.

(b

(९

1, See Seetion 156, Code of Civil Proeeduce, 1382.
2. Order 17, role 2.


158,

17.4. While studying the question of adjovrnments, a distine-
tion should, therefore, be drawn between (i) adjounments where
Cases are not reached at all on the day fixed for hearing, (ii) adjourn-
ments after less than a full day’s hearing, and (ili) adjournment
after a substantial day's hearing. The recommendation below hes
been made. bearing this aspect in mind.

Order 17, rule 1(2), Proviso

17.5. Order 17, rule 1(2), proviso, enacts that when the hearing
of evidence has once begun hearing of the suit shail be continued
from day-to-day. In practice however, this provision is rarely
observed. The need for recording evidence  continuous-
4y, was emphasised in the earlier Report,’ and the practice which
prevails in England was referred to. It is obviousiy desirable as was
observed in the earlier Report thet evidence should be recorded
continuously without any break, except in very exceptional circum-
stances,

17.6. We agree with the above approach. Further, we are of the
view that Order 17, rvle 1(2). proviso, should be made more restric-
tive, by express amendment. The time has come for enacting specific
and positive restrictions in this respect; and, in particular, once the
stage of evidence has been reached, an adjournment should be
granted only for unavoidable reasons. That, indeed. is the spirit of
the existing rule, but we would like to give it express recognition.
We would, in the interest of expedition, also like to impose 2 few
other restrictions on the grant of adjournments. The restrictions
शक we propose will be evident from the draft which we give

low. है

Recommendation

17.7. We recommend, therefore; that the existing proviso to
Order 17, rule 1(2), should be revised, as follows:—

“Provided that,

(a) when the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be
continved frum day-to-day until all the witnesses in atten-
dance have been examined, unless the court finds the ad-
journment of the hearing beyond the following day to be
necessary for exceptional reasons to be recorded;

(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of « party,
except where the circumstances are beyond the control
of the party;

(ce) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another
court shall not be a ground for adjournment;

(d) where the iilness of a pleader or his inability to conduct
the case for any reason other than his being engaged in
another court ts put forth as a ground for adjournment, the

1. Hath Report, Vol. 1. page 303.
2. 3ith Report, page 15, pera 31.



(e)

159

court shall, before granting the adjournment, consider
whether the party applying jor edjournment could not
have engaged another pleader in time;

where a witness is present but a party or his plea-
der ig not present, or, though present, is not ready
to examine or cross-eramine the witness, the
court may, if it thinks fit, record the statement of the wit
ness, and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with
the examination-in-chief or cross-examination of the wit-
ness, as the case may be, by the party or pleader not pre-
sent or ready as aforesaid.”


CHAPTER 18

HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
Introductory

18.1. On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit, the party having
the right to begin is to state his case and to produce his evidence in
support of the issues which he wants to prove; the other party can
then state his case and produce his evidence, and may then address
the Court generally on the whole case. The party beginning will,
then reply generally on the whole case. This topic—the statement and
production of evidence—and the mode of examining witnesses and
recording their evidence is the subject-matter of Order 18. Most of
the questions under this Order arise not from any conflict of deci-
sions, but from practical needs.

Order 18, rule 3A (examination of party)—[New rule]

18.2. We shall first refer to an important point regarding exami-
Nation of the parties. The matter wes considered in the earlier Report’,
but, as we take a different view, we propose to discuss it again.

18.3. The Fourteenth Report* had recommended that ordinarily, a
party who wishes to be examined as a witness should offer himsel!
first, before the other witnesses are examined, The Commission, in
its Report on the Code, however, considered it unnecessary to make
any such statutory provision, It noted that this should be the ordi-
nary rule*, but thought that a rigid provision on the subject would
not be desirable.

Recommendation

18.4. We think that the amendment recommended in the lth
Report shouid be carried out. Since the proposed rule will be confined
to ordinary cases, the hardships arising from special features of the
case, should not present a problem. Having regard to the persistent
and notorious malpractice indulged in by litigants in this respect—
malpractice which borders on dishonesty—we think that the time
has come to insert a statutory provision.

Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the following rule
in order 18:—

“3A. Where a party himself wishes to appear as @ witness, he
shall so appear before any other witness on his behalf has
been examined, unless the court, for reasons to be recorded,
permiis him to appear as his own witness at a later stage.”

1. 27th Report. page 1 rate on Order 18, rule 3.
. [. page 340, para TE, last aub-parn.
3. CY. Sundial Kar v. Pyare Singh, ALR. 1962 Punj, 180, 181.

160

2, Fourteenth Report, ¥



1si

Order 18, rules 5, 8, 9, 13 and 14

18.5. It was nuted in the earlier report that the Fourteenth Repor
had recommended’ that a provision empowering the Judge to dictate
the verbetim record of evidence should be inserted, and the Code of
Civil Procedure should be brought into line with the more elaborate
provisions contuned in this respect in section 256 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.

The Commission, however, after some consideration, felt that the
existing provisions were adequate. The present wording ‘under the
personal direction ....... shovld, in its view, cover dictation.

Point as to tape-recording

18.6. We are, however, of the view’ that the matter should be
put beyond doubt. We are, further, of the view that there should be
an express provision to the effect that the evidence should be dictated
directly on the type-writer. Lastly, the law should permit the evi-
dence to be tape-recorded. We recommend an amendment of rule 5,
on all these points.

18.7. Order 18, rule 8, requires that when the judge does not him-
self take down the evidence, he shall make a memorandum of the
substance of the evidence. Sugh a memorandum is in addition to the
verbatim record kept under rule 5. This ‘dual record’ is, in our view,
not necessary where the Judge takes down or dictates the evidence,
and the rule should, therefore, be modified, accordingly,

18.8. Under Order 18, rule 13. in non-appealable cases, a memo-
randum of the evidence is to be written by the Judge. Here also, dic-
tation should be provided for. Rule 14 (permitting dictation of the
memorandum where the Judge is unable to make the memorandum
himself in appropriate eases) should, in consequence, be omitted.

Recommendation
18.9 to 18.13. In the result, the following redrafts of Order 18,
rules 5, 8, 9, 13 and 14 are suggested: —
“3, In eases in which an appeal is allowed, the evidence of each
witness shall be—
(a) taken down in the language of the Court—

{i) in writing by, or in the presence and under the personal
direction and superintendence of, the judge, or

(ii) from the dictation of the Judge, dictation on the type-
writer, or

(9) recorded mechanically in the language of the Court in the
presence of the Judge.”

1. 27th Report, pages 170. 172,172, note on Order 18, rule &
2. ldth Report, Vol, I, Pages 344, 345, para 89.
3, Gf, Ldth Report, Yo. 1, page 344, para. 80.



162

Revised Order 18, Rule 8

“g. Where the evidence is not taken down in writing by the judge,
or from his dictation in the open court, or recorded mechanically in
his presence, he shall be bound, as the examination of each witness
proceeds, to make 2 memorandum of the substance of what each wit-
ness deposes, and such memorandum shall be written and signed by
the Judge and shall form part of the record.

Redraft of Order 18, Rule 9

"9. Where English is not the language of the Court, but all the
parties to the suit who appear in person, and the pieaders cf such
of the parties as appear by pleaders, do not object to having such
evidence as is given in English being taken down in English, the
judge may so take it down or cause it to be taken down,”

Revised Order 18, Rule 13

“13. Im cases in which an appes! is not allowed, it shall not be
necessary to take down or dictate or record the evidence of the wit-
ness at length; but the judge, as the examination of each witness pro-
ceeds, shail make, or dictate directly on the typewriter, or cause to
be mechanicaliy recorded, 2 memorandum of the substance of what
the witness deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the
Judge or otherwise authenticated, and shall form part of the record.”

{Order 18, rule 14, to be omitted].

Order 18, Rule 174

18.14. A situation sometimes arises where, after the close of the
evidence of a party's witnesses. fresh evidence is discovered which
was not within tbe knowledge of the party. The question may arise
whether the party can produce that evidence, The answer should be
‘yes’,

18.15. The Code has no specific provision on the point, and the
matter is governed by practice. Under the Evidence Act, the order’
in which witnesses are to be produced and examined, depends on the
law relating to procedure. and, in the gbsence of a law, by the dis-
cretion of the Court, The Code of Civil] Procedure also contains pro-
visions? permitting the Court to call or recall witnesses. And the
wide. wording of the relevant rules—e.g, the words “at any time” in
Order 16, rule 14, and the words “at any stage of the suit” in Order
18, rule 17,—suggests that the policy of the Code is to leave a wide
discretion to the Court’.

18.16. It is felt that a specific provision dealing with the situation
described above, would be useful. In the rule dealing with additional
evidence :n the appellate Court, we are recommending the insertion
of a provision permitting the production of additional evidence which
was not within the party’s knowledge at the time when the decree
was passed. A similar provision, covering the stage before the decree
was passed. wovld be desirable. it would minimise the number of
applications for additional eyidence in the appellate Court.

1, Seatios 186, Evidence Act.
2. Onder 16, Rule 14; Order 18, rale 17. .
%. ३०० Medkubai 7. Anithalai, ALR, 1947 Bow, 156 (९४४० under Order 13, rule 17).


163

Recommendation

19.17. Aecurdingly, we recommend that the following new rule
should be inserted in Order 18:—

“17-A, Where a party satisfies the Court that any evidence, not-
withstanding the exercise of due diligence, was not within
his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time

* when that party was leading his evidence, the Court may
permit him to produce thet evidence at a later stage, on
such terms es may appear just.”


Cuapren 19
AFFIDAVITS.

Introductory

19.1. While ihe oral examination of witnesses in Court is dealt
with under Order 18, the next Order—Order 19—-empowers the Court
at any time, “for sufficient reason”, to order that any particular fact
or facts may be proved by affidavit, or that the affidavit of any witness
may be read at the hearing, on such conditions as the court thinks
reasonable. But, if either party bona fide desires to cross-examine the
witness, an order authorising the witness to give evidence by affidavit
cannot be made.

19.2. It is now well settled that in the absence of any agreement
between the parties and in the absence of an order made by a Court
under Rule 1 of Order 19 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and except
in cases in which an Order is made for examination by interrogato-
ries or before a Commissioner the witnesses at the trial should be
examined vive voce and in open Court.*.

This rule is modified by Order 19. There are also other provisions
where, in specific instances’, the Court is expressly permitted to act
upon affidavits.

19.3. In general, the litigating public in India does not seem to
have taken kindly to affidavits, and the words “for sufficient reason”
in Order 19, rule 1. seem to have been construed as limiting the dis-
cretion of the Court of exceptional cases—apart, of course, from
evidence given by affidavits in support of interlocutory applications
where the diseretion of the Court is wider.

19.4. We do not recommend any change in this Order, as the in-
ereased use of affidavits is a matter dependant mainly on cooperation
of litigants.

1. Cf. Warner ©. Mosse, (1880) 16 Ch. 0, 100.
2. (a) Ordor 5, rule 189.
(४) Order 11, rules 8 to 20.
(0) Order 32, rulo 3.
(d) Order 3s. rules 2 and 5.
(4) Order 39, rule 1.
3. Cf. dunt Woasppay. Swemigal, ALB. 1959 Mya, 139 (Soma Math IyerJ.).

164


Cuaprer 20
JUDGMENT AND DECREE

Introductory

20.1, Under Order 20, after the case has been heard, the Court
should pronounce juudgment, which should contain a concise state-
ment of case, the points for determination, the decision thereon and
the reasons for the decision. The Court must state its finding or deci-
sion on every issue. unless the finding upon one or more of them is
sufficient for the decision of the case.

20.2, Under the scheme of the Codc’, on a j¢dgment a decree is
to follow. There are detailed provisions as to what the decree should
contain in general, as well as provisions for several types of decrces.
The guiding principle behind these provisions is that the decree should
be self-contained and capable of execution without referring to any
other document. or, as has been stated", the decree is the “mounth-
piece of the suit in its immediate result”.

Order 20, rule 2

20.3, In the earlier Report’, a point relevant to Order 20, rule 2,
was discussed.

Order 20, rule 2 provides that a Judge may pronounce a judg-
ment, written but not pronounced by his predecessor, The Commis-
sion noted that though the word used is “may”, one view is that the
rule casts a duty on the succeeding Judge, and it is mandatory upon
the succeeding Judge to pronounce the judgment written by his pre-
decessor, and he cannot re-open the whole matter‘. But a contrary
view has been taken in some cases. The former view is based on the
ground, thet the Legislature did not intend to leave an uncontrolled
and unregulated discretion to the succeeding Judge, and that a duty
js cast an the Judge to pronounce a judgment jn the interests of the
public and to save time.

The view taken by the Commission was that the provision seems
to confer a power (and not a duty) but the Code also contemplates
that the power should ordiniarily be exercised. It considered it un-
necessary to insert any rigid rule, No change was. therefore, suggested.

1. (ef, swotion 2(31, definition and section 33 of“ decree”,
2, Ranjit v. Taki, 11859) F.L.R. All. $80, 527 (Stuart C.J).
3. 27th Report, note on Order 29), ene 2. .
4. (2) ¥. Venkateswy. ¥. Suryanaryana, ALR. 1959 Andhra Pradesh 16 110, 8-1:
16) 6241, ए. Ahdut Cony, TLR. 14 Rangoon 136: ALB. 7906 Rangoon 147, 149
(8) Lockman Prased v. Ram Kishan, LL.B. 33 All, 236 (Knox and Karamat Husain JJ.)

165



166

Recommendatien

20.4. In our view, however, it should be mandatory for the succeed-
ing judge to pronounce the judgment in such case. This will avoid
unnecessary delay. We, therefore. recommend that instead of the
word “may”, the word “shall” should be substituted in Order 20, rule
2.

Order 26, rule 5-A (New)—judgment to inferm parties of right of
appeal

20.5. In order to acquaint unrepresented iitigants with the right
of appeal against a judgment adverse to them, it would be desirable
to have a suitable provision to the effect that the judgment shovld
indicate the Court of appeal and the time limit for appealing.

20.6. It may be of interest to note that the Fundamentals of Civil
Procedure in the U.S.S.R.' provides—

“The judgment of the court must be legally correct and valid.
The Court shall base its judgment only on the evidence
examined at the trial. In any event, the judgment must
state the circumstances established by the court; the evi-
dence on which the court’s conclusions are based, and the
reasons for which the court has rejected any evidence; the
laws by which the court was guided; the court’s decision
satisfying or denying the claim in full or in part; the time
limit and the manner in which appeal may be taken from
the judgment. [Rest of the article in not relevant}”.

20.7. A similar provision may be useful. To begin with, cases where
both the narties are represented by lawyers may be excluded from
the new provision for mentioning time-limit and manner of appeal.
Recommendation

20.8. Accordingly, we recammend that the following rule should
be inserted as rule 5A in Order 20:—

“5A. Except where both the parties are represented by pleaders,
the Court shell, when it pronounces judgment in a case sub-
ject to appeal, inform the parties present as to the court to
which an appeal lies and the period of limitation for filing
an appeal.”

Order 26, r. 6, and registered address—Recommendation

20.9. The question whether a provision should be inserted to the
effect that the decree should mention the address for service (conse-
quential on the proposed addition of a rule requiring a pleading to
be accompanied by the registered address), was considered in the
27th Report’. but no amendment was regarded as necessary, We think
that the decree should contain it. We, therefore, recommend that
Order 20, rule 6(1) should be revised as follows: —

“(1) The decree shall agree with the judgment; it shall contain
the number of the suit, the names and descriptions of the
parties. and their registered addresg and particulars of
the claim, and shall specify clearly the relief granted or
other determination of the svit.”

1. Article 37, Pandamentate of Civil Precedare of the U.S.5.B. and the Unlon Repablie

3, 27th Report, page 171, aote on 0- 20, 7. 6 and registered address,



aes

xd

167

Order 20, r. 6A [new]—(Last paragraph ef the judgment)

20.16. Under Order 20, rule & & judgment has to be followed by
a decree, which is the “formal expression” of the adjudication of the
Court. The Code dues not contemplate 2 long interval between the
judgment and decree. But, in practice, the interval turns out to be
jong, with the result that the filling of an appeal apainst the decree
is delayed, because en appeal has to be accompanied by a copy of
the decree’. We think that this delay could be avoided if a provision
is inserted to the effect that the last paragraph of the judgment
should be framed as precisely as 2 decree, so that it can be vsed
for the purposes of appeal. We had. in our Questionnaire’, inserted
a question on the subject, and the suggestion has been generally
favoured,

20.11. This last paragraph of the judgment could, we think, be
used also for the purpose of execution, (though this aspect was not
mentioned in our Questionnaire).

Recommendation

20.12, Accordingly. we recommend that a new rule should be
inserted in Order 41, as follows: —
“6A. (1) The last paragraph of the judgment shall in precise
terms indicate the relief granted.

(2) Where a decree is not drawn up within one month of the
date on which the judgment is pronounced—

(a) a party desirous of appealing may appeal without
filing a copy of the decree, and the last paragraph of
the judgment shall, for the purpose of rule 1 of this,
order be treated as the decree; and

(b) the last paragraph of the judgment shall be deemed.
to be the decree for the purpose of execution, until
a decree is drawn up, and a party interested shall be
entitled to @ copy of that paragraph without being re-
quired to apply for 6 copy of the judgment.”

५. , 20.13, We now turn to a minor matter concerning the copies. of
judgments. Where the judgment is typed. it would be desirable if
carbon or xerox copies of the judgment are made available on pay-
ment of prescribed charges, We recommend. accordingly. that the
following rule should be inserted as Order 20, rule 6B:—

“6B. Where the judgment is typewritten. copies of the judg-
ment, typewritten or rerox, shall be made available to the
parties immediately after the pronouncing of the judgment,
on payment of such charges as may be laid down bu the
High Court, where the supoly of such copies is practi-
ca a

L, Order 41, role 1,
2. Question 20,



468

Order 20, Rule 11

20.14. Order 20, rvie 11, which deals with instalments in case of
money decrees, consists of two parts. Under sub-rule (1), the Court
ean, for sufficient reason, order that the money be paid by instal-
ments, or may order postponement of recovery. This power is to
be exercised by passing a separate order’, unless it is incerperated in
the decree

We think, that is more convenient if it is laid down that—

{i} the order should be incorporated in the decree’;

(ii) the power is exercised after hearing the parties who have
appeared personally or by pleader at the last hearing
before the judgment.

Sub-rule (2) of this rule authorises the court to make an order
for payment by instalments efter the decree. But this requires con-
sent of the decree-holder. With reference to this sub-rule, it may be
nated that some local amendments" provide, that where the court
proposes to pass an order for payment by instalments, the decree-
holder shall be given an opportunity of being heard, but his consent
should not be required. One result of such an amendment would
be, that the court has to exercise a judicial discretion, and the order
would be appealable under section 47, as has beén held in cases
under the similar Madres Amendment.

20.15. The Commission, in its earlier Report’ considered the
question, whether such a change need be made. It took the view that
the present provision ig a good and just one, We agree with this
view.

Recommendation

20.16. In the result. the only amendment required is in sub-rule
(1) of Order 20. Rule 11. It should be revised as follows: —

“(1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of
money. the Court may, for any sufficient reason, and after
hearing such of the parties as were present at the last
hearing, direct by its decree that payment of the amount
decreed shall be postponed, or shall be made by instal-
ments, with or without interest, notwithstanding anything
conteined in the contract under which the money is pay-
able

‘Onder 20, rule 12

20.17. Tt has been suggested by a High Court Jvdge‘ that clause
(c} of Order 20, rule 12, should be removed. This suggestion has been
made as a measure likely to reduce delay

+ appesinhle ag part of decree
Amendments.
Note cm Order 20, Rule 11.

t Report page 1

2
3.

4, 25th Ropert, page 17
5. पु
6. ४. No. 28 fin anawor tu Question 29),

रु


wr ee ge ee nen

ty

169

20.18. It should, however, be pointed out that the power to
pass a preliminary decree directing an inquiry as to mesne profits—
which is the procedure laid down in Order 20, rule 12{c)—is a useful
one. Of course, it is not obligatory in law—see the word ‘may’ in
Order 20, rule 12. But as possession will be delivered after the decree.
the profits for the interval have naturally to be provided for; ant
sifice the parties do net furnish the material for calculating the pro-
fits, it becomes necessary to grant time. Acceptance of the suggestion,
therefore, is not recommended, as it will not be of mvch practical
utility.

Order 20, Rule 12B (New)—Execution of document or endorsement

of a negotiable instrument

21.19. Under Order 21, rule 34, where a decree is for the execu-
tion of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable instru-
ment, and the judgment-debtor neglects or refuses to obey the decree,
the decree-holder may prepare a dreft of the document or endorse-
ment in accordance with the terms of the decree, and deliver the
same to the court. The court shall, thereupon, cause the draft to‘ be
served on the judgment-debtor, together with a notice requiring his
objections (if any} to be made within such time es the court fixes in
this behalf. Where the judgment-debtor objects to the draft, his ob-
jections are to be stated in writing within such time, and the Court
shall make such order approving or altering the draft, as it thinks
fit. The rule, then contains elaborate provisions as to further action.

20.20. Further, as regards suits for specific performance of con-
tracts for the sale or lease of immovable property, the Specific Relief
Act provides’—

“(3) If the purchaser or lessee! pays the purchase money or
other sum which he is ordered to pay under the decree
within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the court
may, on application made in the same suit, award the
purchaser or Jessee such further relief as he may be entitled
to, including in appropriate cases all or any of the follow.
ing reliefs, namely;—

(a) the execution of a proper conveyance or lease by the
vendor or lessor; ~

(b) the delivery of possession, or partition and separate
possession, of the property on the execution of such
conveyance or lease.”

20.21. An elaborate’ provision regarding the decrees for specific
performance of contracts for sale or lease of immovable property was
suggested in an earlier Report’ of the Law Commission. The recom-
mendation there was to the effect, that complete relief (such as, pos-
session, ete., rescission, refund of earnest money. etc.) in such a suit
should be available by application in the suit itself (instead of in
execution as at present), and thet appropriate provision should be
made in the Civil Procedure Code enabling such applications to be
made and orders thereon and also for appeals,

1. Section 28(3), Specitic Relief Act, 1963,

2, ot Repuct (Speaific Belief Act), pages 40-41, 42, para 81, read with pages 6—17,
pare 35. हे ह



170

20,22. The matter was considered in the 27th Report, where it was
noted*—

“It is considered, that so far as a provision authorising the
making of an application and orders thereon is concerned,
section 28 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (reed with section
22) would be adequate. So far as appeals from such orders
are concerned, the orders, it is considered, would fall within
the definition of “decree” given in section 2(2) of the Civil
Procedure Code. It is thought, that the only specific pro-
vision which is required is te the effect that the decree
should specify the period for payment of the purchase-
money or other amount due under the decree.”

Order 20, Rule 12B, (New)

20.23, We are of the view that where the decree orders the execu-
tion of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable instru-
ment, the proceedings for signing the document etc. should he
completed in the very suit in which the decree is passed’,

Recommendation

20.24. Accordingly, we recommend that the following rule should
be added in Order 20 as* rule 12B.

fof. 0.2), B. 340))

*12-B, (1) Where the Court passes a decree for the execution
of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable ins-
trument, and the judgment-debtor neglects or refuses to
obey the decree, all subsequent proceedings provided far
in this rule shell take place in the suit,

[cy. 0-21, RB, 84(2)}

(2) The decree-holder may, 00 such neglect or faiture by the
judgment-debtor, prepare a draft of the document or en-
dorsement in accordance with the terms of the decree and
deliver the same to the Court.

(Cf. 0-21, छ. $4(8)]

(3) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to be served on
the judgment-debtor, together with a notice requiring his
objections (if amy) to be made within time as the Court
fixes in this behalf.

(Cf. 0.21, R. 34(4y]

(4) Where the judgmentdebtor objects to the draft, his objec-
tions shall be stated in writing within such time, and the
Court shall make such order approving or altering the
draft, as it thinks fit,
1. 27th Report, page 172, noteon Order 20,rale 12.
2. Conacquently, Order 21, rule 34 should be deleted.
& As to Order 20, rule 124, coe 27th Report, page 58 and page 172.



~Y

Me

171
(6 0.21, R. 32/49) °

(5) The decree-holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the
drait with such alterations (if any) as the Court may
have directed upon the proper stamp-paper if a stamp is
required by the law for time being in force; and the
judge or such officer as y be appointed in this behalf
shall execute the document so delivered.

[of 0.21, B. 341]

(6) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a
negotiable instrument under this rule may be in the follow-
ing form, namely: —

“C.D., Judge of the Court of

(or as the case may be) for A.B., in a suit by E.F. against
A.B.”, and shall have the same effect as the execution of
the document or the endorsement of the negotiable instru-
ment by the party ordered to execute or endorse the same.
[Of. 0.21, R. 84(6)} है

(7) The Court, or such officer as it may appoint in this behalf,
shall cavse the document to be registered if its registration
is required by the law for the time being in force or the
decree-holder desires to have it. registered, and mey make
such order as it thinks fit as to the payment of the expenses
of the registration,

M/B(D)219NofLT&CA—129


Cuaprer 21
EXECUTION 1
Introduction है

21.1 Order 21 contains detailed rule as to the execution of
decrees. .

The body of the Code itself deals with certain matters relating
to execution", But the detailed procedure is dealt with in Order 21.
Payments and adjustments of amounts due under a decree must be
certified to the Court to avoid controversies later on. Various modes
of execution are provided for. In practice, attachment and sale are
the most common, " .

The rules require an application fer execution to bein writing,
and in the prescribed form. Most movables are attached by seizure
effected by a process-server under the authority of a warrant; im-
movables are attached by aff order served on the judgment-lebtor,
forbidding him to deal with them. If the property is not susceptible
of actual seizure from the possession of the judgment debtor—if, for
instance, it is a debt payable to the 4 jydement Gebtor—a prohibitory
order is served on the person in posséssion or coritrol.

21.2. Attachment may be followed by an application for its remo-
val by a third party, and the present rules require a summary in-
quiry and order, which may be followed by a suit to establish the
right denied in the summary proceedings.

Before attached property is sold, notice must be given to the
parties, and a proclamation issued containing the particulars prescri-
bed. The proclamation must be posted on the court house, pro-
claimed by beat of drum near the Froperty, and the court may re
quire pub lication in a newspaper, The proclamation gives the date
of sale, which must be at least fifteen da: ys in the case of movables,
and thirty in the case of immovables after the proclamation has
been published. The sale is ee a an auction conducted by the
pailiff, an officer of the court in [९ of property under the con-
trol of the court, and of the process serving staff. The bailiff has a
discretion to refuse the highest bid or postpone the sale. In the case
of movables, the property passes at the fall of the hammer, but the
rules governing the sale of immovables are more elaborate. The
judgment-debtor may secure postponement of the sale if he can
satisfy the court tht eet he may be able to raise the
money to satisfy e ‘ee by sale, lease, or mort;
of the attached property, or otherwise. If the property
is knocked down, the successful bidder is required to deposit only
one-fourth of the sale price and has fifteen days in which to pay
the balance. The judgment-debtor may still save his property if with-
in thirty days he satisfies the decree and pays the successful bidder
Sea UNSEEN

1, Section 87, ef seg,

172

eee


a

193

one-twentieth of the sale price. Any person interested may move to
set aside the sale for material irreg! ty or fraud in publishing or
conducting the sale, and the successful bidder may apply to set aside
the sale because the judgment-debtor had no saleable interest in the
property, but, failing a successful application of the kind. indicated,
the sale is confirmed by the court, which may order the purchaser
to be put in possession. Resistance by the judgment-debtor or any
other person acting on his behalf may be punished by civil imprison-
ment, but a person unconnected with the judgment-debtor and in
possession on his own account who has been evicted may apply to
be reinstated. _

Order 21, rule 2, and limitation ,

21.3. A point relating te limitation for applications under Order
23, rule 2, was discussed in the earlier Report’, and should be -men-
tioned here.

The period of limitation for an application for certification of
payment or adjustment is 30 days under the Limitation Act, 1963,
article 125. Since the provision in the. Civil Procedure Code regard-
ing certification is now proposed.to be made more stringent than at
present (by requiring* that the payment should be in the manner
provided in Order 21, rule 4 as proposed to be amended or that the
adjustment should be proved by documentary evidence); it was con-
sidered that a longer period should be allowed. It was, accordingly,
recommended that the period -shauld’ be increased to 90 days’, e
14th Report* recommended that the period should be deleted, but it
was not considered necessary to go 30 far. .

While we agree that the period should be longer, we think that
60 days should suffice, and we recommend’ that the Limitation Act
should be amended accordingly. woe

Order 21, rule 2(2) and sureties

21.4, In the earlier Report’, it was noted that under the Madras
amendment to Order 21, rule 2, any party to the suit can‘certify and
get recorded a payment or adjustment. Besides this, by the Madras
amendment, a person who has become a surety as well as legal re
presentatives of the judgment-debtor are also brought under this
rule. These ‘amendments were considered inthe earlier Report,
but it was felt that it was annecéssaty to adopt them.

21.5. The Commission stated that so far as sureties are concerned,
even now, they fall under the rule’..dqo faras legal representatives
are concetned, section 1 446 was adequate, in its opinion: No change
was, therefore, proposed, on these points,

— + ७ -+
1. 27th Report, page 177, note an Order 21, rule 2 and limitation.
2. See 27th Report, amendment proposed in Order 21, rule 2,
3. Of. Limitution Act, 1908, actiole 178.
4. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 444, para 28. 7
5. This will necessitate amendment of artiole 125, Limitation Act 1963.
6. 27th Report, pages 174-175, Note on Order 21, rula 2.
पर, (दो Tamil v, Deci, TLR, 49 Mad. 325,
(0) Onkarmal v. Nritya, ALR. 1923, Cal. 313,

lene ०


174

We are, however, of the view that so far as sureties are concern-
ed, the Madras amendment should be adopted, so as to make the
position explicit.

Hecommendation

Accordingly, we recommend that in Order 21, rvle 2(2), after
the words “The judgmext-debtor”, the words “or any person who has
become surety for the judgment-debtor” should be added.

Order 21, rule 5, Mode of transfer

21.6. Under the earlier half of Order 21, rule 5, where the Court
tv which a decree is to be sent for execution is situated within the
same district as the Court which passed such decree, such Court shall
send the same directly to the former Court.

But under the latter half of the rule, where the Court to which
a decree is to be sent for execution is situated in another district,
the decree is to be sent through the diatinct court. It was noted in the
earlier Report’, under local amendments’ in case. where the courts are
situated within the same State, the decree can be sent for execution
to the transferee court directly, instead of through the District Court
as is required by the present rule. The previous Commission, how-
ever, considered that the District Judge would be in a position to
know and check up if the court mentioned is the proper court, and
did not, therefore, favour an amendment.

21.7. We are of the view that the local amendments referred to
above are useful, and we do not think that direct transmission of
papers should, ordinarily, ९४०७९ any difficulty. We are also of the
view that in every case of trensfer of a decree for execution {whether
within or without the State), the decree should be sent to the trans-
feree court directly. But the court to which it is sent should, if it
has no jurisdiction, send the papers to the proper court.

Recommendation

!
21.78, Accordingly we recommend that Order 21, rule 6, should
be revised as follows: — पु

नह, ......... Where a decree is to be sent for execution to another
court, the court which passed such decree shall send the
same directly to the former Court, whether or not the
former court is situated in ‘the same State, but the court
to which it is sent shall; i} it has no jurisdiction to execute
the decree, send it to the court having such jurisdiction.”

Order 21, rule 11(2)

21.8. Order 21, rule 11(2)(j)(ii) provides for mentioning “attach-
ment and sale” or “sale without attachment” in the application for
execution. It does not expressly mention simple attachment, The local
amendment made by the Bombay High Court adds the words “by the

1, 27th Report, page 179, note om U2, r. 5.
2. See amendments made by the Allahabad and Bombay High Courte,

a


176

attachment”. Cases of simple attachment may arise when a. decree
or debt or money in the custody of a public officer, ete, is to be
attached. It may also be noted, that section 51(b) covers attachment
simpliciter’ .

21.9. The earlier Report? considered it unnecessary to adopt the
Bombay amendment, as the residuary clause in rule 11 would suffice.
We think, however, that the Bombay amendment could be usefully
adopted.

Recommendation

21.94. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 21, rule 11(2)(j)Gi}
should be revised as follows: — .

“Gi) by the attachment, or by the attachmant and galg,.. or
by sale without attachment, of any property.”

Order 21, rule 16 '

21.98. As recommended under" section 146. it is desirable to amend
Order 21, rule 16, to make it clear that it does not affect the pro-
visions of section 146, and a transferee of rights in the subject-matter
of the suit can obtain execution of the decree without a separate
assigninent of the decree.

Recommendation

21.9.C, Accordingly, the insertion of the following Explanation
below Order 21, rule 16, is recommended: --

“Explanation—Nothing in this rule shali affect the provisions of
section 146, and a transferee of rights in the property which
ig the subject-matier of the suit may apply for execution
of the decree without 4 seperate assignment of the decree,
as required by this rule.”

Order 21 rule 22A

21.10. With reference to execution of decrees, a point concerning
the effect of death of the judgment-debtor was discussed in the earlier
Report’, The erdinary rule is, that the ne sale of a judgment-debtor's
property after his death, and without, aging his representatives on
record, does not bind his representatives. Patna High Court has
added 1uie 22A, to the effect that where property is sold in execution,
the sale shall not be set aside by reason only of the death of the
judgment-debtor between the date. of issue of the sale proclamation
and the dete of sale, notwithstanding the failure to substitute legal
representatives. But, if the legal_representative is prejudiced, the
Court may set aside the sale, The earlier Commission noted the
above position, but considered it unnecessary to adopt the Patna
Amendment.

1. Amudye v, Parkupati, A.B. 1951,Cal, 48, 50, para 7.

2. 27th Report, page 180, note on 0.2). ९. 11(2) and Bombay Amendment,
3. See discussion as to section 146.

4, 27th Report, puxe 184, note on Order 21, rule 22A Patna,


176

Recommendation

21.11. It appears to us, however, that such an amendment would
be unobjectionable in principle, and would also reduce delay, and
we recommend insertion of the following as Order 21, rule 22-A:—

“22-A. Where any property is sold in execution of a decree, the
sale shall not be set aside by reason only of the death of
the judgment-debtor between the date of issue of the pro-
clamation of sale and the date of sale, notwithstanding the
feilure to substitute kis legal representative in his place;
but, in case of such failure, the Court may set aside the
sale if satisfied that the legal representative of the
judgment-debtor has been prejudiced thereby.”

Order 21, rule 24(3)

21.12. Under Order 21, rule 24(3), a process issued by a court (in
execution) should specify the day on or before which it shal] be exe-
cuted. After the date fixed for return, execution is not valid*.

With reference to this rule, a short peint was discussed in the
earlier Report?. The Commission noted that some High Courts had
made local amendments’, which require thet the dey on or before
which the process should be returned, should also be .specified in
the process. The Commission considered it unnecessary to adopt this
amendment, being of a minor character.

Recommendation

21.14. Accordingly, . we recommend that Order 21, rule 24(3),
should be revised as follows:— _

“(3) In every such process, a day.shall be specified on or be-
fore which it shall be executed, end 6 day shall also be
specified on or before which it shall be returned to the
court but no process shali be deemed to be void if 2 day for

’ iis return is not specified as required by this rule.” —-

Order 21, rule 26

21.15. Under Order 21, rule 26(1), the Court to which a decree
has been sent for execution shall, upon sufficient cause being shown,
stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time. to enable
the judgment-debtor to apply to the court by which the decree was
passed, or to any court having appel Hate jurisdiction in respect of
the decree or the execution thereof, fox an order to stay execution,
or for any other order relating to the ‘decree or execution which
might have been made by such court of first instance or appellate
court if execution had been issued theréby. or if application for
execution had been made thereto. Undet ‘sub-rule (3) of this rule, the
court may require security fhom the judgment-debtor, or impose
other conditions, before granting stay.

1. SeaGurdiad ९, Bmp. TLR. 35 All. 119; ALR, 1983 All, 46 (Pullen J.).

2, 27th Report, page 183, note on the 0-21, mule 24(3).
face Se? wlte Civil Justice Committers Report, (1028); page 406, paragraph 19, to the same
offect,



Ne

M7

21.16. In the earlier Report, the following observations' were
made with reference to stay (under this rule}:—

“A recommendation has been made in the Fourteenth Report?*
to the effect that where a judgement-debtor applies for
stay of execution under this rule, the court shall require
him to furnish security or impose conditions under the
rule, before granting stay. This recommendation was made
in view of the feeling that the courts failed to diserimi-
nate between honest and dishonest judgment-debtors and
thus failed to exercise properly the discretion left to them.
It is, however, considered that the existing provision
should continue, and that making jt mandatory would
cause hardship.

Hence, no change is suggested”.

We are, however, of the view that the change proposed by the
idth Report is a salutary one, and should be carried out.

Recommendation

21.17. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 21, rule 26(3)
should be revised as follows:—

“(3) Before making an order to stay execution or for the resti-
tution of property or the discharge of the judgment-debtor,
the court shall require such security from, or impose such
conditions upon, the judgment-debtor as it thinks fit.”

Order 21, rule 29 *
21.18. Order. 21, rule 29, runs as ‘follows: —

“29, Where a suit is pending in any court against the holder of
a decree of such court, on the part of the person against
whom the decree was passed, the court may, on such
terms as to security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay exe-
gution of the decree until] the pending suit has been

lecided.

21.19. At present, there is a conflict of decisions on the question
whether the decree must be of that court which is required to act
under this rule. One view is that a court to which the decree of any
other court is transferred, can ‘act under this rule. But another line
of cases takes a narrower view'.

The wider view bases itself on the principle that the transferee
court becomes the “court” which passed the decree, (section 37), and
would under section 42, become clothed with the seme powers. The
narrower view justifies itself on the language of the section. which
requires identity of the court passing the decree and the court in
which the suit is pending.

1. 27th Report, page 185, Nate on 0.21. r. 36.
2 Wth Report Vol. 1 page 449, para 43.

3. Neo abu Civit Justice Committee (1925), Report, page 406, para 14,

4, Bee casos cited in 27th Report, pase 185, 188, 5008 on Orier 21, rule 29,



178

To clarify the position, necessary change was proposed in the
earlier Report! on the Code, adopting the wider view.

21.20. With this change, we agree. But there are a few other
points which require consideration.

It has been stated in one of the ceplies’ to our Questionnaire
that this rule is not needed, as the purpose can be served by obtain-
ing a temporary injunction. We have examined the matter, but it
appears to us that the scope of temporary injunctions is different.
A temporary injunction is not directed to a court. but to an indivi-
dual". Apart from that, the rule which relates to temporary injunc-
tions', speaks of property being “wrongfully” sold in execution of a
decree, while an applicant under Order 21, rule 29 does not necessarily
assert that the execution is wrongful, One of the objects of the rule
is to prevent multiplicity of execution proceedings, and this object
may be of importance even if property of the person who is now the
plaintiff is, (in. his capacity as a judgment-debtor), being lawfully
sold in execution

21-20A. Another point made in the same reply is, that the rule
is heing abused; but we do not think that deletion of the rule would
be justified merely on the ground of occasional abuse. Situations
that have figured in reported decisions’ show that the rule does per-
form a useful role.

21-20B. For example, in a Madras case’, the respondent was the
assignee-decree-holder, and the petitioner was a woman. She was the
plaintiff in a suit, and her suit was for damages against the assignee-
decree-holder, for having broken his agreement with her whereby
he agreed to receive, in satisfaction of the assigned decree, certain
bonds and to get satisfaction entered up. She desired stay under rule
29, The lower courts took the view that rule 29 did not apply to the
facts. The view was set aside in revision. No opinion was expressed
on the merits, but the facts illustrate how rule 29 covld prove use-
‘ul,

21.21.In another Madras case’, a proceedings before the single
judge was by the appellant bank for an interim order of stay pend-
ing the appeal, with regard to the decree obtained by the respondent
(widow of the deceased employee of the bank). embodying the liabi-
lity of the bank to pay certain provident fund amounts to the credit
of that employee. The bank claimed that the deceased employee was
guilty of malversation of the funds of the institution to a far greater
extent than the claim; and that, therefore, the widow could not ob-
tain such a decree, or at least that she should not be permitted to

1, 27th Report, page 135-138, uoto on Order 21, rule 28,
2, Question 29.
#. ALR. 1918 100. 220, 221.
4. Order 39, rule 1.
5, (०) Maheok Chandz y. Sogendra, ALR, 1928 Cal. 222.
[0] Merchants Bask २, 2. Amemci, 4.1.R. 1953 Mad. 143, 144.
6. Koprummul v. Muftimbumercawamé. ALR. 1936 Mad. 102, 103,
‘7, Merchante’ Bank Let. ¥. D. Ammal, ALR. 1903 Mad. 143.

a



179

enforce the decree and take away the monies pending the appeal by
the hank against the decree in the widow’s suit. No cross-claim by
the Bank was pending, and rule 29 did not apply. But the facts illus
trate how. if the situation was under rule 29, it would have been
useful.

31.52. Security also cannot be required in every case.

As was laid down in a Rajasthan case’'—

“While granting stay of execution under Order 21, rule 29, the
court should consider various circumstances before decid-
ing that security should be furnished up-to the entire de-
cretal amount of the former suit. Where the former decree
is passed on a mortgage, some security is already there.
The court should enquire whether that security is sufficient
or not, If it appears that the security is not. sufficient, such
further amount as might be necessary to make up the deffi-
ciency may be asked. Further, it should also enquire
whether it is possible in the earlier suit for the decree-
holder to ask for a personal decree.”

However, it can be provided that ordinarily, before granting
stay of a money decree. the court shall consider if security ought
not be demanded.

Recommendation

21.28. to 21.25. In the light of the aboye discussion, we recom-
mend the following change in Order 21, Rule 29:—

(i) After the words “a decree of such court”, the words “or &
decree which is being evecuied by such court” should be
inserted’.

(ii) The following proviso should be inserted at the end: —

“Provided that if the decree is one for payment of money, the
court shall, if it grants stay without requiring security,
record its reasprs for doing so.”

Order 21, rule 34

21.26. Order 21, rule 34 should be deleted, in view of our recom-
mendation" to insert in Order 20 a rule dealing with procecdings for
the execution of a document or for the endorsement of a negotiable
Instrument,

Order 71, rale 41

21.27, Order 21, rule 41. provides for oral examination of the
judgment-debtor in order to find out his assets. The Commission in
the earlier Report made a recommendation for the filing of an affi-
davit by the judgmentdebtor'.

1, Finasrej ९, 3: का Raj. 219, (Wanchoo Cal. and Dave 4)
2 CF. the recommendutions in the 27th Report.

3. See discussion as to Ordce 2, rule 188 (Propused).

4. 27th Report, pages, 188-189, note on Order 21, rule 41.



180

The Commission recommended that where a judgmentdebt re-
mained unpaid for 30 days, the decree-holder should be entitled to
call upon the judgment-debtor to make an affidavit of his assets. The
filing of such an affidavit was, in the opinion of the Commission.
much more effective than the examination now in vogue, as the de-
cree-holder (at present) attended the examination without any prior
knowledge of the debtor’s assets and liabilities.

21.28. The following sub-rule was accordingly recommended to
be added: —

“(2) Where a decree for the payment of money has remained
unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, the court may, on
the application of the decree-holder, order that the judg-
ment-debtor, or in the case of a corporation, any officer
thereof, shall make an affidavit stating particulars of his
assets; and the power of the Court to make any such order
shall be without prejudice to its power under subrule (1)".

It was however, considered unnecessary to make any specific
provision as to the penalty for failure to make the affidavit in such
cases, The Commission noted that the Evershed Committee had sug-
gested' that the notice should be endorsed with a “penalty notice”
under Order 41, rule 5, Rules of the Supreme Court. Neglect to make
the affidavit would, thus, render the judgment-debtor liable to a
process of execution for compelling him to obey it. This would attract
the provisions of Order, 42, rule 7, R.S.C.. providing for writ of
attachment, or committal.

_ Recommendation

21,29. We agree with the earlier Commission’s récommendatian.
regarding the duty to file an affidavit. Further, we are of the view
that a penal provision is necessary, in order to secure compliance
with the new duty.

Accordingly, we recommend that the following should be added*
as sub-rule (3), in Order 21, rule 41:—

+(3) In case of disobedience to any order under sub-rule (2),
the Court making the order, or any court to which the
proceeding is transferred, may order the person disobeying
६ to be detained in the civil prison 106 a term not exceed-
ing sit months, unless in thé meantime the court directs
his release.”

Order 21, rule 57

21.30. With reference to Order 21, rule 57, the earlier Report’
considered one point. It was noted, that where an application for exe-
eution is dismissed either by reasén of the decree-holder’s default
or otherwise, the question arises whether an attachment already

L
‘paper 8878, pages 145-140, paras. 453-454 and farm of affidavit at page 371

2. ‘Thia is in addition to the amondiment suggested by 27th Report in Order 21, rale 42
8. 27th Report, pages 106-107, note on Order 21, rule 57,

a] Report of the Committee on Supreme Court Practice aud Procedure, (1853), Cmd .


181

effected ceases or not, At present, the case where the decree-holder's
default entails dismissal ct the application is covered, but other
cases are not. (In the former case, the cessation of the attachment
is, at present, compulsury). Local Amendments’ to the rule seek to
impose an obligation on the court to direct, in each case of dis-
missal, whether the attachment is to be regarded as continuing or
not.

21.31. In sume of the locel amendments (e.g. Bombay and Madhya
Pradesh), it is further provided that, in the absence of an order to
the contrary, the attachment shall cease. This is intended to avoid
doubis which are felt sometimes as to whether the dismissal was
in fact, for “fault”.

The earlier Commission, however, considered it necessary to
adopt these amendments, as it was felt that where the execution
application is dismissed (for default), the atlackment must cease.

It appears to us that there is need for a clarification; and we are
further of the view that cessation of the attachment should not be
automatic. It is move convenient if the provision is to the effect that
the attachment should continue unl¢.5 otherwise ordered. ‘

Recommendation

21.32. Accordingly. we recommend that Order 21, rule 57. should
be revised as follows: —

“57, (1) Where any property has been attached in execution of
a decree, and the Court, for any reason, passes an order
dismissing the application, the court shall direct whether,
the attachment shall continue or cease.

(2) 14 the court omits to give such direction, the attachment
shall be deemed to continue,”

Order 21, rule 58

21.83, With reference to Order 21, rule 58, the earlier Report’ dis-
cusssed a number of points, Of these, the position regarding one of
them has been further examined. The Report considered the question
of making an express provision as to whether the proceedings under
rule 58 et seq and the decisions given thereon will be binding as
between the judgment-debtor and a third party claimant. The answer
to that question, it was stated, would depend on the question,—who
are the parties to suit, and what are the matters raised therein?

_ We have examined the position and, it appears to us that the
yiew taken in the earlier Report* needs no change.

1. Cf, the Amendments mare by the High Courte of Caloutla, Madiss, Nagpur, Patna

ote
2, Seo Civil Justice Committes (1925). Beyiort, page 109. pare 22,
8. 27th Report, page 198.
4, Reference was made to ALR, 1987 AP, 61.
5. Fora rocmt decision, sea 1.1. छ. (1986) ६ All, 101, 106.

X


Order 21, rule 66

21.34. A point concerning Order 21, rule 66, which was discussed
in the earlier Report’ requires consideration.

A recommendation had been made in the 14th Report? to the effect
that to avoid the difficulties caused by mistakes in the estimated
value of the property as stated in the proclamation of sale, rule 66
should be amended on the lines of the Patna Amendment, so as to
provide (in effect) that the court should state merely the estimated
value of the property, if any, as eve by the parties, and insert a
statement that it does not vouch for the accuracy of cither. It was
considered by the Commission in the Report on the Code that it
would be sufficient to adopt a simpler amendment, namely, thet the
proclamation should merely contain a statement that the estimated

value is steted.

Recommendation

21.85, We agree with the view taken in the earlier Report on the
Code, but we would suggest a small drafting change in the draft
amendment suggested in that Report.

Accordingly, we recommend that the following proviso should be
added below Order 21, rule 66(2){e):—

“Provided further that nothing in this rule shall be construed
as requiring the court to enter in the proclamauion its own
estimate of the value of the property, but the proclamation
shall include the estimates, if any, given by etther or both
of the parties’”.

Order 21, rule 72

21.36. With reference to Order 21, rule 72, a point was considered
in the earlier Report. A recommendation had been made in the
Fourteenth Report* to the effect, that a decree-holder shouid be allow-
ed to purchase property unless the court has prohibited him from
doing so.' The object of the recommendation was to avoid the delay
that is frequently caused when the warrant of sale is returned
unexecuted in the absence of bidders. An amendment carrying out
this recommendation was proposed in the draft Report on the Code
which had been circulated. Cormiments received thereon, however,
emphasised the need for the court being aware of any proposal by
the decree-holder to bid. The earlier Commission thought, that there
was force in this approach, and a decision was taken not to disturb
the existing rule.

‘We have considered this matter further, and have come to the

conclusion that the approach in the earlier Report on the Code was
correct. Hence, no change is recommended.

27th Report. page ou Order 21, rule 66 and ileaft rule, jage 68.
Lath Report, Vel. 1, page 44, pura Jt

‘Dhe first provist to be added as recommended in the 27th Report, page 69, will stand,
27th Report. page 202, note on 0521, +, 72.

14th Report, Vol. 1, pages 458, 467, para 67.

896 algo Civil Justice Committes (1925), Report, page 410, para, 24,

॥, Ne

Sar जहा

one


183

Order 21, rule 32

21.36-A. We have considered the more fundamental question it
rule 72 should be retained at all. The object behind this provision is
to ensure fairness in the auction. The decree-holder, if interested in
purchasing the property himself, can, conceivably, keep back or dis-
courage (or even mislead) prospective purchasers. Ordinarily, the
fetching of a higher purchase price would be in his interest {as likely
to satisfy his claim without further execution), But, it should not be
forgotten that when he is the purchaser, this consideration takes
leave, and he—like every purchaser—would like the price io be low,
To a certain extent, he has a hand in initiating the sale, though not
so in theory, It is he who obtains the proclamation of sale; and,
though the rule in Order 21 do not so require, it is he who is expect-
ed to assist, and even to guide, the process-serving staff in various
matters concerning execution—e.g. affixation of the proclamation etc.
He also estimates the price. For these reasons, it is better to keep
the existing safeguard,

Order 21, rule 725 (New)

21.37. A new rule discussed but not recommended in the earlier
Report! may be usefully considered at this stage. The Commission,
in that Report, noted that Order 21, rule 72A, had been added by the
High Court of Bombay, to provide that if leave to bid is granted to
a mortgagee, then, as re; gards him, a reserve price shall be fixed,
(unless the Court shall otherwise think fit), which shall not be less
than the amount due on principal, interest and costs in case the
property is sold.

The history of the Bombay rule is interesting. The Subordinate
Judge of Haveli wrote a letter to the High Court of Bombay in 1913,
stating that this was the practice followed in the mufassil, and as
the rule could not now be made under section 104, Transfer of Pro-
perty Act, jt should be made under Order 34. The Rule Committee ~
recommended that the old rule 20 of the Supplementary Civil Circu-
lar No. 11 should be restored? In the absence of such a rule, the
mortgagee can (under a general permission to bid) recover in execu-
tion the balance from the mortgagor or from his estate, if the amount
for which the property is sold is less than the principal, etc. due to

है :

21.38. The question whether this amendment should be adopted
was considered by the earlier Commission, but it felt that a rigid
provision of such a nature was not necessary. It apprehended that to
a certain extent, such a provision may detract from the remedy of
the mortgagee under Order 34, rule 6 also,

We have carefully considered the matter, and have come to the
conclusion that the Bombay Amendment is a healthy one. We do not
think that it will detract from Order 34, Rule 6, because the decree-
holder can, before secking permission, consider whether the property
is likely to fetch the total amount due to him.

1. 27th Report, page 803, note un Onder 2, rule 724 (Bombay),
2. Sea Aisoussion in Frajlal ७. Venkataswani, LL.B. 52 Bom. 459; ALR. 1928 Bom. 122,
128 (Marten, C.J, aud Blackwell, J.).



184

Recommendation

21.39. We, therefore, recommend that the principle of Order 21,
Rule 724, as inserted by the Bombay Amendment, should be adopted,
Apart from the general rule’ requiring the decree-holder to obtain
leave to bid, it is our intention that for the special case of mortgagee,
leave should be required as above.

The following new rule is, accordingly, recommended—

“724 (1) A mortgagee of immovable property shall not bid
for or purchase property soid in execution of a decree on

the mortgage, unless the Court grants him leave to bid jor |

or purchase the property.

~
(2) If leave to bid is granted to such mortgagee, then the Court
shall fix a reserve price as regards the morigagee, and, un-
less the Court otherwise directs, the reserve price shall be—

(a) not less than the amount then due for principal, inte.
rest and costs, in respect of the mortgage if the pro-
perty is sold in one lot; and

(b) not less in respect of each fot (in case the property
is sold in lots) than suck sum as shall appeal to the
court to be properly attributable io that lot in relo~
tion to the amount then due for principal, interest
and costs on the mortgage.

(3) in other respects, the provisions of sub-rules (2) and 2)
of rule 72 shall epply in relation to purchase by t!
decree-holder under that rule.” —

Order 21, rele 83—period of limitation

21.40. An application to set aside a sale on deposit under Order
21, rule 89, has to be’ made within thirty days of the date of sale!
It has been stated that this period proves. to be too short in practice,
and ofien causes hardship inasmuch as the judgment debtor cannot
arrange for moneys within that time. Banks take a far longer period
than one month in sanctioning advances, and it has been suggested
that the period should, therefore, be increased. We find some force
in this sug gestion, and are inclined to accept it. No doubt, the law
should take into account the position of the purchaser also; but,
since five per cent of the purchase money hes to be paid to him
under the rule, no serious prejudice is likely to be caused to him
by an increase in the waiting period.

21.41. Since section 5, of the Limitation Act does not appiy to
applications in execution, a change in the law is needed if the above
hardship is to be removed.

1, Order 21, Rule 72.
2. Limitation Act, 1963, article 127.

on


185

As to the direction tiWhIGH the 14४ ४४०४० Be amended, ‘thtbe
are two alternatives. One alternative is -to. give the court a power
to extend the period of limitation, subject, of course to seme maxi-
mum. The second alternative would be, to increase the period—30
days—to, say. sixt} days. The first’ alterflative ‘could Be achieved by
inserting 8. proviso somewhat 6n the following lines—

“Provided that; where the Court. is-satisfied that the appli¢a-
tion could not; for reasons beyond the control of the
judgment debtor, be miad¢ within the period prescribed
ig that. liehalf’ by the: Limitation Act;;1963, the Court. may,
by order and for reasons to'be recorded, extend the said
period by such further period as may be specified by it,
so however, that the presoribed ipericd and the extended
period shall not exceed sixty days, in the aggregate.”

The second alternative could be adhisved by amending. articic
127-01 the Limitation Act. We brefer'‘the second alternative, - which

‘is_simpler.

nol foe ” .

21.42. Although the. problem छल arisen: with reference to appli-

cations ‘by the judgment-debtor, the amended period has tu cover all

applications, (i.e. those’ unde’ Order-i21,:ruls..90-81 also), because

after the proposed amen it, the court will have te wait in every
case for the’ increased ere béfofe confirming the sale:

Recommendgtion ou “ in हे 1

Sos

।' 21.424, accordingly} we: recommend that,in the Limitation Act,

1963, in the Schedule, in the sccond column. against entry 127, for

the words “thirty days”, the wordd-\sixty days” should substi-
ut पु

Oriler 21, ruts 94) and: depot © ©?

21.43, With' feferenct to Order ZL, rule: 90; the earlier Report dis-
cussed? one point, A recommendation had been made in the Four-.
teenth Repert* to the effect, that a person applying: to:tebianide the
sale under ape PO should (०९ a to devosit an amount not
exceeding 124 per cent of tha price, which amount ‘can be
utilised for awarding costs if’ the a Heation fails. But the Commis-
sion {in its:sReport:on the Code):stated that 2s the amount of such
costs would not be very latge, it #ad-unhecessany to carry out this
recommendation. Cee ae

Recommendation «ye 4
nd eit AS tie oy

2143A. We have हिम्मत atter further, and have come
to the conglysjon that the regom: end tion made in the 14th Report
need not be carried out: We agree the view taken in the Report
on: the Code, tobe : :

1. Tu be carried ont in the Limitation Act, 1963.

2. 27th R-port, page 208. Note on Ordqa 2], cele. 91 and depostt.

8. 14th Report, Val. I, pages 454, 45%. para 51. हे
‘L/B(D)229Mof LJ&CA—14 ड़



186

Order 21, rule 90, and absence of attachment

21.44. Ancther point concerning Order 21, Tule भी, which .was
discussed in the earlier Report may be noted.*

The Commission noted* that the question whether absence of, or
irregularity in, attachment is, a defect in the ‘publication or canduct
of the sale’ within Order 21, rule 90, had been discussed in several
decisions, At one extreme was the view that attachment is not neces-
sary at all, before sale. At the other extreme stood the view that sale
without attachment is void. A third view was that want of attach-
ment is an “irregularity” but it is not an illegality in publishing or
conducting the sale. According to the fourth view, a sale is not 2
nullity merely because of a defect in the attachment or want thereof,
but, if it causes ‘substantial injury’, it can be set aside under rule 90.

The Commission thought that the last view was the correct one.
The object of attachment (it stated) is to bring the property under
the control of the court, and, in the case of immovable गे
one of the requirements is that the order of attachment हि कर हे be
publicly proclaimed. The main object of the proclamation is to give
puglicity to the fact that the sale ef the proclaimed property is
in contemplation, The pisblication of the attachment, is, thus a step
Jeading up to the proclamation of the sale.

The Commission also considered the question whether it was
necessary to insert a provision to Clarify the position on the sub-
ject. In fact, in the draft Report which had been circulated, an
Explanation had been proposed to rule 90 to the effect that absence of
or defect of an attachment shall be regarded ag an irregularity under
this Rule. After some consideration however, it was decided that no
such provision need be inserted,

2145. It appears to vs that to put the matter beyond doubt, it
may be advisable to insert a specific provision on the subject and the
provision should be to the effect that mere absence of or irregularity
in attechment shall not be 6 grouad for setting aside the sale.

Recommendation -
21.46, Accordingly , we recommend that the following Explanation
should be inserted below Order 21, rule 90— .
“Explanation—The mere absence of or defect in attachment of
the property sold shall not of tteelf be a ground for setting
aside a sale under this rule.”

Order 21, Rule 92(3)

21.47, The question whether an auction purchaser at a court auc-
tion, on finding that the j nt debtor has no saleable interest in
the property sold, has a nig t to sue for a refund of the pu rehase
money on the ground of failure of consideration, has pr to be a
controversial one.

1. 2ith Report, page 206, note on Order 21.
2. Uf. Order 21, rule 64.

a


187

Three different shades of view prevail on the subject—
(1) No such right is available.
(2) Such right is available.
(3) Such right is available, but only on limited grounds.

21.48. The first shade of view is represented by a full Bench deci-
sion of the Andhra Pradesh High Court,’ which holds that the auc-
tion-purchaser cannot, after the confirmation of the sale, maintain
an application for setting aside the sale on the ground that the judg-
ment-debtor had no saleable interest in the property sold.*

Referring to Order 21, rule 92, the Court held that after the sale
is confirmed, and had become absolute, the auction-purchascr is pre-
cluded from bringing a suit to set aside the order confirming the
sale, It was also held that Order 21, rule 93 empowers the purchaser
to apply for payment only in cases where the sales are set aside
under rule 92, Here the rule differs from section 315 of the Code of
1882 (its predecessor), which contained the provision that even when
jt was found that the judgment-debtor had no saleable interest in
the property sold, the purchaser could receive back his purchase
money. This was omitted in rule 93.

The Court held that—

(a) There is no scope for invoking the doctrine of “money had
and received” since it could not be postulated that the
executing creditor received money which he had no right
to do, and, by a legal fiction, the receipt by him was for
the use of the plaintiff,

(b) If no one had guaranteed the title of the Judgment-debtor
to the property sold under a legal process and the pur-
easer had purchased only the judgment-debtor’s interest
therein for what it wag worth it could not be predicted
that there was any failure of consideration for the purchase
of that, or that the judgment-creditor either unjustly or in-
equitably had withdrawn the amount deposited by the
purchaser. The question of failure of consideration would
arise only if there ‘was @ convenant of title. In the absence
of it, the Principle of money had and received would be
inapplicab le, and the suit for return of money cannot be
sustained on that ground,

(०) “Sales in invitum” do not involye a covenant of title,
(9) The purchaser accepts the property with its risks, and the
rule of “caveat emptor” applies to these cases.

(e) As a necessary corollary, he has no right of recovery of
the price, ext as contemplated by the provi-
sions of Order 21, Rule 91 read with rule 93.

1. Suryaianthamma vy. Dorayye, ALR. 1966 AP. 239 (F.B.).
2, Tu the same effect is Ngrwan Pillai v. Gopukam, ALR. 1987 Ker. 145.
L/B(D)229Mof LI&CA—14(a)


188°

21.484. The Court thought that pcrhaps’ the reason why the
legislature (in enacting the Code of. 190§).thought it fit to take away
the remedy of suit and to limit the scope of the relief envisaged
was that the right of suit involves ‘delay,-uncertainty and often
hardships to execution crepitors, and that the quick and. inexpen-
sive remedy provided by e said rules afford adequate and equi-
table relief to the purchaser, by allowing him to get out of the diffi-
culty before the confirmation pf sale- ना नि

Bei the cight to recover ‘the 'autfion-price increase of  fratid’ am
misrepresentation which had indtced'the purchaser 16 ‘Hay thé. pro-
perty, stands on a different foatirt; eS Suth sales werk शत: fall
outside Order 21, and would be within the provisions of the Indian
Contract Act. ee aa

21.48B. As regards the second shade of view, reference may ‘be

made to a Madras Full Bench case; avtich strikes a divergent agte,

Ramesam J., (who delivered the judgment of: the Full,i.Bench),
observed: : tos : ha : 4 कि

“Taking the first: qué: viz, whether the respondent’: is

entitled to a refund’ toe vent by waly of 4’suit, the ques-

tion depends upon the of the patties as they Vow

out of the circumstances of the case,” and not upon nm

whether a provision for such a guit is, mage in the Civil

Procedure Code. The Civil Procedure’'Code is ‘a ‘Code of

objective law, and cannot oreate rights of aetion--though

it may recognise. tham-or take. them» away, Forgetting

for a moment ai] technicalities. and the Codes of Proce-

dure, one would think tom#hie facts that the auction pur-

chaser should have a right-of! action for money had and

received.” 11 at हि थे

21.480. & Calcutta! case’ contains discussion which represents

both the second and the third! shadee of. view. The Court, while

referring to the situation of the auctiom-purchaser,. and the argu-

ment’ that he should have a right. of suit, observed+-. i

“Tf he did’ not Jes such ‘5 ight. he migty be e posed to
loss resulting rip from. fra: 4a. cofiusion b'sale between
an execution creditor

llnces, th

i ‘the’ judgmeht “debtor, and yet
remain सात, rE ५ गा ‘against ‘‘Jogs' sustained in
such circu ces, Jay him defence-
less, and the auction: +3 RSet 1049 1% ‘the purchase
price which he had paid i ‘edti bring hisigelf within the
equitable principkes whick justify: a suit for money had
and received upon ine £9 und that, it is unconsciousable
that, the gfendan| 3 rétain the motiey ds ageinst the
plaintiff, That, I think, 18 the true position df the auction-
purchaser under ‘the law: tpon principle..and.; apart from
any statutory’ right Which he:may posseas.’.;Fhere is au-
thority ‘nlss' for'the view. that where an auciion-purchaser

. does not १४६

1. Macha Koundan v. Kolara Kundan, ALB. 1936 Mad, 60 (P.B.)

2, Rishee cave, v. Manik Moa, ALR, 1996 Cal 971, O78
3. See Dorub Ally Khan v. Abdool Azecz, (1887) 3 Cal. 306, 5 IA, 16'(7,0.).

eee meee


be

189"

at a Court sale has suffered loss through the fraud of the
execution creditor oy the breach of any duty which the
execution creditor owes to the ‘auction-purchaser, he is en-
titled to receive compensation for the loss which thereby
he has sustained.”"'-’-", .

Recommendation Lo

21.48D. Whatever he the correct view on the existing language,
it appears to us that something shouid be;done to improve the posi-
tion. No doubt, to permit the auction-purchaser. to sue for re: Pind
from the decree-holder, is to add to the troubles of the decree-holder,
and thus to delay execution. But that seems to be the only possible
alternative. As ‘between the decree-holddr and the auction-purchaser,
if sorne one has to suffer, the farmer should suffer.

It may not be feasible for ‘the court to inquire into the title of
the judgment-debtor (at the time of the proclamation), in an elabo-
rate manner; but that does not. anager er, the basic question, namely,
when a sale held’ by a Court and imating in a certificate issued
by the court is held to be a nullity f for, want of title, by reason of a
defect discovered. after expiry of thq.period dor making objections
under rule 91 etc., is it justice to dispose of the purchaser's prievanee
by sayi ing that the puurehaser purchased the property at his peril?
The decree-holdtr should . re-imbyrse him: for the loss suffered by
him, because it is the decree-holder. at whose instance the sale was
held, The abstract principle that there is no warranty at court sales
fails to yield a just result in this case. “

The auction-purchaser should hawe a-right to. sue the decree-
holder, Where a third party: challenges 11९ judgmentdebtor’s title
by filing a suit against the auction —prrchaser the. decree holder and
judgment-debtor should be necessary parties, arfd in: that’ suit the
court, shell direct the decree-holder to refund the money to the
auetion-purchaser: * हा i s

If such a decree is pass ea, the original execution proceedings
shall be revived at the stage wi! the sale was ordered, unless. ६]
court otherwise directs, This provision is necessary to avoid compli-
cations as to limitation, . toy .
Recommendation =‘ hhond “

21.49. We, therefore, recomrhend that the following sub-rules
should be added to Order 21, rufe 92:--' ue

“(5) Where a third party’ challenges the judgment-debtor’s
title by filing a syit inst. th, f. auction-purchaser, the
decree-holder and the, judomentade tor shall be necessary
parties to the suit; हु

(6) If the suit referred to in sub-rule 5 is decreed. the court
shall, direct the decree-holder to refund the money to the
atiction-purchaser, and, where such an order is passed, the
etecution proceedingg in which the sale had beer held
shall, unless the court otherwise directs, be revived at the
stage at which the sale e sale was ordere ordered.” ' .

1. Noo 0040 Krishna Naskav vi Amirveiced Das, (102) LL R..20 Ual. 870.
2. Parvathi Ammut x, Govindasams Pith, (1916).1.L4B. 39 2५१, 202,
3, Balvant Reghunata v. Bala, A.1.R. 1922 Bort. 203.



190

Order 21, Rule 162

21.50. With reference to Order 21, Rule 102, the earlier Report’
discussed one point. Order 21, Rule 102 provides that nothing in rules
99 and 101 shall apply to resistance or obstruction, cic. by a person
to whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the property after
the institution of the suit in which the decree was passed or to the
dispossession of any such person, The earlicr Commission noted that
the words “a person to whom the judgment-debtor has transferred
the property” had created a conffict as to whether an involuntary
sale is caught by these words. One view is that they are caught. ३

Tt has also been held that the proper remedy of such a person is
to raise the matter under section 47, amd that he has no locus standi
to maintain an application under rule 100 or to sue under rule 103.'.t

A contrary view, however, has been taken by the Patna High
Court," on the ground that since old section 333 of the Code of 1882
was adopted at a time when the doctrine of lite pendente had not
been extended to a transfer in execution, rule 102 cannot be given the
extended interpretation which section 52 of the Transfer of perty
Act had received.

21:51. The previous Commission, however, did not suggest a
change, as it was of the opinion that the former view could prevail.

Recommendation

21.51A. We agree with the previous Commission thet the wider
view will prevail, but we would like to codify the view. Accordingly,
we recommend that the following expianation shouid be inserted be-
lew Order 21, Rule 102—

“Explanation—In this rule, ‘transfer’ includes a transfer by
operation of law”.

Order 21, Rule 163

21.52. Under Order 21, rule 103, a party (not being a judgment-
debtor) against whom an order is made under rule 98, rule 99, or rule
101, may institute a suit to establish the right which he claims to
the possession of the property; but, subject to the result of such suit,
if any, the order shall be conclusive. The period of limitation for such
suit is one year’. Now, the question to be considered is. whether it
is necessary to institute a suit within one year, or whether a decision
in a pending suit can be availed of, if it involves the same question.

1, 2th Leport, page 20. note on Order 37, Rule 102,
2, Nageidra Noth v. Ram Kriehana, ATR, 1980 Cal. 209,
3. Bepin Chandra ५, Ham Chantre, A.LR. 1989, Cal. 70th.
के. Khem Chand v, Mooi Chand, A.LR. 1934 Lah. 457.
6. Rajarainanm v. Sheikh Hasan Bi, ALR. 1026 Mad. 968.
8, (a) Hariher Prasad v. Lakthantai, 3.1, 8, 1935 Pat. 230.
(5) Guna Darga Prasad Hao v, Krishaa Rao, LL.B. 24 Pet. 698: ALB. 1946 Pat. 184.
7 Artiole U1, Limitation Act, 1908 and corresponding article in the 1068 Act.

a


191

According to one view, the policy underlying Order 21, rule 103, Civil
Procedure Code is to have speedy settlement of the question of title
raised in execution—sales, and what makes the order conclusive
under Order 21, rule 103, is not the failure to institute a suit, but the
failure to have the right established. Where a suit or an appeal al-
ready filed by the claimant is pending at the time when an order
ander Order 21, rule 98, C.P.C. dismissing his claim is made, it is
not, according to this view, obligatory to file a suit under Order 21,
rule 103.

Two single Judges’ decisions of the Madras High Court'-’ took
this view, hoiding that the institution of a suit under Order 21, rule
103, is not the only remedy against the Order under Order 21, rule
98, and that the rule only contemplates the establishment of a right
to the property to supersede the order. But these decisions, it has
been stated’ should be deemed to have been over-ruled by the Full
Bench decision of the Madras High Court,’ which has held that the
provisions of Order 21, rule 103, are mandatory, and the decision in a
claim petition is final unless the party aggrieved takes the course
indicated in the rule by instituting a suit,

21.53. In a Calcutta case* the Court stated that Order 21, rule
103, does not at all refer to the necessity of obtaining a decree of a
court within one year, and all it requires is the filing of a suit within
one year. [t was held in the Calcutta decision that the summary
order was superseded by the decree passed by the trial court in a
pending suit within a year.

In the Madras case of 1969°, it has been ubserved that the Cal-
cutta decision would lead to an anomalous result. If the passing
of the decree is delayed beyond one year by ome day, the party
would suffer through no fault of his own,

21.54. In this state of the case-law, it is necessary to make a
clarification, The Madras view and the Calcutta view represent
partial truths. On the one hand. the Calcutta view may, it is true,
1९३४० to.difficulties where the judgment of the court of first instance
is given within a year, but the proceedings are prolonged by reason
of appeal and the appellate judgment is pronounced beyond the
period of one year. But, on the other hand. the Calcutta view has
the merit of avoiding duplication of proceedings, because it is ilo-
gical to expect a person to file another suit when he has already
led a suit for the very relief contemplated by the rules, The whole
difficulty is caused by the rigidity of the present provisions, whose
langvage leaves out of consideration a situation where a suit is
already instituted and pending. That lacuna should be remedied’
by providing that where the person affected has already instituted
a suit to establish his right, the order shall be subject to the result
of any such suit.

1, Paianippa v. Remaswomy, A.L.R. 1957 Mad. 382.

2. Umnanath v. Pedr Souza, ALR. 1950 Mad. 10 (1949) M.L.J. 286,

2. Sivaraman y, PALS, Mudatiar, ALR. 1960 Mud. 160:

4. Secthamma v. Kotareddi, ALR. 1969 Mad. 586 (F.B.)

5. Gapiram v. Sewantitat, A.LR. 1980 Cal. 580.

6. Supra n, 4

7. Similar arpendment may be desirable in Ordgr 31 , 2019 68, which contains sn suslogeanns
provision.



102

.
Recommendation

21.55. We recommend that Order 21; rule 103. should be revised
so as to read as follows: — . .

“lus. Any party not being a judgmentdebtor against whom

an order is made under tle Je 98, 2016 99 or rule 101 may

institute a suit to establish the right which he claims'.to

the present possession aof:-praperty; but, subject to such

suit Gf any), and subject to the result of any suit which

may be. pending on the daie.on which the order is made

and in which such right :is in issue, the order shall be

on

conclusive”.

0.21, Rules 104.105 (New)—Hearing jf gxecution Proceedings

21.56. It is now well settled thaj owing to the ndn-applicability
of the provisions of section 141 to son mn proceedings, Order 9,
also does not apply to execution procéedings. The résult has’ been
that the courts have found it difficult to‘décide the circumstdncds' in
which an application for exeeutidn’ can ‘be dismissed for non-ap-
pearance, or. jf a court has dismissed-an. application for non-appear-
ance whether the court, in the. absence of any specific provision te-
garding the restoration in the C.P-C., rettore such application. They
cannpt be restored under .O..R. 8, as that:rale does not apply 40
execution proceedings, boon .

The situation has been proposed to be dealt with by the earlier
Report* where two new rvles were inserted to deal with the bear-
ing of applications for execution. We agree with this recommenda-
tion. No other amendments are: necessary in this regard: -

1. Sinitar amendment be made in Order 21, Bule 83,
2, 27th Report, page 72, deast 0-24, R. 103-105 (New), and discussion at page 210.



“

ty

Cuapter 22
DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY OF PARTIES

Introductory oe

22.1 Various “incidental proceedings” are dealt with in Orders
22 -to 26. The ‘first is dealt with in Order 22, relating to procedure
in Suits ‘when a party dies, marries ot! becomes insolvent, or where
otherwise there is an assignmhent df the interest of a party in the
subject-matter of the suit. These rules: were originally ‘taken from
the Common Law Procedure'-Act' iand from the relevant Rules of
Courts in England ni i

Scheme of Order 22 1 i

22.13, Very briefly stated, the scheme of Order 22 is as follows
so far as the effect of death is conedrned: The rere death of a party
does not cause the suit to abate. if the right to sue survives. But.
if the right to sue, survives tty dies during the Oy.
the suit, an application must be ide within, the prescriked period?
to the court. to make the legal eT sentative of the deceased person
a party to the suit. If this is notdebe;: the suit abe tes,—hotivby feaben'*
of death only, but by reason gt death of the party followed by non-
substitutjori of his legal representative: Primarily, the suit abates
‘so far as the deceased plaintiff is coreerped’ pr “as against the de.
ceased defendant, as the case may’ be"”—Order, 22, rule 3(2) and rule
4(2), But, if the nature of the cai hee is such that suit ;,
cannot proceed by or against the hg plaintiffs or de! ॥ 1,22६ i
the whole suit may abate. ‘4 tement, the sult can be

revived by making an 070३ 0 ४ to set aside the abate-
fe) Beal 01 r the purpése myst. be

ment for suffcient cause.
made’ within the prescribed’ period; court has, however. power
edndore delay in making fhe application. taf

This Order also deals with the pifect of marriage and ingol-
vehcy on pending suits, Bit hed ions do not cause ,much
difficulty in ptactice. It is (] flake as to the effect of death
which are.-important,.and we-shall deel-with «few of thei which
have ¢aused difftculty, - 1: s9the, 3:४० क ot

Ortler 22, rule 4—power to redline Whether ‘should be'given
22.2. The first point conceins Order 22; rule 4, under whieh non
substitution.of a legal.represeptative:ieeds to zbatement ‘of the sult.
The question whether the Court shpuk/ ina proper case, -have
power to grant jexemption: ‘in .respett.of the: requiremrerit of: substi- «
tution of the legal representative: was. considered: in the earlier »
Report”. The Commission noted that local amendments giving «
such power had been made by the High Courts of Calcutta, Madras,

1, Common Law Procedure Act, 1854 (15 #16 ए101%. 6).
2, Queations ae to limitation are governed by thie Limitation Act, 1963, Sec paragraph
2d fi, info
3. 27th Report, pages 210-211, Note on Order.22, rule-4- Relaxation of.
1 WO ck:



194

Orissa, etc. in respect of a defendant who has failed to appear and
contest the suit. It however, felt that such a change should not be
made, as it would impinge upon the rule that litigation should not
proceed in the absence of the heirs of a person who is dead. These
local Amendments were not therefore, adopted,

22.3. We considered the matter further. At one stage we were.
inclined to add sub-rule (4) in Order 22, rule 4 as follows: —

“(4) The Court, whenever it seems fit, may exempt the plain-

tiff from the necessity to substitute the legal representa-

live of any defendant against whom the case has been

allowed to proceed ex parte or who has failed tc file his

written statement or who, having filed it, has failed to

appear and contest at the hearing, and the judgment in

such a case may be pronounced against such defendant

notwithstanding the death of such defendant, and shall have

the same force and effect as if it had been pronounced
before the death took place.”

22.4. We have however, come to the conclusion that any such
amendment would amount to passing a decree against a dead man
and would be wrong in principle. Hence no change is recommended.

Order 22, rule 4 and ignoranee of death

22.5. On the death of a party, the plaintiff is, under the rules,
required to move for the substitution. of his legal representatives,
The application for substitution has to be made within the time
prescribed by the Limitation Act'. On failure to do so, the suit
abates. Now, when the plaintiff is ignorant of the defendant’s
death, there may be delay in malsing the application for substitu-
tion of his legal representative. and question whether the delay
due to such ignorance should be ex d for the purpose of limi-
tation has arisen in several cases, it being competent to the court
to excuse delay under section 5, Limitation Act, 1963, provided
there is sufficient reason.

How far ignorance of the death of the party concerned is a
sufficient ground, would depend on the facts of each case*’.

22.6. It was for the last-mentioned reason that the earlier Com-
mission, in its Report on the Code,’ after discussing the position as
above, considered it unnecessary to make an express provision as io .
ignorance of death as a sufficient ground. At one stage we were
inclined to think of a solution wheneunder due regard could be had
to the fact of ignorance of death, while considering an application
under section 5, Limitation Act, for condonation of delay in respect
of an application for setting aside the abatement. This could be
achieved by the insertion of the following sub-rule in Order 22, rule

1. The period for substitution is 99 days (article 120, Limitation Act, 1963), and the period
for application for notting aside the abatement Is 60 dag (article 121) Limitation Act, 1963,
2. (a) Unionof India v, Ram Charen A.LB, W648.C. 215,220;
(b) ALR. 1051 Sin
3, Also (1969) 69 Punj.
4. 27th Report, page 218, Noto on Order 93, eule 4, and ignorance of death.



“

195

“Where—

{a) the plaintiff was wnorant of the death of a defendant, and,
could not, for thet reason, make en application for gubs-
titution of the legal representative under this rule within
the prescribed period as provided in the Limitation Act,
1963;

(9) the suit has, in consequences, abated; and

(c) the plaintiff applies for setting aside the abatement and
aiso for admission of that epplication after the prescribed
period under section 5 of that Act on the ground that he
had, by reason of such ignorance, sufficient cause for not
making the application within such period;

the Court shall, in considering the application under the said
section, have due regard to the fact of such ignorance, १1
proved”.

Recommendation

22.7. But we are separately recommending a new rule’ which
imposes a duty on the pleader to inform the court about the death
of a party, Hence a provision as to the effect of ignorance is needed.

Onder 32, role 4-A (New) (Appointment of person to represent the
a

22.8. In the earlier Repdrt*, a suggestion received from the
Calcutta High Court for the insertion of a provision ta deal with
cases where the legal representative of a deceased party was not
traceable, wes algo considered. Reference was, in this connection,
made to Order 16, rule 46 of the Rules of the Supreme Court,—
now Order 15, rule 15 of the R-S.C, Revision (1962). The adoption
of a somewhat similar provision was suggested in a judgment of
the {faleutte High Court’ also, and the suggestion was repeated in
another case’.

22.9. The English rule on the subject is intended to cover two
cases; first, where litigation is intended to be started but there is
no “personal representative”, and secondly, where litigation has
already started, and then a party dies and there is no personal re-
presentative. History of the English rule is discussed in a judgment
of the Court of Appeal’, and the undermentioned authorities’
discuss the practice under the English rule.

22.10. The earlier Commission, after considering the above mate-
rial, came to the conclusion thst. such cases would not be many, and,
therefore, the provision suggested by the Calcutta High Court need «
not be inserted.

Tr See Onder 22, 7०० 10-4 (New) (proposed); pare 22° 22, infra.
2. 27th Report, page 211, Note on Onder 22, rule 4 and legal reprosentutive not traceable.

2% Wikiam Harold Gibds र. Deba Prasad Roy, (decided on (7-1-1950), 85 Caloutta Law
Journal 230.

4. In the Goods of Golam Nabi Maggo dated 15-5-196t.

3. Puralt v. Lowion Passenger Transport Board (1937) 1 Alt ए. 8. 473, 478 (Court of Appeal)
6, Avan पर. Aistme (1947) 1 AL ELR. 261.

7, Halabary, Sed Edn. , Vol. 16, pp. 121, 184, 398, (and १०१, 9, pags 176 for Cumty Costa),



196

22.11, But it apears to us that such a provision would be useful.
With increasing urbanisation and growing complexity of society,
cases where the legal representative cannot. he ascertained, are likely
to increase; and a specific provision ie,meet.:such situation would be
desirable. 1

22.12. The English provision is wide enough te cover death
before the litigation; but we are conterned only with death ‘during
the pendency of the litigation: We alse consider. it: useful ta: give
some indication of the persons ,who.eould: be appointed.

¢ Loe

Recommendation +

22.13. We, therefore, recomihend thai ‘the following ‘rule should
be inserted ag Order 22, rule WA: cts . हु
“4A. (1) If, in any suit, it shall appear to the court that any
pariy who has died during the pendency of the suit has
no legal representative, the court may, on wre! abpiteseton 4
of any party to the suit, procee inthe absence of-a perenne
representing the estgte,of t relate 78010, or may ees
order appoint the “Ai / न //ह =f eet an officer of the
court or some other person to represent his estate for the
© purpose: af the, swit;y emdnione Radgrast 671 otter *subwest!
quently given or made in the suit shall, bind the: estate
of the deceased person to the sqme erte mt as it would
have beén bound if ap song) representative of the person
had been 6 party to ‘the saat , mo
» (2) Before making an order uhdar: this rule, the Court—

‘ (a), ma: require nbti ० ithe application jor the :
to be given 407 22620 oi fg persons,
he estate a3 it jrks: fits,

having an ‘interest;
and हु
(b) shail ascert t # पाक person pyovosed to.be
_ appointed rot रियल Sg estdie ie wwitting to be
6 चल

"so appointed™ | हे
Order 22, Rule (1) : po ees
8814. Order 22, rule 9(1) is‘as follows: —, —
“9.(1) Where a suit abates or. is disrhissed under this order,
५५ NO fresh suit shall be apaughs onthe seme. cause,of action”
22.15: The rue ‘18 ‘silent 0श the aibedtion whether’ the cate’ of!
action: invokéd in the abated ‘suit cou Wettaiked as ‘a! defence’ in’ a’'
later suit, ही "
22.16. The Madras view: is, that the ‘paintiff whose suit has
abated, is not only barred froma fredW suit 6n'the same cause of
action. but he cannot get rid of the effect of the eatlier decision by

pleading the same matter as a defence in the subsequent suit. The
contrary view taken in a Bombay case” was dissented from.

1, Kamatchi Ainmal v. Athigarjudays, A. 1989 Mad. 426.
2. Fayasing vy. Gopal,(1904), 6 Bom, L.R.698(D.B.fsifed 6°

. tyne
poten. . oo



197

22.17, The Lehore High Court ! has taken the same view as the
Madras High Court. QO है

2218, In the Madras case, it was observed that the decision of
the Lahore High Court is more in accordance with the principle
embodied in Order 22,.Rule 9. The earlier determinatjon should be
deemed to be, a decision agaist him, and he. cannot get rid of the
effect of the earlier datermination just because he happens to be a
defendant in a subsequent suit. । ,: .

22.19: On the other ‘hhnd,- the” Bombay High Court has held’
that where the legal répresentatives of the plaintiff, on whose death
the suit abated, get into possession of the property, they are entitled
to resist the suit brought to oust them from possession, and that the
previous order of ebatement did not preclude them from setting up
their title by way of defence. This is also the Allahabad view.’

Recommendation

22.20. Logically, it would appear that the Bombay view is pre-
ferable. After all, the law should not multiply impediments to just
pleas or defences. Order 22, rule 9, prohibits a fresh suit in order
to avoid undue harassment to the opposite party. But, where the
opposite party himself takes the initiative, and files a suit, there is
no reason why the person whose suit has abated (or his represen-
tative} should be debarred from asserting his rights as a shield.
Procedure should not stand in the way of assertion of lawful claims
or defences, except where such a bar is absolutely necessary. No
gveat consideration of public interest appears to justify the exclu-
sion of such defence. The rule is a disabling rule’, end should be
strictly construed. It does not create ves judicata’. It should not,
therefore, be given a wider effect than is absolutely necessary.

Recommendation

22.91. We, therefore. recommend that a suitable Explanation
should be inserted in Order 22, rule 9(1), to give effect to the Bom:
bay view. The Explanation could be on the following lines: —-

“Explanation—Nothing in this rule shall be construed as
barring, in any later suit, a defence based on the facts
which constituted the eause of action in the suit which
had abated or had been dismissed under this Order.”

Order 22, Rule 10 (New)

22.22. A new rule is proposed to be inserted to the effect that
where a pleader comes to know of the death of a party ta the suit,
he shall inform the court, and the Court, in its turn, shall give

1. Raju र. Ram Chand, ALR. 1933 Lah. 752, 758 (DB).

2, Jayasing ¥. 0०7०७, (1904) 6 Bom. L,R. 628 (D.B.).

8, Bojni Raghi-v. Tef Narain ALR, 194% 87. 99 (Mather J.)

4. Lachhman 7, Bansi Lal, ATR. 1981 Lah, 79, 30.

है, Sheikh Hebiln-Uer v. Faprnvne Singh, A.LR. 1958 Pat. 95, 96, para 7.



रे
KR

198

notice io the plaintiff of the death. Such a provision will, to some
extent, reduce the complications that arise by reason of the plain-
ti@’s ignorance of the death of a defendant. The new rule will be
as follows: —

. 104.01) Wher a pleader appearing for a patty to the suit

_ comes to know of the death of that party he shall inform

jthe court about it: and the Court shall thereupon give
notice to the pluintiff of the death.

2) Where the pleader of a party, on coming to know of his
death, does not, within a reasonable time, communicate
the fact of such death to the opposite party, the court
may order him to pay the costs occasioned by his failure

4- {0 communicate fact.
fi

",


1 का समता PS ee

tome nen mn

%

है

Cuarrer 23
WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS

Introductory

23.1. Rules as to withdrawal aug compromise of. suits are con-
tained in Order 23. These rules roughly correspond with the Rules
of Court in England as to the discontinuance of suits,

23.2. Slade J. has dealt with the mode of dealing with compro-
mises in England‘, According to bim there are various ways in which
an action can be disposed of when terms of settlement are arrived
at when the action comes on for trial or in the course of the hearing.

(1) The first one is very useful where the terms of compromise
consist of an agreement by the defendant to pay a specified sum of
money by specified instalments on specified dates. Here the court
gives judgment for the total amount agreed to be paid, "coupled
with a stay of execution so long as the instalments are paid in ac-
cordance with the terms agreed.

(2) The second way, which is no doubt, more appropriate when the
terms of settlement are not so straightforward as the mere payment
of an agree@ sum of money by specified instalments, is to secure an
Order of the Court, made by censent, that the defendant, and; it may
be, also the laintift shall do the things which they have respectively
engaged themvelves.to do by the terms of settlement, In such a case
the order would take this form, There would be the title and the pre-
amble and then the order would zecite, the terms having been agreed
between the parties: It is ordered that “(a) the defendant do”, etc.,
wtb) the plaintiff do”, etc, making each of the agreed terms an order
of the court thet it should be carried out.

(3) The third method is what has’become known as “the TOMLIN
form of order”. दि

Dashwood v. Dashwood’ is cited asthe as authority for that state-
ment of practice. The ANNUAL 1955, 9. 2007, goes on to
say:

“After this decision TOMLIN, J., stated that in duture when én
action was proposed to be stayed o age reed terms to be
ind the plaintiff and defendant having agreed ie the tera
an @ plaintiff a Ving है to the terms
set forth in the schedule hereto, it is ordered that all fur-
ther proceeding in this action be stayed | ‘ed except for the pur-
pose of carrying such terms into . Liberty to apply
as to carrying such terms into effect,”

3. Green v. Rozen, (1955) 2 4॥ 18.10, 797.
8. Dashwood v. Duskwood (1927) W.N. 8, 27H,



b

Cuapren 23
WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS

Introductory

23,1, Rules as to withdrawal and compromise of suits are con-
tained in Order 23. These rules roughly correspond with the Rules
of Court in England as 10 the discontinuance of suits.

23.2. Slade J. has dealt with the mode of dealing with compro-
mises in England'. According to him there are various ways in which
an action can be disposed of when terms of settlement are arrived
at when the action comes on for trial or in the course of the hearing.

(1) The first one is yery useful where the terms of compromise
consist of an agreement by the defendant to pay a specified sum of
money by specified instalments on specified dates, Here the court
gives judgment for the total amount agreed to be paid, coupled
with a stay of execution so long es the instalments are paid in ac-
cordance with the terms agreed,

{2) The second way, which is no doubt, more appropriate when the
terms of settlement are not so straightforward as the mere payment
of an agreed sum of money by specified instalments, is to secure an
Order of the Court, made by consent, that the defendant, and, it may
be, also the piaintiff,—shall do the things which they have respectively
engaged themselves to do by the terms of settlement, In such a case
the order would take this form. There would be the title and the pre-
amble and then the order would recite, the terms having been agreed
between the parties: It is ordered that “(a) the defend ant do”, ete.,
“(b} the plaintiff do”, ete. making each of the agreed terms an order
of the court that it should be carried out.

(3) The third method is what has become known as “the TOMLIN
form of order”.

Dashwood vy. Dashwood’ is cited es the authority for that state
ment of practice. The ANNUAL PRACTICE, 1956, P. 2007, goes on to
say:

“After this SE OPN, J, ४7% हु that in future when an
action was proj e si on agreed terms to be
scheduled to the order, the order should be as follows:
and the plaintiff and defendant having agreed to the terms
set forth in the schedule hereto, it is ordered that all fur-
ther proceeding in this action be stays ed except for the pur-
pose of carrying such terms into effect, Liberty to apply
as to carrying such terms into effect.”

1, Green y, Rozen, (1965) 2 All E.R. 797,
2. Dashaooud v. Duthsenad (1927) W.N. 8, 276,

im


200

(4) The fourth method is an order of the court made by consent
staying all further proceedings in the action on the terms agreed
on, है

(5) The fifth me; Bish. 33 ६ glow i i nt case, is
where these’ is nef 14]: पा at are ah rely being
told by ccunsel that the case has been settled on the terms Raye asad
on counsels’ briefs, ‘

23.3. Such‘ a variety of methods of recording or actitg on com-
promises is not met with in Indian practice. But there 0068 éxist a
variety of methods of consensual dedfings in connection with’ litiga-
tion—e.g. by making the Judge an arbitrator, by a; greeing net to
appeal. by stating a special ‘dase ugder Order 36, and 1 ike, Some,
but not all of these, fit in with fhe’ procedure given in Order 23,
rule 3, under which the court is empowered [0 record ‘a settlement
or compromise. The most important rules in Order 23, are rule 1
(withdrawal), and rule 3 (recording of compromise), and most. of the
problems that arise revolves|around these rules.

Order 23, rule 1 '

23.4, Order 23, rule 1, speaks of two kinds of “withdrawals” of
suits, namely :—

(1) Withdrawal without permission of the Court to. file a fresh
‘suit, and va

(2) Withdrawal with such permission.

The first is governed by sub-rule'(1), The second is governed, by
sub-rules..{2) and (3), For convenience, the first kirid of withdrawal
may be described. as “absolute”. withdrawal t » while the second may
be described as “qualified” withdrawal, The differences in the leg
incidents of the two types of withdraival are well-known. The Foint
which is proposed to be raised: here: is one of terminology,—and the
Point is, that the use of the same expression. to denote both the.types
<of action is confusing. An ordinary: litigant ‘would certainly get con-
fused, and, sometimes even lawyers do not fully realise the difference
between the two, The position would be improved b using the ex-
pression “abandonment” {of sui है), where absolute withdrawal is in-

mi .

Hecommendation

23.5. Accordingly, We recommend a. amendment of Order 23,
rule 1. so 3s (0 substitute the'e: repretsiog! “al joni “abandonnient”. .
ing re-drafts are suggested for Bujose; Snment’, The follow
Re-draft of Order 23. rule 1(1}—

“(1) At any time after the institution of a suit the Plaintiff

may. 88 against all or any of the defendants, abando i
suit or abandon part of his alain andon his

1. Of, Awalgomated Electricals Co, v. Kuulreddy, ALB. 1970 Mya, 165, 187, pare 12,

OT


“DOL

Order 28, rule 1(2}—
Re-drajt of Order 23, rule 1(2), 1(3) and 1(4)—

Substitute the word ‘withdraw’ for the word ‘abandon’.
Re-draft of Order 23, rule 1(3;—

(3) “Where the plaintiff atendors a suit, or abandons part of a
claim, ynder sub-rule (1), he shall be liable for such costs as the court
may award, and shall be precluded from instituting any fresh suit
in Tespect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of the
elaim.”

Re-draft of Order 23, rule 1(4)

(4) “Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the court
to permit one of several plaintiffs to abandon a suit or part of a
claim under sub-rule (1), or to withdraw under sub-rule (2) without
the consent of the others.”

Order 23, rule 1 and execution proceedings

28.58. The question how far Order 23. rule 1 applies to execu-
tion proeeedings has sometimes arisen. For example, in an Allahabad
ease’, the decree-holder filled an application on August 29. 1885 be
fore the Subordinate Judge requesting that his case may be struck
off for a short tigne. The Court grented the application, end recorded
an order striking off the case “for the present”. On August 28, 1888,
the decree-holder filed another application for execution, to which
the judgment debtors cbiested. The Subordinate J udge disallowed the
objections, The judgment-debtors filed an appeal before the Allaha-
bad High Court. The High Court allowed the appeal, and-set aside
the Order of the Subordinate Judge. Hence, aggrieved from this
decision of the High Court, the decree-holder file aan appeal before
their Lordships of the Privy Council which held that Order 23, rule
1 did not apply. The Privy Council observed?—

“After hearing the appellant ex-parte the Court came to the
conclusion that “It is not supgested that section 373 (now
order 23, Rule 1) of the Civil edure Code would of its
own force apply to execution proceedings.

The suggestion is that it is applied by force of section 647
(mow section 141). But the whole of Chapter XIX of the
Code. consisting of 121 sections. is devoted to the proce-
dure in executions, and it would be surprising if the fra-
mers of the Code had intended to apply another procedure
mostly unsuitable by saying in general terms that the
procedure for suits sholild be followed as far as appli-
eable ......”.

Having taken all aspects into consideration. we are of the view
that it would not be convenient to extend order 23, rule 1 to execu-
tion proceedings.

1, Thakur Prasad ५. Pakir Tak (1894), LR. 17 All. 601 (P.0.) followed in Row Prowl fees
vy, Mahesh Kaur. AR, 1922 Pat. 526,
2. Thakur Prasad x, Patty ak, LR. 17 AIL 601 (B.C),

L/BiD)229M of LI&CA.-15


Ree 2a

,

202

की 20, rule 14 (New)

4 230 We now proceed to deal with a situation not expressly pro-

;

vided for in Order 23. Where a suit is withdrawn by a plaintiff under
Order 23, rule 1, one of the opposite parties sometimes finds it ne-
cessary to be transposed as a pieintiff, so that he can pursue what-
ever claims he may have made a against 8 co-defendant, The Court
has, under Order 1, rule 10, already a power to order transposition
of parties’, But it appears to be desirable 10 provide that where
there is a request by the defendant for transposition {as plaintiffy
in view of withdrawal or abandonment of the suit by the plaintiff,
the court should have due regard to this consideration. .

Recommendation

23.7, The insertion of the following rule in Order 23, is, there-
fore, recommended :—

“1A, Where 2 suit is withdrawn or abandoned by a plaintiff
‘under rule 1 of this Order, and a defendant applies to be
transposed as a plaintiff under Order 1, rule 10, the Court
shall, in considering such application, have due regard
to the question whether the applicant has a sudstantial
question to be decided as against any of the other defen-

37, .

Order 28, Rule 3—Lawful

23.8. Order 23, rule 3 deals with compromises. One of the impor-
tant conditions precedent to the applicability of this rule is that the
compromise must be ‘lawful’. Now, where a decree is passed on
compromise and it is alleged that it embodies terms which are not
lawful, can the validity of the decree be challenged? On this question,
there seems to be a conflict of decisions. We proceed to examine the
case-law on the subject.

23.9, In a Bombay case’, it was held that a consent decree passed
by a Court of competent jurisdiction cannot be treated on the same
footing es a contract between the parties. It is true that before a
Court passes a consent decree. it can, and should, examine the lawful-
ness and validity of the terms of the proposed compromise. But once
that stage is passed and a decree follows, different considerations
arise,

23.10. Thus, as were the facts in that case, where the compromise
decree contained 9 term against alienating certain property, and gave
the other party a right to its possession on such alienation, the decree
was held not to be a nullity, in spite of the fact that the term was
opposed to section 10, Transfer of Property Act. The decree was
merely contrary to law, and bound the parties thereto, unless it was
set aside by taking proper proceedings.

J, [को Edudjee v. Vulebaoy. 1.15 8. 7 Bom, 167:
(bi Bhiamader v, Radhakishon, ALR, 1968 Orissa 230 (reviews canes}.

ए a Gonna roman y, Murtidher Skeletons, ALR, 1988 Bom. 412 (Gajendraggdkar and
ge. EE).


283

23.11. Same is the Andhra view".

23.12. In a recent Mysore case’, it was held that where a com-
promise decree passed by a court of competent jurisdiction contains
a term which is opposed to law or public policy and the decree has
not been set aside in proper proceedings, it is res judicata. The Mysore
High Court, following the Bombay case, said that though the court
should examine the lawfulness and validity of the terms of the pro-
posed compromise, once that stage is passed and the court has put
its seal uf approval to a comsromise and made it a decree of the court,
then that decree is binding between the parties and must be enforced,
unless it is set aside in a proper proceeding. It was also held that
“fmality of decision is an important principle of law based on public
policy, If a compromise decree of competent Court. which has not been
set aside, can be ignored on the ground of it embodying an illegal
term. there wil] be confusion and uncertainty.”

23.13. The Madras High Court’ and the Patna High Court’ have
teken a different view. In the Patna ease. 2 compromise decree provid-
ing for recovery of pension contrary ‘to section 12. Pensions Act, 1871,
was held to be void, (The Bombay case is not referred to in the
Patna judgment).

23.14. In the Patna case’, it was observed—

“ft is a settled princ’ple of law that a contract is not less a
contract and subject to the incident of a contract because
there is superadded the command of the judge. If any
authority is indeed in support of this proposition, reference
may be made ta Wentioorth v. Builenr*. The compromise
ig received under the provisions of Order 23, rule 3 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, which states that where it is
proved to the satisfaction of the court that 8 suit has been
adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or
compromise, or where the defendant satisfies the plaintiff
in respect of the whole or any part of the subject-matter
of the suit, the court shall-order such agreement compro-
mise or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree
in accordance therewith so far as it relates to the suit.”

23.15. The House of Lords’ has decided thet a consent decree
beyond the contractual powers of the corporation is void— हे

“Tt is quite clear that a company cannot do what is beyond its
legal powers by simply going into court and consenting to
a decree which orders that the thing shall be done.”

1. Vontateshivryya v. Firayys, ALR. 1958 47.1 (7.8.)

. Bhima Rana v, Abdal Ravhid, ATR. 1968 Mya. 184 (D-B.).

3. (a) Lakskmanasimamy Naidu ¥. Rangamma, (1939) LR. 26 Mad. 31:

(b) Runachanien 9, Penkelaksiminarayanna, AIR, 1919 Mad. 420.

३. Batieo Jha ४. Ganga Prasad, ALR, 1959 Pat, 17 (Ramaswomi, OF and R.K. Chowdhri
J).

8. Bulleo Tha wv. Oange Prasad, ALR, 1959 Pat. 17, 20. para. 9.

6. Featworth +. Bullen, 109 E.R. 313. 816 (This care, however, does not relate to an iHegak
contract}.

हू, Great North-West Central Ruiloay v. Charbaote, (1898) A.C, 114, 124.
L/BUD)2203fof LT &CA --16(«)



204.

That case however, is distinguishable ircm a case of having an
illegal object.
16. In the above state of the case-law, it is desirable to make a
clarification. In the interests of finality of litigation, it may be better
to provide that a decree shall not be set aside on the ground of ile
gality' of the compromise on which it is based.

Recommendation to insert Order 23, Rule 35
23.16A. Accordingly, we reco:nmend the insertion of the foliow-
ing rule as Order 23, Rule 3A-—~
“3A. No suit shall lie to set aside a decree on the ground thet
the compromise on which tite decree is based was not
lawful.” .

Order 23, rule 3—the words “so far as relates to”

23.17, Order 23, rule 3, authorises the court to pass a decree on
a compromise in so far as the compromise relates to the subject
matter of the suit. The controversy on one point under this rule was
noted in the earlier Report*. That controversy" related to the inter-
pretation of the words “so far as relates to the suit’ used in Order
23, rule 3.

The question that arose in practice was, whether a decree which
records the terms of a compromise in respect of matters beyond the
scope of the suit is evecutable, or whether the terms of the decree
relating to matters outside the suit can be enforced {as a contract)
only by a separate suit. It was not. however, (in the Commission’g
view) possible to resolve the conflict of decisions by verbal changes,
since the application of the rule may vary according to the facts of
each case, ae a general amendment was not thus possible. no change
was considered necessary.

23.18. We have given some thought to the matter and come t¢
the conclusion that—

(i) the controversy should be put an end to, and

{ii} the only way to put an end to it is to widen the provision,

by requiring the court to pass a decree cavering the whole

compromise. so far as it relates to the parties to the suit,

whether or not the subject matter of the compromise is

confined to the subject of the suit. This will avoid the un-

necessary controversy that arises under the oresent word-

ing, namely, how much of the compromise hes attained the

force of 2 decree, and how much is to be ‘eft to be en-

forced by separate agreements, and so on. No doubt, such

a widening can, theoretically. raise questions of jurdis-

diction and court fees. In most cases, however. the wide

power will not affect jurisdiction and court fee. In any

case. the proposed simplification jx need:d, and should

override any such objections.

Actual umendment.not drahed.
ta Rovort, page 213, Noto wn Onder 8. rule? aud thy words “so far as relates to".

© camel disenaeed in Raa Fame ¥, Daviedea Nata, 3.LR. 1960 MP. 280, 282
and 18,

है. कु


205

Recommendation
23,19. Accordingly, we recommend that in Order 23. ruje 3, for
the words “so far as Yeiates to the suit”. the words “so fer as relates
* to the parties to the suit, whether or not the subject-matter of the
agreemznt compromise or ‘satisfaction is the same as the subject-
matier of the suit”, should be substituted.

~  Ontler 23, rule 3-4 (New)
25,20. In a representative suit, leave of the court should be re-
. quired before a compremise s reecrded. Before such leave is given,
notice to interested persons could Le provided for. We have in mind
those suits where a decree passed in the suit can bind persons not
formally on the record, Such a provision is, in our view, required in
order to safeguard the interests of 2ersons so bound.

» Recommendation
23.21, A new rule is proposed accordingly, as follows: —

Of, Order 33, Rule 7 (1).

“3-4. (1) No agreement or compromise in a tepresentative suit
shall be entered into without the leave of the court e2-
pressly recorded in the proceedings; and any such agree-
ment or cOmpromise enzered into without the leave of the
court so reccrded shall be void.

Conraat Order $2; Role 7{2).
(2) Before granting such leave, the court shall give notice to
such persons as may appeal to be interested in the suit,
} im such manner as it thirks fit.

Explanation—In this rule, the expression “representative suit”

means— .

{a) a suit under section 91 or section 92:

(b) a suit under Order 1, rule 8;

(c) 6 suit in whicr the manager of an undivided Hindu
family sues or is sued as representing the other mem-

ers of the family;

(9) any other suit in which the decree passed, may by
virtue of the provisioms of this Code or of any other
law for the time beixg in force, bind any person who
is not named as party to the suit.”

Order 23, rale 3, and the word “proved”

23.22. There is another point corcerning rule 3. According to this
rule, if it is “proved” to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has
been lawfully comproniised or settled. it is bound to pass a decree
accordingly. Now. the «xpression “sroved” has raised an interesting
question as to how far is the cour: bound to hold an inquiry as to
the factum of the compcomise. The matter was discussed at length in
a recent Mysore case, The facts were as follows: —

The respondent filed a suit for cancellation of a registered deed
of sale against the petitioner. The petitioner, during the



206

course of the suit, filed an application under Order 23, rule

3 (read with section 151) saying that a decree be drawn
up in the terms of the compromise. The respondent con-
tended that there was no agreement, and that he had not x
received any money 2s mentioned in the endorsement, and ™
that the document had been brought absut freudulently.
The Munsiff came to the conclusion on the evidence that
the suit had been settled out of court. An appeal to the,
Civil Judge by the respondent was allowed, and the decree
of the Munsiff set aside, On revision before the High Court,
it was contended that the Civil Judge hed exceeded his
jurisdiction in examining the allegations of fraud and mis- *
representation’.

23,23. The High Court held that Order 23, rule 3, requires that
there should be proof to the satisfaction of the Court that the suit has
been adjusted wholly or in part by an agreement; and, further, such¢
agreement should be lawful. The words “where it is proved to the
satisfaction of the court’ with which the rule opens impose ...... an
obligation on the court to be satisfied that the suit has been genuinely
adjusted in whole or in part ...... that the words “proved to the satis-
faction of the court” are comprehensive enough, indeed seem to have
been intended to empower the Court to go into the merits of the
allegations “set up by the party denying or disagreeing with the
terms of compromise or agreement and decide them, so that the
parties get full justice in the suit in which a decree in terms of the
compromise is to be passed under the rule. Where the Court finds
during the course of the enquiry that the alleged agreement or com.
promise is vitieted by fraud, misrepresentation ete. it cannot be said
egally that an agreement has been arrived at. The agreement con-
templated under the rule envisages the two parties coming to certain
terms voluntarily and of a free will, so as to put an end to the litiga-
tion pending between them in the Court ...... If (the Court) decides
that the agreement or compromise is vitiated. it can reject it and
proceed to dispose of the suit on merits.”

23,24. The High Court, after reference to the order of the Civil
Judge and to the depositions of the parties, also came to the con-
clusion that there was no agreement as alleged by the defendant, and
the order of the Civil Judge {for the remand of the suit for disposal
according to law) was therefore affirmed.

23.25. The decision is correct on the present language. But it now
requires to be considered whether some modification in the existing +
position is not called for. in the interest of speed. Reference may be
made to the Punjab Amendment.

In the Punjab, the following provisos have been added to the
existing rule: —

“Provided that the hearing of a suit shall proceed and no ad-
journment shall be granted in it for the purposes of decid-
ing whether there has been any adjustment or satisfaction,
unless the court for reasons to be recorded in writing, thinks

1. Shaity ५. Sasani, ALR. 1970 My

.



207

fit to grant such adjournment, and provided further that
the judgment in the suit shall not be amnounced until the
question of adjustment or satisfaction has been decided:

Provided further that when an application is made by
all the parties to the suit, either in writing or in open court
through their counsel, that they wish to compromise the
suit, the court may fix a date on which the parties or their
counsel should appear and the compromise be recorded,
but shall proceed to hear those witnesses in the suit who
are already in attendance unless for any other reason to
be recorded in writing, it considers it impossible or un-
desirable to do so. If, upon the date fixed, no compromise
has been recorded, no further adjournment shall be granted
for this purpose, unless the court, for reasons to be re-
corded in writing, considers it highly probable that the suit
will be compromised on or before the date to which the
court proposes to adjourn the hearing.”

23.26. A similar provision would be useful. It could, however be
made simpler.

Recommendation

23.27. We therefore, recommend that the following proviso should
be inserted below Order 23, rule 3—

“Provided that where it is alleged by one party and denied by
the other that an adjustment or satisfaction has been arrived
at, the court shall decide the question; but no adjournment
shall be granted for the purpose of deciding the question
whether there has been ony adjustment or satisfaction,
unless the court, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
thinks fit to grant such adjournment.”


CHapter 24
PAYMENT INTO COURT

introductory
24.1, In Order 24, there are provisions as to payment inte Court,
which apply to every suit for debt or damages. The payment amounts
to an admission of the claim in respect of which it is made. There is
20 power to pay money into Court with a defence denying lability.
Provision is made for the two cases. —
(a) Where the plaintiff accepts the deposit as satisfaction in
part, and

(b) where he accepts it as satisfaction in full.
No changes are vecommended in this Order.


CHaPtar 25
SECURITY FOR COSTS
Iniroduetory
35.1, One of the incidental proceedings dealt with in the Code

concerns orders requiring security for costs where the plaintiff resides

out of or leave India and does not possess sufficient immovable pro-
Betty in India. This is in Order 25. No changes are needed in this
der.


Cusrtar 26
हि COMMISSIONS _
Introductory
26.1. Order 26 deals with commissions issued by Courts. Com-
miss are of four kinds—to examine witnesses, to make local in-
- vestigations, to examine accounts and tu make partition of immove-
able property. + पु हे
Most’ of the provisions for commissions to examizte absent wit-
nesses were adapted by the framers of the first Code (of 1859) from
an Act of 1841',

The rules as te commissions for 10281 investigations are ulti-
mately derived from three old regulations.
Order 26, rule 1

26.2. Order 26, 100९ 1 provides as follows: —

“Any Court may in any suit issue a commission for the exami-
nation on interrogatories or otherwise of any person resi-
dent within the local limits of its jurisdiction who is
exempted under this Code from attending the Court or
who is from sickness or infirmity unable to attend it.”

Order 26, rule 1, and medical certificate

26.3. A suggestion was made to us, that for proving the sickness
or infirmity of the witness, a certificate signed by a qualified medical
practitioner should be accepted. Even now, we were told, it is being
done in some covrts; but the practice on the subject is not uniform,
and in some places affidavits* about illness are usually required.

We have considered the matter, and see no objection to a provi-
sion permitting the use of such certificate in evidence, at the discre-
tion of the court, for the purposes of Order 26, rule 1.

26.4. The examination, under the rule is ‘on interrogatories or
atherwise”, It is understood that an order for examination on interro-
gatories is sometimes issued when the examination should really be
comprehensive.

26.5. It is, in our view, against the intendment of the rule to issue
an order ior examination on interrogatories except in special cases,
and we think it desirable to so provide by amending the rule.

Recommendation

26.6. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 28, rule 1, should be
revised as follows :—

“L Any Court may. in any suit, issue a commission for the
examination on interrogatories or otherwise of any person

1, Act 7 18४41.
2. Cf. Order 19,501 1.
210


211

resident within the local limits of its jurisdiction who is
exempted under this Code from attending the Court or
who is from sickness or infirmity unable to attend “it.

r Provided that conimission for examination on interro-
gatories shall not be issued unless the court, for reasons to
be recorded, thinks it necessary to do sa. ceee

*Explanation—The Court may, for the purposes of this rule,
@ccept a certificate purporting to be signed by a registered
medical practitioner’ as evidence of the sickness or infirmi-
ty of any person, without calling the medical practitioner
ds a witness.” :

Order 26, rule 4(1)
26.7. Under Order. 26, rule 4(1), any Court may, in any suit, issue
r a commission for the examination of---
(a) any person resident beyond the iccal limits of its jurisdic-
tion: . :
(1 any person who is about to leave such Limits before the
date on which he is required to be examined in Court; and
(c) any person in the service of the Government, who cannot,
in the opinion of the Court. attend without. detriment to
the public service.
26.8, The rule does not provide for issuing a commission for exa-
- mination on interrogatories, We think that such a prevision would
be useful’, although examination on interrogatories should be resort-
a ed to only in special cases’. ~ :

26.9. There is another point arising out of Order..16, Rule 19.
Order 16, Rule 19, provides that a witness shall not be compelled
te attend a Court in person unless he resides— .
(a) within the jurisdiction of the Court, or

(b) outside the jurisdiction but within the specified distance
(roughly, less than fifty miles, or, if there is an established

public conveyance for five-sixth of the distance. then less

. than two hundred miles), पु
26.10, Thus, a witness living outside the jurisdiction and beyond
= the specified distance cannot be compelled to attend a court in per

son. For the examination of such person, the Code provides for the
issue of a commission under Order 26, Rule 4. But the word used
in Order 26, rule 4, is “may”. Now, it is obvious that where the wit-
ness is beyond the jurisdiction and beyond the specified distance, and
yet is one whose evidence is essential, the only mode of examination
is by commission. :

1. Itaeeeseary, the expression “regiarered medical practitionec” may ke defined.
2. Of. Order 26, vale 1, है
3, Of amoudment prepered to @rder 26, rule 1.


212

It would, therefore, be better if* the issue of a commission under
Order 26, rule 4 is made obligatory in such cases, if the evidence of
the witness is essential in the interest of justice. Such an amendment
will give a more correct pieture of what the law contemplates.

Recommendation
26.11. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 26, rule 4(1) be
revised as follows: —

“4.(1) Any Court may, in any suit, issue a commission for the
examination 00 interrogatories or otherwise of—

{a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its juris-
dietion;

(09) any person who is about to leave such limits before
the date on which he is required to be examined in
Court; and

(९) any person in the service of the Government, who
cannot, in the opinion of the Court, attend without
detriment to the public service;

Provided that where, under Order 16. rule 19, a person cannot
be compelled to attend a Court in person, a com
mission shall be issued for his examination if his evidence
is considered necessary in the interests of justice:

Provided further shat @ commission for examination on inter-
rogatories shall not be issued unless the Court, for reasons
to be recorded, thinks it necessary to do so,”

Order 26, Rule 16A—10-B

36.114, As already recommended’, new rules 10A to 10C should
be added in Order 26 to provide for scientific investigation etc.

Order 2%, Rule 17

28.12. The Kerala Amendment to Order 26, rule 17 provides,
that where the Commissioner is not a. Judge of the civil court, he
shall not be competent to impose a penalty, but such penalty may
be imposed on the application of the Commissioner by the court
which issued the Commission,

In the Report’ of the earlier Commission on the Code, this was
noted, It was, however, considered unnecessary to adopt this minor
amendment. हे

28.18. But we think that the amendment could be usefuliy ad-
opted, though there may be not many occasions in practice where
it would make much difference.

1, Bee disoustion as to’Order 16, Rule 19.

4३. Ree disanesion relating to wection 75.

3. 27th Report, page 315, Nets on Order 26, Rule 17," *



213

Recommendation

26.14. We, therefore, recommend that the following proviso
should be inserted below Order 26, Rule 17—
“Provided that when the Commissioner is not & dudge of #
Civii Court, he shall not be competent to impoge penal-
ties; but sugh penalties max te imposed on the appli
cation of suck Commissioner by the Court which wswed
the commission,”

Order 26 and execution proceedings

26.15A. The Madras High Court’ has held that the provisions of
Order 26, rule 4 are not applicable to execution proceedings, and
have not been made so by reason of the provisions of section 141.

“2. Fenkayya र. Ravlagyn ALR. 1939 Mad. B78,


CRAPTER 27
SUITS BY OR AGAINST GOVBRNMENT

Intreduetory

97.1. Order'27 deals with suits by or against the Government
or public officers in their official capacity. Except as proyided by
special Acts, suits against the Government or public officers may
be instituted in any Court, however inferior, But there are certain
apecial. provisions applicuble to such suits. The procedural provi-
sions in this respect are contained in Order 27.

27,1A, Most of the matters dealt with in the Order relate to
minor details such as. signing ot pleadings, persons authorised to
‘act, description of the plaintiff or defendant, service of process. fix-
ing a day for appearamice. exemption from security and the like, We
shall now discuss such of the rules as vequirc amendment.

Order 27, rule 5
27.2, We first take uo Order 27. rule 9, which is as follows:—
. The Court, in fixing the day for the Government to answer
to the plaint. shall allow a reasonable time for the neces-
sary communication with the Government through the
proper channel, and for the issve of instructions to the
Government pleader to appear and answer on behalf of
the Government, and may extend the time at Its disere-

tion.”

27.8, In the Report on the Code.’ the question of a time-limit for
filing a written stetement by the Government was considered. The
Fourteenth Report? had recommended an amendment to give the
Government 6 minimum period of three months for filing a written
statement, But it was, in the Report on the Code, considered un-
necessary to lay down any such rigid minimum period applicable
to all cvses. .

27.4. We agree that such a long minimum period is not needed.
We. on the other hand, think that a period of two months should
normally suffice, and in the terest of expedition, we recommend an
amendment substituting such fixed period. Government, with its re-
sources. should not find this period too short.

Recommendation
27.5, Accordingly. we recommend that Order 27. Rule 5, should
be revised as follows :—

“5, The Court, in fixing the day for the Government to answer
to the plaint. shall allow a reasonable time for the neces-
sary communication with the Government through the pro-
per channel, and for the issue of instructions to the Goy-

1. 27th Report. pa हु
2. 14th (एक Fol.

16, note on Order 27, rule 5.
1, page 508, nara 18,
24


~

शक

ernment pleader to appear and answer om behalf,of. the. .-;

Government, and may extend the time at its discretion,
but the time so allowed and the lime so extended shell
not exceed two months in the aggregate”, .

Order 27A, Rule 5-B (New)

27.6. It is the unfortunate experience of many judicial. efficers
to deal with litigation between the Government and the citizen
vhich could have been avoided if the Government had been urged
io go into the merits, and if positive attempts at a settlement had
been made at early stages of the litigation. This, in fact, was one
of the objects behind the provision for notice under section 80 of
the Code. but the object was seldom achieved.

27.7, In our view, the time.has come to insert provisions that
would impress upon all concerned the need for such an approach,
in litigation in which Government is concerned.

27:8. The Kerala High Court was constrained to. make these
observations!—

“The State, under our Constitution. undertakes economic
activities in a vast and widening public sector and inevi-
tably gets involved in disputes with private individuals.
But it must be remembered that the State is no ordinary
party trying to win-a case against one of its own citizens
by hook or by crook; for, the State's interest is to meet
honest claims, vindicate a substantial defence and never
to score a technical point or over reach a weaker party to
avoid a just liability or secure an unfair advantage,
simply because legal devices provide such an opportunity.
The State is a virtuous litigant and looks with unconcern
on immoral forensic success so that if on the merits the
case is weak, government shows a willingness to ‘settle
the dispute regardless of prestige and other lessor moti-
vations which move private parties to fight in. court. The
lay-out on litigation eosts and executive time by the State
and its agencies is so_ staggering these days because of
the large amount of litigation in which it-is involved that
a positive and wholesome policy of cutting back on the
volume of law suits by the twin methods of not being temp
ted into forensic show-downs where a reasonable adjust-
ment is feasible and ever offering to extinguish a pending
proceeding on just terms, giving the legal méntors of gov-
ernment some initiative and authority in this behalf.”

+ 27.9. We are of the view that there should be some provision em-
Phasing the need for positive efforts at settlement, in suits to which
the Government is a party.

1. Ahubarker.v, 18४०७ of Indio, A.T.R..1872 Ker. 103, 107.paya 5 (Iver TN


218

Recemmendation
27.10, With the above end in view, we recommend the insertion
of the following rule—
“5.8 (1) In every euit or proceeding to which the Government is
ढ& party or a pudlic Officer acting in his official capacity is a

party, it shall be the duty of the Court in the first instance, -

im every case where it is possible to do 80 consistently with
the nature and circumstances of the case, to make every
endeavour to assist the parties in arriving at a settlement
im respect of the subject-matter of the suit.

(2) Tf, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stave it appecre ह

to the court chat there is a reasonadle possibility of a settle
ment between the parties, the court may adjourn the pro-
ceeding for such period as it thinks ft, to enable attempts
to be made ta effect such a settlement.

{3) The power conferred by aub-rule (2) is in addition to any
other power of the court to adjourn proceedings.”

Order 27, Rule 54 (New)

27.11. Order 27 deals with suits agaitist the Government and
public officers.

In the Report of the Law Commission’ dealing with State liability,
2 recommendation had been made to the effect that when a suit for
damages is filed against the Government in respect of any act of
its employee, agent or independent contractor, the employees, ete.
should be impleaded as a party to the suit. It was also stated, that
any claim based on indemnity or contribution by the State may well
be settled in such proceedin as, as ail the parties will be before the
court, An amendment of the Civil Procedure Code was recommended
on these lines,

27.12. The recommendation was not carried out in the Report of
the Commission on the Code’, (27th Report), as it was felt that a
mandatory provision of the nature suggested was not needed,

27.13. We agree with the view taken in the 27th Report, as a man-
datory provision of the nature suggested in the 14th Heport will un-
necessarily cause inconvenience to individual officers. But, we would
Yike to make a provision for the converse situation, namely, where
a suit is filed against the em npl for official acts. In such cases, the
Government should, we think. made a party, so that the question
of State liability is decided in that very suit. Here, a mandatory pro-
vision would not cause hardship to individual officers.

Recommendation
27.14. The following rule is. therefore, recommended: —

“SA. Where a suit is instituted against a public officer for da-
mages or other relief in respect of any act, alleged to be
done by him in his official capacity, the Government shall
be joined as a party to the suit.”

1. First Report (Liability of the State in Tort), page 40, para IV (ii).
2. 27th Baport, page 218, note on Order 27, and suits ageiast the Gower nment.



CuarPTer 272

SUITS INVOLVING SUBSTANTIAL QUESTIONS OF LAW AS TO
THE INTERPRETATION OF THE CONSTITUTION

Iniroductory

°7-A4. Order 27-A. which deals with suits involving constitutional
questions, was inserted in 1942 by amending Act 23 of 1942. As ori-
#inally enacted, it was intended to provide for suits invelving sub-
stantial questions af law es to the interpretation of the Government
of India Act’. After the Constitution. it has been adapted, so as to
deal with suits involving substantial questions of law 2s to the inter-
pretation of the Constitution.

27-42, Its genesis is of interest. In a case which was decided by
the Federal Courl®, the question arose whether. during the hearing
of an appeal in which the constitutional val itv of an Act of the
Provincial Legislature was impugned, the High Court had the power
to make the Provinee of U.P. a party. under the provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure 1908 as it then stood. While the Federal
Court answered this question in the affirmative. the Chief Justi
expressed certain doubts and suggested that the matter “might well
engage the attention of the Central Legislature”: for, if those doubts
were justified, “private persons could. by a private settlement of their
dispute, or even by collusion, prevent a Provincicl Government from
obtaining a decision of the Federal Court on issues of the highest
importance."

27 . The Amendment Act accordingly sought to provide that
in any suit or appeal in which it appears to the Court that a sub-
stantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Government
of India Act or an Orderin-Council made thereunder is involved,
the Court shall first give notice to the Advocate-Generzel of India
or of the Province as the cese may require. and may, if satisfied that
1६ is necessary or desirable for the satisfactory determination of the
question so 10 do, order that the Government concerned shall be
added as a party.

27-A.4. One object of Order 27-A, was, thus, obviously to prevent
collusion between private parties who conspire to obtain a a ruling
about a constitutional question without the court having an oppor-
tunity to hear the Government, +

27-45, The provision that the Court must give notice to the
Advyocate-General has been adopted in substance from a Canadian
Statute! As to the provision in Order 27-A, rule 3, barring costs, the

1, Contpire section 205 of the Government of Indie Act, 1935.
3, UP, v, Aatigh Bogrem, (1940) FLCR. 110; ATR. 1941 F.C. 16.

3, Statement of Objects and Reasons, dated 26th August, 1942 to the Amendinent Bilt
of 19042.

4. See thn section in the Judicatan: Aet. Ontariv, infra,
शा
1.1810)929/जा व ६३-16


218

reason seems to be this. A question may arise as to the Government’s
right to, or liability for, costs in proceedings in which the Advocate-
General may appear or in which the Government may be impleaded
as a perty in accordance with these provisions. As the Advocate
General or the Government would, in such cases, come in more to
protect their own interests than for the purpose of making the action
effective between the criginal parties. it seems to have been consi-
dered reasonable that ordinarily the Government should have no
right to, or liability for, costs in the first instance. If, after the Gov-
ernment is added as a party, the case is decided one way or the
other. further proceedings by way of eppeal by the Government or
any of the original parties will, of course, be governed as to costs
by the general principles governing all actions. In some cases, how-
ever, special considerations may arise, either because of the menner
in which the Government or one or other of the parties conducts
the case. or because of the special nature of the case. In this special
class of cases, the Court can depart from the general principle above
indicated, and make special order as to costy

27-A.6. In Canada, there are similar provisions. The Judicature
Act' in Ontario, for example. provides as follows*:—

“90, (1) In any action in which the Attorney-General for
Canada or the Attorney-General for Ontario is a party
plaintiff and the other Attorney-General is 8 party defen-
dant, the Court has jurisdiction to make a declaration as
to the validity in whole or in party of “any statute of the
Legisiature or any statute of the Parliament of Canada
that by its terms purports to have force in Ontario, though
no further relief be prayed or sought.

(2) The judgement in any such action {s subject to appeal as
in ordinary cases.

“33, (1) Where in an action or other proceeding the constitu-
tional vlidity of any Act or enactment of the Parliament
of Canada or of the Legislature is brought in question,
it shall not be adjusted to be invalid until after notice
has been given to the Attorney-General for Canada and
to the Attorney-General for Ontario.

(2) The notice shall state what Act or part of an Act ig in
question and the day on which the question is to be
argued, and shall give such other particulars as are neces
sary to show the constitutional point proposed to be
argued.

(3) Subject to the rules, the notice shall be served six days
before the day named for the argument.

(4) The Attorney-General for Canada and the Attorney-
General for Ontario are entitled as of right to be heard
either in person or by counsel notwithstanding that the

Crown is not a party to the action or proceedings.

3, The Judicature Act, R.8.0, 1960 0. 197 (Ontario, Canada).
$, Laskin Canadian Constitutional Law (1960), page 147.


219

(5) Where in an action or proceeding to which this section
applies the Attorney-General for Canada or the Attorney-
General for Ontario appears in person or by counsel,
each shal} be deemed to be a party to the action or pra
ceeding for the purpose of an appeal from any adjudi-
eation as to the constitutiona) validity of any Act or
caactient in question im the action or proceeding.”

27-A.4. For comparabie legislation see the Constitutional Ques-
tions Act. RS.A. 1955, ०, 55; The Judicature Act, RS.A. 1955, ९.
164, s. 31; Constitutional Questions Determination Act, R.S.B.C.
1948. ९. 66, am. 1953, c, 11; An Act for. Expediting the Decision of
Constitutional and Other Provincial Questions, R.S.M. 1954, ¢. 44;
The Queen's Bench Act, R.S.M. 1954, 2. 52. s. 72; Judicature Act,
RS.N.B. 1952, c. 120, ss. 24 and 245; The Judicature Act, R.S.M.S.
1952. ०, 114, ४, 54 (enacted by 1953, No. 33); Constitutional Ques-
tions Act, R.S.NS. 1954, ९. 50. The Judicature Act, R.S.P-EI. 1951,
6. 79, 5. 39; Constitutional Questions Act, R.S.S. 1953, ८. 78.

Order 213, Rule 1

27-A.8. On the question whether in a case which involves a ques-
tion referred to in Order 27-A, rule 1, notice must be given to the
Advocate-General or the Attorney-General, as the case may be,
ivrespective of the considerations whether the State is already a
party to the suit, there are three reported cases from Bombay,
Allahabad and Patna.

27-A.9. In the Bombay case,’ section 6(4)(a) of the Bombay Land
Reqvisition Act. 1948 was challenged as contravening the provisions
of the Constitution, The petition, the Court held, invel [ved a substan-
tial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, and
Order 27-A, Rule 1 made it mandatory for the Court to give notice
to the Advocate-General or the Attorney-General as the case may
be. The Court observed—

“As the rule stands, it is clear and explicit and, as I said
before, mandatory and it makes it incumbent upon the
Court in every suit where such a question arises to give
notice to the Advocate-General or the Attorney-General
as the case may be.”

27-A.10. It was urged that if the State or Union was already a
party to the suit or proceeding, then no object could be served hy
giving notice to the Advocate-General or Attorney-General. The
Court did not agree with this view. The court referred to such in-
stances as, where the Advocate-General represents a charity or where,
apart from being the legal adviser of the State, the Advocate-General
not only represents the State but also the bar as its leader’ The
Court held that “The Advocate-Generals and the Attorney-General
have independent rights and independent function to discharge, and
an occasion may arise when the presence of either one or the other
may be necessary irrespective of whether the State or the Union
is a party to that litigation.”

"Toman ©. Stateof Bombay, ATR. 1951 Row. 121.124 (D.B.) (Chagle 0.3. and Gajendra.
gadkar J).
L/b(Dj220MofLJeCA—16(a}

1


220

27-A.ll. Referring to Order 274, rule 2, the Cnurt said--
“This seems to suggest that the draftsman of the rule contem-
plated that even where the State or the Union was added
as 8 party to the suit. the Advocate General may still ap-
pear and, therefore, the question of costs had to he dealt
with both with regard to the State and the Advocate-
General.”

27-A.12. In the Allahabad case,'one ता the issues involved was
whether the dismissal of a Government employee had been ordered
hy a competent authority, and whether sufficient oprortunity had
been given to him to defend. In the High Court, after the hearing of
the case had almost concluded, counsel for the State requested that
notice of the appeal should be sent to the Advocate-General of the
State, inasmuch as according to him, (Counsel for the State) the case
involved a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of
the Constitution referred to Order 275 , rule 1, Civil Procedure Code.
The Court held that these two points at issue did not involve any
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Const'-
tution, and observed: —

“The State is party to this appeal, and the case on behalf of
the State had been argued by the learned standing Counsel.
We, therefore, find ourselves unable to accede to the request
made by the learned counsel for the respondent.”

S7-A.13, In one Patna case’. the vires of the Svits Valuation Act
was challenged in a suit between private parties. Government was
not a party. For the appellant, it was urged that certain sections of
the Act were ulira vires the provisions of article 14 of the Constitu-
tion. But it was conceded that this point could not be decided in
second appeal, because no notice of this particular ground had been
given to the Attorney-General, as required under Ordsr 27-A.

Recommendation

27-A.14. we have examined the question whethet the present. posi-
tion in respect of the point discussed above should be allowed to
continue. Having regard to what was said in the Bombay case, we
would not disturb the present provision,

27-8.15 We now proceed to discuss one point which concerns the
scope of Order 27-A as a whole, It may be noted that Order 27-A is
confined to situations where the validity of an Act is challenged,
and does not deal with questions relating to validity of stetutory
rules and orders (and other statutory instruments)

We have considered this question, having regard to the increas-
ing importance of statutory instruments We are of the view that
when the vires of 8 statutory instrument is challenged in a suit, the
authority which issued the instrument should be made a party to
the suit, Even now, the promulgating authority would appear to be

६ (2७ Prakush ९. Nate of U.P. (1968) Lab. LC. 302, 319, para ७) (D.B.),
3. Pata Tron and Steel (00, ५. Aram Chandra, ATR, 1907 Pat. 246 (D.B.),



221

a proper party,’ in such cases. But our intention is to make the posi-
tion more explicit in this ect. It is desirable that the Govern-
raent or other authority ing the instrument is given an oppor-
tunity to join as a party, such cases. The amendments which we
recommend in this regard will be substantially on the same pattern
as the present provisions in Order 27-A, which govern cases involy-
ing substantial questions of law as to the mterpretation cf the
Constitution.

Recommendation

Q7-A-16. Accordingly, we make the following recommendations
for amendment of Order 27A:—

(i) The heading of Order
as follows:—
“Suits involving a substantic] question of law as to the
interpretation of the Censtitution or as 10 the validity
of any statutory instrument.”

Order 27-A, rule 1 will remain unchanged].
(ii) The following new rule should be added as rule 1-A:—

“LA. In any suit in which it appears to the court that any
question as to the validity of ony statutory instrue
ment, not being a question of the nature mentioned
in rule 1, is involved, the court shail not proceed ta
determine that question until after notice has been
given—

“(a) to the Government Pieader, if the question Con.
cerns the Government, or

(0) to the authority which issued the statutory instru-
ment, if the question concerns an ‘author.ty other
than the Government.

Explanation—In. this Tule. ‘statutory instrument’
means q Tule, notification, bye-law, order, scheme
or form made under an enactment.’”*

{Order 27-A, rule 2, will remain unchanged].
(iii) The following new rule should be added as rule 2-A:—

“2A. The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings, tn
any suit involving any such question os is referred to
in rule 1-4, order that the Government or other au-
thority shall be added as a defendani—

“(a) if the Government pleader or the pleader appear~
ing in the case for the authori which issued ihe
instrument, as the case may be, whether upon
receipt of notice under rule 1-A or otherwise, ap-
plies for such addition, and

A shou.d be revised, so as ta read

3, Onder 1. Pale 1७.
3, In the alrernative, th

dnijnition could be plaved at the end of the Order,


222

(0) the court is satisfied iat such addition ig neces-
sary or desirable for the satisfactory determina-
tion of the question.”

(iv) Order 27-A, rule 3, should be revised as follows: —

“3. Where, under rule 2 or rule 2-A the Government or any
other authority is added as a defendant in a suit, the
Attorney-General, the Advocate-General or the Govern-
ment Pleader, or the Government or other authority,
shall not be entitled to or liable for costs in the court
which ordered the addition, unless the Court, having
regard to all the circumstances of the case, for any
special] reason otherwise orders,”


Cuarren 28

SUITS BY OR AGAINST SOLDIERS ETC.

Introductory

28.1, Order 28 deals with suits by or against members of the
armed forces, The provisions of the Order are mainly designed to
avoid the inconvenience that may be caused to a member of the
armed forces who has to appear as a party to a suit, but cannot
obtain leave of absence, Mainly, the rules empower him to appoint
some other person for the purpose. No changes are recommended
in this Order.


Cuaprea 29

SUITS BY AND AGAINST CORPORATIONS

Introductory

29.1, Order 29 deals with suts by ‘and against corporations.
There are provisions for the subseription and verification of the
plaint, and for service of the summons on 8 corporation. As regards
forum in the ease of suits against corporations, Explanation II to
section 17 is relevant. The Court may require the personal appear-
ance of any principal officer of a corporation, able to answer material
questions relating to the suit. There are not many points of cantro-
versy concerning this Order, We therefore recommend no change in
this Order,

pe


CuapTer 30

SUITS BY OR AGAINST FIRMS
Introductory
30.1. Order 30 deals with suits by or against firms.

The main provision authorises suing of partners in the name of
toe iil, Disciosure oi partneis’ name is provided for, as also service.
Appearance of partners is dealt with. There is no appearance except
by partners. Appearance under protest is allowed. A suit against a
person as carrying on business in a name other than his own is
goyerned by similar provisions.

Order 30, rule 2

30.2, An amendment has been made to Order 30, rule 2(3) by the
High Court of Orissa, under which the names of the partners disclos-
ed in the manner stated in Order 30, rule 2(1) “shall appear in the
decree”. The question whether this amendment should be adopted for
facilitating the execution of the decree against individual partners
was considered in the earlier Report,’ but it was felt that there was
no need for any such provision,

30.3. We are, however, of the view that the Orissa amendment
js a useful one, and the particulars proposed to be added may come
in handy at the stage of execution.

Recommendation

30.4. Accordingly, we recommend that the proviso to Order 30,
rule 2 should he revised as follows: —

“Provided that all proceedings shall nevertheless continue in
the name of the firm, but the name of the partners dis-
closed in the manner stated in sub-rule (1) shall be entered
in the decree.”

1, 27th Report, page 214i, note on Order 90, Bule 2.

225


Cuarrer 31

SUITS BY AND AGAINST TRUSTEES AND EXECUTORS

Introductory

81.1. In the Order relating to suits by and against trustees, exe-
cutors and administrators, Order 31—the Code first provides that
in suits concerning trust-property, the trustee shall represent the
beneficiaries. and that, unless the Court otherwise directs the bene-
ficiaries need not be made parties. The Court will order the benefi-
Ciaries to be made parties, when the trustees etc. are wholly un-
interested in the matter, or have an adverse interest therein. No
changes are recommended in this Order.


CuaPrer 32

SUITS BY AND AGAINST MINORS

Introductory

32.1, Order 32 relating to suits by and against minors is sub-
stantially taken from the rules of the High Court at Fort William,
dated 10th June, 1874. In the case of a minor plaintiff, the provision
is that: he should be represented through a next friend. In the case
of a minor defendant, the provision is that he should be represented
by a guardian for the suit, to be appointed by the Court.

32.2. There are provisions as to who may act as next friend or
be appointed guardian for the suit, the main object being to protect
the interests of the minor. With the same end in view, the Order
imposes restrictions on—

{a) receipt by the next friend or guardian for the suit, of pro-
perty under a decree for minor;

(b) agreement or compromise by the next friend or guardian
for the suit.

Retirement of next friend. removal of the next friend, and retire-
ment, removal or death of the guardian for the suit, are provided
for, The course to be followed by a minor on attaining majority, is
also dealt with. Unreasonable or improper suits by the next friend
are also dealt with. Application of these rules to persons of unsound
mind is provided for.

We shall now deal with such points as require amendments.

Order 32, Rule 3(4)

32.3. Under Order 32, rule 3(4), notice of an application for ap-
pointment of a guardian ad litem is to be given to the father or other
natural guardian of the minor, It appears to us that the notice
should be given to the mother also, even where she is not the natural
guardian. We also concur with certain other amendments recom-
mended in the earlier Report.’

Re-draft of Order 32, Rule 3
32.4. Accordingly, we recommend as follows:—
In rule 3 of Order 32, or sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules
should be substituted :—
“(4) No order shall be made on any application under this rule
except—
(a) upon notice to—
(i) the guardian of the minor appointed or declared by an
authority competent in that behalf, or. where there
is no such guardian, .... the father or other natural

1 87th Report, note on Order 32, vale 3¢4).
2237


225

guardian of the minor, or where there is no father or
other natural guardian, the person in whose care the
minor is,
(ii) the mother of the minor ulso, and
(b) after hearing any objection which may be urged on
pehalf of any person served with notice under this
sub-rule.
(4A) The Court may, in any case, if it thinks fit, issue notice
under sub-rule (4) to the minor also.”

Order 32, Rule 34 (New) (Effect of adverse interest)

32.5, Where a guardian or next friend has conducted the suit
with care and honesty, can the decree be set aside on the ground
the: he had an adverse interest? Of course, the objections which ihe
minor (or other persons looking after his welfare) may like to urge
as to the partiality of any person, can always be taken when notice
js issued under Order 32, rule 4. But, if the notice does not reach
the minor or the person fooking after his welfare, then difficulty
may arise. On the one hand, it is desirable that a decree of a court
should not be liable to be set aside except lor strong reasons. On the
other hand, justice requires that a minor should not be bound by the
acts of a guardian adverse to the minor's interests.

32,6. Discussion of the case-law on the subject must start with
a Privy Council decision.’ In that case, the suit was filed on behalf
of the minor for a declavation that certain decrees and sales were
invalid becuuse the minor had not been properly represented in the
proceedings from which they resulted. It was held that the decrees
and proceedings were invalid, because the sister of the minor, being
a married woman, was not the proper person to be appointed as
guardian ad litem, and, as regards the other guardian, who was the
minor's uncle, his interest was obviously adverse, as he had purchased
in the name of his sons the decree passed against the minor's father,
and was thus personally interested in the minor’s estate adversely
to her. All this was proved in the suit to set aside the decrees and
sales, and it was therefore held that the minor was never a party to
any of the suits in the proper sense of the term.

32.7. The learaed Subordinate Judge had found that’ the pro-
ceedings impeached in the plaint failed as against the plaintiff tap
pellant), because she was not properly repersented in them. He he!d
that Ulfat-un-nisa, as 8 married woman, could not have been appoint-
ed guardian ad litem, and that Mauladad, whose sons were merely
benami purchasers on’ his behalf, and had an interest adverse to
that of the minor, and was therefore disqualified. The High Court
on appeal set aside his decree, and dismissed the suit upon the ground

that—

“the decrees upon which the execution proceedings were found-
ed are not in any way impeached in the suit, nat could
they be. The impeached transactions were proceedings on
those decrees in execution, and, this being so, it was the

पर fash un Ninea ९. Makawsnad Ivauit, (1000) LLR. 31 All 072 (1.6.2.
2, ashid wn Niese v. Muhanad Zymait, (1909) LL.R. 31 All. 572-382 (P.C.).



229

proper course for the plaintiff, if she had any objection to
jake to the cxecution of the decrees, to raise these objec-
tions under the provisions of section 244 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, and not by a separate suit.”

32.8. The Privy Council observed—

“With all respect to the learned Judges of the High Court,
the'r Lordshins are unable to agree with this cunelvsion.
Section 244 of the Civil Procedure Code upplies to ques-
tions arising between parties to the suit in which the
decree was passed, that is to say, between parties who
heve been pronerly made parties in accordance with the
provisions of the Code. Their Lordships agree with the
Subordinate Judge that the appellant was never a party
to any of these suits in the proper sense of the term. “Her
sister. Ulfat-un-nisa. was a married woman, and therefore
was disqualified under section 457 of the Code from being
appointed guardian for the suit. and Matladad’s interest
was obviously adverse to that of the minor.”

32.9. This decision was followed by the High Court of Madras,
and it was held that where the interest of a guardian ad litem is
obviously adverse, the decree is a nullity. The High Court of
Travancore-Cochin also seems” to have held that the decree is a
nullity.

32,10. In an Allahabad case,’ it was observed—

“It is now settled law that where a gvardian ad litem has an
interest adverse to the minors, they are to be considered
as not having been properly represented in the suit. and
the decree is not binding on them.”

32.11. In a later Madras case,‘ the question whether the notice
given to the father was sufficient notice, was considered in the con-
text of a suit on a mortgage where the executant of the mortgage
wag appointed guardian ad litem of his minor son. The court, refer-
ring to the above question. observed—

“This again depends on whether the appointment of the father
as guardian ad litem is absolutely void, or is only void-
able. We think that in cases where a person contests the
validity of the appointment of a_guardian ad litem on the
ground that his interests are adverse, and where there is
no express prohibition in law as to the appointment of a
person except on the ground that his interests are adverse,
the party must prove that the facts do show that the inte-
rests of the guardian ad litem are adverse. and that owing
to that fact the guardian did not act in the interest of the
minor and did not conduct the defence with proper dili-
gence or raise proper defences to the suit and that the
minor has been prejudiced.”

1, dianpa Goundan ¥. Masa Natken (1924) LL.B. 47 Mad. 79, A.LR, 1924 Mad. 297.
4, Lemail brahim v. Sathaicherian, A,1.R. 1956 Tr. Co. 701.

3. Chiranjilai v. Syed 2796७ Ati, ALR. 1924 All. 751 (Domilo and Dalal 77.).

4. Marais Swamuar v. Subromania, ALR. 1929 Mad. 398, 394.


230

$2.12. In a Calcutta case.' Rankin, C. J. doubted whether the
Privy Council case’ went so far as to hold that the appointment
of a guardian ad litem whose interest was adverse rendered the
decree a nullity in every case.

$2.13. The Bombay High Court nas observed" that where a
minor plaintiff is not properly represented in a suit, he is not en-
titled to ignore the decree passed therein and te file a fresh suit
to have the issves tried on the merits. He should sue to set aside
the deeree in the prior suit, and to revive that suit.

32.14. In a Patna case,‘ the suit was filed to set aside the mart-
gome decree on the ground that the minors were not properly re-
presented by their father. as his interest was adverse. It was held
on the evidence that as the defences Open to the minors were not
put forward by the guardian, the decree was not binding on them,
but that it cannot be said without going into the merits that the
decree was bad simply because the father's interest conflicted with
that of the sons.

32.15. In a Bombay case’, the position in the case of members
of a Hindu joint femily was thus summarised—

“Tn the case of a Hindu joint family where the manager has
the power to bind the minor members of the coparce-
nary by an alienation for legal necessity, it is open to
the son to challenge it in 2 suit brought to enforce the
alienation on the ground that although it may be bind-
ing on the manager, it is not binding on the minor. His
interest may, therefore. conflict with that of the mana-
ger, as the defences of both may be seperate debt on
the family. In such a case it would not be desirable to
appoint the manager as the guardian ad item for the
minor in the suit, but if he is so appointed and a decree
ig passed against the minor’s interest in the property, it
cannot be said, in absence of fraud or collusion on the
party of the manager, that the decree is a nullity merely
because the manager ought not to have been appointed
as his guardian. If th: minor subsequently sues to set
aside the decree, he must show that the alienation was
not. in fact, binding on him. This would be especially
so where the manager is the father who is the natural
guardian of the minor and whose personal debts also are
binding on the son if they are antecedent to the aliena-
tion and ere not illegal or immoral, In the present case.
there is no proof of fraud or collusion on the part of
the father. and the debts for which the mortgage and
the sale were made are not shown as not binding on the
son, The interests of the father and the son are not thus
conflicting. We are of opinion, therefore, that the mort-
gage decree is not proved to be not binding on the son
on this ground.”

व. Gaikh Abdu! Kavion v. Mhabuetar (1998 5
3, Rashid हज ए- Mahemuaned 7४8४, (1009) TL,
3, Larman v. Sarewati, ALR. 1959 Bom, 125,
a
5,

शा

BL AIL. 872 (0.0).

itradhar Nurais Daa v. Khidar Thakur, AR. 1038 Put. $37.
. Mahadeu vy. Shankar, A.LR. 1943 Bom. 387, 390 (Davatia & Lokur JJ}.



231

32.16. We are of the view thal the position should be settled
in this respect. Mere adverse interest is not, according 10. the view
of most High Courts, a ground fer setting aside the decree, But,
where the minor is prejudiced by reason of such adverse interest,
the decree can be set as'de. These propositions should be enacted
into law. At the same time, the ordinary rule that the decree can
be set aside on the ground of gross negligence or misconduct on
the part of the guardian leading to prejudice, should remain un-
affected, since it is independent of any question of adverse inte-
rest.

32.17. It was suggested to us that it would be better to consid-r
this point under the Evidence Act, but since it also concerns the
Code, we are dealing with it here.

32.18. No doubt, theoretically, an adverse interest should be
sufficient for setting aside the decree, because the minor is not
represented. But, svch a provision would create practical compli-
cations, and effect the finality of decrees in numerous suits to
which minors are parties. The question is of choice between the
abstract pristine view of mere adverse interest (on the one hand),
and adverse interest leading to prejudice to the minor (on the
other hand). The latter seems to be the present position, and is the
only practical view.

Recommendation
$2.19. We, therefore, recommend that the (following rule
should be added in Order 32:—

“34. (1) No decree passed against a minor shall be set aside
merely on the ground that the newt friend or guardian
for the suit of the minor had an imterest in the subject-
matter of the suit adverse to that of the minor; but the
fact thet by reason of such adverse interest of the next
friend or guardian for the suit, prejudice has been caused
to the interests of the minor, shali be a ground for set.
ting aside the decree.

(2) Nothing in this rule shall preclude the minor from ob-
taining any relief available under lew by reason of the
misconduct or gross negligence on the port of the next
friend or guardian for th~ suit. resulting in prejudice to
the interests of the minor.”

Order 32, rule 15

32.20. In the earlier Report’ a recommend=tion was made for
the insertion of a new ru OAT In Order 32, in the following
erms:

“2A. (1) Where a suit has been instituted on behalf of the
minor by his next friend, the Court may, at any stage
of the suit, either of its own motion or on the applica-
tion of any defendant, amd for reasons to be recorded,
order the next friend to give security for the payment
of all costs incurred or likely to be incurred by the
defendant,

1, 27th Report, Note on Order 32, Rule 2-A, (New), and draft at page 76.



232

(2) Where such a suit is imstituted in forma pauperis, the
security shall inelude the court-fees payable to the
Government

(3) The provisions of rule 2 of Order 25 shall, so far as may
be, apply to a suit where the Court makes an order
under this rule directing security to be furnished.”

32.21. This followed broadly the Madras amendment on the
subject,

Question of security

32,22, We agree with this recommendation. The reason why we
refer to it here is, however, connected with another provision,
namely Order 32. rule 15.

Under Order 32, rule 15, the provisions contained in Rules 1
to 14 of the Orders, so far as they are applicable, shall extend to
persons adjudged to be of unsound mind and to persons who,
ihough not so adjudged, are found by the Court on inquiry, by
reason of unsoundness of mind or mental infirmity, to be capable
of protecting their interests when suing or being sued. Now, the
Madras amendment to Order 32, rule 15 excludes the operation of
rule 2A (security demanded from next friend or guardian) i.e, the
newly inserted rule in relation to persons of unsound mind etc
The previous Commission noted this, but considered it unneccs-
sary to have any such provision!

Supervening insanity

32.23, Another question relevant to Order 32. rule 15 is of super-
vening insanity, This hed also been considered by the previous Com
mission' in the carlier Report. (at present, rule 2 does not apply
in such case). It would appear that in England", in case of super-
vening insanity, the acticn must be carried on by the next friend
(who will, usvally, be the receiver in lunacy). The previous Com-
mission took note of this. position. However, it thought that as
such cases are not frequent, no amendment was required in the
earlier Report.

22.24. We think that although both these points are minor,
they should be suitably dealt with.

3, Mth Report, pogo 224, Note on Order 92. Rule 15.

3, Pirm Dsokaren Dos v. Debi Suhot, AIR, 1936 Luh. 7, 8 {Becknt J.}.

38, Sec Order 16, एण० I7and Order 17, mnte4,R.8,C, (Hag.) and commentary thereon in
the Annual Practice.

te


y

233

Recommendation

32.25. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 32, rule 15,
shovld be revised as follows:—

“15. The provisions contained in Rules 1 to 14, other than rule
2A, so far as they are applicable, shall extend to persons
adjudged to be of unsound mind before or during the pen-
dency of the suit, and to persons who, thovgh not so
adjudged, are found by the Court on inquiry, by reason
of unsoundness of mind or mental infirmity, to be in-
capable of protection their interests when suing or being
sued.”

L/B(D)220MofLJandCA—i7 _


CHaPTerR 324A ~
SUITS CONCERNING THE FAMILY

Introductory
324.1. We propose to add a new Order, intended to deal with
suits relating to matters concerning the family. We explain below
the reasons for adding it. .

Peculiarity of disputes concerning the family

324.2. In the administration of justice, in disputes relating to
the family. one has to keep in mind the human relationships with
which one is dealing. The objective of family counselling, as a
method of achieving the ultimate object of preservation of the
family, is to be kept in the forefront.

324.3, Litigation concerning or involving affairs of the famiiy,
therefore, requires a special approach, in view of the serious emo-
tional aspects involved. For this sensitive area of personal rela-
tionship, our ordinary judicial procedure is not ideally suited, As
Sir Garfield Barwick (then Attorney-General of Australia), said’
in the debates on the Matrimonial Clauses Bill, 1959, the Judge--+—
not unnaturally feels reticent about intruding into the human re-
lationship of those who come before him; and the parties them.
selves so often enter into a conspiracy of silence, where their in-
nermost secrets are concerned, «

32A.4. It is now being increasingly realised that—

(a) as far as possible, an integrated broad based service to
families in trouble, should become a part of the Court
system;

(b) the existing court structure should be so organised that
one single court should deal with the problem of pre-
serving the families; and

(९) the conventional procedure dominated by the adversary

system may not be appropriate for disputes concerning .
the family.
32A.5. Many of these matters are outside the scope of this हज

Report: moreover, it will require considerable time and effort to
re-mould the legal system to make it an effective instrument for
dealing with them. Nevertheless, it is felt that so far as the Code
of Civil Procedure is concerned, it may be desirable to have spe-
cial provisions on sume matters,—provisions which highlight the
need ‘for adopting a different approach. where matters concerning
the family are at issue. including the need for efforts to bring
about an amicable settlement.

1. Australia, H. Purl. Dob. (Naw Series}, 2222, £225,2 22° (Riis, 4, 19459)
m™


Reeommendation

32A.6. With the above object in view. a few provisions relat-
ing to suits concerning the family are proposed in the form of a
new Order, which will be as follows: —

“Order 32A—Suits relating to matters concerning the family—
1. Application of the Order (1) The provisions of this Order

apply to suits or proceedings relating to matters con-
cerning the family.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of

the provisions of subrule (1), the provisions of this

Order apply to the following svits or procerdings,

namely.—

(a) a suit or proceeding for matrimonial relief, in
cluding a suit or proceeding for a declaration gs to
the validity of a marriage, or as to the matrimonial
status of any person,

(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legi-
timacy of any person:

(c) a suit or proceeding in relation to guardianship of
the person or custody of any minor or other person
under disability;

(व) # suit or proceeding for maintenance.

(e) a suit or proceeding as to the validity or effect of an
adoption;

(f) a suit or proceeding relating to wills, intestacy and
succession;

(g) a suit or proceeding relating to any other matter in
respect of which the parties ere subject to their
personal law.

“(3).So much of any rule contained in this Order, as relates

to a matter provided for by a special law in respect of
any suit or proceeding, shall not apply to that suit or
proceeding.

. Proceedings to be heid_in camere—in every suit or pro-

ceeding to which this Order applies, the proceedings may
be held in camera, if the court so desires and shall be
so held if either party so desires.

. Duty of court to make efforts for settlement—(1) In

every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it
shall be the duty of the Court in the first instance, in
every case where it is possible to do so consistently with
the nature and circumstances of the case. to make every
endeavour to assist the parties in arriving at a settlement
in respect of the subject-matter of the suit.

TB{D)220MofLJuduCA— 17


236

(2) If, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stage it appears

to the court that there is a reasonable possibility of a
settlement between the parties, the court may adjourn
the proceedings for such period as it thinks. fit, to enable
attempts to be made to effect such a settlement.

(3) The power conferred by sub-rule {2) is in addition to

4.

any other power of the court to adjourn proceedings.

Assistance of welfare ecpert—In every suit or proceed-
ing to which this Order applies, it shalt be open to the
Court to secure the services of such person,' whether
related to the parties or not, including a person pro-
fessionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the
family, as the court thinks fit, for the purpose of assist-
ing the Covrt in discharging the functions imposed by
rule 3 of this Order.

. Duty to inquire into facts—In every suit or proceeding

to which this Order applies, it shall be the duty of the
court to inquire, so far as it reasonably can, inte the
facts alleged by the plaintiff and into any facts alleged
by the defendant.”

. For the purposes of this Order, each of the following

shall be treated as constituting a family, that is to say—

“(a) a man and his wife living together, any child or
children being issue of theirs, his or hers, and any
child or children being maintained by them;

(b) a man not having a wife or not living together
with his wife, any child or children being issue of
his, and any child or children being maintained by
1173;

(0) a woman not having a husband or not living together
with her husband, any child or children being issié
of hers. and any child or children being maintained
y her;

(d) a man or woman and his or her brother, sister, an-
cestor or lineal descendant living with him; and

(९) any combination of one or more of the groups speci-

fied in clauses (a), (b), (९) and (9) of this rule.”

1. The person should preferably be » woman, wherever available.

~
*


CuarTer 33

SUITS BY INDIGENT PERSONS
Introductory

33.1. Order 33 deals with suits by indigent persons, The Code
does not deal with the subject of legal aid, but provides for exemp-
tion from Court fees, in respect of persons who are indigent, called
by the inappropriate name of “paupers”.

33.2. The object is to enable persons who are too peor te pay,
court fee to institute a suit without payment of 15. The exemption
does not extend to process-fee (rule 8).

33.3. This Order has a long history.

In the reign of Henry VII, an Act was passed by the English
Parliament as “a Mean to help and speed poor Persons in their suit”’,
This Act, which permitted the destitute to appear in court without
paying the usual court fees at the discretion of the Chancellor, was
in force in England, with modification, until 1949.

33.4, It enabled him to obtain writs original and writs of sub-
poena free of charges. The Indian Legislature first dealt with the
subject’ in 1939; ;and the provisions have, with necessary additions
and modifications, found a place in successive Codes of Civil Pro-
cedure,

Order 33 and expression “pauper”—Recommendation

33.5, With reference to indigent persons, we have a general re-
commendation to make on a question of terminology. We recom-
mend that the expression “indigent person” should be used through-
out the Code, in place of the present expression “pauper”, which is
not in harmony with modern attitudes.

Onder 3 Rule i—Point. not discussed in August & September,

33.6. In Order 83. rule 1, which deals with eligibility to sue, cer-
tain modifications, which are summarised below, were proposed by
the earlier Report‘—

(i) The amount of rupees one hundred was proposed to be
raised to rupees one thousand;

(ii) In considering the question of sufficient means, the subject
matter of the suit (case Bombay Amendment) and neces-
sary wearing-apparel were proposed to be excluded;

"}, datindra v. Dwurka (1899) 14.8. 20 Cal. 111, 116. ~
2. 11 Henry VIL ७. 12.
3. Act 9 of 1839,
4. 27th Report, page 225, note on Order 33, Rule 1.
237



P3R

(iii) The question whether the date of presentation of the ap-
plication or the date of its hearing should be the relevant
date for considering pauperism, was dealt with. The deci-
sion on the subject revealed a conflict of views. A provi-
sion had, therefore, been recommended to the effect that
Property acquired by the applicant after presentation of
the petition and before decision of the application should
be taken into consideration,

We agree with these recommendations. We are also of the view
that certain other points require to be considered and we proceed
10 diseuss them below.

Grder 33, Rule 1, Explanation

33.7, The question whether a person suing in a representative
capacity. who has no property in his hands in that capacity, can sue
as a pauper. has been the subject matter of debate, as is shown by
judicial decisions?

33.8. Here, reference may be made to the earlier Report? which
has taken a similar view, while referring to the Madras Amendment
to Order 33. Rule 1, Explanation (iii), which provides that where a
plaintiff sues in a representative capacity, the question of pauperism
shall be considered with reference to the means possessed by him,
in such capacity. It was, however, considered. unnecessary to make
such an express provision, though the Commission agreed with the
view incorporated in the Madras Amendment:

33,9, We now refer to another point, namely, sults in representa-
tive capacity,

In a Gujarat’ case. the question arose, whether a trustee who has
fot no trust property in his hands could sue as a pauper on behalf
of: the trust, even if he is possessed of sufficient means in his indivi-
dual capacity, पु ced

The High Court held—

“The word ‘person’ in the Explanation to Order 33, Rule 1
being capable of both a wide and a narrow meaning, we
should give that construction which would advance this
salutary remedy and achieve the purpose underlying enact-
ment, so that the facility for institution of a suit with-
out payment of the requisite court-fees can be properly
availed of by all persons. who would be otherwise denied
the remedy merely because the person had no funds to
pay the requisite fees........(The) other! construction
would lead to anomalous results. The pauper(s), minors
and lunatics. who on account of. their Jegal disabilities.

1. Decisinys cit fr the 2711 Roport wre nat repaated here.
2. 27th Repmrt. paue
8. China Eat ५, Chrandaarben, ALR. 165 Guj. 207, 210.

4. Meu} Rajnji v. Kinadwn Bator. |.L.R. 1936 Bom. 279, 281; Bharat Abhyodoy Cotton
Mills Lid. v. Komeshwar Singh, A.I,R. 1938 Cal. 745,



could not act except through someone else on their be-
hali, could not sue at all unless the next friend or guar-
dian was a pauper, because they could not present the
application in person.

Similarly, the trustee of an executor or @ Mutavalli could not
sue or appeal aguinst a decree against a trust estate un-
less they were themselves paupers or they choose to put
jn their own moneys to finance the litigation’.

33.10. Further, in the Gujarat case, it was held that “merely be-
cause the test of a wearing apparel could not be fulfilled and no
deduction of its value could be claimed by persons possessing no
wearing apparel, it could not justify a construction that the word
‘person’ in the clause refers only to natural persons who can possess
wearing apparel, So also, there is no difficulty in complying with
Rule 2, as regards the presentation of the application by the person
himself. “In such cases of trustees and executors, if the suit is
brought in a representative capacity, they could present the appli-
cation in that capacity, and they could remain present as such be-
fore the court to answer any question relating to the trust”.

33.11. The proper test in such cases is to see in what capacity a
person sues and whether in that capacity he is a pauper. The trustees
could therefore, sue on behalf of the trust, provided they had no
sufficient trust moneys in their hand to pay the necessary court fees,
even though in their individual capacity they may not be paupers.
Resources of the trustees in their individual capacity would be irrele-
vant, The question whether the word “person” in Order 33, Rule 1,
Explanation should be taken to include a limited company incorpo-
rated under the Companies Act, was left open.

38,12, It is in our opinion desirable to make the position clear on
this point.

33.13. It is. in our opinion, also desirable to exclude not only the
necessary wearing apparel while calculating the means of plaintiff
desiteus af suing as a pauper, but all property exempt from attach-
ment.

33.14. The basis on which property is exempted from attachment
by the law’ is the assumption that the property is necessary for liveli-
hood or that the exemtion is otherwise necessary encourage
thrift—all of which can be subsumed under the general rule that
the law does not favour proporty (of the particular kind). being
disposed or dissipated or spent away for any purpose. It follows,
that the person to whom such property belongs should ot only assign
it? but be discouraged from selling it in order to provide himself
with the means for fighting litigation.

Recommendation—Order 33, Rule 1°

33.14. Accordingly, we recommend that for Order 33, rule 1,
the following rule should be substituted:— :

“1. Subject to the following provisions, any suit may be in-

stituted by an indigent person

aa to section लिए); Provisn,
. Transfer of Property Act.



240

Explanation 1—A person is an indigent person—

(a) when he is not possessed of sufficient means, other than
property exempt from attachment in execution of ६ dec-
ree and the subject-matter of the suit, to enable him to

pay the fee prescribed by law for the plaint in such suit, x
or

(0) where no such fee is prescribed, when he is not entitled
to property worth one thousand rupees other than the pro- +
perty exempt as aforesaid and the subject-matter of the
suit.

Explanation 2,—Any property which is acquired by a person
ajter the presentation of his application for permission to
Sue as an indigent person and before the decision of the ap-
plication, shall be taken into gccount in considering the
question whether he is an indigent person.

Explanation 3—When the plaintiff sues in a representative capa-
city, the question whether he is an indigent person shall be
determined with reference to the means possessed by him
im such capacity”

Order 33, rule 1A (New)

33.15. We are of the view that inquiry into pauperism should or-
dinarily be made by the Chief Ministerial Officer! of the Court.

Accordingly, we recommend that the following rule should be
added in Order 33:--
“LA. Inquiry into the question whether a person is an indi- €
gent person shall ordinarily be made by the Chief Mi-
nisterial Officer of the Court, unless the Court otherwise
divects; and the decision of that officer shall, unless the
coun B otherwise direct, be deemed to be the decistomei—“——-~
the Court”,

Order 33, rule 5(c),
33.16, There is a minor point to be considered concerning Order
33, rule 5(c),
The rule is as follows:— »
“5, The Court shall reject an application for permission to sue
as a pauper—
(a)...
(b).... पु
(c) where he has, within two months next before the
presentation of the application, disposal of any property
fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permis-
sion to sue 85 a pauper, or

1, Cf. Boction 126 (1) (1),


241

33.17, It may be noted, that under clause (c), the application |
is rejected on the ground of fraudulent disposition of property or
disposition of property in order to be able to apply for permission
to sue as a pauper. The assumption behind this rule is, that if the
property had not been disposed of (within the specified period), then
the applicant would have had sufficient means to pay the court fees.
This, however, is not sufficiently brought out in the clause, because
under the present wording, even where the property disposed of and
the property still in possession of the applicant, taken together, is not
sufficient for paying court fees, the application can be rejected. We
think that this is rather harsh, and should be set right.

Recommendation

33.18. We, accordingiy, recommend the insertion of the follow-
ing proviso below rule 5—
“Provided that no application shali be rejected under clause
(९) if, even after the value of the property disposed of is
taken into account, the applicant would be entitled to
sue as an indigent person within the meaning of rule 1
of this Order.”

Order 33, Rule 5(d)

33.19. Amongst the grounds on which an application for per-
mission to sue 28 a pauper may be rejected, is the ground mention-
ed in Order 33, Rule 5(d). namely, absence of a cause of action.

33.20. In the earlier Report,’ it was noted that the existing
wording of Order 33, Rule 5(d)—‘“where his allegations do not
show a cause of action’—had been interpreted widely by the
courts.’ The Commission considered it unnecessary to disturb the
language of the rule, although it referred to the local amendmems
relevant to the rule.

83.21, Since then, the Gujarat High Court has held’ that Order
7, rule 11 makes a distinction between failure to show a cause of
acliott {on the one hand), and bar of limitation or of any other
law (on the other hand), It was vointed out that the two 1 dees are
quite distinct. “The bar of limitation does not destroy the cause of
action. if any, but only bars the remedy.” Therefore, it was held
that the lower court was wrong in holding that the suit does not
show a cause of action because it 18 time-barred.

33.22. This judgment makes it necessary to clarify the posi-
tion. It may be noted that the Madras High Court has added a
clause (d-1), under which the Court shall reject the application for
permission to sue as a pauper where the suit appears to be barred
by any law. As contrasted with this, the Allahabad High Court has
inserted an Explanation to rule 5, to the effect that an application
shall not be rejected under this clause (d) merely on the ground
that the proposed suit appears to be barred by any law.

५ 27th Report, pages 225. 226,

1. (4) Seo Haba Pasour v, Government, AIR. 1955 All, 415;

(8) Perwmad, A.LR. 1941 Mad. 398,

Romniklal y, Matheratal, A.I.R, 1965 Guj. 214 (Raja, 7).

Asto the effect of the Mudras amerdment, ses Zn rs Annamuian, A.LR. 1056 Med. 677,

b=

Cl ad


242

Reeommendation te insert Order 33, rule 5(dd)

33.23. The Madras amendment is. in our view, preferable. If a
suit is barred by any law, there is no point in granting permission
to sue as a pauper. Of course, border-line cases could occur; but the
power to reject could be confined to cases where it is clear from
the allegation in the application that the suit is barred. We there-
fore, recommend, therefore, that the foliowing should be added as
clause (00), in Order 33, rule 55—

“(dd) where his ailegations show that the suit would be bar-
red by any law for the time being in force; or”.

Appeal against order under Order 33, Rule 5

33.23A. We are of the view that an order under Order 33, Rule
5, rejecting the application, should be made appealable,’ since the
order followed to stand, would prevent the applicant from enfore-
ing his right to sue

33.24. Order 33, Rule 7, prescribes the procedure to be followed
at the hearing of an application for permisson to sue as an indi-
gent person. It says—

“7, (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may. be
convenient, the Court shall examine the witnesses (if any)
produced by either party. and may examine the appli
cant or his agent, and shall make a memorandum of the
substance of their evidence.

(2) The Court shall aiso hear any argument which the par-
ties may desire to offer on the question whether, on the
face of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken
by the Court as herein provided, the applicant is or is
not subject to any of the prohibitions specified in Rule 5.”

This rule, thus, turns back to rule 5.

,_ 33.25, Under Order 33, rule 5, a Court shall reject an applica-_
tion to sve in forma pauperis on any of the five grounds mentioned
therein, These relate to—

(1) The form and presentation of the petition: Rule 5(a);

(ii) The pauperis of the applicant: Rule 5, clauses (०), (०)
and (e

(iii) The merits of the petitioner's claim: Rule 5, clause (०).

33.26. Now. the inter-relationship of rule 7 and rule 5 of Order
33 is of interest.

First. so far as rule 5(a) goes, a perusal 61 the petition is suffi-
cient to see whether the prohibition applies. so that the examina-
tion under rele 7 will not relate to it, Secondly, as regards pau-
perism of the applicant, rules 6 and 7 provide for the adducing of
evidence by the applicant as well as by the Government and by
the opposile party. The examination under rule 7 is, therefore,
certainly directed at pauperism. Clauses (b). (८) and (९) of Rule 5
broadly relate to the quest‘on of paunerism. Se a full enquiry in
the points mentioned in those clauses has to be held.

3, vale L (an).

1. Te be carried ont ander 01



Zan

Thirdly, as regards cause of बला गा, ie. Rule 5, clause (d),
there is a difference of opinion among the various High Courts as
to the material that a Court has to make into account in deter-
mining whether there is a subsisting cause of action or not. The

* conflicting views on the subject are summarised below.

The question which covld arise in practice is' “Whether it
is open to the Government Pleader or an opposite party
duly served with a notice under 0.33, 8.6, or R7 to file
an objection or to adduce evidence cr to present an
argument that the applicant for leave to sue in forma
pauperis has not complied with the provisions of 0.33,
R. 5(d), and/or whether at an inquiry under R7 it is
competent for the Court to determine whether the appli-
eant has complied with the provisions of कि, 5(d).”

33.27, All the High Courts seem to agree that a Court should

a not, under rule 7, embark upon an elaborate enquiry regarding the

merits of the petitioner's claim. But. as to what should form / the
basis for a decision on the point whether the petitioner has a
cause of action or not. at least three views can be gathered from
the decisions—

(i) The first view is. that only the petition can be looked
into for this purpose and nothing else. This view found
favour in a Madras case” But the difficulty with th's
view is, that rule 4 gives 2 discretion to the Court to
examine the applicant as to the cause of his action. If
any statement made by the applicant in the examination
cannot be acted upon by the Court. then it is not easy
to see why a Court should be invested at all with such a
diseretion.

No doubt, the word “allegations” in Rule 5(d) may seem to
..., lend some support to this view, but the word should not be regard-
~— “""-~ed as. material on the above point.

(ii) The second view is, that a court can take evidence re-
garding the petitioners’ cause of action. This view was
taken by in a decision of the Patna High Court? though
a later case takes a different view. It is, however, oppos-
ed to the scheme of the Order. The evidence that can be
adduced after notice to the opposite party. should relate
(as laid down by Rule 6) only to the pawneriem of the

. petitioner

(ii) The third view (which is a middie between the two
extremes mentioned ४00४९) is. that a Court can rely
upon the allegations in the petition and the statements
of the petitioner made by him during his examination
under rule 4, if anv. by the court. This view shared

Veep Uhre Dine ve My. fon. Pan, ALR. 1952 Rang. 107, 110
2. का Pillai y Paps Pid? (1902), 13 NL LJ. 292 (7. 8.).
3 Chore Silay. HC: Makergé, ALR, 1919 Pat. 58, 59 (D.B.).

७8.1.


244

by several High Courts.' But there is again a difference
of opinion regarding the scope and nature ci the exami-
nation of the petitioner under rule 7.

Some Courts* held that his examination under Rule 7 should
not be related to thé cause of action but only to his pauperism,
while others express the opinion’ that his examination under rule

7 may be with reference to the cause of action as well.
33.28. In the Bombay case, it was observed'--

“Tt follows, therefore, that the materials for forming an
opinion whether the applicant has a subsisting cause of
action or not, or to use the words of 8, 5(d) whether “his
allegations do not show cause of action” are (1) the
application, and (2) the evidence of the applicant under
R. 4 or 1. 7, Then, under R. 7(2), the Court has to hear
arguments if any offered on the face of (a) the applica-
tion. and (b) the evidenee (if any) taken, that the appli-
cant is or is not subject to any of the prchibitions: speci-
fied in R. 5.7.

33.29. It is, of course, not open to the Court to hold an elaho-
rate inquiry into the question whether the claim made by the
petitioner is likely to succeed. In ascertaining where there exists
a “cause of action”, the court cannot go into complicated questions
of fact or law’,

33.30. The most sensible view (which is practically the same
as the Bombay view)’ seems to be, that (i) under rule 7, a court
may examine the applicant touching the ‘cause of action’: (ii) that
when he is so examined, the opposite party has a right to cross-
examine him under rule 7; and (iii) that a court may take the
result of such examination together with any examination under
rule 4 and the allegation in the petition in deciding whether the
prohibition metioned in rule 5(d) applies or not: (iv) but the other
witnesses cannot, under rule 7, testify for, or against, the existence
of the cause of action; (v) however, the court can give a deeon
both on peuperism and on the cause of action (or any other prohi-
bition mentioned in rule 5).

33.31, Since Order 33, rule 6, spec‘ficalty mentions that the
evidence to be taken should relate only to the question of paupe-
yism of the petitioner, it is desirable, by a slight amendment of
rule 7, to provide that the examination of the petitioner (as distinct
from the evidence of other witnesses), can extend to the cause of
action also,

1, (a) Jogendrav. Durga Charan, A.1LR. 1919 Cal. 385;
(8) Bai Chandan v, Chota Lai, 4.1. छे, 1932 Bom. 584, 585 (Rangnekar J.);
(ने U Ba Dive v. Mg. Lu Plan, A.1.R, 1932 Rang. 107 (F.B.).
2. (a) Bai Chandan v. Chhota Lai, A.LR, 1932 Bom. 584;
(5) U Bu Dive र. Bg. La Plan, A, 1832 Rang. 107, 112 (Majority view),
2. (a) 7 Ra Dine ४. Mg. tae Plan, ATR. 1932 Rang. 107, 111, 112 Gfajority view
(6) Toaendine v. Durga Charan. ALR. Cal. 385, ३६9.
4. Bat Chandan ए. Chiole Lal, A.1.R. 1932 Bom. 584, 683 (Rangnekar J,).
5. Vijai Pratap v. Hukk Haran, A.LR. 1982 S.C. 841, 943, Para. 9.
8. Bat Chandan v, Chhotalul, A,I.R. 1932 Bom. 584, (Bangackard

4

¢

sae,


245

It is also desirable to provide for a ful] record, in view of our
proposal for appeal against orders. rejecting the application for
permission to sue as a pauper.

Recommendation

33.32, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that
Order 33. rule 7. should be revised as follows: —

“7. (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may be
convenient, the Court shall examine the witnesses (if
any) produced by either party, and may examine the
applicant or his agent and shall make a full record of
their evidence.

(1A) The examination of the witness under sub-rule (1) shall
be confined to the prohibitions in clauses (b), (c) and (e)
of rule 5, but the examination of the applicant pr his
agent may relate to any of the prohibitions referred to
in rule 5.

(2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the
parties may desire to offer on the question whether, on
the face of the application and of the evidence (if any)
taken by the Court under rule 6 or under this rule, the
application is or is not subject to any of the prohibitions
specified in rule 5.”

Appeal against order under Order 33, rule 7—Recommendation

33.32A. We are of the view that an order under Order 33, Rule
7, rejecting the application, should be made appealable.* since it
prevents the applicant from enforcing his right to sue.”

Order 33, rute 8

33.38. We now come one point relevant to Order 33, rule 8. In
our Questionnaire. we had included the following Question :*

“30. How far do you consider it the duty to the State to
provide —

(a) to a person without any means, or

(09) to 2 person with inadequate means, the following
facilities or concessions in full cr part—

(a) Legal ait
(b) exemption from payment of process fees.”

Replies to this question are generally favourable, and we
think that the suggestion in part {b) of the question relating
to process fees should be implemented,

1, Bee discussion below.

2. Cf. Disoussion as to Order 33, Rule 5.

3. To be carried out uadex Onder 43, rule 1 {nn}.
4. Question 30. :


246

Recommendation
33.34. Accordingly, we recommend the following amendment in
Order 33. rule 8—
“In Order 33 rule 8. for the words and brackets “(other than
fees payable fur service of process)", the words “or fees
payable for service of process” should be substituted.”

Order 33, rule 95 (New)—Legal aid to paupers .

33.344. Where a person permitted to sue as an indigent person
is not represented by a pleader, it is desirable that the court should
‘assign a pleader to him at the expense of the State,

As to the mode of selecting pleaders to be so assigned, the faci-
lities to be allowed to such pleaders by the courts and the fees
payable to such pleaders by the Government and other matters, the
High Court can make rvles. *
Recommendation
33.34B. Accordingly, we recommend insertion of the following
rule—
“9A. Where a person permitted to sue as an indigent person
is not represented by a pleader, the Court shall assign a
bleader to him at the expense of the State.
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the
State Government, make rules providing for: —
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders tc be assigned under
sub-section (1);
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the
Courts; 2
(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government,
and, generally, for carrying ovt the purpose of sub-
section (1).”
‘Order 33, rule 15 and costs हा eee
83.35. Order 33, rule 14, allows the filing of a second suit by a
person where an application by that person to sue as a pauper is
refused, But the condition for the second suit is, that the applicant
“first pays the costs” of the Government and of the opposite party,
incurred in opposing the earlier application, Whether this payment
of costs is a condition precedent to the very institution of the second
suit, is a matter on which the position is not clear from the deci-
sions, One view is, that payment of costs is not a condition prece- a
dent, but when the matter is brought to the notice of the court, the
court should reject the plaint or stay the suit एफ payment, The
Madras view? is that the costs have to be paid before institution of
the suit, In any case, if costs are paid long after the filing of the
suit on insufficiently stamped paper, the sult is liable to be dismis-
sed. It was recommended in the Report of the earlier Commission +
on the Code, that there should be a power in the court to give time
(in suitable cases), for payment of the costs
1, Abdal Rehman ¥. Awiwnei, ATR, 1043 Bom. 409, 411 (reviews oases).
2. {a) Rane Krishua v, Ramajoge, ALR. 1943 Mad. 847, 548°
18) Siva Reo v. Ramajoga, A.T.R. 1943 Mad. 547, 648.



247

33.36. We agree that the court should have power to grant time.
Further, we think, that it should be made clear that where the costs
are not paid within the specified time, the plaint should be rejected.

Recommendations
33.37, Accordingly, the following redraft of Order 33, rule 15 is
suggested: —

"15, (1) An order refusing to allow the applicant to sue as 8
pauper shall be a bar to any subsequent application of the
jike nature by him in respect ‘of the same right to sue; but
the applicant shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2),
be at liberty to institute a suit in the ordinary manner in
respect of such right.

(2) No such suit shait be entertained unless the applicant pays
the costs (if any) incurred by the State Government and by
the opposite party: in opposing his application for leave to
sue as a pauper: and where such costs are not paid at the
time of institution of the suit or within such period there-
after as the court may allow, the plaint, shall be rejected”.


CuaPTeR 34
SUITS ON MORTGAGES

Introductory
34.1. Order 34 deals with suits on mortgages,

The scheme of the Code in relation to suits on mortgages is
as follows:—

, Whether the suit be one for foreclosure, sale or redemption, the
preliminary decree in each case must either declare the amount due
on the mortgage, or direct an account to be taken of what is due ta
the mortgeg ९९ for principal, interest and costs, and for other costs,
charges and expenses in respect of the mortgage-security. An account
is then taken of what is due on the mortgage, the sums so found
due to each mortgagee are included in one report, and the sale-pro-
ceeds are subsequently divided between the plaintiff and the puisne
mortgagees in accordance with their claims as found by the report.
Where the mortgagee is in possession, an account is to be taken of
what is due to the mortgagee for principal and interest, and also of
the income derived by him from the property.

34.2, After this, a final decree is passed. The shape which the final
decree takes depends on whether the mortgagor has or has not paid
the total amount due on the mortgage. If he has not paid it, the final
decree is for foreclosure or sale.

34.3. A fundamental defect in the present procedure under Order
34 is that it necessitates two decrees in the same suit and also the
possibility of two appeals against decrees in the same suit.

34.4. We think that this should be avoided, The scheme which
we propose is, that there should be only one decree in svits on mort-
gages. That decree will correspond to the present preliminary

lecree. All subsequent proceedings will take place in execution.
Recommendation
34.5, Accordingly, we recommend the following re-drafts of the
relevant rules in Order 34:—
Redraft of Order 34, Rule 2
2.(1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds, the
Court shall pass a ............decree—
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to
the plaintiff at the date of such decree for—
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage,
(ii) the costs of suit, if any awarded te him, and
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly in-
curred by him up to that date in respect of his
mortgage-security, together with interest thereon;
or
28

4

किक

है

Tosti


(9) declaring the amount so due at that date; and

(2)

(3)

(९) directing—

(i) that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount
so found or declared due on or before such date
as the Court may fix within six months from the
date on which the Court confirms and countersigns
the aceount taken under clause (a), or from the
date on which such amount is declared in Court un-
der clause (b), as the case may be, and thereafter
pays such amount as may be adjudged due in res-
pect of subsequent costs, charges and expenses as
provided in Rule 10, together with subsequent in-
terest on such sums respectively as provided in
Rule 11. the plaintiff shall deliver up to the defen-
dant, or to such person as the defendant appoints,
all documents in his possession or power relating
to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so re-
quired re-transfer the property to the defendant
at his cost free from the mortgage and from all
incumberances created by the plaintiff or any
person claiming under him, or, where the plain-
tiff claims by derived title, by those under whom
he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the de-
fendant in possession of the property; and

(ii) that, 1f payment of the amount found or declared
due under or by the........-..- decree is not made on
or before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails
to pay, within such time as the Court may fix, the
amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent
costs, charges, expenses and interest, the plaintiff
shall be entitled to spply in execution for an order
debarring the defendant from al! right to redeem
the property.

The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be
fixed by the Court, from time to timc, at any time before
an order under sub-clause (ii) of clause (९) of sub-rule Ae
is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of the
amount found or declared due under sub-rule (1) or of
the amount adjudged due’ in respect of subsequent costs,
charges, expenses and interest,

Where, in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgagees, or
persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the rights
of, any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the.........
decree shall provide for the adjudication of the respective
rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner
and form set forth in Form _No. 9 or Form No, 10, as the
case may be. of Appendix D, with such variations as the
circumstances of the case may require.

‘Lj/B(D)229Mofl JandCA— 18


256

fie-drajt of Order 34, rule 3
3.0) Where, before an order debarring the defendant from

(2

(8

)

all right te redeem the mortgaged property has been pass-

ed, the delendant makes payment into Court of all amounts

due from him under sub-rule (1) of Rule 2, the Court shall,
on application made by the defendant in this behalf, in
execution pass an order—

(६) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents
reterred to in the decree,

and, if necessary.—

(9) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost of the defen-
dant the mortgaged property as directed in the........
decree, .

and aiso, if necessary.—

(९) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of
the property.

Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not

heen made, the Court shall, on application made by the

plaintiff in this behalf in execution, pass an order declar-
ing that the defendant and all persons claiming through
or under him are debarred irom all right to redeem the
mortgaged property and also. if necessary, o:dering the
defendant to put the plaintiff in possession of the property.

On the passing of an order under sub-rule (2), all liabili-
ties to which the defendant is subject in respect of the
mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have
been discharged.

Ke-draft of Order 34, Rule 4
4(1). In a suit for sale. if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court shall

pass a............decree to the effect mentioned in clauses (a),-— ~~~.

(b) and (९०) (i) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 and further direct-
ing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein
mentioned, the plaintiff shall be entitled to apply in
execution for an order directing thet the mortgaged pro-
perty or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds
of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of
the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment of
what has been found or declared under or by the decree
due to the plaintiff, together with such amount as may
have been adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs,
charges, expenses and interest, and the balance, if any, be
paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive
ie same.

The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to
be fixed by the Court, from time to time. at any time be-
fore an order for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for
the sayment of the amount found or declared duc under
sub-rule (1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of
subsequent costs, charges, expenses und interest,

«

a

हु


ae

(3)

(4)

251

in a suit lor foreclosure in the case of an anomalous mort-
gage, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court may, at the गान
stance of any party to the suit or of any other person inte-
rested in the mortgage-security or the right of redemption,
pass a like decree {in licu of a decree for foreclosure) on
such terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of
a reasonable sum fixed by the Court to meet the expenses
of the sale and to secure the performance of the terms.

Where, in & suit for sale or a suit for foreclosure in which
sale is ordered, subsequent mortgagees or persons deriying
title from. or subrogated to the rights of, any such mort-
gagees cre joined as parties, the decree referred to in sub-
rule (1) shall provide for the adjudication of the res
pective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in
the manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No.
10 or Form No. 11, as the case may be, of Appendix D with
such variations as the circumstances of the case may re-
quire,

Re-drajft of Order 34, rule 5
5.(1) Where, on or before the day fixed or at any time before the

confirmation of a sale made in pursuance of an order passed

under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the defendant makes pay-

ment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub-

rule (1) of Rule 4, the Court shall, on application made by

the defendant in this behalf in execution, pass an order—

(a) ordering the vlaintiff to deliver up the decuments re-
ferred to in the decree,

and if necessary,—

(b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as
directed in the decree.

and also, if necessary,—

(०) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the pro-

(2)

perty.

Where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been
sold in pursuance of an order passed under sub-rule (3) of
this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub-rule
(1) of this rule. unless the defendant, in addition to the
amount mentioned in sub-rule (1), deposits in Court for
payment to the purchaser a sum equal to five per cent. of

the amount of the purchase-money paid into Court by the
purchaser.

Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be en-

(3)

titled to an order for re-payment of the amount of the pur-
chase-money paid into court by him, together with a sum
equal to five per cent thereof.

Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not
been made. the Court shall, on epplication made by the
plaintiff in this behalf in execution, pass an order direct.
ing that the morigaged property or a sufficient part there.
of be sold. and that the proceeds of the sale be dealt with
in the manner provided in sub-rule (1) of Rule 4,

‘L/B(D)220MofiJandCA— 182


252

Re-drajt of Order 34, Rule 6—Recovery of balance due on mortgage
in suit for sale.

6. Where the net proceeds of any sale held under rule 5 are
found insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff,
the Court, on application by him may, if the balance is
legally recoverable from the detendant otherwise than out
of the property sold, pass an order for such balance in exe-

eution.

Re-dra{t of Order 34, Rule 7—Decree in redemption-suit.
7.(1), In a suit for redemption, if the plaintiff succeeds, the
Court shall pass 8............--' decree—

(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due
to the defendant at the date of the decree for—

(i)
Gi)

principal and interest on the mortgage.
the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him and,

(iii) other costs. charges and expenses properly incur-

red by him up to that date, in respect of his mort-
gage-security, together with interest thereon, or

(b) declaring the amount so due at that date; and
(ले directing—

_ a)

(i)

that, if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount
so found or declared due on or before such date
as the Court may fix within six months from the
date on which the Court confirms and countersigns
the account taken under clause (a), or from the
date on which such amount is declared in Court
under clause (b), as the case may be, and there-
after pays such amount as may be adjudged due
in respect of subsequent costs, charges and ex-
penses as provided in rule 10 together with subse-
quent interest on such sums respectively as pro-
vided in rule 11, the defendant shall deliver up to
the plaintiff, or to such person as the plaintiff, ap-
points all documents in his possession or power
relating to the mortgaged property, and shall, if
so required, re-transfer the property to the plain-
tiff at his cost free from the mortgage and from
all incurnberances created b Yih? lefendant or
any person claiming under him, or, where the
defendant claims by derived title, by those under
whom he claims. and shall also if necessary put
the plaintiff in possession of the property; and

that, if payment of the amount found or declared
due under or by the decree is not made on or
before the date so fixed, or the plaintiff fails to
pay, within such time as the Court may fix, the

a


263

amount adjudged due in respect of subseguent
costs, charges expenses and interest, the defendant
shall be entitled to apply in execution for an
order—

(a) in the case of a mortgage other than usufruc-
tuary mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale,
or an anomalous mortgage the terms of which
provide for foreclosure only and not for sale,
that the mortgaged property be sold, or

(9) im the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or
such an anomalous mortgage as aforesaid, that
the plaintiff be debarred from all right to re-
deem the property.

(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to

pe fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any time
before the passing of an order for foreclosure or sale, as
the case may be extend the time fixed for the payment of
the amount found or declared due under subrule (1) or
of the amount adjudged due in respect of subseqdent costs,
charges, expenses and interest.

Re-draft of Order 34, rule 8—Final Order in redemption suit
8. (1) Where, before an order debarring the plaintiff from all

(2)

right to redeem the mortgaged property has been passed
or before the confirmation of a sale held in pursuance of
an order passed under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the plaintiff
makes payment into Court of all amounts due from him
under sub-rule (1) of rule 7, the Court shall, on application
made by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass 8, ,...... ०
decree or, if a decree has been passed, an order in execu-
jon—

(a) ordering the defendant to deliver up the documents

referred to in the .........००००००० decree,

and if necessary—

{b) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost of the plaintiff
the mortgaged property as directed im ०००० see
decree,

and also ig necessary,—

(९) ordering him to put the plaintiff in possession of the
property.

Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has been

sold in pursuance of an order passed under sub-rule (3) of
this rule, the Court-shall not pass an order under sub-rule
(1) of this rule, unless the plaintiff, in addition to the
amount mentioned in sub-rule (1), deposits in Court for
payment to the purchaser a sum equal to five per cent of
the amount of the purchase money paid into Court by the
purchaser.


254

Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be
entitled to an order in execution for re-payment of the
amount of the purchase-money paid into Court by him,
together with a sum equal to five per cent thereof,

(3) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not
been made, the Court shall, on application may by the
defendant in this behalf in execution,—

(a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sele or of such
an anomalous mortgage as it hereinbefore referred to
in rule 7, pass an order declaring that the plaintiff
and all persons claiming under him are debarred
from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and,
also, if necessary, ordering the plaintiff to put the
defendant in possession of the mortgaged property: or
in the case of any other mortgage, not being a unfruc-
tuary mortgage, pass an order that the mortgaged
Property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the
proceeds of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the
expenses of the sale} be paid into Court and applied in
payment of what is found due to the defendant and
the balance, if any, be paid to the plaintiff or other
persons entitled to receive the same.

Re-draft of Order 34, Rule 8A—Recovery of balance due on mortgage
in suit for redemption

8A, Where the net proceeds of any sale held under rule 8 are
found insufficient to pay the amount due to the defendant,

the Court on ap plication by him in execution may, if the

balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise

then out of the property sold, pass an order for such

'&1 87108.

Re-draft of Order 34, Rule 9—Order where nothing is found due or
where mortgagee has been over-paid—

9. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, if it ap-
pears, upon taking the account referred to in rule 7, that
nothing is due to the defendant or that he has been over-
paid, the Court shall pass an order directing the defendant,
if so required, to re-transfer the property and to Pay. to
the plaintiff the amount which may be found due to him;
and the plaintiff shall, if. necessary, be put in possession
of the mortgaged property.

Re-drajt of Order 34, Rule 10—

10. In finally adjusting the amount to be paid to a mortgagee
in case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption, the Court
shall, unless in the case of costs of the suit the conduct of
the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto,
add to the mortgage-money such costs of the suit and other
costs, charges and expenses as have been properly incur-
red by him since the date of the ............... decree for fore-
closure, sale or redemption up to the time of actual pay-
ment’.

ये. Bor further amendment see below “Recommendation ae to Order 84, Bale 10°

(छः



255

Re-draft of Order 34, rule 11—Payment of inierest

11, In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure, sale or re-
demption, wheve interest is legally recoverable, the Court
may order payment of interest to the mortgagee as
follows, namely :—

(a) interest upto the date on or pefore which payment of
the amount found or declared due is under the
«css Geerge to be made by the mortgagor or
other person redeeming the mortgage— पर

(i on the principal amount found or declared due
on the mortgage-—at the rate payable on the
principal, or where no such rate is fixed, at such
‘as the Court seems reasonable;

(ii) on the amount adjudged duc ta the mortgagee
for costs, chsrges and expenses properly incurred
by the mortgagee in respect of the mortgage-—
security upto the date of the su, deeree
and added ta the mortgage—m ~—at the rate
agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate,
at such rate not exceeding six per cent per annum
as the Court deems reasonable;

(७) subsequent interest upto the date of realisation or
actual payment cn the aggregate of the principal
sumg specified in clause (a) as calculated in accord-
ance with that clause at such rate as the Court deems
reasonable,

Order 34, rule 10

346. There is another point concerning Order 34, Rule 10
The present rule says—

“10. In finally adjusting the amount to be paid to a mort-
gagee in case of a foreclosure, sale or Tedemption, the
Court shall, unless in the case of costs of the suit the con-
duct of the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him
thereto, and to the mortgage-money such costs of the suit
and other costs, charges and expenses as have been pro-
perly incurred by him since the date of the preliminary
decree for foreclosure, sale or redemption upto the time of
actual payment.”

A question which falls to be considered with reference to this
rule is that of costs of the suit. The rule requires the court to award
these costs to the mortgagee, “unless the conduct of the mortgarce
hag been such as to disentitle him thereto.” We considered it desirable
to examine the operation of the rule, with special reference to cases
where the mortgagor has offered the amount due on the mortgage
and also where improvements made by the mortgagee are involved,


256

34.1. A Madhya Pradesh case’ related to a mortgage where the
pleintiff-respondents were: the morigagors, znd the defendant—ap-
pellant the mortgagee, The mortgagors had been awarded the costs
of the suit by the District Judge, and this was contested on appeal.
The High Court held:

“The general rule is that a successful party is entitled to costs,
unless he is found guilty of misconduct, negligence or
omission, or unless there is some other good cause for
denial of costs to him. It is true that the learned Judge
came to the conclusion that the plaintiff-respondent had
not proved the tender of the mortgage-money. But the
plaintiff had given a timely notice expressing his offer to
redeem the mortgage. Further, when the matter was taken
to court. the defendant, by contesting the claim of the
plaintiff with respect to possession, (after having given
the mortgaged property on rent to his own relatives), tried
to deprive him of the use of the property; the court could
not but award the costs of the suit to the plaintiffs. It
cannot be urged that the discretion has not been exercised
by the Judge properly.”

th ft In the Patna case,’ it was held by the Patna High Court
at:

“sos. in a redemption suit the mortgagee is entitled to
costs, unless he has been guilty of misconduct or has re-
fused 8 valid tender of the amount due to him,”

In the present case, the first court found that the deposit of the
mortgage money under section 83 of the Transfer of Property Act
was insufficient and that there was no misconduct on the part of the
mortgagor in contesting the suit and that there was no mala fides
on the part of the mortgagee, the mortgagee was entitled to his
costs, But, where the court does not give him his costs, the appellate
court would be exercising its discretion properly if it reverses the
order for costs allowed to the plaintiff-mortgagor against the mort-
888९५.

34.9, The facts in one Madras case’ were as 10110फ8 :--

There was a suit for redemption of a mortgage executed by
defendants 2-5 in favour of defendant I under a deed exe-
cuted in 1934. Defendants 2—5 executed a subsequent mort-
gage in favour of the plaintiffs in 1937, and the plaintiffs

led the suit out of which the appeals arose for redeeming
the prior mortgage in favour of defendant I. Before filing
the suit the piaintifts deposited the amount due under the
mortgage, respondent, pricr mortgagee, refused to
accept the amount on the ground that the mortgagors who
executed the deed in 1934 to him and the deed in 1937

1, Purshoitam v. Ramacharanial, ATR. 1987 MP. 237, 239 (D.B.).
2. Ram Bilosh पर. Radhabrishna Pravad, A.LR. 1938 Pat. 557.
9. Minakshi Ayyar v. Janaki Achalier 4.1, 8. 21042 Mad. 592{D.B.).


5

257

to the plaintiff petitioners and, therefore, it wouid be un-
safe for him to receive the amount and hand over posses -
sion in the absence of the mortgagors.

It was held that the conduct of the prior mortgagor in taking
the objection was neither vexatious nor unreasonable, and that he
should not be made to pay the casts of the subsequent mortgagee.

34.10. In one Patna case,' the mortgagor sent a telegram to the
mortgagee, asking him to refrain from filing a suit, and promised to
pay by a fixed date. Then he sent & subsequent telegram. expressing
willingness “to pay and informing that amount was ready”. This.
the court held, did not of itself constitute a valid tender. But the
latter was immediately followed up by the mortgagor actually going
to the mortgagee’s place and offering the money which the court held
constituted a valid tender.

In this case where a valid tender of the entire amcunt due under
a mortgage was made and a request was made that the mortgagee
should accept what was just on accounts being taken, and the mort-
gagee not merely disputed the accounts but refused the settlement
of accounts altogether and the mortgagee rushed to the court with-
out justification, it was held that the conduct was such as not to
entitle him to the interest accruing after the date of tender and the
costs of the suit, The mortgagee was also not allowed the costs in
these appeals.

34.11. One of the points raised in a Madras case in an appeal*
against a redemption decree, by the defendants mortgagees was
regarding costs, which the lower court had net awarded, The
Madras High Court held:

“Ordinarily a mortgagee would be entitled to his costs but
this ig subject to the discretion of the court. where he
raises questions which involve a denial of the mort-
gagor’s right to redeem. Here there was a denia! that a
portion of the property was mortgaged: there was also
an excessive claim for improvements and also a claim for
enhanced revenue.”

In these circumstances the High Court refused to hold that the lower
court had exercised its discretion wrongly in this matter.

34.12, The facts in one Punjab case’ were as follows: A mortgag 8
was effected on the land in suit by the plaintiff in favour of the
defendant/appellant. The lower court had passed a decree for the
possession of land on deposit of the amount payable to the defendant
and costs. With regard to improvements, the trial court had held that
only part of the amount claimed had been proved. On appeal, coun-
sel for appellant submitted that in order to increase the yield from
the land so as to recompense himseif in lieu of the interest due on

1, Joti Lai v. Fateh Hahadur, Mgt R, 2929 Pat. 397 (D.B.).
2. Vaateus Holla v. Mahabala Kao, A.1.R. 1926 Mad. 405.
3. Rup Ram v, Munshi Chilly , A.LB. 1960, Ponj. 480 (D.B.).


258

the principal money, the mortgagee had to effect these improvements.
Dua J. held that the mortgagee एव possession cannot be permitted to
lay money im increasing the value of the estate except in circum-
stanees which strictly fall within the four corners of section 63-A
of the Transfer of Property Act. The Court held:

“The interpretation of this section, as suggested on behalf of
the appellant, is obviously calculated to give to the mort-
gagee a handle to so increase the value of ihe estate as to
cripple the mortgagor's power of redemption. This ob-
viously could not be the intention of the Tegislature.”

With regard to costs, the court held:

“The general rule is that costs follow the event. In the present
case, the mortgagee resisted the claim of redemption both
before the Collector and in the civil courts, and indeed it
has been very seriously opposed right up to this court.
The mortgagee has in fact persisted in Bt aiming title to
the land in suit. It was in these circumstances open to
the court below to pass the impugned order as to costs.
There is no question of principle involved in the order
which must, therefore, be upheld.”

34.13. In a Patna case,’ the plaintiff had prayed for a decree for
redemption of certain lands, which were the subject of usufructuary
mortgage executed by one M in favour of the defendants. The plain-
tiff claimed to have purchased the equity of redemption. The trial
court gave a decree for redemption in favour of the plaintiff. and
also granted the plaintiff costs of the suit. On appeal, the Patna High
Court held that “in the written statement the Gefendant challenged.
the title of the plaintiff to redeem the property, and we see no reason
why te, plaintiff should not be given the costs he has incurred i
the suit.” ' ono

34.14, In a suit for redemption which went up to the High Court
of Travancore-Cochin, the trial court had granted a decree, but on
terms which did not satisfy the plaintiff or the contesting defendants.
The High Court held? that normally, in a redemption suit, the mort-
gagee is entitled to his costs unless he is guilty of misconduct.
Putting excessive value on improvements is not misconduct so as to
disentitle a mortgagee to his costs, The question invelyed was,
whether the mortgagee could claim onyth ing more than what he
bargained for in the mortgage deed. Further, the contesting defen-
dents also put the mortgagor to prove her title to redeem, when there
was no doubt about her title. In these circumstances, the court de-
clined to interfere with the lower court's decision awarding the mart-
gagee only one-fourth of the costs.

34.15, In another Travancore-Cochin case.’ in a suit for rendemp-
tion, the defendant mortgagee raised untenable contentions Tegarding
part of the mortgaged property, and also claimed full value of the
building which had been erected by him contrary to the terms of

7१. Ronjlacllccm v. Ram Avtar 03. 201 1053 1.
2. Pakevathi Nectukantan v. Fanmini Pilla, ALR. 1952 Trov. Co. 205 (0.8,).
३. Narayana Pillai v. 2. Kestwan, AR, 1955 NUC (1135. Co.) 3483 (D.B.),


259

the deed. The plaintiff offered to pay only one-fourth of the value of
the improvements to the moriagee snd alss eleimed an exaggerated
amount by way of damages on account of waste. It was held that
the conduct of the parties was such as to disallow them their costs,
and each party was, therefore, to bear its costs.

34.16. The above examination of sample judicial decisions shows
that the rule frirly well. In particular, if the mortgagor deposits the
full amount, he would not be liable for costs of the suit,

“34.17. It may be of interest to note the corresponding English
rule quoted below :?

“Where a person is or has been a party to any proceeding, in
the capacity of a trustee, versonal renresentatiy or mort-
g@agee, he shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, be
entitled to the costs of those proceedings, in so far as
they are not recovered from or paid by any other person,
out of the fund heid by the trustee or personal represen! a-
tive or the mortgaged property, as the case may be; and
the Court may otherwise order only on the ground that
the trustee, ‘personal representative or mortgagee has
acted unreasonably or, in the case of a trustee or personal
representative. has in substance acted for his own benefit
rather than for the benefit of the fund.”

34.18. It has been stated that “a mortgagee has an absolute right
to costs, unless they are forfeited by misconduct: if they are for-
feited by misconduct. then they are within the discretion of the
Judge.’

ot. The English rule was thus explained’ by Lord Selborne

“The right of a mortgagee in a suit for redemption or for-
closure to his general costs of suit, unless he has forfeited
them by some improper defence or other misconduct, is
well established and does not rest upon the exercise of
that discretion of the Court which, in litigious causes, is
generally not subject to review. The contract between
mortgagor and mortagee. asitis understood in this Court,
makes the mortgage a security, not only for principal and
interest, and such ordinary charges and expenses ag are
usuelly provided for by the instrument creating the se-
curity, but also for the costs properly incident te a suit
for foreclosure or redemption. In like manner, the con-
tract between the author of a trust and his trustees en-
titles the trustees, as between themselves and their cestuis
que trust, to receive out of the trust estate all their proper
costs incident to the execution of the trust.

1, Sapreme Conrt Costs Rules (1959) Rule 6(2),
Farlex v, Tones (1880) 38 Ch. D. Hl, 84. per Lopes LJ, (Case under ull O. 65, r 1

RA.
4, Cotterell ४, Stratton (1872) ४00. 295-302, (Lord Selborne L.C.),


260

These rights, resting substantially upon contract, can only be
lost or curtaiied by such inequitable conduct on the part
of ६ mortgagee or trustee as may amount to a violation or
culpable neglect of his duty under the contract. “Any
departure from these principles in the general course of
the administration of justice in this Court would tend to
destroy, or at least very materially to shake and impair,
the security of mortgage transactions and the safety of
trustees, In fact, such a departure, instead of being bene-
ficial ta those who may have occasion to borrow money
on security, or to repose confidence as to property in their
friends or neighbours, would, in the result, throw the
former class cf persons into the hands of thase who in-
demnify themselves against extra-ordinary risks by extra-
ordinary exactions, and would deprive the latter class of
the assistance of all who cannot afford, or are not inclined,
to bestow upon the affairs of other persons their money
as well as their trouble and time.”

34.20. Since the right of a mortgagee to his costs of a redemp-
tion or foreclosure suit is a matter of contract. and not in the dis-
cretion of the Court, costs cannot be denied except where he has
“unreasonably instituted or carried on or resisted any proceedings”
within the above Rule.’ e.g. where he has declined to hand over
reconveyance in exchange jor the principal and interest." Mortgagees
failing on a fairly arguable point in a foreclosure suit may, however,
be allowed to add their costs to suit their security.” Eve J. summed
up the position thus:*

“[ think the various authorities to which my attention was
called in the course of the exhaustive arguments addressed
to me in this case establish three propositions; (1) that 8
mortgagee has an absolute right to costs unless they are
forefeited by misconduct; (2) that, if the absolute right is
forefeited by misconduct, the costs are in the discretion
of the judge; and (3) that the raising of an utenable de-
fence, or 6 claim 3 a balance due after the mortgage has
been fully paid off, both constitute misconduct by which
the aksolute right to costs is forfeited, Authority for these

opositions is to be found in the cases of Charles v. Jones
tre 9) 56 L.T.R. 848; Hall v. Heward (54 LTR, 810, 82
Ch. Div. 430); and Ashworth v. Lord (58 L.TR. 18)”.

34.21. It would, thus, appear, that, in substance, the position in
England does not differ from that in India. Moreover, the rule gives
a discretion which appears to have been soundly exercised. However,
it would, in our view, be desirable to provide expressly that where
the mortgagor pays or desposits the full amount before or at the
time of institution of the suit, ordinarily he shall get his costs, This
does not really change the Jaw, but only makes it more explicit.

Te fa) Catienetl ४. Beatin “19721
(h) Parner ४. Hiaveack

2. Rourke v. Rohiaann 19711 1 Ch. 480,

B. Stamfard ex parte v. Keohle (1913) 2 Ch. p. 102.

4. Heath v. Chinn, (1908) Law Times Reports 856-858.



श्हा

Recommendation as to Order 34, rule 10

34.93. Accordingly, we recommended that to Order 34, rule 10,
the following proviso should be added: —

“Provided that where the mortgagor, before or at the time of
institution of the suit, tenders or deposits the amount due
on the mortgage, or such amount as is not substentially
deficient in the opinion of the court, ke shall not be ordered
to pay the costs of the suit to the mortgagee and the mort-
gagor shall be entitled to recover his own costs of the suit
jrom the mortgagee, unless the court for reasons to be
recorded, otherwise direcis,

Order 34, rule 10-A (New) (Mesne profits) to be paid by the mort-
Ragee

34.23. Where the mortgagor has deposited the sum due on the
mortgage. mesne profits should be paid by the mortgagee, if the
amount tendered or deposited by the mortgagor 15 not substantial-
ly deficient. We are of the view thet an express provision on the
subject is desirable.

Recommendation

34.24, Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the follow-
ing new rule in Order 34:—

“10-A. Where the mortgagor has, before or at the institution
of the suit, tendered or deposited the sum due on the
mortgage, or such amount as is not substentialiy defi-
cient in the opinion of the Court, the Couri shall direct
the mortgagee to pay to the mortgagor mesne profits for
the period beginning with the institution of the suit.”


CuaPrer 35

INTERPLEADER SUITS
Introductory

35.1. Where the plaintiff has no claim as such against a parti-
cular defendant but is interested only for his debt, he can tile an
interpleader suit, under Order 35.

The Order on interpleader is derived from an Act’ of 1841,
which itself was based on an English Statute’. The Order provides
for various matters such as when interpieader suit may be insti-
tuted: when the thing claimed must be paid into Court; the proce-
dure at the first hearing, when agents and tenants can compel their
principals or landlords to interplead; how the plaintiff's costs may
be secured; and so on.

No changes are needed in this Order,

Met sof 1841,
ual Willian + ऐ. 58,

1



Me

CrarTerR 36

STATEMENT OF CASE

Introductory

36.1. Persons claiming to be interested in the decision of any
question of fact ur of law may, under Order 36, enter into an
agreement in writing siating the question in the form of a case
for opinion, and providing that upon the finding of the court there-
on, cervain money shall be paid or property delivered by one of
them to the other, or that one or more of them shall do or refrain
from doing some other specified act.

36.3. The agreement has to be filed in the court, and is num-
pered and registered as a suit. Thereafter, the procedure in other
respects is substantially the same as in an ordinary suit, and the
scheme of the provisions contemplates a judgment as well as a
decree.

The peculiarity and special merit of this procedure les in the
(i) framing by the parties before-hand of the questions involved,
Gi) the submission of the case to the court by agreement of both
parties—to that extent diluting the element of contest met with
in ordinary litigation, (iii) the formulation by the parties of the
precise relief that is anticipated, and (iv) the acceptance by them
before-hand of the binding character of the determination of the
court.

Order 36 Rule 3—Procedure under Order 36, not often

86.3. Unfortunately, the procedure provided by Order 36 is rarely
invoked, and we venture to think that one of the reasons why it
has not proved popular is the absence of any apparent benefit to the
litigant. The choice is always made in favour of the ordinary procedure,
because, the procedure of a statement of case, even if known to the
ordinary litigant, does not furnish any additional inducement. Some
inducement should be offered, which may be in respect of court fees.
The subject of court fees is outside the competence of the Union. But,
in order to highlight the desirebility of making a distinction bet-
ween an ordinary suit instituted by a plaint and a special case
originating in an agreement, the relevant rule of this order should ex-
pressly provide that the proceeding can be initiated by an applica~
tion,

Suggestion to substitute application so as to reduce court fees

36.4. An objection was raised during our discussions that the
proposed amendment would be incongruous, as it would bring in
the idea of “decree” and “procedure for suit” in a proceeding in-
stituted on an application. But we think that from the point of
view | of court fees, such a proceeding should not be treated as a
plaint,


264

it iy also desivable to provide that there should be no appeal
tinm the decrev passed as a result of such proceedings. Even now,
tat should be the position, berause the decree is, in a sense, a
compromise decree, against which there is no appeal’, But an ex-
press provision prohibiting appeal weuld be useful,

Recommendation to amend rule 3

36.5. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 36, rule 3, should
be revised as follows: —

“3(1). The agreement, if framed in accordance with the rules
hereinbefore contained, may be filed with an application
in the Court which would have jurisdiction to entertain
a suit, the amount or value of the subject-matter of
which is the same as the amount or value of the sub-
ject-matter of the agreement.

(2) The application, when so filed shall be numbered and
registered as a suit between one or more of the parties
claiming to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and
the other or others of them as defendant or defendants;
and notice shall be given to all the parties to the agree-
ment, other than ‘the party or parties by whom the appli-
cation was presented.

Recommendation to add rule 6
36.6. The following rule would be added as Order 36, rule 6—

“No appeal shall lie from a decree pronounced under
rule 5."

कपल 96.



a

Crapren 37
SUMMARY PROCEDURE

Introductory

97.1. Order 37 provides for summary procedure, in respect of
certain suits. A suit under this Order is instituted in the ordinary
form by presenting a plaint; but the summons is issued in a special
form'. ‘The essence of a summary suit under Oxder 37 is that the
d2fendant is not, as in an ordinary suit, entitled as a right to de-
fend the suit. He must apply for leave to defend within ten days
from the date of service of summons upon him; and such leave
will be granted only if the affidavit filed by the defendant discloses
such facts as will make it incumbent upon the plaintiff to prove
consideration, or such other facts as the court may deem suffi-
cient for granting leave to the defendant to appear and defend the
suit. If no leave to defend is granted, the plaintiff is entitled to a
decree. The object underlying the summary procedure is to prevent
unreasonable obstruction by a defendant who has no defence.

Bombay Amendment

37.2. The Order is confined te suits on negotiable instruments,
but the effect of the amendments made by the Bombay High Court
is practically to extend it to suits mentioned in section 128(2)(f) of
the Code.

37.3. Moreover, by Bombay amendment, the procedure has, to
some extent, been made less rigorous by an amendment of rule 3
of the Order 37. The Bombay amendment requires a plaintiff to
serve, with the writ of summons, a copy of the plaint and the
exhibits, and the defendant may at any time, within ten days of
such service enter only .an appearance in the first instance. Notice
of the appearance must be given to the plaintiff's attorney, and |
thereafter the plaintiff is required to serve on the defendant a sum-
mons for judgment, returnable in less than ten days from the date
of service, supported by an affidavit verifying the cause of action
and the amount claimed and stating that in his belief there is no
defence to the suit. It is only after the service of this additional
service for judgment that the defendant is required within ten
days thereof to apply for leave to defend.

37.4, In ‘the 14th Report? of the Law Commission, a recommen-
dation has been made for—

(a) amendment of the rvles. relating to summary procedure
on the lines of the Bombay amendment; and ‘

(०) extension of summary procedure to subordinate courts
in important industrial and commercial towns like
Ahmedabad, Asanasol. Kanpur and Jamshedpur.

1. Appendix 8, Form No. 4.
4. 14th Report, Vol. I, page 2:

‘L{BcD)229MofLJandCA—19 265

5, puru, 22, read with para, 21.


268

37.5. The Commission, in its Report’ on the Code examined
these recommendations and expressed the view that action under
(a) above could be taken by the High Courts under section
128{2)(a), and action under (b) above could be taken by the State
Governments under Order 37, rule 1(b). It was, therefore, con-
sidered unnecessary to make any provision on these matters of
detail in the Code.

37.6. We have considered the matter further. As we take a
different view, we should deal with the matter point by point. As
to extending the provisions to other cities. we note that in the 14th
Report, it was observed’: —

“22, A general extension of the summary procedure to all
court of subordinate judges and munsifs has not been
advocated nor do we recommend any such far-reaching
measure. We understand that although Order 37 has
een applied to the courts of all subordinate judges and
munsifs in Madras, it is not in use and has virtually
pecome a dead letter so far as subordinate courts in
mofussil of that State are concerned. The High Court of
Allahabad is opposed to its general extension. The
Bombay High Court is in favour of extending it to the
courts in such commercial towns as: are recommended
by the High Court. The Civil Justice Committee made a
similar proposal. Order 37 was extended to certain courts
in Bengal, Uttar Pradesh and the Punjab, probably on
the basis of that recommendation.”

“We suggest that the High Courts should extend the rules of
summary procedure, as 1 त ied in Bombay, to subordinate courts
in important industrial and commercial towns like Ahmedabad,
Asansol, Kanpur and Jamshedpur.”

37.7. We have taken note of the views expressed in the 14th
Report. We, however. think that the time has come for extending
summary procedure to all courts, in the interest of expedition,
and not to specified towns only.

37.8. It is, in our view, also desirable to extend summary pro-
cedure to all suits mentioned in section 128(2)(f), in the interest
of expedition’

37.9. In our opinion, the procedural amendments made by the
Bombay High Court* are also useful, and should be adopted. __

87.10. As has been observed, having regard to the scheme of
Order 37 as amended by the Bombay High Court, it is not necessary
for a defendant to obtain leave to appeal in a summary suit. He

. 27th Report, page 239, Note on Order 87 (Summary procedure).
. Lath Report, Vohame 1. page 275. para. 22.
Gf. Paw, 87-2, supra,

- Of. Para, 97-3, supra.
Indian Bopress Nrwepaper Id, v. Baewmath Private £id., A.LR, 1069 Bom. 40, 46, 47
para 14.

Pee


267

ean also make applications which do not raise a defence to the
suit without obtaining leave defend,’

Hecommendation

37.11. In short, our recommendations as te Order 37, are as
follows: —

(i) Order 37 should be extended to all courts:

(ii) Order 37 should be amended on the lines of the Bombay
amendment, so es to extend it to certain other suits in
accordance with the Bombay amendment;

(iii) Further, the procedure under Order 37, rule 3, should
be amended as in Bombay.*

Recommendation
37.12. Accordingly, the following amendments are recommend-

(i) For the existing title of Order 37, the following title
should be substituted—

Summary Procedure

(ii) For Order 37, rule 1, the following rule should be sub-
stituted—

“1, Application of Order—

{1) This Order shall apply to the following Courts,
namely,—

(a) High Courts, City Civil Courts, and Courts of
Small Causes: and

(b) subject to the proviso, other Courts:

Provided that in respect of the courts mentioned in sub-
clause (b) above, the High Court may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, restrict the operation of this Order
only to such categories of suits as it may deem proper,
and may also subsequently by notification in the Official
Gazette further restrict, enlarge, or vary from time to
time the categories of suits to be brought under the
operation of this Order as it may deem proper.”

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1), the Order

applies to the following suits, namely: —

{a) suits upon dills of exchange, undies and promis-
sory notes;

(b) suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover
a debt or liquidated demand in money payable
by the defendant, with or without interest, aris-
ing—

(i} on @ written contract or;

1, Cf. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 274-275, pars. 20-2.
3, Cf. 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 274-275.
TyB{D)220MofLJandCA——1%{a)


268

Gi) on an enactment where the sum sought to be
recovered is a fied sum of money or in the
nature of a debt other than a penalty: or

(ii) on a guarantee, where the claim’ agains: the ५६

prneipal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated
demand only;

(iii) For existing Order 37, rule 2, the following rule shall be
substituted:

“2(1) A suit to whieh this Order epplies may, if the

(2)

plaintiff desires to proceed hereunder, be ‘instituted
by presenting a plaint with a specific averment
therein that the suit is filed under this Order, and
that no relief not falling within the ambét: ofthis.
rule has been claimed, and with the inscription
within brackets “(Under Order XXXVIT of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908)" just below the number 0
the suit in the title of the suit, but ‘the summons
shall be in Form No, 4, Appendix B or in such other
form as may be from time to time prescribed.

In any case in which summons is in the prescribed
form (viz. Form No. 4 in Appendix B), the defendant
shall not defend the gyit, unless he enters an appear-
ance and obtains leave from the Court or Judge as
hereinafter provided so to defend; and in default of
his entering an appearance and ‘of his obtaining such
leave to defend, the allegations in the plaint shall be
deemed to be admitted, and the plaintiff shall be
entitled to a decree for any sum not exceeding the
sum mentioned in the summons together with inte-
rest at the rate specified (if any) up to the date of
the decree, and such sum for costs as may be deter-
mined by the High Court from time to time by rules
made in that behalf. and such decree may be exe-
cuted forthwith.” हु पु

(iv) The following shall be substituted for Order 37, Rule 3—
“3(1). In a suit to which this Order applied, the plaintiff

shall, together with the writ of summons under Rule
2, serve on the defendant a copy of thé plaint and
exhibits thereto, and the defendant may, at any time
within ten days of such service, enter an appearance.

-The defendant may enter an appearance either in

person or by pleader. In either case an address for
service shall be given in the memorandum of appea-
rance, and unless otherwise ordered. all summonses,
notices or other judicial processes required to be
served on the defendant shall be deemed to have been
duly served on him, if left at his address for service.
On the day of entering the appearance, notice of the
appearance shall be given to the plaintiff's pleader

a

*

€


1६2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

269

(or, if the plaintiff sues in person, to the plaintiff
himself) either by notice delivered at or sent by pre-
paid letter directed to the address of the plaintiff's
pleader or of the plaintiff, as the case may be.

If the defendant eters: an appearance,! Shey plaintiff
shall thereafter serve on the defendant, a summons
for judgment in Form No. 4-A in Appendix Bet! suth
other form as may be prescribed from time to time
returnable not less. than ten days from the date of
service supported by an affidavit verifying the cause
of action and the amount claimed, and stating that
in his belief there is no defence to the suit.

The defendant may, at any time within ten days

from the service of such summons for judgment, by
affidavit or otherwise disclosing such facts as may be
deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend, apply on
such summons for leave to defend such suit, Leave
to defend may be granted to him unconditionally or
upon such terms as to the Judge of Court appear just.

At the hearing of such, summons for judgment

(a) if the defendant has hot applied for leave to’ de-
defend or if such application has been made and
is refused, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judg-
ment forthwith. or

(9) if the defendant be permitted to defend as to the
whole or any part of the claim, the Court or the
judge shall direct that on failure to complete the
security (if ang: ), or to carry out such other direc-
‘tions as the Court or the Judge may have given
within the time limit in the Order, the plaintiff
shall be entitled to judgment forthwith. “""

The Court may for sufficient cause excuse the delay

‘in entering the appearance under sub-rule (1) or in

applying for leave to defend the suit under subrule
(3) of this rule.”


CHAPTER 38

ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT
Introduction

38.1. The provisional remedies which may be required to pre-
vent the defendant from absconding, and property from disappear-
ing or being wasted pending litigation, are also provided for in the
Code. The Code here deals with the following subjects; arrest be-
fore judgment; attachment before judgment; compensation for im-
proper arrests or attachment; temporary injunctions; interlocutory
orders; and, lastly, the appointment of receivers.

38.2. The rules as to arrest before judgment in England super-
seded the writ of ne exeat regno, and the Indian rules roughly cor-
respond to the English Rules of Court.

38.3. NE EXEAT REGNO* (that he leave not the kingdom),
was a prerogative writ whereby a person is prohibited from leay-
ing the realm, even though his usual residence is in foreign parts.
The writ is directed to the sheriff of the county in which the de-
fendant is resident, commanding him to take bail from the defen-
dant not to quit England without leave of the court. It is granted
on motion, supported by affidavit showing that a sum of money is
due from the defendant to the plaintiff, or will be due on taking
accounts between them, and that the defendant intends to abscond.

38.4. The writ was formerly applied to great political purposes,
but it is now applied in civil matters only, and is almost superseded
in England by orders under the Debtors Act, 1869, s. 6.

Order 38, rule 1

38.5. Under Order 38, rule 1, clause (a), sub-clause (i), if a per-
son has, with intent to delay the plaintiff or to avoid service of
process etc. left the local limits of the court's jurisdiction, he can
be arrested before judgment, if the other conditions mentioned in
the rule are satisfied.

38.6. Similarly, under Order 38, rule 1, clause (७), sub-clause (11),
if a person is, with the above intent, likely to leave the local limits
ot the court’s jurisdiction, he can be arrested before judgment, if
the other conditions are satisfied.

38.2. We have a small suggestion to make regarding this clause.
The liability to arrest should not arise for “leaving” the Court’s
jurisdiction on lawful business. In fact, the requirement of a par-
ticular intent. and the juxtaposition of these words with the world
“abscond”. shows that only malafide acts are covered. However, it
is desirable to make the position clear.

1. Sections 94.98,
2. Mozeley & Whiteley, Law Dictionary (1970), pages 232, 293,
270


271

Recommendation

38.8. We, therefore, recommend that—

(i) in Order 38, rule 1, clause (a), sub-clause @, before the
words “left the. local limits", the words “without lawful
excuse”, should be inserted.

(ii) in Order 38, rule 1, clause (a), sub-clause (ii), before the
words “leave the local limits”, the words “without lawful
excuse”, should be inserted,

Order 39, Rule 5
38.9. Order 38, Rule 5(1) is as follows: —

“5. (1) Where, at any stage of a suit, the Covurt-is satisfied, by
affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant, with intent to
obstruct or delay the execution of any decree that may be
passed against him.—

(8) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his
proptry, or

(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his pro-
perty from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the
Court, .

the Court may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed
by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as may be speci-
fied in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of the
Court, when required, the said property or the value of the
same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy
the decree, or to appear and show cause why he should not
furnish security.”

38.10. The rule, it may be noted, requires that the defendant be
given an opportunity to show cause. The question whether non-com-
pliance with this requirement has the effect of making the order
ultra vires and void, and the consequent attachment a nullity, and
whether, if the Court passes such an order. there is total lack of
jurisdiction, is one on which there has been some controversy.

38.11. In a Kerala case,' it was held that the question really was
not so much whether, (as some decisions had put it), the provisions
of Order 38, rule 5(1) are mandatory or merely directory. Even the
preach of a mandatory provision does not necessarily make it illegal.
The High Court referred to a decision of the Supreme Court,” where
it was pointed out that the question to be considered was whether
compliance with 8 particular provision is a condition precedent for
the assumpton of jurisdiction or whether on the other hand, the
provisions merely lay down the manner in which the jurisdiction
is to be exercised. If it is the former, non-compliance would make
the order void; but, if the latter, non-compliance would only make
the order voidable. The order would be liable to be set aside, but,
until that is done, it would be operative and cannot be ignored or

1. Madhavun v. State, AR, 1966 Ker. 212 (F.B.)
2, Ittyaviva Mathai v. Varkey, ALR. 1964 S.C. 907,


272

collaterally attacked. Therefore, in the light of the above decision
of the Supreme Court, in this case, even though the attachment is
erroneous and liable to be set aside in appropriate proceedings. the
order of attachment is one made with jurisdiction and is not a nul-
lity. Hence, it cannot be ignored or subjected to attack in collateral
proceedings.’ It was held that Order 38, rule 5 is intended for the
protection of the person whose property is sought to be attached
before judgment. If he did nat receive the notice required by law,
and was consequently denied the privilege of staying off the attach-
ment by the offer of security, an injury would, no doubt, accrue to
him: but the law gives him a remedy by way of appeal under @rder
43, rule 1, from such an irregular order to get it set aside.

38.12. Contrary views had been taken in some of the earlier High
Court decisions,” " but these were not accepted as correct in this
case, Hence, it was observed, that the order of attachment in this
ease, though erroneous and liable to be set aside in appropriate
proceedings, was an order made with jurisdiction, and was not a
nullity.

38.13. The question arose in a recent Allahabad case‘, where it
was held that if the procedure provided by law is not followed,
the attachment is a nullity.

Recommendation

38.14. A clarification of the law is badly needed in view of the
recent cases summarised above. On principle. such attachment should
be void, and we recommend the insertion of a sub-rule in Order
38, rule 5, to that effect. .

Order 38, Rule 11 A (news)

38.15, With respect to attachment before judgment (Order 38,
rule 9), reference had been made in the earlier Report’ to the con-
troversy on a certain point, An Allahabad ९४४९९ shows that the con-
troversy still continues.

38.16, In the Allahabad case, the appellants filed a suit in 1947,
and obtained an order of attachment before judgment in respect of
the property of the judgment debtor. The property was attached.
The Munsiff appointed the respondent as “superddar’’ (Custodian) of
the property. In the security bond ‘executed by the respondent, he
made himself liable for any loss of the property entrusted to him.
.First, the suit was dismissed for defavlt of the plaintiff; but later it

I. Dian Singh v, Secretary of State, ALR. 1945 Nag. 97,

2, Abdul Karim हू. Nur Mohammad, A.LB. 1920 Cal, 526, 527 (Newbould and Panton J.)

3. Dalar Singh रु, Ram Chander, ATR. 1984 AM. 165, 167 (Rachhpal Bingh त.)...

4, Sri Krishan Meptu v. Rasn Bab, ALR. 1967 All, 136 (B. Dayal and 0.0, Seth JT.)
[reviews easr-law]

4 Amoadiment net slrlied.

5. 27th Report, pages $9, 107, 234 (imfra),
6, Raj Chander ९. Ramesh Kiekore, ATR, 1965 All. 536.



_ 273

was restored. The defendant went in appeal, atd the case was re-
manded for disposal on the merits, and ultimately the plaintiff ob-
tained a decree. The decree-holder then. moved an applieation for
execution of the decree by arrest of the surety respondent, relying
on the attachment before judgement and the connected ‘bond.

38.17, The main object to this aj tion for execution was that
the order of attachment before ee had come to an end with
the @ismissal of the suit, and the respondent's ability had also
ceased with it. Negativing this contention, the High Court held that—
“A plain reading of (Order 38), rule 9 ‘gces to indicaté-that if
and when the suit is' dismissed, the court is under’. an
obligation to make an order withdrawing the attdchinest.
In other words. the order of attachment before judgment
made by the court would fall with the. d Whe
suit. If the court either peer गल tly or throgh careless-
ness omits to pass an order withdrawing the afta ts iment
and thereby fails to perform a duty imposed ‘ypon_ it,
. could it be said that the attachment shall ‘subsjst “even
though there is no. suit in existence? No discretion is
allowed to the court fo permit the attachment to con-
tinue even after the dismissal of the’ suit, It. therefore,
follows that the mandatory provisions of Rule 9 will not
be: affected by reason of the court having failed to comply
with the provisions of the law.”

38.18. It was also further held, that there was no distinction bet-
ween the dismissal of suit for default and a dismissal of suit on
merits. i a an oa

“If the plaintiff succeeds in getting the suit restored in one
case and the dismissal of suit is set aside an appeal in the
other, all that happens is that the suit becomes alive. It
cannot be disputed that once a suit is dismissed either for
defavlt or on merits, it ceases to exist in the eye of the
law, and any ancillary orders passed in the suit would au-
tomatically come to an end and cease to operate.”

38.19. In the instant case, it was, therefore, held that the supurd-
dar could not, after the attachment proceedings had become ineffec-
tive by reason of the dismissal of the suit for default, be held liable
under the security bond executed by him.

38.20. In this connection, reference may be made to the earlier
Report' portions dealing with Order 21, rule 57. and the proposed new
Order 38, rule 11A. Order 21, rule 57 provides that where property
has been attached in execution of a decree, but, because of the
decree-holder’s default. the court is unable to proceed further with
the execution application then, it can dismiss the application, in
which case “the attachment will cease”. There was a conflict of views
on the question whether this rule applied to attachment before judg-
ment. As a solution, the Law Commission had suggested that a gene.
ral rule applying the provisions of the Code (relating to attachment
made in execution) to attachments before a judgment. should be
inserted.

1. 27th Report, pages 80. 197, 233,


24

38.21. The proposed new rule was as follows:—

“Order 38, Rule 118: The,provisions of this Code applicable
to an attachment made in execution of a decree shall, as
far as may be, apply to an attachment made before judg-
ment which continues after judgment by virtue of the
provisions of rule 11.”

38.22. The judgment of the Allahabad High Court on Order 38,
Rule 9 is in conformity with the general principle recommended by
the Law Commission (in its earlier report). The order of attachment
made before judgment by the court would also fall with the dismis-
sal of the suit.

Recommendation

38.23. The earlier recommendation should be carried out. It will
not, however, solve the special difficulty created by the peculiar
facts that were found in the Allahabad case, and it may, therefore,
be worthwhile to provide also that the restoration of a suit does not
revive the attachment made before dismissal. Accordingly, the fol-
lowing rule should be added as Order 38, Rule 11A—

“113, (1) The provisions of this Code applicable to an attach-
ment made in execution of a decree shall, as far as may
be, apply to an attachment made before judgment which
continues after the judgment by virtue of the provisions
of rule 11,

(2) An attachment made before judgment, in a suit which is
dismissed for default, shall not revive merely by reason
of the restoration of the suit.”


CHAPTER 39
INJUNCTIONS AND OTHER INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS

Introduction

39.1. Order 39 deals with various interlocutory Orders, of which
the most important are temporary injuctions.

39.2. The theoretical interest of the subject of injunctions is
matched by its practical importance. Injunctions were invented by
the Court of Chancery as equitable remedies. One of the earliest
reported English cases deals with injunctions in relation to judicial
proceedings, but the utility of injunctions was soon realised, and
the remedy has now embraced other fields.

39.3. The equitable nature of the remedy is emphasised by se-
veral provisions of the Specific Relief Act’ (which deals with per-
manent injunctions, and by rules in Order 39 (dealing with tem-
porary. injunctions). But it is odd that a subject of such importance
has en dealt with in the Code in provisions which, at
times, prove to be less comprehensive than they ought to
be, It is for this reason that the matter was considered at some length
in the earlier Report, and we also shall have a number of things to
say on this Order.

39.4. The “interdict” of the Roman law bears a resemblance to
the injunctions of courts of ea am Tt is said to have been called an
tnterdict, because, it was originally interposed in nature of an inter-
locutory decree between two parties contending for possession, until
the dispute as to property could be tried. But, afterwards, the appel-
lation was extended to final decretal orders of the same nature’, ५

Order 39, rule 1

39.6. We shall first deal with the scope of the power to grant tem-
porary injunctions, Under Order 39, rule 1, where, in any suit, it is
proved by affidavit or otherwise—

(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of bein,
wasted, maged or alienated by any party to the suit, ec
wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or

{b) that the defendant threatens or intends, to remove or dis-
pose of his property with a view to defraud his creditors,

the court may be order grant a temporary injunction to
restrain such act, or make such other order for the purpose of
staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale,
removal or disposition of the property as the court thinks fit,
until the disposal of the suit or until further orders”.
1. The Specific Rolief Act, 1983. Os oo
2, Story, Equity Jurisgpredence (1917), pawe 365.
273



276

39.7. The rule is primarily concerned with preservation of the
property in dispute till legal rights are ascertained.

39.8. The situation where the defendant threatens to dispossess
the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in relation to
any 6४९७ in-Uispdte 16 the sui€ 48 het covered om -a-Htetal read-
ing. We think that it ought to be covered.

Recommendation

39.9. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 39, rule 1, should be
revised as follows—

Revised Order 39 rule 1— .

_ “1. Where, in any suit, it is proved by affidavit or otherwise—

(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of
being wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to
the sult, or wrongiully sold in execution of a decree, or

(b) that the defendant threatens or intends, to remove or
dispose of his property witha view tc‘ defrauding his
ereditors, or ,

(c) that. the defendant threatens to dispossess the plaintiff
or otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in relation to
fry property in dispute ३४ the. suit,

the court may be order grant a temporary injunction to restrain

such act, or “make such other order for the purpose of staying

.and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, remo-
vil or disposition, of the ‘property, or dispossession of the plain-
tf, or otherwise causing injury to the pleintiff in relation to
any property in dispute in the suit, as the court. thinks fit,
until the disposal of the suit. or until further orders”.

Order 39, rule 3

39.10, Under Order 39, rule 3, the Court is required ‘to: 18876
notice to the opposite my before granting an injunction, “exce pt
where it appears that tl Re Sbiect of glantihe the injunction would be
defeated by the delay”. It is under these words of exception that what
are known as ex-parte ad interim injunctions are granted.

Ex-parte Ad interim injunctions

, 39.10A, Complaints are often, he heard that the grant of temporary
injunctioris—particulary ex parte—causes hardship, and is an indirect
datse of delay. "

Question in the Questlonnaire,as to fempprary injunctions,

3911. Having regard to thé importance of the subject of tem-
porary injunctions, we had in our Quéstionnaire' on the Code, in-
eluded the following question:— a

“24.(a) Would you favour any limitations on the Court's
power to issue temporary injunctions? In particular, do

1. Question 24.


277 -

you favour an amendment to the effect that an ex parte |
interim injunction should not be granted, save in exceptio-
nal cases, and for reason to be recorded in that behalf?

(9) Would you. favour the suggestion that in ease an ex ‘parte
injunction is granted, it-shall be discharged by the court
if it is satisfied that the party which obtained the injunc-
tion is not taking diligent action to serve the opposite
party or to take other steps necessary for. the progress of.
the suit?”. - edt

The majority of replies agree with the approach shown in the
. .fpiestion. हु

39.12, After taking into account all aspects of the matter; we:
have come to the conclusion that an ame! nt of the law is called
for.

39.13, No doubt, such a power of j Aso r Diets 2, 51/20/4468 :
needed for urgent cases. But practi Fil हि 2 6, (21 है rests ‘inate
there ought to be some restriction,es to the uration for whieh: the
ex parte injunction should continue.

In the. absence of such a restrietion, the party obtaining an in-
junction loses interest in prosecuting the suit with diligenes, and the
party bound by the injunction suffers... While. we realise that too
severe or too many restrictions on the powers of the court may work
hardship, we are of the view that some broad limitations. would be
ysetul and workable, What, we think, could be. .reeommended is

at— . . tos

(a) interim ex parte injunctions shot not be grétited for a
duration exceeditig, say, one mont Cow a8

(b) hearing of the application for injunction should be finished
within one moi where! an interim es: parte injunction
has been granted; aa Loe

(ल if extension of the duration of an interim ex. fe imjune «
tion becomes absolutely necessary, the exti bet Fee
be granted only once and should not exceed 18 ब्लू é ,
with the consent of the opposite patty; * ie

(a) 'no interim ea parte injumction should ‘be issued"ilnless a

copy af the plaint accompanies it, ae also a copy ‘@f.-the
application for injunction. : .

39.134. Some of the replies received on the question’ put by us
in this behalf favour an amendment as suggested, while some of them
are opposed to it on the principle that what is discretionary cannot be
made rigid. Bearing in mind the views expressed, we have made the
aboye recommendation. ot as Toa

Toe

39.13B. We are, of the view that if a party, 10 an application for .

temporary injunction or in the supporting affidayit, knowin ay mares t
3 fatse statement on a material particular, the court should take. thet
= sa a

१. Para. 3-11, supra. | . low



278

into account in exercising its discretion under Order 39, Rule 4,—
that is to say—in considering the question whether the Court should
vary or discharge the injunction. That is the law even now; but it
can be usefully emphasised.

39.14, It has been emphasised in England,’ that an injunction may
be refused if the plaintiffs have misled the defendant and the court.
This is on the principle that he who comes in equity must come with
clean hands—a maxim which has been described as not unrelated to
the maxim er turpi causa non oritor actio of the common law’.

39.15. If, on hearing of a motion by a plaintiff for an injunction,
or, in the alternative, to continue an interim injunction already ob-
tained ex parte, it appears that the interim order was irregularly ob-
tained by suppression of facts, the Court may discharge the ex parte
order without any cross notice of motion for that purpose by the de-
fendant; though it may grant the injunction asked for.

Motion of dissolve ex parte injunctions
39.16, Kerr states the position thus:

“If, on the motion to dissolve an ex parte injunction, it appears
that the plaintiff has misstated his case, either by misre-
presentation, or by the suppression of material facts, so
that an injunction has been obtained which would not
have been obtained if a more accurate statement of the
ease had been made, the injunction will be dissolved on
that ground alone’. The plaintiff will not be allowed to
maintain it on the merits then disclosed’, Nor can he be
heard to say that he was not aware of the importance of
the facts so misstated or concealed,’ or that he had forgot-
ten them‘. A motion to discharge an er patte injunction on
the ground of its having been obtained misrepresenta-
tion is proper, though th e injunction is हि cut to expire’,

39.17, It would be useful to codify the position by amending
Order 34, rule 3.

Onder 39, rule 4

39.18, Under Order, 39, rule 4, a court can discharge, set aside or
vary a temporary injunction, It is obvious that where a party has been

2. Bee Rnglinh cases cited Aaiatio Dagincering Os. ¥. अंक Kam , ALB. 1961 All. 746,
pers 91.

2. Armatrong v. Sheppart de Short Ltd. (1959) 2 Q.B. 934.

3. 89७1, Equity, (1986), page 86.

4. Boyse v. Gill (1891), 64 LT. 824, cited in Annula practice, under Order 80, rale 6.
8. Kerr on Injunctions, (1927) 669.
Brown +. Newall, 2M & C., 9. 5

1
J, Oh. 48 Castelti v. Cook, THn., P. 94; Datglich v.
. 3 है + 475; RB. 83; Rose v. Buxton (1888) WN. 55, Boyce ९. GR
64 £.T, (1891) WN. p. 108 ; Schunitten ४. Paula (1893) 84, Seo Rex v, Kensington Income
Taz Commissioners, (1017) 1 K.B. p. 617; 86 LJ.K.B.,

6. AU. Gen. x. Corporation of Liverpook, 1M. & C. 43 RR. 176: Castellt v. Cook पर
Hoe. 9, 4 Dalglieh 7, Jarvic, IMac. & G., p.238; 20 LJ. 386 BB. 83.

1. Dalglish प. Sarvie, 2 Mac. & 0. p. 241; 20 L.J. 01. 476; 86 RR. 83.

8, Clifton v. Robinson, 16 Beav. 355: 98 R.R. 171.

9. Wimbledon Looal Bourd v. Croydon Saxitary Axthority, 82, Ch. D. 421; 56 L.J. Ob. 189:



279

heard (or had an opportunity of being heard} before the injunction
was granted, the injunction should not be discharged etc. except in
special cases, We propose an amendment to bring that out.

Recommendation
39.19. Accordingly, we recommend as: follows: —
~ (i) The following proviso should be inserted below Order 38,
rule 3—

“Provided that where an injuncrion has beer granted with-
out notice to the opposite party
(a) the period for which it shall be in force ag initially
fixed shall not exceed one month;
(b) hearing of the application for injunction shall, as
far as practicable, be finished within one month;
and

“(c) if it becomes absolutely necessary to extend the
period for which the injunction is to remain in
force, the extension shail no exceed fifteen days,
except with the consent of the opposite party’.

(ii) The following further proviso should be added below Order
39, 3

, Rule 3:
“Provided further that where an injunction is granted
on the plaintif’s application without notice to the op-
posite party, the court shall, before granting it, re-
quire the plaintiff to file an affidavit stating thet a
copy of each of the following documents has been
served on the epposite party by delivery to him, or
where such service & not practicable, by sending it to
him by registered post:—
(a) the plaint,
(b) the documents on which the plaintiff relies,
(०) the application for injunction, and
(9) the affidavit or other documents on which the ap-
plicant relies”.
{iii) The following proviso should be inserted below rule 4 of
Order 39:—

“Provided that if a party, in an application for temporary
injunction or in the suj porting affidavit, has knowing-
ly made a faise or misleading statement on a material
particular, and the injunction was granted without
notice, the court shall wacate the injunction unless for
teasons to be recorded it considers it just not to do so”.

(iv) athe following fourth proviso should be added to Order 39,

Tule

“Provided further that where an order for injunction has
been passed after giving a party an opportunity of
being heard, the order shall not be discharged, varied
or set aside on the application of that party, unless
there has been a change gf circumstances, or, unless
the court is satisfied that order has caused undue
hardship to that party”. 7


Cnarrer 40
RECEIVERS

Iinftoduetory

3 40,1, Order 40, dealing with receivers, corresponds to section 503
of the cld Code, of which the portions relating to 8 receiver's remune-
ration and his duties are now to be. f ‘ound in Rules 2 and 3. Under
settion 505 of the previous Code, a réreiver could be appointed only
by High Courts and District Cor but under the present Code, all
Cotirts can appoint a receiver. oe thet js ‘just and convenient’, which
has ‘Bean substituted for “necessary fdr the realisation, preservation
or better custody or management of any property, movable or im-
movable: the subject of a suit or under attachment”, thus enlarging
the power of a Court’. -

No..changes aye needed in this Order,

oy wy 5 . tty

. Se a PO 3a ऋझझझः

1 J: Bie Alaganya v. Krithnaswami, ALR, एटा 2688. 119, 120: .
जल
1 कर



Chapter 41

APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES
Introductory

41.1, Procedure as to appeals from original decrees is governed
by Order 41. It is briefly as follows: —

412. The appellant presents a memorandum, accompanied by a
copy of the decree appealed against. The Code lays down rules 88 ta
the form and contents of this memorandum, and forbids the appellant
to urge, without the leave of the Court, any ground of objections not
set forth therein, To stop the practice of presenting appeals merely
for the purpose of delaying execution, the Code declares that execu-
sion of a decree is not siayed by reason only of its having been appea-
led; but the appellate Court may stay execution when substantial
luss may otherwise result to the appellant, and he applies without
unreasonable delay and gives sccurity for performing such decree
as may ultimately be binding on him. The rules prescribe the proce~
dure after the appellant’s memorandum is admitted.

41.3. To afford the parties reasonable time for preparation and for
instructing their pleaders (if they choose to employ any), a day is
fixed for hearing the appeal, so as to allow the respondent sufficient
time to appear and answer. and notice of the day so fixed must be
published and served on him. Lf a party neglects to appear on the
day so fixed, the consequence is judgment by default in the case of
the appellant, and proceeding ex parte in the case of the respondent.

41.4, There are rules as to the judgment to be passed in appeal.
In order that the litigants may understand the grounds of the deci-
sion, and exercise, if they see fit, the right of seeond appeal, the Code
requires the judgment to state the points for determination, the de-
cision thereupon, the reasons for the decision, and, when the decree
appealed against is reversed, the relief to which the appellant is
entitled’.

Order 41, rule 1A (new)—Court fees on Appeal

41.3, One of the most important problems which a litigant has to
face in respect of appeal is that of dourt fees; and, having regard to
109 importance. we had. in our Questionnaire’ solicited views on the
following question:—

“32. Would you favour the insertion of a provision to the effect
that at the time of filing of the appeal, only one-fourth of
the prescribed court-fee need be paid. and the remaining
may be paid when the appeal is admitted”.

in Belt ९. Oneudas Row

ve wax sulggcelca by इल्‍क 08 Poweoek's milings

Je
1 Bou

2. Question 32.

281
LB(N229MofLI&CA. -20


282

41.6, Majority of the replies on this question favour, broadly,
the suggestion made in the question. After some discussion, we have
also come to the same conclusion.

Recommendation

41.7. We, accordingly, recommend insertion of the following
rule—
1A. At the time of filling of the apneai, only one fourth of the
requisite court-jees need be paid. and the remoinder of the
court: fees may be paid when the appeal is admitted under
tule 11”

Order 41, rule 3A (new) Refund of Court Fees and Process Fees.

41.8. If an appeal is rejected under any rule or dismissed as barred
by limitation or for want of jurisdiction or otherwise than .on the
merits, then a refund of court-fees should in our view, be allowed.
Even now, this can be done under the inherent powers of the court;
but a specific provision on the subject would, in our view, be useful,

Recommendation

41.9. Accordingly, we recommend that a new rule should be im
serted in Order 41, as follows:

“3A. Where an appeal is rejected under any rule contained in
this Order or dismissed as barred by limitation or for want
of jurisdiction or otherwise than on merits, without notice
to the opposite party, the court may allow refund of the
court fees and process fees paid in respect of the appeal, to
such extent as the court may consider just”.

Order 41, rule 5.

41.10. One of the most important aspects of an appeal is the grant
of stay of execution of the decree appealed from. In this context, the
question whether a stay order operates immediately or only when it
is communicated to the Court (or the officer conducting the sale) was
examined at length in the Commission’s earlier Report®. The Commis-
sion, after referring to the conflicting rulings on the subject, express-
ed the opinion “that ordinarily the order should be effective immedig-
tely, and a provision to the contrary may be abused by interested
parties attempting deliberately to delay transmission of the order
from the appellate Court to the lower Courts”. At that time, the
Commission did not recommend any amendment on the subject.

41.11. Since then, the Gujarat High Court has held? that the
stay order granted by an appellate Court becomes effective not from
the moment of its pronouncement. but from the moment it is com-
municated ta the Court, It was held, therefore, that the decree passed
by the Court of Small Causes, before communication of the stay order
issued by the High Court (the communication actually took place the
next day), was a proper decree,

1, 27th Repurt, page 238, wnt on Order 41, Rule 5.
2. Harish Kuour पर. OAlvnallad, ALR, 1966 901, 281.


283

On the fact. it was also held that the signing of the decree by the
Judge of the Court of Small Causes after the stay order granted by the
High Court had been communicated to it, was not a breach of the stay.
order, as the judgment had been pronounced before the stay was com-
municated.

Recommendation for amendment of Order 41, rule 5

41,12, We have given some thought to the matter and are of the
view that stay should be effective from the date of communication,
since the opposite view might create practical complications. At the
same time, we think that an affidavit by an advocate based on personal
knowledge should be acted upon, until a formal order is received, or
until orders to the contrary are received from the court granting stay.

We, therefore, recommend that the following Explanation should
be added to Order 41, rule 5(1).

“Explanation—Stay ordered by the court of appeal shali be effec-
tive from its communication, but an affidavit by a pleader based on
his personal knowledge stating that a stay has been ordered by the
court of appeal shall be acted upon by the court of first instance, un-
til a formal order is received, or untw orders to the contrary are re-
ceived from the court of appeal’,

Order an rule 11—Judgment in case of dismissal of appeal without
notice

41.13. In the earlier Report’, an amendment was suggested to carry
out the recommendation made in the Fourteenth Rep ort? with re-
ference to Order 41, rule 11. The object was to provide that even
where the appellate court dismisses an appeal without notice to the
lower court, it shall deliver 2 formal judgment, and a decree shall
be drawn up. _

41.14. We agree that in such cases, a formal judgment would be
useful, The above recommendation should, therefore, be carried out,
both for the High Court and for the district court when hearing first
appeals.

41.15, In the case of the High Court when hearing a second appeal
however, the position should be the reverse. Having regard to the res-
tricted scope of second appeals? reasons should be required to be re-
corded if the appeal is admitted,

Order 41 rule 5 (4).

41.16. The question of stay of execution of decrees during the
vendency of appeal has engaged our serious attention, and we pro-
pose an important change in this respect.

note on Order 41, Rule 11.
3. 14th Report. Vol. 1, page 348, para 10५ 1

» 140 anil recammendation relating theretn,
xiraugruph 42,2 and 42.3 infra,
L/BON) 2208 fTT&CA--20(0)



41.17. An appeal by itself does not operate as a stay of execution.
But stay can be granted by the Court passing the decree or by: the
appellate court, for “sufficient cause™.' The general direction in this
respect in the Code is, that stay shall not be granted, unless the court
+s satisfied about the existence of three circumstances—

(a) likelihood of substantial Joss to the applicant for stay, if the
stay is not granted:
(8) application without unreasonable delay;

(०) security by the applicant for the due performance of such
decree or order as May be ultimately binding upon him.

Sub-rule (3) of Order 41. rule 5 so provides—But sub-rule (4) of
the same rule says—
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3), the
court may make an ex parte order for stay of execution
pending the hearing of the application”.

41.18. It is this sub-rule which causes trouble in practice. Once an
एड parte order of stay is obtained. the appellant is not interested in
prompt disposal of the appeal, Moreover, it is common experience
that often the vcry object of appealing is to obtain stay, particularly
in respect of money decrees, and even if the appellant knows that he
has uti case. he appeals with the above object.

41.19. Having regard to what is stated above, we are of the view
that Order 41, rule 5, sub-rule (4), requires radical modification, so
that the remedy provided by it may not be abused. It is against the
spirit of sub-rule (4) to grant stay as a matter of course, and it cer-
tainly is unjust that stay without the safeguards contemplated by sub-
re (a) should be granted ex perte. even pending the hearing of the
anplication.

Recommendation

|. We, therefore, recommend that Order 41. rule 5(4), should
ed as follows:

be revis

“(4) Subject to the vravisions of sub-rule (3). the court mav
roake an ex narte order for stay of execution pending the hearing of
the application”.

Order बा. rule 11 and appeals under section 47

A recommendation had been made in the 14th Report of
‘ion’ to the effect that in case of appeals against orders
in execution of money decrees. a restriction should be placed on the
right of ovunecl. by reouiring the apvellant iudgment-debtor to de-
posit, or ct least sive security for. the decretal amount, as a condition

कै, (10५ ॥1. 1६
3. 14th Report



285

precedent to the admission of the appeal. The Report referred to the
proposal of the Civil Justice Committee to that effect', and recom
mended the acceptance of the proposal.

41.22. The Civil Justice Committee had stated in its Repart that
after trial, it was only just that such a protection should be given to
ihe successful decree-holder.

41.23. The Law Commission in its Report* on the Cede, after
noting the above yecommendations, expressed the view tha; such a
rigid provision might cause hardship. and did not, therefore, favour
an ameridment, It also expressed the view that the restriction against
stay, embodied in Order 41. rule 5(3) (read with Order 41, rule 8),
was enough.

41.24. We have considered the matter at length, and bave come
to the conclusion that a provision emphasising the need for demand-
ing security in such cases would prove to be useful, St the same time,
we appreciate that a strict or rigid provision may cause hardship in
some cases. [t appears to us that while the entertaining of the appeal
need not be postponed until security is furnished, the apeal should be
admitted conditionally. that is to say, if security is not furnished
within the time fixed by the eppellate court. then the appeai should
be liable to be rejected.

Recommendation

41.25. Accordingly, we recommend the addition of the following
sub-rule to Order 41, rule 11:—

“(4) Where an appeal ts admitted under this rule against @ de-
termination of any such question as is referred in section
42, and the question relates to the execution, discharge or
satisfaction of a decree for the payment of money, and the
appeal is by the judgment-debtor, the admission of the
appeal shall be conditional on the appellant furnishiny secu-
rity for the due performance of such decree or order as
may ultimately be binding upon him, and if the appellant
does not furnish such security within such time as may be
fixed by the Court, the appeal shali be reiedted.” है

३1.25.3. As to dismissal of appeal without notice, we have already
referred’ to the earlier recommendation.

Order 41, rule 12A (New)—Admission of appeal restricted to certain
grounds,

41,26. On the question as ta whether appeals (particularly, second
appeals) can be admitted on certain grounds only, there has been
some discussion.

il Justice Committee Report, (1925) page 401.
2. 27th Report, page 30, para 68.
3. Pare 41.13, supra.



286

41.27. In its Report’, one of the previous Commissions, stating
that there was a conflict on the subject, observed that this difficulty
could be met by an amendment of the law. It recommended the inser-
tion of a statutory requirement providing that the judge admitting
the appeal should state the point or points of law which arise for
consideration in the second appeal, to ensure a stricter and better
securily at the stage of admission.

41.28, In its Report on the Code, however, 2 later Commission,’
which considered this recommendation. came to the conclusion
that the power of the appellate Court should not be so confined,

41.29. We have examined the matter at some length; and as
we take a different view in this matter, we propose to discuss the
position in some detail,

41.30. An examination of judicial decisions reveals that the
trend of rulings is to the effect that a Court cannot restrict the
grounds on which an appeal is to be heard finally,” though the ap-
pellant can give up some of the grounds‘ at the hearing.

41.31. In this connection, attention may be inyited to the ob-
servations of Asutoosh Mookherjee J. in a Calcutta case,” where he
stated as follows:—

“But in so far as the objection taken that the Appellants
shovld be restricted to the one ground for the considera-
tion of which the appeals were admitted, we are of
opinion that it ought not to prevail, It is not competent
to a Court of Appeal under Rule, 12 of Order 41 of the
Code to restrict the ground or grounds upon which the
appeal admitted under the rule is to be heard finally;
in other words, the restrictive order of this Court made
at the time when the cases were heard under Rule 11
of Order 41 was ultra vires. Rule 11 provides that “the
Appellate Court after sending for the record. if it thinks
fit so to do, and after fixing a day for hearing the appel-
lant or his pleader and hearing him accordingiy if he
appears on that day. may dismiss the appeal without
sending notice of the appeal to the court against whose
decree the appeal is made and without serving notice on
the respondent or his pleader’, Rule 12 then provides that
“Unless the appellate court dismisses the appeal under
rule 11, it shall fix a day for hearing the appeal”. It is
worthy of note that a day is to be fixed for hearing the
appeal, that is to say, the whole appeal and not any
selected grounds out of those specified in the memoran-
dum of appeal. Consequentally, all the grounds taken
in the memo of appeal by the appellants are open for
consideration al the final hearing, and we now proceed
to examine them.”

}. Mth Report, Vol. I, page 392, pare 16 seoond sub-paragraph.

2. 27th Report, page 123, Note on section 100, para 2.

3. Krishnaji ४, Modiuea, A.T.R. 1934 Bow. 207, 211 (2.3.1
{h) Sukhdev. Genduiat, A,1.R. 1954 M.D. 84, 25 (Reviews casce).
(0) (1967) 1 Mys. L. J. 1, Crd in the yrarly Digest,
$. Rekha Plakur, v. Ramnavel qn ALR, 1936, Pat. 7, 8, 9.
5. ८18 Narain Seromji y, Sri Ram Chandra (1911) 16 Cal, W.N, 921, 088 (D.B,}



287

41.32. These observations seem to have been followed in later
decisions of that High Court as well as of other High Courts; and
there is, therefore, no conflict on the question whether an appeal
can be admitted on some grounds only.

41.33. The conflict really is on a slightly different matter,
namely, whether the admission of an appeal i part is illegal. The
Bombay view' on the subject is, that if the subject-matter is scver-
able, this can be done. The Madras view is, that it cannot he done.’

41.34, We think that on the first point‘—namely, the admission
of appeal restricted to certain prounds,—the law should be altered,
in the interest of simplification of precedure and avoidance of de-
lay. On the second point’, namely—the admission of an appeal
in part where severable,—the law should be clarified.

41.35. The alteration on the first point. and the clarification on
the second point, shovld be based on the same approach, namely,
the court should have power to restrict the admission to certain
grounds only or to a part only (as the case may be).

Recommendation

41.36. Accordingly, we recommend that the following rule
should be added in Order 41,

“12A, The Court may, at the time of admission of the appeal,
direct that the appeal is admitted in part only or on
specific grounds only, and where such an order is passed,
it shall not be open to the appellant to arque the appeal
on any other part or to urge any other ground of appeal,
as the case may be, without the leave of the Court.”

Order 41, rule 14, and dispensing with service on respondent against
whom case was ex parte.

41.37, With reference to service of the memorandum of appeal,
one point was considered in the earlier Report’. A recommenda-
tion had been made in the Forteenth Report* to the effect, that
in the case of parties who had not appeared in the court below,
and who had not filed any address for service. a provision may be
made to dispense with service of the notice of appeal. A somewhat
similar recommendation had been made by the Civil Justice Com-
mittee’ also, which observed that the necessity of serving each of
those respondents against whom the suit had proceeded ex parte,
with notice of appeal or of eny interocutory motion, led to an un-
necessary delay. It stated. that this was more specially the case
where the appellant had obtained an interim stay of execution, as
it would be easy for an ex parte defendant to collude with the

1, Rrishnaji ५. Madthusa, A. LR. 1934 Bom, 207 (F.B.}

2. Eawariah v. Ramsskwareys, ATR. 1940 Mad, 483.

8, Paragraph 41-30, supru,

4. Paragraph 41:33, oupri.

6. 2ith Report, page 239, Note on Order 41, rule 14.

6. 1400 Report, Vol. I, Page 893, pare 21.

7. Civil Justice Committee (1925) Repert, page 117, para 27, second sub-parac


288

defendant-anpellant and pvade service uf notice, Amendments on
these lin foo, have becn made by the fligh Courts of Allahabad,
Andhra Pradesh, Assam. Caleutia, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, My-
sore and Pionjab. in Order 41, rule 14, and by the High Courts of
Orissz and Patna by inserting Order 41, rule 143.

41.38. The carlier Commission noted the above position, but
felt that it was unnecessary to carry out the suggested change, a8
Not much driay is caused by the necessity of service of notice of
appeal,

41.39. Ir apperrs tw us, however, that such a provision would be
useful, as saving delay.

Kecommendation

41.40. We, therefore, recommend that in Order 41, Rule 14, the
following subrules should be sdded—

“(3) The notice to be served on the respondent shall be ac-
companied by a copy of the memorandum of appeal,

(4) Norwithstanding anything to the contrary contained im
sub-rule (1), it shall not be necessary to serve notice of
any proceeding incidental to an appeal on any respondent
other than a person impleaded for the first time in the
Appetiate Court, unless he has eppeered and filed an
address for service either “in the trial court or, in the
case of a second appeal, in the lower appellate Court, or
has appeared in the appeal.

(5) Nothing in sub-rule (4) shall bar the respondent referred
to in the appeal and defending it,”

Order 41, rule 17 and disposas on merits in absence of the appellant

4141. When an appellate Covrt does not dismiss an appeal
summarily, it should fix a date for the hearing of the appeal and
notice of the date should be affixed in the appellate Court house
and should be served on the respondent or an his pleader, under
Order 41, rules 12 and 14. The procedure thereafter is provided in
Order 41. rule 17, which lays down that “Where on the day fixed,
or any other day io which the hearing may be adjourned, the appel-
lant does not appear when the appeal is called on for hearing, the
Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed.” In this
rule, the word ‘may' shows that, apart from dismissal of the ap-
peal for default, the court can pass other orders, One such order
could be adjournment of the’ appeal.

21.42. But there is a conflict of decisions on the question
whether, if the appeilant does not appear, the appellate court ean,
under this rule, dispose of the appeal on the merits, The Allaha-
bad view' is that lecision on the merits is permissible.

1. Gojram 5. Rao Roti, AIR, 1965 AU. ‘OAT, 649 (Desai and Pathak J. a.)



eee

289

41.43, Answering the query—how an appeal can be disposed
of on merits without the appellant's or his eovnsel being heard, the
Court observed “I see no anomaly or even difficulty in this. The
appeliate court can read the judgment appealed irom and the
memorandum of appeal and hear the respondent or his counsel
and then can certainly decide onmerits whether the appeal should
be dismissed or not. If the appeal is a good one and the respondent
ur his counscl is unable te show any cause for its being dismissed
the appellate courl can ce: tainly ailow it on merits in spite of the
appellant's absence. Siméla’ if it finds that the grounds of appeal
have no substance, it can dismiss it on merits. Orally hearing a
party or his pleader is nut an essential ingredient of a decision on
merits and the appeal in the instant case could have been dismis-
sed by the leurned Additional Judge on merits in spite of the
appellants’ absence.”

41.44. A later Allahabad case’ takes the same view.

41.45. As to Order 41, rule 30. the Allahabad High Court* deals
with the position thus:

“Order XLI R.30 no doubt makes the hearing of the parties
or their pleaders a condition precedent to the pronoun-
cing of judgment, but this condition has heen laid down
for the benefit of the parties and in their own interest,
and its fulfilment is, by its very nature. dependent
upon their volition and co-operation. The parties
cannot, therefore, by refusing to avail of the bene-
fit and by withholding their co-operation incapacitate the
Court for using that power to the exercise of which the
condition has been attached. If the opportunity for the‘
fulfilment of the condition has been allowed, although it
has not been availed of, the condition will be deemed to
have been complied with and the Court will acquire the
competence to exercise the power conferred upon it as if
the condition had been fulfiled. If this were not so, the
parties would. by their awn omission to avai) of the
Opportunity granted to them, be able to create an in-
Strmountable impediment in what the Court has been
authorised to do by the statute and render the power
Riven to it totally ineffective and nugatory.”

41.46. Other High Courts, however, take a different view,” The
most important case in support of the view that the court has no
power to dismiss an appeal on the merits Gf the appellant does not
appear at the hearing), is a Madras one’ Mostly, the line of reason-
ing adopted in the Madras case has been accepted in the decision
of other High Courts,

1. Habu fam ©. Hhagwom Dass, ATR. 1996, AN. १, FB.)
2. Babu Hare v. Whagwan Dass, A.1R. 1966 Ail. 1. 10, pate 45,
3. Musalizakth Muhamad ४, Menaviakrama, A,1.B., 1925 Mad, 13,



290

41.47, The facts of the Madras case were as २०110%98:--

On the date of hearing of an appeal before the Subordinate
Judge, the appellant was nut present, but a Vakii Rold-
ing a Vakalatnama from him was present, and applied
for an adjournment, The adjournment was refused, and
the vakil thereupon informed the court that as he had
no instructions or papers. he could not argue the appeal;
he took no further part in the proceedings.

The Subordinate Judge, instead of dismissing the appeal for
default, considered the evidence bearing on the appellant’s claim
with reference to the memorandum of appeal, and dismissed the
appeal on the merits with costs.

41.48. Tt was contended before the High Court (on behalf of
the appellant} that it was not competent for the Subordinate Judge
to inquire into the merits of the case in the absence of the appellant
and his pleader, and that he could deal with the appeal only in
the manner provided by Order 41, Rule 17(1). This contention was
accepted by the Divisional Bench which heard the case, and the
judgment of the Subordinate Judge was held to be without juris-
diction. Both the Judges constituting the Bench referred to the
change from the words, ‘shall be dismissed’ in section 556 of the
Old Code!, to the words “the Covrt may make an order that the
appeal be dismissed” in Order 41, rule 17(1) of the present Code,
but they were of the view that in spite of the change, the Subordi-
nate Judge had no power to go into the merits of the appeal. Under
the previous Code, the Court had considered it to be undesirable®
to dismiss the appeal on the merits. हु

41.49. According to most High Courts. dismissal on the merits
is illegal’, when the appellant is not present, In a Punjab‘ case it
was held that the remedy is an application for restoration under
Order 41, rule 19,

Amendment desirable to remove conflict

41.50. Having regard to the conflict of decisions, it is desirable
to make the wording of rule 17 more explicit. Theoretically, a dis-
missal on merits should be permissible.

41.51. No doubt, the following passage from a Supreme Court
case‘( in reference to Order 41, Rule 30) may lend support to the
Allahabad view.

|. Section 656, O.P.C. 1882.
Moheah Chunder Bose v. Thakur Daa. 20 Suth. WR. 425.
. (0) Taher Sheikh ४. Otaruddin Hawaldar, 3,113, 1920 Cal. 475.
(8) eee Whoton v. Mt. Bademi, ALR. 1963 Pat. (overraling ALR. 1021 Pat

wpm

(० Digendre Chwnira v. Radha Bella’, ALB. 1983 Annum. 191.

(व) (7968) 81 80. WR. 388, cited in the Yearly Digest.
|. Kundha Singh y. Punjab State, ALR. 1962 Punj. 82 (7. 0, Pandit J.)
Nukhpal Singh . Kalyan Singh ALR, 1983 8.0. 146; (1963) 2 SCR 733.

“

Pa


4s

201

“Where the appellant and his pleader are not prepared to
address the Court, there is no hearing and, therefore, noth-
ing is shown to the Appeilate Court as to why it should
interfere with the decision of the Court below. The burden
of proof is on an appellant to show that the decision which
he appeals from was wrong and where he does not address
the Court at all, it appears to us that there is no point
raised for determination and therefore, it is not necessary
to give a decision on any point or the reasons for the
decision. It is sufficient for the Court to pass an order of
dismissal for default. Such an order does not necessarily
mean that the appeal is dismissed for default of appear
ance. In such circumstances, the order means that the
appeal is dismissed for default of proof”.

However, these observations should not be taken as necessarily
implying thet a disposal on the merits is necessary where the appel-
lant is absent, It is not necessary for the Covrt to give a decision
on merits, though it is open to it to do so,

Kecommendation

41.52. Moreover. in practice a decision on merits in the appellant’s
absence, is rarely given, and therefore, the better course would be
to preclude a decision on merits in such cases. We are of the view
that the Code should be amended on the above lines.

Accordingly, we recommend that the following Explanation
should be added in Order 41, rule 17(1):—

“Explanation—Nothing in this sub-rule shall be construed as
empowering the court to dismiss the appeal on the merits”,

Order 41, rule 18

41.52A, A point concerning Order 41 rule 18 was discussed in
the carlier Report’ as follows: —

“The Fourteenth Report recommended the adoption by High
Courts of some local Amendment*, whereunder, if on the
day of hearing of the appeal, it is found that the notice
for the respondent has not been served and the appellant
fails to deposit the expenses of serving the notice again,
the court has power to order that the appeal be rejected.
ठंड is a matter of detail which may be left to the High
ourts.””

41.52B. We are, however, of the view that it is desirable to adopt
the amendment suggested in the 14th Report and insert it in the Code.
Such @ provision will. to some extent, expedite disposal of appeals.

1. 27th Report, page 230, Note on Order 41, rule 18,
2. 14th Report, Volume I, page 203, para 22,



292

Recommendation
41.53. Accordingly, we recommend that Order 41, rule 18, should
be revised as follows: —

“18. Where, on the day fixed, or on any other day to which
the hearing may be adjourned, it is found that the notice
to the respondent has not been served in consequence of
the failure of the appellant to deposil, within the period
fixed, the sum required to defray the cost of serving the
notice, or, if the notice is returned unserved, to deposit
within any subsequent period fixed, the sum required to
defray the costs of any further attempt to serve the notice,
the court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed:

Provided that no such order shali be made although
the notice has not been served upon the respondent, if
on any such day the respondent appears when the appeal
is called on for hearing.”

Order 41, rule 18 and refund of process fees.

41.54. A point relevant to Order 41, rule 18 and refund of fees
may now be considered,

Refund of process fees where appeal dismissed without notice,

41.55, A recommendation had been made in the Forteenth Re-
port'-* for an amendment allowing the refund of process fees where
an appeal is dismissed without notice to the other party. The Com-
mission, however, in its Report on the Code,’ felt, that this should
be left to be dealt with by # he practice of the Courts, No amendment
was, therefore, suggested.

41.56, We agree with the view taken in the Report on the Code,
jut for a different reason, As process fees are paid after admission
of the appeal, it is not necessary to provide for refund when the
appeal is dismissed summarily.

41,57, For the above reason, we recommend no change in the
existing rule.

Order 41, rule 20

41.58. As to Order 41, rule 20, the earlier Report‘ on the Code
discussed the controversy as to whether a respondent can be added
in an appeal after the period of limitation for appeal had expired.
The decisions on the subject will be found discussed in the under-

mentioned cases’-".

1, 14th Report, Vol. 1, page 393, pare 22.

2, See also Order 414, vole 2, inserted in Madras.

8. 27th Report, page 240, note on Onder 41, rule 18 and refund.

4, 27th Report, page 240, Note an Order 41, rule 20.

5. P. Anundu y. af. Acharyide, है. 8. 1968, 4.2. 43 (7१. 8.)

6. Notified Area Commities, Buria v. Govind Ram A.B. 1969 Pun. 277, 278 (F.B.)



ww

fa

292

Some of these decisions’ proceed on the inherent power of the
court to add the respondent in such cases.

41.59. In a recent case, the Andhra Pradesh High Court held that
Order 41. rule 20, is concerned with a party tu the suit who was not
made a party to the appeal though interested in the | result of the
appeai. The appellate court can, then, in exercise of its discretion di-
rect that he be made a respondent, This provision is only limited to
certain contingencies. It was held:

_..that apart from the provisions of Order 41, rule 20, CP.
C., the appellate court has inherent powers to permit parties
to be added to appeals in suitable cases and the language of
rule 20 of Order 41 is not exelusive or exhaustive so as to
deprive the appellate court of the inherent powers in this
behalf, When once it is clear that Rule 20 of Order 41 is not
exhaustive of the powers of the appellate court for implead-
ing or adding parties to the appeal, certainly powers un-
der Order 1, rule 10, C.P.C, read with section 107(2)
CP.C. and under other appropriate provisions including
section 151 C.P.C. in proper cases can be availed of even
in appeal, __Jt is obvious that a person who was not
eo nomine a party to the such also can be added as 8 party
to the appeal under the provisions of the Code”, *

41,80, In this. case it was. therefore, held that the court below did
not err in permitting the petitioner to be made a party to the appeal
who was a settlee pendents lite of one of the iterns of suit property
brought by the plaintiff and was a person interested in the results
thereof.

41.61. In one Kerala case,* the question raised was whether a
party could be impleaded in the Civil Revision Petition after the ex-
piry of the period prescribed for filing the petition, The Kerala High
Court held that though the law of limitation does net apply to an
addition of parties by the court of appeal under Order 41. rule 20 of
the Code, yet the power under that provision is discret‘onary, and
should not be exercised in all cases, for instance, where the party is
extremely negligent. But if the court finds it necessary to bring a
party upon the record of an avpeal. in order to do justice between
the parties, the court has ample power to do so irrespective of limito-
tion, even in second enpeal. Even apart from the provisions of Order
41. rule 20, the High Court has power. under section 151 of the Code,
to add a respondent to the appeal, even after the expiry of the period
of limitation for the appeal against him, if in the circumstances of the
case before it, it thinks fit to do so. The conditions to be satisfied before
a party is impleaded under Order 41, rule 20 are in the first place,

1. For example :
(a) Munshi Rom v. Abdo? Lio, ALR. 1943 Lab. 252.
(9) Pritect Tam +. Dini Ram, ATR, 1924 Pot. 1773,

2. Subbaraydu ५. Srahmanandan, ALR. 1970 AP, 211, 215 (D.B.), followirg Notified
Area Compnitter, Buria y. Fohind Ram, ALR. 1959 Punj. 277 (F.B.)

3. Rugmant v. Chellappa Rowther, (1989) Ker, L.7. 782.


284

that the person must have been a party to the suit but not made par-
ty in the appeal, and secondly, that the person added is one interes
ted in the result of the appeal. Once the impleadment is found neces-
sary in the interests of justice, the question of limitation need not
deter the court, because the necessity for the impleadment strikes the
Court oniy at the time of hearing, and by that time, in most cases,
the period allowed for filing the apveal or revision will be over,

41.62. In the circumstances, the prayer for impleadment was
allowed.

41.63. In one Punjab case, it was held that where a memoran-
dum of appeal does not mention the name of a contesting party, and
the mistake creeps in on account of the erroneous certified copies
having been supplied by the court officials to the appellant. he should
not be made to suffer on account of the mistake having been commit-
ted by some officer of the court in the discharge of his duties. It is
quite apparent that the appellant or his counsel did not notice that
error at the time when the appeal was filed, and the names of the
parties in the memorandum of appeal had been mechanically copied
out from those mentioned in the heading of the judgment of the trial
court, The mistake on the part of the appellant or his counsel is,
therefore, bona fide and honest, and the appellate court has ample
power to allow the mistake io be rectified and the party added, even
after the expiry of period of limitation for appeal.

41.64, In one Patna case’, the appéal was filed by an insolvent in
time against one of the creditors, When the other two creditors were
made parties to the appeal, the pericd of limitation under section 75
(4) of the Provincial Insolvency Act had expired. It was held that
under provisions of Order 41, rule 20, even at the time of hearing of
appeal, the court could make persons interested in the result of the
appeal party to the appeal, and the question of limitation would not
arise in such cases.

41.65. In an Allahabad case’ under the U.P. Consolidation of Hold-
ings Act, 1954 (Section 48), failure to implead necessary parties to
appeal was held to be fatal, It was held that the court was not bound
to have necessary parties brought on record.

41.66, It is obvious that the postion s, to some extent, nebulous.‘
The previous Commission did examine it and stated that the correct
view is, that after the period of limitation has expired against a party
be ceases to be “interested in the appeal” within the meaning of rule
20, as interpreted by the Privy Counceil.*

1. Puran Singh v. Gehal Siagh TL.B. (1969), 2 Punj, 369, 372, following Nobifed Area
Committee, Burin, >. Gobind Ram, AJR. 1969 Punj. 277 (F.B.)
2, Rumoshwar Lal Agarwate v. Kutt Moin (1969) Labour 1.0, 780, 712 (Pat.) quoted in the
Yearly Digost (1969), Columa, 470,

3, 1966 AU, W.R. (H. 6.] 138—Quoted in the Yearly Digest, (1968) page. 478.
4, Sith Report, page 240.
5. Chelabingam v. Scethaé, 1.L.R. 6 Rangoon 29; ALR. 1927 P.C. 252,


ee

295

41.67, The previous Commission also noted that the question whe-
ther such a party can be impleaded under the inherent power of the
Court, or whether a separate appeal can be filed against that respon-
dent after obtaining leave of the Court under section 5, Limitation Act
were (in the view of the Commission) different matters. The pre-
vious Commission considered it unnecessary to make any amendment
to cover such cases.

41.68. We are, however. of the view that it would be better if the
Position as regards rule 20 is clarified, and we think that the restric-
tive view, namely, that a respondent cannot be added after expiry of
the period of limitation, should be expressly enacted. At the same
time the court should have powers to grant requests for impleading
a party after expiry of limitation for reasons to be recorded.

Recommendation

41.69, Accordingly, we recommend that the follewing sub-rule
should be added’ in Order 41, rule 26—

“(2) No respondent shali be added under this rule after the ex-
piry of the period of limitation for appeal, unless the court,
for reasons to be recorded, allows thet to be done, on such
terms as to costs. as it thinks fit”.

Order 41, rule 22

41,70. Order 41, rule 22 gives two distinct rights to the respondent
in the appeal. The first is the right of upholding the decree of the court
of first instance on anyi of the grounds on which that court decided
against him, and, in that case, no notice or memorandum required by
the later provisions of the rule is necessary. The second. right is that
of taking any objection, called “cross-objection"—to the decree which
the respondent might have taken by way of appeal.

41.71. The distinction between the two, thou gh fine, is appreci-
able. In the first case, the respondent supports the decree. In the
second case, he attacks" it. The first requires no formal document.
The second does, and court-fees may have to be paid.

41.72. There is 2 third remedy—cross-appeal. But this is outside
the rule. :

41.73. The rationale behind the two remedies has, been thus
explained*—

“When an appeal is preferred, the appellant is, generally
speaking, seeking to get rid of an adverse decision, ad-
verse to him wholly or in part, which means that the
opposite party, had succeeded wholly or in part. That
success might be the result of 2 decision in his fayour on
one or some only of several grounds urged by him; the
Court negativing the other or others. As regards these
latter grounds. he cannot and need not appeal, however,
erroneous the decision, because there is no right of appeal

Exinting Order 41, rule 20, tv be renumbered ax Order 41, rule 20, भाप 1)
. Fora 41.78, infra.
. Fenkoin Rac. Murthi A.1.R, 1943 Mad. 698-700,

who


298

to a party, who has succeeded. But when the opposite
party prefers on appeal, he may find himseif in a difficult
situation, he is obliged to remain content with supporting
the decision on the only point or points on which he had
succeeded without resorting to the others on which he had
failed. For instance, it may turn out on examination that
some or all of these other grounds are good, while those
accepted by the lower Court are unsubstantial......... It is
to provide for suck a contingency, and to avoid injustice
to the respondent in such a case, that the tule hes been
enacted giving him liberty to support the decree if neces-
sary by relying on any of the grounds decided against him
in the Court below.’ The use of the word ‘support? makes
it plain that the right given is limited to the sustaining of
the decree in so far as it is in his favour, and does not
extend beyond so as to enable him to obtain an alteration,
giving him a further advantage, This, he can secure only
by an appeal or cross objection, Where a suit is wholly
dismissed or wholly decreed, it is open to the respondent
to support the decision, by re-agitating ground negatived
by the lower Court. This is simple enough and the language
of the rule is easily understood and applied. Where, how-
ever, the suit is decreed in part and dismissed as to the
rest, we have in reality what may be described as a double
or composite decree. There is a decree for the plaintiff in
respect of the part decreed, and a decree for the defendant
in respect of the part dismissed. If the plaintiff appeals.
he does so for the purpose of displacing the decree in so
far as it is in favour of defendant. If the defendant ap-
Peals, he again does so for the purpose of getting rid of the
decree in so far as it has gone in plaintiff’, favour. In either
case the party who features as the respondent has a decree
in his favour which he is allowed to support on any of the
grounds decided against him by the Court which passed
the decree, When he does this and no more, he is only sup
porting and not attacking his decree. The principle can be
appreciated by taking a simple illustration.

Let us take a case where a plaintiff sues for a debt of, say Rs.
1,000, and the suit is contested by the defendant on two
grounds, (i) discharge, and (1) limitation, Let us assume that
the trial Court dismisses the suit on the ground of limitation,
while negativing the plea of discharge. The plaintiff in an
appeal from that decree may be able to satisfy the appel-
late Court that the decision on the point of limitation is
incorrect. In such an eventuality, Order 41, rule 22 enables
the defendant to sustain the decree by making good the plea
of discharge found against him by the Court below.

41.74, and 41.75. In a Punjab case* Dua. C. J, has held—

“Rule 22 of Order 41, Civil Procedure Code is apparently a
special provision permitting a respondent, who hag not
appealed from a decree, to object to the said decree in the

1. Emphasis supplied.

2, Krishna Gopal, v. Haji Mohd., Musiim, ALR, 1969 Delhi 126, 128,


»

297

opposite party's appeal as if he had himself preferred. a
separate appeal . where a decree is partly against
one suiter and wartiy agesnst another, ene of such parties,
being satisfied with his partial success, may not prefer-an
appCa! within limitation, but on the other party appealing
may like to re-open the adverse part of the. decree. In: the
larger interest of the cause: of justice, it is in such cireum-
stances that the party satisfied with partial success is
granted another opportunity of challenging the part of
the decree aga‘nst him upon his opponent preferring an
appeal, of which notice is served.on.hien. In order to avail
of this right, he has to take cross-objections within. one
month from the date of service on him of notice of the
hearing of his opponent's appeal.”

41,78. In this . there was a decree against some defendants.
One defendant's appeal was dismissed. There was an appeal by the
others. The court left open the question whether the defendant ‘whose
appeal was dismissed can assail the decree and re-open the contro-
versy in the garb of crass-objections. wot

41.77. Further, it was held that cross-objections are to be heard
when the appeal is heard: and as a general rule, the court is expected
to dispose of both the appeals and the cross-objections together by
one judgment, and'the decision should be incorporated in one decree,
By means of a deeming fiction, the cross-objections are, for certain
purposes. treated as a memorandum of apreal, but they are neither
registered as an appeal nor are they clothed with an independent
status as such, They do not constitute a separate independent cavse
or writ, but largely draw their source of survival from the compe-
tence of the appeal in which they are taken; and the exceptions to
this dependence are provided in sub-ruie (4) of Rule 22.

41,78. In the present.case, it was held that in the absence of any
binding precedent or any clear provision of lavwy if would not be
advisable to remit the case to the lower appellate court for adjudi-
cating on the cross-objections on the merits after-the final disposal
of the appeal, even if otherwise such a course were legally permis
sible and called for.

41.79. In a Calcutta case” there was an appeal, by the, plaintiff
whose suit for recovery cf damages against the defendant munici-
pality to the extent of Rs. 1,000 or more succeeded in part (for
Rs, 842.62), in the trial court, but failed wholly in the first court of
appeal, On one of the points taken by plaintiff in the Calcutta High
Court (negligence of the municipality), the defendant had filed 8
crass-objection.

41.80. The High C
negligence is found a:
same time the decree

‘curt 1616, that where the particular issue of
st the defenderit municipality, and at the
dismissing the whole suit is completely in its

favour, a cross-obiction is hardly called for. The defendant munici-
pality, aow the yvespondent. can support the decree on the ground

Bhadreawcar Muntotyatity, (1969) 73 Oal. W. N. 58, 90.
21 :

TAB PNET,



298

that the issue of negligence should have been decided in its favour.
That is what Order 41, Rule 22 sub-rule (1) of the Civil Procedure
Code provides for.* So the cross-cbjection, wholly unnecessary one,
may be left alone,

4181. So much as re the working of rule 22, We have
referred above to the two ae 8 of the rule which give two remedies.”
Now, there ig a small verbal point regarding the first remedy. The
relevant portion of the rule says that the respondent may “support
the decree on any of the grounds decided against him in the court
below", These words, at first sight, appear to be strange, because a
person cannot support a decree on a ground decided against him.
What is meant is. that he may support it by asserting that the
ground decided against him should have been decided in his favour.
Tt is desirable to make this clear.

Recommendation

41.82. We recommend, therefore, that Order 41, rule 22, sub-rule
(1), should be revised, so as to read as follows:—

“(1) Any respondent, though he may not have appealed from
any part of the decree, may,—-

(a} not only support of the decree by stating that the deci-
sion in respect of any ground decided against, him in
the court below ought to have been in his favour; but
also

(09) take any cross-objection to the decree which he could
have taken by way of appeal, provided he has filed
such obj jection in the Appell ate Court within one
month from the date of s¢: on him or his pleader
of notice of the day fixed for hearing the appeal, or
within such further time, 88 the ‘Appell ate Court may
see fit to allow.”

41.83. There is also another point relevant to Order 41, Rule 22.
We are separately recommendin, a eat a Court must decide all
issues, even if the case can be of on a preliminary point,
except where a question of jurisdiction or bar to suit is involved.
This renders desirable a change in the provisions as to cross objec-
tion, Where a decision of the trial court on a preliminary issue is
favourable to the respondent, and the other issues are decided against
him, the respondent should, in view of the recommendation 1 rred
to be empowered to file cross-objection. Strictly speaking, this
follows from the change proposed in the section relating to appeal*
read with the words “any cross-objection which he could have taken
by way of appeal” which appear in Order 41, rule 22. But an express
provision would be desirable.

*. Following Lala Gauri Shankar Lotys. Janki Pershad (1890) 1.L.R. 17 Cal. 809 (P. C.),
# 0७8७ nnder section 561 of the 1882 Code, corresponding to Order 41, Rule 22.

2. Paragraph 41,70, expra.
9. Soe discussion relating to ection 96, and Order 14, rule 2.
4, Section 16,


Recommendation

41.84. We recommend, therefore, that the following Explanation
should be inserted below Order 41, rule 22(1):—

“Explanation—A respondent aggrieved by a finding of a court
which is incorporated in a decree may, under this Tule,
file cross-objection in respect of the decree in so for as it
relates to that finding , notwithstanding that, by reason of
the decision of the Court on any other finding which ts
sufficient for the decision of the suit, the decree, wholly
or in part, is in favour of that respondent.”

Order 41, rule 22—(Cross-objections between. respondents)

41.85. With reference to Order 41, rule 22, the following point
was considered in the earlier Report:*

“A suggestion has been made to the effect that a respondent
should not be allowed to file a cross-objection in which
the appellant is not interested. While that would be the
ordinary rule,’ a rigid provision may not be desirable,
because there may be cases where a different tule might
have to be applied. The suggestion has not, therefore, been
carried out.”

41. 86. We examined the matter again, but have come to the
same conclusion as was recorded in the earlier Report. Cross-objec-
tions as between respondent and respondent are not unknown, and
we do not think it proper to change the existing position.

Order 41, rule 23

41.87. Order 41, rule 23, provides for remand where the lower
court has decided the suit on a preliminary issue. We are Tecom-
mending separately’ that a Court may decide all issues except those
of jurisdiction or bar of suit. The amendment proposed by us. leaves
the matter to the court’s discretion. Hence no consequential changes
wil] be required in Order 41, rule 23.

Order 41, rule 23A (New)

41.88. and 41.89. In the earlier Report‘ on the Code insertion of
the following new rule was recommended:

“934. Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is prefer-
red has disposed of the case otherwise than on a prelimi-
nary point, and the decree is reversed in appeal and a re=
trial is considered necessary, the Appellate Court shall
have the same powers as it has under rule 23.”

1. 27th Report, page 240, Note on Onder 41, rale 22.
2. Foot notes in the 27th Report citing onse law have been ommitted here,
% See discussion as to Order 14, rule 2.
4. 37th Report, page 242, and drait rule at page 82.
TiB(D)229MofT TCA 21 {8}


300

Recommendation
41.90. We scarce. accordingly, we vecomm
should be inserted as follows:

“23.A. Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is pre-
ferred has disposed of the case otherwise than on @ preli
minury point, and the decree is reversed in appeal and @
re-trial is considered necessary, the Appellate Court shalt
have ihe sau. powers as it kas under rule 23."

Order 41, rule 27

41.91. Order 41, rule 27 relates to taking of additiona! evidence
in the Appellate Court. In the earlier Report an amendment: had
been recommended in this rule in implementation of the recom-
mendation made in the 14th Report.* The object was to provide that
additional evidence may be allowed by the appellate court, if the
evidence could not be produced in the lower court because it was
not within the knowledge, ete. of -the party seeking to produce it
now.

41.92. We have examined the matter and we entirely agree
with the recommendation.

Order 41, rule 31, Contents of Appeliate Judgment

41.93. At present, under Order 41, rute 31, the judgment «af a
Court of first appeal or second appeal has to contain the points for
determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for the decision,
and where the decree under appeal is reversed or varied, the relief
to which the appellant is entitled, It was suggested to us that while
these requirements are obviously necessary in the case of a Court
of first instance, their literal application to Courts of appeal may
not be necessary in every case. If the court of appeal has nothing
new to say on any of the points decided by the Court of first in-
stance. repetition could be usefully avoided. In other words. the
judgment of a Court of appeal could be in continuation to that of
the trial court, since it is to be in supvort of the same. We con-
sidered a suggestion was to make provisions on the following lines:

(a) When the arguments advanced before the Court of appeal

are the same as were noticed by the Court below whese
reason: for secenting or rejecting them avpear to the
Court of anpeal to be sound, the judgment of the Court of
appeal need only say that much, and may merely add that
no fresh argument has been urged. In_ such “cases, the
appeal would be dismissed withcut any discussion on the
points involved.
Where the seme arguments as were urged before the trial
Court are repeated before the Court of apveal, but the
Court of apres! comes to a different conclusion on a parti-
cular point or <oints, the judgment of the Court of appeal
could start straightway with a discussion of those parti-
cular noint 0" points. fallowed by its decision thereon and
the effect ‘isi
1. 27h Report
2. Mth Report,

aothat ruc 234

(b



BOL

Wheic, octave the Court of appeal, a new argument is advaneed
in support oi, or against, a unding of the court below, or an alto-
gether new point is urged, the judgment of the court of appeal could
start straightaway with a discussion of the particular pomt or points,
its decision thereon, and the effect of that decision.

41,94. We have considered the suggestion, but are not inclined
to recommend any amendment, The present rule is sufficiently elastic,
To enact provisions on the lines suggested would make the rule
cumbersome, without making any difference in practice.

Order 41, Rule 33

41.95, Under Order 41, rule 33, the Appellate Court shall have
power to pass any decree and make any order which ought to have
been passed or made and to pass or make such further or other deeree
or order as the cas¢ may require, and this power may he exercised
by the Court notwithstanding that the appeal is as to part only of
the decree and may be exercised in favour of ali or any of the res-
pondents or parties, although such respondents or parties may not
have filed any appeal or objection."

The illustration to the section is as follows:

“A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in
a suit against both obtains a decree against X. K app peals
and A and Y are respondents. The Appellate Court decides
in favour of X. It has power to pass a decree against Y.”

We are of the view that this rule should be amended to cover
evoss suits and also a suit in which two decrees are passed. This is
desirable in order to vemove the difficulty caused by the un-
certainty* in this behalf as regards res judicata.

Recommendation

41.96. Accordingly, we recommend that the main paragraph of
the rule should be revised as follows ;—

“33. The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any decree
and make any order which ought to have been passed or
made and to pass or make such further or other decree or
order as the case may require, and this power—

(a) may be exercised by the court notwithstanding that
the appeal is as to part only of the decree, and

(b) may be exercised in favour of all or any of the

~ respondents or parties, although such respondents or
Patties may not have filed any appeal or objection,
a है

(०) may, where there have been decrees in cross suits or
where two or more decrees are passed in one suit, be
exercised in respect of all or any of the decrees, al-
though an appeal may not have been filed against such

ecrees.

4

The provian to the rule is not material, for the present purpose,

u
2, 10९ discussion relating to section 11,

2


Cuarrer 42
APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES

Introductory

42,1. Procedure as to appeals from appellate decrees is dealt with
in Order 42, In general the rules as to appellate procedure in first
appeals apply to subsequent appeals.

Order 42, rule 2 (New)

42.2, We have already made a recommendation,’ that when a
second appeal is admitted, reasons must be given, but that no reasons
need be given for not admitting it.

Recommendation

42,3. Accordingly, we recommend that the following rule should
be inserted in Order 42—

“2(1) When an appeai from an appellate decree is admitted,
the Court admitiing it shali record its reasons for doing so.

(2) It shalt not be necessary for the Court to record reasons
for not admitting an appeal from an appellate decree.”

1. See discussion under Order 42, rule 11, paragraph 41.15, supra.
202


Cuarren 43 oo
APPEALS FROM ORDEES

Introductory

43.1, Apart from appeals from original and appellate decress
which have been dealt with in separate Orders, the Code allows ap-
peals from certain orders enumerated in section 104, and Order 43.
rule 1,

Order 43, rule 1—Analysis of orders listed in Order 43, rule 1
43.2. Order 43, rule 1, lists the orders that are appealable.

For a proper consideration of the provisions of this rule, it would
pe convenient if the orders enumerated are ped under a few
classes, One possible classification would be between orders which
are directly or indirectly in the nature of final adjudications, and
orders which are merely interlocutory.

43.3. Again, while considering the finality of orders in this con-
text, one could keep several aspects separate,
There are—

{i) orders which are final, in the sense thet they put an end
to the list, but are not preceded or accompanied by decrees
that are themselves separately appealable;

(ii) orders which are final inasmuch as they put an end to the
list, but are preceded or accompanied by decrees that are
themselves appealable;

(iii) orders which are fina] in relation to the partioular court;
a

(iv) other orders— which may, for the sake of convenience.
be referred to as interlocutory orders; and

(ए) originating orders.

43.38. Accordingly, an attempt is made below to divide the
orders enumerated in Order 43, rule 1, into a few classes, on the
above basia—

Class (i)

Orders which are final, in the sense that they put an ond to
the list, but are not preceded or accompanied by decrees
that are themselves separately appealable—Clause (c),
Clause (1, Clause (k), Clause (1),—{refusal to give leave).
CNause (n), Clause (t)—({in part), (Refusing to re-admit).
Slause (uj, Clause (रो.


ud

Class (ii)

Orders which are final inasmuch as they put an end te tie list,
but are preceded or atcompanieg by decrees thai are ap-
pealable—Clause (b), Clause (d}, use (13), Clause (70),
in part—ie. orders recording a ctémpromise. Clause (4), in
part—Refusal to re-hear.

Class (iii)
Orders which are rnal in relation to the particular court—
Clause (a).

Class (iv)

Interlocutory orders—Clause (०), Clause (8), Clause (i), Clause
(13: Clause (1)—Order giving leave, Ciause (m), in payt—
Refusal to record a compromi:e, Clause (0), Cleanse (9),
Clause (५), Clause (r), Clause {s).

Class (५)
Originating Orders—Clause (w).

Our approach

43.4. Our approach in making recommendations for the curtail-
ment of appeals against orders is, brocdly speaking, as follows: —

(i) Where the order is accompanied oy followed by another
fiaai adjudication (usually a decree), which itself is appeal-
able,’ it is desirable to aboiish the appeal against the orders,
but at the same time to provide for an opportunity to
challenge the order in the appeal against the final adjudi-
cation. The principal object of suca an approach is to
avoid successive appeals which add to the length of the
litigation. हि

(ii) Where the order is not accompanied or followed by any
such final adjudication, then obviously the question of
avoiding successive appeals does not arise, but abolition
or modification of the right of appeal against that order
should be considered on other relevant considerations, in-
cluding, in particular—(1) whether the order, if allowed
to stand, would cause such hardship to the aggrieved perty
as to justify a right of appeal, and (2) whether any other
remedy would be equally adequate. .

We shail now indicate the changes needed in she various clauses
of Order 43, rule 1.

Order 43, rule 1(a)

~ 43.5. Order 43, rule 1(9), provides for appeal against ‘an order
tmder Order 7, rule 10, where a’ plaint is retarned to be presented
to the proper court. The orily change which is necessary in this rule
ja, that the right of appeal under this rule should be subject to the
new restriction which we propose’ on the right in certain cases.

1. Seo para 43.84, supra. _
2. See Order 7, rule 10A (New)


Recummendation

SU.6. Accorangly, we vecommend inat in Order 43, ruic ilay,
rords “subject to the provisions 0) Order 7, rule 1057, should be
added at the end.

Order 43, rule 1(b}

, 3.7. Rule 100) provides appeal agasnsl an order under Order 8,
rule 10--छव्र the party ia:is to present a wr.tten statement within
the time fixed by the “court, aud whe court proucunces judgment.
against him,

43.8. We ave of the view that an appeal against an order under
Order 8, rule 10 pronouncing judgment against a party, should be
abolished. ‘he idea is 10 reduce the present two successive appeals
te one. ‘ihe defendant can, in an appeal from the decree passed as a
vesult of the order, take the same point as he cau tuke in appeal
under Order 48, rule 1(b). To avoid doubts whether such a point
can be taken—doubts which may arise because the judgment pro-
nounced under Order 8, rule 10, would be regarded as final in the
appeal aganst the decree—an axpress provision could be made to
clarify the position. No doubt, the cppellant will have to pay high
court fees on the appeal. But we would recommend to State Govern-
ments, that the court fees for appeals against the decree in such cases
should be reduced to the Court fees for appeal against orders,

Recommendation
43.9. In short, our recommendations are as follows—
(i) Order 43, rule 1(b) should be deleted:

(ii) court fees on an appeal against the decree in cases where
judgment is pronounced under Order 8, rule 10 should be
reduced to the court fees for orders;'

(iii) the following rule’ should be inserted as Order 43, rule

“LA. Where a court pronounces judgment against a defen-
dant under Order 8, rule 10, he may appeal against the
decree following on the 3 t on the ground that
the judgment ought not to have been so pronounced.”

Order 43, rule 1(e)
45.10, Order 43, 1(e) needs no change.

Oxdex 43, rule 1(d)

11, Pule (1) (०) provides for appeal against an order under
, Rule 13, rejecting an application for an order to set aside a
passed ex purte. It requires no change.

Orc
deer

1. Para 43.8, nepra.
2, Te he inserted an @rder 48, rulel +


306

Order 43, rule 1(e}

43.12. Rule 1 (e) provides for appeal against order under Order 10,
rule 4. where the court postpones the hearing of a suit because the
pleader refuses or is unable to answer any material question relating
to the suit and directs the party to be present on such day.

Recommendation

43.13. We recommend.—
(i) abolition of the right of appeal under rule 1(e). The ground
ean be taken in appeal against the main decree.
(ii) insertion of Order 43, rule 1-8, as follows':—

“1B, Where a Court passes an order against a party under
Order 10, Rule 4, the party may appeal against the
decree in the suit on the ground that the court ought
not be have passed such order”.

Order 43, rule 1 (f)

43.14, Under rule 1 (f), an order under Order 11, rule 21, is ap-
pealable, The order so made appgalable deals with non-compliance
with an order for discovery etc. The effect of such non-compliance
is, that in the case of the plaintiff the suit is dismissed, and in case
of a defendant, his defence is struck cut.

We have, after some discussion, come to the conclusion that this
right of appeal should be retained.
Order 43, rule 1 (g)

43.15. Rule 1 (8) provides for appeal against an order under Or-
der 16, rule 10 for attachment,—where a witness fails to comply with
a summons to attend or produce a relevant document.

Appeal against arrest’ is dealt with separately—

43.16. The Code does contain’ a provision where under the per-
son whose property is attached can apply to the court for vacating
the attachment. This should suffice.

Recommendation

43.17. We recommend therefore that appeal under rule 1
should be abolished. ®
Order 43, rule 1 (h)

43.18. Rule 1(h) provides for appeal against an order under
Order 16, rule 20. Under Order 16, rule 20, if any party to a suit
refuses to give evidence when called on by the court, the court may
pronounce judgment against him or make such order as it thinks

it.

1, Po be inserted as Order 45, rule 1-B. OO
2, Section 1046) 09)-
3. Grder 18, rule 11.

*


37

43.19. We are of the view that the appeal under Order 43, rule
1th) should be abolished. The defendant can, in an appeal from the
decree passed as a result of the order, take the same point as he cen
take in appeal under Order 43, rule 1(h). To avoid doubts whether
such @ point can be taken. the matter could be provided expressly".
The idea is to reduce the present two successive appeals to one.

43.20. We would also recommend to State Governments, that
court fee for appeals against the decree in such cases should be re-
duced to the Court fees for appeal against orders.

Recommendation
43.21. In short, our recommendation is—
(i) to delete Order 43, rule 1(h);
(ii) to reduce court fees, as indicated above’;
(iii) to insert Order 43, rule 1-C, as follows’: —
“1.6. Where a court pronounces judgment against a party
under Order 16, rule 20, ke may appeal against the

decree following on the judgment on the ground that
judgment ought not to have been so pronounced”.

Order 43, rule 1 (i)

43.22. Under rule 1(i), an appeal is allowed against an order made
under Order 21, rule 34, on an objection to the execution of a decree
and the draft of the document prepared by the decree-holder or the
endorsement of the negotiable instrument.

The scope of Order 21, rule 34, is now proposed to be limited‘.
However, no change is needed in the rule relating to appeal.

Order 43, cule 1 (j)

43.23. Order 43, rule 1G) P rovides for appeal against an order
under Order 21, rule 72 or rule 92 setting aside or refusing to set
aside a sale, where a decree-holder purchases property in execution
without the permrission of the Court. No change is needed in this
rule.*

43.24, On the question whether an appeal lies from an order dis-
missing, for default, an application under Order 21, rule 90, the de-
cisions were conflicting. In an earlier Calcutta case’, it was held
that the language of Order 43, rule 1(j), is wide enough to cover
such cases, as the effect of such an order is to confirm the sale under
Order 21, rule 92. It may, however be pointed out that under clause
(j) of Order 43, rule 1, an appeal lies against an order refusing to set

1. Of. Discussion ax to Order 48, rule 1 (9).
2, Para, 4 8.20 supra.
3. To be toserted aa Order 48, rule 1-0.
4, See discussion ax to Order, 21, rule 34.
5s. th has been considered desireable to retain Order 21, rale 73.
Kali Kanlo Chuckerbatty v. Shyam Lal, ALR, 1917 Gal, 615, following (191

6. seg,
492 mudd (1910) 46 1, 0, 493,



308

aside a sale and not against an order confirming the sale. This deci-
sion was followed in another Calcutta High Court case’, where also
it was held that the ctfect of the dismissal of an application under
rale 90 is to confirm the sale under rule 92, and hence an appeal lies
ugaint the Order.

43.244. The Patna High Court* has, following two Calcutta
eases’-', held that an order dismissing an application under Order 21,
rule 90 for non-prosecution 1s appealable under Order 43, rule 1(j),
The reason given being that if the application is disposed of on merits
and. is dismissed the result is that the sale is confirmed, likewise if
the application is dismissed for non-prosecution, the result is the
same. Further, the question of appealability under Order 43, rule 1(j)
dues not depend upon whether the order under Order 21, rule 92 re-
sults in the confirmation of the sale, but on the fact whether the or-
der is one refusing to set aside the sale or setting aside the sale,

43.25, On the other hand, in another Calcutta decision’, it was
held that an order of dismissal for default is not a confirmation of
the sale, and does not preclude the party from making a fresh appli-
cation, and that such an order is not appealable under Order 43, Rule
101), In that case, Page J. observed that in dismissing the application
for default when neither party appears on the case being called for
hearing, the Court does not refuse to set aside the sale, but in the ab-
sence of the parties refuses io consider whether the sale should be
set aside or not. It was observed further, that it is not every order
of rejection that has been made appealable under Order 43, Rule 1(j),
but only that order of rejection by which the Court, on a demand
being made by a person to set aside a sale. refuses to set aside the
sale, This stands to reason, as a party who has allowed his application
to be rejected for default or non-prosecution, cannot really complain
that the Court has refused to set aside the sale on prayer.

43.26. In a Madhya Pradesh case", in a proceeding for the execu-
tion of a money decree against the respondent judgment debtors, ¢er-
tain property belonging to the judgment-debtors was sold and pur-
chased by the second appellant Rajaram, Thereupon, the judgment
debtors filed applications under Order 21, Rule 90 for setting aside
the sale. The application was dismissed by the executing court for de-
fault of appearance of the judgment-debtors. Thereafter, the judg-
ment-debtors filed applications for restoration of their applications
under Order 21, Rule 90 and section 47. These applications were re-
jected by: the District Judge. A revision petition against this order of
the District Judge was dismissed by the High Court by a single Judge
decision, Thereafter, the judgment debtors filed an appeal in the High
Court against the order of the District Judge, Tare J., who heard the

1, Murendranath v. Ruthal Dass, ATR. 1926, Cal. 610.
Reaveatap v. Trilokuath, ALR. 1957 Pat. 465.
Basaat Komar v. Khirode Chandra, A.1R. 1928 Cal. 25,
Aaswleh ए. Bhim Sankar, A.LR. 1929 Cal. 407.

» Rasarafuila v. Renzuddin, ATR. 1926 Cal. 733,

|. Gay? Lat v. Sitaram, A.L.R. 1968 MP. 196 (D.B.)

FERRY

=


309

appeal, took the view that the appeal was not-tenable, in view of the
dismissal by the High Court of the revision petition filed by the judg-
ment-dedtors. Apparently, the single Judge. while deciding as above,
expressed some opinion on the correctness of the orders of the District
Judge.

43.27, Letters Patent appeals were preferred by the decree-hol-
der and the auction-purchaser. Although they were not aggrieved by
the actual conclusion reached by the Single Judge (dismissing the
appeal of the judament-debtors), their grievance was that having held
that the appea! preferred by the judgment debtors was not tenable,
the single Judge was not justified in expressing any opinion on the
correctness of the orders passed by the District Judge.

43.28. It was observed that the first question which the single
Judge had to consider was, whether the earlier appeal (the appeal
vreferred by the judgment-debtors) was competent or not; it was
only after holding that the appeal was tenable that the Single Judge
could have entered into the merits of the orders passed by the
Distriet Judge.

43, 29, The High Court agreed with the reasoning of the Calcutta
case’ referred to above’, where it was observed that when an applica-
tion under Order 21, Rule 90 is dismissed for default. the court does
not “refuse” to set aside the sale. Hence, an order dismissing an app-
lication under Order 21, Rule 90, for default is not appealable under
Order 48, Rule 1(j). It was observed further, that it is not that a per-
son whose application under Order 21, Rule 90 is dismissed for de-
fault has no remedy. Such a dismissal by the Court is in the exercise
of its inherent powers, and the application can be restored by the
court in the exercise of its inherent powers.

43.30. This appears to be the view likely to prevail, and the matter
could be left as it is.

Order 48, rule 1 (k)

43.31, Rule 1(k) provides for appeal against an order under Order
22, rule 9, where the plaintiff or his representative applies to set aside
the abatement or dismissal of the suit and this application has been
refused. Tt necds no change

Order 43, rule 1 (1)

43.32. Rule 1(1) provides for appeal against an order under Order
22, rule 10. giving er refusing to give leave to continue suit in case of
assignment of interest before final order in the suit. No change is re-
quired in this respect.

Order 43, rule 1 (m)

43.43. Rule 1 (m) provides for appeal against an order under Or-
der 23. rule 3, recording or refusing to record an agreement. compro-
mise or satisfaction.

1. Rasaratulla v. Reneudein,
2. Pata, 43.25, ernra,

J.B, 1826 Cal, 773,



310

43.34. Our views en this rule are as follows—

Q) No appeal should be allowed against an order recording or
refusing to record 2 compromise. The trial should go on.

(2) But, in the appeal against the decree, the fact that a compro-
mise ought to have been recorded or 07 ht not to have been
recorded, should be permitted te be tek en, as a ground of
appeal.

(3) The object behind the above amendment is to avoid suc-
cessive appeals concerning the same suit.

Recommendation

43.35, Accordingly, we recommend that the following rule
should be added' as Order 43, rule 1-D:—

“1D, (1) In an appeal against the decree in a suit passed after
recording a compromise, it shall be open to the appellant
to contest the decree on the ground that a compromise
ought not to have been recorded in the suit:

(2) In an appeal against the decree passed in ६ suit in which
the court has refused to record a compromise, it shall be
open to the appellant to contest the decree on the ground
that a compromise ought to have been recorded”.

Order 43, rule 1 (8)

43,36. Under rule 1(n), an 8p peal is allowed against an order re-
jecting an application for an order under Order 25, rule 2 to set aside
the dismissal of suit for failing to furnish security. [t needs no change.

Order 41, rule 1 (nn) (New)-recommended

43-37, As already recommended’, the orders under Order 33, Rule
5 and Rule 7, rejecting the application for permission to sue as an
indigent person. should be made appealable.

Order 43, rule 1 (०)

—43,37A. Under Order 43, rule 1(0), an appeal is allowed against
an order under Order 34, rules 2, 4 or 7, refusing to extend the time
for the payment of mortgage-money.

Recommendation to delete Order 43, rule 1(0)

We recommend that this right of appeal should be abolished,
in view of the changes proposed in the scheme of Order 34, where-
under such orders will now be passed after the decree’.

1. To be inserted na Order 43, Rule 1-0.
2. See discussion as to Order 33, Rules 5 & 7.
3. See discussion as to Order 34.


31L

Order 43, rule 1 (p)

43.38. Orders under Order 35, rule 4 or rule 6 in interpleader
suits are appealable under Order 43, rule 1(9), Roughiy stated, the
situations covered are—

(1) where the court declares that the plaintiff is discharged
from all liability and awarded costs;

(2) where the court adjudicates title to the thing claimed, on
admissions or other evidence;

(3) where the court frames issues for trial, or where any
claimant is made plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the
original plaintiff;

(4) where the costs of the plaintiff are given as a charge on
the thing claimed or in some other & ectual way.

We recommend no change in this provision.
Order 43, rule 1 (q)

43,39, Rule 1(q) allows appeal against orders under Order 38,
rules 2, 3 or 6 regarding security by the defendant, on application by
the surety to be discharged or on application by the defendant
against attachment of property on showing cause for furnishing secu-
rity. .

It needs no change.

Order 43, rule 1 (7)

43.40. Rule 1(r) allows appeal against an order under Order 39,
rules, 1, 2, 4 or 10, regarding temporary injunction; injunctions to res-
train repetition or continuance or breach of contract or other injury
of any kind, varying, discharging or setting aside an order for injune-
tion; or where the court orders the money ete, to be deposited in court
etc.

Tt needs no change.
Order 43, rute 1 (s)

43,41. Rule 1(s) permits appeals against orders under Order 40,
rule 1 or 4 for appointing receivers, and for enforcement of receiver's
luties.

Tt needs no change.
Order 43, rule 1 (t)

43.42, Rule 1 (t) allows appeal against an order refusing, under
Order 41, rule 19, the re-admission of an appeal dismissed for default
or refusing, under Order 41, rule 21, to re-hear an appeal, on the appli-
cation of a respondent against whom an er parte appellate decree wae
made.

Tt needs no change,


312

43.43 and 43.44. Rule t(u) allows appeal against an order under
Order 4}, rule 28, remanding a case where an anpeal would lie from
the decree of the appellate court. Aithough we are recommending an
amendment whereunder all issues are to be decided by the court, there
will be an exception as to issues of jurisdiction or bar of suit’.
Hence the provision in rule 1(u) will still be needed. It should, there-
fore, be retained

Order 43, rule 1(¥)

43.45. Under Order 43, sale 1(), an order under Order 43,
rule 6 made by any court viher than a High Court refusing the
grant uf a certificate to appeal! to the Supreme Court is appeoal-
able,

Reeammendstion

43.46. The appeal contemplated by Order 43 rvle L{v) is absu-
lete, and should be abolished. We recommend seccordingly.
Order 43, rule 1¢w)

43.47. Order 43, rule 1(w) provides for appeal against en erder
under Order 47. rule 4, sranting an application for review, The
text of this rule needs no change. But we are recommending cer-

tain changes in Ovder 47, rule 7, which will heve the effect of

expanding the scope of this appeal
Order 43, rule १-३ (New)

43.48. A new rule 1-8 is proposed to be inserted" in Order 43.
Oréer 43 rule 1-B (New)

43.49, A new rule 1-8 is proposed’ to be ins:rted in 06%: 43.
Order 43, rule 1-C (new)

43.50. A new rule 10 is proposed® to be inserted
Order 48. rule I-D (new)

43.51. A new rule 1-D is propased ta be inserted.*

See discussion as to Order 14, rule 2.

See diecuaeion as to Order 47, rule 7

See diseussion as to Order 43, rule Lfb)., spre.
Seo disoussion as 1७ Order 43. rule 16), supra,
Sec discussion as tn Order 48, rule Hh), ewpre.
Ser dincessinu as to Order 43, mle Hm), enpra,

samt te |


1

Cuarrer 44

APPEALS BY INDIGENT PERSONS
Introductory

44.1. Appeals by indigent persons (described in the Code as
“pavpers") form the subject-matter of Order 44.

There is only one important point to be considered under this
rule, which we discuss below. Verbal changes to substitute the ex-
pression “indigent person” will, of course, be needed.’

Order 44, rule 1(2)

442. With reference to Order 44, rule 1(2), the following dis-
cussion igs found in the earlier Report.’

“Order 44, rule 1(2) provides that an application by a pauper
for leave to appeal as a pauper must be rejected unless
he can show that the decree is contrary to law or usage
having the force of law or is otherwise erroneous ot
unjust ete. A suggestion has been put forth that this
provision is unconstitutional under article 13 and 14
{since no such restriction is applicable to appeals by
non-paupers,) It is however, felt that the existing provi-
sion is prima facie reasonabie, as it is intended to prevent
frivolous appeals by a pauper. It can be justified on the
ground that a person who has failed in one court should
show a prima facie case before he can be permitted to
appear.”

Recommendation .

44.3, We are. however, of a different view. We think that the
present restriction cannot be regarded as justifiable or reasonable,
and js likely to be regarded as discriminatory and is even otherwise
unjust and unfair. It shou!d be removed, as no rational basis can
‘pe advanced in its support.

We therefore, recommend that ‘Order 44, rule 1, sub-rule (2),
should be deleted.

Order 44, Rule 2
44.4. Order 44, Rule 2, contemplates an inquiry into pauperism
of the appellant (who wishes to appeal as a pauper) by or under
the crders of the appellate court. In the interests of expedition,
we recommend the following small amendments—
(i) Where the person applying for leave to appeal as a
pauper was ullowed to sue as a pauper. such inquiry

1. See dinoussion ak 10 Order 83.
2. 2ith Report, page 244, mote on Order 44, rule 119),
313

Tj B(D}220M nf LIAC A292


B14

should be ordered if he makes an affidavit that he has
not ceased to be a pauper after the decree of the first
court, unless the affidavit is challenged later .

(ii) Inquiry that a person has now become a pauper shouid
ordinarily be made by the appellate court (and not by
the lower court),

Gii) Inquiry by an officer of the appellate Court to whom
the power is delegated by the court. should also be
permitted.

Recommendations

44,5. Accordingly, we recommend that rule 2 should be revis-
ed as follows: —

“2. The inquiry into the question whether the applicant is an
indigent person may be made either by the appellate
court or, under the orders of the appellate cout, by an
officer of that court or under such orders by the court
from whose decision the appeal is preferred.

Provided that, if the applicant was allowed to sue or appeal
as an indigent person in the court from whose decree the
appeal is preferred, no further inquiry in respect of the
question whether he is an indigent person shall be neces-
sary. if the applicant has made an affidavit stating that
he hos not ceased to be an indigent person since the
date of the decree appealed from: but if the Government
pleader or the respondent disputes the truth of such
statement, in the affidavit, an inquiry into the question
whether he is.an indigent person shail be held.

Provided, further, that, where it is alieged thet a person has
become an indigent person since the date of the decree
appealed from, the inquiry shall be made only by the
appellate court or by an officer of that court under its
orders, unless the appellate court considers it necessary
in the circumstances of the case that the inquiry should
be held by the court from whose decision the appeal is
preferred,”


“4

Na

CHAPTER 45
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT

Introductory

45.1. Procedure in appeals to the Supreme Court, in so far as
uceediniys leading in such appeal take place in the High
is dealt with in Order 45, .

45.2. Originally. Order 45 dealt with appeals to the King in
Council, that is to say, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Coun-
cil. to whom. in cases uf a certain amount, there was an appeal
in the last resort frcm the judgments of the Court of British India
(ond of all the cther dependencies and colonies of the realm). This
Chapter reproduced the provisions of an Act' of 1874, which had
been, as a $21, submitted to, and approved by, the Judiciai Com-
. and which was repealed and re-enacted by the Code of
1877. With minor modifications, the Order has continued an sue-
cessive Codes, It needs no change.”

1. ‘The Privy Council Appeal Act 1974.

AAs to the hietory nf article 188 of iho Constitution, sec 43th Repurt of the Law Com-
५ paragraphs 7 wut 8.

L{B(D)229Mof L&C A, - ३2(७)


CrarTer 46
REFERENCE

Introductory
46.1, Order 46 deals with reference to the High Court.

The Court trying any suit or appeal in which the decree is
final, ie. which cannot come before the High Court on appeel,
may either of its own motion or on the application of any of the
parties, draw up a statement of the facts and the question, and
refer such statement, with its own opinion on the point, for the
decision of the High Court.

Order 46, Rule 1

46.2. Order 46 rule 1, is as follows: —

“Where, before or on the hearing of a suit or an appeal in
which ihe decree is not subject to appeal, or where, in
the execution of any such decree. any question of law or
usage having the force of Jaw arises. on which the
Court trying the suit or appeal or executing the decree
entertains a reasonable doubt, the Court may, either of
its own motion or on the application of any of the par-
ties, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and
the point on which doubt is entertained, and refer such
statement with its own opinion on the point for the
decision of the High Court.”

46.3. A suggestion was made during our discussion that a sub-
ordinate covrt should have power to refer to the High Court a
substantial question of law of first impression even where the case
is one in which appeal lies. We have discussed it at some length,
but are unable to accept it. The likely effect of such an amend-
ment would be that numerous references would be made to the
High Court on the slightest pretext, and the situation resulting
from it would be impossible to deal with. No doubt, it would be
in the interests of the public if questions of law could be seitled
by a final and binding decision of the highest court of the State.
But there are overriding practical considerations in the way of the
proposed amendment. Moreover. the svit would remain pending
till the High Court decides the issue. Lastly, it is not correct to
assume that the trial court will decide the question wrongly in
every case.

We do not, therefore, recommend any such change.

nA


“a

CuaPTter 47
REVIEW

Introductory

47.1. Order 47 provides for review of judgments, Review is
limited to specific grounds, and the scope is much limited com-
pared with the scope of review under some other systems.

47.2. For example, Order 41 of the Third Schedule to the Court
Ordinance of the Gold Coast provides as follows'—

‘1. Any judge, magistrate. or other judicizl officer, may,
upon such grounds as he shall consider sufficient, review
any judgement or decision given by him (except where
either party shall have obtained leave to appeal, or a
reference shall have been made upon a special case, and
such appeal or reference is not withdrawn), and upon
such review it shall be lawful for him to open and re-
hear the case wholly or in part, and to take fresh evi-
dence, and to reverse, vary, or confirm his previous
judgment or decision, or to order a non-svit.

2. Any application for review of judgment must be made not
later than fourteen days after such judgment. After the
expiration of fourteen days an application for review shall
not be admitted, except by special leave of the court, on
such terms as seem just.”

Order 47, rule 1

47.3. According to some High Courts’, the fact that the view
of the law taken in a judgment has been altered by the subsequent
decision of a superior court in another case, is not a ground for
review of the judgment, According to the Kerala High Court, how-
ever, it is a ground for review’,

474. In the Kerala case‘, Raman Nayar J. held that the fact
that a subsequent binding authority took a different view of the
law from what had been taken in the decision sought to be review-
ed, was a good ground for review. For, it would be the “discovery
of a New and important matter”, and in any case, “दवा error apparent
on the face of the record”, within the meaning of Order 47, rule 1:

1. See Kofi Forfic ¥. Seifadi (1958) W.L.R, 52, 64 (P. 0.)
2. (०) Liagat Husain y. Mohamad Razi, 4.1.2. 1944 Ovdh 198 (Dit):
{ld) Lachmi v, 63296, A.1.R. 1960 Punj. 43, 45, pare. 4:
[0 Paled Naranbhai v. Patel Copaidas, AR, 1972 000. 229,
व. (०) Pathroee v, Sankaran Nair, ATR. 1960 Ker, 186:
(h) ChawtrosheZaran Nayar v. P. Nei, (1989) KLL.T. 683,
4. Pathrose v, Sankavan Nair, ALR, 1900 Ker. 186.
ait


318

In his opinion, this would be a case where, without elaporate
argument, one could point to en error regarding which theve could
reasonably be no two opinions entertained. That the phrase “errer
apparent on the face of the record” is not Simited to errors of faet,
but extends to errors of law, was, in his ७४. a position well-settled’,
and found statutory recognition in the Court Fees Act.* He pointed
out that ihe shrase Mistake apparent from the cecord’ occurring in
section 35 of the Indian Income-tax Act. 1922, is synonymous with
the phrase, “mistake or errer apparent on the 18९ of the record”
It was also pointed out that the Supreme Court had held th: a
misiake of law which is glaring and obvious is a “mistale apastent
from the record.”

47.5. Further, it makes no differeuce whether the binding auiho-
rity demonstrating the error was a decision rendered before. छा
one rendered after. the decision in which the error vecurred, for 4
judicial decision only declares the law and docs not make or chunge
it, A binding judicial authority is analogovs to a statute which
changes the law with retrospective effect. Foll: ९ the Supreme
Court ९६४७", it s held in the Kerala case thai if a subsequent
legislation rendering a decision erroneous is a goud ground for
review, there is no reason why a subsequent binding decision dee-
laring to be erroneous should not be a good ground.

47.6. In an Andhra case“, the facts were as follows: —

An order was passed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution on 1-2-1968, tolow-
ing a Supreme Court decision. The decision of the Sup-
reme Court which was relied on had been reversed by
the Supreme Court on 25-10-1967, but was not Erlly te
ported by 1-2-1968, and was ne. brought to the noti
the High Court. It was held, that th
parent on the face cf the record in the
justifying review of the order. An er
sufficient ground for review.

_The Andhra case is based on error of counsel as a ground of
review, But the Kerala ruling to which we have referred above* is
a direct one.

Recommendation

47.7. It is felt that the position should be settled on ihis point,
If the law is altered by judicial pronouncement of a higher court’,
the party affected should not, in our opinion, have a right to get
the: judgment reviewed.

1. Peniwlacholam 2.7.0, +. Bombay Dd af. to. Ltd. ATR. 1968 ४, 0१. 875, referred te.
2b Seetion 45. Court Freer Act. 1876.
R Conkatarbeltig 12.0. 0. Bomibay D. de MPO. 2.1. 8, VS SE
4

LT. Gifiees ७, Nrinionss Run, AAT. 1969 ALB. 441. 443, rasa, 7५
Para 47.5, supra,
8. An to the effeot uf sutsequent legislation, see AILR. 1964 All 541,


Me

Brg

47.8. An amendment adopting the Kerala view will create 43
serious practical problem. It will keep alive the possibility ot
review indefinitely. Under the Limitation Act.’ the period of jimi-
tation for an appileation for review has been preseribed, but the
delay can, ‘for sufficient cause”, be condoned by the Court under
that 8९००१, Where an application for review is made on the ground
of a later binding authority, the party applying for veview will
usually be able to plead “sufficient cause.” because it is only when
the superior court has made a pronouncement that he will have a
grovnd for revi and he can, therefore, argue with considerable
foree that there “sufficient cause” for his not making the
apptication earlier.

Recommendation

47.9. We, therefore. recommend that the iollowing Explanation
should be added below Order 47, Rule 1—

“Explanation—The fact that the view taken on a question of law
in the judgment of « Court has been reversed or modified by the
subsequent decision of a Superior court in another case is mot a
ground for review of ihe judgment.”

Order 41, rule 7
47.10. There is one point concerning Order 47, rule 7, which
was discussed in the earlier Report’ in these words: —

“Under Order 43, rule 1(७), an appeal lies from an order
under Order 47, rule 4 granting an application for review,
but the scope of such appeal is limited to the grounds
specified in clauses (b) and (९) of Order 47, rule 7(2). It
follows, that where a review is granted on the ground of
a mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or
“for any other sufficient reasgns”, no appeal would lie
against the order granting review. This is not a satisfac-
tory position. There does not seem to be any valid reason
why an appeal should lie when a review is granted on
certain grounds, and vot where it is granted on other
grounds, We recommend, that the restriction at present
imposed by Order 47, rule 7 on the right of appeal against
an order granting review should be removed.”

47,10A. We agree with the view taken in the earlier Report.
namely, that the restriction at present imposed by Order 47, rule 7,
on the right of appeal against an order granting review should be
removed,

1, Article 124, Limitation Act, 1963.

2. Section है, Limitatinn Act. 1963.

3. 37th Report, page 32, jtagraph 71. Also see payes 249-244 (Notes), and draft amend.
ment at page 84-


Cuapter 48
MISCELLANEOLS

Intreductory

48.1. Order 48 deals with miscellaneous matters and needs no
change.


“ye

हक

Cuapter 49
CHARTERED HIGH CGURTS

Intreductory

49.1. Order 49 deals with chartered High Courts. No changes are
recommended in this Order.


Craprer 50
PROVINCIAL COURTS OF SMALL CAUSES

Introductory

60.1. Order 50 deals with courts of Small Causes outside the
Presidency Towns. No changes are recommended in the Order.



~~

Bae

CuapTer 51
PRESIDENCY COURTS OF SMALL CAUSES
Introductory

31.1. Order 51 deals with courts of Small Causes in the Presi-
dency Towns,

Ht needs no change.


Carrer 52
FORMS

Introductory

52.1. The various Appendices te the Code contain a number of
forms, We shall dea! in this Chapter with such of them as require
amendment.

Appendix B Form No. 2

522. In the Commission’s i4th Repert,' a recommendation was
made that instead of a separate order requiring the defendant to file
a written statement, the summons by which the plaint is served on
the defendant should itself require him to file a written statement
within a specified time. The Commission, in its Report on the Code”
did not consider such an amendment to be useful: but we think that
it would be useful. as likely to reduce delay.

Recommendation
52,3. We, therefore. recommend that the necessary amendment
should be made for that purpose Appendix B, Form No. 2 should be

vised, as follows—

“No. 2
SUMMONS FOR SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES
(Order 5, Rules 1 and 5)
(Title)

To
(Name. description and place of residence)

_ has instituted a suit against you for . secs
mmoned to appear in this Court in person, or by
a pleader who is duly instructed, and able to answer all material
questions relating to the suit, or who shall be accompanied by some
person able to answer all such questions. on the
day णॉ................ ० Weer bene o'clock in 18............
noon, to answer the claim: and you are hereby further direct-
ed to file on that day a written statement of your defence, ond to
produce on the same day all documents in your possession or power
upon which you base your defence or set-off or counter-claim, and
where you rely on ary other document whether in your possession
or power or not, as evidence in support of your defence or set-off or
counter-claim, you shall enter such documents in a list to be added
or annexed to the written statement.

Whereas ..
you are hereby si

1, 14७ iteport, Vol. 1, page 302, pare 11.
Uh Report, page 12, para, 25.

Bat



325

Take notice that in default of your appearance on the day
before mentioned the suit will be heard and determined

im your absence.
हि Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this......day of
9.

Notice—l. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not
attend of their own aceord, you can have a summons
from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness
and the production of any document that you have a

407 right to call on the witness to preduce, on applying to

-_ the Court and on depositing the necessary expenses.

2. If you admit the claim. you should pay the money into

Court together with the costs of the suit. to avoid exe-

. eution of the decree which may be against your person
y or property. or both.”

Appendix B Form No. 4

52.4. We recommend’ that for the existing Form No. 4 in
Appendix B, be substituted as Form No. 4:—

“No. 4
SUMMONS IN SUMMARY SUIT
(Order 37, Rule 2)

(Title)
Te
2 (Name. description and place of residence),
WHERAS has instituted a suit cyainst you

under Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1903, for
Rs. and interest, you are hereby summoned
within ten days from the service hereof, to cause an
appearance to be entered for you, in default whereof the
plaintiff will be entitled after the expiration of such ten
days to obtain a decree for any sum not exceeding the

sum of Rs. and the sum of Rs. for costs
together with such interest, if any. as the Court may
order.

If you cause an appearance to be entered for you. the plain-

tiff will thereafter serve upon vou a summons for judg-

~ ment at the hearing of which you will be entitled to esk
the Court for leave to defend the svit.

Leave to defend may be obtained if you satisfy the Court by
affidavit or otherwise that there is a defence to the suit
on the merits or that it is reasonable that you should be
allowed to defend.

Given under my hand and the seal of the Court. this
day of .............--19

*

--.-- ee _. Judge a
aonscquential on the ehunge proposed tn Order 37, Rule 2,



326

Appendix B Form No 4A (new)

52.5. We recommend! that after Form No. 4 in the Appendix
B the following form be inserted—
*No, 4a

SUMMONS FOR JUDGMENT IN SUMMARY SUIT
{Order 37, Rule 3)

(Title)
In the Court. at svit No of 19
KY @ Plaintiff
Versus
AB C Defendant

Upon reading the affidavit of (the plaintiff ए as may he).

Let all parties concerned attend the (Judge or Civil Judge
as may be) on day the day of ;
at o'clock in the noon on the hearing of an
application on the part of the plaintiff that he be at
hberty to sign the judgment in this suit against the de
fendant (or if against one or some or several, insert
names) for Rs. for and interest and costs.

Dated the day of 19 This summons
was teken out by Pleader for ”

1, This i conzoguential on the change prupored to Order 37, mule 5.

»


हु

Cuarren 53
NEED FOR NATIONAL ACADEMY FOR JUDICIAL TRAINING
Introductory

53.1. As already indicated in the Chapter on our approach’, we
now proceed to discuss certain matters to which we attach con-
siderable importance. These concern the remuneration and training
of members of the judiciary.

Importance of role of Judges

53.2. Although we have attempted to examine the question of
introducing reasonable changes in the Code of Civil Procedure. as
comprehensivery as we could, within the time at our disposal, we
ought to indicate some other important «aspects which may. on @
superficial view, appear to be collateral to cur inquiry, but which
we regard as an integral patt of the basic purpose of our inquiry.

It is plain that a Code of Civil Procedure is a means towards
speedy administration of justice by civil courts; however. the role
which reforms of Civil Procedure Code can play for the legal
system as a whole is limited. Apart from the part which rational
procedure will play in making the administration of justice
speedy, less costly and less unpredictable, the role of Judges in
this direction is undoubtedly crucial. That is why we are expres-
sing our views on this aspect of the matter emphaticaliy in the
present Chapter.

53.3. Even at the cost of repetition, we wish to emphasise that
the success of any system, and particularly the judicial system.
depends on the men who work the system. Judges play an impor-
tant role in its working, and we must, therefore. make some re-
commendations for adequately preparing our junior judges for their
task.

But the Members of the Bar have aiso a vital contribution to
make, and their willing and unstinted cooperation can contribute
to the successful working of the system.

As has been lucidly stated*,—

“After all, the success or failure of any procedural system
depends upon the men who administer it. Of the three
groups that comprise the judicial branch of govern-
ment—secretariat, judiciary and counsel—the last is the
most important, the judiciary perform a vital function,
but they are recruited from the renks of covnsel and
their performance depends upon, and seldom rises above,
that of counsel. In an adversary system it is the adver-

saries who do the bulk of the work.”

Chapter 1. के, ampra.

2. David Kilgour, “Prooednre and Judicial Administration in Canada” in Mewhinucy
(Rd.) Canudiun Jurispendence, (1968), 301, 312. हु

327



Remunerstion ef judicial officers

33.4. In this connection. we must, first and icvemost, refer to the
question of adequate remuneraticn ta members of the judi¢iary
which has been discussed more than once. [t is obvious that il-paid
judicia] officers cannot give their best.

53.5. What is more important is, poor remuneration for junior
judicial officers can never attract competent lawyers to join the
judicial service. We confess that we are unable to decide how we
should express our firm belief in this malter. in order to convince
the Union Government and the State Governments that they are
ill-serving judicial edministration by refusing to recognize the
patent truth thot for the success of the judicial process, we must
ittract competent lawyers to join the judicial service, and that
competent lawyers just [] not be attracted to the judicial service
dnless the terms of their service are radically improved.

93.5.A. We are fully conscious that the subject of the terms and
sonditions of service of the subordinate judiciary is a maiter for
the State Governments to decide, but we would urge the Union
Fovernment to persuade the Siate Governments to iake the neces-
sary action without delay before the judicial process falls into
2romplete disrepute by its mnefficiency and unsatisfactory working.
{f the rule of law is to become and continue to be a reality in our
nationel life, our courts must be manned by competent and ex-
perience] and fearless judges. It is in this context that we proceed
to make our recommendations,

Number of Judges

53.6. We should also re-iterate here what was said in the ear-
lier Repert', as to the need for increasing the number of judges,
Discussing the causes of delay, the Commission observed;—

(1) There is congestion of work in several courts. The enly
way of removing such congestion is to appoint additional
judges. Unless the arrears in any court are wiped cut by
the appointment of additional Judges, any_ improvements
in procedure will not resvlt in the expeditious disposal
of cases in that Court.

(2) The remuneration at present payable to Judges is grossly
inadequate. The Law Commission, has in its Fourteenth
Report, made certain recommendations on this subject.
If Judges are expected to work efficiently and honestly,
they should be properly paid. having regard to their
status and the nature of work done by them.

A great deal of preliminary work for getting cases ready
fov disposal is done by the ministerial staff. The minis-
terie! staff should be of svfficient strength to handle such
work properly and expeditiously. The emo'uments paid
to the ministerial staff in subordinate courts are near
the starvation level. A great deal of corruption among

a

1, 27th Report, page 10, pars 16(1) and 16(2).

aay
&


“

है!
7)
५4
}
i
py
हि
रच

329

the ministerial staff in subordinate courts is due to this
factor. It is, therefore, imperative that the conditions of
service of such ministerial staff should be improved.”

Training of judicial officers

53.7. We would, also, like to emphasise the need for the train-
ing of judicial officers, who join judicial service in the lowest
cadre. We attach vital importance to the question of proper train-
ing. Although this topic is outside the purview of the Code of Civil
Procedure, we are dealing with it here because, in our view, no
amount of reform of the law of procedure will succeed if those
who administer the law are not properly equipped for their task.

53.8. The quality and output of work of judicial officers will, to
a great extent, depend not only on the mental and_ intellectual
equipment which they posses, but also on their ideals and sense
of service. The State should, therefore, do its maximum to ensure
that they enter on their duties with the best equipment and with
the highest sense of service.

Institute recommended

53.9. In the relatively isolated atmosphere of the law school,
it is not possible to impart familiarity with the real life drama
in the court. It is, therefore, eminently desirable that those who
will be called upon to face that drama and to pronounce verdict
on it should be adequately prepared for it. We, therefore, recom-
mend, as @ first step, the establishment of an institute for the pur-
pose of training of judicial officers.

‘Training needed to raise intellectual calibre

53.10. The training to be imparted at the institute should be
such as to ensure that members of the lower judiciary have an
intellectual equipment of the best order. It should be borne in
mind that enrichment of the calibre of subordinate judiciary is a
measure necessary to ensure bettter judicial qualities in the higher
judiciary, because many members of the latter are drawn from the
former.

Training io be on all-India basis

53.11. It is desirable in the national interest that the training
should be organised on an all-India basis, and the proposed Insti-
tute should, therefore, be an all-India Institute. The appoint
ments to judicial services should of course, continue to be
made by the States: but it is desirable that the training
should have an ‘all-India’ character, for more reasons than one. In
the first place, it is the task of the judiciary to apply and interpret
the law and familiarise itself with the process of weighing evi-
dence. In India, because of the federal structure and also because
of the vastness of the country, it is specially necessary that the
unity of the legal system based on the several Codes of substan-
tive and procedural law, should be preserved and maintained as
a balance against diversities of interpretation. Judicial outlook


330

towards the interpretation of statutes should, in its broad features,
be uniform. Initial training on an ‘all-India’ level would prove to
be a great step towards maintaining the uniformity referred to
above.

ln tac second place, fhe meeting together of officers from
various States—officers who will, in the course of their work, come
in daily contact with the average citizen,—covld, in the long run,
foster national integration. Mutual discussions and activities pur-
sued together arc bound to foster an understanding of the habits
and cultures of people of the several States; it is such understand-
ing which, more than anything else, will pave the way for integra-
tion of hearts, and is much more valvable than mere mechanical
integration.

Lastly, the level of judicial officers should also be uniform, as
far as possible, throughout India.
Director and staff

53.12, It is desirable that the Institute which we recommend
should be headed by a person of the status of sitting Supreme
Court Judge; and on the staff there should be at least some per-
sons who are of the status of High Court Judges and senior Dis-
trict Judges. All the officers, including the Director, should be on
a tenure basis. :

Training to be condition precedent to confirmation

53.13. We further recommend that the successful completion of
the training which we have proposed should be a condition ‘prece-
dent to confirmation to appointment in the judiciary.

Principles to be kept in mind in framing syHabus

53.14. We would like to indicate broadly the principles which
should be kept in mind when framing the course of training.

In this connection, we may refer to the two “commandments”,
enunciated by Whitehead.

The two commandments enunciated by Whitehead in his famous
essay on the Aims of Education were'—‘do not teach too many
subjects’ end ‘What you teach, teach thoroughly’. “The result of
teaching smal! parts of a large number of subjects is the passive
receiptian of disconnected ideas not illuminated with any spark of
- vitality. Let the main ideas which are introduced.... be few and
important, and let them be thrown into every combination possible’.

Subjects

53.15. The subjects to be included should be such es to deal
with the relationship of law to other social sciences, including, in
particular. economies and sociology. The emphasis should not be
“1. Whitehead, 12 the “Age of Science” (Winter. 1968) Deadolue, page 108,

as quoted by Kamla Chowdbry, “Developing Admipistratoza for Tomorrow (April-June, 1960,
16 Indian Journal of Publie Administration, pege 226.

2, For details, see para 53,19 to 53.26, infra,

‘
|



7

331

on technical law er procedure, but on law as a part of an inter-
disciplinary study and on the application of the law to the facts
of a particular case.

Report of U.K. Committee

53.18. In the Report of the Committee on Civil Service in
U.K.,’ two main attributes were considered essential, «in varying
combinations, for work in the Government service.

“One is being skilled in one’s job—skill which comes from
training and sustained experience. The other in having
the fundamental knowledge of and deep familiarity with
a subject that enable a man to move with ease among
its concepts, Both spring from and re-inforce a constant
striving fur higher standards.”

It is this “constant striving fer higher stardards” which will
be fostered by proper training. It may, therefore, become neces-
sary to provide, to prospective members of the judiciary, some
familiarity with the social back-ground’? in which the laws which
they have to administer, operate

Objectives of training

53.17. The effectiveness and success of the service afforded by
the administration of justice must largely depend upon the degree
to which it can effectively respond to the genuine needs of the
community. And this pre-supposes sufficient knowledge of the pro-
blems and difficulties of the community. The importance of educa-
tion in these aspects is. therefore, dbvious.

The almost exclusively legal universe in which those concern-
ed with the law function should not become an ivory tower, so as
to lead to these needs being ignored. With the growth of the wel-
fare element in State activities. these aspects will assume more
and more importance.

Indications as to subjects

53.18. Bearing in mind the considerations mentioned above, we
indicate the guidelines which should be followed in framing the
sylabus for the training proposed above.

Soclal change and legal iastitutions

53.19. A subject of importance is the effect of social change on
legal instituticns, It is mow well recognised that many of the fun-
damental legal concepts have undergone modifications owing to
social changes

1, Report of the (Fulton) Comntittee (U.K.) The Centza] Service (1968).

2 See also para 58.19 to 53.26, infra,
LIB, D) 228M 01/&/, 4 ,-- १४६)



332

Views of Rescoe Pound

53.20. In this connection. we may refer to the observations made
by Roscoe Pound’:

“TI am-content to see in legal history the record of a conti-
nually wider recognising and satisfying of human wants
or claims or des‘res through social control: a more em-
bracing and more effective securing of social interests; 4
continually more complete and effeciive elimination of
Waste ard precluding of friction in human enjoyment of
the goods of existence—in short. a continually more effi-
cacious social engineering.”

53.21. Lecked at from this broad point of view. the conclusion
inevitably follows that:

“Jurisprudence, ethics, economies politics and sociology, are
distinct enough at the core but shade out into each

other. li the social seiences must be co-workers,
and e ally all must be co-workers with jurispru-
dence’,

It is in the light of this jurisprudential view of the judicial role
that we prooose to describe the scope and nature of the work to
be done at the Institute which we have in mind.

Effect of pulls competing for recognition

53.22. The law is predominantly as an instrument of social
engineering in which conflicting pulls of political philosophy, .eco-
nomic interests, ethical values, struggle for recognition. This strug-
gle has to be viewed against the background of history, tradition
and development of legal techniques. A working knowledge of those
disciplines is therefore essential.

We shal] indicate below, by way of illustration, the effect of
these pulls upen a few branches of the law.

Property and contracts

53.23, Taking first, the field of property, it may be noted that
the concept of perty has been gradually widened, but at the
same time the principles poverning the power and the use of pro-
perty have been profoundly modified under the impact of new social
ideas.

Again, in the law of contracts. the emphasis on contract as an
instrument of free bararining between the parties has been largely
modified,—sometimes by the operation of commercial forces (e.g.
the emergence of standardised contracts), sometimes by econmi¢
pressures (e.g, the evolution of collective agreements) and sometimes
by the impact of positive legislation (e.g. through the imposit'on
of statutars econ ms on contracts).

1. Roseor Pound, “An T:troduetion te the Philosophy of Law", page 57.

2. Roseoe Pound, “An Introduction to the Philosophy of Law", p. 57,

1
पु



Torts

53.24. A similar phenomenon is noticeable in torts, At common
law, the rules of the law of torts, whicn were designed to adjust the
eonsequences of loss, placed the liability on the person who caused
the harm. But the shifting of this liability started with the emer-
gence of vicarious responsibility, and now, on a vastly wider scale,
with the progress of insurance. This change in liability reflects, in the
realm of tarts, the operation of private as well as of social forces
similiar to those operating in the field of contract,

Criminal law

53.23. Criminal law has also witnessed several developments dur-
ing recent times. The most interesting, of course, is the differentiation
between the old-style type of criminal offence and the new type of
public welfare offence. The yardstick in both cases is the gravity of
the intcrest that has been injured. But new types of interest deserv-
ing of protection by the State and unknown to the older criminal law
have emerged, Some-but not all-of these can be measured in terms
of older concepts of criminal law, Some require a new approach, Both
the traditional ‘eciminal’ type of offence and the new public welfare’
type of offences have, therefore, been cmployed in order to protect
the new types of interests.

Recent penological trends are also well-known, and we need
not here enter into their details.

53.28, We are mentioning these developments in order to give
a concrete though illustrative indication of matters which could be
usefully included under the subject of law and society (or any other
similar appellation which is considered suitable.)

Statutory interpretation

53.27, Another subject of importance is that of statutory interpre-
tation. This subject is ut present included in the courses leading to the
law degree of most Indian Universities, But the emphasis in the
training which we propose will be on the practical application of
rules of interpretation, covering enacted' rules of interpretation as
well as others.

53.28. As regards the process of interpretation of statutes, it is
pertinent to note that. because perfect generalization for the future
is impossible, no generalization is complete in any legislative mea-
sure. As Judge Breitel has observed*—

“Aware of this impossibility, legislatures often do not more
than purport to lay down the most general statements of
law, intending that the courts and other law-applying agen-
cies shall creatively adapt the general principle to specific

Sec the General Clouses Act. 1897,
2. Jadge Breitel “Courts and Law-making™ Columbia Law Sehon] Contennie) Sympo-
sinm (1959). है


334

cases. Thus, evcry time a statute uses a rule of reason, or a
standard of fairness without specifications, there is econ-
scious and deliberate delegation of this responsibility to
the courts *

However, exhaustive a statute may be, there will still remain &
group of cases where the purpose of the legislature is not easy of per-
ception. “And here society and the legislature both entrust themselves
to the law making powers of the courts'.” The judiciary will, there-
fore, always have to concern itself with these ‘interstices’ of legisle-
tion’. One may call this process a creative one, or only a process of
unfolding what is latent. The name does not matter.

Cardozo’s view

53.29. In the following passage, Mr. Justice Cardozo expressed
his views, formed on the basis of his personal experience’, as to the
judicial process, “........ logic and history, and custom, and utility and
the accepted standards of right conduct, are the forces which, singly
or in combination, shape the progress of the law. Which of these for-
ces shall dominate in any case, must depend largely upon the compa-
rative importance or value of the social interests that will be thereby,
promoted or impaired. One of the most fundamental social interests
is that law shall be uniform and impartial. There must be nothing in
its action that savours of prejudice or even arbitrary whim or fitful-
ness. Therefore in the main there shall be adherence to precedent.
There shall be symmetrica] development, consistently with history
or custom when history or custom has been the motive force, or the
chief one, in giving shape to existing rules, and with logic or filioso-
phy when the motive power has been theirs. But symmetrical develop-
ment may be bought at too high a price. Uniformity ceases to be a
good when it becomes uniformity of oppression The social interest
served by symmetry or certainty must then be balanced against the
social interest served by equity and fairness or other elements of s0-
cial welfare. These may enjoin upon the judge the duty of drawin,
the line at another angle, of staking the path along new course, o!
marking a new point of departure from which others who come af-
ter him will set out upon their journey.

If you ask how he is to know when one interest outweights ano-
ther, I can only answer that he must get his knowledge just as the
legislator gets it, from experience and study and reflection; in brief,
from life itself. Here indeed, is the point of contact between the legis-
lator’s work and his”.

Exercise of judicial discretion

53.30. Yet another subject which should be included is the exer-
cise of judicial discretion in several branches of litigation. (A trainee
could of course, be allowed to choose one of them’).

1. Jamon Bf. Tandis, “Note on statutory interpretation” (1828) 43 Harv. 1 Review:
3860, 898.

2, Of. Southern Pacific (6. v. Jenson, 244 ए. 3. 205, 221 (Holmes J.)
3B. Cardozo, The Natare of the Judicia] Process (1921), page 112413,
4, B. हु. Sentencing, or family lew, or equitable relief.


™~

335

53.31. For example, there are several factors to be taken as guides
for the exercise of the discretion to grant matrimonial relief; (a) the
position and interest of the children; (b) the interest of the party
with whom the petitioner has committed adultery (where relief is
claimed on that ground). with special regard to their future marriage;
(c) the prospects of reconciliation; (d) the interests of the petitio-~
ner, particularly his prospects of re-marriage; (e) the interest of the
community at large. balancing the sanctity of marriage against social
considerations which make it contrary to public policy to insist on the
maintenance of a union which has utterly broken down’,

53.32. Similarly, there is sufficient scope for the exercise of discre-
tion in the field of equitable relief and also in regard to the award of
costs and (in criminal cases} in the grant of bail and sentencing.

Duration of the course

63.33. We now come to the duration of the course. In our opinion,
the total duration of the course should be one year; during the first
three months, the probationers will undergo intensive course of train-
ing in the well-arranged curriculum; in the next six months they will
be attached to the respective trial courts in their states, where they
will gather experience about the working of the courts; and, in the
jast three months, they will once again be in the Institute, where
they will receive training in the shape of lectures, seminars and group
discussions. At the end of the year. the probationers will appear for
an examination, and it is only on passing the examination that they
will be confirmed and posted to the respective courts.

Conference to be held periodically

53.34, We also recommend that conferences should be held
periodically. to supplement the training which we have recommen-
ed,

Question of expenses

53.35. We are fully conscious that our recommendation to start an
All-India Institute will involve expenditure and we anticipate that
an objection may be raised on this ground; but, we would like to
emphasise the fact that Government have always thought it neces-
sary to train their administrative officers in order that the general
administration of the country should be efficient and for that pur-
pose, administrative training centre. properly manned with a good
curriculum and a well-planned out programme of the education of
the probationers. has been in existence for many years. We are gur-
prised that it did not oceur to the Government so long to train judi-
cial members who enter judicial service on lines especially suited for
judicial work, We are, therefore, confident that the recommendations
we have made will be accepted by the Union Government and that
the Union Government will be able to persuade the State Govern-
ments to give their cooperation in imvlementing our recommenda-
tions, without any delay. As we have indicated in the course of our

1. Of Blunt भू. Bhont (1943) A.C. 517 (Lord Simon, 1.0.)


336

dicussion', the establishment of an All-India Institute of this charac-
ter for the training of judicial officers will indirectly but inevitably
contribute to national integration, We also feel that it will create an
espirit de corps amongst our junior judicial officers throughout India
and we wish to emphasis that these espirit de corps and the sense of
national integration reinforced with the sense of idealism and a spirit
of service will inevitably lead to a considerable improvement in the
quality of administration of justice.

1, Paragraph 68.11, supra,

the


vy

Craprer 54
CONCLUSION

Introductory

54.1. We have now come to the end of our Report. We shall take
the opportunity of making cer‘ain general observations which are of
importance in connection with the present inquiry.

Ultimate object of reform in procedure

54.2. The ultimate object of reform of procedure must be to make
the trial of a cause in court a judicial investigation for the ascertain-
ment of truth upon which to rest a righteous judgment, rather than
merely a sporting contest of lawyers in the use of rules often adapted
to obscure the truth and cause justice to miscarry, We hope that the
vecommendeations which we have made will help in the realisation of
this ultimate object.

54.3. It is also hoped that our recommendations will enable judi
cial officers to bring to bear on their work the best judicial qualities.
A famous writer’ has, while describing the qualities needed in a
Judge, expressed himself thus :—

“These, then are those faults which ex a man to the danger
of smiting contrary to the law: a Fudge must be clear from
the spirit of party, independant of all favour, well inclined
to the popular institutions of his country; firm in applying
the rule, merciful in making the exception; patient, guarded
in his speech, gentle and courteous to all. Add his learning
his labour, his experience, has spropity, his practised an
acute faculties, and this man is light of the world, who
sors ‘human life, and gives security to that life which he
adorns.”

Recommendations to be taken as a whole

54.4. We should, finally, emphasise that our recommendations in

this report should be read as a whole. They are not a series of detached

suggestions, but parts of an integrated scheme, and have been made

in Pursuance of our genera] approach which we have explained at
e outset.

We should, before we part with this Report, place on record our
warm appreciation of the assistance we have received from Mr.
Bakshi, Secretary of the Commission, in dealing with the problem
covered by the Report. As usual, Mr. Bakshi first prepared a draft
which was treated as a Working Paper, The draft was considered
by the Commission point by point, and, in the light of the decisions

1. Sydney Smith Tho Judge that smites contrary to the law (1624), quoted in 26
Canadisn Bar Review, 344, u vo .


338

taken tentatively by the Commission, Mr. Bakshi prepare@ a final
draft for consideration which was after elaborate discussion approved
by the Commission. Throughout the study cof this problem, Mr.
Bakshi took an active part in our deliberations, and has rendered
very valuable assistance to the Commission. . >

P. 8, GAJENDRAGADKAR Chairman

ए, R. Kaisuns Iver Member

P. K, Triparui Member

S. S. Dravan Member

P.M. Baxser Secretary
4
d
.

New Diem;

The 6th February, 1973,


‘}

APPENDIX

QUESTIONNAIRE OF THE LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA ON
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE

{Issued March, 1972)

Introductory Note

This questionnaire deals with some aspects of revision of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. It may be stated that revision of the
Code was considered at length by one of the previous Law Commis-
sions, which duly forwarded to Government a detailed Report on the
Code.‘ A Bill intended to implement this Report was in due course
introduced in Parliament; but the Bill lapsed, Wh-n the question of
re-introduction of the Bill arose, the Government of India considered
it desirable to request the present Commission to examine the Code
afresh from the “basic angle of minimising costs and avoiding delays
in litigation and taking into account its revised terms of reference”.

The scope of the present inquiry will, therefore, be confined to a
consideration of the major changes veeded in the Ccde from the
following points of view:—

(1) minimising costs;
(2) avoiding delays in litigation; and
(3) the revised terms of reference of this Commission, the most

important of such terms being the implementation of the
directive principles.

1६ is not proposed to examine again questions arising from the
mass of cese-law on the Code, the local amendments made in the
various provisions of the Code. as well as the reforms introduced in
other countries,—including, in particular, the changes made in
England in 1962 by way of revision of the Rules of the Supreme
Court,—as these have been already considered by the previous Com-
mission. It ought, however, to be emphasised that the questions in-
cluded here are illustrative only, and any suggestions for amendment
of the Code on other matters from the point of view of the present
terms 01 reference will be thankfully received.

Costs occasioned by delay*

1. Would you favour the insertion of a ‘provision to the effect that
the court shall, while passing an order for costs, make the party
responsible for delay with reference to any step in the litigation, .
pay the cost proportionate to that delay, whatever may be the
ultimate event of the suit?

1. 27th Report of Law Commission.

3. The questions have heen arranged, as far as possible, in the emierin whieh the relevant
ptovislous appear in the Cacle.

339


ca

o

850

Arrest in execut‘on of a money decree

y in the present position
tian of a money decree?

Do you consider any change. necess
regarding li-biity to arrest in exev

Suits an. execution by or against the Government
Do you fayeur repeal of section 80 of the Code, which requires

that two months’ notice should be given of the institution of a
suit agains. tae G.. comcot or agaiis! a public officer, ete.?

What charges would you suggest in sectivn 82 so as to expedite.

execution against the Government?

Pre-trial inquiry
Would you favour the insertion of a provision to the effect that
particularly in suits by cr against the Goyernment, the court shall
hold a pre-trial inquiry, with a view to narrowing down the
seope of the controversy, and, (where such a ccurse is practi-
cablej, for the settlement of the suit without trial?

Appeals against decrees ,

As vegards the right of first appeal, would you favour any
liniitations based on the nature of the questions at issue, or on
any other criterion?

There is a suggestion that from the judgments of lowest courts

of first instance, an appeal on facts should be excluded in petty.

cases, say, cases of a nature triable by a court of small Causes
from the point of view of subject-matter, where the amount or
value of the subject-matter of the dispute in the court of first
instance and still in dispute on appeal was and is not more than
three thousand rugees (or such ot! fe sum as may be considered
proper), and the decree or order does not involve directly or in-
directly some claim or question respecting property of an
amount or value, exceeding three thousand rupees {or such
other sum as may ae considered proper).

The proposal is that in these petty cases, the first appeal
should be allowed only if the appeal court certifies that a ques-
tion of law is involved, and the issue of such certificate should
be decided cither in chambers or in open court as the appeal
court may think proper

What are your views in the matter? Would you agree with
the suggestion? हु
Do you agree that a second appeal should be allowed only if a
substantial question of iaw is “involved?

Appeals in execution

Do you consider ‘t cdvisable that the right of ap pea] against all
interlocutory orders made under section 47 should be abolished?

vps


10.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.
17.

18.

20.

. Have you any other

B41

Would you. as regards appea’s against final orders under section
47, favour adoption of the principle thai no such order shall be
reversed or substantially vavied. nor shall any case be remand-
ed, in appeal on account of any crror, defect or irregularity in
any proceedings avt uffecting the merits of the case or the juris-
diction of the Court?

gestions fer restricting the right of
rders falling under section 477

appeal in respect of
Appeals in general

Have you any other suggestions to make for reducing the

multiplicity of appeals?

(a) Would you favour lotul deletion of s:etion 115, Civi! Pro-
cedure Code. (revision) ieaving the High Court free to
interfere under article 327 of the Constitution in cases of
gross miscarriage o! justice?

(9) In the alternative, do you favour any curtailment of the
right of revision? If so. in what direction?

(९) In particular, do you favour any curtailment of the right
of revision in the case of inter-locutory orders? If so, in
what respects?

Service of summonses
Would you fayour postal service of summonses in all cases?

Do you consider it desirable to allow service on the pleader of
a party of all processes issued after the defendant enters ap-
pearance? .

Do you favour an amendment permitting servicer of summonses
by a party?

Do you faviur the -dopt-on of
of service simultaneously?

Would you permit the service of summonscs on an agent nomi-
nated by the Government, a public corporation or a public
company, in the ease of a suit by or against them?

Arguments

ec more of these methods

_Do-you favour the introduction of written arguments in suits

or appeals, and if so, what concrete suggestions would you
make in this behalf?

JIndgment and decree

{a) Do you think it desirable to provide that the Jast para-
graph of the judgment should be so drafted as to indicate
the relicf granted in precise terms, thereby facilitating the
drawing up of a formal decree without loss of time?

(b) Would you approve of the suggestion that in case a decree
is not drawn up within a specified period. the aggrieved
party may eppeal against the judgment without filing a
copy of the decree, treating the copy of the last paragraph
of the judgment as the decree?


21.

22.

23.

४4,

26.

27,

342

Executien of money decrees

What changes would you suggest in the existing procedure re-
lating io the execution of money decrees, with a view to—
(3) avoiding deiay, and

(0) simplifying the procedure?

Do you agree with the suggestion that where a decree for the

payment of money remains unexecuted inspite of the best

efforts of the decree holder, the State should assume responsi-

bility for its payment upto a specified amount—

(a) if the decree is for damages for tort, for maintenance or
arrears of maintenance, or

(०) the decree is against a public corporation, or

(९०) the decree is for a debt and its non-executability is certi-
fied by the executing court as due to a refusal or neglect
by the judgment debtor to pay notwithstanding the fact
that he has had means to pay if?

(a) Do you suggest any liberalisation of the provisions as to
suits by poor persons?

(b) Would you approve of the suggestion that the Present defi-
nitton of “pauper” be widened so as to include a person
whe is uneble to pay 6 part of the covrt fees?

Temporary injunctions

(a) Would yuu favour any limitations on the courts Power to
issue temporary injunctions? In particular, do you favour
an amendment to the effect that an er parte interim in-..
junction should not be granted save in exceptional cases,
and for reasons to be recorded in that behalf?

(0) Would you favour the Suggestion that in case an ex parte
injunction is granted, it shall be discharged by the court
if it is satisfied that the party which cbtained ‘the injunc-
tion is not taking diligent action to serve the opposite
party or other steps necessary for the progress of the suit?

Stay of execution

. Would you make the imposition of security compulsory before

stay of execution is granied under Order 21, Rule_ 663) or
Order 41, Rule 5(4)? -7

Execution—need for radical changes

It was observed by the Privy Counci] that the troubles of a
litigant in India begin when he obtains a decree. Bearing this
in mind, would you suggest any radical changes with reference
to the provisions relating to execution, in order to reduce any
delay ,expense and inconvenience that is caused by the present
provisions?

Appeals against orders

Would you favour any curtailment of the list of appealable
orders as given in Order 43, Rule 1?


~

t

‘

~

}

$43

Appeal by poor persons
28, Would you favour removal of the present restriction in Orde
44, Rule 1(2) on the right of appeal of a pauper?
Delay
29. Have you any other suggestions to make for reducing delay in
the disposal of cases in so far as such delay is due to defects
im the Code of Civi] Procedure?
Poor persons er persons with inadequate means—Legal aid and
process fees .
30. How far do you consider it the duty of the State to provide,—
(a} to a person without any means; or

{b) to a person with inadequate means, the following facilities
or concessions in full or part—

{a) legal aid;
(o) exemption from payment of process fees,

Court-fees—general

31. (a) What suggestions would you make for reducing the amount
of court fees?

{b) In particular. do you agree with the view that court fees
should be nominal and should not be a source of reimburse-
ment to the State and certainly not a source of profit to
the State?

Court-fees in appeal

$2. Would you favour the insertion of a provision to the effect
that at the time of filing of the appal. only one-fourth of
the prescribed courtfee need be paid, and the, remaining may
be paid when the appeal is admitted?

Expenses other than lawyet’s fees and court-fees

33. What conerete suggestions would you like to make as regards
reduction of the expenses of litigation, in so far as such re-
duction could be achieved by an amendment of the Code of
Civil Procedure?

Other amendments

34, Have you an. % other suggestions to make for amendment of
the Code of Civil Procedure in the light of the scope of the
present inquiry?

1. See present restriction in Onder 33, Rule 8,
2. See Introduetory note,

TAR D)229MofL Ta CA—2,00—8.-873— GPS