LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT

RATE OF INTEREST FOR THE PERIOD
AFTER DECREE AND INTEREST ON
COSTS UNDER SECTIONS, 34 AND 35,

CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908.
May, 1973

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS


9.8. GAJENDRAGADKAR
CHAIRMAN
Law Commission
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-11000L

May 14, 1973
My dear Minister,
Ihave great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 55th Report of the Law

Commission on the rate of interest after the decree and interest on costs under
sections 34 and 35 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

The circumstances in which the subject was taken up by the Law Com-
mission are stated in the openirg paragraph of tbe Report. Since the subject
matter of the Report relates to the Code of Civil Procedure, on which the Com-
mission has recently made a Report (54th Report, in February 1973), the
matter was dealt with on an urgent basis, so that Government may, while
considering implementation of the Commission’s Report on the Code, also
take into account the Commission's recommendations on subject matter of
the Report.

The matter being urgent for the reason stated above, it was not consi-
dered necessary to issue a Press communique for inviting views on the subject
or to circulate the Commission’s tentative proposals for comments.

A draft Report was prepared by the Member-Secretary for the purpose
of discussion, This was considered at length, and revised after full discus-
sion.

With warm personal regards,
Yours Sincerely,

(P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR)

Hon'ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

New Delhi-110001

3 14७/73--1.


Para
No.

|
प्र

Row

RR ww wo eee ee eee -> >
Betwakhe eee esesreaGaarsnprswexrnanu

we
e

CONTENTS:

Subject-matier

Genesis of the Report. . + .
Present law

Section 34, Cade of Civil Procedure . . : पु
Interest prioy to suit . : .

Interest subseguent to suit

Summacy of the present position पु

Rationale of interest . . .

Other provisions as to interest . + + -

History of section 34

History of section 2.

Difference between present section and unamended section .

Discretion still retained

Position under 0.20, Rule 11, C.P.C. foe
Reasons for the amendment of 1936

Amendments made on the basis of social justice,
Change made by Joint Commitiee पं .

Shri Raghvacharis dissentingnote . 0. |॥*"
Exptanation of change by Minister of Legal Affairs
Arguments on apposite side

Restriction apposed

View of Shri Tek Chand as to interest on costs ..
Apprehension as to likelihoad of delay

Discretion under oki section supported 5k
Shri Mathur’s objection to the amendment.
Objections to interest on costs being disallowed
Minister's reply. aan Lo
Points for consideration . पु पु पु

Rate of interest after decree-—Justification for reverting 10 old position,

in case of commercial transactions

Argumem of security

Page

७७०णणक+++]७७७०७००७.

t
4

r
cane baaaad

9-10
10

10
W


il

Para Subject-matter, Page
No.

31 Provision in Motor Vehicles Act. पु . . . . पु 11
32 Desirability of amendment + . . पु पु . . . it
33 Guidelines proposed प्‌ . पु प्‌ . पु . . प्‌ 11--12
34 Article 38 considered =. . . पु . पु . . पु 12
35 Position of agricultural debtors . . . . . . . 12-13
36 Provision in Moneylenders Acts . . . . . . . 13
37 Discretion dependent on circumstances. . . न पं . 1314
38 Varieties of menetary liabilities . + प्‌ पु पु . 14—15
39. Inlerest on aggregate wee Loe 15
40. Interestoncosis © ५. -+५ -+ +- +- +- | - - 15

41 Recommendation for amendment of section 34 प्‌ . . . 15—16


REPORT ON RATE OF INTEREST FOR THE PERIOD
AFTER DECREE AND INTEREST ON COSTS
UNDER SECTIONS 34 AND 35, CODE OF CIVIL

PROCEDURE, 1908

1, This Report deals with three short points which we have
taken up in the following circumstances :--

Tn March, 1973, the Bombay Bar Association submitted be-
fore us, during our oral discussions with them? on the Structure
and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary, the need for amending
section 34 of the Code of Civi) Procedure, on the point of rate of
interest which the court can award for the period after the decree.

2. As this point was brought to our notice after we made our
Report on the Code of Civil procedure? we could not deal with it
in that Report, As the point appeared to us to require serious
consideration, we have considered it proper to deal with it in this
Report. We have also considered it desirable to examine the con-
nected question of interest an costs, and interest on the aggregate.

3. We shall first consider the present law on this subject,
which is contained in the Code of Civil procedure.

4. Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is as follows:

“34. (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the pay-
ment of money, the Court may, in the decree, order interest
at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the
principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit to the date of
the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such prin-
cipal sum for any period prior to the institution of the suit,
with further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent
per annum as the Court deems reasonable on such principal
sum, from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to
such earlier date as the Court thinks fit.

(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the pay-
ment of further interest on such principal sum from the date of
the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court
shall be deemed to have refused such interest, and a separate

suit therefor shall not lie.”

Genesis
of the
Report

Present law

Section 34,
Cade of
Civil
Procedure,

Turisdiction of the Higher fudiciary (30th March, 1973).
2. 34th Report (Code of Civil Procsdure, 1908) (February, 19 73}.

1, Discussions with the Bombay Bar Association on the question of Structure and


Interest
prior to
auil.

Interest
subsequent
to suit.

Sunmary
of the
present
position,

Rationaic
of interest.

2

5. This scclion does not deal with interest prior to suit.

That is a math of substantive law. As the Privy Council ob-
served.+

“The crucial question, however, is whether the Court has
authority to allow interest for the period prior to the institu-
tion of the suit ; and the solution of this question depends, not
upon the Civil Procedure Code, but upon substantive law.
Now, interest for the period prior to the date of the suit may
be awarded, if there is an agreement jor the payment of
interest zt a fixed rate, or it is payable by the usage of trade
having the force of law, or under the provision of any sub-
stantive law entitling the plaintiff to recover interest, as for in-
stance, under section 80, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,
the Court may award interest at the rate of 6 per cent. per
annum, when no rate of interost is specitied in the promissory
note or bill of exchange.”

6. Interest subsequent to the suit is exclusively a matter of

slalulory powers* under this section, and that shows the practical
importance of (he section, But for section 4. even a court could
not award interest after the suit.

7. To summarise the present position :—

For the pre-iustitution period, the rate of interest is the
rate allowed by substantive law, (subject to the provisions of the
various Acts passed by the Legislature limiting the rate of in-
terest), and is outside the Code of Civil procedure. Interest
pendenie lite is in the absoluie discretion of the court, by
virtue of section 34 of the Code. Interest for the period after
the date of the decree till realisation of the decretal amount is
also in the discretion of the court under section 34, but it is
subject to the over-all limitation that the court canno! award
any interest on the principal sum adjudged for such period at a
raic higher than 6 per cent.

8. The rationale of interest is that it is damages for wrongful

retention of money. This was noticed in a Supreme Court case २,
The facts (so Sar as relevant for the present purpose) were as
follows :—

On the death of Arunachalam Chettiar (Senior), his
estate in Ceylon was assessed for cstate duty by the Estate
Duty Authorities of Ceylon. The administrator of the deceased
paid the estate duty under protest, and filed a suit question-
ing the validity of the assessment, In the meaatime three
widows, two widows of Arunachalam Chettiar and a widow

1. BN. RE ye Rulia Singh, ATR. 1938 B.C. 67, 70.

2. Thawardas v. Union of tidia, A.LR. 1955 S.C. 468, 478, para, 31.
3. Ramanathan ¥. LT. Commissioner, Madras A.UR, 1967 8.C, 657.


3

of his predecessed son adopted one child each. The claims
of the administrator was ultimately upheld by the Supreme
Court of Ceylon, which ordered refund of the estate duty
alang-with interest. This decision was confirmed by the Judicial
Committee on appeal.

Ramanathan Chettiar, one of the adopted sons, received
one-third share out of the money refunded by the Estate
Duty Authorities of Ceylon. The money so received by him
was assessed by the Income-tax authorities in India, and
he was required to pay income-iax on the interest also,
The assessee objected to the inclusion of interest in income-
tax assessment. Al the instance of the assessee. the Income-
tax Appellate Tribunal referred the following questions
of Taw 10 the High Court.

1. Whether the aforesaid interest receipt constitutes
income ?

2. If so, whether it is exempted under section 4{3) (vii)
of the Income-tax Act as a receipt of a casual and non-
securring nature 2?

The High Court answered the reference against the
assessee; hence, appeal was taken to the Supreme Caurt,
Before the Supreme Court also, only the above mentioned
questions were raised.

The contentions of the appellant were that the amount
of jaterest reccived by him was not a revenue receipt assess-
able to income-tax and that in any event. the receipt was of
a casual and non-recurrring nature falling within the exem-
ption under section 4(3} (vil) of the Tacome-tax Act, 1929.
‘Therefore. the Superme Court had to examine the exac
nature of the Money received by way of interest,

The Ceylon Civil Procedure Code! empowers the court to
award interest, and provides as follows:

“When the action is for a sum of money due to the plain-
tiff, the Court may in the decree order interest according to
the rate agreed on between the parties by the instrument sucd
on, or in the abseace of any such agreement at the rate of nine
per cent per annum to be paid on the principal sum adjudged
from the date of action 10 the date of the decree, in addition
to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period
prior to the institution of the action, with further interest at
such rate on the aggregate sum so adjudged from the date of
the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as
the Court thinks fit,”

1. Section 192, Ceylon Ordinance 2 of 1889.



Other
provisions
as to
interes.

History of
section 34.

Vistory of
section 35,

4

The Supreme Court held that the word used is “interest” in
contrast to “principal sum adjudged”, hence the interest
received by the appellant could not be considered a capital receipt,
being in the nature of damages for wrongful retention of money.
The court further said that the interest is also not exempted from
tax under section 4(3)(vii) of the Income-tax Act; even the plea
of the appellant that whal he had received was not as an interest
bur as the estate of his deceased father, was not accepted, and
the appeal was disraissed.

9, Besides section 34, there are other statutory provisions as
to interest. By way of illustration, we may refer to a few of
them.

(a) Section 1, Interest Act, 1839.

(b} Section 80, Negotiable Instruments Act 1881.
(c) Section 23, Trust Act, 1882.

(वी Section 28, Land Acquisition Act, 1894.

(७) Sections 352-353, Succession Act, 1925,

(f) Section 61 (2), Sale of Goods Act, 1930.

10. Section 34 has an interesting history. But we जरा] confine
ourselves to the amendment of 1956, which is crucial to the gues-
tion under consideration.

Before 1956, seetion 34(1), Code of Civil Procedure, was as
Follows:-—

“34. Interest.—(1) Where and in so far as a decree is
for the payment of money- the court may, in the decree,
order interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be
paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit
to the date of decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on
such principal sum for any period prior to the institution of
the suit, with farther interest at such rate as the court deems
reasonable on the aggregate sum so adjudged, from the date
of the decree, to the date of payment or, to such earlier date
as the Court thinks fit.”

11. Before 1956, section 35(3) of the Code was as follows:—

“(3) The Court may give interest on costs at any rate
not exceeding sia per cent per annum, and such interest shall
be added to the costs and shall be recuverable as
such”.


5

12, In 1956, both the sections were amended. The feature
which distinguish the present! position from. the previous one?
under section 34 can be thus summarised:—

(i) Before the amendment? of 1956, the section left the
rate of interest, even for the postdecree stage, to the
discretion of the court. After the amendment, the maximum
rate of interest for the post-decree stage is six per cent.

(7) Moreover, interest was previously permissible on the
aggregate sum, and not merely on the principal, as is the posi-
tion under the present section.

(ii) Section 35(3), which empowered the Court to award
interest on costs, has been deleted by che amendment of 1956,

13. Subject to the above limits, of course, the question of
interest after the decree till payment is within the discretion of
the Court.

14, Section 34 may be over-ridden by special provisions.
For example, it has been held that where instalments are ordered
under Order 20, rule 11, of the Code-of Civil Procedure, the
testriction in section 34 does not apply.

15. It is, at this stage, necessary to go into the reason for the
amendment made in the Code of Civil Procedure in 1956.

In the statement of Objects and Reasons, annexed to the Bill
of 1955, (which proposed this amendment), the following ex-
planation was given in support of the relevant clauses®

“Clause 2:—Section 34, which enables courts to award
interest, does not impose a maximum limit. This clause
proposes to limit the rate of interest which a Court can award
on the decretal amount to six per cent per annum.

Clause 3:—It is proposed to take away the power of the
Court to give interest on costs.”

16. In the Lok Sabha Debates’, the Minister of Lega} Affairs
(Shri Pataskar) stated® that in clauses 2 and 3, amendments more

Difference
between

“present

section and
unamended
section.

Discretion
still,
Tetained.

Position
under 0.20,
rule 11,
CPC.

Reasons for
the amend-
ment of
1956,

Amendments
made on the
basis of

social justice.

. Paragraph 4, Supra,
. Paragraph 10, Supra,

. Gordhandas v, Valnji Khatsi, A.ALR. 1967 Guj. 276 (Bhagwati and A.D. Desai JJ).
. Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) 8॥ No.25 of 1955 (Lok Sabha); Statement

L
2.
3. Code of Civit Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956),
4,
5.

of Objects and reasons.

6. Clause 2 related to section 34 of the Code; Clause 3 related to section 35 of the Code,

7. Lok Sabha Debates, 2nd to 4th August, 1955,
8. Clause 2 related to section 34, clause 3 related to section 35,
3 Law/73—2


6

in conformity with the modern ideas of social justice were intro-
,duced. He explained that they disallowed high rates of interest
and also any interest on costs, awarded by the Court.

Change 17. The Joint Committee on the Bill made a further change,
Joint Com. Observing as follows*:—
mittee.” “Clause 2:—Section 34 of the Code empowers a Court

to award further interest from the date of the decree upto
the date of payment on the ‘aggregate sum’ which comprises
principal sum with interest accrued thereon. The Committee
are of the opinion that interest should not be awarded on
interest but only on the principal sum. Suitable amendment
has accordingly been incorporated in this clause.”

Shri = 18. One of the dissenting notes in the Report of the Joint
नमक Committee, stated?:—
dissenting “Clauses 2 and 3:—The idea behind the principle of no
हु interest on interest accrued prior to the date of suit and during
its pendency and even after the decree as well even on the costs
decreed is not in consonance with the actual prevalent prac-
tice in the world of trade and commerce. The argument that
there is no agreement for payment of interest or that. litiga-
tion is not to be a business does not impress me. This idea
appears to be conceived in a spirit of denying a just right
to the creditor to benefit a debtor. Ii is very likely to bring
about a serious shrinkage of credit facilities now largely sup-
plied by private agencies in the absence of adequate Govern-
ment or other institutional agencies particularly in rural
areas. It is also opposed to the principle that money found due
and not paid should carry interest by way of damages.

Further, the costs décreed are often only a part of what -
is actually incurced by a pacty. Greater part of it is paid as
court fees at the time of the institution of the suit. The other
part consists of stamp and process fees and cash batta paid as
well as other taxable sums. The decree that comes long after,
only makes it payable. There is enormous time that further in-
tervenes before its realisation, the law itself. providing a period
of twelve years for such'realisation. Again, most of the plain-
tiffs are not professional money lenders. These creditors are
themselves often compelled to borrow elsewhere on interest to
meet the initial costs of filing the suit.

Under these circumstances, I fee! these provisions are not
only unjust but will work serious hardship both on the
creditors and debtors.

I would have the discretion vested in the Courts to grant
interest in appropriate cases rather than deny it altogether.”

7. Repott of the Joint Committee on the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Bill,
1955 (13th December, 1955}, page (iv), under clause 2.
“2, Dissenting note of Shri K.S. Raghvachari; Report of the Joint Committee on the
Ge.C. Amendment Bill, 1955, Page x-xi.


7

19. The. Minister of Legal Affairs (Shri Pataskar) explained the
change made by the Joint Committee, in these terms':-—

“Clause 2 of the Bill relates to an amendment of section
34 of the Code of Civil procedure. That section empowers 4
court to award further interest from the date of the decree
upto the date of payment on the aggregate sum which com-
prises of the principal sum, with interest. Clause 2 was pro-
vided to limit the rate of interest which a Court can award
on, the decretal amount to six per cent, per annum. The
Joint Committee went further and decided that interest not
exceeding six per cent should be allowed only on the principle
sum and not on the aggregate sum which does include some
amount of interest. This 18 based on the equitable principle
that interest ought not to be allowed on the amount of
interest itself; in other words, to prevent compound interest.”

20. It is clear, however, that the arguments were not all one
way. Thus, in the course of the discussion on the Bill, several
points were put forth by way of objections to the Bill.

One State Government observed that the proposed amend-
ment? may serv as an incentive to the desire of the judgment,
debtor for non-payment of the costs.

21, One High Court Judge, in his comment on the Bill stated,
that the power, unless it is abused by courts, should not be res-
tricted in this manner’,

22. Inthe Debate on, the Bill, there was considerable discus-
sion as to the amendment deleting the power to award interest
on costs. One of the Mambers of the Lok Sabha (who was a
retired High Court Judge), observed+:— a

“Ta this connection, a reference has been made to section

35, sub-section (3), which according to clause 3 of the: Bill,
is to be omitted. Not that I have usurious propensities,
but I do not like this provision. It is true that there should
not be any profiteering by the people; [ concede that, but
there are instances when the costs amount to five figures or
more, and there is no reason why, whem an unsuccessful party
is subjecting the successful party not only to a Jong dilatory
and uneading dispute, but alsa to frivolous and vexatious
litigation whereby he is out of pocket to the tune of stveral
thousands, the Jaw or the legislature should be so solicitous
_ that such person should not pay interest- if he does net pro-
pose to pay or if he intends to delay the payment of the costs.

Explanation
of change
by Minister
of Legal
Affairs.

Arguments
on Opposite:
side.

Restriction
opposed,

View of Shri
Tek Chand
as to
interest on
costs,

1. Lok Sabha Debates, 14th November, 1956.

2. Comments on the Bill of 1955.

3. A Judge of the Allahabad High Conrt.

4. Shri Tek Chand, Lok Sabha Debates, 14701 November, 1956.


Apprehen-
sion as to

Jikelihood
of delay.

Discretion
under old
section

supported.

Shri
Mathue’s
objection to
the amend-
ment.

One unfortunate and unhappy feature of administration
of civil law in our land, is, apart from delays and objections
of frivolous and vexatious nature, justice is made available,
if at all, at a very high and exorbitant price.”

23, Apprehension? as to the likelihood of delay was expressed
in one of the comments on the Bill. It was stated that reduction
in the rate of current interest may encourage judgment debtors
“to postpone payment of the decree amounts even more than
now.”

24, Another comment on the Bill opposed the amendment
of section 34, for these reasons?:—

“The present section 34 which enables the Civil Courts
to award interest does not impose a maximum limit. The
amendment proposes to limit the rate of interest which the
Court can award on the decretal amount at 4% per annum®.
The proposed amendment usurps the discretion vested in
the Court, in so far as the award of interest is concerned.
There are no reasonable grounds for supposing that Courts
have been harsh upon litigants in the matter ef saddling them
with interest, and there is no reason to think that the wise
discretion given to the Court in the award of interest has been
misused. There is no valid reason to fetter the discretion of
the Court in such matter. Moreover, the rate of interest would
vary at different times, also according to the local conditions
prevailing in different districts. The Froposed amendment
would fossilize the discretion of the Court and prevent it
from modulating interest so as to meet the needs of the time
or to suit local ‘conditions. I submit that the proposed
amendment is not proper.”

25. Opposing the amendment as to interest on costs, one
Member# of the Lok Sabha said:—

“What is your change in social ideas which sends you in
all sympathy with that man? I would like to know what is the
change in social ideas that makes you go in sympathy with a
person who, though the amount is due from him, does not pay
up the amount but forces the man to go to a court of law,
who forces that man to take certain loans and engage a coun-
sel and pay the court fees. And you do not want any interest
to be paid on that account. What is this change in social law
which asks you to do that ? [should certainly like to know asto
why you do that?”

1. Comment of a High Court Judge.
2. Comment of a District Judge (later High Court Judge).
३ The original proposal was for a maximum of 4 per cent.

4, Shri H.

jC. Mathur, Lok Sabha Debates, 14th November, 1956.


9

26. Another Member! of the Lok Sabha expressed his dis- Objections

कि है interest
agreement with the amendment as to interest on cost fo interes

“Thave not found myself in full agreement with the aboli- being ve d
tion of interest on casts. My opinion is that in cases where .
the defendents have succeeded in protracting the proceedings
and putting the decree-holder to heavy costs, there does not
seem to te any justificution for depriving the decree-holder
of the interest on the costs. Probably, the Government had
in view the case of professional money-lenders only and then
in order to penalise them, and also to save the judgment-
debtors, they have done so. It is not always that professional
money-lenders get decrees against poor and indigent persons.
There are other persons also who occasionally lend money
and are harassed by debtors by pratracting their proceedings
by false and frivolous pleas. I feel that the Hon. Minister
may think over this matter and, if possible, the law should be
suitably amended.”

27, Dealing with the various points, the Minister of Legal yfinister’s
Affairs? said:— reply.

“Now, take, for instance, clause 2. T thought it was a
very simple provision and I never expected that there would
be anybody in this House who would very seriously object
to making a change in the year 1955, that when costs are
awarded, the courts should not also award interest on the
amount of casts. Some of my friends, very vehemently
argued on that point. There was Shri 5.४, Ramaswamy,
a barrister, who said ‘why should he not get interest on that”
Incurring costs and giving a loan are too distinct matters.
Ican understand that interest is given primarily when there
is an agreement to give interest, because it is something in the
nature of a thing which should carry interest. But to say that
because a man goes to a court and succeeds, therefore, the
other side should be vindictively dealt with, that it should in-
cur not only the costs- which may be heavy—but also, add to
that the interest on it, is something which I, for one, fail to
understand, as 10 how it can be consistent with whatever
ideas we have got. That people should be expected to pay
costs is reasonable: if the party succeeds, the other side should
pay costs. (Shri $.V. Ramaswamy rose).

Shri Pataskar: 1 know there are some people-there are one
or two other hon. Members also-who think that way, but
T for onc do not think that anybody should be allowed to make
out of this cost of litigation something as if it was a loan which
he gave to the other side. If itis not viewed from that aspect,
T think it would not be proper, from the point of view of the
ideas of justice, at any rate,

" ¥, Shri Mul Chanu Duhey, Lok Sabha Debates, 14th November, 1956.
2. Minister af Legal Affairs (Shri Patas Kar) Lok Sabha debates, Ind August, 1956,


Points for
considera~
tion,

Rate of
interest.
after
decree——
Justification
for reverting
to ald
position,

m case of
Commercial
transactions

10

Sini S.V. Ramaswamy: If the money was invested in
a Bank, would it not have carried interest?

Shri Pataskar: 1 would not enter into an argument,
because this is not a discussion about the social phenomena
underlying these processes.

Siri 5.5, Vora: Can you avoid that?

Shri Pataskar: 1 would rather avoid it and | think the
majority will agree that this is not the right thing to १०.

28. This, then, is in brief the material indicating the reasons
which led io the amendment of 1956, and the reactions thereto,

On the above material, three points require consideration: —
{i) Rate of interest for the period after decree;

Gi) Admissibility of interest on the aggregate of principal
and interest;

Gii) Interest on costs.

29. On the first point,! it cun be said in fuvour of the present
section that the tendency of medetn legislation is to discourage,
rather than to encourage, high rat | interest, and 0७ doubt,
the amendment was made after taking into account that tendency.

Jr appears to us, however, that the practical working of the
section requires a special provision for commercial transactions
fora high amount. In the first place, judgment-debtors* entering
into such transactions have exploited the amended law, by invest-
ing moseys at a much higher rate of interest than 6 per cent, know-
ing that they themselves do not have to pay more than 6 per cent
interest; and thisis hardly just or fair. The law may, as a matter
of abstract policy, regulate the maximum rate of interest and im-
pose legal restrictions in that regard. But it ought not to
allow a person to take advantage of the Icgal restriction,
and make profit thereby. After all, the judgment-debt belongs to
the decrec-holder, and the fruits thereat ought also to belong to
him. In the second place, whatever be the current rate of in-
terest around 1956, it is well known that the rate of interest now
obtainable in the market is much higher than 6 per cent—at least
in commercial transactions, and jdugement-debtors, one can
presume, must he taking advantage of that higher rate.

1. Para. 280), sera.
2, See osal suggestion of the Bombay Bar Association, para, 1, supra,


il

30, Ic is true chat the deccee-holder has a security in the shape Area
ofa decree, and, for that reason, theoretically, one can distinguish °*S* .
the period after the decree from the period before the decree.
But there are practical considerations, mentioned above, which
are to be 90106 in mind, and which overbalance this theoretical
distinction in special situations.

31. I. may be noted in this connection that a recent provision
as 10 interest! (interest on compensation for injury caused by a
motor vehicle) gives a wide discretion to the court. It is as
follows (-+

“110-CC. Where any Court or Claims Tribunal allows a
claims for compensation made under this Chapter, such Court
ot tribunal may direct that in addition to the amount of com-
pensation. simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and
from such date not earlier than the date of making the claim
as it may specify in this behalf.”

Special considerations, thus sutisfy a wider discretion.

32. We have in mind commercial teansactions, Le. transactions  Desicability
connected with industry, trade or business. Monetary liabili- of amend-
ties arising out of such’ transactions stand on a special footing, ™*
because the activilies conccrued are carried on with a view to
profit. The debtor and the creditor do not stand in situations of
disparity. If. for example, it is a case of loan, then the money
would have been borrowed for carrying on or improving the bust-
ness of the borrower. It is far removed from a debt incurred by

a poor agriculturist or a needy urban resident to make his two
ends inzer,

33, We are, therefore, of the view that : Guidelines

proposed
(a) Where the princi
sand rupees. and

sum adjudged exceeds five thou-
Cb) the liahility in respect of which the decres is passed
arose oul of a commercial transaction,

the court should have a diserction to order that the rate of further
interest may exceed six per cent per annum.

For this purpose. a transaction is a commercial transaction, if
it is connected with the industry, trade or business of the party
incurring the liabilliy.

The possibility of exploitation of the debtor by the creditor
would be non-existent in such cases. The monetary liability
being connected with the industry, trade or business of the debtor.
and the principal amount being high enough, one can reasonably
assume that the partics wouid be dealing with each other on an

1. Section 110-CC, Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (As amended by Act 56 of 1969),


Ariicle 38
considered

Position of
agricultural
debtors.

12

equal footing. and that independent advice would have been within
easy teach of the person liable.

The minimum monetary limit which we propose will also eli-
minate the possibility that petty debtors will be exploited. In
the particular situation which we have referred to, considera-
tions of economic justice require rather that a higher rate of in-
terest shold be permissible, than that the discretion of the Court
should be rigidly controlled.

34, The Directive principle contained in article 38 of the Con-
stitution, which lays emphasis on social, economic and political
justice will be furthered, rather than impaired, by our proposal.
No doubt, the debtor is some timesin an inferior position,
and stands at a disadvantage in relation to the creditor, For
such cases, thete are Acts regulating the rates of interest on loans
advanced, as well as the total amount which can be recovered on
each such loan, The tule of Hindu Law known as the rule of
Damduput (under which a creditor cannot recover more than
double the principal sum), is well-known. These regulatory
measures were necessary to protect debtors. But the case of Com-
mercial debts stands on an entirely different footing.

The amendment which we are recommending is intended to
expedite the execution of money decrees. By taking note of the
increase in the rates of interest in the market, the amendment
secks to bring the law in line with conditions which exist in reality
and which. if not attended to, may constitute an obstacle to speedy
justice. It will not only prevent commercial credit from drying
up hy reason of the dishonesty of judgment-debtors, but also
advance economic justice by creating a legal frame-work which
will permit the court to 1ake info account the peculiar nature of
these transactions.

35. Weshould now consider the effect of the proposed amend-
ment an special Jaws. So far as the relief of agricultural indebted-
ness is concerned, there is in most States, self-contained legislation
for the scaling down of debts, and such legislation will not be
affected by any amendment of the procedural law. Even where
such legislation itself contains a provision referring back to section
34 of the Code, the court can be expected to exercise its discre-
tion faixly and after bearing in mind the special features of the
case. The last-mentioned reasoning applies equally to situations
where the judgment-debtor, though not an agriculturist, belongs
to a section of the society which is more often exploited than not,
or where the circumstances in which the monetary liability was
incurred, make it desirable that the court should not award a
high rate of interest. It should be pointed out that even after the
amendment which we propose, the rate will be in the discretion

1. See also paragraph 33, supra.


13

of the court. And, it is well established that such discretion must
be exercised on sound judicial considerations,’-*.

Reference may also be made in this context to a provision in
the Kerala Act? for the relief of agricultural debtors.

“5, Interest payable on debis and rents :—

(1) (a) Por determining the amount of a debt other
than a debt due to a banking company as defined in the
Banking Companies Act, 1949, for the purpose of pay-
ment under this Act, notwithstanding anything con-
tained in any law,4 contract or dectee or order of court,—

(i) Tnterest shall be calculated at the rate appli-
cable to the debt under the law, custom, contract or
decree 07 order of court under which it arises or at
five per cent per annum simple interest, whichever, is
less, and credit shall be given for al! sums paid or
credited towards interest and only such amount as is
found outstanding, if any, as interest thus calculated
shall be deemed payable together with the principal
amount or such portion of it as is due ; and

(ii) notwithstanding anything in clause (i) not
more than one-half of the principal shall be deemed
payable or to have been payable towards interest
which accrued due till the commencement of this Act.

If the amount paid or credited towards interest
exceeds the amount payable under clause (i) or clause
(ii), such excess shall be credited towards the principle
and the balance, if any, and future interest alone shall
be recoverable.”

36. On the question of legislation dealing with indebtedness
in general, we may, by way of illustration state that it has been
held that section 30 of the Bengal Money-lenders Act controls
the discretion® under section 34, because of the wide overriding
words “Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being” which occur in the section.

37. As segards the amendment proposed in section 34, we
may repeat that even under the amended section, the discretion
will be exercised after due regard to the circumstances. Every

Provision
in Money-
lenders Ac

Discretion
dependent
on circums-
tances,

1. Amar Chand v. Union of tndia, ALR, 1964 5.C. 1658, 1963, para 17.
2. Sarajubaia v. Saradanath, ALR. 1919 (81,144, 150

3. Kerala Agricultural Debtors Relief Act, 1958

4, Emphasis supplied,

5. Prohkahali v. Ani! Kumar, ALR. 1943 Cal 629, 633.


14

“debt is not necessarily a ican,! and the circumstances in which
aclaim for interest may come up for consideration vary from case
to case. This variation is, in most cases, attributable to the diffe-
rence as regards one or more of the following circumstances:—
{a} Financial capacity of the judgment-debtor (e.g, the
judgment-debtor may have the means to pay and yet fails
to pay):
(0) Financial position of the decree-holder;
(©) Comparison between (a) and {b) above;

(d} Conduct of the parties, e.g. dishonest transfer of
property by the judgment-debtor after or in anticipation of
the litigation, of inordinate delay in taking steps necessary for
progress of the litigation 2+

(e) Relationship which gave rise to the lability sued
upon, ¢.g. the judgment-debtor standing in 2 fiduciary capa-
city towards the decree-holder;

(f) Natuce of the monetary liability.4

Varicties of 38. The nature of the monetary liabilitys itself offers scope
monetary for numerous variations. For example:-—
Hiabilities

{i} it may be a pure and simple transaction of loan, bet
ween parties beiween whom there is not much disparity; or

(ii) it may be a transaction between parties of whom one
is able wo exploit the other; or

(iii) the monetary liability may arise out of a claim for
maintenance; or

(iv) it may be for the wages of wholc-time employment;
or

(x) it may be a contractual liability, for a specific sum,
-e.g. a claim against a publisher for arrears of royalties; or
in respect of leasing out of certain right to fell trees,* or

(si) it may be Tor accounts of custody of joint family
property ;7

“1, See (a) Sujan Singh v. Ramachandrarao, AR. 1949 Nag. 104, 106, para. 6 (eviews

cases);
(b) Saradindu v. Latit Mohan, ALR. 1941 Cal. 538.

2. Bhagwant v. Gangubesain, A.L.R. 1940 Bom. 369, 377.

3, The vases cited do nat necessarily relate 10 interest for the post-decrea period. They
ase seferred to only to shaw the variety of situations met with in real life,

4, Paragraph 38, infra.

5, Paragraph 37, supra.

6. (a) Sarajubala v. Surendranath, AJR. 1919 Cal, 144, 150;

(0) Bhagwant v. Gangubesain, ALR, 1940 Bom. 369, 370, 377, 378 Unterest on

unliquidated damages).

7, Parrarnv. Subharopudi, ALR, 1922 PC. 71, 72.



15

(vii) it may be lability in damages for breach of contract!
—e.g. against a manufacturer for breach of warranty ot against
a supplier for non-delivery of goods:

(sili) it may be liability based on use of partnership
money >>

(5) It may be in the nature of compensation for tort,
~€.g. against the owner of a motor-vehicle or his insurer, for
Toss caused by an accident#

39. So much as regards the first point.4 As to the second
point—interest on the aggregate of the principal and interest -we
would not, in the absence of any suggestion for reverting to the
old position, disturb the amended Jaw.

40. On the last point—interest on costs—there is much to be
said on both sides. While it is true that no man ought Lo make
a profit out of litigation and that costs are meant anly to re-
imburse the successful Sitigant, and not to be a source of Tres
income, it should not be forgotien that a person is awarded costs
to cover expenses which he has rightfully incurred, towards
litigation rightfully initiated. Until he is able to recover the
amount from the party against whom he has been awarded costs,
he loses interest an money which he has rightfully spent and which
(if it had not been required for litigation) he would have invested.
At the time, we have to take note of the fact that Parliament,
having considered these aspects, nevertheless removed the rele-
vant provisions. In this position and in the absence of compel-
ling reasons disclosing the need for modification, we are not
inclined to disturb the law on this point.

41. In the fight of the above discussion, we recommend that
section 34(॥) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, should be
amended by inserting the following proviso and Explanation:—

“Provided that:—

(०) where the principal sum adjudged exceeds five
thousand rupees, and

(b) the liability in respect of which the decree is
passed arose out of a commercial transaction,

ihe rate at which such further interest may be ordered may exceed
six per cent per annum.

Interest on
aggregate.

Interest
‘on costs.

Recommen-
dation for
amendment
of section
34,

1, Anandram v. Bholaram, A.1.R. 1946 Bom. 1, 7.

2. Udhavji v, Bapudas, ALR. 1950 Bom. 94, 101. of Section 37, Partnership Act.

3, See also paragraph 31, supra.
4, Paragraph 280), sepra.

5, See, for example, Shri Tek Chand’s view; para. 22, supra and the dissenting note

ef Shri K. 5. Raghyachari, para. 18, supra.


16

“Explanation:—For the purposes of this section a
transaction is a commercial transaction, if it is connected with
the industry, trade or business of the party incurring the
liability.’”

We should, before we part with this Report, place on record
our warm appreciation of the assistance we have received from.
Shri Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission, in dealing
with the problem covered by the Report. As usual, Shri Bakshi
first prepared a draft which was treated as a Working Paper.
The draft was considered by the Commission point by point,
and, ia the light of the decisions taken tentatively by the Commis-
sion, Shri Bakshi prepared a final draft for consideration which
was after elaborate discussion approved by the Commission,
Throughout the study of this problem, Shri Bakshi took an active
part in our deliberations, and has rendered very valuable assis-
tance to the Commission,

ए. 8. Gajeudragudkar Chairman

¥.R. Krishna Lyer Member

P.K. Tripathi Member

8.8. Dhavan Member

8. 7, Sen-Varma Member

P. M. Bakshi Member-Secretary
New Dethi,

The 14th May, 1973.

MGIPRRND—3 M of Law--i]}—22-11-732,000


PLDS2.EV
2,688.

Price : (oland) Rs. 1.25 (Foreign) £ 0.15 or 45 conty

oo 7“/:/थ)थ)तहझत;
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, RING ROAD, WEW pELET-110027,
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DeLHI-110006, 1973