LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
ON
STATUTORY PROVISIONS AS TO
NOTICE OF SUIT OTHER THAN

SECTION 80, CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE
MAY 1978

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS


P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR Law CoMmMISSsION
Chairman GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-1,

May 14, 1973

My dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 560 Report of the
Law Commission on statutory provisions as to notice of suit.

The circumstances in which the subject was taken up by the Law
Commission are stated in the opening paragraph of the Report. The pro-
visions dealt with are analogous to section 80, Civil Procedure Code, on
which the Commission has recently made a Report (S4th Report, in
February 1973). The matter was therefore dealt with on an urgent basis,
so that Government may, while considering implementation of the Com-
mission’s Report on the Code of Civil Procedure, also take into account
the Commission’s recommendations on the provisions in question.

The matier being urgent for the reasons stated above, it was not con-
sidered to issue a Press communique for inviting views. But the Commis-
sion’s tentative proposals on the subject were circulated to the Ministries
administratively concemed with the provisions under consideration, The
comments received by the specified date (30th April, 1973) have received
the Conunission’s due consideration.

The questions for consideration were studied and a draft Report was
prepared by the Member-Secretary. This was considered by the Commis-
sion at length, and has been revised in the light of the discussions held in
the Commission.

With warm personal regards,
Yours sincerely,

P. B, GAJENDRAGADKAR

Hon'ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India.

New Delhi.


Para No,
a

18.

2

3

45.

6

7-10

i

B
14—16
168.
yw

ds

19

aL

22
23

26
26-31
SLA,
32

33
383.

36-26

37-38

Appendix

CONTENTS
Subjeot-matter

Genesis of the Report... न ” न
Provision ia article $61 (4) of the Constitution
Statutory provisions covered by the Report
Section 79B, Railways Act 1900. a” 7
Requirement of notice mandstory, under the Railways Act
Seotion 273, Cantonments Act,1924 .. .

Case-law on section 273, Cantonments Act

Provisions in Municipal Acta न न .
Provision in Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957
Section 150(2), Customs Act 1962 .
Fix pression ‘Local authorities’ in Customs Act

‘No bar to proceedings under article 226...
Section 120, Mojor Poct Trusts Act, 1963 4.
Sections in other Port Truste Acts .. on
Requirement of notice, & eommon feature.
Object of notice considered .
Object of provision inthe Reikways Act =.
Discrimination not to be favoured

‘Reasons given in earlier Reports for recommending dele-
tion of section 80, Code ae Civil Procedure

‘These reasons applicable to provisions in question

Difficulties created by provision in Railways Act.
‘Jndicial eriticiem .. “ न

Inconveniente .. ow

Stale demands guarded againat by law of limitation ..
Inconvenionca and injustice
Commonta of Ministries concerned .. न
Recommendation a

eriod of imitation under the Limitation Act, 1963, for a
suit for compensation for logs, destruction or deteriora

tion of animals or goods delivered to be carried by
railway .. हा

Effect of recommendation indicated with reference to each
provision - न न

History of Section 77, Railways Act .. न बन

नम मे नफणचकलनलजफ लू

कक कक @

5

10
10
le
१

ll
i
i
12
1s
13
18
1a
wu

15

16
18


fe

Genesis of

the Report.

Section 78-B,
Railways
A

REPORT ON NOTICE OF SUIT REQUIRED
UNDER CERTAIN STATUTORY PROVISIONS

1. This Report deals with the requirement of notice of suit
under the provisions of certain statutes. The subject has been
taken up by the Law Commission suo motu, after consideration
of 4 suggestion received from a High Court*, Broadly speaking,
the statutory provisions in question bar a suit unless notice of
the suit is given. Having regard to the experience of practical
working of these provisions, and also bearing in mind the
changed conditions, the Law Commission las considered it
proper to examine the law on the subject. It may be of intetest
to note that the Commission has, in its Report on the Code of
Civil Procedure,’ already recommended repeal of a section of the
Code of Civil Procedure’ which requires notice of a suit to be
given in the case of a cause of action against the Government or
against a public officer for an act done by him in his official
capacity.

1A. We may mention here that the Constitution‘ contains
a provision requiring two months’ notice before instituting a suit
against the President or the Governor. This provision stands on
a special footing, and we do not propose to go into it in the
present Report.

2. This Report is concerned with the following statutory
provisions in so far as they enact a requirement of notice of
suit:

{i) Section 78-B, Railways Act, 1890;
Gi) Section 273, Cantonments Act, 1924;
ही) Section 478, Delhi Municipal Corporation Act,

(iv) Section 155(2), Customs Act, 1962;
(v) Section 120, Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.
3. The first provision to be considered is section 78-B,

Railways Act (as amended in 1961). This, in its subject-matter,
corresponds to section 77 of the Act, as it stood before 1961.

2, Suggestion of the High Cour tof Avdhra Pradesh, in the Registrar’ it ‘alotter
dated 18 Hove 1960, 1972, forwarded to the Law Commission by the Ministry of
Law & Justice, Lopiclative Department, letter No. F, 14(22)/68- Leg. IT, dated
nil, See Law Cormiesioner’s file No. F.2(1)/71-L.¢, .

£, 64th Roport, Code of Civil Provedare, para, 1-,2,
१, Section 80, Code of Civil Peooadure, 1908,
4. Actiole 261(14) of the Constitution,


2

Section 77 of the Railways Act, 1890 (before 1961) was as
follows':—

“A person shalt not be entiticd to a refund of an over-
charge in respect of animals or goods carried by Tailway or
to compensation for the loss, destruction or deterioration of
animals or goods delivered to be so carried, unless his claim
to the refund or compensation has been preferred in writing
by him or on his behalf to the railway administration withia
stx months from the date of the delivery of the animals or
goods for carriage by railway.”

Rog

4, After the amendment of 1961, the section has been re- लावा
numbered as section 78-B, and certain textual modifications also mandatary,
made. But the broad requirement of “notice” (claim) within six gnder the
months, temains unaffected. This provision is similar to section Railways
80, Code of Civil Procedure, in so far as it requires prior notice
of suit. It also lays down a period of limitation.

The present section on the subject~section 78B, Railways
Act—is as follows: —

“78-B. A person shall not be entitled to a refund of an
overcharge in respect of animals or goods carried by railway
or to compensation for the loss, destruction, damage, deterio-
tation or non-delivery of animals or goods delivered to be so
carried, unless his claim to the refund or compensation has
been preferred in writing by him or on his behalf—

(a) to the railway administration to which the
animals or goods were delivered to be carried by rail-
way, or

(b) to the railway administration on whose railway
the destination station lies, or the loss, destruction,
damage or deterioration occurred, within six months
from the date of the delivery of the animals or goods
for carriage by railway:

Provided that any information demanded or inquiry
made in writing from, 07 any complaint made in writing to,
any of the railway administrations mentioned above by or
on behalf of the person within the said period of six months
regarding the non-delivery or delay in delivery of the animals
or goods with particulars sufficient to identify the consign-
ment of such animals or goods shall, for the purposes of this
section, be deemed to be a claim to the refund. or compea-
sation.”

1, For history of Seotion 77, Sce Appendix,


3

5. kt is well established that requirements of this section
are mandatory’, and failure to comply with its provisions wilt
result in the dismissal of the suit in imine. However, a combined
nolice given under section 77 (before the amendment of 1961) of
the Railways Act and section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure
is valid.*

6. The next provision to be cousidered is in the Cantonments

Seation Act, which is as follows :—

ceria ae “273, (1) No suit shall be instituted against any Board

or against any member of a Board, or against any officer or
servant of a Board, in respect of any act done, or purporting
to have been done, in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or
bye-law made thereunder, until the expiration of two months
after notice in writing has been left at the office of the
Board, and, in the case of such member, officer or servant,
unless 10४08 in writing has also been delivered to him or
left at his office or place of abode, and unless such notice
states explicitly the cause of action, the nature of the relief
sought, the amount of compensation claimed, and the name
and piace of abode of the intending plaintiff, and unless the
plait contains a statement that such notice has been so de-
livered or left.

(3) No suit, such as is described in sub-section (1)
shall, unless it is an action for the recovery of immovable
property or for a declaration of title thereto. be instituted
alter the expiry of six months from the date on which the
cuuse of action arises.

@)..
Sub-section (1) of section 273, quoted above, is similar to

section 80, Code of Civil Procedure, Sub-section (3) of the section
imposes a special period of limitation,

7. Case-Jaw on section 273 of the Cantonments Act‘ may
Cose-Law on BOW be referred to, in brief. The facts of an Allahabad case* were
section 273, as follows:

Cantonments
Act, The plaintiff was a shopkeeper, who alleged that he

had supplied certain materials to the Cantonment Board, but
had not been paid the full amount of the price. He claimed
nearly Rs. 300 as the amount of the balance with interest.
His case was that after having supplied the goods, he waited
for some time, but the Board did not make any further pay-
ment, In consequence of this, he was obliged to ‘sue the
Board, after serving motice upon it as required by law,

3, Union of India ¥, Haji Jivakha®, ALR, 1962 Madhya Pradesh 374

॥, (a) Uniow of India v. Meghraj Khubchand (1962) M.P. L.J. (cited in the
yearly Digest);

(6) Madho Prasad v. Union of Tnilia, ALR, 1961 All. 433.

3, Seotion 273, Cantoumenta 6०७, 1924,

+. Paragraph 6 supra,

5, Ganomnent Goad, Alahabad ¥. Hazarilal, 4.08. 1934 Ally 436,


The Board denied the receipt of all the materials
alleged 10 bave been supplied by the plaintiff, and also
pleaded that the claim was barred by the six months’ rule ot
limitation, enacted in section 273(3), Cantonments Act.

The lower court decreed the suit, and the Cantonment
Board filed a revision application before the Allahabad
High Court.

The High Court held- “the plaintiff is uot suing the
Board for any act done by the Board in pursuance of the
Cantonment Aci; nor is he suing the Board for any act done
by the Board or purporting to have been done by the Board
under any rule or bye-law made under the Cantonment Act.
The suit is for the recovery of the price of the goods sup-
plied by the pluintiff to the defendant which is still un-
paid.”

“No doubt, under section 12, Cantonments Act, a Canton-
ment Board is empowered to acquire and hold property boih
movable and immovable and to contract. It is also clear
that the purchase made by the Board was by virtue of the
power vested in it under the Cantonments Act. But I am
unable to regard the suit of the plaintiff against the Board
as a suit in respect of an act done by the Board in pursuance
of the Act itself as distinct from the act done in the exercise
of the powers granted to the Board under the Act. In my
opinion, section 273, sub-section (1), does not contemplate
the class of suits of private contractor for which specific
tules of limitation ure prescribed in the Limitation Act,
They contemplate actions brought against the Board in res-
pect of acis done in pursuance of any rule or bye-law that
has the force of law.”

Therefore, the case was held not io be governed by $. 273
at all.

8. In another Allahabad case,’ the plaintiff! worked in the
Cantonment Board, Meerut, as a Tax Superintendent. After some
time, he was appointed us Office Superintendent on a salary of
Rs. 225. The salary prescribed for his post was Rs. 300 p.m. and
his predecessor was also receiving the salary of Rs. 300 p.m. The
appointment of the plaintiff was made by the Board under the
powers given to the Board by the Cantonmenis Act. But the Act
contained no statutory obligation or cast a duty on the Board to
make the appointment. On retirement the plaintiff filed a suit,
after giving a proper nolice as required by law, against the Bourd,
claiming the arrears of salary.

The plea taken by the Board was that the suit was barred
by limitation under section 273(3), as the notice was given on
22-12-1938 and the suit was filed on 19-9-1939, after a lapse of
more than 8 months. The trial coust decreed the suit, but the
District Judge ou appeal, reversed the decision of the trial court.
Hence, an appeal was filed before the Allahabad High Court.

3, Kamohander Shai .v. Cotetnetd Board, Meerut, ALR, 1947 | 1


5

The only question for consideration before the High Court
was the question of limitation, Following ils earlier decision,’
the court drew a distinction between acts done in pursuance of
the Act itself and those done in pursuance of the power given
by the Act. The Court held that the case “did not come within
the scope of s, 2731) because there was no statutory obligation
on or duty of the Board to make the appointment at all.”

In this case, the Court relied on the interpretation placed
in England on section 1 of the Public Authorities Protection
Act? which resembled section 273 of the Cantonments Act, 1924.
Section 1 of that Act provided as follows*:—

“Where, after the commencement of this Act, any
action, prosecution or other proceeding is commenced in the
United Kingdom against any person for any act done in
pursuance or execution or intended execution of any Act of
Parliament, or of any public duty or authority or in respect
of any alleged neglect or default in the execution of any
such act, duty or authority, the following provisions shall
have effect:

{a) The action, prosecution, or proceeding shall not
lic or be instituted unless it is commenced within six
months next after the act, neglect, or default complain-
ed of. or in a case of continuance of injury or damage,
within six months next after the ceasing thereof.”

9. The question of interpretation of the provisions of sec-
tion 273 of the Cantonments Act, 1924, arose before the High
Court of Punjab also.

The facts of the case were as follows: —~

Bajrang Singh, plaintiff, was employed by the Canton-
ment Board, Ferozepur as a Pump driver. After some time,
he was charge-sheeted for some mis-conduct, and was dis-
missed from seryice. After exhausting the departmental re-
medics, he filed a suit for a declaration that the order of
his dismissal was inoperative and illegal, and that he conti-
nued to be in the service, The suit was contested by the Board
on the grounds, inter alia, that the suit was not maintainable
and that it was barred by time.

The trial court granted the required declaration to the
plaintiff, and this was. on appeal, confirmed ‘by the Addi-
tional District Judge, Ferozepore. In the second appeal
before the High Court by the Cantonment Board, Feroze-
pore, one of the questions for consideration was whether
the suit was barred by time.

1, Cantonment Board, Alahabad v. Hacarilat A.T.R, 1934 All. 436.

5, Section 1, Public Authorities Protection Act, 18937(Eng.)

१, The English Aot was repeated in 1854,

1, Vavomment Board, Ferozepur 9, Bajrang Vays UR [141 ए५ ४. 151,


6

The Punjab High Court distinguished the present case
from the Allahabad Judgment’. The Court held that sec-
tion 1 of the Public Authorities Protection Act 1893 (referred
to in the Allahabad judgment) bad no bearing at all on the
interpretation of section 273 of the Cantonment Act, 1924.
The Court further held, “All that sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 273 contemplates is that the act must have been done
in pursuance of the Act or of any rule or bye-law made
thereunder, and this section cannot be interpreted to mean
that the acts done by the Board in exercise of its powers
under the Act will stand on differene footings than those done
in discharge of the duties imposed on the Board by the
Act.”

Therefore, the suit was held to be governed by the provisions of
section 273(3) of the Cantonments Act, 1924, and, as such, was
barred by limitation.

_ 10. A Madhya Pradesh case’ may now be referred to. The
firm Chhajromal & Sons eniered into-a contract with the Canton-
ment Board, Mhow for repairing a road. When the Cantonment
Board refused to make the payment to the firm for the repair
work done by the firm, the firm filed a suit to recover the
amount, after giving the notice required by law. One of the
questions for consideration before ihe High Court was whether
the suit was within limitation, according to the provisions of
acction 273(3) of the Cantonments Act, 1924.

The Madhya Pradesh High Court, following the decision of
the Allahabad High Court,’ drew a distinction between acts done
in pursuance of the Act itself or in pursuance of any rule or
bye-law thereunder, and acts done in pursuance of some power
granted to the Board under the Act. The Court held that section
273(1) “does not contemplate suits on private contracts for which
specific rules of limitation are prescribed under the Limitation
Act. The Cantonment Act does provide for a duty to be perform-
ed, in so far as its funds permit, to get a street repaired, but it
does not insist that it ought to be done through a contractor.” For
these reasons, s. 273 of the Camtonments Act had no application.
and the suit was not barred by Limitation, even though it had
been filed after six months from the date when the cause of action
arose,

11. Provisions similar to section 273 of the Cantonment Act,
1924, occur in. several Municipal Acts.*

2, Ram Chander Sahat v. Cantonment Board, Meerut ALR, 1047 All. 42,

* Cantonment Board, Athos प, Ohhajrumal # Sona, (1868) #. 9.1... 425;(1969)
Jeb. LJ, 304 cited in the Yesrly Digest, (03 2601969)

3 Uantonment Board Allahabad v. Hazari Lal, ALR. 1994 All, 438.
«eg. (a) seetion $26, U.P. Municipalities Act, 3016;
(#) ‘Beotion 478, Dothi Municipal Corporation Act, 1067 (Para 12, infra).

Provisions
in Municipal
Acta.


Delhi
‘Municipal

Corporation

Act, 1957,

BScetion 155

ision in

7

12. The third provision 40 be considered is in the Delbi

Municipal Corporation Act', which is a Central Act, and is
quoted below:—

“478.(1} No suit shall be instituted against the Corpo-
ration or against any municipal authority or against any
municipal officer or other municipal employee or against
any person acting under the order-or direction of any muni-
cipal authority or any other municipal officer or other muni-
cipal employce, in respect of any act done, or purporting to
have been done, in pursuance of this Act or any rule, regula-
tion or bye-law made thereunder, until the expiration of two
months after notice in writing has been left at the municipal
office and, in the case of such officer, employee or person,
unless notice in writing has also been delivered to him or left
at his office or place of residence and unless such notice states
explicitly the cause of action, the nature of the relief scught,
the amount of compensation claimed, and the name and place
of residence of the intending plaintiff, and unless the plaint
contains a statement that such notice has been so left or
delivered.

(2) No suit, such as, is described in sub-section (1), shall,
unless it is a suit for the recovery of immovable property
or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the
expiry of six months from the date on which the cause of
action arises.

(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to ap-
ply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an in-
junction of which the object would be defeated by the
giving of the notice or the postponement of the institution
of the suit.”

13. The fourth provision to be considered is in the Cus-

2), Costoms toms Act, which is as follows*:—
ch.

“Section 155(1).

(2) No proceeding other than a suit shall be com-
menced against the Central Government or any officer of
the Government or a local authority for anything purport-
ing to be done in pursuance of this Act without giving
the Central Government or such officer a month’s previous
notice in writing of the intended proceeding and of the
cause thereof, or after the expiration of three months from
accrual of such cause'.”

It may be noted that this section does not apply to suits.

Jn other respects, it is broadly similar to section 80 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, though the period of notice is only
one month, as contrasted with the period of two months provid-
ed for in section 80, Civil Procedure Code,

1, Section 478, Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1967 (66 of 1957},
*. Section 155(2), Customs Act, 1962,
*, Compare section 108, Sea Customs Aot, 1878 (repealed),


8

14. Section 198 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, provided Expression

that no proceeding uther than a suit shall be commenced sete tied
against any person fer anyihing purporting to be done in in Customs

pursuance of this Act, without giving 10 such person a month’s Act.
previous notice in writing of the intended proceeding and of
the cause thereof. This Acu was repealed by the Customs Act,
1962. In the Customs Act, 1962 it has been laid down in sec-
tion 15502) that no proceeding other than a suit shall be com-
menced ugains, the Central Government or any officer of the
Government or a local authority for anything purporting to be
done in pursuance of this Act, without giving the Central Goy-
ernment or such officer a month's previous notice in writing of
the intended provceding and of the cause thereof. The words
‘local authority’ have not been defined in the Customs Act, 1962,
but section 3(31) of the General Clauses Act lays down that
‘local authority’ shall mean a municipal committee, district
Board, body of Port Commissioners or other authority legally
entitled to or authorised by the Government with the control
or management of a municipal or local fund.

15. वा has been provided in section 6 of the Customs Act,
1962, that the Central Government may entrust to any officer
of the Central or the State Government or a local authority any
functions of the Board or any officer of Customs under this
Act. Under section 1510) of the Act. specified officers of the
locat authorities are empowered and required to assist officers
of Customs in the execution of this Act.

16. No case appears to have been reported under section
155(2) of the Customs Act, 1962 regarding giving of the re
quired notice to a focal authority or the officers of a focal axtho-
rity.

16A, [t has been held by Calcutta High Court’ that sec-
tion 198 af the Sea Customs Act (which was the predecessor
of section 155 of the Customs Act, 1962.) was not a bar to
the proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution against
the order of the Customs Authorities’,

17. The fifth provision is in the Major Port Trusts Act,’ geotion 120,
which provides for notice of suit. It is quoted below: — Major Fort
Trusta Act,
“120. Limitation of proceedings in respect of things 1963.
done under the Act--No suit or other proceeding shall be
commenced against a Board or any member or employee
thereof for anything done, or purporting to have been done,
in pursuance of this Act until the expiration of one month

1 (a) Socraj Mull Nagar Mull v, Pha Assistam Collector of Ci
(0 कण 3 8 0 of Customs, ALR

७087 का Collector of Customs ए. Suraj Mull Nagar Mull ALR. 1958

*, Simliar ia the position na regarda other provirinns,

3, Section 120, Major Port Trusts Act, 1963.


Sections in
other Port
Trusts Act.

Requirement
of notice a
common
feature.

Object of
notice
oonstdercd

Object of
Provisions

Railways
Act.

v

after notice in writing has been given to the Boaru or him,
stating the cause of action, or after six month after tbe
accrual of the cause of action.”

This provision covers suiis and other proceedings. In other
respects, it is similar to section 80 of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure,

18. 1६ may be noied that this section corresponds to section
142 of the Calcucta Port Trusts Act, 1800, section 87 of the
Bombay Port Lrusis Act, 1870 and section 110 of the Madras
Port Trusts Act, 1905. No decision on the section in the Major
Port Trusts Act appears to have been reported.

19. The provisions referred to above, while differing from
one another in matters of detail, all share a common  feuture,
namely, the requirement to give notice of suit (or proceeding) as
a condition precedent to the institution of a suit (or proceeding).
The period vuties. So does the mode of computation of the
period. Either the notice is required to be given within a parti-
cular peciod from ife date of the cause of action, or the notice
should have been given on a certain date prior to the suit. But,
in some form or other, notice becomes a condition precedent.

We shall now proceed to consider the possible grounds on
which the requirement of notice could be supported,

20. In the first place, such a notice could be regarded as
desirable in order to_give the authority concerned (the Railway
Administration, the Cantonments Board, the Port Trust or other
authority) an opportunity 10 settle the claim and thus to avoid
unnecessary litigation. Secondly, at least in the case of some of
the provisions referred to above', the notice may be intended to
prevent the presentation of stale demands, particularly where the
authority to be sued has to handle innumerable transactions in

the course of which liability could possibly arise in favour of the
citizen,

21. Thus, for example, explaining the object of the notice
prescribed by section 77, Railways Act, the Supreme Court has
said, “the object of service of notice under this provision is essen-
tially to enable the railway administration to make an enquiry
and investigation as to whetber the loss, destruction or deterioration
was due to the consignor’s laches or to the wilful neglect of the
railway administration and its servants and further to prevent
stale and possibly dishonest claims being made when owing to
delay, it may be practically impossible to trace the transaction
or check the allegations, made by the consignor......... 2” The
Supreme Court observed: —

“In enacting the section, the intention of the legislature
must have been to afford only @ protection to the railway ad-
muinistration against fraud and not to provide meatis for

3, Eg. seotion 78B, Raihrays Act. (para 4, supra)
3, Jotmull v. DH, Biy., ALK, 1962 8.0, 1879.


iv

depriving the consignors of their legitimate claims for
compensation for the loss of or damage caused to their con-
siguments during the course of transit on the railways.”

22. As agaiost those possible grounds of justification for the

present provisions, it should be stated that prima facie such pro- ae wee be
visions are discriminatory and against the general principle of ०!
equality. It may not be improper to mention here that, in practice,
the first object of these provisions, namely, to give an opportunity
to the authority concerned fo settle the claims, is hardly realised.
Experience of the working of the corresponding provisions in the
Code of Civil Procedure! has unfortunately shown that, for
reasons into which we need not go, the notice of suit against the
Government or public officer given under that Code is not acted
upon within the time contemplated by the law. We venture to
think that the posilion under the special statutory provisions with
which this Report is concersed is not substantially different in
this respect.

23. It muy be noted that several reasons weighed with the Reason egiven
Law Commission* in recommending deletion of section 80, Civil Reports for
Procedure Code, In the first place, the evidence taken by the Law recommend-
Commission for the purposes of an earlier Report’ disclosed that ing deivtion

in a large majority of cases the Governments or the public officers कर Bu,
made no use of the opportunity afforded by the section. Procedure,

Secondly, the same evidence disclosed’ that in a large
mumber of cases Governments and public officers utilised section
80 mainly to raise technical defences contending either thai no
notice had been given or that the notice, though given, did not!
comply with the requirements of the section. Thirdly, the Com-
mission was of the view that in a democratic country there should
be no distinction of the kind envisaged by section 80 between the
citizen and the State, A welfare State should have no such pri-
viliges as are needed’ by 8 police State in the matter of litigation,
and should have no higher status chan an ordinary litigant in
this respect*.

24. These reasons apply with equal force to the provisions Recta
with which this Report is concerned. provisions in |
question.

25, For example, as to section 77, Railways Act (ow re-
placed by section 788)", nice questions as to the scope of the
section arose in the past. Many of these have been set at rest
Here, we ate referring to a few of them, to show how uncertainty
could arise and might cause injustice. Thus, two problems raised

1, Svetion 80, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2, 27th Report (Codg of Proceditre), pages 21,23, paras, 5-52; and also
bath Reports

8. 14th Report, Vol. 1, pages 475-476.

4, 1461 Report, Vol. 1, pages 476-476,

5, 27th Report (0018 of Civil Procedure) page 22, para 52,
*, Paragraph ३, supra.

hiner


Tudicial
criticism.

il

by section 77 were—

{i} Whether the provisions of section 77 applied to cases
of compensation for non-delivery or not’, and

(ii) Whether under section 77, notice was required to be
given to all the railway administrations which had carried
the goods’,

26. No doubt, some of the points have been settled by judicial
decisions or by statutory amendments, But the very fact that such
controversies urose shown the difficulties created by the section.
Unfortunately, there have been occasions where the courts had to
criticise the conduct of the Railway authorities in raising the
defence of want of notice. In one of the Calcutta’ cases, for
example, Henderson J.. made weighty though caustic obserya-
lions as to the plea taken by the railway. In a Patna case‘, in a
very well considered judgment by Courtney Torrell C.J. and Fazi
Ali J., it was pointed out that one of the defences taken by the
railway company was the familiar, though somewhat disin-
genous contention that a claim in writing had not been prefer-
red,

27. In another Calcutta case’, the High Court was constrain-
ed to make the following observations:

“Every step taken by the railway officials was as im-
proper and as illegal as it could be, But, far from being
apologetic for their irregular and high handed behaviour they
have sought to escape from their just liabilities by raising
the plea that they have not received the notice of claim, re-
quired by section 77, Railways Act and this plea has becn
accepted by a Judge, and a Full Bench of the Smalt Cause
Court.” ,

28. In a Patna case’, the Full Bench, after referring to a few
cases, observed-—

“In other words, the railway, in order to defeat the
claims of the claimant, does not hesitate to take up un-
attractive disingenuous, if not uncommendable and contra-
dictory, defences.”

1 See now, 1. in Council v. Mueaddi Lal 4.1. 8. 1961 8.0. 725, followed in
Unign of india पा Bahadeo Lat, A.T.R. 1965 8. 0. 1755,

2899 fethmull v. DH, Bly., ALB, 1962 8,0. 1870,

5 Srinthidar Mandol v. Governor General-in-Council ALR. 164 Cal. 412;
49 C.W.N, 240.

3 2.3, Railay ¥. Maharaja Komeshwar Singh, LLB. 12 Pat, 67, 71 ALR.
1933 Pat. 45.

ह Shamaul Hag v. Secretary of State, ATR. 1991 Cal. 332, 334 (Lord Williams

6 G.G.in-Council v, G8, Mille, ALB, 1949 Pat, 347, 351 7.B.).


12

29, Even some of the more recent cases make interesting
reading, In a Madhya Pradesh case’, for example, while sending
notice under section 77, counsel had, by mistake, sent his office
copy which was unsigned, The Railway challenged the validity of
the notice. Fortunately, the High Court held that this mistake did
not affect its validity.

30. A recent Kerala* case illustrates the difficulty that exists
in relation to interpretation of the words “for carriage by railway”,
and the word “preferred”, in section 788.

31. Even in 1969, an objection was put-forth that notice of
claim served on the Refunds Officer was not valid under section
78B’, even though the Ministry of Railways had issued a pamph-
let stating that the Refunds Officer may receive such notices.

31A. The inconvenience caused by such technical plans is, ;
thus, apparent. Inconvenien-

As has been observed by one Australian writer* with tefe-
rence to an analogous provision in an Act in force in Victoria

(Australia),—-

“Numerous indeed are the unfortunates who, through
mistake or for same other reason, have failed to give the
necessary notice.”

32. As regards the abject of preventing the making of stale Be gerd

demands, that could be achieved by the general law of limitation, against by
and we do not see any reason why there should be special pro- law of limi-
vision requiring the giving of a notice (or submission of claims} tation.

to the authority concerned within a specified period, for suits con-

cerfing the matters to which the provisions in question apply,
Moreover, it should be stated that in practice, prospective litigants

will always take care, in their own interest, to give a notice to the

authority concerned before filing a suit.

33. In our view, the inconvenience and injustice caused by Ticonvenience
the various provisions for notice, outweigh the possible advantages and injustice,
of those provisions.

33A. We had, before finalising the recommendation, invited
the views of the Ministries concerned. One of the Ministries has Somme‘ of
offered the following comments* with reference to section 273, concerned.
Cantonments Act: —~

“It is considered that the provision of giving 2 months’ notice
in section 273 affords protection to the Cantonment Board
and its officials and un opportunity to make amends, if neces-

1 Union of India v. Hamel Choad (1966) MP. LJ, (Notes) 150, cited-in the
Y¥early Digest (1966), Col. 2295,

2 Dain of India v. Mis, Lakshnsi Textiles, ALR. 1908 Kor, 23,

३ Brooks. Bond India (Private ) Lid., v. Union of India AYR. 1969 Cal, 89.
4 1.4, Redmand, ‘Notices before action” (1964) 37 Aust. L.J. 816, 817.
‘Ministry of Defeneo letter No, 798-0 (Q & 0), dated 18th April, 1973.


a3

sary. It does not appear to cause any undue hardship and
injustice to anybody.”

In the circumstances, the Ministry favours retention of the
provision for notice,

We may, in this connection, reiterate what we have already
stated’, that mandatory notice does not lead to any practical ad-
vantage and that in practice, if notice is not given, the Court can
award costs.

In the comment received from the Ministry? concerned with
the Major Port Trusts Act, it is stated that the provision in that
Act, (and similar provisions in the Acts relating to Bombay and
Madras Port Trusi)'-+ are helpful and necessary for the purpose
of obtaining the relevant information and documents from
various quarters in order to settle the cases, if possible, out of
court. In the absence of this provision, it is stated, it would also
not be possible for the Port Trust to gather the required infor-
mation or material in time for defending the suit, if a suit is
ultimately filed. It has been conceded that in some quarters this
provision may not have been properly utilised; but the real remedy
(it is stated) lies in making it oblig atory for the concerned officer
of the Department to give a proper reply within the statutory
period or to seek extension of the time. It is, lastly, stated that
the contention that in a democratic country observance of the
distinctions of the kind envisaged by section 80, Code of Civil
Procedure between the citizens and the State will be invidious, “is
only partly true”, as “the State has to be supreme in order to keep
the welfare of the citizens before it in everything it does. If this
be so, the inclusion or retention of the special provision cannot
be assailed.”

We have given our anxious thought to these points, but we
regret that we are unable to agree. We do not, in the first place,
regard a statutory provision for notice (as a condition precedent
to litigation) as indispensable or necessary in order to enable
Department concerned to collect the material for defending the
suit. In practice, as is well known, the prospective plaintiff does
not usually rush to court without calling upon the Department to
redress the alleged illegatity; if he dares to do so, he runs the risk
of being denied the costs of the suit. Settling the claim can be
done even after the suit is filed.

Secondly, under the Civil Procedure Code, reasonable time is
allowed to every defendant to file his defence; and if within that
time, he makes a reasonable offer of scttlement, the court is not
precluded from taking that into account in exercising its discre-
tion as to costs.

3 Paragraphs 5233, supra,
3 Comment of the Ministry of Shipping and Transport dated 3rd May, 1973,
® (a) Section 85, Bombay Port Trusts Act, 1897;

18) Section 110, Madras Port —‘Trusta Aot, 1005.
4 Of, Paragraph 18, supra, a


14

Thirdly, as regards the suggested alternative remedy of re-
quiring the appropriate officer to send a proper reply to the
notice within the specified Lime, or to seek extension, we think
that it would hardly be workable. If the officer concerned does
not send a reply, the question of consequences of non-compliance
will arise. Controversics are 8180 bound 10 arise as 10 whether the
reply sent was adequate, and so on. The suggested alternative
would hardly be an improvement on the present position.

Finally, as regards the paint made about the supreme posi-
tion of the Slate and its duty 10 secure the welfare of the citizens,
we may state that what we are recommending (02५ not, in any
way, come in the way of the performance of that duty.

34, In the fight of what is siated above, we recommend that Recommendee
the provisions in question, in so far ws they require the service of tiv.
notice as a condition precedent to the institution of a suit or other
proceeding, should be deleted, So much of these provisions as
relates to the periods of limitation for the institution of suit or
Proceeding will, of course, remain unaffected by our recommen-
dation,"

35. We have considered the question whether our recom. Period of
mendation, in so far as it affects section 78B Railways Act’, ren- limitation
ders it desirable io make any change in the Limitation Act in Tbnitntion
respect of the period of limitation for suits for compensation Act, 1963 for
for loss etc, of goods carried on railway. The Limitation Act, suit for
1963, Article 30 pravided one year as the period of Limitation gom sation
for suits against a carrier for compensation for loss of or injury feuction o
to goods. On the recommendation of the Law Commission’, the Deterioration
Limitation Act of 1963 has provided the period of three years‘ of animals or

1 imitati ‘ goods deliver
as the period of limitation for such suits. io be tare

36. We do not think that any modification of the period ied by  tail-
of limitation provided in respect of suits against the Railways’ 18 "7
required. In practice, there is not much likelihood of stale
demands or dishones; claims, because the normal period of limi-
tation would suill apply.

a Tecommendati पी! inv
37. Our rec ion will involye— Bffoot of

(i) repeal of section 78B, Railways Act, 1890; recon पा

Gi) repeal of section 2731), Cantonment Act, 1924 and with reference:

consequential re-casting of sub-section (3) of that section: fe pack prov
ion.

(0) amendment of section 478, Delhi Municipal Corpo-
ration Act, 1957;

(iv) amendment of section 155(2), Customs Act, 1962;
(५) amendment of section 120, Major Port Trusts, Act,

1868 alen para, 36-37, inva.
है Para, 27, supra,

+ Law Commission of India, 8rd Report (Limitation Act), pages 30-21, para
79,

४ Article 10, Limitation Act, 1963,
+ Article 10, Limitation Act, 1863.


15
38. The amendments concerning the above provisions’ will
be confined to removing the portion requiring notice, and, as
already indicated.” they will not affect the periods of limitation
specified in the provisions concerned. The actual amendments
will be on the following lines—

(i) Section 78B, Railways Act, 1890 should be re-
pealed;

ii} Section 2731), Cantonment Act, 1924, should be re-
pealed and section 273(3), Cantonments Act, should be re-
yised as follows :—-

“(3) No suit against any Board or against any member
of a Board, or against any officer or servant of a Board, in
respect of any act done, or purporting to have been done, in
pursuance of this Act or of any rule" or bye-law made there-
under, shall, unless it is a suit for the recovery of immovable
Property or for a deciaration of title thereto, be instituted
after the expiry of six months from the date on which the
the cause of action arises.”

(iii) Section 478, Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957,
(66 of 1957), should be revised as follows:—

“478. (1) No suit shall be instituted against the Cor-
poration or against any municipal authority or against
any municipal officer or other municipal employee or
against any person acting under the order or direction of
any municipal authority or any municipal officer or other
municipal employee, in respect of any act done» or pur-
porting to have been done, in pursuance of this act or any
Tule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder, .

after the expiry of six months from the date on wl
cause of action arises.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a suit
for the recovery of immovable property or for a declara-
tion of title thereto... ”

(9) Section 155(2} of the Customs Act, 1962, should be
revised as follows—

“(2) No proceeding other than a suit shall be com-
menced against the Central Government or any officer of
the Government or any officer of a local authority for

3 Para. 37, supra.
4 Para, 35, supra.

3 The amendment. is confined to the requirement of notice, and does not
purport to deal with the conflict of decisions aa to the meaning of the words “in
parmuanoe of",


16

anything purporting to be done in pursuance of this Act
.... after the expiration of thres months from the
accrual of the cause of action for such proceeding.

(vy Section 120 of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 should
be revised as follows: —

“120. No suit or other proceedings shali be com-
menced against a Board or any member or employee
thereof for anything done, or purporting to have been
done, in pursuance of this Act . after six months
after the accrual of the cause of action,”



Section 77

W
APPENDIX

History of section 77, Railways Act, 1890

Section 77 of the Railways Act corresponded to an executive
order’, which provided for notification of claims to refund of over-
charges and compensation for loses etc.? in respect of goods carried
by railways.

At the time when the Indian Railways Bill was under con-
sideration, it was observed’ with reference to Clause 77—

“This validates the Bill of a rule at present of a very
doubtful legality. One would date the six months period from
the date on which the overcharge was intimated, or the loss,
destruction or deterioration became known to him. Might the
rule not be made subject to ‘reasonable and sufficient cause’
for delay?”.

It may also be noted that when the Bill, was under considera-
tion, certain authorities suggested* (in the correspondence on the
Bilf) that the period of six months was too long. and that 2 months
was sufficient to claim the refund of overcharges or compensation
in respect of animals and goods.’

There was a comment from a Lieutenant Governor’ to the
effect that the Railway Administration should be similarly debar-
red from recovering undercharges from the public unless the
claim is made within 6 months.

1 U0. Reg, No, 3874 of 1882.

‘Information taken from the file relating to the Iudian Railways Bill, Lecia
lative papers relating to Act 9 of 1890, marginal note against clause 77 of the Bil
Notional Archivos).

4 Gorarnment Advocate, Punjab, vide Govrnment of India, Legislative De.
partment Office Memorandum No. 337, dated 13-2-1880 (Cl. No. 1712 B.T.), refee
red ta in the papers in the file relating to the Indian Railways Bill; Legislativ
Papers relating to Act 9 of 1890 (National Archives).

4 (a) Board of Directors, Bengal and North-Western Railway, Col, No. 687, dated
21-21889 (Geuoral No. 3701 B.T.); and

(8) Agont and Chiof Bngineer Rebitkhand and Human Raihway, Col. No. 274
8. dated 27-10-1838 (Cl. No, 4869 R.T.), and

(2) Agent, D.N.R. vide Consulting Engineer, Lucknow No. 2270, dated
9-12-1888 (Cl. No, 14720 B.T.).

* Information taken from the Ale relating to the Indian Raihway Bill; Lagiee
Istive Papers relating to Act 9 of 1890 (National Archives),

॥ Lioutanant Governor, Government of Bengal No. 26442, dated 27-11-1380
(OL No. 11846 R.7), Information teked from file relating to the Indian Rail-
‘waye Bill, LegislativePapors rolating to Act 9 of 1890 (National Archives).


18

There was also a commeat by the Manager of a Railway,
that just as, by section 77, the public are debarred from obtainin;
a refund of an overcharge, unless the claim is preferred within 6
months from the date of delivery, the Railway Administration
should also be debarred from recovering overcharges from
public unless the claim is made within 6 months.*

These comments do not, however, seem to have carried
much weight, and the clause was passed without substantial
change on the points raised.

We should, before we part with this Report, place on re-
cord our warm appreciation of the assistance we have received
from Shri Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission, in
dealing with the problem covered by the Report. As usual, Shri
Bakshi first prepared a draft which was treated as a Working
Paper. The draft was considered by the Commission point by
point, and, in the light of the decisions taken tentatively by the
Commission, Shri Bakshi prepared a final draft for considera-
lion which was after elaborate discussion approved by the Com-
mission. Throughout the study of this problem, Shri Bakshi took
an active part in our deliberations, and has rendered very valu.
able assistance to the Conimission.

P. B. Gajendragadkar— Chairman
9. R, Krishna [yer

P. K. Tripathi
Members

5. 6. Dhavan

$. 7, Sen-Varma

P.M. Bakshi— Member-Secretary

New Delhi-
the 7th May, 1973.

1 Mana; re and Engineer-in.Chief, Thixhout State Bailway, No. 5336, date:
23-7-1988 (Cl, No. ७76 R.T.).

2 Information. taken from the file, relating to the Indian Railways Bill, Legis»
lative papers relating to Act 9 of 1890 (National Archives),

LRN) 104MofT, I. CA—2,000-—1-5-74—GIPS


Price: inland Rs. 1.55. Polper‘Poreign’3ah. 8d, oF 56 cents,