LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
BENAMI TRANSACTIONS

August 1973

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS


Chairman

P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR LAW COMMISSION
NEW DELHi—110001
Dated: the August 7, 1973.

My dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 57th Report of
the Law Commission on ‘Benami Transactions’.

The circumstances in which the subject was taken up by the Law
Commission are stated in the opening paragraph of the Report.

When the subject was taken up, # Questionnaire giving a brief
resume of the present position, setting out the problem and putting
forth the possible alternatives for reform of the law was prepared.
After approval by the Commission, it was circulated to State Govern-
ments, High Courts, Bar Associations, Chambers of Commerce and
other interested persons and bodies. The views expressed on the Ques-
tionnaire were studied, and a draft Report prepared on the subject.
This was considered by the Commission, and the Report was revised
in the light of the discussions.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
P. 8, GAJENDRAGADKAR

Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

NEW DELHI

(1)


Chapter No.
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2

CuaPTEr 3

CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5

CHAPTER 6

CONTENTS

Subjectmatter
Introduction - . . पु .
Benami transactions in general

Benami transactions in English and Indian law
compared ‘ पु : : + : .

Statutory modifications relevant to Benami . .
Summary;of present position

Amendments in the law . . . . .

(ili)

PAGES
1-6
7-12
13-16

17-22
23-27
28-38

ve


CHAPTER ॥
INTRODUCTION

1.1 Genesis and scope of the Report.—The question of prohibit-
ing benami transactions has been taken up by the Law Commission on
a reference made on the subject by the Union Government.’

1.2 In the letter of reference sent to the Law Commission, it is
stated :—

“The problem of property held benami has been causing con-
cern to the taxing authorities for some time. The Select Com-
mittee on the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1969 had also
suggested that Government should examine the existing law
relating to benami transactions with a view to determining
whether such transactions should be prohibited. This sugges-
tion was re-iterated in Parliament during the debate on the Taxa-
tion Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1971.”

Accordingly, the Law Commission has been asked to examine the
matter and let Government have the benefit of its advise on the ques-
tion of prohibiting the practice ‘of holding property benami.

_ 1.3 The letter addressed by the Government refers to the views
expressed by the Select Committee on the Taxation Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 1969. It appears that the Committee made the following com-
ment*: —

“45, Clause 43 (New Clause 34)—-As explained in paragraph 13,
the Committee have decided to drop the new procedure for ‘re-
cognition’ of partnership firms and to continue the existing pro-
cedure for registration of such firms with a few modifications.

During the course of the discussion of the modifications given
effect to in this clause, it was suggested that Government
should examine the existing law relating to benami transactions
with a view to determine whether such transactions should be
prohibited, and the Committee had agreed to this suggestion.”

1.4. During the debate’ on the ‘Taxation Laws’ Amendment Bill
1971, one of the Members‘ commenting that the proposed amendment
of the Income-tax Act was inadequate, observed as follows: —

“Even now, benami transactions are not debarred by law. A
very drastic remedy is needed. That is the point that I am

1, Letter No, 2462/72/ Adv. F, dated 20th December, 1972, of the Minister
of Law to the Chairman, Law Commission.

2. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1969—Report of the Select Committee
Grd August, 1970), page XVI.

3, Rajya Sabha Debates.
4. Shri T. N. Singh,

ON


2

making. Merely saying that he will suffer in a certain way and
that it will be discouraging the benami transactions is not
enough. All benami ttansattions should be debarred under the
law. And I want to know why it has not been done. Why do
you want to encoutage benami transactions indirectly by a sup-
posed penalty or harm or by saying that the party may suffer
because he has done that? Why not debar it completely ?”

1.5 Meaning of ‘benami transaction’.—Pourchase or holding of pro-
perties in the name of anotber is known. in India, as a benami trans-
action. This custom has been recognised by Indian Courts for a long
time. Literally, the word “benami” means ‘without name’. The
essential legal characteristic of these transactions is that there is no
intention to benefit the person in whose name the transaction is made.
The name of that person, popularly known as the ‘benamidar’, as the
Privy Council pointed out. '=" is simply an alias for that of the person
beneficially interested. The benamidar has the ostensible title to the
property standing in his name ; but the beneficial ownership of the
property does not vest in him but in the rea] owner.

1.6 Risk offset by greater advantage.—There is always a risk in
giving or holding property in names different from those of the real
owners. But still, benami transactions ate resorted to in order to avoid
the greater risks referred to below. ** .

1.7 Factors accounting for the origin of benami.—The practice of
benami might have come into existence by reason of a number of fac-
tors :--

(a) The Joint Hindu Family system and a desire to make secret
provisions is one factor’ which might have led to the practice
of benami.

(0) Fraud on creditors might be another such factor. As Bhat-
tacharya* has obscrved :-—

“ince its first establishment, the British Government, in the
exercise of its legislative functions, have from time to time
made attempts to check the inveterate practice obtaining
in India of holding property by one person in the name of
another. This practice, having its origin in the dishonest
motive of defrauding creditors of their just and lawful dues,
has had so Jarge and widespread prevalence here that the legis-
lature cannot altogether put an end to it by a drastic enact-
ment declaring the practice absolutely illegal in all cases.”

1. Peter Perumal v. Muntandy, (1908) LR, 35 Cal. $51, 358 (Privy
Council).

2, Gurnarain v, Sheolal, ALR. 1918 P.C. 140.

28. See para 1.7(d), below.

3. West and Bubler, “Hindu Law’, (Fourth Edition), pages 157, 563.

4. K, K. Bhattacharya, Joint Hindu Family, (Tagore Law Lectures) (1884-
85), pages 469, 470.



3

“Such a-step would be.attended with immense mischief. But,
as the British Government by its revenue laws has retained in
its hands the supreme. control over the vast majority of land-
ed property, there have been cenactments' to discourage
benami purchases at a revenue sale.”

(c) Desire to evade taxes may be another motive of persons enter-
ing into benami transactions. The. victim here. is not indi-
vidual, but the State. Nevertheless, it is a species of fraud.

(d) Benami transactions might also have originated in a desire
to avoid certain political and social risks. According to Pol-
lock,’ “Practices of this kind (benami practices} naturally
grow up in a state of society where there is an appreciable
risk, from one generation to another, cf hostile conquest or
confiscations, And, having regard to the political state of
India before and after the short-lived prosperity of the Mogul
Empire, 1 do not see the necessity of explaining the frequency
of these transactions by some supposed innate love of secrecy
in the minds of oriental owners of property. Neither is there
anything surprising in the persistence of the habits ofthe kind
after the reasons for them disappear. Our modern life is full
of these survivals in things great and small. Again, it is
quite natural for ingenious persons to discover that the means
of concealment which formerly were a shelter from the strong
hand of princes and adventurers can be turned in peaceful
times to the less ambitious but not less lucrative end of baffl-
ing creditors.”

1.8 Judicial recognition of benami,—Whatever the factors wluch
led to the practice of benami, there is no doubt that it has a firm foot-
ing in the legal system. Judicial recognition of the practice came very
early in India. In one of the very early Calcutta cases,’ a purchase in
the name of the wife’s name was held to be “Farzi’" (fictitious). ता
was held that the property vested in the person to whom the grant was
actually made, and not necessarily in the person whose name was made
use of.

1.9 Essence of benami transaction —The various aspects of benami
transactions, and the relevant statutory provisions, will be discussed in
detail, later, At this stage, it is sufficient to state that the essence of

1. The author cites several enactments to illustrate this proposition.

2. Pollock, Law of Fraud, misrepresentation mistake (1894), page 33, 84.

3, Sheikh Bahadur Ali v. Sheikh Dhomu, 1 Calcutta Sud, R. Diw. Rep. 250,
251, cited in Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 396, foot note 1.

4. (a) Balanjyappa Chetty v. Arumugon Chetty, (1864) 2 M.H.C.R. 26.

(bo) Bipen Beharee Chaudhry v, Ram Chunder Roy, (1870) 14 W.R. 12.
15, (common form of Benami).

(c) Tagore v, Tagore, (1872) 1.4. Supp. 47, 71 (“Tagore Case”),
4d) Ravji v. Mahadev, (1897) LL,R. 22 Bom. 672, हु
(९) Akbar Ali v. Mahomed Faiz Buksh, (1871) 15 W.R. 12, 14.


4

benami transactions is the use of ar alias in respect of the holding of
property, usually, (but not always) with the object of concealing the
teal owner. Benami transactions are not confined to purchases, and
can extend to other modes of transfer.

1.10 Benami transactions common in India.—It is not disputed
that benami transactions are common in India. As the Federal Court
observed'—

“A practice has long been common in this country for intend-
ing alienees of land to take the document of transfer in the
name of their friends or relatives, sometimes with a view to
defeat the claims of creditors, sometimes with a view to avoid
claims by other members of their own family, and sometimes
to escape restrictions imposed upon them by Government
Servants’ Conduct Rules etc.”

1.11 Sir George Farwell’s observations in the Privy Council? may
also be quoted :—

“Down to the talugdar’s death the natural inference ig that the
purchase was a benami transaction a dealing common to
Hindus and Muhammadans alike, and much in use in India ;
it is quite unobjectionable and has a curious resemblance to
the doctrine of our English law that the trust of the legal
estate results to the man who pays the purchase money, and
this again follows the analogy of our Common law, that where
a feoffment is made without consideration the use resylts to the
feoffer.”

1.12 In the leading case of Gosain v. Gosain’, Lord Justice Knight
Bruce, delivering the opinion of the Privy Council, took the view that
the English doctrine of advancement did not apply in India. He said—

“Tf then the person in whose name the purchase was effected
had been a stranger in blood, or only a distant relative, no
question could have arisen; he would have been prima facie
a trustee, and if he desired to contend that the prima facie
character of the transaction was not its real character, the
burthen would have rested on him; but the individual in
whose name the present purchase was effected was the son,
and at that time the only son, of the person who made the
purchase, and whose money it was, and it has been contend-
ed that the circumstance changes the presumption, and that
what would be the presumption in the case of a stranger does.
not exist between father and son; that the presumption is
advancement, and that, therefore, the burthen of proof is

. Punjab Prevince v. Daulat Singh, A.LR. 1942 F.C, 38, 40 (Varada-
chariar J.)

2. Bilas Kunwar v, Desraj Ranjit Singh (1915) LL.R. 37 All. 557, 564, 565;
ALR, 1915 P.C. 96:

3. Gopeekrist Gosain v. Gungapersaud Gosain (1854) 6 M.LA. 53.



5

shifted. Now, on this, as far as their Lordships can learn,
there is no authority in Indian law, no distinct case, or dic-
tum, establishing or recognising such a principle, or such a
tule, It is clear that in the case of a stranger the presumption
is in favour of its being a benamee transaction, that is a trust ५
bur it is clear also that in this country, where the person in
whose name the purchase is made is one for whom the party
making the purchase was under an obligation to provide, the
case is different; and it is said that that ought to be deemed
the law of India also, not because it is the law of England,
but because it is founded on reason and the fitness of things,
if I may use the expression, or natural justice, that on such
grounds it ought to be considered the law of Indie. Now,
their Lordships are not satisfied that this view of the rule is
accurate, and that it ig not one merely proprii juris. Probable
as it may be, that a man may wish to provide for his son ts a
certain extent, and though it may be his duty to do so, yet
there are other considerations belonging to the subject ; among
others, a man may object to making his child independent of
him in his life time, placing him in such a position as to enable
him to leave his father’s house and to die, leaving infant
heirs, thus putting the property out of the control of the father.
Various Teasons may be urged agains, the abstract propriety
of the English rule. It is merely one of positive law. and not
required by any rule of natural justice to be incorporated in
any system of laws, recognising a purchase by one man in
the name of another, to be for the benefit of the real pur-
chaser. Their Lordships, therefore, are not prepared to act
against the general rule. even in the absence of peculiar ला
cumstances ; but in India there is what would make it parti-
cularly objectionable, namely, the impropriety or immora~
lity of making an unequal division of property among child-
ren. This might be more striking where there were more
sons than one; but if the objection exists, it does not become
less where there is only one son, for the father may have
others, and in such a case the same objectionable consequ-
ences would follow as where several sons were in being.”

1.13 Legality of benami transactions.—In itself, a benami transac-
tion is not illegal, because “transfer of property”, by its definition,
does not require that the transfer in favour of one person may not be
in the name of another person,

1.14 Propriety of benami transactions.—As to the propriety of
benami transactions, the Federal Court observed? :—

“& notion bas sometimes prevailed in this country that all
benami transactions must be regarded as reprehensible and

1. Section 5, Transfer of Property Act.
2. paniae Province Vv. Dautat Singh, ATR. 1942 F.C. 40 (Varadachariar


6

perpen if. not illegal; but, as late as in 1915, Sir George
Ferweil, delivering judgment of the, Judicjal .Committee
in 37 All. 557 spoke of them as ‘quite: unobjectionable’ and
as having their analogues in the English law; and Mr. Ameer
Ali, delivering the judgment of the Committee in 46 Cal,
566°, observed that ‘there is nothing inherently wrong in it.
and it accords, within its legitimate scope, with the ideas and
habits of the people’. As indicated by the qualifying words
‘within its legitimate scope’, their Lordships’ observations
were clearly not meant to countenance transactions entered
into for fraudulent or illegal purposes.”

1.15 Resort to benamj to commit fraud.—Every benami transac-
tion is not harmless. Past experience shows that benami transactions
have often been resorted to for furthering illegal or questionable
objects, including the evasion of taxes. Benami transactions are some-
times also resorted to in order to defeat creditors.

1.16 Legislative inroads.—The legislature, realising this abuse of
the practice of ‘benami’, has already made certain provisions to guard
against the dishonest use of benami transactions.’

1.17 Legal and factual controversies.—Apart from these undesir-
able consequences of benami transactions, it may be noted that the
recognition of this practice as a part of the legal system creates contro-
versies, both legal and factual. in the actual application of the law in
courts; and this itself leads to complexity and uncertainty. It appears
to us that such complexity and uncertainty is worth avoiding, if that
can be done without causing any serious hardship.

1.18 Scope of rest of the Report.—The rest of this Report will,
accordingly, be concerned with an analysis of certain aspects of benami
transactions, so as to illustrate the legal and factual controversies refer-
red to above,’ and with an examination of the justification for a change
in the law, and the direction in which the change could be usefully
made,

1. Mt. Bilas Kunwar ¥. Desraj Ranjit Singh, ALR. 1915 PC, 96; 37
All. 557; 42 LA. 202 (P.C).

. Gur Narayan v. Sheo Lal Singh, A.LR. 1918 P.C, 140; 46 Cal, 566:
46 LA. 1 (PC)

3. See Chapter 4, infra.
. 4. See para 6.21, infra.
5. Para 1.17, supra.

n

»


CHAPTER 2
* BENAMI TRANSACTIONS IN GENERAL

2.1 Nature of a benami transaction.—The nature of a benami

transaction has been described by the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council? thus— हे

“The system of acquiring and holding property and even
of carrying on business in names other than those of the real
owners, usually called the benami system, is and has been a
common practice in the ००परा३........ ००००० The rule ap-
plicable to benami transactions was stated with considerable
distinctness in a judgment of this Board delivered by Sir
George Farwell? Referring to a benami dealing, their Lord-
ships say: “It is quite unobjectionable and has a curious re-
semblance to the doctrine of our English law that the trust of
the legal estate results to the man who pays the purchase
money, and this again follows the analogy of our common
law that where a feoffment is made without consideration the
use results to the beoffer”.

“So long, therefore, as a benami transaction does not contra~
vene the provisions of the law, the courts are bound to give
it effect. As already observed, the benamidar has no benefi-
cial interest in the property or business that stands in bis
name; he represents, in fact, the real owner, and so far as
their relative legal position is concerned, he is a mere trustee
for him.... ”

2.2 As between the benamidar and the real owner, the law fully
recognises the ownership of the real owner, and disregards the benami-
dar. This, of course, is subject to certain statutory exceptions, which
will be dealt with in due course*

2.3 Principle that transaction is presumed to be for benefit of per-
son providing money.—The principle is that where property is acquir-
ed in the name of one person but the purchase price is paid by another,
a presumption arises that the transaction was one for the benefit of the
person providing the money. Such cases are common in India where
*‘benami’ transactions are recognised.

1 Gurnarayan ¥. Sheolal Singh, ALR. 1918 P.C, 140, 143...

2. Bilas Kunwar v. Besraj Ranjit Singh, ALR. 1915 P.C. 96 (Also see
para 1.11, supra).

3. See chapter 4, infra.


In support of this general proposition, the undermentioned case
may be cited :-—

2.4 Benamidar representing the true owner—In general, the bena-
midar fully represents the owner of the property in dealings with, the
third persons. In fact, that is the very object of benami transactions.
The property stands “in the name” of the benamidar, and a third party
would not be able to challenge his title so long as the rea} owner does
not come in the picture. The cases mentioned in the footnotes ilius-
trate or discuss the application of this principle.’/*/*

At the same time, it is clear that the Benamidar cannot act in oppo-
sition to the real owner.”

2.5 Position as between real owner and third parties.-As to the
position between the real owner of the property and third parties, ordi-
narily the real owner will not have an occasion to make any assertions
about title. If, however, such a situation does arise, then law will have
regard to the reality, and (disregarding the ostensible title of the bena-
midar), the law will allow the real owner to assert his ownership, as 2
general rule.

2.6 Statutory modifications of general principles—The general
position regarding benami transactions has been modified, or may, in
practice, become modified, by reason of certain statutory exceptions,
chief amongst which are the following :

@ Section 66, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908."
(ii) Sections 41 and 53. Transfer of Property Act, 1882;"

(9) Section 281-A, Income-tax Act, 1961, as inserted by the Taxa-
tion Laws (Amendment) Act, 1972 (45 of 1972).¥

5 1-8

1. Gopee Krist Gosain v Ganga Prasad Gosain, (1854-57) 6 MLA, 53
(P.C) [See para 1.12 supra].

2. Bilas Kunwar v. Desraj Singh, (1915) 1.L.R, 37 All. 557; 42 LA, 202;
19 C.W.N. 1207 @.C.).

3. Nritvamoni Dasi vy. Lakhan Chander Sen, (1916) LL.R, 43 Cal. 660;
20 C.W.N. 552 (P.C.)

4. Raja of Deo v. Abdullah, (1918) IL.R, 45 Cal. 909; 45 LA. 97, 22
C.W.N. 891 (PC).

5. Gur Narayan v. Sheo Lat Singh, (1919) LL.R. 46 Cal. 566 (P.C.)

6. Promode Kumar v. Madan Mohan, ALR. 1923 Cal 228. 27
C.W.N. 305.

7. Murlidhar v. Paramanand, A..R. 1932 Bom. 190 (Shingne J.),

8, Radhakrishnan v. Union of India, AR. 1959 Bom, 102, 104, 105
(Shelat 13.

9. Gur Prasad v, Hansraj, AJR, 1946, (जाता 144, 145 (reviews cases).

10. Radhakrishnan v. Union of India, A.I.R, 1959 Bom, 102.

11, Chapter 4, infra, Also see 54th Report of the Law Commission.

12. Chapter 4, infra.

13. Para 4.3, infra, relating to section 281A, Income-Tax Act.



9

2.7 Expression “Benami” not frequently used in statute law—As a
matter of legal theory, benami transactions, though familiar to every
Indian lawyer, do not figure in many statutory provisions; and, with a
few exceptions to be presently noted,’ the word ‘benami’ remains rather
a stray visitor to the world of legislation, though a familiar figure in the
judicial sphere.

2.8 Section 82, Trusts Act—Resulting Trust—The most important
provision which has the effect of giving a statutory footing to benami
is in the Trusts Act* which creates a resulting trust.

2.9. Uncertainty as to how iar doctrine of benami survivers indepen-
dently of the Trusts Act—It is not very clear whether the doctrine of
benami should now be regarded as resting on this provision of the
Trusts Act, or whether the doctrine is to be treated as independent of
it, Judicial decisions relevant to benami, though they occasionally
refer to the provision in the Trusts Act, do not usually proceed to deal
specifically with the above question. It should be noted that if the
former view is correct, then the title passes to the benamidar, though
he holds the property in trust. If the latter view is correct, then tifle
does not pass at all té the benamidar. The latter view appears to be
favoured by Mulla’ and by some cases.‘ The former view has the
support of observations in some cases.*

2.10. In an Oudh case’, the Additional Judicial Commissioners
discussed the case law on the subject, and the proposition was laid
down that section 82, Trusts Act, appears to throw the burden of proof
of benami on the person who alleges that the transaction is benami,
while previously (ie. before the Act) where one person paid the consi.
deration, he could throw the burden of disproof on the other side.

2.11. Views that section 82 alters burden of proof.—According
to another view’ “section 82, Trusts Act, though it may not have really
altered the burden of proof, has made it much clearer than it was
before that the burden of proof of establishing all the facts necessary
to lead to the inference that a transfer was benami lies upon the person
asserting it to be so.”

4, Para 4.3. infra, relating to section 281A, Income Tax Act,

2. Section 82, Trusts Act.

3. Cf. Mulla, Transfer of Property (1966), Commentary on section 53,
page 272.

. Para, 2.12, infra.

» Para. 2.13 and 2.15, infra.

Raj Kunwar v. Rani Maharaj Kunwar, AI.R. 1925 Oudh 243,
Sardar Jahan v. Smt. Afzal Begam, ALR, 1941 Oudh 288, 292 (Yorks &
Aggarwal 33).

Nek


16

2.42. In a Bombay case, Shelat J. made the following observa-
tions! :--
“Now, it is true that under sections 80 and 82 of the Trusts
Act 2 benamidat holds the property for and on behalf of the
real owner in consequence of which there would be a result-
ing trusts in respect of the property in favour of “the real
owner”, But then, it would be fallacious to urge from those
sections that the legal ownership in such property vests in the
benamidar as it does in the case of trustee. What those sec-
tions really mean is that a benamidar is in a fiduciary rela-
tionship with the real owner and therefore hag all the obliga-
tions of a person in such fiduciary position towards the real
owner. A benamidar is no more than an ostensible owner of

the property he holds benami, though his acts in certain cir-
cumstances would be binding upon the real owner. That is
because the real owner holds him out to third patties as an
owner of the property. It is, however, impossible to say as
jn the case of a trustee that any right in the property either
vests in him or that under section 13 and the sections follow-
ing thereaiter of the Trusts Act any obligations therein set out
fail on him. In Gur Narayan v. Sheolal Singh, LL.R. 46 Cal.
566: (ALR. 1918 P.C. 140(C), their Lordships of the Privy
Council stated that so long as a benami transaction did not
contravene the provisions of the law the Courts were bound
to give effect to it but they made it clear also that the benami-
dar has no beneficial interest in the property that stands in
his name; he represents in fact the real owner and so far as
their t relative legal position is concerned, he is a mere trustee
for him.

2.13. There is an exhaustive discussion of the position in a Fede-
ral Court judgment.’ We quote only the important portion: —-

“It is true that the Indian law does not recognise an equita-
ble ownership in the sense known to the English law, because
we here do not, as in England, have two kinds of Jaw or juris.
diction, viz., common law and equity; but on an analysis of
the legal incidents involved. it will be found that for all prac-
tical purposes there is little or no difference between a bene-
ficiary under the English law and a beneficiary under the
Indian Trusts Act, so far as the substance of their rights is
concerned. I may first point out that so far as the “rights
and privileges are concerned, there is little or no difference
between a beneficiary under an express trust and a benefi-
ciary under a resulting or constructive trust, if we leave alone
questions arising under the Limitation Act, Section 82, Trusts
Act, which deals ‘with benami transfers, occurs in the chapter

1 Radhakrishnan ए. Union of India, ALR, 1959 Bom, 102, 104, 105
(Shelat 3).

2. Punjab Province v, Daulat Singh, ALR. 1942 F.C. 38-43 (Varada-
chariar J.)


15

beginning with section 80, which provides that an obligation
in the nature of a trust is created in certain specified cases,
and section 82 enacts that the transferee must hold that pro-
perty for the benefit of the person paying or: providing the
consideration. Section 95 reaffirms the provision implied in
section 80. In the case. of express trusts, the Act describes
the beneficiary's rights against the trustee as “beneficial inter-
est or interest of the beneficiary.” Under section 55, the
beneficiary has, subject to the provisions of the instrument of
trust, a right to the rent and profits of trust property and un-
der section 56 the beneficiary, if there is only one and he is

> competent to contract, may require the trustee to hand over
possession of the trust property to himself. This is almost a
matter of course where, as in benami transactions, the holder
of the legal title is only a bare trustee. Under section 58, the
beneficiary, if competent to contract, may transfer hig interest,
and under section 69, every person to whom a beneficiary
transfers his interest has the rights of the beneficiary in respect
of such interest at the date of the transfer.”

2.14. The following statement of the law is from a Madras ९४६६ ---
“When a person acquires an interest in property with his funds
in the name of another for his own benefit, the jatter is called
a benamidar. A benamidar is not a trustee in the strict sense
of the term. He has the ostensible title to the property stand-
ing in his name, but the property does not vest in him but is
vested in the real owner. He is only a name jender or an
alias for the real owner. The cardinal distinction between
a trustee as known to English law and a benamidar lies in
the fact that a trustee is the legal owner of the property stand-
ing in his name and the cestu? que trust is only a beneficial
owner, whereas, in the case of a benami transaction, the real
owner has goi the legal title though the property is in the name
of the benamidar......... [9 mortgage stands in the name of
a benamidar, the person for whom the mortgage was obtain-
ed could sue on the mortgage. and the same rule applies to
other transactions except those forbidden by law. The bena-
midar has some of the liabilities of a trustee but not ail bis
tights, When the benamidar is in possession of the property
standing in his name, he is in a sense the trustee for the real
owner.”

2.15. In an Oudk case*, however, it was observed—

“A benamidar holds the property ay a trustee for the benefi-
ciary', The legal title in the property vests in him and not in

1. Pitchayya v, Rattamma, ALR, 1919 Mad. 268, 269 (Devadoss and
‘Walsh JJ.)

2 कु Prasad v. Hansraj, AIR. 1946 Oudh 144, 145 (Ghulam Hasan

3. Emphasis supplied.
2-1 LAD (ND\J23


12

the beneficiaries. As a legal owner, a benamidar has the right
to sue for possession against a trespasser. In 58 LA. 279,
the Privy Council remarked that Indian law does not recog-
nise legal and equitable estates. According to that law there
can be but one owner, and where the property is vested in a
trustee, the owner must be the trustee.”

2.16. These decisions’ show that the legal position is somewhat
obscure as to the vesting of the title. They show the misconception
that is likely to arise, so long as benami is recognised.

1. Chhatra Kumari Devi v. Mohan Bikram Sheh, (1931) ACR. 1931
P.C, 196; 58 LA 279,

2. Para 2.13, supra.



CHAPTER 3
BENAMI TRANSACTIONS IN ENGLISH

3.1. Introductory.—In this Chapter, we propose to make a brief
comparison of the Indian law in regard to benami with the English law
on corresponding matters.

3.2. General rule in England.—The general rule in England is that
where a person purchases property in the name of a third person, a
trust “results” in fayour of the purchaser (or his representative). This
is not, however, an absolute rule; it is a presumption which varies ac-
cording to the facts. There is an important difference as between con-
veyance to a relation (of the purchaser) and a conveyance to a person
who is not a relation. In the former case, the presumption is that the
purchaser did not intend to benefit the nominal transferee, and a trust
results to the man who advanced the purchase money.’

3.3. Purchase in another’s name a consnon form of resulting trust
in England.—Purchase in another’s name has been described in
England* one of the most important and common forms of resulting
trusts. The rule is that where real’ or personal‘ property is vested in a
purchaser jointly with others or in another or other persons alone, a
resulting trust will be presumed in favour of the person who is proved
to have paid the purchase money; the beneficial interest in the property
“results” to the true purchaser, The general principle of such trusts
was established as long ago as 1788 in Dyer v. Dyer’ by Eyre C. B, '

Section 82, Trusts Act is based on the same principle.

3.4. English rule based on presumption.—Primarily, the English
rules on the subject are based on the intention of the parties.

Upon similar grounds i.e. on the ground of intention, where a man
buys land in the name of another, and pays the consideration money,
there is a resulting trust in his favour.

1. Dyer v, Dyer, (1788) 2 Cox 92,

2. Parker and Mellows, Modern Law of Trusts, (1966), page 101,

3. Dyer v. Dyer, (1788) 2 Cox Eq. 92 (real property).

4, Re Scotish Equitable Life Assurance Society, (1902) Ch. 282 (in
respect of personal property),

|. Dyer v. Dyer, (1788) 2 Cox Eq. 92, 93.

. Rider v, Kidder, 10 Ves. 360.

13

aw


14

As has been stated.'_ “The clear result of all the cases, is” that “the
trust of a legal estate, whether freehold, copyhold, or leasehold; whe-
ther,taken in the names of the purchaser and others jointly, or in the
name of others, without the purchaser; whether in one name or several;
whether jointly or successively (successive), results to the man who ad-
vances the purchase-money. This is a general proposition, supported
by all the cases, and there is nothing to contradict it. And it goes
on @ strict analogy to the rule of the common law, that, where a
feoffment is made without consideration, the use results to the feoffor”.

3.5. Supply of money basis of rule—In truth, this rule has its
origin in the natural presumption’ in the absence of all rebutting cir-
cumstances, that he who supplies the money means the purchase to be
for his own benefit, rather than for that of another; and that the cou-
veyance in the name of the latter, is a matter of convenience and ar-
rangement between the parties, for other collateral purposes. The same
doctrine is applied to cases where securities are taken in the name of
another person, as, if A takes a bond in the name of B, for a debt
due to himself, B will be a trustee for A for the money.

3.6. Presumption rebuttable—Presumption of advancement.—The
presumption which arises on a purchase in the name of another is
rebuttable by parol or other evidence that the purchaser intended to
benefit the other. Further, in certain circumstances there is a presump-
tion the other way, namely, that there is no resulting trust. This ap-
plies where the person in whom the property is vested is the lawful wife
or child of the purchaser-or was a person to whom he stood in loco
parentis.

3.7. Exception as to child based on moral obligation.—As regards
the exception recognised in English law (in respect of cases where pro-
perty is purchased by a parent in the mame of a son), it has been
stated‘ that the moral obligation of a parent to provide for his children
is the foundation of this exception, “since it is not only natural, but
reasonable in the highest degree, to presume that a parent, by purchas-
ing in the name “of a child, means a benefit for the latter in the dis-
charge of this moral obligation, and also as a token of parental affec-
tion”. The like presumption exists in the case of a purchase by a
husband in the name of his wife and of securities taken in her name.’

. 1. Dyer ९. Dyer, (1788) 2 Cox 92, 93 (Eyre C.B.).

2. Story, Equity Jurisprudence, (1919), page 507, para, 1201.

3. (9) Ebrand v. Dancer, 2 Ch. ९. 26; sc. 1 Eq. Abr. 382, pl. 11;
2 Mad, Pr. Ch. 101.
(b) Lloyd v. Read, LP, Will. 607.
(c) Rider v, Kidder, 10 Ves. 366.

4. Story, Equity Jurisprudence, (1919), page 508, paragraph 1203,

5. Dunbar v, Dunbar, (1909) 2 Ch. 369, 101 L.T. 553.


15

3.8. Presumption of advancement also rebuttable.—However, just
as the presumption of a resulting trust may be rebutted, so also may
the presumption of advancement be rebutted; and it may be done in
the same way by evidence of actual intention.

3.9. No rebuttal where iradulent or illegal purpose,—-There is yet
a further restriction on the ability to adduce evidence in rebuttal of
the presumption. This is that the transferor cannot rebut the presump-
tion by evidence that the transfer was for a fraudulent or illegal pur-
pose and the transferee intended to retain the beneficial interest. Ac-
cordingly, where a husband took a lease of land in his wife's name
in order to protect the Property from creditors, it was held that he
could not adduce evidence to show that he did so for the purpose men-
tioned above.!

It will be found that there were two relevant intentions in the
above case.* The first was the intention of the husband that the house
and land should, so far as the beneficial interest was concerned, be
and remain his. The second intention was that he put the land and
house into his wife’s name with a view to protecting it from his credi-
tors in case he should get into financial difficulties.

The first intention was not given recognition because of the
second.

3.10. In England, the. Principle applies also where the purpose of
the transfer is to defeat revenue laws,—where English or foreign.*
Equity will not assist a person who seeks to contravene revenue laws —
whether English or foreign.

3.11. Purchase in name of stranger—English Iaw.—So far as the
purchase in the name of a stranger is concerned, the position is
not different in England and in India. Under the Trusts Act,‘ there is
a resulting trust in this case,

3.12, Presumption where transfer in favour of relation and English
law.—If the conveyance is to the wife or child of the purchaser, then
the presumption (in England) is the other way, namely, that the pur-
chaser intended to benefit the child or wife. This is known as the
presumption of ‘advancement’ This presumption displaces the pre-
sumption of resulting trust, on the logic that in view of the telationship

1. Gascolgne v. Gascoigne, (1918) 1 KB. 223 intention to defeat cred
lors).

2. Gascoigne v. Gascoigne, (1918) 1 K.B. 223,

3. Re Emery's Investment Trusts, (1959) Ch. 410; (1959) 1 All EAR. 577
(Evasion of tax of friendly foreign country).

4. Section 82, Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

5. Para 3.6, supra.


16

between the true purchaser and the nominal purchaser, it may be pre-
sumed that a gift to the nominal purchaser was intended. his pre-
sumption of advancement is also rebuttable by evidence to the con-
trary, whenever the consideration for the purchase of property is ad-
vanced by another person.

3.13. Indian law different—Where the purchase is in the name of
a relation, the Indian law is the reverse of the English law. The pro-
vision in the Trust Act! as to resulting trusts continues to operate, and
is not displaced? by a presumption of advancement as in England*

The English presumption of advancement has not been applied
in India on the ground that it is a rule of positive English law and not
founded on natural justice.**

Of course, evidence of intention could still be given to turn the
scales,’ and it appears that very little evidence might suffice to turn the
scale. But the initial presumption is as stated above.

Section 82, Trusts Act.
Guran Ditta v. Ram Ditta, (1928) 32 Calcutta Weekly Notes 871
ALR, 1928 P.C. 172.

|. Para 3.6 to 3,12, supra. -

.Gopeckrit v, Gunga Prasad, (1854) 6 Moore's Indian Appeals 53.

. See also para 1.12, supra.

. Mohammad Sidig v. Fakhar Jahan, (1931) 59 LA, 1, 15.16, 36 Calcutta
Weekly Notes 137, 146 (P.C.).

veo

AnAY


CHAPTER 4

STATUTORY MODIFICATIONS RELEVANT
TO BENAMI

4.1. Statutory modifications of general principle recognising
benami.—So far, in India, two important statutory modifications of the
general principle that the real owner is recognised by the law in place
of the “benamidar’ have been made. The first is in the Code of Civil
Procedure; the second is in the recent amendment of taxation laws.
Certain other provisions are also of interest.

4.2. Section 66 Civil Procedure Code.—As regards the first, the
relevant section’ in the Civil Procedure Code (so far as is material)
provides that no suit shall be maintained against any person claiming
title under a purchase certified by the Court, (in such a manner as may
be prescribed) on the ground that the purchase was made on behalf
of the plantiff or on behalf of someone through whom the plantiff
claims. :

Similar provisions exist for revenue, sales and have a long history.
Under Regulation 11 of 1822, the Government was empowered, by
section 19 and 20, to cancel and annul benami purchases made at a
sale for arrears of revenue. The hext enactment upon the subject is
contained in Act 12 of 1841, section 22 whereof provides that ‘any
suit brought to oust a certified purchaser as aforesaid on the ground
that the purchase was made on behalf of another person not the certi-
fied purchaser, though by agreement the name of the certified purchaser
was used, shall be dismissed with costs’,

It is unnecessary to refer to later versions of this provision.

It may be added that we have, in our Report on the Code of Civil
Procedure,’ recommended an extension of the principle of this provision
So as to prohibit also the pleading of a defence based on ‘beaami’ in
suca cases. This provision, it may be noted, is confined to sale certi-
cates, issued by courts. It does not Prohibit ‘benami’ transactions in
general, a

. 4.3. Section 281-A, Income-tax Act, 1961, inserted in 1972,—So
far as the recent amendment in Taxation laws is concerned, the effect
of the amendment is not to prohibit ‘benami’, but to avoid its being
1. Section 66(1), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
2. 54th Report of the Law Commission (Cade of Civil Procedure) (1973),
Paragraph 1-8, 53.
3. Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1972,

17



18

made the basis of a suit unless compliance with the prescribed require-
ments is made. These requirements, broadly speaking, are intended.
to ensure that the taxing authorities concerned with income tax and
wealth tax acquire knowledge of the transaction alleged to be benami.

4.4, The germ of such a provision is to be found in the Report
of Professor Kaldor' on Indian Tax Reform. Professor Kaldor had
made the following observations :—

“As regards benami transactions, my suggestion is that the
benami holder should be asked to disclose the name of the
beneficial owner at the time of the registration and in the
event of his failing to do so (and declaring that be is not the
beneficial owner himself) ke should be treated as the beneficial
owner in law. This provision is clearly “‘intended to deter a
person from entering into a benami transaction just for the
purposes of tax evasion. While it may be true that a certain
amount of personal trust is involved between the benami and
the real owners in all such cases, 1 seriously doubt whether
the system could continue to exist but for the recognition of
benami in common law. Even retention of the title deed
would not protect the true owner in case the benami holder
formally declared that he was the beneficial owner of the pro-
perty; and in case the true owner protected himself further
through 1.0.U.s, mortgage deeds. etc., this would call for (as
indicated in para 93(g) (above) the same kind of disclosure
“It has been argued that the proposal would make it more
difficult to defeat malafide transfers of property undertaken
to prevent attachment of property in view of outstanding
demands. I should be interested to know the number of
cases in which the Revenue succeeded in breaking the benami
through court action. My feeling is that the Revenue would
gain fay more from screening all benami transactions at the
very outset than it would lose from any added difficulty in
breaking the benami in the case of such fraudulent tran-
sactions. हु

4.5, A similar recommendation was made by the Administrative
Reforms Commission? also. Accordingly, the Government sponsored
legislation through the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1971 to dis-
courage benami holding of property. Under the provision inserted as
section 281A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, no suit shall be instituted
in any court to enforce any right in respect of any property held benami
unless the claimant has either disclosed the property in question or
the income therefrom in connection with his wealth tax or income-tax
assessments of given notice to the Income-tax Officer about the parti-
culars of such property in the prescribed form.

L Nigholes Kaldor, Indian Tax Reform (1956), pages 58-59, para.

2. See Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee, Final Report, (Dec. 1971), page
66, para 2.231.


19

4.6. Provisions in the Incometax Act.-The special case of the
husband or father transferring assets to the wife or minor child (other
than a married daughter) is dealt with by a more direct provision’ in
the Income-tax Act,—a provision which has been on the Statute Book
for a long time.

There are also other provisions in the Income-tax Act; designed to
check the avoidance or evasion of tax (or its recovery) by fraudulent
and other transfers. .

4.7. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act.—We may also refer to
provision relevant to Benami transfers in the Transfer of Property
Act. The law of estoppel is enacted in section 115 of the Indian
Evidence Act, and the leading case on that section falls equally under
this provision of the Transfer of Property Act. In that case,‘ the owner
transferred property to his wife as benamidar. After his death, she
mortgaged the property, her son assisting in the transaction and re-
ceiving the mortgage money. The son was held to be estopped from
disputing the mortgage. If the provision in the Transfer of Property
Act’ had been applied, the case would have been similarly decided on
the ground that by the consent of the son, the mother was the ostensible
owner.

4.8. Fraudulent transfers of property are dealt with by another pro-
vision in the Transfer of Property Act.’—namely, section 53.

4.9. With reference to section 53, Transfer of Property Act (frau-
dulent transfers), it may be noted that before that Act, there was in
force,’ is Presidency towns,* an English statute’ covering all types of
property and all types of transfers.” This English statute. was in har-
mony with the common law. The Transfer of Property Act, repealed
this English Statute." The present section 53 (if the Act) does not
cover benami or sham transfers, But such transfers can be declared
void independently of the section.

. Section 64, Income-tax Act, 1961.
. Sections 175, 178, 230A and 281, Income-tax Act, 1961.
. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act.

. Sarat Chunder v. Gopal Chunder, (1863) LL.R. 20 Cal. 296, 19 LA.
203 (P.C.)

. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act.

. Section 53, Transfer of Property Act.
. 13 Bliz. C-5,

. See LL.R. 25 Bom. 202, 208.

Cj. Twynes’ case, (1601) 3 Co Rep. 80 and Mulla’s commentary on
section 53, Transfer of Property Act.

10. See, now, section 172, Law of Property Act, 1925 (Eng.).
11, See Multa’s commentary on section 53, Transfers of Property Act.

Rene

OPN AW


20

4.10. Principle wel established.—The principle underlying section
53 of the Transfer of Property Act is in accordance with justice, equity
and good conscience, and has been held applicable even in ateas where
the Transfer of Property Act is not in force, or in cases* not covered
by the language of the section.

4.11. Section 84, Trusts Act—Transfer for unlawful purpose.—
Where any transfer of property is intended to effect an unlawful pur-
pose, and the unlawful purpose is not carried out, the transfer can
(subject to certain qualifications) be disregarded. This principle, which
forms the basis of a specific provision’ (as to illegality) in the Trusts
Act, is also relevant to the subject of benami transactions entered into
for an illegal object. (Under a provision of the Transfer of Property
Act,’ as transfer for an unlawful object is void).

4.12. Prineiple.—In a Calcutta case,’ Asutosh Mookerjee J. after
referring to all the available Indian case law and discussing the English
and American cases bearing on the subject, wound up his judgment
with the following quotation from a decision of the Supreme Court
of the United States!

“The law leaves the parties to such contract as it found them.
If either. has sustained a loss by the bad faith of a particeps
crimins, it is but a just infliction for premeditated and deeply
practised fraud which, when detected, deprives him of antici-
pated profits, or subjects him to unexpected losses.”

This states succinctly the general rule as to the effect of illegality.

4,13, Indian case law as ¢o illegal transfers—The Federal Court
of India’ and the Supreme Court.’ as well as the High Coutts," have
had occasions to consider whether the beneficial owner ought to be al-
lowed to recover from his benamidar when the latter proves that the

1, Mt, Akaramunnisa v. Mustafann, A.1.R. 1929 All. 238,

2. Md. Ishaq v. Md. Yusuf. A.1.R, 1927 Lah 420.

, (a). Abdul Hye vy. Mir Mahomad, (1883) J.LR. 10 Cal, 616 (B.C)
(b) Chidambaram vy. Srinivas, (1914) LL.R. 37 Mad, 227 (P.C.) (Movea-
ble Property).

. Ramanathan v. Unnamatai, A.L.R. 1942 Mad. 632.

. Section 84, Trusts Act. [See para 4.15 infra]

. Section 6(h)(2), Transfer of Property Act.

. Raghupati Chatterji v. Nari Shinga Hari Das, A.LR, 1923 Cal, 90.

. Bartles ४. Coleman, 4 Peter 184 (Baldwin J.).

. Punjab Province v. Daulat Singh, A.1.R, 1942 B.C, 38, 40, 41 (1942)
F.CR, 67, 75, 76.

10. Kadar v. Prahlad (1960) S.C.J, 1072 AIR. 1960 S.C. 213;

11, Seeta) Quadir Baksh v. Hakam, A.1.R. 1932 Lah. 503 (F.B.) (reviews

cases);
10) Pranballav v. Tulsi bala Dassi, A.I.R. 1958 Cal. 713, 725, para 114.

w

POI aun


21

intention of the parties was to commit an illegality. The present posi-
tion’ seems to be that where the illegal object is not carried out or
where other special reasons exist, the illegality will be disregarded.

The matter has also arisen before the Privy Council in appeals

from other countries.’*-

33%

In these cases, it would be against the public policy to allow the
defendant to violate his fiduciary relationship with the plaintiff.

“He must not expect that a judicial tribunal will degrade itself
by an exertion of its powers, by shifting the loss from the
one to the other, or to equalize the benefits or burthens which
may have resulted by the violation of every principle of morals
and laws. As Chancellor Walworth puts it: “Wherever two
or more persons are engaged in a fraudulent transaction to
injure another, neither law nor equity will interfere to relieve
either of these persons, as against the other, from the conse-
quence of their own conduct.”

4.14. Position where illegal purpose not carried out—The Privy
council’ dealt with the question why the maximum in pari delico should
not be applied. where the illegal purpose is not carried out, in these

words :

“The answer to that is that the plaintiff, in suing to recover
possession of his property, is not carrying out the illegal
transaction, but is seeking to put everyone, as far as possible,
in the same position as they were in before that transaction
‘was determined upon. It is the defendant who is relying upon
the fraud, and is seeking to make a title to the lands through
and by means of it. And, despite his anxiety to effect great
mora! ends, he cannot be permitted to do this. And, there-
fore, the purpose of the fraud having not only not been effect.
ed, but “absolutely defeated, there js nothing to prevent the
plaintiff from repudiating the entire transaction, revoking alt
authority of his confederates to carry out the fraudulent

scheme, and recovering possession of his property.”

4.15. In a Calcutta case. Bachawat J. stated the position thus,
“tn Indian law the transfer claiming that the transfer is void may

sue to

recover the property on the strength of his original tide, and,

2.

3,

4,

3.

6.

See para 4.14 et sec Infra.
Sajjan singh v. Sardara Alt (1960) 1 AJL E.R. 269 (P.C).

Chettiar v. Chettiar, (1962) 1 All E.R, 494 (PC), commented on by
Derrett in 11 1.C.L.Q, 864.

Mistry Amar Singh v. Kulubra, (1963) 3 All. E.R, 499 (PC).
Petherpermal Chetty v. Muniandy Seervai, (1908) LL.R. 35 Cal. 550,
558, 559 (P.C.).

Pranballav v. Tulsibala Dassi, A.LR. 1958 Cal, 713, 725, para. 114.


22

in general, he may be given relief though he is particeps criminis, in
the following cases:

(a). Where his case falls within one of the three exceptions recog-
nised by section 84 of the Indian Trusts Act,—or

(0) (i) Where public interest or the interest of third parties requires
that the relief should be given, ot (ii) where denial of
the relief may defeat a legal prohibition, or (iii) where the
transaction is such that it ought to be allowed to stand on
grounds of public policy.

“Relief may be given upon such terms as the justice of the
case may require.”

[Section 84 of the Indian Trusts Act recognises three exceptions
to the rule denying relief to a Particeps criminis. Where the owner
of the property transfers it to another for an illegal purpose, the trans-
feree must hold the Property for the benefit of the transferor if (a) the
itlegal purpose is not carried into execution, or (b) the transferor is
not as guilty as the transferee, or (c) the effect of permitting the trans-
feree to retain the Property might be to defeat the provisions of any
law. The transferor is prima facie entitled to recover the property
from the transferee if his case falls within one of these three excep-
tions.]

4.16. The transfer of property under illegal Transactions—position
in England.—In England,’ the prevailing view is that where Property
has been transferred under an illegal contract, and the parties have,
in addition, observed all the formalities necessary for conveying title
to the particular property concerned, then title to that property will
pass, regardiess of the illegality of the transaction?

4.17. Sections 422-424, Penal Code—The Indian Penal Code
has also certain provisions’ punishing fraudulent deeds and disposi-
tions of property. These are wide enough to cover fraudulent benami
transactions,

1. (@) Scarf v. Morgan, (1838) 4M & W 200;
(b) Taylor v. Chester, (1869) 4 0.8. 309;
(©) Bowmaker Ltd. v. Barnet Instruments, (1945) 1 K.B. 65 (CA),

2, See Hamson, “Illegal Contracts and Limited Interests”, (1949) 10
Camb. LJ, 249, 251 who describes it as “trite law”,
3. Sections 421 to 424, Penal Code.


CHAPTER 5
SUMMARY OF PRESENT POSITION

5.1. Introduction—-In this Chapter, we shall-summarise the pre-
sent position as to benami transactions.

5.2. Summary of present position—in general—A few basis
points concerning benami transactions may be stated, as follows:

(a) Benami transfer or transaction means the transfer by or to a
person who acts only as the ostensible owner in place of the
teal owner whose name is not disclosed;

(b) The question whether such transfer or transaction was real
or benami depends upon the intention of the beneficiary;

(c) The real owner in such cases may be called the beneficiary, and
the ostensible owner the benamidar.

ILLUSTRATIONS

‘A’ purchases property in the name of his relation ‘BY. ‘A’ sup-
plies the consideration and ‘B’ merely lends his name. ‘A’ is the bene-
liciary and ‘B? his benamidar.

5.3. Effect of benami transfer.—The effect of a benami transfer
is as follows*: —

‘a) A person does not acquire any interest in property by metely

jJending his name;

(9) The benamidar has no beneficial interest though he may re-

present the legal owner as to third persons?

{c) A benami transaction is legal, except in certain specified situa-

tions.

5.4, Statutory provisions re-inforcing benami—There are  statu-
tory provisions—() re-inforcing benami, or Gi) modifying it, or (ii) of
a special nature. The Indian Trusts Act* contains a general provision,
under which, where property is transferred to one person for a consi-
deration paid or provided by another person, and it appears that such
other person did not intend to provide such consideration for the bene-
91६ of the transferee, the transferee must hold the property for the bene-
St of the person who paid or provided the consideration. The effect
of this poyision is to reinforce the doctrine of benami,

1. Gour, Hindu Code (1938), page 726, para, 218.
2. Gour, Hindu Code (1938), page 726, para, 219.

3. See para 2,11 te 2.14, supra.

4. Section $2, Trusts Act.

23


24

A “resulting trust” arises in such cases; and it is not readily re
butted—as in England—by the presumption of advancement where the
transfer is in favour of the wife or child of the person who provided
the consideration. Rather, where the transfer is in favour of the wife
ot child, the courts are more ready to give effect to this provision (of
the Trusts Act) than in other cases. है

5.5. Statutory provisions modifying benami.—Recognising, how-
ever, the fact that benami transactions have often been resorted to for
dishonest purposes, the Legislature has enacted provisions modifying
the doctrine of benami. These provisions are to be found principally
in the Code of Civil Procedure’, and in the Income Tax Act?

5.6. Provisions oi a special nature wider than benami—Then
there are provisions of a special nature. Their scope and reach are
wider than benami transfers, but they could apply also to benami.
Under a provisions in the Income-tax Act’, income from property trans-
ferred to a spouse or minor child‘ (other than a married daughter)
without consideration is deemed to be the income of the: transferor.
The scope of this is wider than benami transfers.

(There are also minor provisions’ in special Jaws as 10 the disclo-
sure of benami dealings and the like).

5.7. Unlawful transfers—A transfer of property for an unlawful
object is void, by virtue of a specific provision in the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act’. Recovery by the transferor of property transferred for an
unlawful object is, however, permissible only in certain specified cases.
Under a provision in the Trusts Act,’ where the owner of property trans-
fers it to another for an illegal purpose, and such purpose is not carried
into execution, or the transferor is not as guilty as the transferee or the
éffect of permitting the transferee to retain the property might be to
defeat the provisions of any law, the transferee must hold the property
for the benefit of the transferor.

5.8, Fraudulent transfers—There is, in the Transfer of Property
Act,’ also a provision empowering the Court to set aside transfers in
fraud of creditors and transfers in fraud of subsequent tansferees.

These provisions are not confined to benami transfers.

5.8. Civil Procedure Code.—There are also provisions in the Civil
Procedure Code.
Section 66, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
Section 218A, Income-tax Act, 1961 inserted by Act 45 of 1972,
. Section 64, Income-tax Act.
|. Also see para. 513, infra.
E.g. Sections 247 to 250, Companies Act, 1956.
. Section 6(h)(2), Transfer of Property Act.
. Section 84, Trusts Act.
8. Section 53, Transfer of Property Act.

कर 9 ए # ७ ० १०


25.

5.9. Criminal liability —So for as criminal liability is concern-
ed, references may be made to the general penal provisions in the Penal
Code punishing cheating,’ and to the specific provisions in that Code*
which punish certain fraudulent dealings with and disposition of pro-
petty, including fraudulent dealings intended to defeat execution.’
‘These provisions are wide enough to cover fraudulent benami_transac-
tions, if the other ingredients of the relevant sections are satisfied. The
relevant provisions‘ is the section under which a person who dishonest-
ly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, without
adequate consideration, any property, intending thereby to prevent, the
distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or
the creditors of any other person, is punished.

5.10, Position with reference to different types of transiers—A
study of the various statutory provisions relevant to the subject will
show that the position with reference to the different kinds of transfer
may vary according as the transfer is—

(1) to a wife or child’ (on the one hand) or to a person other than

a wife or child;
(2)
(3)
(4)

for consideration or without consideration;
with the intention to transfer title or without such intention, and
for an honest purpose or to commit fraud.
5.11. Analysis of position in various situations——For the sake of

convenience, we would, at this stage, like to summarise the position
with reference to various situations as follows: —

Transfer in favour of wife or child

(a) Transfer in favour of wife or chiid Governed by section 64, Income-tax
(whether or not with the object of

transfering title to the wife or
child) without adequate considera-
tion.

(b) Transfer in favour of wife or child
for consideration, but for a frau-
dulent purpose and not in good

faith,

(0) Transfer in favour of wife or child
for consideration, and with genuine
object of transfering title to the
wile or child.

Act [Also sce (g) below]. (No crimi-
nal liability unless the case falls
withing sections 415 to 424, Penal
Code or section 206-207 of that
Code),

Governed by section 6(h) (2) and
section 58, Transfer of Property Act.
(Criminal liability if case falls within
sections 415 to 424, Penal Code or
sections 206-207 of that Code),

Not covered by any provision. (No
criminal liability).

1, Sections 415, and 417, Penal Code.
2. Sections 421 to 424, Penal Code,
3. Sections 206 and 207, Penal Code,
4, Section 421, Penal Code.

5.

. Actually, section 64, Income-tax Act applies to a spouse or minor child
other than a married daughter.


26

(d) (i) Transfer in favour of a person

other than wife or child without
consideration, but with the genuine
object of transfering title and with
No fraudulent purpose.

Gi) Transfer in favour of a person
other than wife or child without
consideration, and without intent
to transfer title, but with no frau-
dulent purpose.

ii) Transfer in favour ofa person
other than wife or child without
consideration, with intent to trans-
fer title, but for a fraudulent pur-
pose and not in good faith.

(iv) Transfer in favour of a person.
other than wife or child without
consideration, without intent to
transfer title and for fraudulent
purpose.

(०) Transfer in favour of person other
than wife or child for considera-
tion, with jntent to transfer title,
put for a fraudulent purpose and
not in good faith.

(f) fransfer in favour of person other
than wife or child with considera-
tion, but with genuine object of
transferring ownership and with
90 fraudulent intent.

General

(g) Transfer in favour of any person
benami (i. e. without consideration
and with no genuine intent to
transfer).

Transfer in favour of persons other than wife or child

Not covered by any provision, (No
criminal liz bility).

Goverred by section 281A, Income-tax
Act. [8०6 (8) below]. (No criminal
liability).

Governed by section 6(h) (2) and sec-
tion 53, Transfer of Property Act
(Criminal liability if case falls within
sections 415 to 424, Penal Code or
sections 206-207 of that Code).

Governed by section 281A, Incomie-tax
Act. (See (g) below]. Also section
660) (2) and section 59, Transfer of
Prop:tty. Act. (Criminal liability if
case falis within sections 415 to 424
Penal Code or sections 206-207 of
that Code).

Governed by section 6(h)(g) and sec-
tion 53, Transfer of property Act.
(Criminal liability if case falls within
sections 415 to 424, Penal Code or
sections 206-207 of that Cede).

Not covered by any provision,

Object of checking tax evasion sub-
stantially achieved by barring a suit
instituted without informing the
taxing authorities. See section 231A,
Income-tax Act (inserted by Act 45
of 1972).

5.12. IMustrations.—A few illustrations will be useful.'

(i) A becomes heavily indebted to B who is expected to attach
his property for the satisfaction of his debt. To screen it from
B, A transfers some of it to C. The transfer is void.’

1. Some of the illustrations are taken from Gour, Hindu Code (1938),

page 728, para. 220.

2. Section 53, Transfer of Property Act.


iid

27

A has innocently transferred his Property to B who holds it
for A, but getting involved in heavy losses, B compromises.
with his creditor ९ to whom he transfers the property X in
satisfaction of his debt. A sues to eject C on the strength
of his real title. C claims to be a bona fide purchaser from
B without notice of A’s title. A cannot eject C4,

5.13. Question of evasion of tax considered.—As regards evasion
of tax by benami transactions, the position is briefly this—

i)

(ii)

Where the real owner of the property is the husband or father
and the benamidar is his wife or minor child (other than a
married daughier). the general* provision as to income from
assets transferred directly or indirectly without adequate con-
sideration by the husband or father would appear to be ade-
quate for all practical purposes. .

Where the real owner is not the husband or father, the provi-
sion recently inserted in-the Income Tax Act’ has the effect
of securing that the benami transaction is disclosed to the
Income Tax authorities. There does not, therefore, appear
to be any serious gap so as to require further radical mea-
sures for checking evasion of direct taxes resulting from

wee

4.

. Section 41, Transfer of Property Act.
. As to public policy, see Shea Narayan y. Mata Prasad, 1L.R. 27 AlL,73.
. Section 64, Income Tax Act, 1961,

Section 281A, Income Tax Act, 1961.

3--1 LADIN.D.)/73


CHAPTER 6
AMENDMENTS IN THE LAW

6.1. Introduction.—Having dealt with the present position, we
propose in this Chapter to consider the amendments needed in the law.

6.2. It would appear that the various statutory provisions that have
been enacted so far achieve the objects of checking tax evasion’ and
checking frauds on private creditors’. If these provisions do not suc-
ceed, that may be mainly due to reasons other than defects in the law.

6.3. Possible alMernative for regulating bensmi: transaction.—
Several possible alternatives could be thought of, with reference to pro-
hibiting or regulating benami transactions for avoiding prejudice to
private individuals or minimising litigation :~

i) Entering into 8 Benami transactions could be made an offence;

Gi) A provision may be enacted to the effect that'in a civil suit
a right shalt not be enforced agaimist the benamidar or against
a third person, by or on behalf of the person claiming to be
the real owner of the property on the ground of benami; a
similar provision could be made to bar defences on the ground
of benami.

(This provision would be based on the principle on which the
existing provisions in the Civil Procedure Code and the new
provision in the Income-tax Act are based, but could be wider
in scope and more radical).

Gii) The present presumption of a resulting trust’ in favour of the
person who provided the consideration may be displaced (as
in England) by the presumption of advancement, in cases
where the person 10 whom property is transferred is a near
relative! of the person who provided the consideration. (This
would bring in the doctrine of advancement, so as to rebut
the presumption of resulting trust under section 82 of the Trusts

ct).

Whichever alternative is adopted, it may be desirable to make an
exception for an acquisition made by the manager of a joint Hindu
family in the name of one of the co-parceners, and similar cases.

1. As to tax evasion, see Chapter 5, para. 5.2, supra.
Chapter 4, supra.

. Section 82, Trusts Act.

. The expression ‘near relative’ could be suitably defined,

28

BYR


29

6.4. Questionnaire —The Commission, in its questionnaire issued
on the subject, invited views on the following questions: —
QUESTIONS

(1) Whether, in order to check the evasion of direct taxes or other
types of dishonest acts, it is necessary to prohibit benami
transactions in toto or to regulate them by more stringent
provisions than have been enacted so far

<2) If so, which of the alternatives’ mentioned above should be
adopted?

(3) If the alternatives mentioned above are not considered adequate
or feasible, what other amendments in the law should be made
with reference to benami transactions ?

6.5. The questionnaire was circulated to State Governments, High

Courts, Bar Associations, Chambers of Commerce and other interested
persons and bodies. .

6.6. Views as to first alternative-—The first alternative has recciv-
ed the support of one High Court,’ two Judges of another High Court,
two Judges. of one more High Court.’ some Judges of another High
Court' and one State Government*

6.7. Those who favour the first alternative—ie. the imposition of
a prohibition (in the sense of making the entering into benami transac-
tions an offence)—-, regard benami transactions as outmoded, or state
that there is no place in modern times for such transactions, or state
that there can hardly be a legitimate motive for such transactions. This
group is, in number, smaller than the group which favours the second
alternative or the third alternative.

6.8. The first alternative has, however, been opposed by the majo-
tity of the comments on various grounds. It has been stated that
benami transactions are entered into for honest motives also, and not
necessarily with the intention of evading taxes or defeating the+claims
of third parties. Secondly, it is stated that this is a deep rooted habit,
and ought not to be prohibited by law, but restrictions may be imposed,
wherever necessary. Thirdly, it has been emphasised that the prohibi-
tion may be difficult to enforce, as a benamij transaction will not ordi-
narily come to light. Lastly, the view has been expressed that the pro-
visions so far enacted are adequate to check the evasion of taxes or
defeating the claims of third parties. हु

69 Thus, a retired High Court Judge’ has stated as follows: --

“However strongly one may disparage benami transactions from
the above two points of view, there will be always need to

These alternatives were the same as those mentioned in para 6.3 supra.

No. 43.
S. No. 48.
5, No. #8 (No other lesser provision will have any effect, it is stated).

7790४ # ७०० २
wa
Zz
8


30

provide for situations where one person advances money for
a transaction teken in the name of another with a genuine
intention to benefit the latter’.” After noting that a fresh look
is necessary from the point of view of (i) vexatious litigations,
(i) tax-evasions, he suggests. “Such transactions should be
allowed to prevail, and not barred in toto. If the operating
motive is tainted by fraud, only then should legislation bar
them.”

6.10. A High Court Judge* has emphasised that benami transac
tions “have been prevalent in the country for a very long period, and
it will be difficult 10 check these by legislation, so long “as one person
will enjoy the confidence of another”. In spite of legislation benamt
transactions may continue, and the benamidar may execute a deed in
favour of the real owner subsequently at an’ opportune time.”

6.11. Another High Court Judge# while noting that it is desirable
to prohibit such transactions completely, has added it may not be pos-
sible to do so through legislation, “and more so where the real and
the ostensible owner would combine against the law.” He, therefore.
thinks that “the law should go only that far where it would be effective.
Only such legislation be made as may regulate the transaction and
make it unremunerative for the ostensible owner to agree to act as the
shield. The provisions should be such as may bring all benami tran-
sactions on the surface.”

6.12. Views as to second alternative-—One High Court Judge has
stated that the second alternative will help the ostensible transactions,
and not the revenue. Government will not be able to proceed against
the property. (He, however. is unable to suggest any other alterna-
tive).

6.13. Several persons and bodies have preferred the second alter-
native. To this category, for example, belong one High Ccurt,” some
Judges of one High Court,’ one Judge of another High Court,’ two
Judges of another High Court’ one Judge of yet another High Court."
one High Court Bar Association, ", and the Legal Remembrancer ofa
Union Territory,-" and two State Government."

Emphasis supplied,
S. No. 30.

Fa
te
पट

No. 47.

10. $. No, 35 (labalpur High Court Bar Association.) Also S. No. 16
(Kanpur Bar Association),

11. S. No, 22 (Legal Remembrancer. Chandigarh).

12. The above list is illustrative only.

13. $. No. 53 and $. No, 21,


31

It may, however, be mentioned that one of the High Courts' has
emphasised that only benami transactions which contain an element
of dishonesty or fraud, should be prohibited.

6.14, The Legal Remembrancer of a Union Territory, who favours,
the second alternative, has added* these comments. “The only excep-
tions thereto may be made in the case of acquisitions made by a karta
of the joint Hindu family for himself and the members of the joint
Hindu family, by a guardian for the minor (if the minor is having a
source of income) and by the trustee for the beneficiary of the trust.”

6.15. Views as to third alternative.-.Another group of replies*
favours the third alternative. Some of the replies in this group do not
give detailed reasons but it would appear that so far as the question
of evasion of taxes is concerned, they would regard the existing posi-
tion 88 more than adequate.

Some of them favour‘ both the second and the third alternatives.

6.16. Views for maintaining present position—A_ considerable
number of persons* have expressed the view that the existing law is ade-
quate enough, and an amendment or further addition is not required.

6.17. One High Court Judge has stated * that it is enough if the
provisions of certain sections of the Indian Trusts Act (sections 1, 82
and 96 are the important amongst them), are borne in mind and made
applicable to persons of all communities.

6.18. Altemative considered.—Having discussed the present posi-
tion and the trends of views expressed on the subject, we shall now
proceed to indicate our own conclusion.

6.19. General Observations.—A few general observations may be
in order, before the merits of the various possible alternatives are stated.

1, S. No. 55.
2, $. No. 22.
3. (a) S. No. 13.
(b) S. No. 37 (Bar Association, Dhulia).
(०) S. No. 46.
(d) S. No. 52.
(९) S. No, 54 (District Bar Association. Alipore).
( 5. No. 39.
4a) 5. No. 30.
(0) $. No. 33 (Southern Gujarat Chamber of Commerce),
5. E.g. (i) $. No. 44,
(ii) 8. No, 43.
ii) $. No. 41 (Punjab & Haryana Chamber of Commerce).

(iv) S. No. 23 (Bar Association, Bankura).
(२) $. No. 13.

(vi) 5. No. 46... *
(vii) $. No. 40 (Bar Association, Silchar),
6. S. No, 47,



32

At the outset, it may be stated that one of the important causes'
which accounted for the origin of benwmi transactions has now ceased
to exist. Thus, the importance of the joint Hindu (Mitakshara) Family
has been reduced, after the enactment of the Hindu Succession Act.
The joint family, in the strict sense of the co-parcenary, hardly existed
among the Hindus governed by the Dayabhaga.

Experience shows that benami transactions are a highly fruitful
source of bitter litigation. Benami transactions also lead to acrimony.
Thus, when a benami transaction is resorted to for defrauding credi-
tors, the true owner may be guided by the consideration that if the
property can be saved from the clutches of the creditor, that by itself
would be a gain, even if the benamidar, being the son or any other
near relative, may ultimately succeed in effectively keeping the pro-
perty as his own property. This leads to acrimony among the parties
concerned when a controversy arises.

There is, therefore, a case for refusing legal recognition to the
benami character of such transactions.

6.20, Object of checking evasion of taxes already achiéved!—-It
may be noted that the object of checking evasion of taxes has been sub-
stantially achieved by the recent amendment’ of the Income-tax Act,’
It may also be noted that transferees of property for value without
notice are protected even now.' What remains now is the question of
minimising litigation arising by reason of factual controyersies.*

6.21, Objective of avoidance of litigation,—There is also no doubt
that as regards avoiding litigation, a more direct approach is needed.
Tn this connection, we may refer to a Bombay judgment,’ where it was
stated as follows: —

“It may be observed that in the modern society the present system
which ties up the property and permits frauds to be committed: has no
place. If the Legislature has made great inroads in the matter of per-
sonal life of the people, we do not see why it cannot now change the
joint family property law. Moreover, the law permitting and recognising
benami transactions rerults in a lot of wasteful litigation and enables all
sorts of frauds to be committed. Day in and day out, after years of tran-
sactions, suits are raised challenging the alienations of a father as being
not for legal necessity. : Similarly, if a transaction is comple-
ted and money receive meone raises his head and says he is the

1. para. 1.7, supra.

2, Section 281A, Income-tax Act, 1961, as inserted by the Taxation Laws
Amendment Act, 1971 (45 of 1972),

. See summary of the position (para 5.11 and 5.13 supra).

}. Sections 95, 96, Trusts Act.

. ef. Chapter 5, supra.

|. Hasman Gani Ahmed Sahib v, Vidhadhar Krishnaraa Mung (Appeal
No. 533 of 1968 from original decree, decided on 17-1-1969 by Patel
and Wagle JJ.)

AMR w


33

owner-and often notice of such title is even falsely alleged. 18 it now
time that this branch of the law was reformed — This will reduce much
wasteful litigation, and the Courts will be able to do better and more
truitful work.”

6.22. Tests for deciding whether a transactions is benami.—It
may, in this connection, be pointed out that in determining whether
a transaction is benami, several factors, such as, motive, source of con-
sideration, possession of the property and its enjoyment, and custody
of title deeds, are the features whose effecl, either severally or cumu-
latively, has to be considered.

6.23. Various alternatives considered.—In the light of the above
observations, we proceed to consider the various alternatives.

6.24. First alternative not likely to be effective —The first alterna-
tive referred to above, namely, the imposition of a criminal prohibition
against benami transactions, 18 the most drastic alternative, but it is not
likely to be more eifective than the others. A prohibition backed by
criminal sanctions would not, moreover, be desirable, unless the mens
rea is also included in the provision to be enacted.

if this alternative is to be adopted. a provision could be enacted
on the following lines :—'

“Where property is transferred to one person for a considera-
tion paid or provided by another person, and it: appears that
such person did not intend to pay or provide such considera-
. tion for the benefit of the transferee, the person paying or
है providing the consideration shall be guilty of an offence puni-
shable with imprisonment upto three years, or with fine, or
both:

Provided that this section shall not apply where the transferee
is a ca-parcener in a Hindu undivided family in which such
other person is also a co-parcener, and it is proved that such
other person intended to pay or provide such consideration
for the benefit of the co-parceners in the family.
Exception Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
. affect section 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or any
» provision similar thereto.”

Yet-another device for giving effect to the first alternative, with a
requirement of mens rea, would be to have a law on the following lines:

“Where: property is transferred to one person for a considera-

» tion paid or provided by another person, and it appears that
such person did not.intend to pay or provide such considera-
tion for the benefit of the transferee, the person paying or pro-
viding the consideration shall,

1. 8 separate law will be needed,



34

if he has caused the transfer to be entered into with the inten-
tion of facilitating the evasion of any law, or defeating the
claims of his creditors, or the creditors of any other person
de guilty of an offence punishable with imprisonment upto
three years, or with fine, or with both.”

Yet another device to give effect to the first alternative would be
to add a section in the Indian Penal Code as follows‘: —

“421A. Whoever, dishonestly or fraudulently causes to be
transferred to any person, any property, for which transfer he
has paid or provided the consideration, intending thereby to
prevent, or knowing to be likely that he will thereby prevent,
the distribution of that property according to law among his
creditors or the creditors of any other person, or intending
thereby to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby facilitate, the evasion of any law, shall be punished
wit imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extead to two years, or with fine, or with both.”

6.25. Second alternative——The second alternative is less drastic
than the first. In form. it could follow the existing statutory provision
limiting the judicial recognition of benami transactions, such as, sec-
tion 66, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. But its scope would be much
wider. The provision’ could be to the effect that no suit shall lie to
enforce a right in respect of any property held benami, either against
the person in whose name ‘the property is held or against any other per-
son, by or on behalf of a person who claims to be the real owner of the
Property on the ground that the person in whose name the property is
held is a benamidar of the claimant. (If necessary, a defence can also
be barred).

6.26. Third alternative.—The third is the least drastic alternative,
and would make the matter depend on the intention of the parties ——
with the qualification that a specific provision requiring the court to
draw a rebuttable presumption of advancement in the case of near re-
latives will be introduced. The practical advantage of such a provision
will be its elasticity.

Section 82, Trusts Act could be revised on the following lines*: —

“Where property is transferred to one person for a considera-
tion paid or provided by another person, and it appears that
such person did not intend to pay or provide such considera-
tion for the benefit of the transferee, the transferee must hold
the property for the benefit of the person paying or providing
the consideration :

Provided that the fact that the transferee is a near relative of
such other person shall not, of itself, be regarded as a suffi-
1. This could be inserted as Section 421A in the Indian Penal Code.
2. This is not a draft,
३3. This is only a very rough draft.



35

cient ground for drawing an inference that such other person
did not intend to pay or provide such consideration for the
benefit of the transferee,’ and in such cases the court sha.l
presume that such other person intended to pay or provide
such consideration for the benefit of the transferee.”

6.27. Second alternative refusal to recognise Benami preferred.—
In our opinion, the simplest alternative would be the second alterna-
tive. The law should refuse to recognise the Benami character of tran-
sactions, without making them an offence. The law should, in ettect,
provide that where property is transferred benami, the benamidar will
become the real owner. The result of such a povision will be that the
tact that the benamidar did not provide the consideration, or that the
consideration was provided by a third person, will not be a ground
for recognising a person other than the benamidar as owner. To put
the matter in broad terms, the doctrine of benami will, under the pro-
posed amendment, cease to be a part of the Indian law.

It may be observed that in enacting the proposed provision, the
legislature will carry, to its logicat conclusion, the trend illustrated by
provisions, such as, section 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
section in the Code is applicable to involuntary alienations, while the
proposed provision will extend the same principle to voluntary trans-
vrs as well,

We think that this will be the simplest and most effective course,
and is, therefore, preferable to others.

The amendment will bring out a change in the legal position in
some of the sityations* where, at present, the benami character is re-
cognised.

6,274. We are also of the view thai it is not necessary to enact
a prohibition attracting criminal penalties—which is the course sug-
gested in the first alternative. Such a prohibition will have to be ac-
companied by a requirement of mens rea, thus narrowing down its scope
and limiting its practical utility.

6.28. Exception recommended for certain cases.—While enacting
the provision which we have recommended,’ it would be desirable to
make exceptions in the case of acquisition made by a karta for himself
and the members of the joint Hindu family, or by the trustees for the
beneficiary of the trust and similar situations. In the case of a joint
Hindu family, the ordinary situation arising in this connection would be
where the property stands in the name of the manager or member, but
actually belongs to the whole family. Here the member in whose name
the property is held is himself a beneficiary. In the case of a trustee,

1. Exception for cu-parceners etc, could be made.

2. Para. 5.11, categories (4) and (b) if there is no intent to transfer title,
and categories (d)(ii) and (d)(iv).
3. Para. 6.27, supra.


36

the property would ordinarily stand in the name of the trustee, who
is not beneficially entitled. The two situations are, thus, different, but
the reason for making a combined exception for the two situations (and
other similar situations) is the common one, arising from the fact that
the section which we propose will bar a suil to enofrce a right on the
ground that the person in whose name the property is held, is not the
real owner. In the situations to which we have referred, it is obviously
desirable that this new section, if applied literally, would create a result
which is the opposite of what is intended by the legal position as under-
stood at present. Hence the need for an exception.

6.29. Exception fior past transactions, —It is also necessary to make
an exception for past transactions. The provision which we pro-
pose will be procedural in form, but will be substantive in its true
character. We do not consider it desirable that it should apply to past
transactions, because those transactions would have been entered into
after keeping in mind the legal position as understood at present, name-
ly, that the real owner car always enforce his rights against the benami-
dar. This position is now proposed to be reversed, and the reversal
should not work in a manner which will defeat the intention of the
parties who acted under the old law. Of course, those benami transac-
tions which have been entered into with the object of carrying out frau-
dulent or illegal motives, and which therefore, fall within. specific pro-
visions enacted by the Legislature to prevent the abuse of the practice
of benami’, are governed by those specific provisions, and the bar against

retrospective operation of the new provision will not affect the opera-

tion of those specific provisions.

6.30. Repeal of certain puovisions.—As a consequence of our re-
commendation to abolish the doctrine of benami, section 32 of the
Trust Act, section 281A of the Income-tax Act and section 66 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, will become unnecessary and we, therefore,
recommend that they should be repealed.

As regards provisions like section 53 of the Transfer of Property
‘Act or section 64 of the Income-tax Act, their scope is much wider than
benami transactions. These provisions could be pressed into service
even in cases not falling within the doctrine of benami. For example,
section 64 of the Income-tax Act applies even where the transfer to the
spouse of the assets concerned is genuine, provided the transfer is not
for adequate consideration or in connection with an :greement to live
apart. We do not, therefore, think that they require any change in con-
sequence of the new section which we are recommending.

630A. Saving for s. 53, 1.0, Act or for transiers for an illegal pur-
pose.-It may, of course, be necessary to introduce a saving
for section 53 of the Transfer of Property Act, so that the
fact that the real owner is to be debarred from enforcing his
right against the benamidar (which is, in substance, the gist of

1. See Chapter 4 supra.


37

the proposed provision), should not be understood as standing in
the way of setting aside a transfer by Wie real owner to the benami-
dar, if the transfer was made wi!) intent to defeat or delay the creditors
of the transferer and is thus attracted by secion 53.

For similar reasons, it will be necessary to save the law relating to
transfers for an illegal purpose.

6.31 Constitutional aspect of proposed provision.—In the course
of our consideration of this question, we had occasion to examine a
smal! constitutional issue, namely, whether the proposed provision pro-
hibiting the real owner from filing a suit to enforce his right against
the benamidar would conflict with the provision in Article 19(1)(f) of
the Constitution. Under that article, all citizens have the right to ac-
quire, hold and dispose of property. We have come to the conclusion
that the proposed section will not be hit by that clause. In this con-
nection, we may point out that Article 19(5) saves a law imposing rea-
sonable restrictions on the exercise of any of the rights conferred by
sub-clauses (0), (e) and (f) of clause (1), if the restrictions are in the
interest of the general public.

6.32. Public interest requires that unnecessary litigation should be
avoided; and if the law enacts provisions designed to achieve such ob-
ject, it does not hinder the public interest. It advances it. The time
of the citizens and of the agencies charged with the administration of
justice should be devoted to more fruitful tasks than to the decision of
questions arising by reason of the mere use of the name of a person
who is not intended to be the owner of the property held in his name.
{f there is no compelling consideration for such use of the name of
another person, we do not see any reason why such a practice should
not be restricted. For these reasons, the restriction should be regarded
as reasonable within the meaning of article 19(5).

6.33. Recommendation.—In the light of the above discussion, we
recommend the enactment of a separate law containing the following
legislative provisions : —

>1(1) No suit to enforce any right in respect of any property
held benami against the person in whose name the property
is held or against any other person shall be instituted in any
court by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner
of such property.

(2) In any suit, no defence based on any right in respect of
any property held benami, whether against the person in whose
name the property is held or against any other person, shall
be allowed in any court by or on behalf of a person claiming
to be the real owner of such property.

1. Section 6 (00), Transfer of Property Act, and Section 48, Trusts Act.


38

(3) Nothing in ‘this section shall apply—
(a) whether the person in whose name the property is held

७)

is a manager of, or a co-parcener in, a Hindu un-
divided family, and the property is held for the benefit
of the co-parceners in the family, or

where the person in whose name the property is held is
a trustee or other person standing in a fiduciary capa-
city, and the property is held for the benefit of another
person for whom he is ७ trustee or towards whom he
stands in such capacity.

2. The following provisions are hereby repealed, namely,—

(a)
(b)
0)

section 82 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;
section 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908;
section 281A of the Income Tax Act, 1961.

3. Nothing in this Act shall—

(a)

oy)

affect the provisions of section 53 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882. or the law relating to transfers for
an illegal purpose, or

apply in relation to any. property held benami at the
commencement of this Act.”

Thais Report has not been signed by Mr. Justice V. R. Krishna Tyer.
When the draft of the-Report was fully discussed and approved by the
Commission, Mr. Justice Iyer was a Member of the Law Commission
and participated in the discussions, However, before the Report, as fina-
lised and approved, could be typed for the signatures of the Members of
the Commission, Mr. Justice Iyer left the Commission to join the Sup-
reme Court. He has authorised us to state that he fully agrees with the
approach and recommendations of the Report.

We desire to place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable
assistance to have received from Mr. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the
Commission, in the preparation of this Report. At all stages of the study
of this problem, Mr. Bakshi took an active part in our deliberations.

P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman
ए, K. Tripathi Member.
$. $. Dhavan Member
S. P. Sen-Varma Member
P. M. Bakshi Member-Secretary

DaTED: New DELHI,
the Ith August, 1973.

GIPN—S 7—1 L.A.D.{ND)!73—6- 12-73—2,000.