LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT

ON

STRUCTURE AND JURISDICTION OF THE
HIGHER JUDICIARY

JANUARY, 1974


‘Cuapree 1 TIE .. Scope and genesis of the Report .. न बन
‘Cuapren 2 ++ Some general observations “ बन “
Cuaprar 3 Appeals to the Supreme Court. बन
Coarren 4 + Petitions for writs before the Supreme Court .
CHAPTER 5 ++ Petition for writs before the High Court ., -
‘Coarran 6 «+ Matters relating to taxation. =. बन न
‘Cuarrzn 7 Disputes cor.cetning industria] relations =... +
OnapTen 8 +» Dispntesconcerning matters arisirg ‘out’ of service
under the State. os
‘Cuarrme 9 «+ Zonal Courts of Appeal—Proposal for creation of .,
‘Cuarrer 10 «+ Conditions of service of Judges ... oe न
Summ uy of Recommendations an 1[Con:lusions . न बन
APPENDICES
Aprenpix 1 ++ Rules of some High Courts as to interim stay “
APPENDIX 2 ++ Pre-1950 position as to writs - डर -
Aveesprx 3 roposed amendments in the Income Tax Act -
AppENDIX 4 Tables showing answers to question 8 of the Law
Commission Questionnaire from State Governments
AppenDIx 5 «+ Rules as to disciplinary proceedings against Govern.
meat servants in some States बन
Aprpsotx 0 « Extract of Supreme Court Judges T.A. Rules -

CONTENTS

PacB

u
24
42
50

83

92
104
109

125

180
132

137

138
डा


2. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR
CHAIRMAN,
LAW COMMISSION,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,
12, TUGHLAK ROAD,
NEW DELHI-11,
JANUARY 8, 1974
My dear Minister,

I am forwarding herewith the Fifty-eighth Report of the Law
Commission on Structure and Jurisdiction of the Higher Judiciary.
The first Chapter of the Report sets out the circumstances under
which the Commission took up this matter for its consideration.

After the preliminary discussion of the various issues arising in
the inquiry, the Commission issued a Questionnaire and invited the
views of all State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations, and
other bodies interested in the problem under inquiry.

The Commission divided itself into three Groups and each Group
visited the High Courts assigned to it and held discussions with the
Judges of the High Courts and the members of the Bar on the ques-
tions covered by the inquiry.

After considering the various suggestions and views received by
the Commission and discussing the matter at length, it has finalised
its Report.

Before I conclude, I would like to invite your particular attention
to the Iast Chapter of the Report relating to the terms and conditions
of service of higher judiciary. The Commission attaches very great
importance to the recommendations made in that Chapter and it hopes
that the Union Government will consider our recommendations favour-
ably and as early as possible.

So far as the present Commission is concerned, this Report is its
fourteenth Report.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,

9. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR
Hon’ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Government of India,
New Dethi.



CHAPTER 1
SCOPE AND GENESIS OF THE REPORT

1.1. At the outset we would like to explain the genesis and scope
of the present inquiry. The questionnaire which we issued at the com-
mencement of the inquiry, and the preamble thereto, speak for them-
selves. We quote below the questionnaire along with the preamble.

“Ever since our Constitution was adopted and the Supreme Court
was established, the Supreme Court has, by its verdicts rendered during
the last twenty-two years, made the concept of the Rule of law rele-
vant, coherent and stable in this country. It has consistently protected
the Fundamental Rights of the citizens against unconstitutional en-
croachment, examined the validity of legislative and executive actions
fairly, impartially and fearlessly, and introduced an element of certainty
and uniformity in the interpretation of laws. The service thus rendered
by the Supreme Court is of a very significant character and its im-
portance cannot be exaggerated in the context of the federal set-up of
the Indian Republic.

2. During the same period, High Courts in our States also have
done valuable work in exercising their ordinary civil and criminal
jurisdiction and their constitutional jurisdiction under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution. Broadly stated, it can be legitimately claimed
that the operation of judicial process in our country during the last
twenty-two years has, on the whole, fostered and strengthened the best
judicial traditions and thereby deserved and commanded confidence
from the Indian community in general and the litigating public in
particular.

4&3. However, all sensitive Judges and ftawyers have been feeling
an increasing concern about the problem of growing arrears in the
administration of justice. Delay made in the decision of cases at all
stages inevitably leads to accumulation of arrears and these arrears
have now assumed a somewhat alarming dimension. In fact, the pro-
blem of growing arrears has received the attention of several com-
mittees appointed from time to time. The Civil Justice Committee ap-
pointed in 1924 examined some aspects of this problem and 80; पट
some remedies. The High Courts Arrears Committee appointed 1949
by the Government of India under the Chairmanship of S. R. Das, J.,
as he then was, also examined this lem. The Uttar Pradesh Law
Reforms Committee appointed in 1 beet as well as the Judicial Re-
forms Committee of the State of West Bengal appointed in 1949, and
the Law Commission which began its work in 1955 also considered the
same problem along with other relevant matters. In 1967, the Govern-
ment of India appointed another Committee to review the problem of


2

arrears in the High Courts and to suggest ways and means for reduc-
ing the same. This Committee was later headed by J. C. Shah, former
Chief Justice of India, and it has recently submitted its Report. “One
of the critical social problems”, says the Committee in its Report, “is
the acute congestion of cases especially in the High Courts. There is
gross delay in the disposal of pending files, leading to serious dissatis-
faction in the public mind about the effectiveness of Court process for
ventilating the grievances of citizens.”

“4, For some time past, the Law Commission has been examin-
ing the question of suggesting changes in the Code of Civil Procedure
with the object of avoiding delay in the trial of suits, in the dispos disposal
of appeals, and of execution proceedings and appeals arising ‘rom.
Having studied this problem in depth, the Commission proposes to
make certain radical recommendations to the Union Government in
the belief that, if the said recommendations are implemented, the
problem of delay may be solved at least to some extent.

“3. In attacking the problem of delay in judicial administration
which inevitably leads to the accumulation of arrears, two factors have
to be considered. The first factor is human. Judicial process must be
constantly conscious of its obligation to the community to render judi-
cial verdicts, as whatever stages the proceedings may be pending, with-
out delay. This does not mean that judicial verdicts should be hasty
or ill-considered and should be based merely on the calculation of time
taken up in rendering them. Judicial process must make a consistent
and determined effort to combine speed with efficiency. This aspect of
the attack on arrears is, as has been just observed, human and no
rules of procedure can be of material assistance.

6. The other factor is procedural. It involves the consideration,
inter alia, of the propriety and necessity of several appeals and revi-
sions which are at present contemplated in litigation which takes
different forms and falls in different categories. Even while the Law
Commission was examining the question of suggesting necessary
changes in the Code of Civil Procedure, it received some suggestions—
formal and informal—in relation to the wider question of delay and
arrears in the High Courts and the Supreme Court; the study which
the Commission now proposes to undertake is based mainly on these
suggestions.

7, Before formulating the points arising from these suggestions
the Commission deems it necessary to make it absolutely clear that
these points do not repre: sent the Commission’s views even tentatively
or its provisional thinking in the matter. The idea in posting these
problems and circulating them to the different Bar Associations in the

igh Courts and the Supreme Court, to the High Courts and the
Supreme Court is to initiate a dialogue on the question posed. It is
obvious that the problems posed deserve serious consideration in all


3

their aspects; and views expressed by the members of the Bar and the
higher judiciary and (in relation to industrial relations) by associations
of employees and employers would naturally play a major role in
guiding the discussion and the ultimate decision of the Commission in
that behalf.

8. Let us begin with the Supreme Court. The problem of arrears
in the Supreme Court had yet not assumed a significant dimension;
but arrears are growing and, in course of time, they may present a real
problem.

Two suggestions have been made in regard to the functioning of
the Supreme Court. One is that no attempt should be made to affect
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, wide as it is, and its authority
to deal with matters covered by Articles 32, 133, 134 and 136 should
not be curtailed. It is urged in support of this view that, as the highest
Court in the country, the Supreme Court must continue to exercise its
final authority in correcting errors committed by High Courts and
other Tribunals whose decisions, orders or awards fail within its appel-
late purview and, though the burden imposed on the Supreme Court
in discharging this vide jurisdiction may be heavy, no attempt should
be made to reduce that jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court under Article 32 must, of course, be maintained, because the
right to move the Supreme Court in enforcement of Fundamental
Rights is itself a fundamental right and it must remain inviolable.

9. On the other hand, it has been suggested by some that time has
come when it should become possible for the Supreme Court 10 con-
centrate on substantial questions of law concerning interpretation of
statutes and on dealing with constitutional matters involving the breach
of individual citizens’ fundamental rights. The advocates of this view
point out that it is not fair to the Supreme Court that matters con-
cerning dismissal of individual employees or bonus, or other industrial
disputes, should be brought to the Supreme Court straight from the
decisions of the Labour Courts or Tribunals. Similarly, service matters
which involve considerations of an administrative character need not
be brought before the Supreme Court—as they are at present.

In support of this view, it is su; that the Union Govern-
ment should revive Labour Appellate शा or set up Industrial
Relations Commissions in the States and at the Union level, and these
should deal with all industrial di leavin ag it open to the aggriev-
ed parties to move the Supreme ee under Article 136 on substantial
questions of law.

10. In regard to service matters, it is urged that a separate high-
powered Tribunal or Commission should be set up to deal with service
matters and this Commission should be presided over by a Judge of
the status of the Supreme Court Judge assisted by two independent
Experts, and the decisions of this Tribunal or Commission should be


4

final, subject to the right of the Public servant to approach the Supreme
Court under Article 136 on the ground that his fundamental rights
are violated. The terms and conditions of service of members of this
Tribunal or Commission should be similar to those of the Judges of
the Supreme Court.

11, In regard to tax matters, it is proposed that the Reference to
High Courts contemplated by the Income-tax Act which invariably
involves considerable delay should be eliminated and the decisions of
the Income Tax Appellate Tribunals should become final, subject to
the said decisions being reviewed either under Article 226 by the High
Courts or under Article 136 of the Constitution by the Supreme Court.

12. Another idea, which has been suggested, is that time has come
when we should think of setting up Zonal Courts dealing with appeals
against decisions of the High Courts in a particular zone. This scheme
would proceed on the basis of dividing the country into four Zones
and the Courts would be composed of Chief Justices or Senior Judges
ए the High Courts in the respective States constituting the Zone.
These courts would function like circuit Courts and would hold their
sittings in the said respective High Courts from time to time. If this
idea is accepted, many appeals, which come to the Supreme Court
today, may be filed before the Zonal Courts and their decisions would
be regarded as final.

13. Even in regard to Article 136 of the Constitution, it is sug-
gested that Article 136 should be suitably amended so as to exclude
from its purview civil and criminal appeals which are not covered by
articles 133 and 134. In other words, so far as civil and criminal ap-
peals are concerned, it is only such appeals as satisfy the requirements
of Articles 133 and 134 that should reach the Supreme Court and no
other. In this connection, attention is invited to the recent amendment
of Article 133 and it is proposed that Article 134 should be similarly
am .

14. In regard to Writ Petitions pending in the High Courts, the
complaint is that a large number of such petitions are filed mainly tw
gain time by obtaining stay orders, and ultimately it is found that they
do not involve any question which justifies the interference of the High
Courts under Article 226. In order to prevent the institution of un-
substantial or frivolous writ petitions, a Suggestion is made that the
writ Court should not issue interim stay or injunction, unless notice of
the proposal to move the court in that behalf is served on the respon-
dent and copies of ali documents in support of the ‘Plea for stay or
injunction are filed in court and served on the opposite party.

15. Another point which has been raised is: Should the High
Courts in proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution and the
Supreme Court in proceedings under article 32 of the Constitution deat


5

with disputed questions of fact? If yes, should oral evidence be allow-
ed to be tendered as in ordinary trial proceedings?

16. It is in the light of these suggestions which the Commission
has received, that relevant questions have been framed.

The Commission is conscious that the questions thus formulated
by way of illustration needs very careful consideration, as they affect
the structure of the appellate and writ jurisdictions of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts in one respect or another. But the object
in framing the Questionnaire is first to invite opinions of the different
Bar Associations in the High Courts and the Supreme Court, and of
associations of employees and employers. and of the High Courts and
the Supreme Court, and then discuss the same with some of the repre-
sentatives of lawyers, and employees and employers and with Judges.

The Commission would like to add that the present study has
been undertaken in the first belief—which the Commission is confi-
dent is shared by the Judiciary and the Bar and employees and em-
ployers alike—that the strength and glory of our system of judicial ad-
ministration rests solely on the confidence which it commands from
the community, and that it should be the concern of all of us to devise,
from time to time, legitimate, fair and effective ways and means of
avoiding delays and accumulation of arrears.


QUESTIONNAIRE
ON
STRUCTURE AND JURISDICTION OF THE HIGHER JUDI-
CIARY

(OCTOBER, 1972)

1. (a) Are you in favour of limiting the scope of criminal appeals
under article 134 of the Constitution?

(b) If so, do you favour limiting such appeals to cases where a
substantial question of law cf general importance is involved?

(०) If not, do you suggest any other limitations in this regard?

2, Would you favour any modification as to the scope of appeal
under article 136 of the Constitution, against judgments of high
Courts?

3. (a) Do you favour the view that in petitions to the Supreme
Court under article 32, disputed questions of fact should not be gone
into?

(b) If so, what course would you suggest for the trial of issues of
facts in such petitions?

(०) If not, do you think that evidence should be recorded in a
petition under article 32 in the same manner as in a suit?

_ _4- In relation to the grant of ad interim stay by the Supreme Court,
in petitions under article 32, do you favour the same limitations as
have been suggested below’ in relation to the High Courts?

High Courts
5. (a) Do you agree with the suggestion that in writ Petitions to

the High Courts under article 226 of the Constitution, stay should not
be granted, save in exceptional cases?

(b) Do you favour an amendment of the Constitution to the effect
that unless the Court, for special reasons to be recorded, otherwise
orders by reason of exceptional circumstances, no interim order for
stay shall be asked for, in a petition under article 226, without filing
evidence before the High Court that (a) notice of the intention to move
the Court at a specified time and for specified relief has been or shail
SSS

1 Sec Questio.: 5, infra.

6


7

be given to the opposite party; and (0) copies of ali documents filed
in court and intended to be relied upon in support of the application
for interim relief has been or shall be served upon the opposite party?

6. With respect to the jurisdiction of High Courts under article
226 of the Constitution, do you favour the same limitations as to in-
quiry into disputed facts as have been suggested above’, in relation to
the Supreme Court?

Taxation
7. (a) Do you favour the creation of a National Tax Court for
hearing references from the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal (or similar
tribunals constituted under taxation laws of the Centre and the States),

Whose decisions will be final, subject only to appeals? as indicated
low? -

(b) If so, should appeals to the Supreme Court from the decisions
of the Tax Court,—

(i) be allowed with special leave, or

(ii) be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial ques-

tion of law of general importance is involved, or

(iii) be allowed subject to any other limitation?

(c) In the alternative, are you of the view that the decisions of the
present Income-tax Appellate Tribunals (or corresponding Tribunals
under other Central and State laws relating to taxation) should be final,
subject to review by the High Court under article 226 of the Constitu-
tion or appeal to the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitu-
tion?

(d) If yes, what should be the status and terms and conditions
of service of Judges of the above Court?

Indsstrial Dispetes
8. (a) Do you favour the creation of a National Aj prelate Court
for industrial disputes whose decision will be final, subject to appeal
as indicated below?
(b) In the alternative, do you favour the creation of a Commis-
gion for Industrial Relations as recommended by the National Labour
Ommission’

3. Question 3.

4. The Special Courts eontemplated in this questionnaire, will, no doubt, be com.
posed of persons having 8 grounding and experience of genera] laws, with particular know.
ledgo in their specified field.


8

_ (c) or, would you recommend the revival of Labour Appellate
Tribunals, as they existed previously?

(d) If you are in favour of any of these alternatives, should ap-
peals to the Supreme Court from the decisions of the proposed Na-
tional Appellate Court of Labour Appellate Tribunal or National Com-
mission on Industrial Relations—

(i) be allowed with special leave, or,

(ii) be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial ques-

tion of law of general importance is involved, or

(iii) be allowed subject to any other limitations, or

(iv) not be allowed at all?

(e) What should be the status and terms and conditions of service
of Judges appointed to the above court or Commission?

Disputes as to Matters relating to Civil Services
9. (a) Do you favour the creation of a court at the national level
exclusively vested with jurisdiction over disputes between the Govern-
ment and members of the public service in matters relating to service’
(including, in particular, petitions based on article 311 of the Consti-
tution), whose decisions? will be final, subject to appeal to the Supreme
Court as indicated below?
(b) Should such a Court be presided over by a person of the
status of Supreme Court Judge or High Court Judge, aided by two
experts whose independence is guaranteed by their tenure?

(c) Should the experts referred to in (b) above be members of the
Court, or should they be only assessors?
(d) If your answer to (a) is in the negative, what other suggestions
oud you make as to the terms and conditions of service of its mem-
ers?
(०) Should appeals to the Supreme Court from the above court—

(i) be allowed with special leave, or

(ii) be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial ques-
tion of law of general importance is involved, or

(iii) be allowed with special leave but only if a question of funda-
mental right is involved, or

{iv) be allowed subject to any other limitation?
(f) Besides a national Court as suggested in (a) above, do you
favour regional courts for the purpose mentioned in (a) above?

3, These would include terms an‘ conditions of service, promotions, punithment ete
8. Compare tribunals functioning under French Administrative Law.



9

Zonal Courts

10. (a) Do you favour the creation of Zonal Appellate Courts,
dealing with appeals against decisions of the High Courts in particular
Zone?

(This scheme would proceed on the basis of dividing the country
into four zones, and the Courts would be composed of Chief Justices
or Senior Judges of the High Courts in the respective States constitut-
ing the Zone. These Courts would function like circuit courts, and
would hold their sittings in the said respective High Courts from time
to time.}

11. (a) If you are in favour of Zonal Courts of appeal as propos-
ed above, what in your view, should be the method of appointing
Judges of those Courts?

{b) Should Judges of the Zonal Courts be chosen by seniority or
otherwise?

(c) What arrangements do you suggest as regards the respective
jurisdiction of Zonal Courts and High Courts?

(9) Shovid the decision of Zonal Courts be final, or should those
decisions be subject to appeal, under Article 136?

12. If you are not in favour of Zonal Courts of appeal as propos-
ed above, have you apy other suggestions for avoiding the possibility
of accumulation of arrears in the Supreme Court?

Other Suggestions as to various Courts

13. Have you any alternative suggestions to make as to the status,
jurisdiction, composition and personnel of the various Tribunals men-
tioned above?

Pay and Pension of Judges

14, Do you agree with the suggestion that one of the peo
steps to help the efficient and speedy disposal of cases in the Hi
Courts is to attract experienced, senior and competent lawyers to the
Bench, and that this object may be achieved if—

(i) the terms and conditions of service of the High Court Judges
are improved;

(ii) their age of retirement is increased to 65 years;


10

(iii) the salaries of the Supreme Court Judges and the High Court
Judges are increased or, in any event, suitable additional
fringe benefits are provided for them;

(iv) on retirement, the pension of the Supreme Court Judges and
the High Court Judges is made equal to their pay, or, in any
case, is materially enhanced?

Miscellaneous

15. Have you any other suggestion to make as to the structure and
jurisdiction of the higher judiciary or allied matters, with a view to
ensuring that the higher judiciary would continue to command the
confidence of the community, and would be able to perform its func-
tions effectively, so that delays and accumulation of arrears would be
avoided by legitimate and fair means?


CHAPTER 2
SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Introductory

2.1. We have aiready explained the scope and genesis of this Re-
port’. Before we preceed to ‘deal with the various questions, we would
like to make certain general observations, which will explain in detail
the theoretical background of our approach.

Re-evaluation of human institutions needed

man institution needs re-evaluation, and, where
or modifications, periodically in order to mect the
changing needs of time. The State, being itself a complex of important
human institutions, is no exception to this rule. And the limb of the
State which deals with the adjudication of disputes and the administra-
tion cf justice is of very great importance.
Concept of ‘law’ in ancient times

2.28. According to ancient Hindu concept, “law” sustains, sup-

ports and helps the progress of society. The Upanishads describe ‘law’

in eloquent words, thus:—
“Law is the king of kings, far more rigid and powerful than they.
prowess as by that

There is nothing higher than law; by its
of the highest monarch, truth prevails, and the weak succeed
against the strong.”
The function of maintaining, sustaining or supporting” is the
essence of the word “Dharma”, derived from the root ‘dhr’, a word
corresponding to the Latin ‘fir’, from which the word ‘firmus’ (strong
and durable) is derived. According to the Mahabharata’, “law” main-
tains everything that has been created, “and is thus, that very principle
which can maintain the universe”.

The concept of justice
2.3. Justice, it has been stated’, is a concept that has been mooted
since the Sumerians, so far as recorded history is concerned. About
2050 50 B.C., Umammu, King of Ur, set owt a BY SO Urammu, King of Ur, set out a law code intended to

TN Chapter 1, supra.
* ये धर्में घारयते पूजा: ।

3, Mahabharata, Shanti Parva, 109, 59.
4, Earl Murphy, Book Review of Kirchheimer, Political Justice (1961-62) in 35

Temp. L.Q. 444.

2.2. Every hut
necessary, changes

ul
LfP(D)194MofLI&CA—2


12

insure justice in the land aad promote the welfare of its citizens. Be-
cause these were pragmatic pecple not inclined to discourse on a high
Jevel abstraction, the laws contined themselves to Proteciion of the
Week ugainst the econo: Hy strong, the fisc against corruption, the
ignorant against the knowledgeable. and to assuring punishment to
Perpetrators of physical harm. “It is what every law code since has
sought to accomplish; and iv implicitly contains an absolute concept
Of justice against which conduct can be measured.”

Its sanction
2.4. The legal order, thus, is a regime of adjusiing relations and
ordering conduct by the systematic application of forc2 of 2 peliticalls
organised society.

The role of the higher Courts

2.5. For the maintenance anc enforcement cf ri
the judiciary is the principal ment of the legal ६
fare State, administrative tr not belonging
judicial hie-archy may be inevitable, but the ulin
etcise of jurisdiction by such tribunals is the
lice, therefore, is of supreme importance. Of 1!
through which this justice is administered. the co
constitule the itigher judiciary in India, the Supreme (०
High Comts—can be said to occupy a position of importa:
becaus: cf the fact that they are at the apex but also be
wide and comprehensive jurisdiction which they possess.

High Courts
2.6. Although the High Courts in India—unlike the High Court
of Justice in England or the Supreme Courts of the States in Australia --
do not (with a few exceptions) possess original civil jurisdiction of
the ordinary character: yet, their all-pervading influence over the judi-
cial system of the State is undisputed.

High Courts as the highest Courts of civil and criminal appeal

2.7. The High Courts are the highest courts of civil and criminal
appeal, reference and revision. by virtue of the Provisions in the Civil
urts Act of each State and the Cr.P.C. They have, under the Consti-
tution, powers to issue certain orders and directions for the enforce-
ment of fundamental rights and for other purposes. They also possess
certain special jurisdictions, conferred by statutes relating to various
subjects. Therefore. the uniformity of the course of judicial decisions is,
in a large measure, secured by the effective exercise of the powers of
High Courts. This proposition may sound elementary; but it is funda-
mental

>. Earl Murphy, Book review of Kirchheimer, Political Justice, (1961-62) in 36
Temp. L.Q. 444.

wt and था?
2. 10. जाए
eof the



13

The Supreme Court

28. The Supreme Court, in our Constitution, also performs a
muttiple role, and has jurisdiction much wider than the highest Court
of any other country. Jt is a federal court, in the sense that it is the
exclusive arbiter of disputes between the Union and the States or be-
tween one State and another. Tt is the highest constitutional court of
the country. nei enly in its capacity as the protector of fundamental
righis as ourt ९ ginal jurisdiction, but also in its capacity as the
final court of appeal in matters involving substantial questions of law
as to the interpretation of the Constitution. It is a national court, in
.2 that. subiect to certain restrictions. appeals lie to it from the
s of the High Courts on questions pertaining to ordinary
ci to sav. even Where the question is not one of constitu

the

s also certain important varieties of special
t has an over-riding power to grant special
tudgment, decree. determinaticn, sentence or
tier passed or made by any court or tribunal
५. except any court or पाया constituted by
lating to the armed forces. The Supreme Court
important place in the structure of our Constitution
pstitutien ressly provides that the law dectared by the

Ceurt shall binding on all courts and authorities in India,
it all authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India
cr in aid of the Supreme Court.

my

and th

shall a

The need for review

2.9, Moreover, in India, the organisation of the Courts has not
just evolved. as has happened in some other countries. The judicial
hierarchy has been deliberately created by statute, and the whole orga-
nisation of the courts is based on a rational plan. In order that the
machinery of justice so created may concentrate upon its legitimate
task, and meet speedily and efficiently the constantly varying demands
is desirable, as we have already stated’, that the machi-

made upon it. it is a ated i
nery should be subjected to periodical review. 1 and economic
ns undergo changes and pose new problems, and the judicial

system should, therefore, be re-examined from time to time in order
to ensure that it adapts jtself 10 perform, in an efficient manner, the
functions entrusted to it by the Constitution and the laws. In this pro-

cess, some of the assumptions with which we have been familiar, might

require reexamination,  ---  िनययाय- re-examination.

3, Para 2-2, eupra.


14

Task of law reform

2.10. It is the task of law reform to adapt the law to “the ever
shifting phases which human affairs assume.” The time has now come
when it is necessary to examine how far our method of adjudication
of disputes is adequate to meet the Tequirements of the general wel-
fare. There need not be any undue conservatism in this regard.

Frankfurter has noted?:—

& ३०००० framers of judiciary Acts are not required to be
seers, and great judiciary Acts, unlike great poems, are not
written for all times.”

No reason to be complacent

2.10.A. Some years ago, Chief Justice McRuer (of Ontario,
Canada) said,’ that—

“Jn Canada, we have some reason to be proud of our judicial
Process, but we have no right to be smug.”

This applies to India also. We have sound judicial traditions: a
coherent pattern developed for the organisation of the judiciary; and
a rational and systematic judicial process. There is no doubt that these
factors have conferred great advantages on the country. An indepen-
dent and efficient judiciary, a unified judicial system, and a modernised
procedure—though legacies of the pre-independence year,—have been
cherished by us. The judicial system has earned the Tespect of the
people, and the respect so earned is well deserved.

Feeling that system has not proved beneficial

2.11. Nevertheless, “we have no right to be smug”. In certain
quarters, there is a growing feeling that the eyprasent system has not
worked to the benefit of the common man. We have to take note of
this feeling, and seriously consider the question whether the system
has any short-comings that could be remedied. Society can only stand
to gain from such an inquiry. It is, thus, the object of this enquiry to
consider how best the higher judiciary—the Supreme Court and the
High Courts—can discharge their functions in the most satisfactory
manner.

4, A phrase used by Goodhart in English Contributions to the Philosophy of Law
(1948), pages 27-84,
3, Frankfurter, Business 01 the Supreme Court.
3. MoRaer ~.J., Lectures on the Evolution of the Judicial Process, page 73 (tbe
‘W, M. Martin Lestures dafiverod at the Univoreity of Saskatchewan in 1956) (published
in 1987 by Olarke, इक; . Ltd.), quoted by Rorace Read, “The Judicial Process in
‘Common Law Canada”, (1959) 37 Canadian Bar Review 263, 265.


15

Earlier inquiri

2.12, The inquiry which we have undertaken is not the first of its
kind. In previous Reports of the Law Commission, procedure in Civil*
and criminal’ matters has been dealt with comprehensively. The juris-
diction of the Supreme Court on the civil appellate side, has been the
subject-matter of the Law Commission’s Reports’. The main objec-
tives, in the previous Reports of the Law Commission‘, have been to
reduce delay and expense in the judicial process, to simplify the proce-
dure, and generally to advance the interests of justice. In 2 sense, the
present inquiry is a logical continuation of the work already under-
taken.

The present context

2.13. During ihe last 25 years, not only has the volume of busi-
ness brought to the various courts increased, but the nature of litiga-
tion has also assumed a new shape. This enlarged volume of business
and its ever-changing nature have naturally created serious problems
in the working of the higher judiciary. Any attempt to improve the
system must devote attention to the factors relevant to the efficiency
Of those who work the system, and to the procedure by which the
system is worked day-to-day.

Questions selected for consideration

2.14. Bearing in mind the above considerations, we have select-
ed, for examination.: such questions concerning the jurisdiction and
structure of the higher judiciary as require urgent attention. As we
have pointed out’, this selection was not made on any theoretical basis,
but on pragmatic considerations and keeping in view the gravity and
nature of the problems, as disclosed by our experience in this field.

Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

2.15. We shall now briefly refer to the principal questions dealt
with in this Report* With reference to the appellate jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court. it appeared to us that it migl ht be convenient to
deal with its jurisdiction in criminal appeals under article 134, since
we have already recommended an amendment of the corresponding

3, 27thand 34७६ Reporte.
#. 37th and 415६ Reports.

3, 44thand 45th Reports.

3, Including the Lith Report.

5, See Chapter 1.

$, For the quostionnairo, 550 Chapter 1, supra.


16

article relating to civil appellate jurisdiction’, and our recommendation
has been accepted? by the Government and has already become law.
The basic approach which we have emphasised is that the docket of
the Supreme Court should not be burdened with questions of fact or
minor questions of law. and its main role as far as appellate jurisdic-
tion is concerned, is that of dealing with such substantial questions of
few of general importance as need to be decided by the Supreme
‘ourt.

Conditions essential for creative task

2.16. Felix Frankfurter once spoke* of “the conditions essential
for the kind of creative tasks which are involved in the effective exer-
cise of the Court's jurisdiction, which means essentially a feeling of
serenity of mind and an absence of jostling”, and he referred especial-
1४ to jostling due to too many problems occupying the attention of the
court. The relevance of these weighty comments to our system is
obvious,

Question of proper role of the Supreme Court

2.17. There is another aspect relevant exclusively to the Supreme
Court, which requires consideration‘. The basic question that has pre-
sented itself is this—what ought to be the proper role of the Supreme
Court? Should its role be conceived as primarily one of upholding the
Constitution and interpreting the supreme law of the country. thereby
constituting it, in the proper sense, the “Supreme” Court of ‘the coun-
try? Or, should that Court be required also to deal with ordinary
judicial business, the determination of questions of ordinary civil and
criminal liability, questions concerned with the fortunes of ‘individuals
and the fate of particular criminals? As we will point out later’, two
views are possible on this issue. But, for the purpose of making the
present Report, we have not thought it necessary to record a formal
or final decision in that behalf.

Tnstinet for appeal
2.18. In this context, we may examine the structure of appeals.

The instinct for appeat is human. St. Paul’s famous cry—“E appeal
unto Caesar”, expresses a fundamental instinct in humanity. as has

1, 45th Report of the Law Commission.

3, Constitution (30th Amendment) Act.

१, John H. Manfield (Professor of Law, Harvard Law School, formerly Law Cler
to Mr. Justice Frankfurter) in (1955) 78 Harv. L. Rov. 1529, 1531.

$, See para 8 ofthe Prefatory note to the Questionnaire (quoted in Chapter 1).

*. See Chapter 3, infra.


17

been pointed out’, Nevertheless, it is also recognised that there must
be an end to litigation. Though provisions for appeals are essential as
providing checks and counter-checks for arriving at a correct decision,
some reasonable limits have to be set to the search for a wue and cor-
Fect decision.

The U.S. Supreme Court compared

2.19. A comparison with the U.S. Supreme Court is worthwhile in
this connection, It is well-known that, as a matter of working practice,
the Supreme Court of the U.S.A. by exercising discretionary control
over its own jurisdiction, has become essentially a ‘public law tribunal’.
The workicad of the court places a premium on the time of the
Justices, which is, as Justice Frankfurter noted, directly related to the
quality of their judicial work-product.

~The iudgments of this Court are collective judgments. They pre-
suppose ample time and freshness of mind for private study and ree
flection in preparation for discussion at Conference.” “Without ade-
quate study there cannot be adequate reflection; without adequate re-
flection there cannot be adequate discussion; without adequate discus-
sion there cannot be that fruitful interchange of minds which is indis-
pensable io thoughtful, unhurried decision and its formulation in
learned and impressive opinions.”*

Courts of appeal in the U.S.A.

2.20. In the U.S.A.’, the courts of appeals are the vital centre of
the federal judicial system, in two respects. With few exceptions, fede-
ral litigation ends in the courts of appeals; less than three per cent of
the cases decided are considered by the Supreme Court. Although the
filing of cases in the district courts increased only sixteen per cent in
the past seven years, filing in the courts of appeals increased one
hundred per cent during that time. During the same period, the Supreme
Court has kept its review of cases at a fairly constant numerical level.

In West Germany

2.21. It may also be noted that the Constitutional Court of West
Germany is. by constitution, statute and practice, a specialist tribunal,
which has jurisdiction only over constitutional issues.*

3, Lop Bversiod (formerly, Sir Raymond Bvershed).

2. S22 Brvakfartor at Levdis. “The Supreme Court under the Judiciary Act of
1925", (4925) 42 Harv. L. Rov. 1. 18.

3, Dik ७. New York fi'fe Ins. fo. (1959) 357 US. 437, 458-459 (dissenting
opinion).

4, S.AV.Lumbard (Chief Judgeof one ofthe U.S.
(1968) 54 Comell Law Rev. 29.

4. Me. Whinney, ‘Judicial Restraint and the West German Constitutional Court’,
1961) 75 Harvard Law Review 5, 6.

uct of Appouls)‘*Courts of Appeal”



ig
The tradition in Commonwealth countries

2.22. It would, we think, not be inappropriate to refer to the re-
mark that “It has been something of a fetish in Commonwealth na-
tions that final appellate tribunals should be courts of comprehensive
jurisdiction, embracing both private and public jaw with the bulk of
their business normally being private law."

Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

2.23, The essence of the matter is that it is desirable that the
highest Court in the country should concentrate on questions of na-
tional importance. If this be the approach, it may be desirable to have
a fresh look at the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and to
consider how far that jurisdiction should be restricted in harmony
with this approach, and to maintain uniformity with the amendments
which have been already made in regard to appeals to the Supreme
Court in ordinary civil proceedings.

Writ jurisdiction of the High Courts

2.24. The next topic to be mentioned concerns what is usually
referred to as “Writ jurisdiction”. Under article 226 of the Constitu-
tion, the High Courts have been vested with jurisdiction to issue direc-
tions, orders and writs for the enforcement of fundamental rights and
for other purposes. These include writs in the nature of the five “prero-
gative writs”, as usually known to students of constitutional and ad-
ministrative law, but the orders and directions which can be issued by
the High Courts are not necessarily confined to them. The jurisdiction
to issue such writs was, before the Constitution, possessed by only a
few High Courts. The constitutional jurisdiction is now exercisable by
every fe Court, and its popularity is now well-known.

‘Two important procedural aspects

2.25. We are not, at the moment, concerned with a consideration
of the scop ९ of this jurisdiction, But, in order that this jurisdiction of
the High Court may be exercised in the true spirit in which it is intend-
ed to be exercised and also in order that justice may be done to all
patties concerned who are likely to be affected by the exercise of this
jurisdiction, it appeared desirable to examine a few aspects of the juris-
diction. This was not an academic exercise, because the very large

2, Me. Whinney, “Judicial Restraint and the West German Constitutional Court’,
(१03) 75 Harvard Law Review 5,6.

4, See Constitution (30th Amendment) Act, Amendment of article 183,


19

number of petitions under article 226 which are filed and disposed of
in almost every High Court, justified a look at some of the procedural
aspects, not with the object of any unnecessary tampering with the
present rules, but with the object of ensuring that the power of the
High Court is exercised in the best interests of justice. Two matiers
appeared to require attention; first. the question of interim orders issued
on such petitions for the duration of the main proceedings, and
secondly, the trial of disputed questions of fact in such proceedings.
These questions are also relevant to the similar jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court exercisable under article 32 of the Constitution.

Certain special types of matters brought before the Supreme Court and
High Courts

2.26. Apart from ordinary civil and criminal litigation, and peti-
tions for writs, certain special types of matters are often taken to the
Supreme Court under its special appellate jurisdiction or under its
writ jurisdiction. Similarly, such matters are often agitated before the
High Court, by invoking the jurisdiction to issue orders and directions
in the nature of writs. These attempts naturally increase the judiciat
business of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, and, in conse-
quence. the decision of really important constitutional matters as well
as of ordinary civil and criminal appeals may sometimes get dclayed.
This is one aspect of the matter which we have to examine. We indi-
cate below in brief the special types of matters which we have in
mind.

Challenges against quasi-judicial decisions

2.27. As the position stands at present, the Constitution leaves it
open to a party aggrieved by a decision of a judicial or quasi-judicial
authority on many matters to approach the Supreme Court' and seck
special leave to appeal from the decision of the authority, or to chal-
lenge certain action of a judicial or a quasi-judicial authority before
the High Court in its writ jurisdiction. The parties cannot be blamed
for invoking the constitutional jurisdiction. But, in respect of certain
matters, which are of a very specialised character, the question to be
considered was whether a specialised judicial machinery could be set
up or certain changes could be made in the existing procedure so that
justice could be done better and more speedily.

Number of service cases and labour disputes and taxation matters

2.28. It is common knowledge that a substantial percentage of
the petitions filed before the High Courts invoking its writ jurisdiction
under article 226 of the Constitution relate to the terms and conditions

3, 8 ७ para 9 to 1101 the profatory note to the Questionaire (quoted in Chapter 2).


20

of service and promotion and punishment of Government servants. It
appeared to us that an improvement in the disposal of disputes relat-
ing to Unese matters would benefit the Private litigants as well as the
Gevernment. Determination of these disputes require special know-
ledge and experience.

There was also a feeling that the Supreme Court and the High
Courts were unnecessarily burdened with industrial disputes and mat-
lers relating to taxation. Industrial disputes should be settled promptly
and it cannot also be denied that their decision requires knowledge
and approach of a specialised character, It is not appropriate that they
should congest the calendar of the highest Court in the land. Matters
relating io taxetion, again, should be disposed of promptly. In both
these vases, considerations of national economy are at stake.

Thice types of cases

2.29. Adopting these criteria, we applied ourselves io the tusk of
enquiring how, in respect of three selected matters, the present judicial
machinery could be amended, or the procedure could be revised, as
stated above. These three matters were—dispuies relating to direct taxes,
disputes concerning industrial relations, and disputes arising out of ser-
vice under the Union or a State. Here again, the selection of topics was
made not on any theoretical basis, but on the basis of the practical im-
porance of the subjects in question.

Suggestions for ‘Zonal’ Courts

2.30. There fell also’ to be considered a suggestion for an inter-
mediate Court between the High Court and the Supreme Court for the
disposal of appeals. This idea took the shape of “Zonal Courts”,
which would take over from the High Court such appellate jurisdiction
as is exercised by the Division Benches of the High Court: there would
be Zonal Courts for 5 or more zones into which the country could be
divided. The main objective was not the reduction of arrears in the
High Courts, but the bringing into being of a Court which would be
removed from local influences and which would facilitate the mobility
of the Bench and the Bar. In other words, the Process of national
integration on the judicial side would be furthered by the creation of
such courts.

Some other connected questions

2.31. In order to secure a better functioning of the higher judiciary,
it also become necessary to consider the possibility of improvements in
salaries and conditions of service of its personnel.

2, See para 12. prefatory note to the questionnaire (quoted in Chapter 1).


21

Questionnaire

2.32. Having selected the problems. we gave some thought to these
matters and issued a Questionnaire. The Commission had not then
formed any conclusions (even provisional) on any of these issues. But
these issues required serious consideration, and, in order that there
may be a public debate on the subject, in which knowledgeable per-
sons and bodies can participate, and in order to ensure that those parti-
cipating in such debate make a useful constribution, the Commission
considered it desirable to define the broad issues to be considered and
to elicit opinion thereon.

2.33. It was with the above object in view that the Commission
prepared a short Questionnaire. The Questionnaire was not to be
taken as representing the views of the Commission, tentative or other-
wise. As stated above, the object was to put the issues before the pub-
tic, and to invite well-informed opinion thereon, thereby facilitating a
dispassionate. careful and constructive consideration of the problem in
all its aspects. The Commission is grateful to all those who co-operated
with it by answering the Questionnaire and by participating in oral dis-
cussions.

The problem of arrears

2.34. We are fully conscious of the difficulty of devising satisfactory
solutions for the problems that will come up for consideration in the
present inquiry. In particular, the problem of delay and arrears is a
difficult one to solve.

The causes of arrears

2.35. As has been observed in the U.S.A.,’—

“There is no simplistic solution to a pattern of delay such as
these cases illustrate; if there were, we would not have the
problem. The causes are numerous. They vary from case
to case and from place to place. The delay is more pro-
nounced in urban centres where the caseloads are heaviest.
Causes include inadequate court personnel (both in number
and in training), outdated procedures, the multiplicity of
pleadings and appeals and, frequently, delay in preparation
of transcripts. The historical resistance of legislatures and
the Congress to providing a court with the money, person-
net and facilities they need to meet increased caseloads may
be an important factor.”

3, Rohort W. Mpsorve (Pr
Association Journal, 1129, 12:

+ Auerioan Bar Association) in (1972) American Bar



22

Litigation not an evil

2.36. We should make it clear that we do not regard litigation
as an evil. Thurman Arnold has analysed the source of judicial prestige
in terms of the dichotomy between substantive law and procedure. He
has pointed out that many institutions other than courts settle disputes.
Yet, of all the institutions engaged in the settlement of disputes, courts
alone had “found a way of doing it which has brought them over-
whelming prestige and respect’". Courts are bound by precedent”,
Amold noted, while “bureaus are bound by red tape”. Amold added:
“It is obvious that our belief that courts are the chief guardians of the
supremacy of law is the reason why we adopt such a respectful attitude
toward them.”

Increase in case-load to be anticipated

2.37. What should, however, receive attention is that appellate case
joad will, in future, increase and not decrease. This work-load may
eventually pose a challenge. We have to visualise the financial and
human needs of an appellate system competent to carry what has been
described as the “burdens that will be thrust upon it in the coming
generation of conflict and change.”?

Effective response to this challenge demands initiative and plan-
ning by all concerned with the state of the appellate process,—a process.
which has been described as “interdependent phases of a single system
performing a vital social task.”*

Problems considered

2.38. It is in the light of these considerations that we proceed to
consider, in detail, the problems relating to the structure and jurisdiction
of the higher judiciary that seemed us to need solution.

Arrears not the major consideration

2.39. At this stage, we ought to make it clear that the question of
growing arrears is not the sole or major consideration which weighed
with us- Our object has been to review the judicial system, in so
far as it relates to the topics mentioned above, and to suggest reforms

Substantive Law and Procedure in the Legal Process’?
630.

5. Wiaslow Charistian (Tnstice of the i
Criminal Appeals”.(1971), Stanford Law Review.

(Justice of the Califor

Court of Appeals), “Delay in
702. ४
rt of Appeal), “Delay in Crimi«



23

wherever they appeared to be reasonable and necessary. It is hardly
necessary to add that the ultimate beneficiaries of these reforms are
the citizens of the nation, and not this or that branch of the State.

Object of Reforms

2.40. We may refer, in this connection, to what the Lord Chancel-
lor said,’ in England, in the Debate on the “Administration of Justice
Bill,” in 1934-—

“Some reforms are designed both in the interests of the State and
of the individual, to ensure economy and expedition in the
administration of the law; others are intended in the interests
of the litigant himself.”

Principal questions dealt with
we propose to deal with in

2.41. The principal questions whi

following Chapters are 85 1010!

(a) Supreme Court

Criminal appeals to the Supreme Court.

Appeals to the Supreme Court by Special Leave.

Petitions for writs before the Supreme Court—Questions of fact.

Petitions for writs before the Supreme Court—Grant of Interim
stay.

(b) High Courts

Petitions for writs before the High Courts—Grant of Interim
stay.

Petitions for writs before the High Courts—Questions of fact,

(c) Specialised matters

Matters relating to taxation.

Disputes concerning Industrial Relations.

Disputes concerning matters arising out of service under the
State.

th

e

(9) Zonal Courts
Other suggestions concerning various Tribunals.
(०) Other suggestions

Other questions concerning the higher judiciary, including condi-
tions of services.

1, HL. Debates (Administration of Justice Bill), 5.June, 1934, Col. 789,


CHAPTER 3
APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT
Criminal appeals

Questions dealt with serially

3.1. Of the questions inciuded in our Questionnaire, which we
now proceed to discuss serially, the first two questions relate to the
jutisdiction of the Supreme Court. We shall first take up
appellate juri ion of the Supreme Court. Article 134
of the Constitution reads thus—

©134. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to

criminal matters—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court

1 any judgment. final order or sentence in a crimina! pro-
oi: a High Court in the territory of India if the High

1 of an accused

has a appeal reversed an order of aca

person and sentenced him to death; or
105 withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any
court subordinate to its authority and has in such trial
convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death;
or
(c\ certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme
Court;

Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to
such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of
article 145 and te such conditions as the High Court may establish
or require.

“(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any
further powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final
order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the
territory of India subject to such conditions and limitations as may
be specified in such law.”

Act of 1970

3.2. It may be stated with reference to clause (2) of article 134
that Parliament has passed kegislation’ enlarging the scope of the
appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

ln en
3, Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Juriediction) Act, 1970 (28
of 1976.)
24



25

Criminal appeals to the Supreme Court.

3.3. Ques! 1 in our Questionnaire deals (ie criminal ap-
pellats jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The question is as fol-
lows: —

“haya ur of limiting scope of criminal appeals

unde of the Con fiteiion?”

pt
gieston of law

niting such appeals to cases
general importance

whore ao
is involved?

“ed 7 not. de you suggest any’
regard?”

Article 13411) ead (>) and 1970 Act net desit with

is ne. concerned wit
4 of the Constitution’.
ft two sub-clauses a matter of right, and
there is no question of disturbing that provision. Simitarly. we de not
in this Report propose to suggest any modification in the Act of 1970",
© provisions of Article 134 as a whole, or in
s Where necessai’ ve. in the ensuing

f referred tothe pesi der those two sub-
clauses and und the Act of 1970. But the discussion should not be
construed as suggesting any amendment of those sub-clauses or of
the Act of 1970.

Git of replies

3.5. The replies on our question* are evenly balanced in favour
of and against the amendment put forth in the query.

Some Judges‘ of the Supreme Court, who have responded to our
Questionnaire, have in their reply favoured limiting the scope of cri-
mina} appeals by deleting sub-clauses (a) and (b) of article 134(1).
They suggest that the scope of criminal appeals under article 134 of
the Constitution should be limited to cases where a certificate that
it is a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court is obtained under
article 134(1) (०), The replies of Hi gh Courts and High Court Judges
on this question are almost evenly balanced.

+

Paragraph 3°1 supra,
nyraph 3eS. infra,
. Para 3- 2, supra.
4.8. No. 56,



26

Views favouring limitation in a modificd form

3.6. Limitation of the scope of appeals under article 134 but in
a modilicd form has been favoured in some of the replies received by
us. For example, there is a suggestion’ that in every case where the
sentence of death is awarded, there should be a right of appeal, be-
sides cases where 3 substantial question of law of general importance
is involved. Another suggestion’ is that in every case of life imprisoo-
ment, appeal be allowed.

Then, there is a suggestion’ that clause (०) of Article 134 (1),
should be totally deleted, since Article 136 serves well the purposes
intended to be achieved by article 134(1)(c)-

Some of the replies,* while not favouring a change in Article 134,
express the view that the parliamentary legislation’ passed under
Article 134 (2) should be repealed. .

Jn addition, several Judges and members of the bar have, in oral
discussions, expressed their views on various aspects of the question.

We now proceed to deal with the present position, and the ques-
tion whether an amendment is needed.

Present Position

3.7. The legal framework as to the right of appeal in criminal
cases in India, appears to rest upon one broad principle, namely, the
desirability of allowing one appeal as of right, both on facts and on
law, in respect of a conviction for the first time in a case. Appeals
from such judgments of courts other than the High Court are al lowed
in all cases (barring certain minor cases* in which the sentence does
not exceed a specified period of imprisonment or a specified amount
of fine, or where a plea of guilty is accepted.) Appeals from judgments
of the High Court, before which a conviction is ordered for the first
time, are limited to serious offences,” obviously to prevent the Supreme
Court from being troubled with less important cases.

a cn
2, 8, No, 19.
3, Oraidiscussions (Madras Bor).
#, 8. No. 41 (a High Court Judge.)
4. 8.No. 36 (four Jwiges ofa High Court.)
wre ™ Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act,
५, Section 413 and 414, Cr. P.C. 1898.
1, The exceptional provision in section 4114 (4), Cr. P.C. 1898, is now elmost

opaclete,


27

3.8. Reading together article 134 (1) (a) and (b) and the recent
Act? of 1970, broadly speaking, an appeal against such conviction
lies to the Supreme Court, if the High Court has reversed an acquittal
or withdrawn a case and tried it itself, and passed a sentence of
death,’ imprisonment for life or imprisonment for not less than 10
years.*

3.9. In other cases, there is no unqualified right of appeal, and,
as is evident from article 134 (1) (०) of the Constitution, an appeal
lies only if the High Court certifies the case to be a fit one for appeal
to the Supreme Court.

3.10. This can be illustrated with reference to article 134 (1) (a)
and (b) of the Constitution. Thus, by virtue of article 134(1)(a), where
4 person acquitted by the Court of Session is, on an appeal against
acquittal, convicted by the Appellate Bench and sentenced to death,
he has a right of appeal to the Supreme Court, because as Dr. Ambed-
kar observed, the initial presumption of innocence is, in this case,
further strengthened by the fact that the trial Judge had found him
innocent.’ If, in such cases, the Appellate Bench finds him guilty
and sentences him to death, it is certainly a matter which requires
further investigation.’ Similarly, article 134 (1) (b) provides a right
of appeal to a person who, having been tried after withdrawal of
the case by the High Court is convicted and sentenced to death;
here the right of appeal is based on the principle that a person who
has been convicted for the first time and condemned to death, ought
to bave at least one appeal.’ The Act of 1970 has extended this right
to cases where the High Court setting aside an acquittal passes a
sentence of life imprisonment or imprisonment for ten years.’ As
already stated, the appeal to the highest Court is, of course, limited
to serious cases. Chief Justice Pratt observed long ago, that “it is
the glory and happiness of our excellent Constitution that, to prevent
any injustice, no man is to be concluded by the first judgement; but
that, if he apprehends himself to be aggrieved, he had another court
to which he can resort for relief”.

_ In the present inquiry, we have no intention to consider any chang-
es in article 134(1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution. We are concerned

3, Supreme Court (Enfargement of Criminal Appellate Juris:
8) Article 134(1}(a) anit o. rel ह
$, Act of 1970.
8. Soe Dr. Ambodkar’s Speech, Vol. 8, Constituent Assembly Debates 858 (1411.
१००६ हक Tek Chand’s §
, Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand's Speech, Vol. 8, Constituent Assembly Debates,
851 Gath Fave, 1040). 2 1200 Page
', Soe Dr. Ambe:ixne’s 599०2), Vol. 8, Corstitue. ६ Assembly Debates, .
{14th June, 1949). है Debates, page 863
ozo” Th? Supreme Court (Bnslargement of Appell. Crimival Juvisdie-ion) 806

1९009) ¢ ct, 1970.


28

with cases outside them and outside the Act of 1970 where redress
is still sought from a superior tribunal.

Rational and sound guideline desirable

3.11. The grounds on which a certificate can be granted “under
article 134 (1) (९) are not stated in the article. Judicial decisions have
laid down broad guidelines,’ but, in the interest of unifermity and
certainty, it is desirable that the test should be indicated in the Con-
stitution. Our primary concern, therefore, in dezting with this aspect
of the problem has been to devise a rational and sound :crmula,
which wouid ६३ ob. 1d would furnish clear guidelines to the
High Courts in considering applications for certificate under article
134 (1) (०)

Special aspect of Criminal cases as involving liberty considered

3.12. We ought to state that while we considered the question of
amending article 134 (1) (०) of the Constitution, we gave anxious con-
sideration to the fact that, unlike civil cases, criminal cases involve
question of life and liberty of the citizen. After elaborate considera-
tion, however, we came to the conclusion that amending article 134 (1)
(०) on lines similar to those on which article 133 (1) (०) has recently
been amended by Parliament in pursuance of cut recomme:dation,
wontjd caus: no hardship or injustice. In our view, cases cl grave
miscarriage of e can be easily saved and covered uncer article
€ the Consitution. Whexever the Supreme Court is satisfied that
imate verdict of the High Court has

} grave tiscarriage of justice, its jurisdiction to grani special
लि he 1 |, 2800० by such a verdict, is unlimited, and
$0, amending art 134 (1) (c) would cause no real hardshir

Eifect of the recommended change a

13, It is true that if article 134(1) (०) is amended in accordance
with our recommendation, it will not be possible for a party aggrieved
by the appellate judgement of the High sourt in a criminal proceeding
to ask for a certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court unless the
case falls within one or the other of the sub-clauses of article 134(1).
But, this position is subject to the right of the party aggrieved to
move the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal against the
judgement of the High Court under Article 136, even though the res
quirements of article 134(1) are not satisfied.

Embarrassment likely to be caused to High Court as ¢o certificate on
questions

of fact
3.14. Besides, the amendment which we are going to propose
|, in substance, give the intending appellant a right to claim a
हम हर where he is able to satisfy the High Court that a substantial
question of law of general importance has arisen which, in the opinion
of the High Court, needs to be decided by he Sipeme oes the High Court, needs tobe decided by the Supreme Court.

T Boer Paragraph $24, iafra,for the present guide lines.


29

Incidentally, it is not difficult to appreciate that in cases of alleged
grave miscarriage of justice, the High Court may feel embarrassed to
grant the certificate under the existing clause (1)(c) of article 134 on
the ground that its verdicts has, prima facie, causes grave miscarriage
of justice; whereas the Supreme Court will feel no such embarrass-
ment in dealing with the same question under article 136. It is, there-
fore, logical not to keep the jurisdiction of the High Court too wide
and indefinite. That is why we have decided to recommend a suitable
amendme rticle 134(1)ic) which will make it similar to the
amended article 133¢1\{c).

Findings ot High Court to be final on facts

3.15. One of the reasons which have weighed with us in recom-
mending the amendment of article 134(1)(c), is that, ordinarily, findings
of fact, recorded by the High Court skould be final. Similarly, ordi-
narily, the conclusions recorded by the High Courts on questions of
law should also be final unless there is a divergence of judicial opinion
or the question of law is otherwise of general importance. The formula
which we have decided to adopt is that certificate should be granted
if the intended appeal involyes a substantial question of law of general
inion o! the Uigh Court needs to be de-

same expression been used by
ndment of 16 133(1)(0) of

us in

the ©
Implications of proposed a:endment
216, In that F 'ढ. had elabsraicly explained the implica-

rans of the am which we had then recommended. Shortly
stated, ike adopti f this formv:la means that if the appeal in ques-
tion of law cn which there is a divergence of opinion amongst different
High Court or the point of law is important, because it is one of
first impression and is of general significance, the appellant is entitled
to a certificate because it is the primary function of the Supreme Court
to resolve such divergence on important questions of law. It is the
privilege and duty of the Supreme Court to introduce uniformity in
the interpretation of laws and where a divergence of opinion is ex-
pressed by the High Courts, the party is justified in seeking a verdict
of the Supreme Court on such a question of law of general import-
ance.
Well settled questions of law not to be certified

3.17. If, on the other hand, the appeal involves a question of law
on which there is no divergence of opinion, in the view expressed by
other High Courts, then, such well-settled points of law need not be
brought to the Supreme Court. That is one implication of the formula
which have adopted.

3.18. The other implication of the formula is that indings of fact
recorded by the High Court while exercising its appellate jurisdiction



30

should, except in cases covered by article 134(1)(@) and (b), or the
Act of 1970, ordinarily be treated as final, and their propriety or
correctness should not be liable to be challenged by way of appeal
unless the Supreme Court is persuaded to grant special leave in such
matters. It is well-known that there are no uniform or mathematical
yardsticks which judicial approach can adopt mechanically in appre-
ciating oral evidence, and it is generally on oral evidence that the
decision in the criminal trials depends. Experience shows that two
judicial minds, appreciating the same evidence, may not always reach
the same conclusion. But that is no reason why the test of finality
should not be applied in dealing with criminal matters at the stage
where the High Court, in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, has
considered the evidence, weighed the pros and cons urged in respect
of it, and pronounced its verdict. From this point of view, the fact
that the verdict of the High Court affirms the decision of the trial
court, or reverses it is not, in itself, material. We thought it necessary to
explain briefly the implications of the formula because, as we have
already indicated, the conclusion is that the scope of article 134(1)(c)
should be placed on the same basis as that of article 13310, as
amended in accordance with our recommendation.

Article 136

3.19. In conclusion. we must re-emphasise that, notwithstanding
the limitations sought to be imposed by amending article 134(1Xc),
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136 remains totally

unaffected.
Effect of proposed amendment on work-load of Supreme Court

3.20. Before we part with this aspect of the matter, we may inci-
dentally refer to another consideration. In the absence of proper and
definite guidelines, which would assist the High Court in disposing
of applications for certificates made article 134(1)(c), certificates are
on some occasions granted when it is ultimately found that such grant
of certificates was really not justified, and the granting of certificates
in such cases tends to add to the load on the docket of the Supreme
Court. If the formula which we are recommending is accepted, it is
not unlikely that this unjustified addition to the work-load on the
calendar of the Supreme Court may be reduced. if not altogether eli-
minated. When we refer to the work-load on the calendar of the
Supreme Court. we are indirectly referring to the problem of growing
arrears which the Supreme Court has to face. Accumulation of large
arrears must be regarded as a relevant consideration in revising the
structure of the higher judiciary. Our approach is that the significance
of this consideration should not be unduly exaggerated. Nor can
this consi4eration be treated as decisive in devising a mechanical for-
mula, wnich is otherwise not rational, reasonable or fair.


31

Some figures

3.21. Considered from this point of view, it may be relevant to
indicate the position in regard to the number of criminal appeals in
the Supreme Court during the last 3 years.

3.22. We may refer to a few figures at this stage. The number of
criminal appeals to the Supreme Court during the last three years was
as follows':—

{a) Number of appeals at the openii.g of the 1969 970 1973
‘year. ” a ve 563 505 538

(8) Number of appealsisatituted during the

° ven न .« 262 234 338

(c) Number of appeals disposed of during the

Pe oe oe 220 201 289

year

Note:—These figures are both under article 134 and Article 136
of the Constitution.
Separate figures are not available.

These figures show, a slow but steady increase.

Amendment wil! only codify existing interpretation

3.23. We may also point out that our recommendation does not
really constitute a new or radical change. Even at present, the usual
practice followed by the High Courts is to grant a certificate under
article 134(1)(0) only in cases where questions of law of general im-
portance are involved. This is clear from many pronouncements of the
Supreme Court. Though clause (1)(c) of article 134 does not expressly
say so, it has been judicially interpreted by the Supreme Court as con-
fined to such cases. The proposed amendment will, thus, give legis-
lative recognition to the judicial interpretation of the existing clause.
In support of this statement, we shall refer to some decisions of the
Supreme Court by way of illustration.

Decisions

3.24. In referring to these decisions here, our object is to draw
attention to the fact that not only the Supreme Court, but the High
‘Courts that have had occasion to consider applications for the grant
of certificate, have, broadly &] peaking, taken the view that the certifi-
cate is to be granted only wi certain important questions are at
issue. This unwritten limitation—we do not use the word “limitation”
jn any rigid sense—sometimes finds expression, while sometimes it is
the implicit basis for the grant or refusal of a certificate. Proceedings
for the grant or refusal of the certificate are not usually reported: But,
on a perusal of those cases in which judicial pronouncements fell to

3 Statement No. 8-4.
4 Para 3-26, infra.



32

be made, as also from oral discussions with the judiciary and the bar
at various places, we have no doubt that such is the position.

3.25. The jurisdiction of the High Court to certify a case as a fit
one for further appeal is, to a certain extent discretionary, and, like
the jurisdiction of the Judges of the Divisional Court in England to
give or to refuse leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal from their
own decisions is, (to use the epithet employed’ by Lord Esher M.R.
in relation to that jurisdiction), a “very declicate one.”

Jurisdiction ualike an ordinary Court of criminal appeal

3.26. Though the discretion of the High Court is not expressly
limited, it is weil recognised that the Jurisdiction under article 134(1)(c)
is not that of an ordinary court of criminal appeal, and the High Court,
before it certificates the case, must be satisfied that it involves some
substantial question of law of principle and not merely a question of
law of principle and not merely a question of appreciation of evi-
dence.* No doubt, the fact that this article deals with criminal cases,
will be borne in mind while granting the certificate. But, at the same
time, a certificate granted on questions of fact without disclosing any
substantial question of law or principles, may not be acted upon by
the Supreme Court.’ If the appeal is under Clause (a) or clause (0)
of article 134(1), it is as of right;* same is the position where the
appeal is under the recent Act of 1970.* But the appeal under clause
(©) lies only on a certificate and the Tequirement of a certificate itself
implies that there should be something more than what is required
for an ordinary appeal under the Code of Criminal Procedure. In
Considering the question of granting or refusing the cettificate, the
High Court must take note of the fact that except in cases falling
under the Act of 1970—the Constitution intends that in all criminal
matters, the High Court in the respective States should normally and
ordinarily be the final court of appeal, which means that the certifi-
cate should be granted only in special and exceptional cases.°

Some cases

3.27 In a very early case, the State Government had provided,
to displaced persons, some ‘abadi’ land and agricultural land in a

3, Ex Porte Gilchrist; In Re Armstrong, (1886) 17 Q.B.D. 521, 2d.

3, State of Assam ¥. Abdul Noor, A.I.R. 1970 8.C. 1365, 1836 (1970) Criminal Law
Joumal 1264.

*. Sushil Kumar v. Joy Shanker, A.1.R. 19708.C. 1543, 1547; (1970) 38.C.R. 770.
4, Tara Ohand v. State of Maharashira, A.1.R. 1962. 8.0. 130, 132; (1962) 28.0.8.

*, Seo (1971) Keraln Low Times 514, reforred to in the Yearly Digest.
5. Babu v. The State, A.LR. 1965 8.0. 1467, 1470, 1471; (1965) 28.6.8. 7१1.

2. Baloodin and others v. State of U.P., ALR. 1956 8.C. 181 (Bose, Jagannadhacse
and Sinha JJ.).



33

village Goran to the new-comers (refugees), who were not welcome to
the old residents. This created some tension and hatred between the
two groups. There were many complaints made to the district authori-
ties. But they did not take any interest in settling the matter.

3-28. On 7th February, 1954, the group of old residents attacked
the new-comers at Mangal Singh’s house armed with axes, spear and
guns, etc. and shot down six male members of the refugees. The High
Court convicted the appellants, but granted a certificate of appeal
to the Supreme Court.

3.29. The Supreme Court held that the High Court should not
grant a certificate as a matter of course, but it must exercise its dis-
cretion judicially under Article 134(1\(c) of the Constitution. The High
Court must apply its mind and give reasons for the order. The im-
portant question of jaw must also be apparent on the face of the
order.

3.30. In this case, the High Court had granted & certificate by
simply stating in the last line of the judgment “leave to appeal to
Supreme Court is granted.” On the course adopted by the High Court,
the Supreme Court commented: “We have seen that neither it has
shown any important question of law, nor certified the case as @ fit
case for appeal. Therefore, it has exercised its power mechanically
and not judicially.”

3.31. In another case’ the Supreme Court has said, “It is mani-
fest that before granting a certificate under sub-clause (c), the High
Court must be satisfied that it involves some substantial question of
law or principle.”

Eartier decisions

3.32. Some of the earlier decisions which take the same view are
given in the footnote.*

3, State of Assam v. Abdul Noor, A.B. 1970 8.0. 1865, para 7.
3, (७) Nareingh v. The State of U.P. (1955) 18.0.R. 238—-Article 134 (1) (०-
(8) Baladin v. The State of U.P. A.LR. 1986 8.0. 181—(Artiole 134(1) (¢).
(0) Banarasi Prasad v. Keshi Krichan, 28,1.A.11,13, 18, (P.C.)
@ Yaishionath Pitlas v. King Emperor, 40 1.A. 193, L.B. 36 Mad., 501; 14 Cr. BT
(©) Haripade Dev, v. State of West Bengat (1066) B.0:R. 629 —Article 124(1) (0)
and Artiole 136.
(A) Sidhesingar Ganguly v. State of Wert Bengal. (1068 ) 8.C.R. 749, 764—Acticlee
and 136,
७0) Kbuehat Rao. State of Bombay (1068) ALR. 1968 8.0. 22—Articles 194
and 136.


Recent cases

3.33. In a recent case, decided by the Supreme Court,’ it has ex-
pressed the same view, and has clearly indicated that the word “certify”
is a strong word, and it requires the High Court to exercise its discre-
tion carefully and grant a certificate only if an important question of
general importance is involved.

Article 136 considered

3.34. At this stage, we may state that we shall later consider the
question whether article 136 should be suitably amended so as to ex-
clude, from its purview, ordinary civil and criminal apeals covered by
articles 133 and 134. We may anticipate our conclusion and state that
we propose to recommend no such change in article 136. It is on that
basis that our recommendation to amend article 134(1\(c) is founded.

Functioning of the Sapreme Court under a Federal Constitution —

3.35. While discussing these questions, one of the points which we
carefully considered was the nature of the functioning of the Supreme
Court under a Federal Constitution. Two views were expressed in the
course of the discussion. One view was that, ultimately, by suitable
constitutional amendments made from time to time in the light of the
experience gained, the position of the Supreme Court in our country
should become similar to that of the Supreme Court in the United
States of America in certain respects. In other words, according to
this view, our Supreme Court should be called upon to consider and
decide only important public issues of constitutional significance as
well as important points of law on which there is divergence of opi-
nion in the High Court, and its calendar should not be burdened with
multifarious Jess important matters. If that be the goal to be achieved,
—may be by suitable stages —it is visualised that, ultimately, a much
smaller number of really important matters would be brought before
the Supreme Court, and it may then become possible for the Court to
deal with such matters, not by sitting in different Benches but by the
whole Court sitting as one Bench. In that case, the present strength
of the Court may have to be reduced, say, to seven or nine Judges.

Hearing by whole Court congidered

3.36. According to this view, we ought to recognise that hereafter
when the Indian Legislature attempts to implement, by appropriate
legislation, the Directive Principles which are fundamental to the

1, State of Bihar v. Bhagirath Sharma, (1973) 1 8.C.W.R. 655 (3 May 1973), (on
appeal from Patna).
3 Para 3: 54, infra.


35

governance of the country, the constitutional problems which may
arise before the Supreme Court may need close examination in depth
not only of the provisions of the Constitution, but also of complex
socio-economic considerations; and, in discharging this onerous task,
both the Bar and the Bench will have to_make research on the several
issues involved and devote more time for debate and discussion of
those issues. If the whole court hears such matters, it would be a
collective decision of the Court, though, it is inevitable that, on occa-
sions, the minority and the majority views may be expressed. Besides,
if the whole court sits together to hear matters, the possibility of con-
flicting judgments, delivered by different Benches, will be eliminated.
That is why, according to this view, the ultimate goal to be reached,
not immediately, but in future by stages, should be to leave freedom
to the Supreme Court to concentrate on really important issues and
Jay down the law on those issues authoritatively-

Number of Jadges

3.37. Incidentally, if the load of the calendar of the Supreme
Court is rationally reduced and is confined to really important issues,
the problem of growing arrears, which is disturbing the mind of the
Supreme Court, may also be solved; and in the long run the number
of the Supreme Court Judges may have to be conveniently and pro-
portionately reduced.

Two views on to iole of kighesi court

3.38. It may be recalled that in an earlier Chapter,’ reference was
made to the view expressed by Justice Frankfurter that, if the highest
Court under a federal Constitution is to lay down laws, constitutionally
or otherwise, to bind all the federating units, its calendar should not
be over-burdened and sufficient time should be allowed to the Judges
of the Court to think about the complex problems brought before them
and pronounce verdicts which may enrich the legal literature of the
country. These observations support the view which three of us—the
Chairman, Dr. Tripathi and Mr. Bakshi—took in this debate.

3.39. On the other hand, two of us—Mr. Dhavan and Mr. Sen
Varma—strongly expressed the view that the analogy of the United
States and Western Germany cannot be regarded as relevant to the
conditions of our country for several reasons. They thought that the
conferment of the comprehensive and wide jurisdiction on the Supreme
Court was intended to serve the primary purpose of sustaining the
anity of the country. Besides, the history of judicial administration

3, Chapter 2, supra.


36

in our country, the nature of our Constitution, which is not federat
in the traditional technical sense, the hopes and expectations of liti-
gants to have final verdict from the Supreme Court, at least in im-
Portant matters, and other relevant facts, which are special to the
administration of justice in India, would make it unreasonable and
certainly unfeasible to invoke the analogy of the United States in
considering this point. Therefore, according to them, in its broad
features the functioning of the Supreme Court must continue, as at
Present. In regard to the problem of growing arrears, the view of these-
two members is that the proper solution to the problem is to appoint
large number of Judges in the Supreme Court.

Basis of our conclusion

3.40. We ought to add that, in our present Report, in dealing
with the issues pertaining to the scope and extent of the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court, we have not based our recommendations on
either of the two views which were expressed in our discussion. We
thought that the conclusions, to which we ultimately arrived unani-
mously and which are the basis of our relevant recommendations, 60.
not need a final decision on this issue. That is why, two members of
the Commission, who did not agree with the majority view in this
matter, did not think it necessary to elaborate their point of view by
writing a minute of dissent, or by suggesting that the theoretical basis
of their point of view should be expressly stated in the introductory
observations.

3.41. Our conclusion, therefore, is that article 134(1)(c) of the
Constitution should be revised as follows:—

Conclusions
“(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment,
final order or sentence in criminal proceeding of a High Court
in the territory of India if the High Court—
{(a) and (b) as at present]
(c) certifies—
(i that the case involves a substantial question of law of
general importance; and
(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court, the said question
needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.

“Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall be subject to
such provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of
article 145 and subject to such conditions as the High Court may
establish or require.”


37

Appeals to the Supreme Court on special leave

Appeals by special leave under article 136

3.42. We now proceed to consider whether it is necessary to modi-
fy article 136 in view of articles 133(1)(c) (as amended) and 134(1)(ch
as proposed to be amended in this Report. Article 136 of the Consti-
tution reads as follows:—

Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court

“136. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme
Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal
from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order
in any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribu-
nal in the territory of India.

(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment,
determination, sentence or order passed or made by any court
or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the
Armed Forces.”

‘The wide scope of article 136

3.43. The plenary nature of the jurisdiction‘ under article 136 is
well recognised. The language of the article is very wide.

The width of the jurisdiction is brought out by several words used
in the article. The appeal could be against the decision of any court
or tribunal. 10 could be in respect of any species of judicial determina-
tion, i.c., against a judgment, decree, determination, sentence, or order.
‘And the order sought to be appealed from could be in any cause or
matter, Nevertheless, the possibility that undue advantage may be
sought to be taken by litigants of this extensive and all-embracing
jurisdiction could not be ruled out; litigants may attempt to circumvent
the restrictions under articles 133 and 134 by resorting to article 136.
Tn this background, it appeared to us a) propriate to elicit opinion as
to whether the scope of article 136 should be restricted from the point
of view mentioned above.

‘The question posed
) ३.44, Accordingly, Question 2 in our Questionnaire reads as fol-
lows: —

Q.2. Would you favour any modification as to the scope of ap-
peal under article 136 of the Constitution, against judgments
of High Courts?

4. Para 3742, supra.



38

Recent amendment of article 133

3.45. The main point to be considered in regard to this article is
if the article should be suitably amended so as to exclude from its
purview, ordinary civil] and criminal appeals. In this connection, atten-
tion is invited to the recent amendment’ of article 133 (It is Proposed
that article 134 should similarly be amended?), The suggestion was
that so far as civil and criminal appeals are concerned, it is ouly those
appeals which satisfy the requirements of article 133 (as amended) and
Article 134 (as proposed to be amended)° that should reach the Supreme
Court, and no other.

Figures of appeals pending in the Supreme Court

3.46. It may be relevant, in this connection, to note the number
of appeals by special leave (in the Supreme Court). At the close of the
last three years, the figures of appeals in the Supreme Court under
articles 132, 133 and 136 were as follows‘:—

1969 19701972
Am ey

(a) Namber of Appeals atthe opening of the
क्र न a न 4,209 4,873 3.430

year.

(0) Number ofappeals iistituted during the
year om . ” हा. आग. 2.83. 2,175
(० Number ofappeals disposed of during the

yoar 2,046 1.03 1437

(व)

umber खा appeals po:

alticond ofthe
year : नर

3,375 ea) 6.एा4

Note: These figures are under article 132, 133 and 136 of the
stitution. Separate figures under each article are not avail.

3.47. It was apprehended that a desire to circumvent articles 133
and 134 might result in an appreciable increase in the number of ap-
Plications for leave to appeal under article 136.

The scope of article 136

3.48. We have already referred’ to the fact that the jurisdiction
under article 136 is plenary. The relationship of Article 136 of the

1, Constitution (30th Amedment) Act, 1973.
4, See discussion as to Question 1.
$. See discussion as to Question I.
4. Statement No. S—s.
5. Para 3-43, supra.


39

Constitution with the other articles can be illustrated by referring to:
a few situations where the article has been resorted to:—

(1) Article 136 has been utilized even where an appeal is barred.
by a specific constitutional provision, such as article 133@),
quoted below :—

“(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall,
unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, lie to the
Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final order
of one judge of a High Court.”

(2) Article 136 has been applied where a certificate under article
133 or 134 was wrongly granted, but the case was one in
which special leave could appropriately have been sought
under article 136.

(3) Similarly, resort to article 136 has been regarded as permis-
sible where a certificate under article 133 or 134 was wrongly
refused.

(4) Leave has been granted under article 136 even where the case
could have been dealt with, and an appeal as a matter of
right would have been competent, under another article, e.g.
article 132(2), which reads as follows: —

(2) Where the High Court has refused to give such a certi-
ficate, the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the
case involves a substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of this Constitution, grant speciul leave to
appeal from such judgment, decree, or final order.”

Gist of the replies

3.49. Opinion received by us on this question reveals strong op-
position to curtailment of this jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. It
has been stated that it is almost impossible to anticipate all possible
situations in which the discretion under article 136 should be exercis-
ed. Many of the replies stress the desirability of preserving the existing
wide discretion of the Supreme Court, and point out that it may be
assumed that the discretion is exercised sparingly and only in cases of
exceptional nature. The overwhelming majority of the replies on the
Question are against the imposition of limitations suggested in the
query.

In particular, it may be stated that some Judges‘ of the Supreme
Court, in a written reply on our Questionnaire, do not favour any
modification in the scope of appeal under article 136 of the Constitu-
tion against judgements of High Court.

3, $.No. 50.


40

Other important suggestions on question 2

3.50. Some of the other important Suggestions with reference to
this question are as follows:—

One Labour Depariment! of a State Government favour modifica-
tion in article 136 to the effect that appeals should be allow-
ed only in cases where substantial points of law are involved.

3.51, Four Judges’ of a High Court have expressed the view that
the scope of appeais by special leave under article 136 shouid be limit-
ed to cases where a substantial question of law ielating to imterpreta-
tion of the Constitution sr a substantial question of law of general
importance is involved, or where the High Court has improperly re-
fused leave under articles 133 and 134 of the Constitution.

3.52. There is a suggestion® that appeais under article 136 should
be limited io cases where substantial questions of law of general im-
Portarce or questions of constitutional law of general importance arise.

Object of the Question

3.53. We may siate here that our object in putting the question
was to elicit vi from Uiose who have Practical experience of the
Portant aspect, namely.

enacted er pre
under icles 133
tions may 53 ci:
135,

No Al

1४ suggested

3. i appenrs, however, that any such restriction hay ६ en re-
garded as inadvisable by most Judges and most Judges and ! embers
of the Bar.* But, apart from this opinion evidence 10 which we, no
doubt, attach considerable importance, on principle, it seems to us that,
baying regard to the history of judicial admi tration in our country
and the nature of our constitutional and judicial Set-up, conferment of
comprehensive powers on the highest court in the country is justified,
We feel that the very existence of this power may be ‘expected to
exercise a salutary check on all judicial and other bodies where deci-
sions are subject to the jurisdiction in question.

Leave granted sparingly

3.55, Having reached this conclusion, we ought to add that we
have no doubt that the very width and comprehensive character of en very width and comprehensive character of the

+ 8, No. 33(Assistant Secretary, Labour Department, Government of West Bengal.
+, 8, No. 50

*, 8. Nos, 21 and 19.

+, Para 3-49, supra.


41

power conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 136 will naturally
make the approach of the Court very circumspect. cautious and care-
ful in dealing with the applications for special leave under tne said
article. In fact, that is the view which has frequently been expressed
by the Court itself.

3.56. It is well established that grant of special leave under article

136 is a matter of discreaion, and not of right. Being a constitutional

power, the power of the Supreme Court under article 136 15 beyond

the reach ef legislation’; and the over-riding power is wider than the

tive right exercised by the Privy Council’. But the Supreme

grant leave only in special and exceptional cases. where it

is manifest that by the disregard cf the forms of legal process or by

violation of the principles of natural justice or otherwise, substantial
and grave injustice has been done’.

Lord Simon’s L. C. observations

3.57. In 1941, a statement’ was made by Lord Simon, L. C. pre-
siding ia the Judicial Committee, in which he first enunciated the prac-
tice in general terms; “Broadly speaking, the Judicial Commitice will
only interfere where there has been an infringement of the escential
principles of justice.”

Though the Supreme Court’s jurisdiction under article 136 need
not be equated to that of the Privy Council, the above statement,
gives an idea of the broad considerations on which leave will be
granted in criminal cases.

1 धर res, Phe State, ALR, 1971 53.0. 1950, 1053.
tL btsiww 7, Bteshwar Prasad, ALR. 1968 8.0. 559, 695: (1968) 2 S.C.

8 Durga Shanker v.Phakur Rrzuraj Singh A. 1.8, 1943 8.0, 520, 522; (1955)
8.0.R, 267.

« State of Andhra Pratesh v. 1.8.8. Prasad Rao, A.I.R. 1970 8.0. 648, 651
6 Muhammat Nawaz v. R. (1941) L.R. 68 1.4. 128.



CHAPTER 4
PETITIONS FOR WRITS BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT
Introductory

4.1. We propose to deal in this Chapter with two questions con:
cerning petitions for writs before the Supreme Court.

Disputed questions of fact
Petitions under article 32
4.1A. Article 32 of the Constitution reads as follows:—
“32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.—-

(1) The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate pro-
ceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this
Part is guaranteed.

(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue direc-
tions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of
habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo-warranto and
certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement
of any rights conferred by this Part.

(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the
Supreme Court by clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law
empower any other court to exercise within the loval limits
of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by the
Supreme Court under clause (2).

“(4) The right guaranteed by this article shal! net be
suspended except as otherwise provided for by this Constitu-
tion.

4.2 & 4.3. Question 3 in our Questionnaire reads thus—-

Question 3
“3. (a) Do you favour the view that in petitions to the Supreme
Court under article 32, disputed questions of fact should not
be gone into?
(b) 11 so, what course would you suggest for the trial of
issues of fact in such petitions?
(० If not, do you think that evidence should be recorded
in 3 petition under article 32 in the same manner as in a
suit?’

42


Gist of the replies

4.4. With reference to this question, a very large number of re-
plies are for maintaining the status quo and are opposed to any amend-
ment. This constitutes, by far, the largest majority. A very small num-
ber consists of replies which favour restricting the trial of facts to affi-
davits, without oral evidence.

There are a few other suggestions also.

Views of some Judges of the Supreme Court

4.5. Some Judges’ of the Supreme Court state in their reply that,
as a matter of practice, the Supreme Court does not go into questions
of fact in petitions under article 32 of the Constitution. Hence, there
js no need to make any change in the law.

Nature of the remedy under article 32

4.6, The present position is that if a petitioner makes out a case of
violation of his fundamental rights, the grant of the appropriate writ
by the Supreme Court under article 32 is not discretionary, but is a
matter of right. In one of the leading cases* on the subject, Das, C. J.,
said that neither the existence of an adequate alternative remedy, nor
the fact that the petition raised disputed questions of fact, justified the
rejection of a petition under article 32, if it established a prima facie
case of actual or threatened violation of fundamental rights. The Chief
Justice said that ordinarily, disputed question of fact could be decided
‘on affidavits. In some cases, the court may consider it desirable to
allow the parties to put in further affidavits, or may issue a commis
sion, or set down the petition for trial on the evidence, and this had
been frequently done on the Original Side of the Calcutta and Bombay
High Courts.

Remedy—a fundamental right

4.7. This liberal view is largely attributable to the fact that article
32 itself confers a fundamental right’. It is often stated that a special
responsibility is laid on the Supreme Court in this matter.

Duty of Supreme Court in petitions under art. 32

4.8. The Supreme Court has pointed out‘ that “article 32 does
not merely confer power on the Supreme Court (as article 226 does

‘on the High Courts) to issue certain writs for the enforcement of the

ENO OOO ee

3, KK. Kochunni . State ० / Madras, (1958) Supp. (2) 8.C.R. 316, 326; AIR. 1959
8.C.334, 336.

3, See para. 4:8, infra.

4. Romesh Thapper v. State of Madras, (1950) 8.C.R. 694, A.L.R- 1960 8.0. 124
(Patanjali Sastei J. delivering the majority judgment).



44

rights conferred by Part III, or for any other parpose, as part of the
general jurisdiction.” Article 32 provides a ‘guaranteed’ remedy for the
enforcement of those rights, and this remedial right is itself made a
fundamental right by being included in Part IM. “This Court is thus
constituted the protector and guarantor of fundamental rights, and it
cannot, consistently with the responsibility so laid upon il, refuse to
entertain applications seeking protection against infringements of such
rights.”

Nature of jurisdiction under articles 32 and 226

4.9, In one sense. the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court
under article 32 is narrower than that conferred on the High Couris
by art 226. As is often pointed out. under article 226, the High
Courts ace empowered to issue certain writs or orders for the enforce-
ment of the fundameatai rights as well as “for any other purpose”;
whereas, article 32 is limited to the enforcement of fundamental rights.
But’ the right to move the Supreme Court under article 32 to enforce
the fundamenitai righis is itself a fundamental right, and the aut!crity
conferred on the eme Court by this article is coupled with a duty
to exerciss that authority. Exercise of authority under article 226, is
discretionary, but net the au ity under article 32, That is a point
which has १७ be borre in mind in consid the question which we
are discuss n this Chapter,

Relevance ef statistics

on of the question whether an amendment
of the Constiution is needed in respect of trial of quessions of fact,
a study of the rumber of petitions disposed of by. or pending in, the
Supreme Court is Cosirable.

Petitions disposed ef during 1969-70

4.11. Ie sppears that the retitions for writs disposed of by the
Supreme Court? during 1969, 1970 and 1971 were 471, 616, 396 res»
pectively. and even out of these, many were decided in limine.

Statistic: vegarding institution and disposal of petitions

4.12, The number of petitions’ pertaining to writ jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court. pending at the close of three years (1969, 1970
and 1971) was as follows: —

17] Nun-‘er of petitin: sat the opecing of the

TS} 245 288

4b) Numoor of potitioss i

year Aas 656 469

5. Darn, 4. 8, supe:
2, Statement Ne
* Statement No



45

(८) Number तर peti
year

itionsd disposed of during the
es . a 471 छा6 396

(a) Number of po ing atthe end of

tie ¥ we an a 248 288 361
(6) एसी एक sel ixfimine during the
year न >> >> 192 302 219

Norte :—Figures of column (०) are also included in the figures of
column (०).

No change recommended

4.13. Having regard to the very significant role which article 32
is intended to play in the enforcement of fundamental rights conferred
on citizens by Part III, it would, we think, be inappropriate to seek to
introduce any ‘imitation in the exercise of the Court’s jurisdiction
under this article in respect of disputed questions of fact. Jt is true
that sometimes, the Court may find it inexpedient to decide disputed
35 Of fact on affidavits. In such cases, the Court may adopt any
alternative courses to which the Chief Justice has referred in
K.K. Keochini v. State of Madras.' Yn any case, this is a matier which
must Le left to the discretion of the Court, and it would be unwise
ssonable to seek to introduce any limitation on the exercise of
ove Supreme Court under article 32 even though
of the petition may raise a disputed question of fact.

Grant of Interim Stay

Interim reef in pethiovs wader article 32

4.14. In connection with the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
to issue writs? under article 32 of the Constitution, there is another
question to be considered. This question applies to ihe High Courts
105० the High Courts also have jurisdiction to issue writs. The
nt in regard to such writ petitions is that sometimes such peti-
tions are filed mainly to gain time by obtaining stay orders, and ulti-
mately it is found that the petitions do not involve any question which
justifies the interference of the court. In order to prevent the institution
of unsubstantial or frivolous writ petitions, a suggestion which we had
ler was, that in exercise of the jurisdiction to issue writs, an
interim stay or injunction should not be issued, unless notice of the
proposal to move the court in that behalf is served on the respondent
and copies of a!l documents in support of the plea for stay or injunc-
tion are filed ir court and served on the opposite party.

3, Para 4-6. supra,
3, See queation 5.


Question 4

4.15. This point is, we have stated’, common to the writ jurisdic-
tion of the Supreme Court and the High Court. In so far as the
Supreme Court is concerned, Question 4 in our Questionnaire was as
follows :—~

“Jn relation to the grant of ad interim stay by the Supreme Court,
in petitions under article 32, do you favour the same limita-
tions as have been suggested below’ in relation to the High
Courts?”

Interim stay often prayed

4.16. Figures relating to stay granted by the Supreme Court in
petitions under article 32 are not available.’ But it is very likely that
writ petitions are sometimes filed before the Supreme Court, mainly
for obtaining interim stay.

Recommendation in Report on C.P.C.

4.17. It may, at this stage, be useful to mention that, in our
Report* on the Code of Civil Procedure, the following recommenda-
tions were made for amendment of the provisions of that Code as to
the issue of temporary injunctions—provisions mainly contained in
Order 39 of the First Schedule to that Code: —

(i) The following proviso should be inserted below Order 39,
tule 3—

“Provided that where ar injunction has been granted without
notice to the opposite party—

(a) the period for which it shall be in force as initially fixed
shall not exceed one month;

(0) hearing of the application for injunction shall, as far as
practicable, be finished within one month; and

{c) if it becomes absolutely necessary to extend the period
for which the injunction is to remain in force, the exten-
sion shall not exceed fifteen days, except with the consent
of the opposite party.

1, Para 4: 14, 3४.76.
2, See Question 6.

4, & proforma (Statement No. 6:2) had been prepared for the purpose, but the
figures woron0t readily available.

#, 8७0 Report (Code of Civil Procedure), para 39-18.


47

“Provided further that where an injunction is granted on
the plaintiff's application without notice to the opposite
party,” the court shall, before granting it, require the plaintiff
to file an affidavit stating that a copy of each of the follow-
ing documents has been served on the opposite party by
delivery to him, or where such service is not practicable, by
sending it to him by registered post—

fa) the plaint,
(b) the documents on which the plaintiff relies,
(c) the application for injunction, and

(9) the affidavit or other documents on which the applicant
telies :

“Provided further that if a party, in an application for
temporary injunction or in the supporting affidavit, has
knowingly made a false or misleading statement on a material
particular, and the injunction was granted without notice, the
court shall vacate the injunction unless, for reasons to be re-
corded, it considers it just not to do so”:

“Provided further that where an order for injunction has
been passed after giving a party an opportunity of being
heard, the order shall not be discharged, varied or set aside
on the application of that party, unless there has been a
change of circumstances, or, unless the court is satisfied that
the order has caused undue hardship to that party.”

Reasons for above safeguards

4.18. We may state here that so far as the issue of temporary in-
junctions under the Code of Civil Procedure is concerned, these safe-
guards had to be thought of in view of the widespread feeling that
many suits were delayed because of the grant of temporary injunctions
ex parte, and injustice was often done to the opposite party (.6., the
party against whom the injunction is issued). The restrictions’ suggest-
ed are self-explanatory. It appeared to us desirable to consider the
question whether somewhat similar conditions should apply in rela-
tion to the grant of stay in writ cases also.

Gist of the replies
4.19. A large majority of the replies 2.9 uestion 4 both from

Bench and the Bar are opposed to any a: Iment on the fines put-
forth in the question, and only a small number favours it.


48

4.20. Some Judges’ of the Supreme Court, who have favoured us
with their written views, are also against any provision in the Consti-
tution to limit the power of the Supreme Court in the matter of grant-
ing ad interim stay in petitions under article 32. The object, they say,
could be achieved by making suitable rules under article 145 Of the
Constitution,

4.21. One of ithe other comments states that the prevailing situa-
tions in the country are such that the aggrieved citizens are filing large
number of writ petitions, a good number of which ends in success. If
the power of granting stay under article 32 or article 226 is restricted,
the purpose for which those articles are intended would be frustrated
to a great extent.

Trend of opinion

4.22. it appears, thus* from the views received, that judicial and
Pprofessiona} opinion generally does not consider it necessary to intro-
duce such elaborate limitations. Our principal object in putting a ques-
tion on the subject was to elicit views as to the machinery to be devised
for saving the time of the Supreme Court, often taken by au applica-
tion for interim stay filed without adequate material and also avoiding
injustice to the respondent by obtaining interim stay. The trend of
opiaion, however, seems to suggest that no serious problem of abuse
of jurisdiction exists,

Roles of Court

4.23. We should also refer to the rules made by the Supreme
Court on the subject of notice of motion. The practical result of these
rules is the imposition of itations substantially of the same nature
as those recommended by us in relation to the grant of interim injune-
tions under the Code of Civil Procedure.

The relevant rules as to notice of motion are as follows‘ :—

“I. Except where otherwise provided by any statute or prescribed
by these rules, all ap, plications which in accordance with
these rules cannot be made in Chambers shali be made on
motion after notice to the parties affected thereby.

2. Where the delay caused by notice would or might entail serious
hardship, the applicant may pray for an ad interim ex parte
order in the notice of motion, and the court, if satisfied upon
affidavit or otherwise that the delay caused by notice would

2, 8. No. 5),

3, Para 4-19, supra.

*, Para 4-17, supra.

4, Supreme Court Rules, 1966—Order 8, Rules ३ and 2.


49

entail serious hardship, may make an order ex parte upon
such terms as to costs or otherwise, and subject io such under-
taking being given, if any, as the Court may think just, pend-
ing orders on the motion after notice to the parties affected
thereby.

3. Where an ex parte order is made by the Court, unless the
Court has fixed a date for the return of the notice, or other-
wise directs, the Registrar shall fix a date for the return of
the notice and the application by notice of motion shall be
posted before the Court for final orders on the seturnable
date”. हु

No change recommended

4.24. In our opinion, these rules are, on the whole, satisfactory.
Orders passed in accordance not with them are not likely to cause in-
justice. We do not. therefore, recommend any amendme™* in this ree

gard.


CHAPTER 5
PETITIONS FOR WRITS BEFORE HIGH COURTS
Interim Stay
Jurisdiction of High Courts to issue writs
5.1. A similar question relating to the jurisdiction of the High
Courts to issue writs needs consideration. The Constitution has de-
clared certain rights to be fundamental. For the purpose of the speedy
enforcement of the rights—as we have already pointed out',——the
Constitution has conferred on the Supreme Court? and the High
Courts’a powers to issue “directions, orders and writs”. Besides, the
Constitution has also conferred on the High Courts power to issue
such directions, orders and writs “for any other purpose”, It has
been stated,‘ that presumably the object of giving this power was to
put the High Courts substantially in the same position as the Court
of the Queen’s Bench in England.

Article 226 of the Constitution reads as follows:—

“226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs—(1) Not-
withstanding anything in article 32, every High Court shall
have power, throughout the territories in relation to which
it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority,
including in appropriate cases any Government, within
those territories directions, orders or writs, including writs
in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo
warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforce-
ment of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any
other purpose.

(1A) The power conferred by clause (i) to issue directions, or-
ders or writs to any Government, authority or person may
also be exercised by any High Court exercising jurisdiction
in relation to the territories within which the cause of ac-
tion, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise if such Gov-
ernment or authority or the residence of such person is
not within those territories.

1, See chapter 4. supra.
3, Article 32.

#.a Article 226.

3, Article 226,

*. Election Commissiner v, Saka Venkata 3७७७ Rao. (1953) $.C.R. 1144, 1150.

5)


51

(2) The power conferred on a High Court by clause (1) or
clause (1A) shall not be in derogation of the power con-
ferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32”.

Use of writ jurisdiction

5.2. It is common knowledge that extensive use has been made
of this jurisdiction of the High Courts, not only by setting aside in-
valid laws and subordinate legislation, but also by nullifying admi-
nistrative orders which infringe fundamental or other rights and by
supervision ‘over quasi-judicial authorities.

If, for example, a High Court holds a law to be invalid, it will
ordinarily issue a mandamus or give a direction commanding the
person enforcing or seeking to enforce the law to refrain from doing
so.’

Writs and Subordinate legislation

5.3. When a writ petition challenging the validity of subordinate
legislation is filed and is successful, the High Court usually issues a
writ in the nature of mandamus, requiring the authority concerned
to forbear from enforcing it.

Writ jurisdiction and administrative orders

5.4, The writ jurisdiction has been most frequently invoked to
challenge administrative orders. It is not intended to enter here into
a discussion of the possible grounds of such challenge. It is suffi-
cient to refer to a few of the important grounds, such as, mala fide
bias, non-observance of rules of natural justice or non-compliance
with the Constitution, the law or rules or other subordinate legis-
tion.

Supervisory jurisdiction of High Courts

5.5. Another important aspect of the writ jurisdiction is its use
as a means of ensuring the supervision of the High Courts over the
actions of quasi-judicial and administrative tribunals.

Scope of the jurisdiction

5.6. It is thus clear that the scope of article 226 is very wide
and its provisions are intended to afford to the citizens a speedy
remedy against illegal executive or administrative actions as well as
illegal invasion of their Fundamental Rights. On the whole, this arti-
cle has served a very useful purpose and thereby sustained the doc-
fine of the rule of law, on which our democratic way of life is
iounded,

3, Mohl. Hanif Qureshi v. Stats of Bikar, (1959) 8.C.R. 629.



52

~ Weare aware tbat, in some cases, in their zeal to do justice as
between’ citizens and the State, some High Courts have occasionally
entertained petilions which strictly do not satisfy the requirement of
article 226 and have granted relief, overlooking the limitations ob-
viously invoived in the exercise of the power conferred by the arti-
cle. But, such unjustified exercise of the power in a small number
of cases does not detract from the significance and usefulness of the
conferment of the power itself.

Interim relief in writs

5.7. However, our point in emphasising the wide scope of the
jurisdiction is this. When the court issucs an interim order, pending
the determination of the petition, should not the party seeking in-
terim relief be required to give notice to the opposite party of the
application for interim relief? Such a course could be regarded as
desirable. having regard to the wide range of activities’ likely to be
affected by petitions filed under article 226. The matters with which
such activities have to deal, affect governments, local authorities and
citizens; and. for the effective functioning of the administration at its
various levels, it is often essential that the authoritative determina-
tion of questions should be obtained with the minimum of delay.

Compiaint about frivolous petitions

5.8. In regard to Writ Petitions pending in the High Courts, the
complaint is that a large number of such petitions are filed mainly
to gain time by obtaining stay orders, and ultimately it is found
that they do not involve any question which justified the interfe-
rence of the High Courts under article 226. In order to prevent the
institution of unsubstantial or frivolous writ petitions, a suggestion
is made that court empowered to issue a writ should not issue in-
terim stay or injunction, unless notice of the proposal to move the
court in that behalf is served on the respondent and copies of all
documents in support of the plea for stay or injunction are filed in
court and served on the opposite party.

Statistics indicating the grant of ad imterim stay in petitions
5.9. We have collected statistics relating to ad interim stay
granted by the High Courts in petitions under article 226. These
show’ that the proportion of cases in which such stay is granted is
not negligible. The figures are as follows:
ALLAHABAD

(a) No. of cases in wh'eh stay was granted during the year (1971), in petitio; ह under
Article 226... कं ve रु का i Em)

(89) No.oferses in whichstay wasgranted during the yearafiernotice, '
insucb petitions . . न o

867

1, See Pares 5:2 to 5-8. supra.


53

BOMBAY

in whichstay wasgranted duriug the year (1971), in
Article22600

in which stay was granted daring the year (1971).
smneder Article ae

ay was geauted dnrii

43) No. of essay bi whi
7 potion, i

the year (1

whichstay was gre:rt 2d during the yearafier i

KERALA

sin whoh stay
ler Article 226

fa) No.0

= granted during the you (1071). ta
pe . -

(b) No.ofeasesia waiokstay was granted during the year after notiee
in, such petitions . .

MADHYA PRADESH
(a) No.ofcasesin which stay wasgrantedduringthe year(1971) —.~
(0) No.of casesin which stay was granted during tke year after notice,
in each petition a
MYSORE

(a) No. of casesin which stay was granted during the year (1971),in
petitions under Article 226

(8) No, of cases in which stay was granted during the year after
notice, in such petitions .

PATNA
(a) No. of cases in which stay was granted during the year (1971),
in petitions under Arti oe .

(b) No. of casea in which stay was ted during the after
notice, in such petitions रे हा नर yor

the year afler *

598

154

163

5,032

804

1,143

Information
ia not
available.

201

150


54

PUNJAB AND HARYANA
(०) No. of cases in which stay was granted during the year (1971), in

Petitions under Article 226 न : 2,316
(०) No. of cases in which stay was granted during the year after
notied, in such petitions न >> न कु 13
RAJASTHAN

(a) No. of eases in which stay was grated during the year after
notice, in auch petitions we we a कि

5.10 The percentage of stay granted during the years 1969, 1970
and 1971, without notice in writs under article 226 by High Courts
with reference to the total number of writs disposed of during those
three years works out as follows !~*

126

High Courts Percentage

1. Allshabad High Court, न न . 23%
2. Bombay High Court . . न न 49%
3. Caleutta High Court 0५ a” . . . 42%
4. Gujarat High Court न न जन बन o 28%
5. Korala High Court os कु न . न 67%,
6. Meluva Pradesh High Court . . . 1%
7. Maclvas High Court . . न न “ 19%
8. Orisna High Court . . . ” . 18%
9. Punjab & Haryana High Court. . . . 47%
10. Patna High Corrt® न “ oe . 7%
AL. Rajasthan High Court. . . . >> 51%

Total percentage ss 92% appr.

‘foulation based on figures of disposal given in statement No. H—1 and figures
of interim stay in Statement H—2. These were collected by the Law Commission from
the Hig Courte for the year concerned.

3, Arranged alphabetically.

Dadi for the Patna High Court is based on the figures for the year
1970 and 1971.

Figures for 1969 have not been received,



Question 5

5.11. In order to solicit views on the subject, Question 5 was
put in our Questionnaire as follows:—

“Q.5(a). Do you agree with the suggestion that in writ petitions
to the High Courts under article 226 of the Constitution,
stay should not be granted, save in exceptional cases?

(0) Do you favour an amendment of the Constitution to the
effect that unless the Court, for special reasons to be re-
corded, otherwise orders by reason of exceptional circums-
tances, no interim order for stay shall be asked for, in @
petition under article 226, without filing evidence before the
High Court that (i) notice of the intention to move the
Court at a specified time and for specified relief has been
or shall be given to the opposite party; and (ii) copies of
all documents filed in Court and intended to be relied upon
in support of the application for interim relief have been,
or shall be served upon the opposite party?”

Gist of copies

5.12. A very large majority of the replies to question 5 are op-
posed to an amendment of the Constitution on the lines suggested
in the query. This includes a very large majority of the High Courts
and High Court Judges that have sent replies. They do agree that
stay should not be granted except in exceptional cases. But they are
not all in favour of any constitutional amendment in this regard.
Some of them state that the necessary provision can be made in the
rules, but most do not go even so far. A very smal} minority’ favour
an amendment, as suggested in the query.

Views of some Judges of the Supreme Court

5.13. Some Judges of the Supreme Court agree? with the spirit
of the suggestion that in writ petitions under article 226 of the
Constitution interim stay should not be granted unless the Court.
for special reasons to be recorded, otherwise orders by reason of
exceptional circumstances, They, however, feel that the provisions
regarding notice to be given to the opposite party and copies of all
documents may be done by making appropriate rules by the High
Court, and they are not in favour of amending the Constitution for

18 purpose.

1, E.G.S. No, 8;S, No. 19;S, No, 21;8. No. 32; and 8. No, 388.No. 45 and. No, 49.
4, S.No. 50.


56

In this background, we shall now consider the question of stay
ad-interim.
“Stay” explained

5.14. “Stay” is of course, a convenient expression, which may
be taken as covering several situations, important amongst which are
the following: —

(a) Stay of proceedings held before a quasi-judicial authority
{This is most frequently granted when the ultimate writ
applied for is of certiorari);

(b) stay of executive action (usually prayed for when mando-
mus is sought),

(7 stay of administrative proceedings.

पा reference to category (b) above, what is sometimes called

“anticipatory mandamus’, is also relevant. Alleged illegal action is
sought to be prevented thereby.

ex to issue wrils

tion of this and other questions concerning writs
som: vital points, It has been observed,

age of an inexorable command. By it the Court is constituted
the trustec ef 2 high power for a high purpose maintaining cuqili-

brit, bow © (wo antithetical off springs of jus naturalia abso-
lure, the Rights of M Its constitutional origins, its immence
potent for god and harm alike counsel the Court to exercise the
power with & coming prudence and reason, so that on the one hand,

the State may not be unduly hampered in its legitimate domain, and
on the other hand. the esseutial rights of man may not be abridged un-
neces हु

A delicate balance between the two aspects referred to above
has, therefore. to be achieved.

Supreme Courts observations as to the power to issue writs
5.16. As the Supreme Court has observed:

“In view of the express provisions in our Constitution, we need
not look back to the early history of the procedural! technicalities of
these writs in English law, nor feel oppressed by any difference or

1, Muster Husaia v. State of U.P. ALR. 1960 Allahabad 539. 50), para 18
(SN, Dwivedi व.)

3, Otto Gierkee Barker’s Translation),Natural Law and the Thy
1800—-Reacou, B.C. Fei. ०६ pages 41 and 113-314.

ryt Society, 1500—



57

change of opinion expressed in particular cases of English Judges.
We can make an order or issue a writ in the nature of certiorari in
all appropriate cases and in an appropriate manner, so long as we
keep to the broad and fundamental principles that regulate the exer-

cise of jurisdiction in the matier of granting such writs in English

Inierinn stay without notice—effect of

5.17, What we are concerned with al the moment is the subject
of interim siay granted in writ petitions. Occasionally, such stay, if
issued without notice, causes hardship.

High Court’s Power to grant interim stay discussed
5.1९, There has been sonic discussion even about the existence

of a pow
th

et to issue interim slay in writ cases. It hes sometimes been
t the High Cours nas no dower to Issue ad interim: writs.
ahabad case, for example, sorae doubi was raised on the

ver, i: is assumed that the power to issue an
we not come across any other judicial

0 is one of ensuring that
stances which lead to ils

ing ६ request for 9 preliminary order
rye a state of affairs such
ion of full trial, to render
© problem thus is of recon-
doing justice to both.

an her party
2 the interests of both narties. and

4.20. The protlems which we are now facing are not unknown

९1९५.

Position in the U.S.
In the U.S.A.. 5 serious problem arose’ by reason of injunctions
issued by (federal) ¢'strict courts, enjoining the enforcement of State

unconstitutional statues. Opposition to this practice gave rise, in 1908,

£250, 256: ALR. 1954 5.0". 440,

seappa 0५ T. Nagapye (1955) LS.

ad.
2, Hye Clout Bhatia एन Rent Controt aml Eviction Officer, Lucknow and another,
ATW. 1966 Al}. S7(FB).
3, Gonerally, See “Phe Tiree Judge District Court”, (1963) 77 Havard Law Review
299.


58

.to an abortive congressional attempt to oust the jurisdiction of dis-
trict courts to enjoin State statutes on the ground of unconstituiona-
lity." In 1910, Congress established the extra-ordinary “three judge
court”, with a direct appeal procedure, for such suits?

The Act of 1910 was motivated less by hostility to the granting
of injunctive relief than by concern over the precipitate manner in
which a federal judge sitting alone could frustrate carefully planned
State policies. Congress seemed desirous of impressing upon federal
judges the serious and drastic nature of the injunctive remedy.?

What Senator Bacon, one of the sponsors of the Act observed*
in 1908 is of interest for our purpose also. He said. “If these (federal)
courts are to exercise the power of stopping the operation of the laws
of a State and of punishing the officers of a State, then at least let it
be done on notice and not hastily, and let there be the judgement of
three judges to decide such questions, and not permit such dangerous
power to one man.”

5.21. The present law on the subject in the U.S.A. is as follows:—

Before a federal district court can grant an injunction against the
enforcement of a State’ of federal‘ statute’ on the ground
that the statute is unconstitutional, the case must be heard
and determined by a three judge district court.t

The relevant section of the Judiciary and Judicial Procedure Act*
provides as follows:—

“Injunction against enforcement of State statute, three judge
court required—An inter-locutory or permanent injuction res-
training the enforcement, operation or execution of any State
statute by restraining the action of any officer of such State
in the enforcement or execution of such statute or of an

1, 42 Cong. Rec. 4849 (1908).
3, Nole—*Three Judge Court Reas:eased’’ (1963) 72 Yale. Law Journal 1646.

3, 42 Cong. Rec, 4853, referred toin Note,“‘Three Juco Court Reassessed””. (1963)
72 Yale Law Journa)l646.

$, See (1964) 28 U.S, Code 2281.

§, Also, in the case of the states, ‘‘an order made by an administrative board or com-
mission acting under statestatutes...... » (1964) 28 U.S.C, 2281.

५. The composition and procedure of three judge district courts is described at length
in (1964) 28 ए.8,0. 2284.


59

* order made by an administeative board or commission acting
under State statutes, shall not be granted by any district
court or judge thereof upon the ground of the unconstitu-
tionality of such statute unless the application therefor is
heard and determined by a district court of three judges
under section 2284 of this title.”

5.22. As regards federal statutes, another section of the Judiciary
and Judicial Procedure Act states' as follows:

“Injunction against enforcement of federal statutes: three-judge
court required—

An interlocutory or permanent injunction, restraining the en-
forcement, operation or execution of any Act of Congress for
repugnance to the Constitution of the United States shall not
be granted by any district court or judge thereof unless the
application therefor is heard and determined by a district
court of thre judges under section 2284 of this title.”

Three Judge Courts

5.23. The Uiree judge courts have ben at the centre of some of
the major conflicts between national and State policy, particularly
those involving economic regulation and segregation.

Recommendations in Law Commission’s 54th Report

5.24. As regards our own law, we may mention that ia our Re-
port’ on the Code of Civil Procedure, we had made recommendations
for amendment of the provisions of that Code as to the issue of tem-
porary injunctions. These have already been referred (04 .

Rules by High Courts

5.25, We may add that some limitations highlighting the need
for notice before the grant of stay in writ petitions, have been inserted
in the rules of some High Courts.‘

Spe 195

9 ३२००, (er Note! Troe Judge Court re-assessed”’, (1963) 72 Yale Ld, 1046:
Cot Dovelopinests—Injunetions”, (1005) 78 प्र. L. 8 , 990, 1028,

24. Para 4-4, supra.

3 Seo, 54th Report (Code of Civl Prosedure), Para 19° 13.

4 See Appendix to this Report.



60

Conclusion

5.26. We have already referred to the opinion evidence received
by us on this question. We have arly considered that evidence
and have come to the conclusion + था principle, it will be inap-
Propriate to insert in the Constitution any specific provision in regard
to the procedure which the High Courts should follow in granting
interim orders of stay or injunctions on petitions filed under article
226. We are aware that in many cases, as we have already pointed
out’, writ petitions are filed, mainly, if not soley, for the purpose of
obtaining stay and that stay granted indiscriminately, without
notice to the respondent, may, in some cases, conceivably
cause social injustice. If, for instance, stay is granted in regard to
the enforcement of taxation laws, or of any of the provisions of bene-
ficial socio-economic legislation, without hearing the State in support
of the validity of the impugned laws, injustice may ensure because
speedy implementation of such laws is essential for the welfzre of the
community. Occasionally, petitions filed by students against orders
passed by University authorities are intended merely to pcstpone the
implementation of the impugned order and, if stay is granted in such
petitions, it creates a sense of frustration and bitierness in the minds
of Uniyersities and in fact, iends to derogate from then autonomy.

5.27, But, on the other hand, while exercising their discretion in
granting interim stay or Injunction without notice to the other side.
if the High Courts examine such petition carefully and refuse to grant
interim stay or injunctions unless they are satisfied that noi granting
such stay or injunction without notice to the respondent would really
cause irreparable hardship to the petitioner, then, there will be no
scope for complaint. This is a matter which must be left to be govern-
ed by the rules framed by the High Courts. In fact, some High Courts
have framed rules in this matter.’ In cur view, a procedur::! matter,
though of considerable importance, must normally be governed by
the rules framed by the High Courts and should not be inducted in
the document of the Constitution itself. That is why we do not pro-
pese to recommend the addition of any clause in article 226 pertain-
ing to the procedure which the High ( Courts should follow ir granting
temporary stay or injunctions in dealing with writ petition filed under
the said article.

Recommendation

5.28. Before we part with this topic, we should, however, like to
recommend that the Minister of Law & Justice may suggest to the
eee

+ Para 5*8, supra,
* See par 6°25, supra.

~~


61

Chief Justice of India to take such action as he may deem desirable
and expedient to see that all the High Courts make appropriate rules
in this matter and that such rules are, as far as possible, uniform.
The object of such rules should be to enable the High Courts to grant
interim reiief even without notice to the respondent only in exceptional
cases and the rules should require that, ordinarily, a petitioner filing
a petition under article 226 should, if he wants to apply for interim
stay or injunction, serve a copy of his petition as weil as a copy of
his application for interim stay on the respondent and make an aver-
ment to that effect in the writ petition itself. In other words, the rule
should be so iramed as to prevent abuse of the process of the Court
s0r obtaining interim stay in frivolous matters while safeguarding
genuine cases, where a party has a legitimate point to urge in his writ
petition and satisfies the court that without the interim order, his inte-
rest would be irreparably damaged. We feel that making such a rule
is very necessary in the interest of justice, both of the citizens and of
the Srate.

Trial of disputed questions of fact
Metbods to reduce delay

5.29. Having regard io tie fact that petitions ior the issue of writs
226 constitute a fairly large portion of the total civil
business of the High Court’, we thought it proper to consider
another problem pertaining to this jurisdiction, namely trial of dis-
puied questions of fact.

Accordingiy
tionnaire:

“Q.6. Wiih respect to the jurisdiction of High Courts under arti-
cle 226 of the Coustitution, do you favour the same limita-
tions as to inquiry into disputed facts as have been suggested
above, in relation to the Supreme Court?”

the following question was included in our Ques-

Supreme Court's view

5.30. As the Supreme Court of India? has observed, the jurisdic.
tion which the High Court exercises under Article 226 is extra-ordi-
nary original jurisdiction, and it is well settled that Article 226 confers
a discretionary power on the High. Courts to issu> appropriate orders
and writs.
SS

3 See discussion regarding ९, 5, supra.
3 Stateof U.P. v. Vijay Anad Maharaj, 4.1.8. 1963 8,0. 946.


62
This jurisdiction is extraordinary or special original jurisdiction,
as distant from the ordinary civil jurisdiction conferred by the Letters
Patent.‘

5.31. There are dicta in a case decided by the Privy Council’ to
the effect that the power to issue a writ of Que Warranto is within
the ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court.’ The decision re-
lates to the words “ordinary” and “extra-ordinary” as used in the
Letters Patent of the Calcutta High Court, 1865.

5.32. We thought that having regard to this special jurisdiction,
it may be‘ desirable to consider the points* raised in 0. 6. Before we
proceed to a consideration of the question, the present position on the
subject may be examined.

Number of Writ Petitions

5,320. The number of petitions for writs‘ pending in the High
Courts at the end of 1971 was as follows’: —

1 Allababad - . . नर 12336
2 Anlbrs Pradesh न . . न - 5029
3 Bombay . . न . 4227
4 Calcutta न हु . न 1440
5. Gujarat . कि कि कि कि 3,005
6. Kerala न - न . . 9,965
‘7. Madhya Pradosh . . सु . 1,292
8. Medras. a a बन न os 4,684,
9. Mysore कि कि की कि कि 6,634
10, 00857 रु बन नर बन . Lvl
11. Patns on बन बन . : 1,773
12, Punjay & Harysna . हु . . 5,984
18. Rajasthan . न न न . 3,082
381, 384, 335.

9 Hanid Hasan v. Banwari Lal, A.1.R. 1947 P.C. 90,93 (Sie Joh Beaumom:t),
2 For case-lay, 520 Slyanararayana Murthiv. LT.A.7. ATR. 1987 Audh. 123, 126,
para 3.
4 Por history of the Jurisdiction to 3880० writs,
See-(a) Ryois of Garabandha v. Zamindar of Patlakimedi, AIP, 1943 P, 0, 164.
(8) Venkatarainam v. Secretary of State, ALR. 1930 Mad. 896, 901;
(० ALR, 1962 All, 551, 557, 558;
(@) 70, Basappa v. 8. Nagga, ALR. 1954 8. C. 440, 448, para 5.
& Para 5.29, oupra,
© Fader artical 226,
1 Based on statement No. H—2.


Questions of fact

5.32B. It would appear that as to the question how far, in a writ
petition, the High Courts goes into questions of fact which involve
the recording of evidence, a simple answer cannot be given. The
following analysis of the representative judicial decisions will, 10 some
extent, ilJustrate the various aspects of the question.

(a) There are decisions which hold that the Court will not ordi-
narily decide disputed questions of fact,’ in proceedings for
writs.

There are, in particular, decisions holding that the court
will not decide disputed questions of fact if they require a
protracted inquiry,” or except in exceptional cases.*

(0) But it is also established’ that the High Court is not, as &
matter of jurisdiction, precluded from deciding such ques-
tions,

For example, the High Court would determine the facts if the
jurisdiction of an administrative tribunal itself depends on
findings of facts.‘

3 (4) eyes
about mainte of pai
(8) Dadian Clemical की Pharmaceutical Works v. State of AP. ATR. 1964 AP.
£30, 333, Para 10 (Qn -stian wi. ther chlore| Ly droate is a “noree
(5) Abdul Burik v. Unian of Jadia, AIR. 1964 Cod, 324, 226-
Mukerji
idy Jagir Singh v. Siate of Pwrjab, A.L.&. 1964 Puuj, 9 ५9१, Para 13 (Dispute
asto accuracy of Rent revenus records, distingushing Karishan Khanna v,
the State of Punjab. ALR. 1962 Punj. 32,36.
2 See, for examp.e, Uaion of India v. TR, Varma, A.LR. 1957 80.882, 886, para
6 (Dsmissai of employee).
3 See forexample, Mokammod Ibrahim v. Assansel Iron & Steel Workers’ Union
ALR. 1955 Cal, 189, 191-192 (Para, 10 and Para 18) (D.N. Sinha J).
4 (a) Moti Dass v. 8. 2. Sahi, ALB. 195) 8.0. 942, 951 para 17 (Question Whether
properties here trust properties.
(b) Union of India v. Chaus Mohd, 4.1,8., 1961 8.C. 1526 1527, para (whether
ruspeadune ireign eins,
(० Poincer Traders v. Chief Controller, Exports and Import, A.I-R, 1963 S.C. 569
574, para 12.
(d) Express Newspapers v. The Worker, A.1.R. 1968 8.C, 569, 574, para. 12,
(० 8.7.0.¥. Shiv Rattan, A.I,R. 1966 S.C.142, 144 (facts to be decided related to
taxabilitY).
(f) State of Orissa v- Binapani Des. A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 1269.

5, State of M.P. v. D.K. Jadav, A.1.R. 1968 8.0, 1186 1199, para? Quoting Rex yv,
Shoreditch Assessment Committee (1910) 2K.B- 859, 873.

५, Peres pi 16 Question

227, pers 10 PB



64

(० When it becomes necessary to decide questions of facts in a
writ petition, the High Court would normally take recourse
to affidavits, and it is a matter within its discretion whether
to allow cross-examination or not of a Person who has
sworn to an affidavit.’

Usually, the High Court, in the exercise of its discretion,
declines to do so.?

Discretion of High Court

5.33. The quesetion was discussed by the Supreme Court in a
case reported" in the year 1967. The Company Law Board (of the
किक issued an order oss 19th May, 1965, under sec-

ion of mpanies Act, 1955, appointing four persons ag
inspectors for investigating the affairs of the Barium Chemicals Ltd.,
and for ascertaining the irregularities and contraventions alleged to
have been committed by the managing director and officials of the
Company. This order of the Company Law Board was challenged by
the Company, in a writ petition under article 226 before the Punjab
igh Court.

During the course of the hearing, the petitioner company applied
to the High Court for summoning a Tespondent for his cross-examina-
tion about certain disputed facts. The High Court did not pass any
separate order on this application, but dismissed it in the course of
its judgment on the main petition on the ground that it was not
necessary to ask additional evidence and that the affidavits filed by
Parties were enough for the disposal of the petition.

Supreme Court’s view on High Courts powers to cross-examine

5:34. The matter came up before the Supreme Court in appeal
under article 136. The followmg observations of the Supreme Court
regarding the determination of disputed questions of facts in writ
petitions, may be referred to—

“In our opinion, in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Consti-
tution, the normal rule is to decide disputed questions on the
basis of affidavits and that it is within the discretion of the
High Court whether to allow a person who has given an affi-
davit before it to be cross-examined or not.

3 Birium Chomi~sls 1.61, Vs. Comprny Law Board. A.I-R. 1967 8.9. 295.

4 (a) Dabur Lid. ४. Workmen 4.1. छे, 1968 8.0. 17, 19 Para 4.
(8) Sri Trinmata Venkateswara v. C.T.O. Rajah Mandi A.1.R, 1968 8.0. 784 786
para 5,

3 Barium Chemical Ltd. v. Company Law Board, A.1.R. 1967 S.C, 295.


65

“In exercise of its discretion the High Court has refused permis-
sion to cross-examine them. In such a case it would not be
appropriate for this court when hearing an appeal by special
leave to interfere lightly with the exercise of that discretion.”

“The Court has to find the facts and if it finds that it can do so
without cross-examination, it is not compelled to permit cross-
examination. We bave no reason to think that the High Court
could not have ascertained the facts on the affidavits them-
selves.”

“In a petition under article 226, there is undoubtedly ample power
in the High Court to order attendance of a deponent in court
for being cross-examined. Where it is not possible for the
court to arrive at a definite conclusion on account of there
being affidavits on either side containing allegations
counter-allegations, it would not only be desirable but, in
the interest of justice, the duty also of the court, to summon
a deponent for cross-examination in order to arrive at the
truth.

Oral evidence

5.35. Oral evidence is not thus ruled out. In fact, the rules of
courts provide for oral evidence being taken. The Supreme Court has
referred, with approval, to the practice of the Calcutta and the Bombay
Hing Courts, on their Original Sides, of setting down petitions for
hearing evidence in appropriate cases*-*,

Recent cases

5.36. The matter regarding “disputed questions of facts” in a
wt petition came up before the Supreme Courts in an appeal,’ recent-
ly.

The petitioner, Kamini Kumar Das Choudhary, was a Sub-Inspector
of Police in Calcutta. He was ordered on 20th May, 1951, to carry
out the search of a particular house. During the search, he left the
house and went out for taking tea. A departmental enquiry was held
against him, and he was dismissed from service by the Dy. Commis-
sioner of police on Ist August, 1951.

1 Seo, for example, rule 63", Bombay High Courts Rules (0.9.)
3 कु, Kauchuni Moopil Nayar v. State of Madras, (195%) supp. (2) 8.C.R. 316,337
A.LR. 1959 8.0. 725, 734 para 23.
4 866 aleo—
(a) 0.R.H. Readymoney Lid., v State of Bombay, &..1.18. 1968 Bom, 181, 191, para 21
(Expert evidence as to Wine);
(b) State of Maharashira v. Bennet Coleman & Co., Ltd. A.I-R, 1964 Bom. 213, 216,
217, para. 8 to 10 (018) evidence as 0 prize competions), (1973),

4 Kamini Kumar Das Choudhary v. State of West Bengat (1971).


66

5.37. The petitioner filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution against his dimsissal from service. This petition was dis-
missed on 11-9-1957 by a Judge of the Calcutta h Court, an appeal
filed by the petitioner was also dismissed by a ision Bench of the
Calcutta High Court. The matter came up in appeal before the Supreme
Court under Article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution’. A number of dis-
puted questions of facts were involved in the matter. It was, for
example, alleged by the petitioner that he was denied due opportunity
to adduce evidence and to cross-examine witnesses in the departmental
enquiry. It was also alleged that the Dy. Commissioner of Police, who
had passed the dismissal order, became a complainant in the case
and there was a bias on the part of the dismissing authority and the
order of dismissal was vitiated by mala fides. Dealing with these
disputed questions of facts, the Supreme Court observed that the
questions whether there was bias, ill-will, mala fides or a due cppor-
tunity to be heard or to produce evidence given in the course of
departmental proceedings were so largely questions of facts that it
was difficult to decide them merely on conflicting assertions made by
affidavits given by the two sides.

Alternative remedy
5.38. The Supreme Court also observed that in accordance with

the rule laid down by the court in Union of India v. T. R. Varma’,
he writ petition could have been dismissed on the ground that it was
sot the ctice of courts to decide such disputed questions of fact
in proce gs under Article 226 of the Constitution. Other proceed-

ings are more appropriate for a just and proper decision of such
question.

Summary cf Supreme Court view

Thus. the view of the Supreme Court in this matter is that dis-
puted questions of fact should not ordinarily be tried in a writ peti-
tion under article 226 of the Constitution, and such questions should
be left for consideration by an ordinary civil court.

Discretion of the High Court

5.40. It, thus, appears that the question whether a disputed ques-
tion of iuct snuuid be tried on a petition for writ is leit to the dis-
cretion of the High Court. In some cases, the High Court may con-
sider it desirable to let the matter be decided by a regular suit in
an ordinary civil court. If the High Court so desires, it may decided
the question on affidavits; the power to cross-examine the persons

1 48, S.0.J. No. 11, page 622 (Supreme Court Journal dt, 1-6-1972).
3 Union of India vs T.R. Varm+ ATR 1957 8. 0. 852.


67

who have sworn the affidavits, and, if necessary, the power to take
evidence as in a suit, is not denied. Any such power may be resorted
to at the discretion of the High Court, if the circumstances of the
case render such a course just. What circumstances render cross-
examination or taking of evidence desirable, cannot, it seems, be
categorised into hard and fast rules.

Gist of replies

5.41, The opinion on question 6° is divided, and there are va-
rious shades of view expressed. There are those who favour the
suggested limitations, and those who oppose any amendment.

The first constitutes equally strong group as the second. These
two, taken together, exhaust a large number of replies. A tew replies
favour affidavits, while there is one suggestion for recording evidence
through Commissioners.

Some Judges* of the Supreme Court are not in favour of making
any changes regarding the limitations as to inquiry into dispztcd facts
under Article 226 of the Constitution.

Some of the important points made in the replies are the

With respect to the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226,
one High Court Judge’ does not favour the view that dis-
puted questions cf fact should not be gone into. For the

trial of such issues of fact, the Judge suggests that the Dis-

urict Court may be directed to record evidence so us to save

U.c precious time of the High Court. The present practice

of Sling affidavits and counter-affidavits may be continued.

In exceptional cases, the High Court may send it for recording
evidence in the same manner as in suit.

Broad propositions
5,43. Tn the course of our oral discussions at a few places with

the Judges and the bar, we put the query whether the foilowing pro-

positions substantially reflect the present practice, and we understand
that they broadly reflect the present practice.
Where in a petition for a writ or order under article 226, a
question of fact arises,—
(2) whore the question of fect is frivolous and appears to have
been raised only to oust the jurisdiction of the High Court
tries it;

(b) where the question of fact is genuine but cannot. by reason
of any provision of law, be tried in a proceeding cther than
such petition, the High Court tries 1:

Para 5.29 , supra

No. 50,
S.No. 17.

1
2
a


68

(c) where the question of fact is geniune, and can be more ap-
Propriately tried in a proceeding other than a petition under
article 226, the High Court declines to try it, except where
the question can be decided on admitted documents and can,
in the opinion of the High Court, be satisfactorily disposed
of in such a petition;

(9) if the High Court decides to try @ question of fact in aay suck
Petition, it gives an Opportunity to the parties to cross-
examine the opposite parties and persons who have made
affidavits supporting their case with Teference to the state-
ments made in their affidavits.

Rigid provisions not mecessary
5.44, We have no doubt that High Courts ordinarily do sct upor
some such broad principles as have been stated above. Views ex-
Pressed to us in writing’ as well as during oral discussions—taking the
jority nion—do not regard any rigid provision in this regard
ry. and we have also, after careful consideration, come
to the same conclusion.

Conclusien—no change needed

5.45. The matter appears to be one which can be left to the dis-
cretion of the High Courts—a discretion which, as we have stated
above.* is generally exercised on the broad principles already indicat-
ed.

Tt would, we think, be inappropriate to introduce any provisions
on this point in the Constitution,

Recommendation

5.46. Tn this connection, we would like to recommend that the
Minister of Law and Justice may suggest to the Chief Justice of India
to take such acticn as he may deem desirable and expedient to see
that all the High Courts may appropriate rules in this matter and
that such rules are. as far as possible, uniform. The object of such
rules should be to lay down a definite Procedure in dealing with dis-
puted questions of fact in writ petitions filed under article 226,

It may also be stated that, at present, there is divergence of
opinion* on the question whether, by virtue of section 141 of the Code
ot Civil Procedure, 1908, the provisions of that Code are attracted to
petitions for writs. The framing of self-contained rules on important
Procedural matters would be useful, with Tespect to petitions under
article 226 of the Constitution.

9 Para -41, eupra. SS Para 5.41, supra,

* Para 5.44, supra.

३ See 54% Report of the Law Commission (Code of Civil Procedure). Pages 107—
108 para 1.0.25 to 1.9.32, -


CHAPTER 6
MATTERS RELATED TO TAXATION

Importance of questions relating to taxation

6.1. The determination of questions relating to taxation laws is
one of the most important types of judicial business. This function
of the Courts has assumed greater importance with the increase in
the conient of the taxing laws. The problems raised by taxing statutes
are of a complex and difficult character. As the eminent economist
Harris has pointed out, taxing statutes become complex, not Lecause
any cne really wants them to be so, but because there are ceriain
persasive reasons. In that connection, he mentions that one special
probtcr: after another arises in matters relating to tax, and the law
tends ७ be complex. This complexity of the taxing laws renders it
desirable that the problems cf interpretation which arise in conse-
quence should be solved without delay. By delay, onerous costs are.
incurred by parties. and, on eccasions. by reason of uncertainty in the
15७, Dus ies are often held up because of such
wu tou Yt is thus plain that the interest of the comniunity as
wal a the State precmptorily require that tax matters sheuld be
disposed cf satisfactorily and expeditiously.

Question 7

6.2. It ix in the light of these considerations that Question Nc. 7
hay besn formulated by us. The question reads thus:

‘tay Do you faveur the creation of a National Tax Court fer
hearing references from the Income-tax Appetflate Tribunal
(or similar tribunals constituted under taxation laws of the
Centre and the State), whose decisions will be final, subject
only to appeals as indicated below?

(b) If so. should appeals to the Supreme Court from the de
of the Tax Court—
(४) be allowed with special leave or.

be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial
question of law of general importance is involved, or

{iii) be allowed subject to any other limitation?
“Adaptation of the Tax System” (1971) 25 Public Finance 113°

~ "+ ¢, Lowell Harris,
142,

69


70

(c) In the alternative, are you of the vicw that the decision of
the present Income-tax Appellate Tribunals (or corresponding
Tribunals under other Central and State laws ielating to
taxation) should be final, subject to review by the High
Court under article 226 of the Constitution or appeal to the
Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution?

(9) If yes, what should be the status and terms and conditions
of service of Judges of the above Court?

Three alternatives

6.3. and 6.4. It witl be noticed that Question No. 7 elicits opinion
on two alternit ve courses, and the third alternative was evolved in
the course of our inquiry. The first aiternative is that a National Tax
Court should be established and against its decision, an appeal
should lie to the Supreme Court under one or the other of the three
conditions indicated under 0. 7(b). The other two alternatives are
as follows. Either the decision of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal
should be revisable by the High Court under article 226 ण the
Constitution and an appeal against the decision of the High Court
(under that article) should lie to the Supreme Court under article
136, or, instead of the present reference Proceedings, an appeal
against the judgement of the Tribunal should lie to the High Court
on a substantial question of law, and against the decision cf the
High Cour! is such 90 apreal, 9 further apy henid be the
Supreme Court if the case involves a substaniial question of law of
general importance which needs to be decided by the Supreme Court,
Object of inquiry

6.5. In including the two alternatives in Question No. 7 our

-main purpose was first to solicit opinion on the question as to whe-
ther the present reference proceedings, which take considerable time
and almost always lead to delay in the disposal of references in the
High Court, should be continued or should be dropped.

Provisions in Income-tax Act

6-5A. We shall briefly deal with provisions in the Income-tax
Act. The provisions in regard to reference to the High Court are
contained in sections 256 to 260 of that Act. Sections 256(1) provides
that tne assessce or the Commissioner may. within the Prescribed
period, move the Appellate Tribunal by an application made in that
behalf in the prescribed form, for a reference to the High Court on
any question of law arising out of such order. It further imposes
upon the Appellate Tribunal an obligation to draw up a statement
of the case and refer it to the High Court within the prescribed
period.

1. Para 6-1, supra.



7

6.6. Sub-section (2) of 5. 256 deals with cases where the Appel-
Jate Tribunal refuses to state the case on the ground that no ques-
tion of law arises, and it lays down that in such cases, the assessee
or the Commissioner may, within the prescribed period, move the
High Court for a direction that the Tribunal be called upon to state
a case and to refer it. If the application made by the assessee or
the Commissioner under this clause succeeds and the High Court
requires the Tribunal to state the case, the Tribunal shall state the
case and refer it accordingly. That is the effect of the provisions of
clause (2). With sub-section (3) of 5. 256, we are not concerned.

67 Section 257 authorises the Appellate Tribunal to draw up
a statement of the case and refer it, through its President, to the
Supreme Court, if, on an application made to it under s. 256 it is
“of the opinion that on account of conflict in the decisions of the
High Courts in respect of any particular question of law, it is ex-
pedient that such a reference should be made.”

6.8. Section 258 empowers the High Court or the Supreme
Court to refer the case back to the Tribunal for the purpose of
making such additions to the reference already made by it or such
alternations in such a reference, if the High Court or the Supreme
Court is satisfied that the statement in the case referred to it is not
sufficient to enable it to determine the question raised thereby. In
other words, under this section, a further statement or a modification
of the statement already made can be requisitioned by the High
Court or the Supreme Court.

6-9, Section 259 provides for the manner in which the High
Court should hear Income-tax reference and dispose of the same.
Secticn 260 jays down that a copy of the judgment deijivered by the

हे the Supreme Covst will be forwarded to the Tribunal
ner indicated by the secticn and that ‘on receipt of such
a copy, the Tribunal shall pass such orders as are necessary to dis-
pose of the case conforming to such act Clause (2) of section 260
deats with the question of costs with which we are not concerned.

6.10. Sectioh 261 provides for an appeal to the Supreme Court
against the judgment of the High Court delivered by it on a refer-
ence made io it under section 256 provided the High Court certifies
the case to be a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court. Section
262(1) lays down the procedure for the hearing of the appeals be-
fore the Supreme Court. Sub-section (2) and (3) of section 262 are
not relevant for our purpose.

6.11, It may. incidentally, be pointed out that the order passed
by the High Court calling upon the Tribunal to state a case for the
decision of the High Court can be described as an “order in the
nature of a mandamus”.



72

Gist of views expressed on the question

6.12. In regard to the opinion received by us on this question,
it may be stated broadly that the majority of the replies oppose the
creation of the National Tax Court; some replies are inclined to
aupport the idea that the decisions of the Tribunals should be final
subject to articles 226 and 136 of the Constitution. On the other
hand, some replies indicate dissatisfaction with the proposai to leave
it open to the party aggrieved by the decision of the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal io seek relief either under article 226 or under
article 136 of the Constitution. According to these replies, an appeal
should lie to the High Court in place of the present reference and
thereafter, if a party is aggrieved by the appellate decision of the
High Court, a further appeal should lie to the Supreme Court on a
substantial and important question of law.

Unanimity as regards replacement of reference by appeal

6.13. In regard io the present provisions relating to tie refer-
ence proceedings, there appears to be almost complete unanimity
for deleting them and for substitution of an appeal in their place;
and this trend of opinion can be well appreciated, because it is com-
mon experience that the procedure of reference, at present
lated by section 256, is dilatory and serves no significant or 1 portant
purpose. We ought to add that if proceedings relating to referz
are omilted from section 256, it is certain that the d
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal would naturaliy be mo:
and conform to the traditional requirements of : appellate judgment'.
We are, therefore, satisfied that the present provisions about refer«
ence should be deleted. We shall deat later with the question of the
procedure to be substituted in their place.

National Tax Court

6.14. The concept of a National Tax Court may have merit of
leading to uniformity of decisions in tespect of direct ta laws
throughout the country and this, no doubt, is a relevant con: jcration,
The other point in favour of this concept is that, if a National Tax
Court is to be established, its Members would, inevitably, be chosen
for their expertise in tax laws: and judges pre-eminently qualified
in this matter who might sit on the National Tax Court would be
expected to dispose of tax appeals expeditiously.

Practicability considered

6.15. On the other hand, there are some considerations which
are very much against the practicability and feasibility of this con-
cept. The first consideration which detracts from the merits of the

{8 &* Seo}Paragrph 6-36 and 6-37 infra,



B

eoncept is that even if a National Tax Court is established, unless
suitable amendments are made in the Constitution, it would be im-
Possible to exclude the applicability of article 226 and article 136 of
the Constitution to the decisions of such a Court, and we are reluct-
ant to make such a recommendation.

Likelihood of large number of appeals

6.16. Besides, if the National Tax Court is intended to deal
with tax appeals arising from the decisions of the Income-tax Appel-
late Tribunals all over the country, it is easy to imagine that the
Court will be flooded with a large number of appeals; and in that
case, the problem of arrears in tax matters will merely be shifted
from the High Courts to the National Tax Court. That cannot be
said to be a solution to the problem of arrears.

Difficulty if located at one place

6.17. The concept of National Tax Court suffers from another
serious infirmity, and that is, that such a Court cannot conveniently
function in one place like the Supreme Court in New Delhi. For the
convenience of the parties, it would be essential that the Court will
have to sit in Division Benches at convenient places all over the
country, and that would weaken the argument that the Court sitting
in one place might lead to uniformity of decisions. Therefoze, in our
opinion, it would not be reasonable or feasible to support the idea
of a National Tax Court.

Not recommended

6.18. Having thus, carefully considered all the pros and cons in
the matier, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that
the idea of National Tax Court cannot be recommended.

Article 226

6.19. Similarly, we do not think it would be advisable to adopt
the alternative of leaving it open to the party aggrieved by the
decision of the Income-tzx Appeliate Tribunal to move the High
Court under article 226 because the jurisdiction of the High Court
under urticle 226, no doubt, more timited than its appellate jurisdic-
tlon. While exercising its jurisdiction under article 226, the High
Court would be inclined to interfere with the impugned order of the
Income-tax Appellate Tribunal only if it is shown that it discloses
an error apparent on the face of the record. It is well-known that
this requirement limits the jurisdiction of the Court ahd may not
always enable the citizen aggrieved by the order of the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal to raise even a substantial question of law before
the High Court against the said order,


74

Observations of Lord Denning

6.20.

In this connection, we would like to refer to the observa-

tions made by Denning L.J., (as he then was) in Rex v. Northimber-
fand Compensation Appeal Tribunal.’ Said Lord Denning: —

“There was no way other than this by which the mistake could

4 Rex. v.

127 (G.A.).

be rectified. The Attorney-General pointed out the undesir-
ability of the court interfering with the decisions of tribunals
set up by Parliament. I agree with him that the Divisional
Court cannot extend its powers. It can only act according
to the well-recognised rules. It is equally important that
the court should not hesitate to act to prevent an injustice
being done if the remedy sought is within the scope of its
powers. Much time has been expended in recent years in
considering whether in particular circumstances certiorari,
or prohibition. will lie. A great deal of it could be saved. The
regulations under the National Health Service Act, 1946, are
of great complexity. The interpretation of them is left to
the tribunal; there is no provision for an appeal to the courts.
That position arises frequently now-a-days.

I most earnestly wish that in such cases, where difficult
questions of law, and of interpretation, must arise, there
should be given some right of appeal. Perhaps the most
cenvenient form is that adopted in section 37 of the National
Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act. 1946, under which any
Gusstion of law arising in connection with the determination
at certain questions may, if the Ministry thinks fit, be referred
to the decision of the High Court, and any person aggrieved
i the decision of the Minister on any question of law not
so referred may appeal from that decision to the High Court.
And there is provision in sub-section (5) that the decision of
the High Court shall be final,—a provision which may be
thought desirable in such cases. After all, it is the function of
the courts to determine questions of law. Tribunals are some-
time given an unduly difficult task. There must be a feeling
of dissatisfaction if it is recognised that a decision of a tri-
bunal is wrong in law and yet there is no power to correct
it—in other words, if there is no right to obtain the opinion

of the court.

J am satisfied that the course I have suggested would
result in a saving of time. and of expense, and would be for

the public good.”
Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal (1952) 1 AM E.R. 122,



75

6.21. While we agree with the view taken by Denning. 1.J.. that
the remedy by way of an appeal would be more suitable in proceedings
Szfore tribunals,’ we may, incidentally, point out that the National
Insurance Tribunals cannot be compared to the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunals in our country. The reason is that Income-tax
Appellaie in Telia are almost invariably presided over by a
Senior Judge with adequate judicial experience.

Article 136

6.22. We are also retuctant tc Dt the alternative suggestion
: ved party should be given ihe option of cither invoking
fe 226 or article 136 «' the Constitution. In our view, if such an
iin is provided for in 2 relevant provision of the Income-tax, that
it nor affect the right of the party. who is aggrieved by the decision
न the High Court under article 226, to move the Supreme Court under
136 unless article 136 is suitably modified in that behaif. and
we ure net prepared to suggest any such amendment in article 136.

Sulistizution of appeal recommended in section 256

6.23. Therefore, having carefully examined this problem, we are
satisfied that the only reasonable solution, which may tend to make the
disposal of iax matiers more satisfactory and expeditious, would be to
delete the present provision relating to reference ‘section 256. Income-
wx Act) and to provide for an appeal against the decision of the In-
come-tax Appellate Tribunal on a substantial question of Iaw instead of
१ 4 simple question of law, as at present, and also to provide that
against the appellate decision of the High Court, it should be open to
tie aggrieved party to move the Supreme Court with a certificate of
the High Court that the case involves a substantial question of Jaw
of general importance which needs to be decided by the Supreme
Court.

Section 257, Income-tax Act

6.24. Section 257 of the Income-tax Act, to which we have
already referred*, provides for a direct reference from the Tribunal to
the Supreme Court on an application made in that behalf. if the
Tribunal is of opinion that on account of a conflict in the decisions of
High Courts in respect of any particular question of law, it is expe-
dient that such a reference should be allowed direct to the Supreme
Court. This section was. for the first time. introduced when the Income-
tax Act was revised in 1961, and its genesis lies in a recommendation

1 Pare 6.20, २४ ~
Piva 6-6 and 6.
1, PM YEMAPLTECA—8

smpin


G6

of she Tyagi Commitee. The principal object of the recoramendation
was to secure uniformity in interpretation. lt was represented to the
Tyagi Commie thai. apact from the delay in disposal, a great deal
ship was caused to the tax-payers on account of the lack of
uniformiiy in the interpretation put on the various provisions of the
axing statutes by the assessing and the appetiate authorities. The
Commiittce made a recor:mendation for inserting such a section. It
can be invoked after ibe ounal has pronounced iis order.

6.25. In icims, this provision (S. 257) proceeds on the assunp-
tion of gn application made either by the assessee or the depariment
under section 256, and consequently, section 258 deals wilh the power
of the High Court and the Supreme Court in regard to the reference
made to them. In other words, if a reference is made to the Supreme
Court by the Appellate Tribunal under section 257, it would be com-
+ 10 the Supreme Court to refer the case back to the Appellate
mal. if it is satisfied that the statement in the case in question is
not sufficient to enable it to determine the question raised. It also
follows that, as a consequence of section 260, the judgment delivered
by the Supreme Court would be in the nature of an advisory opinion,
it would no doubt be binding on the Tribunal, but it does not amount
to a Hnal decision of the case. The Appellate Tribunal has to pro-
nounce its judgment on the point referred to the Supreme Court in the
light of the opinion which the Supreme Court may express on that
point. Thus, the reference directly made to the Supreme Court is,
speaking legatly. of the same character as the reference made by the

Tribunal to the High Court under s. 256.

Continuance of s. 257 discussed

6 Hoving decided to recommend? that the reference procedure
contemplated by s. 256 should be replaced by an appeal, the question
which we have to consider is whether the reference procedure contem-
plated by s. 257 should continue.

Vexed problein

6.27. We have examined this question elaborately and we are free
to confess that this appears to us to present a vexed problem. There
is no doubt that a direct reference to the Supreme Court contemplated
by s. 257 would be in the interests both of the State and the assessee
inasmuch as it avoids delay in decision of the point on which
there is a divergence of opinion in the different High Courts in the

5M), page 93

ire Comspittee. Report (195

2, Para 6-23, aupre,


V7

country. Section 257 enables the Appellate Tribunal to circumvent the
High Court of the State in which it is functioning and send the case
to the Supreme Court direct for its verdict and thereby avoid delay in
the tinal decision of the case. Delay is avoided for the reason that
ultimaiely the Tribunal formulates its conclusion on the question of
law, which had been referred to the Supreme Court, in the light of the
verdict of the Supreme Court: and that, in a sense, becomes final.

Simuianeous reference not ruled out

riheless, in spite of the reference which may be made
under s i the assessee wants a reference to be made to the High
Court of the State on certain other points, and the Tribunal is satisfied
that the reference should be made, the reference has to be made within
the time and in the manner prescribed by section 256. The other
protisions of section 256 as to the procedure open to the party, whose
st for a reference has been rejected by the Tribunal, would also
in relation to. points other than the one which is the subject
of the reference under section 257. Thus, in a case where a
ref ce is directly made to the Supreme Court, it is not unlikely that,
in some cases, reference may be pending in the same case both in the
High Court and in the Supreme Court, though, in the reference to the
High Court. the point referred to the Supreme Court directly would
noi be involved.

No reported cases

6.29. Section 257 was inserted when the Act was revised’ in
1961: but unfortunately, we have not been able to collect statistics
as to the number of references directly made by the Appellate Tribunal
to the Supreme Court under this section, nor have we been able to
find any pronouncements by the Supreme Court on such references (as
none have been reported). Therefore, we have to decide the question
about the propriety and reasonableness of the continuance of section
267 hereafter on purely juristic and the oeretical grounds.

6.30. In our opinion, the view that recourse to section 257 might
avoid delay. which prima facie appears to be attractive, may not
prove to be quite sound in actual practice. Even if a reference is made
to the Supreme Court under section 257, it may involve delay if the
Supreme Court exercises its power under section 258 and calls for 8
further statement of facts. That consideration cannot be treated as
irrelevant.

3, Para 6-24 supra,



78

6.31. Besides, even it a reference is made to the Supreme Court
under section 257, the reference which is pending in the High Court‘
will have to run its own course, and after the verdict of the Supreme
Court is pronounced on the reference made to it directly by the Tri-
bunal, the Tribunal will have to modify, if necessary, its conclusion
on the guestion referred to the Supreme Court; and this modified de-
cision of the Appellate Tribunal may have to be brought to the
notice of the High Court.

Procedure not serving any significant purpose

631A. There is another consideration which has weighed with
us in dealing with this question, namely, फ the procedure involved
in the reference proceedings does not serve any significant purpose;
we have already adverted* to this consideration while dealing with
section 256. On the recommendation that we have made, as a result
of which section 256 will be replaced by an appropriate section pro-
viding for an appeal to the High Court on a substantial question of
Jaw, a direct reference to the Supreme Court under section 257 seems
to us to be juristically unjustified. If there is a divergence of opinion
amongst the High Courts on any issue of law, it is legitimate that even
that question should form part of the grounds which the party affected
by that decision will take in its appeal before the High Court, and the
High Court may consider the divergence of opinion, and, conceivably,
in some cases, may change its view. That is the normal procedure of
appeals and second appeals in judicial proceedings; and we see no
justification for departing from this procedure, particularly when we
are, in substance, assimilating the proceedings before the Tribunal to
those before the first appellate Court.

Substitution of appeal im section 257 considered inappropriate

6.32. During the course of our discussion, we considered the ques-
tion whether the substitution of an appeal to the Supreme Court (in
place of the present procedure of reference) in section 257 would be
an appropriate course, and we examined the point whether providing
for such an appeal would be juristically sound and practically useful
and convenient to the party concerned. We came to the conclusion
that, if an appeal is provided instead of the present reference proceed-
ings under s. 257, it would be inappropriate to limit the appeal to only
the point on which there was a divergence of opinion amongst the
High Courts. The concept of an appeal and its scope will naturally
‘be determined by the conditions on which an appeal is provided for

3. Para 6-28 supra.

3, Bara 6-23 anpra,


79

under the statute; and, in the present case, we are recommending’ the
amendment of section 261 of the Act and suggesting that an appeal
10 the Supreme Court should lie on a certificate by the High Court
that the case involves a substantial question of law of general impor-
tance which, in the opinion of the High Court, needs to be decided
by the Supreme Court.

6.33. If that recommendation (concerning section 261) is accepted,
then it would be juristically unsound to provide for an exception in
regard to cases falling under section 257 and state that, in cases where
an appeal lies to the Supreme Court directly, all questions which arise
in appeal should fall to be considered by the Supreme Court even if
they do not satisfy the tests recommended by us.

This latter provision would be inconsistent with section 261, if
that section is amended in accordance with our recommendation.

Recommendation to delete section 257

6.34. Having given our anxious and careful consideration to the
problem. we are satisfied that, consistently with the philosophy which
we have accepted against the usefulness of the reference proceedings,
the provision about the direct reference to the Supreme Court con-
ismplated by section 257 should also be deleted.

Resulting scheme

6.35. In the result, the scheme of the proceedings subsequent to
the Judgment of the Tribunal (sections 256 et seq of the Income-tax
Act) would be that. after the Appellate Tribunal has pronounced its
judgment, an appeal will lie to the High Court on a substantial ques-
tion of law, and against the appellate judgement of the High Court, an
appeal will lie to the Supreme yom on a certificate of the High Court
that it involves a substantial question of Jaw of general importance
which, in the opinion of the High Court, needs to be decided by the
Supreme Court.

In consequence, section 256 will need to be revised. Section 257 will
need to be deleted.Sections 258 to 262 may also require to be deleted
or amended.

We need mention have 2.a all the consequential amendment’.
But we deal below with one important point‘.

1, Para 6-35 and 6-89, infra.

2, See para 6-39, inf

2.8. See Appendix,

3, Similar changes will be needed in other Lawe dealing with direct taxes contain
ing similar provisions.

4, Para 6-36, infra.



80

Section 255(7) (New) Judgments of Tribunals

6.36. At present, there is no provision in the Income-tax Act
requiring the Appellate Tribunal to pronounce a judgment. Under
section 256(1) of the Act, where there is a reference to the High Court,
the Tribunal is required to draw up a statement of case and refer it to
the High Court. It has been emphasised more than once’ that the state-
ment of case to be prepared by the Tribunal should contain an intelli-
gible summary of the facts found by the Tribunal, the points raised by
the parties, the authorities or statutory provisions relied upon for view
taken by the Tribunal, and its own conclusions and findings of fact.
In view of the recommendation to substitute an appeal in place of
reference, it now becomes imperative that the Tribunal should give
a formal judgment in every case”. Under the Civil Procedure Code,’, a
Court is required to give, in its judgment, a concise statement of the
case, the points for determination, the decision thereon, and the
reasons for such decision. This and other important provisions of that
Code applicable to contents of judgments should now be extended to
the Tribunal. We recommend the insertion of sub-section () in
section 255 of the Income-tax Act for that purpose.*

Reasons for recommendation
6.37. Since we are recommending radical changes in respect of

proceedings subsequent to decision of the Income-tax Appellate Tri-”

bunal, it is necessary that we should explain the reasons which have
weighed with us in making these recommendations. We have already
dealt with the point that the provisions about reference serve no
useful purpose, and, in fact, they invariably tend to introduce an
element of delay in the final disposal of Income-tax cases. That is
why, consistently with the opinion almost unanimously expressed in
our present inquiry, we are recommending that the procedure as to
reference should be dropped.

Proceedings at the stage of Tribunal—traly judicial proceedings

6.38. In regard to the appeals to the High Court,—which we are
recommending.—we are providing for an appeal to the High Court
only if it involves a substantial question of law. and not merely a ques-
tion of law as permitted under the present section 256. In our view.

1. EBA, Alladin v. Dicome Tua Commissioner, ATR. 1968 S.C. 788, 794, Para 11,

3, See ale para 8.13, spr,
3, Onder 20, Code of €

4. See Appendix,

iv


81

though it is true that the assessment proceedings before the Appellate
authority can be legitimately regarded as proceedings before Depart-
mental persons, and, in that sense, not judicial proceedings as such,
there can be no doubt that when the case reaches the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal, the proceedings before the Tribunal are judicial.
‘A Bench of the Tribunal ordinarily consists of two members,” and
one of them is invariably a senior person with adequate judicial ex-
perience. From that point of view, the proceedings before the Appel-
fate Tribunal can well be regarded as the first appeal either by the
assessee or the Commissioner. We are prepared to describe these pro-
ceedings as the first appeal, though, ordinarily, the question has been
considered by two authorities, namely, the Tocome-tax Officer and
the Appellate Authority. If that be so, the apepal to the High Court
can well be considered to be in the nature of a second appeal and
we think, it would not be unfair or unreasonable to suggest that such
a second appeal to the High Court should lie on a substantial ques-
lion of law. We have made a similar recommendation in regard to
the second appeal under section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.*

6.39. Then, as to the appeal to the Supreme Court, we propose
10 adopt the same philosophy of jurisprudence on which article
1331)(c) has been already amended by Parliament in accordance
with our recommendations; and opting the same philosophy, we are
recommending a similar amendment in article 134(1)(c) of the Consti-
tulion, This article deals with criminal appeals to the Supreme Court‘
and the test, we are recommending, is that, except for the cases
covered by article 134(1)a) and (0), an appeal from the appellate
criminal decision of the High Court certifies that it raises a substantial
question of Jaw of general importance which, in its opinion, needs to
be considered by the Supreme Court. We see no reason, why, if the
High Court had considered the appeal in Income-tax matters and.
has decided even important questions of law, an appeal should lie
against its decision to the Supreme Court if the point of law, decided
by the High Court, is not a point of first impression or is not one
on which there is a divergence of opinion amongst different High
Courts in country.

6.40. That, in brief, explains why we have recommended a
somewhat radical change in the scope of the appeal to the High
Court as well as the appeal to the Supreme Court.

3, of, section 25020), Tncome-tax Act, 1961,
2), Im

2, Sth Report.

Act, 1061.

2, Section 25:

4, Chapter 3, supra,


82

Special leave when can be obtained

6.41. Incidentally. we may be permitted to point out that, in
view of the specific provision in the Income-tax Act, providing for an
appeal to the Supreme Court subject to the conditions specified by
section 261, it would, ordinarily, not be open to the party aggrieved
by the appellaie decision of the High Court in Income-tax matters to
circumvent the provision of s. 261 and move the Supreme Court for
special leave under article 136. Such a course may be open to the
aggrieved party if he satisfies the Supreme Court that though his:
appeal does not satisfy the test prescribed by s. 261 of the Income-tax
Act, the judgment of the High Court has led to. a grave miscarriage
of justice.


CHAPTER 7
DISPUTE CONCERNING INDUSTRIAL RELATION

Question 8

“1. We now proceed to deal with question 8 formulated in our
Questionnaire. This Question reads thus:

ag

:a) Do you favour the creation of a National Appellate Court
for industrial disputes whose decision will be final, subject
to appeal as indicated below?

so) In the aliernative, do you favour the creation of a Com-
mission for Industrial Relations as recommended by the
National Labour Commission?

t1) Or, would you. recommend the revival of Labour Appellate
Tribunals, as they existed previously?

d) If you are in favour of any of these alternatives, should
appeals to the Supreme Court from the decisions of the pro-
posed National Appellate Court or Labour Appellate Tri-
bunal or National Commission on Industrial Relations—

(i) be allowed with special leave, or
(ii) be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial
question of Jaw of general importance is involved, or
(iii) be allowed subject to any other limitation, or
(iv) not be allowed at all?

fe) What should be the status and terms and conditions of
service of Judges appointed to the above Court or Commis~
sion”?

Voume of industrial litigation and relevant statistics

7.2. The inquiry contemplated by this Question was intended to
elicit. opinion from interested parties on the different aspects of the
problem raised in the question and decide which method of dealing
with industria! disputes would lead to a satisfactory and expeditious
disposal and reduce the volume of industrial litigation on the dockets
of the High Courts and the Supreme Court. The volume of fitigation
relating to industrial relations ending before the Supreme Court can

bad


st

be Hiustrated by the figures which have been supplied' to us for the
years 1969, 1970 and 1971:

1969 1970 1971
Number of appeals at the opening of dhe ~~
or “ peewee ee ves 200 311 430
4) Nomler of apy setinuted ctr
year कद . . 628 175 256
(वे Number of appeals lisposed of du
year—
() allowed. 22
(i) disinissed 87
(8) compromised 16
‘oral >> 125
(8) Number of appeats Posdiny at the end of
the year . aid 591
We ought 10 udd that ibcse res include appeals under Article 132
and Article 133 of the Cons.iiation. They also show that disposal of

these matiers is not uble 13 keep pace with institution: and, as is
well-known, ¢xpeditious and satisfactory disposal of industrial matter
is very important io the industrial life of our country, That is one
coasideration which weighed in our mind when we formulated the
Questionnaire. We thought time had come when all interested parties
should consider whether any satisfactory alternative method could be
devised by which the number of industrial matters going to the High
Courts under Art, 226 and to the Supreme Court under Articles 432
and 136 could be appreciably reduced.

Difierence of opinion revealed in the replies

7.3. In regard io Question 8, we have received several replies
from the members of the Bar and the Judiciary. These replies show
a sharp differviace of opinion. Some replies seem to favour the creation
of a National Court of Industrial Disputes, while others desire that
the Industria! Relations Commission, as recommended bythe
National Labour Commission, should be established, while some
others would like the revival of the Labour Appellate Tribunal. The
replies received from the different Government of the States? as well
as from the Union Government’ show a divergence of opinion.

2, Statement No. ४. 6,
७० Appendix,
(Reply of Additional Secretary, Ministry of Labour).

28,



85

We may state that the reply from the Minisiry of Labour,’ indi-
cates that a comprehensive machinery including the creation of Indus-
trial Relations Commission, as recommended by the National Com-
mission on Labour, is favoured

Paucity of replies from organisations of employers and employees

7.4. Unfortunately, however, we have received only just a few
replies from employer-organisations, and none at all from any of the
national and State trade unions to which our Questionnaire had been
sent. Since we did not receive any response from the employers and
the employees, it was not possible for us to organise a meeting of the
represeniatives of the employers and the employees and, without a
discussion with them, it would, we think, be unreasonable to make
any recommendation in the matter covered by Question 8.

Relevant considerations

7.5. Jt is possible that the failure of the employers and the em-
ployees to respond to our Questionnaire may be due to the fact that
hey know that the Ministry of Labour in the Union Government’
is thinking of introducing a comprehensive machinery, including the
creation of Industrial Relations Commission, as recommended by the
National Commission on labour, on the lines agreed to by the tri-
partite conference. Under these circumstances, we do not propose to
discuss this Question at length: but would content ourselves merely
with starting broadly some relevant considerations.

Importance of productivity

7.6. It may sound platitudinous, but nevertheless it is profoundly
true, thai, in modern times, no nation can make progress in achieving
its objective of establishing social and econcmic justice, unless it is
able to persuade both the employers and the employees to help the
Process of productivity-in the country; and productivity in industrial
matters cannot be accelerated without industrial harmony. That is
why the main objective of industrial jurisprudence is to heip the
growth of industrial harmony between the employers and the em.
ployees. In considering one or the other of the alternatives indicated
in Question 8, this main objective must be kept in mind

‘Trade union movement in India compared with U.S.A. and U.K.

7.7. 16 may, incidentally, be pointed out at this stage that unfor-
tunately, trade union movement in this country did not have to
aumdergo the trials and struggle which were witnessed in the United

No. 25. (Reply of Aldi
2.7, f, para 7-3, supra.

onal Secretary, Mi of Labour.)



86

States of America and in the United Kingdom. In both the countries,
before unionism attained the status of Tespectability, trade unionists.
had to undergo severe trial. In the United States, the struggle for
recognition that was carried on by the trade union movement often
ted to violent fights between employers and the employees. The
‘yellow-dog’ contracts, which were used as weapon by the employers,
came to an end only in 1932 under the Norris La Guardia Act and
the National Labour Relations Act, 1935 makes reasonable _ provi-
sions on the basis of the legitimacy of the Trade Union Act.

In the United Kingdom, the Common Law doctrine of conspiracy
held away, and even if two or more workmen combined to bargain
for better terms of employment, they were hauled up on the charge
of conspiracy, and sometimes sentenced to undergo what would now
strike one as a savage sentence. It was in 1906 that the Trade Dis
putes Act took the first stern step recognising the right to form Trade
Unions."

Thus, both in the U.S.A. and in the U.K. trade unionism had
gone through the batism of fire before rece ig recognition and
attaining the status of respectability.

History in India

7.8. On the other hand, in India the story of the growth of trade
union movement is not so deserved. It is true that, in 1918 for ins-
lance,* ihe Common Law doctrine was invoked by the Madras
High Court in dealing with the case of the Madras Labour Union
ted by B.P. Wadia which had declared a strike. But, with the pass-
ing of the Trade Unions Act in 1926, the Employees’ right to forny
trade unions was, in substance, recognised. Several other Acts were
passed later, which conferred legitimacy on the trade union movement
and its activities.

Rule 81A, Defence of India Roles

7.9. In the development of industrial law in this country, Rule
8IA of the Defence of India Rules? has played an important role.
Originally, this Rule was passed during the Second World War, with
a view to providing speedy remedy for the settlement of industrial dis-
putes by referring them compulsorily to conciliation or adjudication
by making awards legally binding on the parties and by prohibiting

soe Fox and Thompson, History of British ‘Trade Unionism (1964) Vol. 1 page.
313-325,
3, (a). (a) Rustaaiji, law of Iudustriel Disputes in India (1964), p. 145.
()_K.N, Subramania, Labour Management Relations in India 1967, pages 37, 41,
53,

() National Commission on Labour Report (1969) paze 55, para 6.44 and 6,45,
‘The Defence of India Rules, 1939,


87

strikes or lockouts during the pendency of conciliation or adjudica-
tion proceedings and for two months thereafter. This Rule also put
a blanket ban on disputes which were not genuine industrial disputes.

Later Ordinance and Act of 1947

7.10. After the termination of the Second World War, Rule 81A
of the Defence of India Rules, 1939 was about to lapse on the Ist
October, 1946, but it was kept alive by an Ordinance issued in exer-
cise of the Government’s Emergency Powers. This was followed by
the Industrial Disputes Act,’ 1947. This is an Act which contains*
more than 60 sections, and none of its sections lays down any principles
of industrial Jaw as such. Section 10 of the Act authorises the appro-
priate Government to make a reference of industrial disputes to
Boards, Courts or Tribunals wherever the said Government is of
opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended. In exer-
cise of this power, several disputes were referred by different Govern-
ments to Boards, Courts or Tribunals, and it is the awards or decisions
of these bodies that laid the foundation of industrial law in our
country:

Labour Appellate Tribunal

7.11. Later, the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950
brought into existence the Labour Appellate Tribunal, and appeals
against the awards of Industrial Tribunals all over the country were
provided for. subject to the conditions mentioned in the relevant pro-
visions of that Act.

7.12, The Labour Appellate Tribunal sat in defferent branches at
different places, and it must be said to the credit of the Tribunal that
its decisions evolved principles of industrial law which later formed
part of the industrial jurisprudence of tht country.

Abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal

7.13. However, complaints were heard that the Industrial Disputes
(Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950 did not serve its purpose, because pro-
ceedings before the Labour Appellate Tribunal took unduly long time,
and industrial disputes, which are always sensitive in character, brook
no delay in their disposal. That is why, in 1956, the Labour Appellate
Tribunal was abolished.

१. Phe Potuseriat

Net, 1917 (4 of 1047:

inerted by amerlments.


88

7.14. The Statement of Objecis and Reasons’ annexed to the Bill,
which proposed the abolition of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, stated
as follows

“There is a large volume of criticism that appeals filed before
the Appellate Tribunal take a long time for disposal and
involve a great deal of expenditure which the workers
cannot afford. It is proposed to repeal the Industrial Dis-
putes (Appeliate Tribunai) Act, 1950, and at the same
time, io substitute the present system of tribunals by tribu-
nals manned by personnel of appropriate qualifications.
References to the National Tribunals will be made by the
Central Government, and they will cover disputes which
involve questions of national importance or which are of
such a nature that establishments situated “in more than
one State are likely to be interested in, or affected by, the
dispizes.”*

Supreme Court

7.15. On the commencement of the Constitution, the Supreme
Court had begun to function, and its decisions on a number of impor-
tant questions had already laid the foundation of a sound industrial
jurisprudence. When an appeal was brought before it, against an
aw... pussed under the Industrial’ Dispute Act in Biarar Bonk ४.
Bharat Bank Employees Union? a question was raised as to whether
an award in an industrial matter is subject to the appellate jurisdic.
tion of the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution. By
9 majority judgment 3:2. the Supreme Court held that the awards
made by the Industrial Tribunals are subject to appeal to the Supreme
Court under article 136 of the Constitution. In one sense, this judg-
Ment constitutes a landmark in the history of India’s quest for indus-
trial harmony, based on sound principles of industrial jurisprudence.
It is well known that, ever since the Supreme Court Pronounced its
judgement in the Bharat Bank’s case. the Court has dealt with princi-
ples of industrial law in several decisions, and these decisions, along
with the decisions of the Labour Appellate Tribunal. constitute. as al-
ready pointed out, the essence of industrial jurisprudence in India.

3, Statement of Obicus
2, Page 433, retatina t+
visions) Bill, 1955,

2, The Bill was disoussed in the Lok Sabha on 9th and 23rd December, 1649, 26th
January, 1950, 10th Feb, 1950 and 8th and 119 April, 1980.

3, Bharat Bank ५, Thcir Employees Union. (1950) $.C.R. 459. ALR. 1950 8,0', 188,


89

Federal Court

7.16, Bei, before the Supreme Court came on the scene, one special
jculure of indusirial taw was considered by the Federal Court ia
siern Judig Auonwbile Association v. Industrial Tribunal, Bom-
ban. ba the dispute brought by the empiovers ore the
Federal Court was in relation to the powers of industrial tribunal to
‘ 5 Salatemem of an employee where services had been termi-
‘d by ihe employer. Basing the argument on principles of Com-
mon Lew, retaiing io master and servant, the employees urged that the
Industrial Tribunal had no jurisdiction to direct reinstatement, since
the termination of the employment was in accordance with the terms
af contract. “Adjudication”, said the Federal Court in rejecting this
argement. does not. in our opinion, mean adjudication according to
the strict law of master and servant. “The award of the tribunal may
contain provisions for settlement of a dispute which no court could
order if it was bound by ordir.ary faw, but the tribunal is not tettered
in any way be these limitations.” 1६ is on this basis that the whole
of indast:ial Jansprudence has been subsequently founded by the de-
cisiogs of Use Suprems Court.

Importance of collective bargaining

ig ail these vears. however. both the trade unionists and
have exposed the fecling that the course so far foliowed
by adjudicatory metheds in dealing with industrial matters has in-
sweetly, though aawitingly, statled the progress of collective bargain-
ing: and it is an accepted principle. on which there is no difference of
eninion. that the best way to solve industrial disputes is to persuade
the parties to come to an agreement by collective bargaining. If ad-
judication takes the place of collective bargaining, legalism pervades
the proceedings and the spirit of trade-unionism and its independent
philosophy do not thrive. It is in the light of this criticism that we
formulated’. Question 8 with a view to considering which of the alterna-
tives would least hinder the growth of collective bargaining. It was also
our intention to find out which of the alternatives would reduce the
burden on the dockets of the High Courts and the Supreme Court of
miscellaneous industrial disputes.

Three alternatives

7.18. Three alternatives were placed for soliciting opinion. The
concept of National Appellate Court for Industrial Disputes has, no
doubt, received support from some lawyers and Judges and, as we have

1. Western India Automobile Association +. Industrial Tritunal, Bombay, (1949)
“.R. 321,
3, Para 8-1, supra,

a



90

already slated,’ we have not received any opinion from the tade-
unionists and very few from the employers. The opinions received trom
Governments are divergent. However, in regard to the Nationa] Appel-
late Court for Industria Disputes, we would like to make two inci-
dental observations. If one National Appellate Court for industrial
disputes were established, it would, in subvtence, amount to the re-
vival of the Labour Appellate Tribunal. We do not think it would
be reasonubly possible for the National Appellate Court to sit in one
place and deal with all the disputes arising in the term of appeals
against the decisions of Boards, Courts or Industrial Tribunals ali
over the country.
First alternative—National Appellate Court—difficultty in creation of
7.19. Besides. unless suitable constitutional chatges are made and
the National Appellate Court is given the status of the Supreme Court
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 and of the Supreme
Court under Article 136 cannot be excluded. In other words. against
the decisions of the National Appellate Court, writ petitions will lie
to the High Courts under Article 226 and applications for special
leave to the Supreme Court would be competent under Artic.e 136;
and the problem of delay in the decision of the National Appellate
Court may arise, and, in ihe process, the burden on the dockets of
the High Courts and the Supreme Court may not be appreciably
reduced. That. however, should be treated as an incidental observa-
tion mage by us.

Second alternative—Commission for Industrial Relations

7.20. The idea of creating a Commission for Industrial Relations
has been considered exhaustively by the National Commission on
Labour in its Report? The National Labour Commission has also
suggested that Labour Courts should be established, and they should
be entrusted with the judicial function of interpretation and enforce-
ment of all labour laws, awards, and agreements. The main feature
of the proposed Industrial Relations Commission is that it combines
in itself both the conciliation and adjudication functions. The Report
claims that, if the Commission as recommended is established, it would
help the process of collective bargaining and ultimately reduce the
influence of adjudication on the settlement of industrial disputes.

Third alternative—Labour Appellate Tribunal

7.21. As we have already indicated, it appears that ‘he Union
Government proposes to introduce a comprehensive Bill on the
question of industrial relations. The’ revival of Labour Appellate

1, Daca 7-4, supra.
2, National Commission on Labour--Repart, Paragrephs 23-68 snd 29-2

2 Paya 7S and 7-5, sepra.


91

fribumal may also have to be considered by the Government, but
Plots cdete, we Maly Peuit Out that it came to be abolished for reasons
which may present themseives even today.’ These, however. are
matters on which we propose 10 express nu conclusion, because we
ave had no wpportenity ८७ discuss this question with the trade-unions
and ihe employers.

2 -ammnendation

puld Hike to make in this
ce is that he should sug-
100 Minister ut Labour to take such action as he may
fil and necessary, in consultation with the State Governments
ional Tras

f pulls and pressures
and will persuacs both the irade-usions and the bodies of employers
noi (0 lean on adjudicaticn Collective bargai ald find a -prid
of place in the x that
sion cr arbitration should step in, and adjudication should come in.
ifort all That is the objective which the Union Labour
set Wili, We base ४० ६.3४, keep in mind when he formulates his
posats lo enact a comprehensive Bill to r ¢ industrial rela-
tions.

Conclusion

30 comerusion, we wish 10 emphasise th oor view it is
ime hat the machinery for the settlement of industrial dismues
should be_so devised that the dockets of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court are not burdened with too many industrial matters.

t जब 7-19:

8.11, फक-

1, PD) af LI&CA—


CHAPTER 8
DISPUTES RELATING TO SERVICES

Introductory

In this chapier, we shall discuss another type of specialised
between the State and members of the civil service.
This ciass of cases is commonly known as “service matters.”

The civil service—the legal background

8.2. Before we go into the actual question, it is desirable to ex-
plain the legal background in which the question was framed. The
question is primarily concerned with the civil service. Service under
the Crown in England (or under the State in another country) has
come to be known as the “civil service”. It may be of interest to
note that this expression itself has an association with India: the
expression “civil service” originated in India in connection with the
East India Company.' It was Provided in the Charter Act? that the
Last India Company could engage “civil servants”,

In order that decisions of the Government may be first formulated
and then implemented, a corps of Government officials is essential,”
This is the function of the civil service, so called in contra-distinction
to the Armed Forces and to the exclusion of political servants,

Position in common law—Two balancing principles
Position at common law—dismissa} at pleasure

would be a clog on the Crown’s tight to dismiss at pleasure, and
therefore unenforceable. The Principle on which this peremptory
tule rests, was thus explained by Lord Herschell.* “Such employment
being for the good of the public, it is essential for the public’ good
that it should be capable of being determined at the Pleasure of the

Shorter Oxford

a

1
8,
3, Dunne, The (४7०, (1६96)1 ९. 8. 101
92


93

Crown, except in exceptional “cases where it has been deemed to be
more for the public good that some restrictions should be imposed
on the power to dismiss its servants.”

Security—the counter balancing principte

8.4. The rigour of this rule is, however, set off by another principle
—which, in England, is only a convention, but in India has been
given the status of a constitutional provision—whereunder the civil
servant has a very high degree of security. Here the principle’ is
this. It is important that those who are most closely concerned with
the higher administration of the public services should, in fact, enjoy
security of tenure. without which it would be difficult to easure conti-
nuity of loyal service to successive Ministers of different political par-
ties. It is to be borne in mind that in contrast with private emplo-
yees, civil servants hav? to serve a master which in theory is an absrac-
tion (the State). and in oractice operates through official superiors.

The synthesis between the two principles, apparently in conflict
with each other, is achieved in the Constitution,* as we shall explain

later®

Reason for rule barring action for wrongful dismissal

8.5. It is sometimes stated that the reason for the rule which bars
an action for wrongful dismissal by a servant of the Crown is that
the relationship between the Crown and its servant “is probably not
one of contract at all, but a status, as it is in the case of the Armed
Forces”.' But even this reason is really one which can be subsumed
under the general, and more fundamental, principle of public wel-

fare or public interest.

Rowlatt J. has stated.’—

“The government cannot by contract hamper its freedom of
action in matters which concern the welfare of the State-
Thus, in the case of the employment of public servants,
which is a less strong case than the present, it has beer
laid down that, except under an Act of Parliament no one
acting on behalf of the Crown has authority to employ

Wade & Phitlips, Constitutional Law (1970), paces 218 and 680-062.
Articles 310 and 311.

Paras. 8.13 and 3-14 infra.

‘Anaon, Law of Contract (1969), citing Shenton v. Smith, (1805) A.C,
Redwall v. Thomas, (1944) K.B. 596: Inland Revenue Commissioner v, Hambrook

(1956) 2 Q. 8. 041.
8, Roderiaktiebolaget Amphitrite v. The King, (1921) 3 RK. B. 600, 504.



. 94

any person except upon the terms that he is dismissible
at the Crown’s pleasure; the reason being that it is
का the interest of the community that the Minister “ior
the time being advising the Crown should be able to dis-
pense with the services of its employees if they think it
desirable.”

Provision in Ergiand ¢

sioner

8.6. It may be of interest 10 note that, in England, the Parlia-
‘nentary Commissioner Act' excludes, from investigation by the Parlia-
mentary Commissioner, “action taken in respect of appointments or
removals, pay, discipline, super-annuation or other personnel matter”.
affecting those employed under the Crown (including the long list of
public authorities set out in the Second Schedule to the Act) and
members of H.M. Forces, including the reserve and auxiliary and
cadet forces.

luding jurisdiction of Partic~emiary Commis-

Position in Commonwealth

8.7. In many countries of the Commonwealth, the position is the
same in substance, and the principle of pleasure, co-existing with the
safeguards created by statute, has provided up with a rich harvest of
hudicial decisions, many of which are from the Commonwealth
countries.” These cases fully bear out the proposition that the civil
servant can be dismissed at pleasure, except in “special cases whereby
it is siherwise provided by law”?

The rule of pleasure has been altered in many cases in Australia,
and civil servants, as a general rule, now have rights which were not
thought of in earlier days. Gould v. Stuart,’ provides an illustration of
such a case.

8.8. On the other hand, Cross v. Conunonwealth. is an example
of the complete maintenance of the older rule in the case of the Com-
monwealth military forces, even though the statute itself in that case
provided that the commission of an officer should not be cancelled
unless a procedure designed to give him a hearing was observed.
Knov ९. J. held that these words were directory only and tha! ihey
conferred no legal rights upon an officer.

ner Act, 1967. Third Schedwie, Para 10,

8 sco Marshall “Tegal 1९
servants”, (1966) 151. C. LQ. 150: and the judgment of the
Pltsher ¥. Knott, (1985) 60 Commonwealth Law Reports 556.

8. Inland Revenue Commissioner ४. Hambrook, (1956) 2 0.3. 640, 653; on ayyeab
(1956) 2 Q.B.958, corresponding to (.968)1 All E.R. 807, 811 and (1958) 3 AN FR. 428.

3, Gould v. Stuart, (1896) A.C 575,
3, Crass v. Commonwealth, (1921) 20 CLR. 219.

3, Parliamentary Commi
2, For a detailed ¢

Hip Fetween Scate आते
netralion High Cont in



95

Aspecis of Contract

Position viewed from the point of view of a contract

8-9. Some aspects relating to contracts may now also be referred
to. A contract may contain, within itself, the elements of its own
discharge—in the form of a provision, express or implied, for its
termination in certain circumstances. In particular, a continuing con-
tract may contain a provision making it determinable at the op:ioh
of one of the parties.

B

Contract of service under common law

8.10. Under the law of master and.servant, a contract of service
may be for a fixed period of time, or it may be for work without
fixing any period of time. In either case, a contract may contain 8
provision enabling it to be terminated by notice. If the contract does
wot provide for its termination by notice and is not for a fixed period,
then, in the absence of custom, the !aw implies an obligation to give
ने rensoaable noc. the reasonableness of the notice being a ques:
tion of fact Jf a contract is terminated without giving the requisite
notice, the aggrieved party can claim damages for wrongful termina-
tion of the contract. If the contract is for a fixed period without any
power to terminate it by notice, the termination of the contract, be-
fore the exziry of the fixed period, is again, a wrongful termination, the
aggreived party can claim damages for its breach.?, However, whether
the contract is for a fixed period or not, the contract can be terminated
by the master if the servant is guilty of misconduct, or conduct which
is inconsistent with bis duties as a servant. This is the position as
regards private employment.

Service under Government

8.11. But the position changes in the case of a servant under the
Government. In England, in respect of service under the Crown—-
civil as well as miliiary—except where it is otherwise provided by
Stature. the Crown has the power to dismiss at pleasure’ The tenure
of service at pleasure «pptizs to the Colonies also."

pp. 48 fot

1. Halebay.t

+. (७) Shentin
(0 हिंद 5. staart, (8 .
(हो Dams 6. 0६6८७, (1896) 1 ९. 8, 110.
fa. See alvo para 83 to
1. Denning v. Seeretary of State for India in Council, (1920) 37 TALL. 138 (PC).



96

Position in India before the Constitution

8.12. The tenure of service at pleasure applied in India also be-
fore the Constitution. In Dennings’ case,’ the paintiff, Denning, was
appointed by the defendant, Secretary of State for India in Council
10 a post in Bengal for a period of five years from January. 1910. In
breach of the agreement, the defendant terminated the plaintiff’s ap-
pointment in January, 1913. No imputation of misconduct was made
against the plaintiff. 11 was held that a Crown servant (even if no mis-
conduct was alleged) was liable to be dismissed at the pleasure of
the Crown without notice, even if the form of agreement under which
he had been engaged implied that except in the case of misconduct
the engagement could be terminated only by notice.

Principle of pleassre continued under the Constitution

8.13. The ‘tenure during pleasure’ principle continues under our
Constitution, but with an important qualification—to be noted pre-
senily. There are two forms of tenure, of persons holding public
offices, namely, (1) tenure during pleasure, and (2) tenure during good
behaviour. Tenure during good behaviour applies to persons holding
high judicial offices like the Judges of the Supreme Court and the
Judges of the High Courts and also to the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and the Chief Election Commissioner of India. The
difference between the two forms of tenure is that a person holding
tenure during good behaviour cannot be removed from office except
for misconduct, and the procedure for such removal has been laid
down in clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 of the Constitution; whilst
@ person holding tenure during pleasure can be removed without any
reason being assigned for his removal,

Modification by statute
Restriction by statate

8.14. The ‘tenure during pleasure’ principle, however, can be res-
ticted by’ statute. In India, it is qualified by the Constitution,? which
provides several safeguards for the protection of Government servants.”

Consti(utiona) provisions relevant

8.15. We have referred to these aspects of civil service under the
State because much of the litigation relating to “service matters”—to
which this Chapter is devoted—is directly relatable to the constitutional
Provisions (articles 310 and 311),* relevant to these aspects.

1. 0527 ९५ Semstary uf State in India, 1920) 37 'F.LR. 13९ (PC).
3, See Para 8-4, supra.

3, Article 311

4, Para $17 and ४-18, infra.

&


97

Special Courts

8.16. We shail now consider the specific suggestion with which this
Chapter is concerned, namely, the creation of Special Courts—National
as well as State,—for hearing ‘Service matters’.

Service disputes

8.17. Disputes in service matters arise in the following circum-
slances:-—

Article 320 of the Constitution provides that every person who is a
member of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of
an All-India service, or holds any post connected with defence or any
civil post under the Union, holds office during the pleasure of the
President, and every person who is a member of a civil service of a
State or holds any civil post under a State holds office during the plea-
sure of the Governor of the State. This principle of holding office
during ‘pleasure’ is borrowed from the English Common Law.'

Constitutional safeguards

8.18. But, the “during pleasure” principle is, under our Consti-
tution, subject to several restrictions and safeguards for the protection
of the Government servants. Article 311 of the Constitution provides,
in effect, that no Government servant shall be dismissed or removed
by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed, nor
dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in
which he has been informed of the charge against him and given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in his defence.

There are other safeguards which have the status of fundamental
tights. Clause (1) of Article 16 of the Constitution lays down that there
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State. The Supreme
Cour: has held? that the protection of this clause is not limited to the
initial stage of appointment, but throws its protective mantle on the
Government servant throughout his career and extends the principle
of equality of opportunity in such matters as promotion, selection for
special posis, retrenchment. setirement (including compulsory retire-
ment), pensic1 and so on. Clause (2) of Article 16 enjoins that no
citizen shall on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent or
place of birth. residence or any of them be ineligible for or discrimi-
nated against in respect of any employment or office under the State. *
In addition to these special safeguards, Article 14 lays down that the
State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal

1, See para, 8-3., supra,
2, General Manager 0. Ranguehari. A.V.R, 1962 8.C. 26, 40--41.


98

Protection of the law within the territory of India. As stated above,
the general guaraniee of equality under Article 14 and the special
guarantees of equalily of Opportuaiiy and of non-discrimination under
Article 16 have the Staius of fundamental rights.
Enforcement of safeguards

8.19. The protection of Article 311 against arbitrary dismissal, re-
moval. or reduction in rank, as well as the guarantees of equality of
opportunity and of nun-discrimination under Articles 14 and 16 can
be enforced in Courts of law, and goverament servants have availed
of this remedy in a larg: number of cases.

Then again, conditions of service of goverameni servanis are
governed by rules framed under Article 309 by the Central or the State
Goverment, as the case may be. These rules lay down the conditions
of service and prescribe the procedure which should be followed be-
fore taking disciplinary action against a government servant. Further-
more, the rules themselves musi be consistent with the provisions of
the Consiitution. and must not offend against the safeguards provided
by fe 31! and ७६ Articles 14. 15 and 16. In several cases, a
& Rent servant. in his petition before the High Court. has chal-
lenged the vatidity of a Particular rule as ultra vires.

Article 226—use of, in service matters

8.20. Article 220 of the Constitution Provides a convenient. ex-
peditious and effective remedy for every government servant in case
of violation of his rights under Article 311 or under Article 14, 15 and
16, or any action against or affecting him which is unconstitutional,
illegal, arbitrary or mala fide. It is not surprising, therefore, that a
large volume of the work of High Courts consists of disposal of cases
arising out of “service matters”. In addition, a fairly large number of
suits are filed in the civil courts which ultimately reach the High
Court, and in some cases, the Supreme Court in appeal. Some peti-
tions have been filed in the Supreme Court under Article 32 where the
petitioner alleged that his fundamental rights under Article 14, 15 or
16 had been violated.

Types of service matters

Types of cases

8.21. A study of the recent judgments of the Hich Courts and
the Supreme Court indicates that these cases generally arise out of-—
(1) dismissal or removal from service, (2) termination of service not
falling within Article 311 of the Constitution; (3) compulsory retire-
ment; (4) reduction in rank; (5) reversion to substantive post, Rot
amounting to reduction within Article 311 of the Constitution; (6) with-
holding of increments; (7) suspension from service; (8) termination of


99

probation, as a punishment; (9) abolition cf a permanent post: (10)
denial of claim to promotion; (11) supersession: (12) non-selection for
a particular post or defect in selection: (13) denial of right to senio-
rity; (14) deniaf of or delay in confirmation: (15) reduction or denial
af pension: (16) denial of dearness atlos + particularly if there is
alleged a violation of the principle of eq (17) change in condi-
lions of service not permit

ted by the Cor

Cases under (1) and (2) are the most numerous.

Question 7

§.22. Now, the suggestion has been made that service matters
shoul b> heard by specialised courts having jurisdiction to ny them,
io the exclusion of the courts of law including the High Courts and
the Supreme Court. This Besuon ४ de vi
in mend. The firs abject crete ti composed of menibers
with exgertise. who can bring to bear their special knowledge and ex-
perience upow the consideration of these complicated matters.

As Bose Io said. in 8 ing the construction of 166
Central (1६1 Services (Temporary Services) Rules and tha Fundamen-
jal Rules. “No one can be blamed fer not knowing where they are
(sig) in this wilderness of rules and regulations and coined words and
phrases with hly technics] and artifi meenings.”

2, Rhee ॥| wo other 00९९७ in mind in putting the question
about sertagoers First, the creation of such courts reduce the exist-
ing arrea courts (including ihe High Courts and the Supreme
Court), and a'so Yeduce the load ‘of other courts of law: secondly, it
would be in the intefest of the Government servants themselves, who
will have a better opportunity of placing their grievances before such
courts. ‘

8.24. We have considered the proposal on merits, in some of the
paragraphs which follow; but, as the suggestion has been made from
time to time in this country, we decided to elicit opinion on issue.
Accordingly. question 9 was framed thus:

“9. (a) Do you favour the creation of.a court at the national
level exclusively vested with jurisdictian over disputes bet-
ween the Government and members one “the public service in
matiers relating to service* (including, in‘pagticular, petitions
based on article 311 of the Constitution), “fyhose decisions
will be final. subject to appeal to the Supreny spore as indi
cated below?

419,432, Prva 2

_ promeitinns, 5

2, KS.
® Trese w nil include treme acl

nena ys, Eninn of Latin


100

(४) Should such a court be Presided over by a person of the
status of Supreme Court Judge or High Court Judge, aided
by two experts whose independence is guaranteed by their
tenure?

(०) Should the experts referred to in (b) above be members of the
Court, or should they be only assessors?

(9) If your answer to (a) is in the negative, what other suggestions
would you make as to the terms and conditions of service of
its members?

(e) Should appeals to the Supreme Court from the above Court—
{i) be allowed with special leave, or
(ii) be allowed with special leave but only if a substantial
question of law of general importance is involved, or
(iii) be allowed with special leave but only if a question of
fundamental right is involved, or
(iv) be allowed subject. to any other limitation?

(0) Besides a National Court as suggested in (a) above, do you
favour regional cour:s for the purpose mentioned in (a)
above?”

8.25. The replies to this question indicate that opinion is divided
on almost every aspect of the proposal. The suggestion for the creation
of Special Courts at the State level for hearing the grievances of the
State Government servants has received a large measure of support,
but the proposal for a National Court to decide disputes arising out
of matters involving the All-India Services of posts under the Union
has not received strong support.

As regards the composition of the Courts, opinion of those who
support the proposal is almost unanimous that the Chairman of the
State Court should be a person of the status of a High Court Judge,
and in the case of the National Court he should be of the status of a
Supreme Court Judge, and in each case the Court should have two
associate members of high status, one of whom should be an expert
and the o’her a seniur official. All the replies in favour of the nro-
posal have emphasised that the Service Courts, National as well as
State, must have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide service
matters and the jurisdiction of ordinary Civil Courts should be barred.

Supervisory jurisdiction—view as to

8.26. Should the Service Courts be subject to the supervisory
jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 and the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under articles 132, 133 and 136 of
the Constitution or any of them?


101

On this question, the majority of replies were strongly in favour
of making these Courts subject to the jurisdiction of the High Court
and the Supreme Court, though a small minority favoured the exclu-
sion of the jurisdiction even of the High Court and the Supreme
Court and the amendment of Articles 32, 226, 132 and 136 of the
Constitution if necessary-

Special Courts—merits
Special Courts—merits considered

8.27. After a detailed analysis of the replies received and giving
our anxious consideration to the proposal, we are of the following
opinion.

The proposal for the creation of Service Courts has some merit.
In several countries, Administrative Courts which deal with the grie-
vances of private citizens against the administration also deal with the
grievances of civil servants against the State, where illegality is alleged.
These Courts enjoy a reputation for independence, impartiality and
integrity. In the opinion of several eminent writers, these Administra-
tive Courts give a fairer deal to the aggrieved party than the Common
Law Courts in England.

Continental concept of public employment .

8.28. It should be noted that the Continental conception of public
employment is somewhat different. The civil servant adversely affected
by an administrative action that bears on his employment has the
same remedies available as the ordinary citizen injured in his personal
or property rights. For example, the French civil servant who is
damaged in his career by an administrative decision may obtain
review of that decision by the administrative courts, just as a private
individual can whose property rights are adversely affected by a deci-
sion of the administration.’

This assimilation of the civil servant in Freach law, not to the
private employee, but to the ordinary citizen vested with personal or
property rights, stems in part from the fact that his relationship tothe
government is not conceived as a contractual one. “The situation of
the civil servant vis-a-vis the administration is wholly governed by
statutes and regulations,” reads the law of October 19, 1946, now the
basic law governing the legal status of the French civil servant. If he
is adversely affected by administrative action, he is affected not in his
contract rights, but in the rights given him by statutes and regulations.
And, he may resort to administrative courts if those rights are violated,
just as any Frenchman can whose personal or property rights are in-
fringed by the administration.*

7.1 Schwartz, Prench Administrative Law, page 86.
3, Schwartz, French Administrative Law page 86.



102

Greater protection and reduction of arrears

8.29. The creation of Special Service Courts in India may, there-
fore. provide to the honest and efficient government servant greater
and more effective protection against discrimination or ‘victimisatioa,
Dat ai prescni

Furthermore. the creation of service Courts may reduce the grow-
ing volume of arrears in the High Courts and the Supreme Court,
proveded Ges are not made subiect to the inrisdiction of the High
Cone totes Jtstiels 226 and of the Supreme Court wider Actiles 123
and 136 et the Conseititi:

Supervisory jurisdiction
Crucial issue—supervisory jurisdiction

8.30. This brings us to the crucial issue in this proposal. The
creation of Service Courts, if it is to serve any useful purpose, must
involve the amendment of the Constitution if the supervisory jurisdic-
tien of oh tah Courts and the Supreme Curt 6 Wis os.
to be abolished. Such a proposal has, however, been oppo: by the
large majority of replies received by us. They are not in favour of
restricting the powers of the High Courts and the Supreme Court for
the purpose of conferring “exclusive” jurisdiction on Service Courts.

No likelihood of reduction of arrears if supervisory jurisdiction

8.31. But, if the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court and
the Supreme Court remains intact, and the decision of the Service
Court is subject to review by these higher Courts, we do not see how
the creation of Service Courts will reduce the growing volume of
irreans? i (६ २ Courts.

Existing rules eleguate

8.32. There is one more consideration which has weighed with
us in dealing with the present problem. We have carefully considered
the procedure prescribed by the relevant statutory Central as well as
State Rules in relation to disciplinary proczedings, and we are satis-
fied that the procedure prescribed by these Rules is, on the whole,
satisfactory. All the essential ingredients of a fair and just trial are
prescribed by the relevant Rules and experience shows that this pro-
cedure, which is self-contained, has generally not caused miscarriage
of justice. Since this procedure has, on the whole, operated satisfac-
torily over the years, it would, we think, be unnecessary to make a

1, Para 8-27 supra.
2, See Para 8.29, supra.


103

radical change by recommending the creation of a Service Tribunal.
15 this © tion, we ought 16 emphasise Lif ing gives are, the
procedure prescribed by the relevant Rules is not strictly followed, or
the fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 14 and 16 are contra-
vened, or the requirements prescribed by article 311 are not complied
with in their Jetter and spirit, the aggrieved public servant is entitled
to claim relief under the writ jurisdiction of the High Court, and (if

senda: ei nghis ae ६26), the Supreme Covet. Ip our oninion,
the existing Jegal and constitutional position affords sufficient protec-
Gor, We ce गर्व, chevefere peseyment the eraren of थे seperate

Service Tribuaal.

Likelihood of abuse

8.33. There is yet another reason which is against ihe proposal.
I: may be true that Service Courts consisting of judges of high status,
independence, and integety. will give proizciiy © the, nest and
capable Government servant against victimisation, discrimination, or
arbitrary action; but, as against this, we cannot ignore the fact that
‘access to Service Courts with large powers of interference with execu-
tive decisions is Jike’v to be abused by underserving er dishonest
officials, and may conceivably, in some cases, be subversive of disci-
plines inasmuch as undue advantage may be taken of the facility pro-

Conclusion

8.34. T all the relevant circumstances into consideration, we
are of the perm oy that the existing provisions for the protection of
the rights of the Government servants are on the whole adequate,
and the creation of Special Service Courts is neither necessery nor
desirable under the present conditions prevaiting in India.


CHAPTER 9
ZONAL COURTS OF APPEAL—PROPOSAL FOR CREATION
OF

Question 10

9.1. Question Number 10 in out Questionnaire deais with the
suggesiion for creating Zonal Courts of Appeal. It reads thus:—

“Do you favour the creation of Zonal Appellate Courts dealing
with appeals against the decisions of High Courts in a parti-
cular Zone?”

Question 11 ,

9.2. Question Number 11 deals with the details of the composi-
tion "5 Zonal Courts and the points raised by clauses (a) to (d) of
that Question would naturally have fallen to be considered if we had
decided to recommend the establishment of Zonal Courts. Question
Number 12 reads thus:—

“If vou are not in favour of Zonal Courts of Appeal, as proposed

above, have you any other suggestions for avoiding the
possibility of accumulation of arrears in the Supreme Court”?

Question 12

9.3. Since we have decided’ not to recommend the creation of
Zonal Courts, it is unnecessary to consider the points raised under
Question Number 11. Under Question Number 12, just a few sugges-
tions have been received. but they are not of any significance and so
it ig not necessary for us to deal with Question 12 as well. We will now
deal with Question Number 10 and first indicate briefly the grounds
which were urged in favour of establishment of Zonal Courts.

Idea of Zonal Court

9.4. The idea of Zonal Court was suggested for our consideration
by some eminent persons who occupied a very high position in the
judicial life of this country. In support of this idea, it can be urged
that the establishment of an intermediate Court of Appeal like a
Zonal Court may help to reduce the load on the docket of the
Supreme Court. The idea of the Zonal Court postulates that our
country should be divided into four Zones and each Zone should have

3, Para 9-16, infra.


105

a Zonal Court. Zonal Courts, according to this concept, are really
intended to function as Courts of Appeal at the stage of the High
Courts. This idea postulates that in each High Court, all the Judges
should function in single Divisions, and appeals against their judg-
tmenis should lie to the Zonal Courts. Zonal Courts should be com-
posed of Judges, selected fromm each of the High Courts in the States
constituting the Zone on some rationale principle as that of seniority.
The Chief Justice cf each High Court and one or two of his senior
colleagues should become members of Zonal Courts. The Zonal
Cour.s thus contemplated wouid function like Circuit Courts. They
shouid hold their sittings in each High Court and hear appeals against
the judgments delivered by single Judges of that High Court. Since
Zonsi Courts would thus be constituted by senior judges of the High
Court and may sit in a Bench of three judges, it was suggested that
article 136 of the Constitution could be suitably amended and appeals
agains: ihe decisions of such Zonal Courts should be aliowed only cn
subsiantial question of !aw of general importance. If the idea of the
establishment of Zonal Court is accepted, some consequential amend-
ments may have to be made even in articles 133 and 134.

Additional grounds in su»port of proposal for Zonal Courts

५.8, Some additional grounds in support of the proposal were
also suggested for our consideration. One reason in support of this
idea was that it would encourage mobility amongst the lawyers of
different High Courts constituting the Zone and would ‘enable
healihy exchange of ideas amongst! different Judges who would consti-
tute the Zonal Courts. The number of Judges, who should constitute
the Zonal Courts in each Zone, would naturally depend upon the ex-
tent of work which was likely to come before such Zonal Courts.
if in each High Court a Zonal Court of three Judges consisting of one
Judge from the High Court concerned and two Judges from outside is
formed, it would, it was thought, enable exchange of judicial ideas and
that would be a healthy development in making the administration of
justice more satisfactory. .

Desirability of avoiding local pressures

9.6. Another argument which was urged in support of this idea
was that complaints are heard in some quarters that some of the
Judges of the High Courts in some places are likely to be subjected
to local pulls and pressures and it was apprehended that this ten-
dency to attempt to exert local pulls and pressures even on Judges
of High Courts may conceivably increase in future. That is why, 8
Zonal Appellate Court, consisting of three Judges, two of whom


106

would be from other High Courts. functioning in a State which is a
constituent of tie Zone, would avoid this unhealthy trend. Mobiiity
of the Bar, to which we have already referred,’ was also emphasised
as a very important factor. It was ihought that if Zonal Courts begin
to function, members of the Bar from one High Court are likely to bz
imsited to appear in ocher High Courts, formin s of the Zene..
and any sten. which esiablishes more intim: lationships between
Bers prac erent High Courts, would vleame.

Imporiance ७

Ri Ad Was suggested +1 favour of this idea
was that if Zonal Courts are estab‘ished, they would natnally function
in Engiish util Hindi becomes rich and ripe enough to iake the place
of English and it receives acceptance from all the States of the
coumry, including particularly the non-Hindi speaking States. The
argument is that in the interest of judicial edministration. it is im-
portant that the High Courts and the Supreme Court -he-v'd fonction
m the same Janguage. For quite some time. this language nas ३0 be
Engiish 0 advocates of the concept of Zonal Couris fear that ,
under local ressures, it is sot unlikely that Bigh Courts may begin
to funetion fa language of the State and if that happens, i: will
have adverse e on the efficiency of judicial administration and
ir the w ४ of judicial process as an important ins:rument for
i y of the country. If the High Courts begin to func-
Won in regional languages. the Tanguage of the Supreme Court may
pose a serious question which may be over-loaded with political con-
siderations: and such a possibility can be avoided if Zonal Courts are
established becatise that would guarantee the continuance of English
for such tine until, as we have already mentioned, Hindi takes the
place of English with the concurrence of all the States.

It is on such considerations that the Commission was requested to
consider the concept of Zonal Courts.

Views expressed on the proposal

9.8. In reply 10 the Questionnaire, we received answers from
different Bar Associations and High Courts and we found that the
opinion expressed in these answers is almost unanimously against the
concept of Zonal Court. After careful consideration of these replies
and giving due weight to the grounds set out above in support of the
concept, we have come to the conclusion that it would be unreasonable
and unwise to accept the concept and to recommend it to the Union
Government.

7, Para 9.3 supra,


107

Proposal not favoured

9.9. In our view, it would be undesirable to require that all High
Court Judges should function in Single Division and‘ that every appeal
against every appealable decision of a Single Judge of a High Court
should be taken to the Zonal Court; as most of the High Court
Judges have stated in their replies as well as in their oral discussions
with the Commission, this would impair the dignity and status of the
High Court Judges.

Problem of selection

9.10. Besides, the selection of Judges for the Zonal Courts would
present problems which it would be very difficult to solve in a rational
Inanner without creating bitterness and dissatisfaction in the minds of
many High Court Judges.
Socio-ec ic history of local legistation

9.11. There is yet another consideration which is very much
against the concept of Zonal Court. In many States, High Courts are
called upon to consider questions of interpreting provisions of different
pieces of State legislation, and it is well-known that when socio-
economic legislation is passed by any State, it has a history of its owa.
The context in which the legislation has been passed, the mischief
which it is intended to cure and remedy, the conditions which are laid
down in different provisions of the Act by reference to the genesis of
the Act, the previous legislation, if any, in respect of the matter and
prior judicial decisions in respect of the provisions thereof are all
relevant factors, and it is difficult to visualise that the two additional
Judges, who would constitute the Zonal Court alongwith one Judge
‘of the High Court of the State, would be able to appreciate these rele-
vant factors as well and as quickly as the Judges of the said High
Court would themselves be able to do.

Objective of reducing docket of Supreme Court not likely to be
achieved

9.12. Even if Zonal Courts are established, since they would
take the place of the Courts of Appeal of the different High Courts,
it would not be easy to accept the suggestion’ that finality should be
attached to the decisions of such Zonal Courts and articles 133, 134
and even article 136 of the Constitution should, accordingly, be suit-
ably modified; and if these articles cannot be modified even after the
Zonal Courts begin to function, that cannot help the main objective
of reducing the burden on the docket of the Supreme Court.

1, Para 9-4, supra.
3. Para 974, supra.
LjP(D)195MofLI&CA—S


168

Sense of separateness likely to be created

9.13. Resides, it is feared by thoge who oppose this concept that
if the country was divided into four Zones and Zonal Courts were
established in such Zones, far from helping the integration of the
country, it may create four blocs attached to each other, and may en-
courage a sonse of separateness in these separate blocs.

Question of language considered

9.14. In regard to the problem of the language' of the Court, it is
urged that one need not take recourse to the concept of the Zonal
Courts to achieve that objective. Oa principle, it can and should be
urged that it is desirable and essential that the language of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court should continue to be one and that one
language, for some years, has inevitably to be English- On this point,
both the advocates and the opponents of the concept of Zonal Courts
are agreed. The opponents, however, contend that an artificial device
of establishing Zonal Courts which would radically alter the structure
and functions of the High Courts, would hardly assist the object on
which most of the lawyers and Judges of the country are agreed,
Therefore, we have come to the conclusion that the idea of Zonal
Courts cannot be accepted and should not be recommended,

Conclusion

9.15. As we have already indicated,’ in view of this conclusion,
Question No. 11 does not fall to be considered and on Question No.
12, we have received just a few suggestions which need no examination,

9.16. This disposes of Questions 10 to 12 of our Questionnaire.

ss कककत---््ह#/.हतहतढफ रह ॒_

3, Para 9.7, supra,
3, Para 9-3, supra.


CHAPTER 10
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF JUDGES
Introductory

10.1. We now proceed to deal with the terms and conditions of
service mainly of the Judges of the High Courts and, incidentally, of
the Judges of the Supreme Courts as well. We ought to add that we
regard our recommendations on this point as very important and in-
deed, we attach considerable significance to this part of our inquiry.

Conditions of service of lower judiciary

10.2. Before we proceed to deal with the problem, we ought to
make it clear that we are fully conscious that terms and conditions of
service of the members of the lower judiciary require improvement in
a substantial manner without any delay. In fact, in our Report on the
Code of Civil Procedure,' we have devoted one Chapter which deals
with the terms and conditions of the subordinate judiciary and with
other measures, such as the setting up of a National Academy for
training Junior Judicial Officers with a view to improving the quality
of judicial service in that cadre. While doing so, we were conscious
that we had been asked to make recommendations about the revision
of the Code of Civil Procedure and, strictly speaking, the terms and
conditions of service of the subordinate judiciary were not within the
purview of that reference. Besides, we were also conscious that the
terms and conditions of service of the subordinate judiciary, and the
steps we had recommended for the improvement of quality in the
cadre of subordinate judges were constitutionally subject to the autho-
rity of the State Governments and, yet, we thought that the question
was of such importance that we should, by devoting a Chapter to that
problem, invite the attention of the Union Government and request
them to get in touch with the State Governments and consider the
recommendations made by us favourably and as early as possible. We
have made these observations at the outset of the present discussion,
because we are anxious to avoid the impression that we are concen-
trating on the improvement of the terms and conditions of the higher
judiciary and are ignoring the urgency of the problem of substantially
improving the terms and conditions of service of the lower judiciary.

4, 54th Report (Code of Civil Procedure),
109


ho

Question 14

10.3. In order to ascertain opinion from the members of the Bar,
the Judiciary, and other interested parties, Question 14 was thus for-
mulated by us in our Questionnaire:

“Do you agree with the suggestion that one of the necessary
steps to help the efficient and speedy disposal of cases in the
High Courts is to attract experienced, senior and competent
lawyers to the Bench, and that this object may be achieved
if—

{3} the terms and conditions of service of the High Court
Judges are improved;

(ii) their age of retirement is increased to 65 years;

ii} the salaries of the Supreme Court Judges and the High
Court Judges are increased, or, in any event, suitable
additional fringe benefits are provided for them;

(iv) on retirement, the pension of the Supreme Court Judges
and the High Court Judges is made equal to their pay,
or, in any case, is materially enhanced?”

Gist of views expressed on the question

10.4. On this question, considered as a whole, evidence received
by us from the Bar Associations and from the Judges of the High
Courts is unanimous. It is clear from the answers sent to us by the
Tudges of different High Courts in writing after discussing the question
in their respective chamber meetings, and the oral evidence given by
Judges of the High Courts, visited by the Members of the commis-
sion, that all the Judges of the High Courts are completely dissatisfied
with the present position in regard to the terms and conditions of
their service. All of them complained that, though they are doing
their best to discharge their onerous function in the administration of
law, they do not feel at peace with themselves, because of the unsatis-
factory nature of their salaries and the absence of any additional
amenities. We wish to emphasise that the existence of such wide-
spread discontentment in the minds of almost all the Judges of the
High Courts is a very disturbing factor, and its relevance in the dis-
cussion and decision of the question of improving their terms and
conditions of service must be fully recognised.

View of Supreme Court Bar Association

10.5. We do not propose to deal with the evidence supplied by
the replies sent to us by the different Bar Associations: but we think
it would nc be inappropriate to refer to the opinion expressed by the
Supreme Court Bar Association as an illustration.


lit

This is what the Supreme Court Bar Association has said in reply
to the relevant question:?

“We are strongly of the opinion that the most essential step to
aid in the efficient and speedy disposal of cases in the
High Courts is to attractable, experienced and competent
lawyers to the Bench. We feel that the terms and condi-
tions of service of the High Court Judges should be sub-
stantially improved. Their age of retirement should be
increased to 65 years so as to be at par with that of the Judges
of the Supreme Court. Suitable additional fringe benefits
should be provided for the Judges of the Supreme Court,
the High Courts and the Tribunals and Courts mentioned
above. On retirement, the pension of “the Supreme Court
Judges, the High Courts Judges and the Members of the
Tribunals mentioned above should be equivalent to not less
than two-thirds of their pay, and provisions for free medi-
cal aid and subsidised housing should be made for them

after their retirement.”

‘Work of Administrative Service not under-estimated

10.6. After this summary of opinions, we shall dispose of one as-
pect concerning the proposal for an improvement of the conditions
of service of Judges of the High Court.

In discussing the question of the improvement of the service con-
ditions of the Judges of the High Court, it is necessary to remember
that comparison of their salaries with the salaries drawn by mem-
bers of the Administrative Services is really not relevant and, in any
case, should not be given undue significance. We have no hesitation
in expressing our appreciation of our jant young men and women
who, in a spirit of idealism. join Administrative Services in our coun-
try, though they know fully well that the salaries with which their
careers initially begin are inadequate and that, even at the end, the
salaries which they may expect to draw at the top of the ladder may
also not be attractive. We are also conscious that as members of the
Administrative Service rise in their own cadre, they deal with impor-
tant matters concerning the welfare of the community, because a wel-
fare State like India has inevitably to lean on its administrative
agency to carry out the welfare policies laid down by socio-economic
legislation. Therefore, when we say that the salaries drawn by the
members of the Administrative Service should not be treated as rele-
vant or significant in re-examining the question of the terms and con-
ditions of Judicial Service, we do not wish in any manner to under-
estimate the importance of administrative work in the progress of our
country.

4, 8, No, 74 (Supreme Court Bar Association).



112

Prospects of promotion in administrative service

10.7. When a person chooses to join Administrative service, a
spirit of idealism no doubt inspices bis choice, because, as we have
already pointed out,' his initial salary is inadequate, and the highest
he may hope to reach canmiot be regarded as too atéractive. But, on
the other hand, when he begins his career, as an Administrative Offi-
cer, he has a security of tenure, and he occupies a position of authority
jn the area for which he is appointed. He is entitled to look forward
10 a gradual rise in his salary according to the increments prescribed
in his scale. He is also entitled to look forward to promotion and,
in that sense, from the commencement of his career, he does not have
to face the problem of uncertainty about his future.

Position of members of the Bar different

10.8. The position in regard to the members of the Bar who are
called upon to join the Bench is very different. All persons who join
the Bar—including those who have reached the highest position in the
profession—have to face the severe test of a fairly long period of pro-
bation when briefs do not come their way. When the junior begins
to get briefs, he is never too certain that the flow of briefs will conti-
nue until he reaches a stage when he establishes his own reputation,
and the sense of security in the profession can then be enjoyed by
him. All of us must recognise that members of the Bar who are
invited to join the Bench have to face a peculiar dilemma.”

Problems dealt with by administrative service not so complex

10,9. Besides, the problems which the administrative branch of
the public service has to face are, by and large, not so complex, sensi-
tive or difficult as are the problems which the higher judiciary has to
face. Thus, the nature of work performed by the two branches, the
administrative and the judicial, also materially differs. It is in the
light of these circumstances that we take the view that the position
of the administrative service is not comparable to that of the higher
judicial service and, from that point of view, in dealing with the pro-
biem of the terms and conditions of service of the High Court Judges,
the emoluments paid to the public servants in the administrative
branch should treated as irrelevant.

Opinion ot distinguished persons in democratic countries—Chorchill’s
speech,
10.10. Having summarised ihe position of the evidence which we

have to consider in dealing with the question, and having dealt with
the question whether Judges can be compared to members of the

35 See para 10-6, eupra,
See Para 1-16 infra.


113

administiative service, we proposé to refer to the opinion expressed
by important and distinguished persons in two democratic countries,
in order that our discussion ia this Chapter, and the recommendations
which we propose to make, should be considered by the Union
Goverament in their proper perspective.

When Churchill moved a Bifl for raising the salaries of Judges in
England on the 23rd March, 1954, he paid a tribute to the service
rendered by Judges and bore eloquent testimony to the importance
and significance of their work. Said Churchill,”

~The service rendered by Judges demands the highest qualities

of Jearning, training and character. These qualities are not tc
be measured in terms of pounds, shillings and pence accord-
ing to the quality of work done. A form of life and conduct
far more severe and restricted than that of ordinary people
is required from Judges and, though unwritten, has been
most strictly observed. They are at once privileged and res-
tricted. They have to present a continuous aspect of dignity
and conduct... The Bench must be the dominant attraction
to the legal profession, yet it rather hangs in the balance
now, and heavily will our society pay if it cannot command
the finest characters and the best legal brains which we can
produce; and heavily will our country pay in an epoch where
our relative material power has diminished, if we do not
sustain these institutions for which we are renowned.”

Tn fact, like many of Churchill's utterances, this piece has attain-
ed the status of a classic.

Silverman quoted

10.11. Participating in the debate* in support of the Bill moved
by Churchill, Mr. Sidney Silverman said,

“The real case for this increase is the quite simple one, for which

we need make no apology at all, that the value of the salary
is not now equal to the nature of the job. I agree with my
hon. friends who said that we were living in a different kind
of society from that in which we were living in 1831. Judges
cannot expect to retain that degree of advantage over ordi-
nary citizens which they enjoyed then. But it is very different
from saying that the discrepancy was too great, than to say
that the salary, with all the charges that have taken place
since then, is adequate now.

+. H.C. Debates (23rd March, 1954), Vol. 525, Col. 1081, 1062,
# HC. Debates (2870 March, 1954), Vol. 525, Col. 1099.


ll4

The proof that it is not is that there is great dissatisfaction on
the judicial Bench, which is a new phenomena. One must
have sufficient confidence in the judges to Tecognise that if
almost unanimously they feel aggrieved, disturbed and in-
adequately treated, there is Probably sufficient in the grie-
vance to justify this House in correcting it. For these reasons,
I support the Bill.”

Salaries revised in England since 1873

. 10.12. So far as England is concerned, it may be noted that the
salaries of the higher judiciary, last increased on April 1, 1966, were
increased again under the Judges’ Remuneration Order, 1970. The new
scale of £11,500 p.a. for a2 High Court Judge compares’ with £10,000
introduced in 1966, £8,000 in 1954 and £5,000 in 1873. This wilt clearly
show that in England, Parliament has been raising the salaries of
Judges during the last 100 years.

Present salary in India not adequate

10.13. In India, until 1950, a Judge of the High Court received
Rs. 4,000 as his monthly salary, whereas, when the Constitution came
into force in 1950, the said salary was reduced to Rs. 3,500 per month,
The amount of Rs. 3,500 per month cannot, in our opinion, be regard.
ed as a reasonable salary for the Judges of the High Court.

Mansfeld’s view

10.14. It was stated? by Lord Mansfield (though in a different
context) that a senior member of the Bar with good practice, when
called upon to join the Bench, is in a whimsical situation between
tragedy and comedy; inclination drawing one way and imperative call
of duty to serve on the Bench the other.

Tt is noteworthy that, over the years, the British Parliament has
shown awareness of this problem and has, as already indicated by us’,
increased the salaries of the Judges from time to time.

Tucrease in pofessional gains since Second World War

10.15. It is sometimes not irae by persons who are not
connected with the working of the 180 Courts and the Supreme Court

3. See (a) Holdsworth, HE. L., Vol. 1,
(0) Editorial in (1970), 12) New Law Journal 421,

* Lord Monofield, letter to Gartick, quoted by Holdsworth, Some Makers
of English Law.

* Para 10-12, supra,


115

that a significant phenomenon has taken place in relation to the func-
tioning of these Courts. After the Second World War, the cost of living
has been steadily increasing, until we have reached a stage when it
can be said without any exaggeration that Judges, who draw a salary
of Rs. 3,500 are finding it difficult to live a life with ordinary amenities
—much less a life of comfort and ease. On the other hand, after the
Second World War, the professional gains at the Bar have increased
by leaps and bounds. The inevitable result of this anomalous situation
has been that senior members of the Bar have lost faith in the validity
of the principle which governed the ethics of the Bar in the past, and
which compelled them as a matter of duty to the profession to accept
an invitation of the Chief Justice to join the Bench. In the past. if the
Chief Justice of the High Court sent for a member of the Bac and
offered him an invitation to be his colleague, it was thought to be a
matter of duty to the nation to say “yes” and never to decline the
offer. Decline in the faith of this professional principle has now led
to this unfortunate and distressing result that the Chief Justice of
every High Court has the sad experience of getting a “No” to his
request from several members of the Bar. This is a circumstance the
relevance of which cannot be ignored in considering the present
problem.

Reason for reluctance

40.16. Any senior, or even mid-senior, practitioner at the Bar is
used to a certain way of life and to the conveniences and comforts of
the members of his family and the education of his children in a
certain style. Besides, he has before him an alluring prospect of reach-
ing the position nearabout the ‘ep of the professional ladder where
professional incomes have reached unprecedented heights today. In
this situation, if members of the Bar are reluctant to join the Bench,
it would not be easy to disapprove of or condemn their conduct. It is
from the class of these members of the Bar that the Chief Justices of
the High Courts are very keen to recruit members on the Bench.

This predicament is the determining factor for the quality of the
higher judiciary, and, therefore, it will be dangerous and ostrich-like
to ignore this dilemma.

The dilemma, to which we have referred, should not be treated
as illusory, and the reality behind the dilemma should not be ignored
in considering the service terms of the High Court Judges.

Role of judiciary in determining important questions of law

10.17. There is another aspect of this problem, to which we must
refer. In a democratic State, committed to the ideal of establishment
of socio-economic justice and the creation of a new social order of an
egalitarian type, it is well-known that the law plays a major role as


116

an instrument of change, and so, it is but natural that questions about
the validity of the law or even about the construction of its benevolent
Provisions are bound to play a major role in assisting democracy it
its onward march towards socio-economic justice. In dealing with
questions, both constitutional and legal, which the judicial process has
to face from time to time, both the lawyers and the judges have to
Play their role not merely as legal technicians but as jurists. We must
note that the stakes involved are very high.

Cohen’s view

10.18. What Cohen has observed about the role of lawyers, in
our view, applies equally to the role of Judges. Says Cohen':

“A lawyer must study the stream of life and be constantly think-
ing of ways of improving the containing legal forms. We too:
are men, and now we will live not as pall-bearers of dead
past but as the creators of a more glorious future. By all
means let us be loyal to the past, but above all loyal to the
future, to the Kingdom which doth not yet appear.”

Judges must possess vision

10.19. Discussing the function of the Judge, W. A. Robson(*) has.
pointed out that stress is always laid on the duty of a Judge to be a
trustee of the past, but, in reality, it is far more important that he
should be a prophet of the future, in so far as that is compatible with
the faithful administration of the existing body of law.

Even as to the problem of judicial int etation, a Judge must be
endowed not only with deep knowledge of ba w, but must also possess
@ proper vision about the significance of the role of law in a democra-
tic State. As Cardozo has observed.’

“The problem of judicial interpretation is to hold a just middle
way between excess of valour and excess of caution.” “My
duty as a Judge may be”, said Cardozo‘, “to objectify in law
not my own aspirations and convictions and philosophies,
but the aspirations and convictions and philosophies cf men
and women of my times. Hardly shall I do this well if my
own sympathies and beliefs and passions and deviations are
with a time that is past.”

७ Morris कै, Cohen, A Dreamer’s Journey, (Autebiography of Mortis R. Cohen),
pages 180-181.

® Robson, Justice and Administrative Law, pages 242—245.
3. Margaret E. Hail, (Ed) Selected writings of Benjamin Nathan Cardoze. p- 40

+ Cardozo, Nature of the Tndicial Process, p. 173


117

This illustrates the proposition which we havé just enunciated,
namely, that both lawyers and Judges must bring to bear upon their
respective tasks not only their skills as technicians in the law, but also
their vision as jurists.

Law as a dynamic instrument

10.20. In a democratic State, law can never be static. It is dyna-
mic, and it is fully conscious of its purpose as an instrument of social.
change. It is in connection with this dynamic role of law that Fried-
manon' has observed:

“It would be tragic if the law were so petrified as to be unable
to respond to the unending challenge of evolutionary or revo-
lutionary changes in society. To the lawyer, this challenge
means that he cannot be content to be a craftsman. His
technical knowledge will supply the tools, but it is his sense
of responsibility for the society in which he lives that must
inspire him to be jurist as well as lawyer.”

Crucial role of Judges

10.21. Having referred to the significance of the role of law and
the importance of judicial process in that connection, we ought to add
that Judges have to play a crucial role in this process. As Mr. Eric
Fletcher has stated’:

“Whatever detailed reforms may be introduced for improving the
machinery of justice, for speeding up the process of litigation
and for developing a more expeditious and cheaper system
of justice in the country, we shall always find that the linch-
pin of the system is the Judge.”

When we are discussing the question of revising the terms and
conditions of service of the Judges, we must bear this observation in
mind.

Problems of arrears

_ 10.22. All persons, who take interest in the administration of
justice are disturbed by the problem of growing arrears in different.

igh Courts and even in the Supreme Court; but it is not appreciated
by ordinary persons that this problem cannot be solved merely by
appointing additional number 0 Judges. When one speaks of expedi-
tious disposal of cases pending in the High Courts and the Supreme
Court, one is not asking for superficial or hasty decisions of cases;
one is expecting the Judges to bring to bear upon their task the wealth

3, W, Friedmann, Law in « changin Soriety, 9. 503.
3, Eric Pletcher in H.C. Debates, 23rd March, 1954, Col. 1089.


Hg

of their experience and their legal acumen coupled with a vision of
the true character of their function with a view to dealing with matters
expeditiously; and, in that connection, the quality of the Judges matters
much more than the number of Judges.

Likely consequence of refusal by members of the bar

10.23. If we find by experience that distinguished and experienced
lawyers continue to say ‘No’ to the invitation made by their Chief
Justice to accept a seat on the Bench.

Chief Justices may have to choose lawyers who do not occupy a
positicn even in the second rank at the Bar. Lawyers of this category
may. no doubt, be happy to be elevated to the Bench: but selection of
such lawyers will not add to the strength of the Bench; on the con-
trary. it may lead to the lowering of judicial standards and deteriora-
tion of the administration of justice. This fact cannot be ignored in
dealing with the problem of the improvement of the salaries of the
High Court Judges.

If the Chief Justices of High Courts show reluctance to choose
such lawyers for elevation to the Bench, the only course open to them
would be to recruit on the Bench distinguished District Judges; and, if
such a course is adopted, as it may well have to be, ultimately all the
High Courts may be manned by District Judges, because in their case,
elevation to the High Court’ Bench invariably means substantiat
financial rise in their salaries,

Limitations of persons appointed from the subordinate judiciary

10,24. When we make this observation, we are not, in any manner,
under-estimating the quality of the contributions made by some District
Judges who were elevated to the Bench of different High Courts, Ex-
perience shows that District Judges elevated to the High Court Bench

ing to bear upon the discharge of their functions 2 balanced appreach
and a mind trained by long judicial experience in appreciating evidence
and in assessing the merits of rival contentions. But there is no denying
the fact that, in his long judicial career. a member of the subordinate
judiciary does not get an opportunity to become familiar with some
of the important branches of law which constitutes an important part
of the judicial business of different High Courts.

Thus, in some respects, their work in the High Courts is qualita-
tively different from that which they do in the district courts.

Variety of experience gathered by members of the bar

10.25. On the other hand, members of the bar, who practice in
their respective High Courts, become familiar with all branches of law
and acquire excellence and expertise by virtue of the experience gained
in handling a variety of cases before different Benches of the High


119

Courts. Besides, on elevation to the Bench, successful members of the
Bar bring to bear upon the discharge of their duties a fresh outlook
characterised by creative thinking and unhampered by precedents and
inspired by the vision of the role which law has to play in a democratic
society,

Role of each complementary to role of other

10.26. We would like to add that on the Bench of the High Court
those appointed from the bar and those appointed from the subordi-
nate judiciary are complementary to each other, but in no sense a
substitute for each other.

That 5 why Chief Justices always expect to have a large number
of practising lawyers on the Bench, in addition to the District Judge
who, by the excellence of their work, are naturally promoted to the
High Court. This expectation of the Chief Justices is being gradually
defeated. That is a very serious problem which the administration of
justice in the High Courts is facing today, and may have to face in
future in a much larger measure. We earnestly hope that the policy-
makers in our country will take this consideration into account in
dealing with our recommendations on this subject.

Present economic conditions not a deciding factor

10.27. It is in this background that we have given anxious consi-
deration to this problem. In doing so, we have constantly borne in
mind the fact that we have adopted the ideal of establishing a new
society based on social, economic and Political justice in our country
and that a democracy like ours is reluctant to allow any section of
Public servants to claim exa; ted salaries or amenities. We have
also taken into account the fact.—very distressing indeed—that, at
Present, we are passing through a very difficult time. But the problem,,
we are dealing with, is a long-ran problem, and we suggest that, in
finding proper solution to this problem, the present economic conditions
in the country should not be the deciding factor.

Recommendations

10,28. Having considered all the aspects and given them very
careful thought, we are not inclined to recommend any increase in
the salary of High Court Judges. We would, however, make the fol-
lowing recommendations which we earnestly suggest should be taken
85 one integral recommendation.

Age of retirement of High Court Judge to be increased to 65 years

10.29. We recommend, in the first Place, that the age of retire-
ment of the High Court Judges should be raised from 62 to 65 years,
This question has been argued over and over again, and we do not


120

think it necessary to advance elaborate arguments in support of our
recommendation. We may only add that, in its Fourteenth Report, the
Law Commission’ had made a similar recommendation.

If the High Court Judge is normally appointed at the age of 45
to 50 years and is able to look forward to a career on the Bench for
15—20 years, that may, we venture to think, persuade some of the
members of the Bar, who are inspired by the desire to serve the cause
of the administration of justice, to accept the invitation of their Chief
Justices to serve on the Bench. We do not apprehend that, if the age
of retirement of High Court Judges is raised to 65, there would be
difficulty in persuading eminent Judges of the High Court to move to
the Supreme Court. Appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court is
regarded by all the members of the higher Judiciary as the highest
prize, and the identity of the age of retirement of Judges of the High
Courts and the Supreme Court will certainly not act as a disincentive
to the High Court Judges if they are called upon to join the Supreme

‘ourt.

Incidentally, raising the age of retirement will mean that the
vacancies will arise less frequently than at present. As the average age
of appointment may be expected to be as at present a longer tenure
automatically means less frequent vacancies. 7

Free unfurnished house or house rent allowance for High Court Judges

10.30. Secondly, we recommend that Judges of the High Courts
should be provided with a free unfurnished house, or, in lieu thereof,
a suitable amount of House Rent Allowance. The option should be
Jeft to the Judges in this matter. It may be provided that, in regard to
High Courts situated in cities notified as “A” Class for the purpose of
the general rules in force for the drawal of house rent allowance by
Central Government servants, the House Rent Allowance should be
Rs. 500 per month and in other cities it should be Rs. 350 per month.
It is hardly necessary to add that exemption from the taxability of the
house rent allowance should be permissible to the extent to which it is
exempt in the case of ordinary Government servants.

Conveyance allowance
10.31. Thirdly, we recommend that a conveyance allowance of
Rs. 300 per month should be given to Judges of the High Court.

Pension of Judges

10.32. Fourthly, in regard to pensionary benefits, we recommend
as a broad rule that High Court Judges who have rendered ten years
of service or more should, on retirement by superannuation, get by
way of pension half their monthly salary.

3, 14th Report (Reform of Judicial Admicistration).


121

If a High Court Judge retires otherwise than by superannuation,
after completing ten years of service or more, he should be entitled to
a pension of Rs. 1,000 per month. Similarly, if a High Court Judge
retires (otherwise than by superannuation) after completing less than
ten years of service, he should be entitled to a proportionate pension
not to exceed Rs. 500 per month (the amount will be determined
proportionately according to the length of service, subject to the
maximum of Rs. 500 per month).

Pension fo be granted to widow of sitting High Court Judge

10.33. Fifthly, we recommend that if a sitting High Court Judge
dies, his widow should receive a monthly pension of Rs. 500 or of an
amount equal to half the pension to which the Judge would have
been entitled, if he had retired on the date of his death, which-
ever is higher. This pension should be paid to the widow during her
life time.

Pension of Chief Justice of High Court to be increased

10.34. Sixthly, in regard to the Chief Justice of a High Court
retiring on superannuation, we recommend that if a Judge functions
as Chief Justice for five years or more, he should get, as his pension,
half his salary as Chief Justice. If he functions as Chief Justice for
Jess than five-years, his pension should be proportionately determined.
But in no case should his pension be less than the maximum pension
of a High Court Judge.

Medical benefits after retirement to High Court Judges

10.35. Seventhly, we recommend that free medical attendance and
other medical benefits, available to the High Court Judges in service,
should be available to them even after retirement.

Conditions of service of High Court Judges in other respects to be
equalled to those of Secretary to Government of India
10.36. Our eighth and last recommendation regarding High Court
Judges is as follows:—
With regard to the conditions of service of a Judge
of a High Court, for which no express provision has been
made in the High Court Judges (Conditions of Services)
Act, 1954, it has been provided’ that “such conditions shall
be, and shall, from the commencement of the Constitution, be
deemed to have been, determined by the rules for the time
being applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative
Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government of
the State in which the principal seat of the High Court is
situated.” In our view, it would be more appropriate to

जे High Court Judges Rules (1956), cule 2 and provieo thereto.



122

equate the High Court Judges with the Secretary to the
Government of India, rather than with the Secretary to the
Government of the State in this matter. Unfortunately, in
regard to the Judges of the Delhi High Court, they seem to
be equated by the relevant rules ‘with the person holding the
rank of Joint Secretary in the Government of India. That,
we think, should be suitably changed.

Recommendation regarding Supreme Court Judges—increase in pension

10.37. Now, in regard to the Judges of the Supreme Court, we

would like to make the following recommendations:—

First, we recommend that Judges of the Supreme Court, who
have rendered 8 years of service or more in that Court should,
on retirement by superannuation, be entitled to a pension
equal to half their salary.

Medica! aid after retirement to Supreme Court Judges
10.38. Secondly, we recommend that medical attendance and other

medical benefits should be available to retired Supreme Court Judges
as they are available during their tenure of service.

Conveyance allowance to Supreme Court Judges
10.39. Thirdly, we recommend that Supreme Court Judges should
be given a conveyance allowance of Rs. 300 per month.

Pension of Sepreme Court Chief Justice

10.40. Fourthly, in regard to the Chief Justice of India, we recom-
mend that if he functions as such for three years or more, he should,
on retirement on superannuation, get a pension equal to half his salary
as Chief Justice. If he works as Chief Justice for a period less than
three years, the amount of pension (on such retirement) should be

proportionately determined. In no case should the pension of a retiring
ief Justice be less than the maximum pension of a High Court
Judge.

Leave travel concession to be allowed every year to Supreme Court
jadges
10.41. Our fifth recommendation relates to the Supreme Court

Judges Travelling Allowance Rules, 1959. It appears that recently'
a rule” has been added to these rules, whereunder travel concession is

+ Rule 6A, Supreme Court Judges Travelling Allowance Rules, 1059, ineerted
1972, (Min. of Law & Justice, Notification No. 2/7/72. Jus dated 28-2-1972),

3. Seo Appendis,



123

allowed to every Supreme Court Judge and members of his family
for travel to his permanent residence in his home state.

We recommend that this concession should be available every
i fe two years as at present. Incidentally, we note
ion that on retirement Supreme Court Judges are now

A., under a recent amendment made in the relevant

enuth
rules’.

vo deduction to be made ia allowing rail fare for purposes leave travel
ecneession

10.42. We now conie to our last recommendation relating to
Supreme Court Judges. It pertains to the rule relating to travel con-
cession, to which we have referred*—rule 6A of the Supreme Court
L.A. Rules. 1959, concerning travel by a Judge etc. to his
peimanent residence in his home State during his leave. The rule
provides that for this purpose, rule 6 of the Supreme Court Judges
Rules, 1959, read with the rules applicable in this behalf to a Member
ef the Indian Administrative Service holding the rank of Secretary to
the Government of India, sball be applicable. Under the rules appli-
satle to the Indian Administrative Service, there is a deduction for
[९ calculating the amount of the leave travel concession,
in our view, should not apply to Judges of the
and the members of their family. Our sixth and last
berefore, is that rule 6A, referred to above (which
'). should be amended, so as to carry out the above

Recommendations chould receive early consideration

10.43, As we have repeatedly pointed out during the course of
our discussion in this Chapter, we have given anxious consideration
to this problem and very carefully weighed the pros and cons. We
have ultimately come to the conclusion that it is absolutely essential
that the recommendations which we are making, and which, we think,
on the whole, are modest and moderate. should receive early and
favourable consideration from the Union Government.

Contended Judiciary essential for Role of Law

10.44. We wish to emphasise that a contended Judiciary satisfied
with the terms and conditions of service and at peace with itself, can
be a source of incalculable significance for sustaining the Rule of Law

1, Rule 6(3) , Supreme Court Judges Travelling Allowance Rules, 1959.
2. Para 10.41, ewpra,
LP(D)194MofLJ&CA—9


124

in a true democratic manner, and helping Indian democracy in its.
march towards the ideal set before it by our Constitution,

In this connection, it is pertinent to recall what Justice Holmes
said about the ambiguity of words. Holmes said:*

“A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged; it is the
skin of a living thought and may vary greatly in colour and.
content according to the circumstances and the time in which
it is used. Lamar v. United States?”

In particular. when words are used in socio-economic Ie, ion,
they sometimes appear to be ambiguous vehicles of thoughts or ideas.
On such occasions, blind reliance on the dictionary of a mechanical
application of the rules of grammer may not help. What will assist in
the judicial process of discovering the true and full meaning of the
words is the vision of the Judge and his awareness of what Justice
Holmes described, “as the major inarticulate premises”. Thus, when
socio-economic welfare legislation is placed on the Statute Book, it is
the judicial interpretation which makes much legislation meaningful.
and thereby facilitates its easy and effective implementation. We feel
confident that if the function of the judiciary of considering the vali-
dity of legislative or executive actions and of interpreting the true
intention of legislative enactments is considered in this perspective, all
shades of opinion will readily accept the modest and the moderate
recommendations which we have made in this Chapter.

Conclusion

10.45. Before we part with this topic, we may point out that we
have made rough calculations as to the additional expenditure which
Government may have to incur if all the recommendations made in
this Chapter are accepted; and we have found that the extent of the
additional expenditure is not likely to be unduly heavy. Jn this con-
nection, we would also like to refer to the fact that, consistently with
the tradition of judicial behaviour, our High Court Judges have showm
dignity, restraint and decorum and have not publicly articulated their
dis-satisfaction with the terms and conditions of their service, nor have
they, either individually or collectively, made any representation in
that behalf. In our view, that is all the greater reason why the Union
Government should, without delay, take into account the prevailing
dissatisfaction in the minds of the Judges and accept the recommenda-
tions which we have made in this Chaptet after deep, careful and
anxious consideration.

1, Downe ४. Eianer, (1917) 245 U.S, 247; 60 L, Ed. 372, 276.
2. Lamar v. U.8,, 240 U.S, 60, 65; 60 L. Ed. 526, 528, 36 Sup. OCS. Rep. 255.


125

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

1. Article 134U1)(c) of the Constitution should be amended,’ so
as to restrict criminal appeals to the Supreme Court by certificate to
cases where the certificate by the High Court is to the effect that the
case involves a substantial question of law of general importance
which needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.

2. No amendment is recommended in respect of appeals to the
Supreme Court by special leave under article 136 of the Constitution.*

3. No change is recommended as regards the procedure in respect
of writ petitions before the Supreme Court in respect of the trial of
disputed questions of fact or the issue of ad-interim orders in such
petitions.®

4. The Minister of Law and Justice may request the Chief Justice
of India to suggest to the High Court that framing of suitable rules
in respect of petitions under article 226 of the Constitution, as regards
the issue of ad-interim orders* in such petitions.

5. Na amendments are recommended as regards the trial of dis-
puted questions of fact’ in writ petitions before the High Court.

6. In regard to taxation matters, in place of reference to the High
Court by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, an appeal on a substan-
tial question of law should be substituted. From the decisions of the
High Court on such appeal, an appeal should lie to the Supreme Court
only where the High Court certifies that the case involves a substantial
question of law of general importance which needs to be decided by
the Supreme Court.*

7. A general recommendation is made with reference to industrial
relations,’ as follows: —

The Minister of Law and Justice should suggest to the Union
Minister of Labour to take such action as he may deem fit
and necessary, in consultation with the State Governments,
National Trade Unions, and bodies of employers, to create
a machinery which would encourage and strengthen collec-
tive bargaining, will remove political pulls and pressures in

ee

1, Chapter 3.

2, Chapter 3.

3. Chapter 4.
4. Chapter 5.
6. Chapter 6.
6. Chapter 6.
7. Chapter 7, Para 7-22 and 7.23.


126

the functioning of trade unions. and will persuade both the
trade unions, and the bodies of employers, not to lean on
adjudication. Collective bargaining should find a pride of
place in the settlement of collective disputes: failing that,
conciJation or arbitration should step in, and adjudication
shoul i come in, if at all, only last. That objective, it is hoped,
will be borne in mind when the Union Labour Minister
fermulates his proposals for a comprehensive Bill to regulate
indusirial relations.

It is high time that the machinery for the settlement of industrial
disputes was so devised that the dockets of the High Courts
and the Supreme Court are not burdened with too many
industrial matters.

8. Creation of special Service Courts for the trial of service"
matters is not favoured.

9, Creation of Zonal Courts of appeal is not favoured.”

10. Conditions of service of High Court Judges and Supreme
Court Judges should be improved.’ In this connection, detailed recom-
mendations are made as follows:

HIGH COURT JUDGES

(1) The age of retirement of High Court Judges should be raised
from 62 to 65 years.

(2) Judges of the High Courts should be provided with a free
unfurnished house, or, in lieu thereof, a suitable amount of
house-rent allowance. The option should be left to the Judges. -
in this matter. It may be provided that, in regard to High
Courts situated in cities notified as “A” Class for the purpose
of the general rules in force for the drawal of house rent
allowance, the house rent should be Rs. 500 per month, and
in regard to other cities, it should be Rs, 350 per month.

(3) A car allowance of Rs. 300 per month should be given to
Judges of the High Courts.

(4) In regard to pensionary benefits, a broad rule is recommend-
ed that High Court Judges who have rendered ten years of
service or more should, on retirement by superannuation,
get by way of pension half their monthly salary.

1, Chapter 8.
2, Chapter 9.
3, Chapter 10.


127

If a High Court Judge retires otherwise than by superannuation,
after completing ten years of service or more, he should be
entitied to a pension of Rs. 1,000 per month. Similarly, if a
High Court Judge retires (otherwise than by superannuation)
after compieting less than ten vears of service, he should be
entitled to proportionate pension not exceeding Rs. 500 per
monih. (the amount will be determined proportionately ac-
cording io the length of service, subject to the maximum of
Rs. 500 per month).

(5) If a sitting High Court Judge dies, his widow should receive a
monthly pension of Rs. 500 or of an amount equal to half
the pension to which the Judge would have been entitled, if
he had retired on the date of his death, whichever is higher.
This pension should be paid to the widow during her life-
time.

(6) In regard to the Chief Justice of a High Court retiring on
superannuation, the recommendation is that if a Judge func-
tions as Chief Justice for five years or more, he should get,
as his pension, half bis salary as Chief Justice, If he func-
tions as Chief Justice for less than five years, his pension
should be proportionately determined.

In no case should he get less than the maximum pension of a
puisne Judge of the High Court.

(7) Free medica! attendance and other medical benefits, available
to the High Court Judges in service, should be available to
them even after retirement.

(8) With regard to the conditions of service of a Judge of a High
Court, for which no express provisions has been made in the
High Court (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, they should
be equated to a Secretary to the Central Government.

SUPREME COURT JUDGES

(1) Judges of the Supreme Court, who have rendered 8 years of
service or more in that Court should, on retirement by
superannuation, be entitled to a pension equal to half their
salary.

(2) Medical attendance and other medical benefits should be
available to retired Supreme Court Judges as they are avail-
able during their tenure of service.

Supreme Court Judges should be given car allowance of
Rs. 300 per month.

GB

2


128

(4) In regard to the Chief Justice of India, the recommendation
is that, if he functions as such for three years or more, he
should, on retirement on superannuation, get a pension equal
to half his salary as Chief Justice. If he works as Chief
Justice for a period less than three years, the amount of pen-
sion (on such retirement) should be proportionately deter-
mined.

In no case should he get 1९55 than the maximum pension of a
Judge of the Supreme Court.

(5) Leave travel concession should be available to Supreme Court
Judges (and their family) every year, instead ot every two
years as at present.

(6) In regard to railway fare, no deductions should be made
while calculating the leave travel concession, permissible to
them,

We desire to place on record our warm appreciation of the valu-
able assistance we have received from Mr. Bakshi, Member-
Secretary of the Commission, in the preparation of this
Report. At all stages of the study of this problem, Mr. Bakshi
took an active part in our deliberations.

2, B. GasENDRAGADKAR . —Chairman

P. K. TRIPATHI Member

S. S. Duavan —Member

S. P. SEN-VARMA —Member

P M. Baksui —Member-Secretary
Dated the

New Dethi, the 8th January, 1974


APPENDIX 1

APPENDIX 2

APPENDIX 3

Aprexpix 4

APPENDIX 5

Appennix 6

Rules of some High Courts as to
interim stay.

Pre-1950 position as to write,

Proposed amendment in the Ine
come Tax Act 1961.

Tables showing answers to ques-
tion 8 of the Law Commission
Questionnaire from State Gover.
mente, ete,

Rules ae to disciplinary proceed=
ings against Governmenta
servants in some States.

Extract of Supreme Court Jadgea
T.A. Rules,


APPENDIX I
RULES OF SOME HIGH COURTS AS TO AD INTERIM STAY

Andhra Pradesh‘

“3. Whenever a petition is presented accompanied by an application
for stay or suspension of orders, notifications and ‘the like of the
Government, or for other direciions, or wherever stay of collection of
any tax, fees, or dues is sought, the copies of the petition, application
and the accompanying affidavit shall be served on the Government
Pleader or Standing Counsel concemed, and the said petitions and the
applications shall not be accepted in the Registry unless they contain-
an endorsement of service signed by the Government Pleader or Stand-
ing Counsel or someone authorised by him.”?

Calcutta’

“25. Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, all applications for a
rule nisi shall be made ex parte in the first instance, before the Court,
on such day or days and at such time or times as is fixed by the Court.

“Provided that an application for a rule nisi involving revenue
law, shall not be moved, unless the Judge otherwise directs, without
serving a fortyeight hours’ prior notice along with a copy cf the appli-
cation under Article 226 of the Constitution proposed to be moved on
the Administrative Head of the department concerned with the ad-
ministration of the revenue law.”

“26, The Court. hearing such application, may issue a rule nisi or
summarily reject the application or make such order thereupon as it
thinks fit. A Judge issuing a rule nisi may make it returnable before a
Division Bench. A rule nisi shall be drawn up as far as may be in the
model form set out in Annexure I.

1, Andhra Pradesh High Court rules regulating proceedings under article 226 of the
Construction.

2. Notification by Big! ch Court of Andhra Pradesh Roc. No. 189, 170, 311 Supplemen-
tary to A.P. Gazette Part II, dated 21 May, 1970,

8. Caleutta High Court Rules relating to pottions under article 226 of the Constrao-
tion (1971) (with the amendments made on 9th June, 1973, by High Court Notification No.
5863-G, incorporated). 120


131

Panjab’

“29, Subject to the cases covered by rule 3 below, all Civil Writ Peti-
tions shall be brought to a hearing of notice of motion to the respon-
dents. “Notice of motion with a complete copy of the petition (includ-
ing its annexures) for each respondent shall be presented to the Deputy
Registrar of the Court at the time of filing the writ petition. The date
on which the writ petition is to be heard by the Motion Bench shall
be entered by the Deputy Registrar in the notice of motion and its
copies and also noted on the writ petition, The notice of motion in
form C.W.P. 4 shall then be endorsed by the Deputy Registrar under
his signature and date. The petitioner or his counsel may thereupon
serve the notice on the opposite party either in person or by registered
post acknowledgement due and produce before the Deputy Registrar
affidavit proof of Service of the notice on the respondent in the
prescribed form C.W.P. 5 at least two working days before the date of
the motion hearing of the petition. The office shall then record a note
on the opening sheet indicating that the notice of motion has been
served by the counsel of the petitioner on the respondent for the date
on which the case is being placed before the Court for motion hear-
ing.”

1. Punjab High Court, Rule 29 of the Amended weit Rules


APPENDIX 2
PRE-1950 POSITION AS TO WRITS

The position immediately before the Constitution, in respect of
gach of the writs, or directions in the nature of those writs, was as
lows : —

{a) Habeas corpus—Every High Court could issue a direction of
the nature of a habeas corpus’ under section 491 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898. The jurisdiction was statutory’.
After the amendment made in 1923, it was not confined to
the ordinary original limits of the High Court’s jurisdiction.
Any High Court could issue the direction within the limits of
iis “appellate criminal jurisdiction.”

(0) Certiorari—Each of the three High Courts of Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay could issue this writ within the limits
of its ordinary original civi} jurisdiction.’-*.

In the case of certiorari, it is to be noted that it could not issue in
any matter concerning the revenue or its collection.

(c) Prohibition—Each of the three High Courts of Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay had authority to issue this writ within
the limits of its ordmary original civil jurisdiction’-*.

(d) Mandamus—The three High Courts couid issue an order in
the nature of this writ within the limits of their ordinary
original civil jurisdiction. The jurisdiction was defined by
section 45 to 50 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, which was
then in force.*

3, Chapter 37, Cr. P.C. , 1898,

4. 0, MATHER v. D.M. TribandrumV, ALR. 1939 PC. 213.

3, Indumati v. Bengal Court of Wards, 42 C.W.N. 230.

4, In Re Ramjidas, LL.B. 1985 Cal. 1011.

5, In Re National Carbon Co., 38 0. W.N. 720; A.LR, 1934 Cal. 725, 727, 128

*, Annie Besant v, Advocate General, 23 C. W.N. 986; ALR. 1919.

1, Indumati v. Bengal. Court of Wards, 42 C.W.N. 290.

3, In Re Ramjidas, LL.B. 1935 Cal. 1011.

2, Alcock Ashdown & Co. v. Chief Controlling Revenu2 Authority, 50 Tadien
Appeals 227. ALR. 1923 P.C. 138.

132


133

(०) Quo warranto—Each of the three High Courts of Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay had jurisdiction to issue this writ with-
in the limits of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, The
jurisdiction has been assumed* or discussed** in several
cases.

The doubts that were thrown on this subject by one of the Privy
Council decisions* were mainly in relation to exercise of the jurisdic-
tion where the subject-matter of the dispute arose outside the Presi-
dency town. The discussion in the High Court of Calcutta relating to
the quo-warranto case* gives history of the jurisdiction. Of course, the
point was kept open by the Privy Councit on appeal, because the
Privy Council was of the opinion that the jurisdiction could not be
exercised outside the Presidency town!

3, Amarendra v. Narendra, 56 C.W-N. 449.
3, In Re Banwari Lat, 48 C.W.N. 768.
3, 1.Q. Master's Union v, Dutt., ALR. 1951, Cal. 570, 573.

20 sae of Garabandho v. Zemindar of Parkamedi, (1943) 70 L.A. 129; ALR. 1943

5, Inve Banwari Rai., 48 U.W-N. 766 (on appeal, 4.1.8. 1947 P.C. 90).

6. For history of all writs, gee 8.18. Das J. in 48 C.W.N. 766, 795, 796, 797, Para 35, 37,
36 and 40 respectively.


APPENDIX 3
PROPOSED' AMENDMENTS? IN THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961
Section 255(7) [New]

The Appellate Tribunal shall, at the close of the case, pronounce
a judgment. and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
relating to judgments shall. so far as may be, apply in the case of the
Appellate Tribunal as they apply in the case of a district court.

[If the procedure of appeal is to be substituted in place of reference,
the principal sections? of the Income-tax Act, 1961, may be: revised*
as follows: —]

Re-draft of certain sections of Income-tax Act
Re-draft section 256

Revised Section 256—“256(1). The assessee or the Commissioner
may, within sixty days of the date upon which he is served
with notice of an order under section 254, by & memorandum
of appeal in the prescribed form, accompanied where the ap+
peal is made by the assessee by a fee of one hundred and
twenty-five rupees, appeal to the High Court on a substantial
question of law arising out of such 002 .

(2) If, on an appeal under sub-section (1) the High Court is of
the opinion that the facts stated in the order under appeal
are not sufficient for the disposal of the appeal, the High
Court may require the Appellate Tribunal to state the facts,
and, on receipt of any such requisition, the Appellate Tribunal
shall state rhe facts accordingly.

“(3) Where. before the hearing of the appeal by the High Court,
ghe jassessee withdraws his appeal, the fee paid shall be re-
unded.”

1, There are very rough drafts.

2, Corresponding provisions, if any’, in other laws relating to direct taxes should be
amended on similar lines.

3. There may be minor changes needed in other sections of the Income-tax Act
also,

4. Similar changes could be made in other laws dealing with direct taxes and provid.
ing for reference to the High Court.

134


135

Section 257 to be omitted.

Section 258 to be omitted.

Re-drafl of section 259

“259. 11) When uny appeal has been preferred to ithe High Court
under section 256, it shall be heard by a Bench of not less
than two judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in
accordance with the opinion of such judges or of the majority,
if any, of such judges.

(21 Where there is no such majority, the judges shall state the
point of Jaw upon which they differ, and the case shall then
be heard upon that point only by one cr more of the other
indges of the High Court, and such point shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of the judges who
have heard the case, including those who first heard it.”

Re-dralt of section 260

“260. (1) The High Court. or the Supreme Court, upon hearing
any such appeal as is provided for in section 256 shall decide
the questions of law raised therein, and shall deliver its judg-
ment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision
is founded. and a copy of the judgment shall be sent under
the seal of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to
the Appellate Tribunal, which shall pass such orders as are
necessary to dispose of the case conformably to such judg-
ment,

(2) The costs of any such appeal to the High Court, which shall
also include the tce for the appeat, shall be in the discretion
of the High Court.”

[Section 260 A (New)]

“260A. The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, re-
Jating to appeals to the High Court shall, so far as may be,
and subject to the provisions of sections 258, 259 and 260,
apply in the case of appeals to the High Court under section
256, as they apply in the case of appeals from decrease of a
civil court.”

1. Itis but fair that the costs shouid include the appeal fee also.


136

Re-draft of section 261

“261. An appeal shail lie to the Supreme Court from any judg-
ment of the High Court delivered on an appeal under section
256, if the High Court certifies that the case involves a sub-
stantial question of law of general importance which needs
to be decided by the Supreme Court.”

(Under the present section’, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court from any judgment of the High Court, delivered on a
reference made under section 256, “in any case which the
High Court certifies to be a fit one for appeal to ihe High
Court.”]

1, Section 261, LT, Aot, 1961,


137

aoa _ज्ण्पुप्त _पणणाह)
96 ONS
squavtuy “(erefuy
“ndog Inoge]) “ndog moqey)
oN s $8 “ON'S t
“dog 30०4७1) “ndeg moqey,
sone 69 ON 'S
(प्मण्ण्व eye
(४, 2038101)
(घ)9 ONS
“CH, ri
(aa ‘moqey] Jo >थशण्धुर)
०8% 'S
(34०) ०4७०) (QuomsoAeD |०७००))
5 ONS $3 ON 8 a
peneddng poroddny 20%, bepoddng

ePa Teusnpuy (q) ५-०० ayepeddy yeuonen (७) °g
{SyHOUIUADAOL) OY) THO’, ए३43०)7 se)
AAIVNNOLLSAND NOWWSINWOD ४७४1 AHL 40 8 NOLLSAND OL SYTMSNV SNIMOHS A14VL
# XIGNdddV



APPENDIX 5

= AS TO DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS AGAINST
CUVERNMENT SERVANTS IN SOME STATES

(1) Kerala

The Kerals Civil Se--ices @isciplinary Proceedings Tribunal) Rules,
1960

These hav.
officers unde ru
than those referred to

into force on 1-1-1960. The rules apply to all
miking control of the State Government other
article 314 of the Constitution of India.

The Tribunal consists of a judicial officer who has worked or is
eligible to be appointed as District and Sessions Judge. Appointment
to the Tribunal is made by the Government. The Government may
refer to the Tribunal any case or class of cases, which they consider
shouid be dealt with by the Tribunal,

Hf on a complaint or cther information received and after such
investigation, if any, as may be deemed necessary, the di: ipiinary
authority or the appointing authority or any officer or authocity em-
ployed by the Government in this behalf is satisfied that there is a
prima jacie case for taking action against an officer before the Tribu-
nal, the authority shal! forward to Government all the records of the
case. The Government may, after examining such records and after
making such consultations as may be deemed necessary decide whether
the case shall be proceeded with and if so whether it shall be tried
by the Tribunal. The Departmental authorities may so send to the
Government the records of cases other than of corruption which they
think fit to be tried by the Tribunal and the Government may decide
whether they shall be tried by the Tribunal or not. If the Government
decide that the case shall be tried by the Tribunal they shall send the
records to the Tribunal. When the Tribunal is seized’ of the case all
departments of Government shall assist the Tribunal in the production
of witnesses, in securing the necessary documents, and in such other
ways as the Tribunal may desire.

The proceedings of the Tribunal are held in camera and after all
the evidence and the arguments have been heard the Tribunal records
its findings in respect of each charge and in case the accused Govern-
Tent servant is held guilty of any charge, it recommends to Govern-
ment the punishment to be imposed.

138


139
(2) Orissa

The Disciplinary Proceedings (Administrative Tribunal) Rules, 1951

{a) These have been framed under the proviso to article 309 of
the Constitution. They apply to all Government servants under the
rule making contro! of the Orissa Government.

(b) The Tribunal shail consist of 3 members, one of whom shall
be a member of the Board of Revenue, another a judicial officer who
js or was of the status of a District Judge and the third, the head of
a Department.

(©) An assessor may be coopted from the Department to which
the official charged belongs.

(d) Cases relating to Government servants drawing a monthly
salary of Rs. 150 and above may be referred to the Tribunal in respect
of matters involving corruption, failure to discharge duties properly.
irremediable general inefficiency and personal immorality.

(७) In conducting enquiries the Tribunal shall be guided by rules
of equity and natural justice and shall not be bound by formal rules
relating to procedure and evidence.

(8 The Tribunal is also required to make recommendations about
the punishment to be awarded including compulsory retirement, with
or without pension or gratuity.

(3) Tamil Nadu

Madras Civil Services @isciplinary Proceeding Tribunal) Rules, 1948

(a) These rules have been made under the powers conferred by
section 24101) (0) and (2) (b) of the Government of India Act, 1935.

(0) The Tribunal shall consist of two judicial officers of the status
of the District and Sessions Judge.

(c) Cases relating to Government servants drawing Rs. 150 per
mensem and above in respect of matters involving corruption are
particularly to be referred to this Tribunal.

(d} Government can also refer any particular case or class of
cases which in its opinion should be dealth with by the Tribunal.

(९) The record of investigation will be sent to the Government
and the Government will then decide in consultation with the head of
the Department whether the case should be sent up before the Tribu~
nal,


140

(0 The Police will help the Tribunal in securing documents, in
Producing witnesses and in such other ways as the Tribunal may
desire.

(g) Counsels will be allowed on both sides,

(0) The Tribunal may co-opt an assessor who should be an officer
of ihe Department to which the Government servant charged belongs.

6) It appears that the Tribunal should Suggest the penalty to be
imposed also in cases where the charges are held proved, but this is
not quite clear in the rules,


APPENDIX 6
EXTRACT OF SUPREME COURT JUDGES’ T.A. RULES, 1959,
AS AMENDED

“6A. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 6, a Judge of the
Supreme Court shall be entitled to travel concession for himself and
the members of his family for visiting his permanent residence in his
home State during his leave, once in a block of two years, in accordance
with rule 6 of the Supreme Court Judges Rules, 1959, read with rules
applicable in this behalf to a Member of the Indian Administrative
Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government of India,

For this purpose, leave shall include vacation:

Provided that the Judge and his wife will have the option to travel
by air subject to the condition that reimbursement of air fare
will be permitted after deducting the rail fares which he
would have been 18016 to pay under the Leave Travel Con-
cession applicable to a Member of the Indian Administrative
Service holding the rank of Secretary to the Government of
India.

‘L/P(D)194MofLd &CA—2,000 — 11-1-1975 —GIPS
ua