LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

FIFTY-NINTH REPORT

ON

HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955
AND ह
SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954.

MARCH, 1974


CONTENTS:

Cuapter 1.—Introductory. पु पु
Carter 2,—Proposals of the Ministry of Law. पु

Carter 3.—Conditions of marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act

CHarter 4.—-Restitution under the Hindu Marriage Act.
Cuarter 5.—Judicial separation under the Hindu Marriage Act
Cuaprer 6,—Nullity under the Hindu Marriage Act .
Chapter 7.—Divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act

Cuapter 8.—Certain matters of procedure under the Hindu Marriage Act

Cuarrer 9.—The Special Marriage Act.
Cuaeter 10.—Summary of recommendations.

Appenpix 1.—Letter from the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs

Appenntx 2,—Bilt forwarded by the Ministry of Law.

40
52

56
57
65
73
ol
108

122
124



P. B. Gajendragadkar.
D. 0. No. F. 1(1)/74-L.c.

12, Tughlak Road,
NEW DELHL-11.

March 6, 1974.

My dear Minister,

Today, my colleagues and 1 have signed the Com-
mission’s Fifty-Ninth Report on the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955, and the Special Marriage Act, 1954,

You may recall that this Report is the result of
the suggestion you had made in your letter addressed
to me on the 17th January, 1974. As requested by
you, the Commission took up the work on a priority
basis, and I am happy that we have been able to
complete the work within a month and a half.

The appendices to the Report are being typed and
Mr, Bakshi, Member-Secretary, expects io forward
the entire Report to you some time next week. Since
Tam leaving for Bombay en route to Geneva tomorrow,
I am sending this demi-official letter to you for your
information.

May 1 add that, since I took over as Chairman
of the Commission, we have made fourteen reports
so far; some of these are, no doubt, short documents
then deal with specific problems which the Commis:
sion thought needs immediate attention on the ground
of special justice. The present Report is our fifteenth
Report.

Yours sincerely,
(P. 8. GATENDRAGADKAR)

Hon'ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

New Delhi-1.


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

The present inquiry—its genesis and scope

1.1. On the 17th of January, 1974, the Minister of
Law, Justice and Company Affairs addressed a com:
munication’ to the Chairman of the Commission sug-
gesting that the Commission may examine the question
about revising the Hindu Marriage Act and the Spe-
cial Marriage Act on a ‘priority basis’ and forward
to the Union Government a Report at an early date.
Along with this letter, the Minister forwarded to the
Commission a draft Bill? which had been prepared
by his Ministry after considering various suggestions
received from some Members of Parliament and the
general’ public. The Minister. requested that the Com-
mission might examine the question as to whether it
would be reasonable and desirable to liberalise the
divorce provisions so as to reduce the period गा
waiting for divorce after a decree of judicial separa-
tion or restitution of conjugal rights and to eliminate
the period of restriction for remarriage after divorce.

It was further stated in this letter that the Draft
Bill proposed “to permit a right of divorce only to
the wife” if she had obtained an order for maintenance
under section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
and desired that the Commission may consider
whether, in such a case, a similar tight should be con-
ferred on the husband. .

The suggestions thus made by the Minister in his
communication for examination of the two Acts con-
stitute the genesis of the present inquiry. -

1.2. Since the Commission was thus entering upon
an inquiry in regard to the revision of the relevant
provisions of the two Acts, it examined not only the
draft Bill forwarded to it, but considcred the other

1. Appendix 1. हर
2. Appendix 2,


2

provisions of the Acts not covered by the draft Bill.
The present inquiry is thus not confined to the amend-
ments proposed in thé draft Bill, but examines the
problem in relation to, all the provisions of the two
Acts. That is the extent of the present inquiry. In
the course of the Report, the provisions made in the
draft Bill will, for the sake of brevity, be described
as “proposals”.

Significance of the Hindu Code

1.3. The Hindu Marriage Act, with which the pre-
sent inquiry is concerned, was passed by Parliament in
1955. It forms part of a larger legislative effort to
codify the personal Jaw of the Hindus, 1t was followed
by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956; the Hindu Mino-
rity and Guardianship Act, 1956; and the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. Originally,
Parliament intended to pass one Act comprehensively
described as ‘Hindu Code’, but, later, the original
Code was split up into four different Acts, which
were passed one after the other; these tour Acts, in
substance, constitute the Hindu Code.

In adopting these four legislative measures, Parlia-
ment has acted upon the principle formulated by
Dr. Radhakrishnan that “to survive, we need a revolu-
tion- in our thoughts and “outlook. From the alter of
the past we should take the living fire and not the
dead ashes. Let us remember the past, be alive to
the present, and create the future with courage in out
hearts and faith in ourselves.”?

1.4. When it was announced that Parliament in-
tended to pass the Hindu Code making redical
changes, where necessary, in the personal law of the
Hindus, traditional and conservative Hindu opinion
resisted the idea, because it thought that, by the pro-
posal to enact a Hindu Code, Parliament was invading

1, Gunnar Myrdal, Asian (Drama, Vol, page 76, Romesh
‘Tapar, “wiffie woffie in High Places”, The Economic weekly,
November 4, 1961, p. 1683).



3

the area of Hindu religion and was changing Hindu
Taw which was “Sanatana”, that is to say, which had
not undergone any change and had remained as it
was handed down by the Srutis and the Smritis.
The opposition thus expressed by traditional con-
servative Hindu opinion was met by the progressives’
plea that personal law is essentially secular in char-
acter, and cannot be treated as a part of Hindu reli-
gion properly so called. Reformers also urged that
Hindu Jaw was never “Sanatana” or static and had
undergone changes from time to time. Before the
Bill was introduced in Parliament and during all
stages of its progress in the form of four different
Acts, there ensued a national debate; and that was as
it should be under any democratic legislative process.

Parliament ultimately upheld the point of view
strongly expressed by social reforms and proceeded
to pass the four Bills in question on two fundamental
assumptions; the first assumption was that personal Jaw
in the case of citizens of this country cannot be treated
as part of their religion properly.so called; and second-
ly, that the history of the development of Hindu law
shows that it was never static and had changed from
time to time so as to meet the challenge of changing
requirements of different regions and different times.

1.5. It would not be out of place to point out, with
respect, that both these assumptions are well founded.
If we examine the sources of Hindu Law, it would
be noticed that custom is one of its important sources.
According to Yajnavalkya!, Srutis and Smritis or the
conduct of good people or good conduct constitute,
inter alia, the sources on which the Hindu Law is
founded.

1.6. It is obvious that, in different regions, different
customs prevailed, and in the same region, from time
to time, customs in regard to matters covered by the

1. श्रुति cgfa: सदाचार ।
स्वस्म च प्रियमात्मन ॥
सम्यक PET: काम |
धमेमूलमिदम्‌ स्मृतम्‌ ॥
Yaj. I, शा.
Also see Manu IE. XTi.


4

provisions of Jaw were likely to change. Thus, by
assigning to changing customs the status of 4 source
of law, the text has provided an inbuilt source of
changes in law as and when they woyld become neces-
sary.

One distinguishing feature of the development of
Hindu law throughout the ages has been the remark-
able part played by eminent commentators of the texts
of Smritis, Amongst these commentators, Vijnames-
wara occupies a pride of place. Scholars of Hindu
Jaw have justly paid a rich tribute to the work of these
Hindu jurists in sustaining the living character of
Hindu law by making necessary adjustments in its
provisions from time to time on the basis of rational
rules of interpretation.

1.7. In this connection, the first consideration which
is relevant is that the Hindu Jaw, as it was applied
until the present Acts were passed, was divided into
two Schools; one the Mitakshara and the other the
Dayabhaga. The Mitakshara school, in tum, was di-
vided into four sub-schools, the Benares, the Mithila,

>the Maharashtra and the Dravida, Broadly stated, the
Mitakshara school adopted the interpretation placed
by Vijnaneswara on the relevant provisions of the text
of Yajnavalkya; while the Dayabhaga school. which
prevailed in Bengal, adopted the view expressed by
Jimutavahana. There is general consensus that both
these distinguished jurists thrived in the twelfth cen-
tury. In regatd to the sub-schools of the Mitaksha-
ra school, however, each one of them followed the in-
terpretation placed on the same Smriti texts by di-
fferent commentators who lived in the areas governed
by the said sub-schools. It will thus be seen that,
though the texts on which Hindu Law was founded
in a primary sense were the same, different interpre-
tations placed on the said texts by different commen-
tators gave rise to different schools which are recog-
nised in the respective areas. That itself is an illus-
tration of the significant part played by the commen-
tators in the development of Hindu Law. The texts
were the same; but, by adopting rational and highly
developed rules of interpretation. the commentators


5

brought the letter of the texts in conformity with the
customs prevailing in their localities and the beliefs
and faith of the people in the locality. That explains
the existence of these different schools of Hindu Law.

1.8. We would fike to illustrate our thesis by re-
ferring to two provisions of Hindu Law as interpreted
by the commentators. The first relates to the broad
and progressive concept of women’s property evolved
by Vijnaneswara. It is well-known that, until the
Married Women’s Right to Property Act was passed
in England? in 1882, the position of English married
women in relation to their rights to property was in
@ very unsatisfactory condition.

Consider, by way of contrast, how Vijnaneswara
defines ‘Stridhana’. Incidentally, it may be pointed out
that the property, which is technically described as
Stridhana’, is property of which the woman is an
absolute owner, over which she has full disposing
power, and in relation to which there is a special line
af succession.

Says Vijnaneswara:

“That which was given by the father. by the mother,
by the husband, or by a brother: and that which was
presented by the maternal uncles and the rest at the
time of wedding before the nuptial fire; and a gift on
a second matriage or gratuity on account of supper-
session and, as indicated by the word ‘adya’ (and the
rest), property obtained by:—

(1) inheritance;

(2) purchase:

(3) partition:

(4) seizure, e.g., adverse possession;
(5) finding;

and this is Stridhana, according to Manu and the
rest.”

The Married Women’s Property Act, 1882 (45 & 46 Vie.
75).


6

Tt is significant that, whereas the first part of the
definition given by Vijnaneswara reproduces the de-
finition of ‘stridhana’ which is given by Yajnavatkya,
the second part is the expansion made by Vijnanes-
wara basing himself on the word ‘adya’ which occurs
in Yajnavalkya’s definition of stridhana, — By this
juristic effort to widen the scope of “stridhana”, Vij-
naneswara included in the concept of siridhana not
only the properties which were so treated by Yaina-
valkya, but also five additional distinct kinds of pro-
perty which were not regarded as ridhana’ by the
early sages,

1.9. In this connection, it is interesting to refer to
the observations made by the High Court of Madras
in Salemma v. Lutchmana:*

“It is scarcely nceessary to say that Vijnanes-
wara’s statement that ‘stridhana’ is not to
be understood in a technical sense (Mitak-
shara, Chapter 2, section 11, Para 3} was
not mere philological observation. By lay-
ing down that proposition, Vijnaneswara
and other great commentators, who follow-
ed him, succeeded in effecting a beneficial
change in the archaic Smriti law and placed
women almost on a footing of equality with
men as reeards the capacity to hold pro-
perty.””

Unfortunately, the explanation made by Vijnancs-
wara in regard to the scope of the word “stridhana”
went by the board as a result of the decision of the
Privy Council in Debi Mangal Prasad v. Mahadeo
Prasad*

1.10, The second example relates to a part of the
Jaw of adoption, ‘he power of the woman to
or take a boy in adoption is based on the text of
Vasistha.? Says Vasistha:

“Let not a woman give or take a boy in adop-
tion without the consent of her husband.”

1, Salenpna v. Lastchmauts, A898) LL.B. 21 Mad 100, 103, 104.
2. peri Mangal Prasad v. Maluader Prasad, 39 1A. 21
(P.C)

3. pach ad दक्षात्‌ प्रतिगृहणीयात्‌ वः ग्न्यवसनुजानत्‌ a1 Vasista



7

This text appears to be simple in its terms and
cicar in its meaning; and yet, different commentators,
who lived in different regions, interpreted it in diffc-
rent ways. One view was that a widow cannot take
or give a boy in adoption, because the consent of the
husband in her case is impossible. Another view was
that this prohibition is inapplicable to a widow, unless
it is shown that her husband had expressly prohibited
her from taking or giving a boy in adoption before
his death. The third view was that a widow can give
or take a boy in adoption if she secures the consent
of the manager of the family. There were other
finer shades of interpretation which it is ‘unnecessary
to set out.

1.11. These two illustrations emphasise the point
that Hindu Law developed and changed to meet the
requirements of changing times or of usages prevail-
ing in different regions of the country by virtue of
the very wise contribution of Hindu jurists in that
process. Therefore, the conclusion is irresistible that
Parliament was. right in assuming that Hindu Law
was never static; it was dynamic and was changing
from time-to time.

The object of law, whether personal or public,
must be to sustain the stability of the society and
help its progress: — .
घारणादर्म मित्याहु' | ध॒र्मी धारयते aT:

‘fhe structure of any socicty, which wants to be
strong, homogeneous and progressive, must, no
doubt, be steady but not static; stable but not sta-
tionary; and that is exactly the picture we get if we
study the development of Hindu law carefully before
the British rule began in India.

1.12, When the British came on the secne, two
constraints were imposed on this healthy course of
development of Hindu law. The first was imposed


8

by the decision of the Privy Council in the case of
collector of Madura v. Moctto Ramalinga'. In that
case, the Privy Council laid down a clear and un-
ambiguous direction to the Judge administering Hindu
Law in India. The Privy Council held:

“The duty therefore of an European Judge who
is under the obligation to administer Hindu
law, is not so much to inquire, whether a
disputed doctrine is fairly deducible from
the earliest authorities, as to ascertain whe-
ther it has been received by the particular
School which governs the district with
which he has to deal and there has been
sanctioned by usage. For, under the
Hindu system of law, clear proof of usage
outweigh the written test of the law.”

1.13. It is necessary to remember that judicial de-
cisions made it very difficult, if not impossible, to
prove the existence of any new custom because courts
do not recognise the validity of any custom unless it
was proved to be “ancient, certain and reasonable,”2
A spirit of inquiry and an attempt to interpret the
texts to adjust law to changing requirements were
thus completely stalled; and that justified the obser-
vation made by Mayne in the first edition of his
book on Hindu Law and Usage® published in the
seventies of the last century that under the British
tule, Hindu Law “was in a state of arrested progress
in which no voices were heard unicss they came from
the tomb.”

1.14. The other constraint, which stalled the pro-
gress of Hindu law during the British regime, flowed
from purely political considerations. As a foreign
power ruling over a very large country, it was the de-
clared policy of the British not to interfere with tho
customs, faiths and beliefs of the population over

1, Collector of Madura v. Mootto Ramatinga, (1868)
12 M.LA. 397, 436 (P.C.)

2, Hurpurshad v. Sheo Dyal, (1876) 3 1.4, 259, 285.

3. Mayne, Hindu Law, Ist Edition.


9

which it ruled and, naturally, the British Government
frowned upon any effort to make radical changes in
the provisions of the Hindu law, though Hindu refor-
Mers were agitating for such changes from time to
time. No doubt, some laws were passed to meet the
demand of social reform; but the efforts for charges
in personal law were never positively encouraged and
the steps taken in that direction were slow, halting and
reluctant. That is how the growth of Hindu law was
atrested during the whole of the British period in the
history of India.

When we became free and the Indian Parliament,
which was sovereign, began to function, the age of
commentators came to a close and that of legislators
commenced, Naturally, one of the first tasks to which
Parliament addressed itself was to change Hindu law
with a view to modernising its provisions and, wher-
ever necessary, to effecting changes on the basis of
social justice. The task of rationalising and modern-
ising Hindu law was a challenging task and, as we
have already pointed out, it led to a national debate
and, in consequence of the heat generated by the
debate, the attempt to introduce one comprehensive
Code at one stretch had to be given up, and the task
was accomplished by introducing four different Bills.

1.15. The significance of the Hindu Code at its re-
volutionary character lies in the fact that. by passing
the four Acts pertaining to the personal law governing
the Hindus, Parliament has emphasised that persona!
law is a social and secular matter and not a part of
religion properly so-called. These four Acts thus
constitute the first decisive step in implementing the
important Directive Principle enshrined in Article 44
of the Constitution. That, in our view, is the real
significance of the four Acts of which Hindu Marriage
Act was the first to be enacted,

Revision of Laws is a continuous process

1.16. It may sound platitudinous but is nevertheless
true that revision of laws is a ‘must’ in a dynamic
society like ours which is engaged on the adventure of
creating a new social order founded on faith in the


10

value-system of socio-economic justice enshrined in
our Constitution. With the changing times, notions of
fairness and justice assume newer and wider dimen-
sions, anc customs and beliefs of the people change.
These, in turn, demand changes in the stracture of law;
avery progressive society must make a rational effort
to meet these demands. Between the fetter of the
‘aw and the prevailing customs and the dictates of the
current value-system accepted by the community,

- there should not be an unduly long gap.  Ranade
often said that the story of social reform, which involves
reform in personal law, is an unending story; it con-
tinues from generation to generation. ach generation
contributes to the continuance of the effort of social
reform: but the effort is never conchided and the end
is never reached in the sense that no further agempt (0
veform is required. It is in that souse that we believe
(hat the revision of personal Jaws, and indeed, of all
jaws, has to be undertaken by modern societies, These
thoughts have been present in our mind when we em-
barked upon the present inquiry,

Our approach

1.17. 16 holding the present inquiry, we have first
examined the proposals and, after an elaborate and
careful consideration, we came to our conclusions in
respect of them. Ther: we examined all the provisions
of the two Acts ourselves and considered the ques-
tion whether any of them need ta be revised. When we
reached conclusions in this part of the inquiry, we
proceeded to formufate our recommendations serially
by reference to the different sections of the two Acts.
In other words, Part I of the Report! will deal with
the proposals and our recommendations in respect of
them. Part IL will deal? with our recommendations
in regard to the provisions not covered by the pro-
posals; and Pact ITI w: enumerate cuc recommenda-
tions serially by reference to the respective provisions
of the two Acts.?

i, Chapter 2.

2, Chaplers 3 to 8 (Hindu Marriage Act) ; Chapier 9 (Special
Marriage Act).
3, Chapter 10,


181

In the course of our inquiry, we have examined
important and relevant judicial decisions, taken’ inta
account the opinions expressed by Members of Parlia-
ment in their communications to the Minister of Law
and Justice from time to time, and have carefully
borne in mind the trend of public opinion in regard to
the expanding horizon of social justice. Every section
of both the Acts has been examined by us in the light
of the test of the value-system of social equality which
is enshrined in the Constitution and has gradually re-
ceived more and more acceptance from the Indian
Community.

We have also attempted, wherever we thought it
necessary and advisable to do so, to bring about uni-
formity in matters which arc essentially common to,
the two Acts.

1.18. Before we conclude, we may refer to one
more point which is relevant to the Hindu Marriage
Act. We have already referred to the spirit underly-
ing the enactment of these four Acts amongst them be-
ing the Hindu Marriage Act. While enacting these
Acts, Parliament has taken care to preserve what it
thought to be consistent with the spirit of modernism
and social justice. It has also taken care to preserve
what it thought to be the essential featurcs of any
fundamental proposition of Hindu law. In regard to
marriage, for instance, it has preserved the require~
ment that the marriage should not take place between
persons who are within the prohibited degree of
Sapindas relationship, vide section 5(iv) and (v).
Similarly, it has preserved the requirement as to Sapta-
padi (that is, taking of seven steps by the bridegroom
and the bride jointly before the sacred fire) vide sec-
tion 7(2) and that again, only when performance of
the said rite is in accordance with the customary rites
and ceremonies of either party to the marriage. Thus,
broadly stated, though the Hindu Marriage Act has
introduced radical changes in regard to divorce and
Judicial separation, it has maintained the basic feature
of the martiage which is partly consistent with the
provisions of Smriti texts. Under the Act, Hindu
Marriage is not a sacrament in the religious sense; but,
7M of Law/74—2


12

nevertheless, it is founded on the basic moral postu-
lates, as evidenced, for instance, by the continuance
of the pre-existing requirement as to Saptapadi,

1.19, Even in regard to divorce, there are some
Hindu texts which permit divorce as, for instance, the
text which says that, in five cases of misfortune, women
are entitled to marry another husband. These cases
are : where the husband is lost and is not heard of for
the prescribed period, where he is dead, or has taken
Sanyas, or where he is impotent, or has committed a
sin as a result of which he is excommunicated.*

1.20. Bearing in mind this distinctive character of
the institution of marriage as envisaged by the Hindu
Marriage Act, we have carefully considered the ques-
tion of making changes in the provisions pertaining to
judicial separation or divorce.

In any civilised and progressive socicty, marriage
is an institution of great importance. It is the centre
of a family which in turn, is a significant unit of the
social structure. Children who are born of marriage,
also contribute to the stability of the institution of
marriage. These factors are material and have to be
taken into account; but in some cases, their validity
cannot be over-estimated because, if the marriage
which primarily concerns husband and wife is irre-
trievably, broken, then collateral considerations about
the significance of the marriage institution or about
the importance of children and their interest may have
to play a subordinate role. It is in the light of this
philosophy that we have attempted the somewhat
sensitive and difficult task of recommending certain
radical changes in the provisions of the Hindu
Marriage Act.

Disputes concerning the family

1.21. Before we proceed to deal with the questions
relating to revision or amendment of the provisions of
the two Acts, we ought to mention here one important

1. med wa safest क्लीवे च पतिते oat,
कंचत्स्वापत्सु नारोणां पतिरन्यों विधोयते।

Narad XII—-37


13

consideration which is an integral part of our app-
roach. In our Report on the Code of Civil Proce-
dure.) we have had occasion to emphasise that in
dealing with disputes concetning the family, the coust
ought 10 adopt a human appreach—an approach ra-
dically different from that adopted in ordinary civil
proceedings, and that the court should make reason-
able efforts at settlement before commencement of the
trial, In our view, it is essential that such an approach
should be adopted in dealing with matrimonial dis-
putes. We would suggest that in due course, States
should think of establishing family courts, with presid-
ing officers who will be well qualified in law, no doutt,
but who will be trained to deal with such dispute in a
human Way, and to snch courts all disputes concerning
the family should be referred. What we have said in
our Report on the Code of Civil Procedure should be
treated asa part of the present Report also.
We are clear in our mind that if these measures are
adopted, they will go a long way towards the proper
resolution of such disputes. We may add that selected
judicial officers could be posted in courts empowered
under both the Acts, and by dealing with disputes con-
cerning the family, they will be able to acquire expe~
rience and knowledge which should not only be cf
value’ to them but will ultimately benefit the society.

1, S4th Report, Chapter 32A,


Tntroduc-
tory

Section 10

CHAPTER 2
PROPOSALS OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW

2.1, In this Chapter, we shall deal with the pro-
Posals of the Ministry of Law.

2.2. Under section 10(1) of the Hindu Marriage
Act, a party to a marriage may present a petition
to the District Court praying for judicial separation
on the ground that the party has been guilty of the
specified types of misconduct or has been suffering
from the specified types of disease. Under clause
(०), the fact that the opposite party has “treated the
petitioner with such cruclty as to cause a reasonable
apprehension in the mind of the petitioner that it will
be harmful or injurious for the petitioner to live with
the other party” is one such ground. ‘The proposal
now is that in place of this clause, the following:
should be substituted:

“(b) has after the solemnisation of the marriage
treated the petitioner with cruclty.”

The difference between the present section and
the proposal is obvious. In the present definition,
the element of apprehension as to harm or injury is
comparable to the element of “injury or likelihood
of injury to health” which, in England, was required?,
since 1897. It has been abolished in England,? and
the corresponding ground in England now is, that
“the respondent has behaved in such a way that the
petitioner cannot reasonably be expected to live with
the respondent”. If this is proved, the marriage can
be taken to have “broken down irretrievably”, with-
in the meaning of the principal provision? as to the
ground for divorce. The behaviour of the respon-
dent of the nature referred to above, seems to cover
cases which, under the old jaw, would have amounted.

1. Russeil vy. Russell, (1897) A.C, 395, CHL.
2. Section 2(1(b), Divoree Reform Act, 1969 (Ch. 55),
3. Section 1(1), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973.

14



45

to constructive desertion, and elso rape, sodomy and
bestiality and, apparently. conviction of serious cri-
minal offences. Of course, proof of behaviour of
the above nature (or for that matter, of any other
type of miscondict specified in this context in the
Act), merely creates a rebuttable presumption, it
being still open to the respondent to prove that the
marriage has not irretrievably broken downt.

The statutory qualifications attached to “cruelty”
in section 10(1)(b) of the Hindu Marriage Act are
derived from the concept of “danger to life, limb
or health”, required at one time by the Ecolesiastical
courts in England, for passing decrees of divorce,
and need not by emphasised at the present day.

In view of what is stated above, we accept the
proposal.

2.3. Section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act, in $0 section 11
far as is material, provides that a marfiage shall
be null and void and may “on a petition presented
by either party thereto,” be so declared by a decree
of nullity, if it contravenes one of the specified con-
ditions,—(briefly, the conditions relate to monogamy,
prohibited decrees of relationship, and absence of
sapinda relationship). The proposal now is that the
words “on a petition presented by either party there-
to”, should be omitted. The obvious object is to
make the relief in question available at the instance
of other parties who may have a legitimate interest
in seeking such relief. The proposal was mooted
because the present restriction causes hardship when
a first wife, for example, seeks to get a sccond mar-
riage set aside or when relief of nullity is sought after
the death of a party.

The proposal may, at first sight, appear to ba
attractive. If a marriage is void, why, it is argued,
should the relief under the Act be confined to the
parties? It is stated that the words “on 3 petition
presented by either party thereto” (or similar words)
do not appear in the corresponding provision of the
Special Marriage Act, 1954,

1. Lord Dilhorne, HL, Debates, Vol. 304, Col. 1094,


16

2.4. At the same time, there is 4 strong argument
against it. The Hindu Marriage Act is a piece of
matrimonial law and decrees of nullity, contemplated
by it, are decrees passed by a Matrimonial Court.
It is fundamental that a Matrimonial Court has con-
cern only with the marital rights of the parties ta
marriage (and incidentally with the rights of the
children), but with nothing else. A petition for a
decree of niullity in respect of a void or a voidable
matriage can be made only by either the husband or
the wife. It would not be appropriate to provide
that a petition for the purpose can be made by 8
stranger to the marriage. A third party (for exam-
ple, a person interested in the estate of either the
husband or the wife) can certainly question the vali~
dity of their marriage int @ civil suit and obtain a
finding, or he may even bring a suit for a declaration
that the marriage was void?. But such a decree,
made by a civil court, will not be a decree of “nulli-
ty”, as contemplated by matrimonial law.

Proposal 2.5. There is also a serious practical visk in
ed. _ allowing the grant of decrees of nullity after the death

of either of the parties to the marriage*, because the
effect of “it is to bastard and disinherit the issues who
cannot so well defend the marriage as the parties both
living themselves might have” done?.

Then, there is the question of multiplicity. We
may refert to the observations of Panchapakesa.
Ayyar J. :+--

“The legislature has restricted the summary re-~
medy of an application under section 11
to be actual parties to the void marriage,
so that thitd parties may not interfere

1, See para 2.4, infra.

2. See also pata 6.2, infra,

3, Code, 2nd Institute 614 ; Rv. Sherwood (1836) 1 Curt
173, 137, 138 (Dr. Lushington) : Graveson : Century of Family
Law (1957), page 312, footnate.

4. Lakshmi Ammal v. Ramaswami, ALR. 1960 Madras
6, 7, para 5.


17

narassingly by taking advantage of this
cheap remedy of an application.”

A void marriage can, no doubt, be invalidated at
the instance of other parties!, but it is better not to
incorporate the remedies of third parties into the
Hindu Marriage Act and confuse matrimonial relief
with declaratory relief.

We are, therefore, opposed to the proposed
amendment of section 11.

2.6. This does not mean that third parties have no R

remedy at all. They have—but not by & petition available to
under the Hindu Marriage Act. ties

The Specific Relief Act®, in section 34, provides
as follows:

“Any person entitled to any legal character, or
to any right as to any property, may insti-
tute a suit against any person denying or
interested to deny, his title to such char-
acter or right, and the Court may in its
discretion make therein a declaration that
he is so entitled and the plaintiff need not
in such suit ask for any further relief:

“Provided that no Court shall make any such
declaration where the plaintiff, being able
to seek further relief than a mere decla-
ration of title, omits to do so.”

Explanation—A trustee of property is a ‘person
Interested to deny’ a title adverse to the title of some
one who is not in existence, and for whom, if in
existence, he would-be a trustee.”

Under section 35 of the Act, the declaration is
binding only on the parties etc?.

1. Faremouth v. Waison (1811) 1 Phil. 355 /(Void Marriage).
2, Section 34, Specific Relief Act, 1963.
3, Section 35, Specific Relief Act, 1963


18

Banerji in his Tagore Law Lectures on the Law of
Specific Relief, observed? :—

“The Indian enactment, in one respect at any
rate, has a more extended scope. for it con-
templates the settlement, not only of con-
flicting claims to property but also of dis-
putes as to status.”

Holland,?-* in his ‘Elements of Jurisprudence’, ex-
plaining the meaning of “status” says:—

“The chief varieties of status among natural
persons may be referred to the following
causes:

(1) Sex, (2) minority, (3) ‘patria potestas’
and ‘manus’, (4) coverture, (5) Celibacy,
(6) mental defect, (7) bodily defect,
(8) rank, caste and official position,
(9) race and colour, (10) slavery,
(11) profession, (12) Civil death, (13)
illegitimacy, (14) heresy, (15) foreign
nationality and (16) hostile nationality.
All of the facts included in this list,
which may be extended, have been held,
at one time or another, to differentiate
the legal position of persons affected by
them from that of persons of the normal
type.” :

There can, therefore, be no objection if a third
party claiming an interest in the property, sues for
a declaration that B was not the lawfully wedded of
A. In an English case‘, it was specifically held that
a declaration may be granted that a marriage has
been dissolved. The grant of similar relief was held
to be competent in a Calcutta case’.

1. Banerji, Law of Specific Relief in British India (T.L.L.
1906), page 490, cited in Abdul Karim v. Sarraya Begam,
ALR. 1945 Lah, 266, 270.

2. Holland, Etements of Jurisprudence page 351, cited
in Abdul Karim v. Sar rava Begam, A.1.R, 1945 Lah. 266, 270,

saa" See also Ramakrishana vy. Narayan, AUR, 1915 Mad.

दा Shafei v. Har Shafei, (1953), All England Reports

5. Noor Jehan र, Eugene Tischenko, हरि, 1942 Cal, 345.


19

2.7. We are, for the above reasons, not inclined Change not
to accept the proposal under discussion. ood en

2.78. The next proposal is to substitute, in sec- Section 12
tion 12(2) (0) (iii) of the Hindu Marriage Act, the (2)() Gi).
words “said ground’ for the words “the grounds of
decree.” This berbal change is obviously appropri-
ate, and we agree with the proposal.

2.8. Under section 13({1)(v) of the Hindu Section 130)
Marriage Act, (so far as is material), any marriage £2) Nenereal
may be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the ground
that the other party—‘(v) has for a period of not
Jess than three years immediately preceding the pre-
sentation of the petition, been suffering from vene-
real disease in a communicable form.” There is no
restriction that the disease should not have been con-
tracted from the petitioner,— restriction explicitly
provided for in the corresponding provision relating
to judicial separation.

The proposal is to add the words “disease not
having been contracted from the petitioner” in s.
13(1}(v). It is pointed out that these words
occur in s. 10(1)(d) of the Hindu Marriage Act

"dealing with venereal disease as 2 ground for 2 judi-
cial separation.

. 2.9. While we agree that there should be no dis-
parity between venereal disease as a ground for judi-
cial separation and the same as a gtound for divorce
so far as the source of the disease is concerned, it
appears to us that it would simplify the statement of
the law if the condition that the venereal disease
should not have been communicated by the peti-
tioner, is removed from section 10(1)(d).

We iake this view for several reasons. In the first
place, it wrong to throw the burden on the petitioner
to prove the negative, and, prima facie, the fact that
the respondent has been suffering from venereal
disease for the specified period, should be enough to
entitle him or her to divorce. Secondly, it is not,

1, Section 10(1)(d), HMA.



Recom-
mendation.

Section
1301)
(viii) —
‘propo-
sal to add
cruelty
as 8 ground
of divoree,

20

medically speaking, always easy to prove that where
two spouses are found to be suffering from this disease,
one got infected prior te the other. The party suing
should not be burdened with the onerous task of prov-
ing this, in the first instance.

No doubt, the provisions of section 23(1)(a) of
the Hindu Marriage Act wili still continue to apply
even after the above amendment, so that if the disease
was comtracted from the petitioner, the respondent
can still take the plea that the petitioner is taking
advantage of his or her “own wrong”. That, how-
ever is a fair and just principle applicable to all cases
of divorce.

2.10. Our recommendation, therefore, om the topic
discussed above is, that (i) the proposal to add the
words in question in s. 13(1)(v}, Hindu Marriage
Act should not be accepted, and (ii) these words
should be removed from section 10(1)(d} of the
Hindu Marriage Act, if that section is retained in its
present form. We are, however, separately recom-
mending* that section 10 should be revised so as to
refer to section 13.

2.11. We now proceed to consider the proposal to
add, in the grounds of divorce under section 13(1),
cruelty on the part of the opposite party. The fact
.that the respondent has “treated the petitioner with
cruelty since the solemnisation of the marriage”, it is
proposed, should te a ground for dissolution of mar-
riage. It may be stated that at present cruelty is
only a ground for judical separation®, and that too
where it causes a reasonable zpprehension of harm
oc injury.

We welcome the proposal. If destruction of mutual
confidence is the basic justification for dissolution of
matriage—which we think is the basic position,—it
caanot be denied that cruel treatment would constitute
a strong ground for dissolution. There can be no
more unimpeachable evidence of the destruction of

1. See Chapter 5, infra,
2, Section 10(1}(b), HMA para 2. 2, supra.


21

mutual love and feelings than cruel treatment of one
party by the other. Cruelty is the very antithesis of
love and affection. The duration and frequency of
the conduct to be proved (to establish cruelty) need
not be explicitly spelt out! in the section, because the
very words “treated with cruelty”, in general, imply
harsh conduct of a certain intensity and persistence.
Tt was suggested to us that some further indication is
advisable not as merely qualifying the type of cruelty,
but as indicating that the ultimate ground of divorce
is the impossibility of operating the marriage. The
misconduct described as cruelty should, it was sug-
gested, be one which amounts to cutting the sacred
fink that the parties had, when entering upon the
marriage, sought to create between themselves.

2.12. A draft on the following lines was suggested
during our discussion :

“that the respondent has, since the solemnisation
of the marriage, treated the petitioner with
such cruelty that the petitioner cannot
reasonably be expected to live with the
respondent.”

We do not, however, think it necessary to add such
limiting words, because we consider that the court
would, even in the absence of such words, broadly
adopt the same approach.

2.13. It may incidentally be mentioned here that
in many countries, matrimonial relief is provided to
the aggrieved spouse on the ground of cruelty. This
redress is usually justified on the ground of the princi-
ple of protection.

2.14 to 2.16. Having considered all aspects of the
matter, we have come to the conclusion that it is
sufficient to provide for cruelty as a ground of divorce,
and it should be left to the courts to determine on
the facts of each case whether the conduct amounts
to cruelty.

1. For Engl sh cases unto 1948, see Rosen, “Cruelty in Matri-
. monial Causes” (1949 12 Modern Law Rev, 324,



Recom-
amenda-
tion.

Section 13
(1A).

Section 13
(2) Liv-
ing apart
order of
mainten-
ance,

22

2.17, Accordingly, we recommend that in section
13(1), Hindu Marriage Act, a new clause should be
added as follows:—

“has treated the petitioner with cruelty”.

2.18. Under section 13(1A) of the Hindu Marriage
Act (inserted in 1964), cither party to a marriage
may present a petition for dissolution of marriage on
the grounds:—

(i that there has been no resumption of cohabi-
tation as between the parties for two years
after a decree of judicial separation, or

Gi) that there has been no restitution of conjugal
rights as between the parties for two years
-after a decree for such restitution. The pro-
posal is that the period of two years should
be replaced by one year in each of the
two cases.

We agree that the proposal is reasonable and should
be accepted. As the proceedings for judicial sepa-
ration or restitution may themselves take time, it is
not proper to insist on a long waiting period. The
facts required to be proved in each of the two cases
governed by section 13(1A) imply that the parties
have ceased to value each other's society, and their
need for each other’s company is prima facie at an
end.

2.19, There is a proposal to add the following
clause in section 13(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
which deals with divorce at the instance of the wifc:—

“(1) that an order has been passed against the
husband by a Magistrate awarding separate
maintenance to the petitioner, and the
parties have not had marital intercourse for
three years or more since such order.”

2.20. It may be said that, in one sense, this pro-
posal treats the order passed for awarding separate
maintenance to the wife under the Cr. P.C.1 on the

1. Section 488 of the Cr. 8.0. 1898; Section 125 of the Cr.
P.C, 1974,


23

same basis as an order or a decree for judicial sepa-
ration under section 10 of the Act; and, as such, it
gives the wife & right to claim dissolution of the
marriage by a decrec of divorce on the ground that
subsequent to the passing of the order under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, the wife and the husband hava
not had marital intercourse for the stipulated period.

1६ will be noticed that a claim for the dissolution
of the marriage by a,decree of divorce passed on this
new proposed ground is similar to the claim which
can be made either by the husband or the wife under
clauses (i) and (ii) of the section 13(1A).7

2.21, Tt must, however, be pointed out that one Points to
significant point of difference between the position cq
as contemplated by the proposal and the position
under clauses (i) and (ii) of section 13(1A) is, that,
whereas under the latter provisions, it is open either
to the wife or to the husband to claim a decree for
divorce, under the former, (ic. under the proposal).
it is only the wife who is to be entitled to make such
a claim.

On this proposal, two questions fall to be consider-
ed?. Would it be reasonable, fair and appropriate
to insert the proposed clause, as suggested? And, it
yes, would it be reasonable, fair and appropriate that,
if the Commission recommends that the proposal
should be accepted, the right should be given to claim
a decree for divorce, not only to the wife, but also
the husband?

2.22. In dealing with the first point’, it may be Nature of
relevant to refer briefly to the nature of the proceed- proceedings
ings for maintenance under the Code of Criminal iia
Procedure. It is well-known that, in substance, these
proceedings empower the competent Magistrate to
pass an order for the maintenance of wife and child-
ren. With the problem of children, we are not con-
cerned in the present discussion. The condition pre-

1. Para 2.18, supra.
2, See para 1.1, supra,
3, Para 2.21, supra,


Situation
one of
cruelty

24

vedent, which has to be satisfied by the petitioning
wife under this section, is that though her husband has
Sufficient means, he neglects or refuses to maintain
her, and, in the proceedings ensuing on such petition,
one of the factors, which nas to be considered by
the Magistrate is whether the wife is justified in re-
fusing to live with the husband even if be offers 16
maintain her on condition of her living with him. If
this question is answered in favour of the wife, then,
Subject to the other terms and conditions prescribed
by the section, an order for maintenance in favour
of the wife can be and is passed.

it is plain that the main object of the proceedings
permitted under the section is to prevent vagrancy by
ordering the husband to support his wife. The pro-
visions of this section are not in the nature of penal
provisions; they are intended to serve the social pur-
pose of compelling the husband to discharge his duty
to maintain his wife on the ground that a default or
failure on his part to discharge his duty may lead to
the vagrancy of his wife. It is necessary 10 empha-
sise that neglect to maintain one’s wife is not an
offence, and an application made by the wife against
her husband for suitable action under this section is
not a “complaint” within the meaning of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. The proceeding is not a cri-
minal proceeding, and does aot end either in order
of conviction or acquittal, Therefore, in such a pro-
ceeding, the husband can be, and almost always is,
examined on oath as a witness in a civil case, As a
result, the provision relating to examination of the
“accused”! does not apply to such proceedings. In
other words, these proceedings though instituted under
a section of the Code of Criminal Procedure, cannot
be described as “criminal proceedings” as such.

2,23. Reverting to the basis on which an applica-
tion under the Code can be founded, we may state
that it is the neglect or refusal of the husband to
maintain his wife, as a result of which, she is com-
pelled to leave her husband and stay separately, I

1. Section 342, Ce. PC, 1898 and Cosresponding provisions
in the 1974 Code,


25

is possible to take the view that where a wife is thus
compelled to leave the shelter of her husband and
seek the remedy provided by the Code, the husband,
in effect, is guilty of cruelty towards his wife. We
have decided to recommend? that cruetly simpli-
citer should be a ground for judicial separation
under section 10(1)(b) and we are also recommending
that it should be a ground for a decree of divorce
under section 13. In the light of this recommenda-
tion, it may not be unreasonable to treat cruelty, in-
volved in the conduct of the husband which drives
the wife to seek for relief under the Code, as falling
within the concept ‘of cruelty contemplated by sec-
tion 10 and 13,

Therefore, on principle, the fact that the wife has
chosen to take recourse to the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure and not to sections 10 or 13 of the Hindu Mar-
riage Act, does not make a substantial difference to
her case that her husband has treated her with
cruelty. If that be so, we see no reason why she
should not be given the right to claim a decree for
divorce, and that, in fact, is the proposal which gives
an additional right to the women who has been aban-
doned by her husband; and, on grounds of social jus-
tice, the proposal is, in our view, well-conceived and
should become a part of the Act.

2.24. Having reached this conclusion, we have iether
to consider the second question already formulat- husband
ed*. Should a husband be given liberty to apply should be
for a decree of divorce in cases falling under the right.
Code? Prima facie, it may appear that, accepting
the analogy® of clauses (1) and (ii) of section 13(1A),
there should be no objection to conferring a right on
the husband similar to the one which it is proposed
to confer on the wife by the proposal. If the order
for maintenance under the Code is virtually and, in
substance, the result of the cruelty practised by the
1. See sections 10(1(b) and 13(1) HMA as proposed to be

amend d.

2. Para 2.21, supra.
3. Para 2.20, supra.



26

husband against his wife, why not allow the husband
to claim a decree of divorce subject to the conditions
prescribed by the proposal?

2.25. We have carefully considered this aspect of
the matter; but, after elaborate discussion of the pros
and cons, we have come to the conclusion’ that, hav-
ing regard to the social conditions prevailing in our
country, if liberty is given to the husband to apply
for a decree of divorce in cases under which an order
has been passed under the Code, in a large majority
of cases, it may work great hardship to the wife.
Moreover, we do not think that the guilty party—
namely, the husband who is proved to have negiect-
ed or refused to maintain his wife, should be allow-
ed to take advantage of his own wrong and get rid
of the obligation imposed by the order for mainten-
ance.

We are conscious that if, on the same cause of
action, the wife applies for a decree of judicial
separation under section 1001), the husband would
be entitled to claim for a decree of divorce, subject
to the conditions prescribed by section 13(1A). But
the wife may not adopt such a course, she may not
proceed under section 10(1) for jadicial separation or
under section 13, for divorce. She may remain
satisfied with an order for maintenance under the
Code. In such case the husband cannot—and should
not—(because on the hypothesis, he is guilty of cruel-
ty), claim a decree of divorce under section 13(1A).

2.26. There are two more considerations which are
relevant, and to which a feference must be made.
One consideration is in favour of extending to the
husband the option to claim a decree for divorce in
cases falling under the Code. It may be said that a
wife, grievously embittered by her husband’s neglect
or refusal to maintain her, may, out of spite or
malice, refuse to avail herself of the option to ask
for a decree for divorce and thereby prevent her hus-
band from marrying another woman. But the shert
answer is that the wife would thereby be denying
herself an opportunity to marry again and that, from
a psychological point of view, is very unlikely.


27

On the other hand, if the right to claim divorce
in such cases is conferred on the husband, it may
be abused by the husband. It is not unlikely that a
husband who is keen to get rid of his wife, will de-
liberately abandon her, and if a proceeding is brought
against him under the Code, would readily submit to
an order for payment of maintenance to her in the
full knowledge that, after the lapse of the prescribed
period, he will be able to get a decree of divorce and
carry out his intention to marry another woman. In
such a case, the wife will be exposed to grave jeopardy
and in fact, may have to face the cruelty of vagrancy,
which would be ironical because the prevention of
vagrancy in the case of an abandoned wife is the very
tasic philosophy on which the scction in the Code
if founded.

* 2.27, Having considered all the relevant facts, we
are not prepared to recommend the extension of the
principle contained in the proposal to the husband.

2.28. This disposes of the main question. Now,
some matters of detail regarding the above proposal
may be referred to. We think that the period of
one year should be enought. We are also of the view
that the condition should be non-resumption of coha-
bitation, rather than absence of marital intercourse
or as is put in the Ministry's proposal.?

Finally, we think that the provision proposed
should apply also to a decree for maintenance obtain-
ed by a wife who is justifiably living apart®, under
the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, section
18(2).

2.29. Accordingly, we recommend that the follow- Recom-
ing should be added in section 13(2) of the Hindy ™mendation.
Marriage Act:

“that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 ot

1. of section 13(1A), H.M.A. as proposed to be amended.
2, Para 2.19, supra.
3. See, section 18(2), Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act,
1956.
1 M of Law/74—3


Section 14.

Recom-
mendation
98 to sec-
tion 14.

28

in a proceeding under section 125 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974, a decree
or order, as the case may be, has been pass-
ed against the husband awarding mainten-
ance to the wife notwithstanding that she
was living apart and that since the passing
of such decree or order, cohabitation bet-
ween the parties has not been resumed for
one year or more.”

2,30. Section 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act pro-
hibiés the Court from entertaining a petition for cissola-
tion of marriage by a decree of divorce, unless, at the
date of the presentation of the petition, “three years
have elapsed since the date of the marriage.” Under
the proviso to the section, the court has, subject to
rules made by the High Court, power to allow a peti-
tion to be presented before the three years have elap-
sed, on the ground that the case is one of “exceptional
hardship to the petitioner or exceptional depravity
oa the part of the respondent”. This proviso itself is
subject to certain Testrictions, and sub-section (2) of
the section further requires the court, in disposing of
any applications under the section (for leave to pre~
sent a petition before the expiration cf three years),
to have regard to the interests of any children of the
marriage and “to the question whether there is a rea-
sonable probability of reconciliation between the par-
lics before the expiration of the said three years”.

The proposal now made is that period of onc year
should be substituted in place of “three ycars”,

2.31. We are of the view that the section should
be deleted. The object of prescribing a minimum per-
iod for entertaining a petition for divorce is to ensuce
that if there is a prospect of reconciliation, then efforts
should be made in the direction.

While we appreciate the legislative policy of placing

an emphasis or reconciliation rather than on a hasty
* divorce, we think that there should be no restriction as
to time. The coust will have, under section 23(2),
opportunity to consider if the peace and harmony sre
beyond retrieval. if they are not beyond retrieval,


29.

reconciliation under section 23(2) will succeed, te-
cause section 23(2) is intended to create condition
for maintaining or restoring the mutual confidence
between the parties.

We, therefore, recommend that section 14 should be
deleted.

2.32. We now consider the proposa! which relates Section 15,
to section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act. Under the
main paragraph of the section, when a marriage has
been dissolved by a decree of divorce and cither there
is no right of appeal against the decree, or if there is
such a right the time for appealing has expired. with-
out an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has
been presented, but has been dismissed, it shall be law-
ful for either party to marry again. Under the proviso
to the section, it shall not be lawful for the respective
parties to marry again unless, at the date of such
matriage, one year has elapsed from the date of the
decree in the court of the first instance. The proposal
now is that this proviso should be deleted. Appa-
rently, the assumption is that the prohibition
against the marriage during the period of appeal or
during the period allowed for filling an appeal, which-
ever is the longer, is enough, and the further restriction
that one year must have elapsed from the date of the
decree in the court of the first instance, is not required.

In England there is no such restriction of one
year’ but there are, in most matrimonial causes,
two decrees in England-nisi and absolute, The
minimum petiod between the two decrees is three
months. A degree absolute can be expedited
in certain cases’.

The primary object of the prohibition against re-
marriage in section 15, proviso, is two fold, first,
avoiding confusion of parentage, and second, check-

1. Section 8, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1965, re-enacting section
13 of the Act of 1950, है
+ Matrimonial Causes (Decree Absolute) General Order,
1957, First Schedule, Paragraph 1,
3. Practice Direction in (1964) 1 W.L.R. 1473.


Section 16.
Legitima-
cy of chil-
dren,

30

ing an attempt to obtain divorce from one woman
with the specific object of marrying another woman.

We think that the consideration of the parties, free-
dom to marry and the imconvenience caused by the
present law, should outweigh the above advantages.
The proviso should, therefore, be deleted from section
15 of the Hindu Marriage Act.

It may incidentally be noted that the breach of sec-
tion 15 renders the second marriage void".

2.33. Under section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
the children of a void marriage are deemed to be
legitimate, but only if certain conditions are satisfied.
The section also deals with voidable marriages, but,
we are not concerned with those marriages. As the
section stands now, where a decree of nullity is gran-
ted in respect of any marriage under section 1I{i.c. in
respect of a void marriage), any child begotten or
conceived before the decree is made, who would have
been the legitimate child of the parties to the marriage
if the marriage had been dissolved instead of having
been declared null and void, shall be deemed to be
their legitimate child, notwithstanding the decree of
nullity, Under the proviso to the section, this section
does not confer, on any child of a marriage which is.
declared null and void any rights in or the property
of any person other than the parents, in any case
where, but for the passing of this Act, such child
would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring
any such rights by reason of his not being the legiti-
mate child of his parents. (We are referring, only to
that part of the section which relates to a void marri-
age, as already stated).

Now, the first proposal is that the condition that
a decree of nullity must have been granted in order
that the section may apply, should be removed. The
second, and the more controversial, proposal is that
this section should apply only if, at the time of the act
of intercourse resulting in the birth (or at the time of
the celebration of the marriage, where the marriage

1. @ma Charan v. Kajal, ATR. 1971 Cal. 307 (Reviews cases.)


31

follows the act.) both or either of the parties reasonably
believed that the marriage was valid.

2.34. We are in favour of the first proposal'. Legat pro-
Tn our view, it should not be a condition precedent to seedings
the applitability of the benefical provision in the O42 RL.
section that there must have been actual legal pro-*ary-
ceedings resulting in a decree. Certain serious ano-

malies have resulted from the present position.

Tt may be noted that section 16 is an adaptation of
section 9 of the (English) Matrimonial Causes Act,
1950, In making the adaptation, however, it seems
to have been overlooked that the English section was
concerned solely with decrees of nullity passed with
respect to voidable marriages, and had nothing to do
with void marriages. As a matter of fact, at the
date of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950, children
of void marriages were, in England, not yet regarded
as legitimate issue in any circumstances?. So far
as voidable marriages are concerned, the children of
such marriages should be treated as legitimate issues
so long as the marriage is not avoided. But there was
a doubt in this regard at common law. Hence the nezd
for making them legitimate (notwithstanding a decrez
of nullity) by an express provision in the English
Statute.

2.35. In England, section 11, Matrimonial Causcs
Act, 1965, used to govern the Icgitimacy of children
of voidable marriages after 1965. It was as follows:

“11, Where a decree of nullity is granted in res-
pect of a voidable marriage any child who
would have been the legitimate child of the
partics to the marriage if at the date of the
decree it had been dissolved instead of being
annulled shall be deemed to be their Iegi-
.timate child®”.

1. Para 2.33, supra.

2. See, now section 2, Legitimacy Act, 1959.

3. For presen: law see section 16, Matrimonial Causes Act,
1973.


- 32

Legitimacy of children of void marriage is governed
by another provision’. Legitimation of children, by
the subsequent marriage of their patents, is governed
by a separate law?,

विश of 2.36. The second एणाए, however, is one of great

belief. difficulty. With reference to the status of children

Pohl Caste born of a void marriage, theoretically, four principal

dered—Four Views are possible :—

views as to

legitimacy. (i) One view is that such children must be re-

we garded as illegitimate, because a void marri-

age has, in law, no existence, and the chil-
dren of such a marriage can only be regarded
as filius nullius;

(४) The second view is that they should be enti-
ted to succeed to their parents, as if they
were legitimate, provided that the parents
had contracted the marriage hora fide and
without knowledge of any impediment;

(iti) According to the third view, they should,
in all cases, be entitled to succeed to thcir
parents as if they were legitimate.

(iv) There could be a fourth view, namely, that
they must be entitled to succeed to other
relations in all cascs.

2.37. The first view‘ is the traditional common law
view, but has now been modified in most countries,
According to this view, the prohibition of certain
matriages being based on grounds of public policy,
it is unavoidable that in a conflict between the intercsts
of the general public and the interest of the innocent
offspring of prohibited marriages, the former must
prevail,

While the first view is at the one oxtreme, the other
extreme is represented by the fourth view, according
+ Legitimacy Act, 1959, section 2.
- See the Legitimacy Act, 1926, section 1 as amended by the

Legitimacy Act, 1959, section 1,
५ Para 2.33, supra.
4. Para 2.36, supra.

ne

w


33

to which the rights of children of void marriages to

succced to the property are Tecognised as if they are
legitimate.

As tegards the second view, it is a compromise
between the first and the third. When the Parties to
the marriage deliberately break the Jaw, the second
view gives effect to the public policy referred to above.
But, if the parties are not aware of the true facis con-
stituting the impediment to a valid marriage, the de-
mands of public policy, according to the second view,
are sufficiently met by declaring the marriage to be
void, without visiting the consequences of the mistake
of the parents on the children. In England, the Legi-
timacy Act, 1959, gave effect to the second view!,
This was alteady the position under the law of Scot-
land. Before the Reformation, the Canon law also
held that child of a void marriage was legitimate where
the defect rendering the marriage void was unknown
to one of the parties®,

The Hindu Marriage Act, however, has already
adopted the third view it would be a retrograde step
if it now reverts to the second view. That apart, the
third view is obviously more fair to the innocent off-
spring of the marriage, and more in harmony with
thodern social notions. We are, therefore, of the
opinion that there is no justification for teverting to
the second view.

2.38. We may repeat that we are aware that the Section 2,
(English) Legitimacy Act, 1959—section 2—contains Teaitimacy
some such limitation as is suggested in the proposal
sent to us. But we do not consider it to be a rational
one. The English section was referred to in a Medras
judgment pertaining to section 16 of the Hindu पा
Marriage Act, but we do not think that the Madras
High Court wished to suggest that every ingredient of

1 Section 2, Legitimacy Act, 1959,
the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce
(1955), Cmd. 9678, pages 305 and 306, paragraphs 1184 to
1186.
3, Gowri ammal v. Thulasi Amma, ATR. 1962 Mad. 510
(Ramakrishnan J.).


A point of
drafting.

34

the section should be incorporated into our law. And,
on principle, we think that such an approach is not
well founded.

The fact that the scope: of the section is being ex-
panded in one respect—by removing the present re-
quirement that there must have been a decree of
nullity—also does not seem necessarily to. require that
the section should be narrowed down by adding a re-
quirement that’ the parties must have belicved thaf
there was no impediment to marriage.

2.39. An argument may be advanced that what is
stated above takes away the utility of the prohibitions
against marriage. The answer to this argument is,
first, that these prohibitions ought not to operate upon
the children, and, secondly, that the prohibitions still
retain some significance. as the parties are not husband
and wife in Jaw, and cannot sue each other for any
relief based on a valid marriage (e.g. maintenance or
restriction etc.). We should say, with Shakespeare’:

“Why bastard, wherefore base? When my di-
mensions are as well compact, My mind as
generous, and my shape as true, As honest
madam’s issue? Why brand they us with
base ? with bascness ?bastardy? base, base?”

2,40. It is of interest to note that in the U.S.A., the
North Dakota Supreme Court, in declaring the state
inheritance statuté unconstitutional, stated that “a
statute which punished innocent children for the trans-
gressions of their parents has no place in our system
of government which has as one of its basic tencts
equal protection for all?”.

2.40A. The fourth view?, of course raises larger
issues and it is not necessary to discuss its merits or
demerits at least in the present social context.

2.41, This finishes the two points of substance
concerning section 16. One point of drafting should
“1 King Lear, 7

2. In Re Estate of Jensen, (1968), 162 1२.७, 2d 861 (North
Dakota). >

3. Para 2.36, supra.


35

also be mentioned. The words “if it had been dis-
solved”, which occur in the present section 16, are
fot very appropriate, because a “void” marriage can-
not be dissolved. The wording to be used in this
context should be such as to provide straightaway
that the children shall be legitimate as if the marriage
were valid.

[As to the view that only a valid marriage can be
dissolved, see the undermentioned cases".?].

2.42, We may also note that, in England, though English Act
the status of “illegitimacy” is maintained in the legal .
system, the property rights of illegitimate children
have been widely extended by recent legislation’.

2.43. In the light of the above, we recommend that Recor 7
this part of section 16(1) should be revised as fol-
lows:—

Revised seciion 16(1), in part,

“16(1), Notwithstanding that a marriage is null Legitimacy
and void on any ground specified in section 11, any of children,
child is horn before or after the commencement of the voidable
age had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such marriages.
child is born before or after the commencement of the
Hindu Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1974, and whe-
ther or not a decree of nullity is granted in respect
of that marriage®, under this Act and whether or
not the marriage is held to be void otherwise than on
a petition under this Act”.

It is considered unnecessary to limit the operation
of the new sub-scction to children conceived before
the decree of nullity is passed (where the case is

1, Khambatta ५. Shambatie, (1933) 36 Bom, L.R. 11; AIR
1934 Bom. 93 (Submission of parties)

. Khambatta v. Khambatta, (1934) 36 Bom. L.R, 1021; A.LR.
1935 Bom, 5.

. Family Law Reform Act, 1969 iEng.) Sections 14 to 19.
, The words “of such marriage” could be added after the
words “any child”, if necessary

५ Children of voidable marriages to be dealt with in separate
sub-section.

Aw


Section 234

(new),

Relief to the

36

one in which such a decree is passed). Of course,
after a decree of nullity, cohabitation would, in most
eases cease, if it has not already ceased, and concep-
tion after the decree is, therefore, very unlikely.

The rest of section 16 could be recast as follows:—

“(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in res-
pect of a voidable marriage under scction
12, any child begotten or conceived before
the decree is made who would have been
the legitimate child of the partics to the
marriage if at the date of the decree it had
been dissolved instead of being annulled,
shall be deemed to be their legitimate child
notwithstanding the decree of nullity.

(3) Nothmg contained in this scction shall be
construed as conferring upon any child of
a marriage which is nuli and void or which
is annulled by a decree of nullity under
section 12, any rights in or to the property
of any person other than the parents in
any case where, but for the passing of this
Act, such child would have been incapable
of possessing or acquiring any such rights
by reason of his not being the legitimate
child of his parents”.

2.44. There is a proposal to insert a new section
permitting the court to give relief to the respondent

respondent who opposes a petition for divorce on the ground of

on petition
for divorce,

“Relief to
Respondent
on petition
for divorce.

the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, The
proposal is that: the court may give him the same 185
lief to which he would have been entitled if he had
filed a petition. Of course, the relicf must be based
on that particular ground—this is implicit, though the
proposal does not state so.

The precise proposal’ sent to us for consideration fs
that after section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the
following section should be inserted:—-

“23A, If in any proceeding for divorce under
this Act, the respondent opposes the relief
sought on the ground of the _ petitioner’s


37

adultery, cruelty or desertion, the court may
give to the respondent the same relief to
which he or she would have been entitled
if he or she had presented a petition seeking
such relief”,

We do not see any objection to the substance of
the proposal in so far as it goes, but ther2 are certain
matters of detail or language which we would like to
deal with.

244A. We may, for example, point out that the
words “the same relief (used in the proposal! of
the Ministry) create an ambiguity. In a petition for
divorce, the respondent should have a right to coun-
ter claim not only for divorce (“same relief’) but also
for judicial separation, or, for that matter, any other
appropriate relief. The respondent need not be
confined to claiming divorce only.

There is another point. The proposition that the
defendant may counter-claim is not directly brought
out. Contrast the provision in the Parsi Marriage
& Divorce Act, 1936 quoted below?:—

“37, In any suit onder this Act, the defendant
may make counter-claim for any relief he
or she may be entitled to under this Act”.

There is obvious advantage in bringing it out more
directiy.

2.45. We would, therefore, recommend that the Recom-
section to be inserted in the Hindu Marriage Act mendation.
should be on the following lincs:—

“23A. In any proceeding for divorce or judicial
separation or restitution of conjugal tights
under this Act, the respondent may not
only oppose the relief sought on the ground
of the petitioner's adultery, cruelty or deser-
tion, but also make a counter-claim 07
any relief under this Act on that ground;

“1. Para 2.44, supra,
ction 37 Parsi Marriage & Divorce Act, 1936.


Special
Marriage
Act—
Amend-
ments
desired in
‘the Minis-
try’s propo-
3815.

38

and, if the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty of
desertion is proved, the court may give to
the respondent any relief under this Act to
which he or she would have been entitled
if he or she had presented a petition sccking
such relief on that ground”.

2.46. We have already stated', that certain pro-
posals for amendments in the Special Marriage Act
have also been mentioned in the reference to the
Commission, and the Commission’s views sought
thereon. We do not consider it necessary to deal
with them in detail, but think it sufficient to state our
general view that we see no objection to the relevant
provisions of the Special Marriage Act, being brought
into line with our recommendations in this Report
as to the corresponding provisions of the Hindu Mar-
riage Act, where necessary-

We may mention that the amendments proposed
by the Ministry of Law in the Special Marriage Act,
1954 are only five in number.

(a) The first relates to section 2(c) of the Act, and
is intended to revise the definition of “District Court”
on the lines of the corresponding definition already
existing in the Hindu Marriage Act.

We aceept the proposal.

(b) The second relates to section 26 of the Special
Marriage Act. That scction deals with the legitimacy
of childern of void and voidable marriages, and is
comparable to section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act.
In this connection, *our comments with reference to
section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act? may be
seen. Section 26 of the Special Marriage Act should
be revised on the same lines as section 16. Hindu
Marriage Act.

(c) The third relates to section 27 of the Special
Marriage Act, and is intended to add, to the grounds

व, Para 1.1, supra.
2. Para 2.43, supra.


39

of divorce available to the wife, the new ground re-
lating to the passing of an order for separate, main-
tenance by a Magistrate. In this connection, aur com-
ments with reference to section 13(2) of the Hindu
Marriage Act may be seen?. Section 27 should be
revised on the same lines as section 13(2), Hindu
Marriage Act.

(d) The fourth relates to section 29 of the Specisl
Marriage Act, which deals with restrictions as regards
divorce during the first three years after marriage. Our
recommendation to delete section 14 of the Hindu
Marriage Act may be seen, in this connection*.
Section 29 should also be deleted.

(०) The fifth relates to section 30 of the Special
Marriage Act, which deals with re-marriage after
divorce. In this connection, our comments as to 5९९-
tion 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act may be seen*,

Section 30 of the Special Marriage Act should
be amended on the same lines. This finishes consi-
deration of all the proposals contained in the draft
Bill forwarded by the Minister of Law. है

1. Para 2.29, supra.
2. Para 2.31, supra.
a. Para 2.32, supra.



Introduc-
tion.

CHAPTER 3

CONDITIONS OF MARRIAGE UNDER THE
HINDU MARRIAGE ACT

3.1. In this Chapter, we shall deal with points re-
lating to conditions of marriage under the Hindu
Marriage Act, except points which we have already
dealt with while? discussing the proposals of the
Ministry of Law.

3३.14. There are certain conditions of a marriage,
mentioned in the Hindu Marriage Act?. The effect
of breach of these conditions is not precisely the same
in every case. Breach of some of the conditions merely
renders the marriage void’. Breach of some of the
conditions merely renders the marriage voidable*.
Breach of some of the conditions—e.g. the condition
as to minimum age—does not affect the validity of
the marriage, though it may attract criminal penal-
ties®.

3.2. Apart from the conditions of marriage specifi-
cally mentioned in the Act, it is elementary that a
marriage must be based on free consent.6 Hence,
if the consent is obtained by force or fraud, the
marriage is voidable.? Again, having regard to the
sexual and reproductive aspects of marriage, impo-
tence of a party renders the marriage voidable.®
Finally, the fact that the wife was at the time of

|

. See Chapter 2, supra.

. Section 5, H.M.A.

. Section 11, H.M.A.

. Section 12, H.M.A.

. Section 18, H.MA-

. See para 3.8, infra.

. Section 12000, H.M.A.
. Section 12(1)(a), H.M.A.

waa weep


41

marriage pregnant by some person other than the
husband, unknown to the husband, renders the
marriage voidable.4

3.3. Hence arises the threefold . classification of
marriages into valid, void? and voidable marriages.®
A valid marriage gives rise to all the mari-
tal obligations. The obligations can be enforced by
a decree for restitution of conjugal rights, and the
children are legitimate. The obligations can be termi-
nated (if at all) by obtamning divorce, or (to use an ex-
pression which is convenient), suspended by obtaining
judicial separation. A void marriage is no marriage
in the cye of the law, and need not be formally termi-
nated,—although, for the sake of convenience, a decree
of nullity can be obtained. A void marriage does not
create any marital obligations between the couple, and
but for the special statutory provisions in that re-
gard,’ the children would be illegitimate. A void-
able marriage stands midway between the two. It
creates marital obligations, and can be terminated by
obtaining a decree of diverce (if the requisite grounds
exist), or those obligations can be suspended by
obtaining judicial separation. Jt can, however, be
avoided by a petition, presented by the party affected,
on the ground of one of the statutory defects (men-
tioned above).* In this sence, it differs from a valid
marriage.

3.4. This triple classification is unavoidable, and
the scheme as a whole cannot be done away with.
Such modifications as are required (if at all) concern
mainly the conditions themselves, or the catcgorisa-
tion of a particular marriage as void or voidable, or
other incidental matters.

We proceed to consider such changes as relate to
the coriditions of the marriage (section 5). Points
concerning the effect of breach of a particular condi-
tion will be dealt with later (section 11-12).

1. Section 12(1)(9), H.M.A.
2, Section 11, H.M.A.

3. Section 12, H.M.A.

4. Section 16, HLM.

5, Para 3.2, supra.

Valid,void
and void-
able marri-
ages.


Section 5
(i) Ga
soundness
of mind
asa.
ground of
mullity of
murriage.

42

3.5. The first question concerns the effect of mental
incompetency ‘upon capacity to contract a valid
marriage. This is a matter of some difficulty. The
Hindu Marriage Act contains, in section Siii) and
scetion 12(1) (0), 2 provision whereunder, if the oppo-
site party was an “idiot or a lunatic” at the time of
the marriage, the marriage can, subject to certain con-
ditions, be avoided.

The words “idiot or lunatic” have not been defined
in the Act, These words are, no doubt, familiar to
Hindu Law. They occur also in the Indian Divarec
Act? and may have been derived from that Act.
The word “lunatic” occurs in the Indian Lunacy Act,
1912, also. But the precise scope of this particular
condition of marriage requires some examination. ~

3.6. Idiocy and fanacy are expressions used in the
legislation that had been passed, relating to the re-
moval of certain disabilities of Hindus. An idiot is
ane congenitally incapable of distinguishing between
rigbt and wrong.”

3.7. In a Calcutta case*, the meaning of the ex-
pression “lunatic” in section 5(ii) of the Hindu Marti-
age Act was discussed at length. The court referred to
various cases, including Ratneswari Nandan Singh v.
Bhagawati Saran Singh*—and noted the contention
that unless total loss of reason, incapacitating a party
toa the marriage to understand the very ceremony of
the marriage, is found, the extremely strong presump-
tion in favour of the validity of the marriage remained
unrebutted and, therefore, prevails (which is the
Jaw laid down by the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council in Mouji Lal ए. Chandrabati KumariS, and
teferated by the Federal Court in the Ra‘neswar: Cave.
The Court pointed out that the old Hindu law under

1, Sections 19(3) and 48, Indian Divorce Act, 1859,
2. (9) Ticumamagal ए. Ramaswami, (1863) 1 M.H-C.R. 214;
(9) R. Muthammal v. Sri Subramaniaswami, AAR. 1960
S.C. 601, (1960) 2 8. C.R, 721.
3. ALR, 1969 Cal, at page 306.

4, Ratmeswari Nandan Singh v. Bhagawati Saran Singh, ALR.
1950 F.C. 142.

3, wee Laly, Chandrabati Kumari, (1911) 1.R. 38 Cal. 700
(८.


43

which insanity was not a disqualification for pur- ५
poses of marriage, was no longer in force. Sir Guru-

das Banerjee had, in his Tagore Law Lectures on
Marriage and Stridhan,! said:-—

“Even considering Hindu marriage to be
entirely a sacrament, the acceptance of
the bride is a necessary and indispensable
part of the ceremony. Therefore, he whose
loss of reason is complete, should be deem-
ed incompetent to accept the gift of the
bride. Such marriage is invalid on — the
ground that the capacity for performance
of the essential ceremony of the inarriage
is lacking in the bridegroom.’?

The Court then dealt with the section in the Act—
The (Hindu Marriage) Act does not say anything
about various degcees of lunacy. But who is a lunatic?
The Hindu Marriage Act does not even define a
‘lunatic’. The Indian Lunacy defines a ‘lunatic’,
By section 3, clause (5) thereof, ‘lunatic’ means an
idiot or a person of unsound mind,

“It is, therefore, a hard and fast definition and we
cannot give any other meaning to the word ‘lunatic’
than that which is mentioned in the definition i:sclf...
Hence, going by the language of the Hindu Marriage
Act, it is not possible to make room for — different
degrees of lunacy.”

3.8. At common law, the mental incapacity. due Position in
to unsoundness of mind, to consent to marriage, un- Enstand at

doubtedly* made the marriage void ab initio, be- Jaw, and
cause “consent is an essential ingredient of a valid tien of.

19th cen-
_ tury.

1, Banerjee, Marriage and Stridhan cited in the Ratneswari -
case, A.LR. 1950 F.C, 142,

2 Emphasis supplied in the Ratneswart case, A.ILR. 1950 F.C.
142.

»

Emphasis supplied,

4. Tolstoy, “Void and Voidable Marriages", (1964) 27 Modem
Law Rey. at page 394. पु

व M of Law/744


Position
in England
under Act
of 1937
and subse-

quent: Acts.

44

marriage.”In Browning v. Reane', it was Stated”,
“want of reason must, of course, invalidate a con-
tract, and the most important contract of life, the
very essence of which is consent.”

An Act of 1742", replaced by an Act of 18111,
made void the marriage of any person who was found
lunatic by inquisition or any one whose person = or
estate had been committed to the care and custody
of trustees under any statute, and the martiage of
such a person was void though it might have been
solenmnized during the lucid period. Thus, as Lord
Stowell pointed out®, it was the state of insanity”, and
not the affected person’s condition of aiind at the
time of the marriage, which made the marriage void.
The scope of the concept of Iunacy was expanded in
course of time’—this wilt be explained later’

Mental incapacity now renders the marriage veid-
able, and not void in England®,

3.9. The Act of 1811 (referred to above?) requir-
ed that the person must have been found funatic by
inquisition, or must have been committed to care and
custody under some statute. The Matrimonial
Causes Act of 1937 (and later Acts) expanded the
scope of unsoundness of mind in this respect. Even
if a person is of unsound mind but is not so found
by inquisition, it was felt that the marriage should

5 Browning ९, Reane. (1812) 2 Phil. Eccl. 69; 161 E.R. 1080.
Also see Re Park, (1954) Probate 89, 96, aflirmed (1954)

Probate 112 (1953) 2 Ali E.R. 1411; 97 Sol Jo 830, approved
in Hill ४. Hilt, (1959) 1 All E.R. 281 (P.C.).

(1742) 15 Geo. 2 Chapter 30.
. The Marriage of Lunatics Act, 1811,

. Turner v. Meyers, (1808) 1 Hagg. Const. 414, 417, 161 F.R.
600 (Lord Stowell).

. This aspect is of importance.

+ (3) Section 7 (1) (9) , Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937;
(b) Section 8 (1) (b) , Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950;
(c) Section 9 (1) (b), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1965;

(०) Section 12, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973—para 3.12,
infra.

. Para 3.9, infra.
Para 3.12, tafra.
10, The Marriage of Lunatics Act, 1811, Para 3.8 supra.

ee wos

22


45

be capable of annulment in the interests of the other पर
party no 1059 than in the interests of possible children
of the marriage and of the State'. Progress made in
the classification of mental diseases also provided
scope for improvement, and the Act of 1937, there-
fore, provided* that the marriage should be voidable
on the ground that either party was, at the time of
the marriage, “of unsound mind or a mental defective
under the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913 to 1927, or
was subject to recurrent fits of insanity or epilepsy.”
The principal object of this formulation was to make
it clear that even though the ceremony and its resul:-
ing rights and obligations may have been understood.
by the party said to be mentally abnormal, the ab-
normal ‘mental state, it it could be shown to have
existed, would render the marriage voidable. In a
case decided in 1885? it was held that it was not suffi-
cient that the marriage ceremony was understood by
the party, and it was also necessary that that party
should understand the obligations of married life.
This aspect assumes importance, because it would
appeart that there could be cases where a person
might be mentally abnormal, but, by reason of the
administration of tranquillizers, he ot she may not
appear to be so at the time of marriage and may even
appear to understand the marriage ceremony at that
particular moment.

3.10. An analysis will reveal that there are — two Position at
ideas which underline the approach of the common पक बज
law towards capacity to exercise legal powers. First, aspects.
there is the insistence upon the necessary state of
mind to transact the business or Iegal act in question
(the relevant state being dependent upon the exact
nature of the business or act). Secondly, there is the
proposition that soundness of mind is based upon

ability to manage oneself and one’s affairs.

1, Report of Divorce Law Commission (1912), page 117, cited
in Graveson, Cencury of Family Law (1937), page 337.

2, Section 7(1Mb), M.C.A. 1937.

3. Durham v. Durham, (1885) 10 probate Division 80, 81 referrd
toin Re Park (1953) 2 All. E.R. 1411, 1427.

4, Suggestion by an aggrieved party in a file of the Ministry of
We


Position 7

under
Act of

1950, as
amended
in 1959.

46

This approach clearly stated in an En;
where it was said that the question for decision was
whether a person was of perfectly sufficient sound-
ness of mind to form a valid contract of mirriage.
“J the incapacity be such,” said Sic John Nicholl, in
another case’, “that the party is incapable of under-
standing the nature of the contract itself and incap-
able, from mental imbecility, to take care of his or
her own person and property, such an individual
cannot dispose of her person and property by the
matrimonial contract, any more than by any other
contract.”*

3.11. In England, a marriage could, under — the
Act of 19504 be avoided (even if originally valid) on
the ground that “either party to the marriage? was,
at the time of the marriage, of unsound mind or was
then suffering from mental disorder? within the
meaning of the Mental Health Act, 1959, of such a
kind or to such an extent as to be unfitted for mar-
riage and the procreation of children or subject to
recurrent attacks of insanity or cpilepsy.” By this pro-
yision, a marriage could be annulled even though, at
the ceremony, a spouse possed the necessary capa-
city discussed above.

The phrase “subject to recurrent fits of insanity”
(in the English Act of 1973) was contrued’ to mean
“subject to an increase of the acuteness cr severity of
unsoundness of mind recurring periodically in its
course.”

1, M‘Adénv. Watker (1813) 1 Dow. 148.
2, Browning ९. Reane (1812) 2 Phill, 69, 70, 71; 161 E.R. 10180.

3. c.f, Sit William Scott, in Tirner v. Meyers, (1808) 1 Hag.
Con. 414, 418, 161 E.R. 600.

4, Section 8(1)(b), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950. as amended
py the Mental Health Act, 1959, section 149, Schedule ४11,
Pt. 1. ~

. See now the 1973 Act—Para 3.12, infra.

. As to mental disorders, see para 3.12A, infra.

', Section 7(1)(b), 1937 Act para 3.9 sepra.

1-8 Smith v. Smith (1940) Probate 179, (1940) 2 All E.R,
595; 84 Sol Jour, 359.

. Section 12, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973.

aw

2


47

‘Thus, 8 person who, at common law, though ef w1-
sound mind, contracted a marriage duri ig the lucid
interval (which would have made the marriage valid,
unless he were a lunatic so found by — inquisition,
when the Marriage of Lunatics Act, 1811, would
have applied, before its repeal in 1959), is regarded
as contracting a voidable marriage under the Act of
1950.

3.12. The current Statutory provision in England Current

on the subject reads :—

12.A marriage celebrated after 31st July, 1971,
, shall be voidable on the following grounds
only, that is to say—

* * * * *

(c) that either party to the marriage did not validly
consent to it, whether in consequence of duress, iis~
take, unsoundness of mind; or

(d) that at the time of the marriage either party,
though capable of giving a valid consent, was suffer-
ing (whether continuously or intermittently) — from
mental disorder witiun the meaning of the Mental
Health Act, 1959, of such a kind or to such an Ox
tent as to be unfitted for marriage ;

statutory
provision.

3.12A. As regards mental disorders, the Mental Mental

Health Act! provides as follows :— Health
Act, 1959.

“In this Act, ‘mental disorders’ means menial ilk
ness, arrested or incomplete development
of mind, psychopathic disorder, and any
other disorder or disability of mind.”

3.13. So much as regards the substantive law. A Py

‘resump-

presumption of validity? of marriage arises where it tion of

is alleged that a party was of unsound mind at the “'

1. Section 4(1), Mental Health Act, 1959 (Eng.).

2. Tostoy, “Void and Voidable Marriage” (1964)
27 Modern Law Review, at page 394.

alidity.



ee ५७७७» ३.

48

time or marriage and was, for that reason incapable
of giving consent to the marriage,’ but that presump-
tion is rebuttable?.

Considera- 3.14. The above brief resume will show that,

tions tele” speaking from the social point of view, several con-
siderations seem to nave competed with cach other

for recognition in this field. The first is that ihe con-

sent of the mentally incompetent person is no con-

sent at all. The second is that it is not in the interests

of the other spouse—who is of sound mind—that.

he or she should be mate to live with a person men- :

tally incompetent. The third consideration, which may

be called one of eugenies, is that the marriag2 of a

person with mental abnormality might lead to the

birth of children who would be abnormal. There

might be a fourth consideration also, namely, that

even the party who was suffering from mental ab-

aormality, though not of such a nature as to affect

the competence to consent, should be free to present

a petition for avoiding the marriage.

3.15 to 3.17. This, in fact, is the law in Eng-
land, under which, subject to specified conditions, a
marriage of a person of unsound mind is voidable at
the instance of either party [Sce s. 12(1) (०) (6) Act
of 1973]8

Giving the right of avoiding to the insane party
may not necessarily conflict with section 23(1) (a)
in so far as it prevents a party from taking advantage
of his own wrong. Such a person would not be taking
advantage or his own wrong‘, because there is no
deceit, and it would be a “most infelicitious use of
Tanguage” to say so when there is no deceit®. How-
ever, it may conflict with the prohibition against tak-

4. Browning v. Reane (1812) 2 Phi 1, 69; Portsmouth v.
Portsmouth (1828) A Hag. Con. 355 at p. 359 ; Couper v.
Grane (1891) Probate 369; Re Soier (1947) W.N. 46; Re
Park (1954) Probate 89 at p. 96.

~ 2, Cooper v. Grane, (1891) Probate 369, 376,

3. Para 3.12, supra.

4, Section 23 (1)(a), Hindu Marriage Act.

5, of. Lord Merriman’s observations, (with reference to impor-
tance) in Harthan v. Harthan, (1948) 2 All E, R. 639, 644,


49

ing advantage of one’s “own disability” in section
23(1) (a). An express provision over-riding section
23(1) (8) could be inserted.

“Unsound mind” and ‘insanity’ mean the same
thing’.

3.18 and 3.19, We are of the view that a provision Recom-
substantially on the lines of the English provision? ™endalion
of 1973 should be substituted, and in addition, in section
order to avoid controversy, the situation of recurrent / (05 HMA
attacks of insanity or cpilepsy should specifically
mentioned* (as in s. 8(1) (b) of the English Act of
1950). The revised: provision in section 3 (ti) should,
therefore, be as follows? :— .

“that at the time of marriage neither party to
the marriage—

(a) was incapable of giving a valid consent to it in
consequence of unsoundness of mind ; or

(०) though capable of giving ६ valid consent, was
suffering from mental disorder of such व kind or to

such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the
procreation of children ; or

(c) was subject to recurrent attacks of insanity or
epilepsy.”

3.20, One of the conditions which is tequired to Section
be fulfilled for the solemnisation of a Hindu marriage BUH) and

हि sO 5(vi)-—Mini-
is, under section S(iii), that. . . . mum age and

Section 9(1)
“(ili) the bridegroom has completed the age of
eighteen years and the bride the age of
fifteen years at the time of the marriage,”

» (a) 17६ v. Smith, (1940) Probate 179 ; 11940) 2 AILE. R.

(bo) Whysaily. Whysall (1960) Probate 57, (1959) 3 AILE. R,
389, 395,

2. Section 12, Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 ; para 3.12, supra.
- Para 3.11, supra.

4. In section 23¢i)(a), an express exception to be made for
insanity, see para 3.15, supra.


Suggestion
to give
right to
avoide the
Marriage

50

However, the fact that a marriage has teen solem-
nized in violation of this condition has not been made
a ground for any matrimonial relief. The general
understanding? is that the marriage remains valid,
though criminal penalties may be attracted by reason
of violation of the requirements as to minimum age.
Certain observations in a Punjab case*, however, re-
quire to be considered. In that case, which related to
a petition for restitution of conjugal rights filed by the
husband against the wife, the respondent wifz, at the
time of marriage, was hardly 12 years of age, and the
petitioner husband was also 15 or 16 years of age,
so that section 5(iii) was not compiled with. It was
the defence of the wife that, because of this. no
marriage could validly take place. The High Court
took the view that under section 9(2), only that
fact could be pleaded in answer to a petition for
restitution which was a ground for matrimonial or
relief. The fact that the parties were under-age was
not a ground for nullity or judicial separation o:
divorce. The High Court, therefore, held that it was
not a defence to a petition for restitution that the
parties were under-age. While doing so, however,
the High Court observed : —

“A marriage may not be valid if not performed
between the parties who have noi at‘ained
the requisite age as prescribed by law
Invalidity or voidability of the marriage
cannot be pleaded in defence in answer to
a petition for restitution of conjugal rights.”

3.21. It was suggested before us that these obser-
vations create some doubt as to the effect and sig-
nificance of the requirement of the minimum age.
Since the general understanding? is that the breach of

fra.

2. Budhan y. Man Rai, (1970) 72, Punjab Law Reporter 102,
104 (H. R. Sodhi J.).

3. Emphasis supplied.

4. (a) Ram Saran v. Sital, ALR. 1939 All 340 (Case under
the Child Marriage’ Act).

(0) 8, Siranandy v. जी. Brazavathyamma, ALR. 1962 Mad,
400 (case under the Hindu Marriage Act).


31

that condition does not affect the validity of the
tuarriage, it was stated that it was advisable ६0 avoid
such controversies in future.

3.22. The suggestion was that from the social point
of view, it would be more just to provide, that the
party who was under-age (mostly, that party would
be the. wife) should have a right to avoid the marri-
age, subject to apropriate. safeguards as to limitation
of one year and non-consummation! of the marrage.

It may in this connection be noted that in England,
before 1929, the age of consent for marriage was
determined by puberty (fixed, by presumption, at 14
years for boys and 12 years for girls). Marriage
under that age (if unconsummated) could be avoided
by extra-judicial act, after the parties attained 14
years and 12 years respectively’.

King Henty शा, who, while under fourteen,
married Catharine of Ar: gon in 1504, made a “pro-
test” against the marriage In 1505, when he 1eached
the age of fifteen. 11 may be noted? that Catharine was
the widow of his elder brother, and was five years
older than Henry VIII. But the protest became irrele-
vant, because he later married her? again in 1509.

3,23. We have, however, not accepted this sugges-
tion, a8 we think that public opinion in India is not
yet ready for such a change. Besides, having regard
to the fact that many marriages in violatica of the
condition in question may be taking place, such a
change might create serious difficulties in practice,

1. Section 12 would then require amendment. ~

2. Geary, Marriage and Family Relations (1892), page 30,
quoted in Graveson, A. Century of Family Law’ (1987),
Page 340.

3. Geary, Marriage and Family Relations (1892), pege 30
quoted in Graveson, A. Century of Family Law (1957),
page 340.

4, Anthony Toyne, An English Readers’ History of England
(Oxford, 1971), page 99.

5. Geary, Marriage and Family Relations (1892), page 30,

Suggestion
not accep-
ted.


Introduc-
tory.

Section 9--
Restitution.

Section
9(2) con-
sidered.

CHAPTER 4

RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL: RIGHTS
UNDER THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT.

4.1. This Chapter will be devoted to a discussion
of the relief of restitution of conjugal rights under
the Hindu Marriage Act.

4.2. The remedy of restitution of conjugal rights
is dealt with in section 9 of the Act, which reads as
follows :—

“9(1). When either the husband or the wife has,
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from
the society of the other, the agggrieved
party may apply, by petition to the District
Court, for restitution of conjugal rights and
the court, on being satisfied of the truth of
the statements made in such petition and
that there is no legal ground why the appli-
cation should not be granted, may decree
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.

(2) Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a
petition for restitution of conjugal _ rights
which shall not be a ground for judicial
separation or for nullity of marriage or for
divorce.”

4.3. Sub-section (2) of section 9 has created con-
siderable difficulty, and the problem that has arisen
is this.

Where the respondent cannot prove, on the part of
the petitioner, a matrimonial misconduct constituting
a ground for judicial separation or nullity of marriage
or divorce under sub-scction (2), can he or she still
defend the petition for restitution on the ground that
he or she (i.e. the respondent) has withdrawn from.
the society of the petitioner because of a reasonable
excuse as mentioned in sub-section (1)?

52


53

4.4. The. majority! of the High Courts answer the
question in the affirmative, The Andhra Pradesh
High Court, however, has taken a different. view’.

4.5. 11 18 plain that the majority view is inconsis-
tent with the cléar and unambiguous words used in
s. 9(2): As a matter of construction, it is impossible
to hold that s. 9(2) does not control s. 9(1). If that
be so, reading ss. 9(1) and (2) together, it follows
that no plea can be taken under’s. 9(1) in support
of the contention that there is a legal ground why
the application should not be granted unless such a
plea satisfies the specific requirements of s. 9(2).
Why the Legislature made a general provision in
s. 9(1) and then proceeded to control it rigorously
by 5. 9(2), it is difficult to understand or appreciate ;
but, under no rule of construction can the width of
the provisions in s. 9(1) resist the application of the
rigorous test laid down by s. 9(2).

4.6. There is, however, no doubt that the effect
of reading section ’9(1) and s. 9(2) together is unfair
and unjust. Restitution of conjugal rights covers a
very sensitive arca in matrimonial reiations and it
seems to us that it should be permissible for the party
resisting restitution of conjugal rights to satisfy the

* court that restitution should not be granted on grounds,
which may otherwise be reasonable, though they may
not satisfy the test prescribed by s. 9(2). It is because
courts felt that interpreting s. 9(2) as over-riding
s. 9(1) may lead to social injustice that they felt
compelled in substance to ignore the provisions of
s. 9(2) and treat s. 9(1) as though it were indepen-
dent of s. 9(2). We are, therefore, inclined to recom-
mend that s. 9(2), should be deleted.

4.7 and 4.8. Thete is one more consideration
which has weighed in our minds in coming to this
conclusion. It is well-known that in proceedings under
s. 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure®, where a
1, Shanti Devi v. Balbir, ATR. 1971, Delhi 294 (reviews

cases).

Annapuramma v, Appa Roa, ATR. 1963 A. P, 321.

|. Section 488 of the Code of 1898, see , now, section 125 of
the Code of 1974,


Recom-
mendation
to delete
section
912),
HWA.

Section 9(1)
Burden of
proof

54

wife, including a Hindu wife, applies for maintenance
against her husband, she has almost in every'tase to
justify her separate residence. . Invariably, when a
husband is confronted with a claim made by his wife
for maintenance under 5. 488, he pleads his readi-
ness and willingness to maintain her provided she
returns to his residence and when such a plea is raised
by the husband, the wife has to satisfy the court
under s, 488(4) that there is a sufficient and reason-
able ground for her refusal to stay with her husband.
It is not disputed that when the wife is required to
show a reasonable cause for insisting to stay separately
from her husband, she is not confined to the pleas
such as are contemplated by s. 9(2) of the Hindu
Marriage Act. In other words, the plea which the
Hindu wife can take under s. 488 in justifying her
separate residence need not necessarily be a plea
which would be a ground for judicial separation or for
nullity of marriage or divorce,

4.9. If s. 9(2) were to remain on the Statute
Book, it would, we venture to think, be very easy for
a Hindu husband, against whom an application for
maintenance has been made by his wife under! section
488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898, to
retaliate by filing a petition for restitution of conjugal
rights, and if he adopts such a course, a decree for
restitution would invariably follow unkess the wife
is able to prove any of the grounds contemplated by
s. 9(2). Thus, s. 9(2) would indirectly, but decisively,
restrict the rights of a Hindu wife under s, 48%, that
could not have been the intention of the legislature
when s. 9(2) was enacted. We have, therefore, no
hesitation in recommending that s. 9(2) of the
Hindu Marriage Act should be deleted.

4.10. There seems to be some controversy as to
whether the burden of proof of “reasonable excuse”,
mentioned in section 9(1), is on the party against
whom the petition is made, or, whether the absence
of such excuse is for the petitioner to prove. In a

3. Section 125 is the corresponding provision in the Code of
1974,


55

Delhi ९४४९, it has been stated that for the success
of the petition, the petitioner must prove three
things,—namely, first, the absence of reasonable ex-
cuse for withdrawal from society, secondly, the ab-
sence of any legal ground why the petition should
not be granted, and, thirdly, the truth of the state-
ments contained in the petition. However, it seems
to have been the view of the Punjab High Court®
that the burden of proving reasonable excuse for
Staying away is on the person opposing the petition.
This also seems to be the Madhya Pradesh view.®
In the circumstances, 4 clarification is desirable in
this regard. Under the corresponding section in the
Indian Divorce Act', it is for the respondent to prove
the existence of a reasonable excuse. This seems to
have been the English law also,® so long as the action
for restitution was allowed. [The action has recertly,
been abolished’].

4.11. Since, ordinarily, the presence of a “reason-
able excuse” would be more within the knowledge of
the respondent® than the absence thereof could be
within the knowledge of the petitioner, it would not
be unfair to provide that the respondent should prove
its existence. It may be difficult for the petitioner
to prove the negative.

4,12, We recommend that section 9(1) should be pon.

amended as above® as to the burden of proof, mendation
as to bur-
den of

proof
under sec-
tion 91).

"Shanti Devi v. Balwarit Singh, ALR. 1971 Delhi 294, 296,
para 12.

. Hardip Singh v. Dalip Kaur, A.
284, 285, paragraph 5 (0, 0. Suri J.).

५ Anna Sahib. Tara Bat ALR. 1970, M. P. 36.

. Section 33, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

Wadia v, Wadia, (1914) LL.R. 38 Bom. 125, 130.

. of. Green v. Green, (1916) Probate 188, 191 (Shearman J.).

. Section 20, Matrimonial Proceedings and Property Act,
1970 (Eng.).

ofsection 106, Evidence Act.

9, Para 4.11, supra,

ra

1970 Punj. & Haryana

yaaa


AIntro-
duetory.

Recom-

mendation.

as to
section
101)
HMA.

CHAPTER 5

JUDICIAL SEPARATION UNDER THE HINDU
MARRIAGE ACT

5.1, We shall be concerned in this Chapter with
judicial separation under the Hindu Marriage Act,
dealt with in section 10. This relief is purely the
creation of statute.” It first found place, under this
name, in the matrimonial legislation passed in some
of the provinces. But it may be noted that the Hincu
Women’s Right to Separate Residence and Mainten-
ance Act, 1946, gave the wife some, though not all,
of its advantages.

5.2. In general, judicial separation is a milder relief
than divorce, and for that reason, while most of the
grounds for judicial separation and divorce are con
mon, the requirement is milder in case of judici
separation under the present Hindu Marriage Act,

Since we are making the grounds of divorce more
liberal, and doing away with the maximum periodst
at present prescribed in connection with various
diseases, the specific mention of grounds of judicial
separation in section 10(1) is not necessary. The sub-
section should now be revised so as to refer to the
grounds included in section 13(1), (which relates to
divoree),

1, See_recommendations as to section 13, H.M.A., para 7.6
to 7.23, infra.

56


CHAPTER 6

NULLITY OF MARRIAGE. UNDER THE HINDU
MARRIAGE ACT

6.1, We deal in this chapter with nullity of mar- Introduc-
riage under the Hindu Marriage Act. Questions al- tory.
_teady dealt with in connection with proposals of the
Ministry of Law’ will not, of course, be discussed

again.

6.13. The question whether a declaration can be Section

obtained under section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act तक,
after the death of cither party? is a matter of some for nullity
uncertainty. The question came up for consideration ate of
in a recent Punjab’ case, where all the cases are re- spouse.
viewed, In the Punjab case, a petition under section
11 was filed after the death of the husband by Kishni
Devi, gne of the widows, impleading the (other)
widow of her husband as a respondent, and claiming
a declaration that the petitioner’s marriage with her
(late) husband was a nullity. Apparently, the ground
for seeking such declaration was that the petitioner’s
husband had been already married to the respondent.
The petition was dismissed on the ground that it was
not maintainable in view of the husband’s death. On
appeal, the High Court set aside the dismissal, em-
phasising that in.the case of a void marriage, there is
no marriage in the eye of law. The High Court held
that one of the spouses in such a marriage can obtain
a declaration from the court about her status qué even
after the death of the other spouse. The High Court
dissented from the contrary view takcn by the Madras
High Court*.

1. Chapter 2, supra.
2, See also para 2.5-supra.
3. Kishni Devi v. Tulsani Devi, (1972) Punj, 1.. R. 561.

4, (a) Gori Ammal | Tulsi Ammat, A..R, 1962 Mad. 5
On appeal Tulsi Ammal v. Gori Animal, A.L.R, 1964,
Mad. 118.

(b) Paramsani v. Sarnathanunal, A.1.R. 1969 Mad. 124.

37


Recom-
mendation.
to amend
$. 11
HMA.
Section
12(1)(8)--
Impotence

asa
ground of
avoidance.

16008,
HMA.
and idiocy
or lunacy.
Section

12(D(c).
HMA.
Section 12
yd),
HMA.
and pre-

marital
pregnancy.

58

We ought, however, to point out that in such a
case, the proper remedy is a suit under the Specific
Relief Actt. A petition under section 11 of the
Hindu Marriage Act cannot be appropriate, because
the other spouse is an essential party to any such
petition. This should be clarified by an amendment.

6.2. We recommend that section 11 should be suit-
ably amended for the purpose. है

6.3. In regard to voidable marriage, there is one
matter in respect of which reform is urgently required.
That relates to the case where a person is not impotent
at the time of the marriage, but is found to be so
when the marriage is, for the first time, attempted to
be consummatcd?. It cannot be disputed that such
cases should be covered because, on the words of
section, the petitigner’s claim can be met technically
on the ground that the impotence supervened after
the marriage. Section 12(1)(a) of the Hindu Mar-
tiage Act, which makes the marriage voidable on
the ground of impotence “at the time of marriage”,
should be revised so as to cover such cases. We think
that the following re-draft would be simple, and
achieve the object : °

“the marriage has not been consummated owing
to the impotence of the respondent.”

6.4. Section 12(1) (0) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
which relates to idiocy or lunacy, will? now be read
in the light of section 5(ii) as proposed to be revised,

6.42. Section 12(1) (0) is discussed later‘.

6.5. Under section 12(1)(d) of the Hindu Mar-
tiage Act, subject to certain conditions, the pre-mari-
tal pregnancy of the wife is a ground on which the
marriage could be avoided.

1, Section 34 5. R. Act see para 2.6, supra.

3, Ravanna १. Susheelamma, A.1.R. 1967 Mys. 165.
3, See, recommendation as to section 560.

4, See para 6.8 infra para 3.19. supra.


59

The Act, however, does not provide for any such
relief.to the wife of the male with whom the pregnant
wife had sexual relations. It was suggested that if
the rationale of the present provision entitling the
innocent husband (of the pregnant wife) to relief is
that mutual love and affection cannot possibly survive
in such circumstances by reason of the grave fraud
of the one party, then the same rationale applies in
favour of the innocent wife of the male who has
been guilty of sexual relations with another woman
leading to that woman’s pregnancy.

6.6. As Morse J. observed :—

“The essence of the marriage contract is wanting
when the woman, at the time of its consum-
mation, is bearing in her womb, knowingly,
the fruit of her illicit intercourse with a
stranger ; and the result is the same whether
the husband is ignorant of her pregnancy,
and believes her chaste, or is cognizant of
her condition, but has been led to believe
that the child is his,”

This reasoning, it was stated, should apply against
the father of the child.

6.7. We are not in favour of any such change. We
think that a distinction can be made between the preg-
nant woman and her paramour, The former is
burdening her husband with a child, The latter does
not burden the wife with a child.

6.8. One of the grounds for avoiding a marriage Section
is the fact that the consent of the petitioner (or his or 126)0)--
her guardian) to the marriage was obtained by force BMA
or fraud. The relevant provision is to be found in case law
section 12(1)(c) of the Hindu Marriage Act. The
section does not expressly limit “fraud” to deception
in relation to the marriage ceremonies only or to the
identity of the party marrying. But many judicial de-
cisions have taken that view. In a recent Bombay

7 Sissung v. Sissung, 65 Mich. 168, 31 N.W. 770, 773 (U.S.A.),
cited in Morres v. Morres, (1940) 13A 2d 603, Goldstein
‘Family & the Law, (1964) p. 652.

7M of Law/74—S.


Section
12(1Xe}
‘fraud’.
suppres-
sing |
previous
marriage
effect.

60

९88९.) for example, it was held that a person who
freely consents to a solemnisation of the marriage
under the Act with the other party in accordance with
customary ceremonies, that is, with knowledge of the
nature of the ceremonies and intention to marry,
cannot object to the validity of the marriage on the
ground of a fraudulent representation or concealment.
Therefore, concealment of curable epilepsy and a
false representation that « party to the marriage was
healthy, does not amount to fraud within the meaning
of section 12(1)(c) of the Act.

6.9. In a Calcutta case,? the marriage was sought
to be annulled on the ground that at the time of the
marriage, the gitl was suffering from tuberculosis and
that there was a fraudulent misrepresentation about
her health. Evidently, the marriage was consummated.
Ht was held that the marriage was not voidable under
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. Relying on the Eng-
lish law and the position under the Indian Divorce
Act, 1869, the High Court took the view that the
fraud in relation. to matrimonial consent must exist
at the time of solemnization of a marriage.

The High Court also stated that the provisions of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, “clearly suggest that
concealment of a disease other than those mentioned
in the said section (section 13) cannot be the founda-
tion for avoiding the marriage.”

6.10. On the other hand, in a Madhya Pradesh
case’, the respondent before his marriage was repre-
sented as a Brahman boy. when actually he was a
dasiputra (an illegitimate child born of gurmi woman).
The marriage was held to be voidable.

610A. It has been held in another case‘ that
“fraud” within the meaning of section 12(1)(c) means

1. Raghunath Gopal Daftardar v. Vijaya Raghunath Daftardar,
(1970) 73 Bom: L.R. 840 (reviews cases).

2. Anath Nath v. Lajjabati Devi, ATR. 1959 Cal. 778, 782.
|. Bimla Bai ए. Shankerlal, ALR. 1959, M. P. 8.

4. Rajaram Viswakarma v. Deepabai, (1973) M. P. L. J. 626
C97) Jb J, 662, cited in the Yearly Digest (Aug. 1973),
col



61

tither deception. as to the identity of the other party
to. the marriage, or deception as to the nature of. the
cotemonies being perfonmed. Where consent.is given
with. the intention of ‘marrying the other party and
with the knowledge that what is being solemnised is
marriage, an objection to the validity of the marriage
on the igtound of. any fraudulent misrepresentatioa or
concealment is not tenable. Mere concealment of the
fact that the party was once married to another cannot
be a ground for annulment of marriage as it cannot
be said that consent of the other party was obtained
by fraud within the meaning of section 12(1)(c).
Of course, the marriage would be declared a nullity
under section 11 if a spouse was living at the time
of the marriage,

The pefition for annulment of the marriage of a
‘pardanashin’ girl .was granted in a Patna case,’ when
the. girl averred that she was given to understand,
before the marriage took place, that the would-be
husband was an affluent man and was of the age
25-30 years, but after marriage, she discovered that
he was not so affluent, and was also over sixty years
of age.

+ 6.11, Thus, the law on the point requires to be

settled. If the narrower view is socially the preferable gon,

view, it should be incorporated into the section, be-
cause the present language does not carry any such
limitation. If, on the other hand, the wider view
is socially preferable, then that should be given legis-
lative recognition.

6.12, to 6.14, It should, in this connection,

pointed out that case law? under the Indian Divorce Act distin-
Act, section 19, is not a sufficient guide, because suished.

under that Act fraud is referred to as a possible ground
for making the marriage void.

6.15. In England, before the Reformation, want English
of consent, like any other impediment, rendered the 12”

1, Babul Panmate पर. Ram Agya Singh, AIR. 1968 Pat. 190,
192, para 10.
2. E.g.Emmanualy. Kamal, A..R. 1934 Pat. 670.


Consent

essential
ingredient.

Effect of
duress.

Effect of
fraud not
relating

to identity
or cere-
mony.

62

martiage void ab initio, and this must have remained
so after the Reformation, except that in case of certain
impediments, marriages became voidable, as for
example, marriages within prohibited degrees or in the
case of importence?.

6.16. Decided authorities in England establish that
consent is an essential ingredient of marriage, and that
its absence, howsoever brought about, makes the mar-
tiage void ab initio®-4-6,

6.17, So far as duress vitiating an otherwise valid
marriage is concerned it must be proved that the will
of the party complaining has been over-borne by
genuine.and reasonably held fear caused by the threat
of immediate danger, for which the party is not him-
self responsible, to life, limb or liberty, so that the
constraint destroys the reality of consent to ordinary
wedlock. Duress need not come from the opposit
partly*.

6.18. In relation to fraud, however, English courts
have taken a narrower view. In Moss v. Moss,” the
point directly in issue was whether the marriage was
vitiated by the wife's fraud in stating to the husband.
(in order to gain his consent to the marriage), that
she was not pregnant per alium, when, in fact, she
was. But in deciding this point, Sir Francis Jeune P.
also examined the effect of duress and fear, and held
that these factors which also caused “an absence of
consenting will”, likewise rendered the marriage void
ab initio; he held that fraud or error invalidated a

1. D. Tolstoy, “Void and Voidable Marriages”, (1964) 27 Modern
Law Review 385, 387.

2, D, Tolstoy, “Void and Voidable Marriages”, (1964)27 Modern
Law Review 385, 387.

3, Fulwoods’ case (1638) Cro . Car. 482, 488, 493, referred
to in Mass y. Moss, (1897) Probate 263,268.

4. Tarry ४. Browne, (1661) 1 Sid, 64, 65 ; see D. Tolstoy, “Void
and Yoidable Marriages”, (1964) 27 Modern Law Review

5. Harford. Morris, (1776) 2 Hag. Con. 423, 436 ; as explained
in Portsmouth ४. Portsmouth, (1828) 1 Hag. Feel. 355,

6. Szechter v. Szeckter, (1970) 3 All. E. R, 905, (Sir Jocelyn
Simon P) For comment, see 121 New Law Journal 160,

7. Moss v. Moss, (1897) Probate 263, 266, 267, 269,


63

marriage only if the petitioner was thereby deceived
as to the identity of the respondent, and, since the
petitioner (husband in that case) was deceived not
ag to the respondent’s identity but as to her pregnancy,
the marriage was valid.

6.18A. Fraud or mistake as to the ceremony made Fraud as
the marriage void’. For example, where there is a mony.
mistaken belief that the ceremony was one of betro-
thal and not of marriage, the marriage is void for
want of consent®, As Lord Guest has said’, “In a
void marriage, the decision depends upon the ascer-
tainment of a state of tacts instantly verifiable at the
date of the marriage, such as lack of capacity or of
the necessary consent or duress.”

6.19. We are of the view that having regard to Proper ap-
Indian conditions, the law should not be so narrowly proach.
confined as has been done in England*. No doubt,
scope should not be left for all kinds of flimsy excuses
for avoiding a marriage on the ground of fraud. But,
at the same time, serious injustice is likely to result
if fraud affecting vital matters (such as, absence of
@ particular disease) is totally disregarded. We do
not see.any reason in justice for forcing the parties
to hold on to a marriage when one of them has been
cheated by or on behalf of the other on cssential
matters, even if those matters do not pertain to the
ceremony or the identity of the party marrying. It
should be noted that as to the actual situation in Moss
v. Moss*, the legislature® had to intervene in England.

This shows that the test adopted there is not totally
‘satisfactory. ae a
न See Mehta १. Mehra, (1945) 2 All, E.R. 690.

2. Per Hodson J, : View approved by Evershed M. R. (1951)
Probate 124, 133 : passage quoted in Kassim v. Kassim,
(1962) Probate 224, 229.

> Ross-Smith v. Rass-Smith, (1963) A, C. 280, 248 (HL L.).

Para 6,18 and 6.18A, supra,
५ Mossy. Moss, (1897) Probate 263, Para 6.18, supra.

6. Present provision as to pre-marital preenacy is in section
126), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973,

as


64

om 6.20. In the light of the above discussion, we recom-
toamend mend that in section 12(1)(c) of the Hindu Marriage

हाल Act, in place of the word “fraud”, the words “or by
Hives” fraud ag to the nature of the ceremony or as to any

material fact or circumstance concerning the respon-
dent”, should be substituted.

a


हि .. CHAPTER 7
DIVORCE UNDER THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT

VAN ‘We deal in this chapter with certain important Inttodue-
questions ‘concerning divorce under the Hindu Mar-
riage Act!. The substantive provision on ‘this subject
is contained in ‘section 13. Before we deal with the
specific grounds for obtaining divorce, we think that
it would be useful to refer briefly to the position before
the: Act.

7.2, Divorce was not totally unknown to the Hin- Position
dus before the Hindu Marriage Act, Customary law, before the
in. many cases, recognised divorce. There were also
provincial enactments in force in some provinces,
which. permitted divorce in specific circumstances*.

In fact, even in the ancient texts, there is the often
cited revolutionary verse in Parasara?, which runs as
follows :—

“Anather husband is ordained for the woman in
five calamities, namely, when the husband is
lost, is dead, has become a Sanyasin, is im-
potent or has falen.”-5
This verse did not find acceptance, in its literal sense,
in judicial decisions which constituted the Anglo-
Hindu Law, and courts refused to recognise divorce
except on the basis of custom or specific legislation’.
Banerjee’: regards this text of Parasara as relating to
a very. primitive stage of the community when multi-
Plication was the main goal, or as evidence of a differ-
ence of opinion amongst the Hindu sages. There is
no doubt that, in general, the view taken was that
a marriage was regarded as indissoluble.

See also Chapter 2 for proposals of the Ministry of Law.
See, infra para 7.3.

Parasara TV, 30.

‘The Sanskrit word is “Patita’* (debased).

See also Para 1.19, supra.

Kudomeo V. Jotecram (1877) LL.R. 3 Cal. 305.

'. Banerji, Hindu Law of Marriages and Streedhana, page
128, 131.

जज

65


Legislation
in Native
States and
in the
provinces.

cance of
पका

Act.

General
approach,

66

7.3. Baroda was the first Indian State to introduce
divorce for all Hindus by legislation? in 1971. Divorce
was alowed ;to certain Hindus of Malabar? in 1933.
In 1946, divorce was introduced by Bombay. Madras
provided for divorce for Hindus in 1949, Saurashtra
passed 1७ “Hindu Divorce Act in 1952. There were
also enactments in force in Madras and Travancore
Cochin, providing for divorce for certain communi-
ties®.

7.4, The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, introduced
divorce— (i) for all Hindus ; (ii) throughout the ter-
ritories to which the Act extended ; and (7) on spe-
cifically enumerated grounds. It was, therefore, wider
in its scope than the pre-existing law, and, for that
reason, the legislature proceeded cautiously. Briefly
speaking, section 13 of the Act provides for divorce
on the ground of living in adultery, conversion, incur-
able insanity, virulent and incurable leprosy, veriereal
disease, renunciation of the world by entry into a re-
ligious order, not being heard of as being alive for
at Teast seven years, non-resumption of cohabitation
after judicial separation and non-restitution-of conjugal
rights after a decree for such rights. In addition, the
wife can petition for divorce on certain special
grounds.

7.5. We shall, in due course, discuss the amend-
ments required in respect of specific grounds of
divorce. But we may state, at the outset, that our
general approach in this regard has been that while
all reasonable efforts must be made to protect the
stability of the marriage, at the same time, if circum-
stances exist which show that conjugal life is impossi-
ble either by reason of a matrimonial offence or by
reason of a disease or other specified circumstances,
then the reality must be recognised, and provision
should be made for terminating the bond of marriage.

1, The Baroda Hindu Divorce Act, 1931, referred to in Report
of Hindu Law Committee (1947), page 27, Paras 109,110.

2. Madeas Act 21 of 1933.
3. Not enumerated here. .


9

7.6. Under section 13(1)(i) of the Hindu Mar- Section 13
tiage Act, “living in adultery”, is a ground for divorce. go )
This should be contrasted with “adultery”, which is adultery”
the ground: of divorce usually mentioned in legislation
in other countries and also in the Specjal Marriage
Act. ‘In India, Parliament in 1955 took the view: that
a single act of infidelity to the marriage bond should
not be a sufficient ground for relief by way of a decres
of divorce for a Hindu marriage, but should only be
@ ground for judicial separation. It is, therefore, at
present necessary that one of the parties to the mar-
tiage should be leading a continuous course of adul-
terous life1. The course of adulterous “living” is not
a matter of the past, but must be continuing at the
time of presentation of the petition.

7.7. In practice, however, it is difficult to establish
adulterous “living”. Apart from this, on principle, a
single act of adultery should, in our view, be enough.
In Indian conditions adultery is, in general, very
likely to impair. seriously the mutual confidence of the
parties, thereby rendering conjugal life difficult if not
impossible.

7.8. Both legally and morally, adultery has been re-
garded as the most serious matrimonial offence* in
other countries also.

7.9. to 7.11. It may, incidentally, be stated that
the words “living in adultery” in section 13(1) (i),
Hindu Marriage Act, seem to have been taken frora
section 488(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898, under which, a wife “living in adultery” could
be refused maintenance. In that section of the Code
those words have a relevance, because, if the wife is
living in adultery, she would be practically receiving
some kind of financial support from her partner in
adultery, and there is no economic hardship or possi-
bility of vagrancy if she is refused the aid of the
prompt .remedy under the Code, which is primarily

1. Subramaniyem V. Pennkshiainmal, AAR. 1958 Mys. 41.
2. Rajani V..Prabhakar, AR, 1958 Bom. 254.

3. See AV. A (1962) 2 All E.R. 573, 5775 (1962) 3 WALR.
213, 287 (Ormrod J.)

4, See now, the Code of 1974, section 12515).


Section
13@)Gii)
‘unsound:

ness of
mind —

Recom-
mendation.

68
aimed at pfeventing vagrancy. But it is, in our view,

inappropriate to adopt that test when we are dealing
with the grounds of divorce.

7.12, In the light of the above discussion, we
recommend that section 13(1) (i) of the Hindu Mar-
riage Act, should be revised so as to read as
follows: —

“(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage,
had voluntary sexual intercourse with any
person other than his or her spouse.”

7.13. Section 13(1) (iii) of the Hindu Marriage
Act deals with unsoundness of mind as a ground of
divorce, The requirement is that one of the spouses
should be incurably of unsound mind for a continuous
period of not less than three years. We are of the
view that the minimum period of three years, imposed
on the right to seek divorce, is not reasonable. Un-
soundness of mind, which is incurable, constitutes a
situation wherein the parties can be hardly expected
to share conjugal life together; and to insist on a
minimum period is to demand a sacrifice which is
unreasonable. The period should, therefore, be done
away with,

,7.14, At present, desertion is not a ground of
divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act. It is a
ground of judicial separation under section 10, but
this affords no practical relief, because, when one
party has deserted the other, the grant of judicial
separation merely enables the deserted party to obtain
a ruling from the court that, because of the unjusti-
fiable conduct of the deserter, the deserted party will
not be bound to cohabit with the deserter’.

7.15. The fundamental duty of the parties to a
marriage is to stay together, and to give each other
the warmth and support expected by the partners in
the marriage. If this warmth and support be denied,
the marriage falls in its substratum, and the situation

1. Sec section 10(2), H,M,A.


69

is an appropriate one for the grant of divorce—sib-
ject, of course, to the usual safeguards. It would, there-
fore, be appropriate if desertion for a specified period
say two years—is made a ground of divorce under
section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, by inserting
@ new clause for the purpose.

For this purpose, it will be convenient to adopt the
definition of “desertion” contained in the Explanation
to section 10(1) of the Act.

7.16. Accordingly, we recommend thet in section Recom
13(1), a new clause should be added as follows:—  ™*ndation.

“has deserted the petitioner for a period not less
than two years immediately preceding the
Presentation of the petition, or”

And the following Explanation should be inserted
at the end of section 13(1) :—

“Explanation.—In this section, the expression
“desertion” means the desertion of the
petitioner by the other party to the marriage
without reasonable cause and without the
consent or against the wish of such party,
and includes the wilful neglect of the peti-
tioner by the other party to the marriage,
and its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions shall be construed accordingly.”

7.17, We now consider a suggestion made to us, Section 13
to add a ground of divorce. There is, at present, no 294 wilful
separate provision for relief under the Hindu Marriage consum-
Act, where either party wilfully refuses to consummate mate tbe
the marriage. In some circumstances, such conduct हु
may amount to cruelty, but the suggestion was that
the nature of the behaviour is such that it should be
made a separate ground for divorce. Under the
Special Marriage Act, wilful refusal by the respon-
dent to consummate the marriage is a ground which
tenders the marriage voidable. This was the law, and
is the law, in England also®. But, on principle, it was

1. Section 256), Special Marriage Act, 1954.

2, Section 8, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1960; section 961) (४),
Matrimonial Causes Act, 1965; section 2(b), Nullity of
Marriage Act, 1971 and the fater 1973 Act.


70

stated, this is an incorrect approach. In general, a
marriage is regarded as void or voidable by reason of
some circumstances existing at the time of the
marriage. This is obvious from a study of the various
grounds which render the marriage voidable or
void?.

7.18. It may be mentioned that in England, Lord
Simon urged that wilful refusal should be a ground
for divorce,? though this suggestion was not accepted.

7.19, In England, wilful refusal of consummation
was made a ground et nullity in 1937, as had been
recommended by the Gorrel Commission of 1912*.

In 1955, the Archbishops’ Commission on Nullity re-
ported* as follows (---

“We cannot find any logic in a provision by which
a marriage, valid at the time it was made,
can be declared void ab initio as a result
of a subsequent event.”

The Archbishops’ Commission went on to recom~
mend that the provision should be repealed, and that
the following sub-section should be inserted at an
appropriate place.

“In any proceedings for nullity of marriage, the
Court may draw an inference of sexual in-
capacity at the time of the marriage from
evidence that the marriage has not been
consummated owing to the refusal of the
Respondent te consummate the marriage.”*

1. Sections 14-12, H.M.A.

2. House of Lords debates, Vot. 317, calumns 809 to 811.
3. Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937, section 71a).
4.
5

. Gorrell Commission (1912), Report (Cid. 6478), para 353.

| The Church and the Law of Nullity of Marriage (1955),
page 34, cited in Putting Asunder (S.P.C.K, 1964), page 36.

6. The Church and the Law of Nullity of Marriage, page 48,
cited in Puiting Asuader (1964), page 36.


या

7.20..The Morton Commission took a ‘similar view
of the logic of the provision, and stated:+

“To make this a statutory ground of nullity sug-
gests some confusion of thought. Nullity
should be granted for some defect or incapa-
city existing at the date of the marriage.
Wilful refusal is something that happens
after the marriage, and should therefore be
a ground for divorce.”

7.21, In the Commonwealth of Australia it is a
ground for divorce that “the other party to the
marriage has wilfully and persistently refused to con-
summate the marriage.”” ry

7.22. The suggestion before this Commission was
that the following should be added as a ground of
divorce in section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act:—

“that the marriage has not been consummated
owing to the wilful refusal of the respondent
to consummate it.”

Of course, “wilful refusal” connotes a settled and
definite decision, come to without just excuse’.

7,.23..We are, however, of the opinion that this
need not be a specific ground for divorce. Where
such conduct amounts to cruelty, it can be dealt with
under that head.

7.24, We have finished the grounds of © divorce,

and have now to deal with a point concerning relief. !

We propose to recommend a general provision to the
effect that where the relief desired is divorce the
court may (except in certain.cases) grant judicial
separation instead. The desirability of such a pro-
vision can be established even under the present
scheme, because, since the court has a discretion, or
rather a duty, to refuse the desired relief in certain

1. Morton Commission Report (Cmd. 9678), para. 89.
2, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1959 (Austr), section 28(c).

3. Horton V. Horton, (1947) 2 AME. R. 871, 874 (Lord
Jowitt, L.C).

Section
3A
(New).


72

circumstances, it should have the lesser power of
granting the milder relief. It would be convenient if
the court is given a discretion not to dismiss the pre~
ceedings in toto, but to grant a lesser relief instead.
Since we propose to recommend expansion of the
grounds of divorce,? and also propose to modify the
requirement as to the period for which 8 particular
ground of divorce should have been in existence,* we
think it is necessary that some such power should be
conferred on the court in express terms. ‘This dis-
cretion will be exercised where, in view of the special
circumstances of the case, the court is of the opinion
that in the interest of justice the marriage should not
be immediately dissolved. We do not propose to
confine thi8 discretion only to cases where the grant
of divorce is the alleged adultery of the respondent.
Guidance in the exercive of the discretion could, cf
course, be drawn from the decisions relating to exer-
cise of the discretion of the court where adultery is
a ground of divorce.

7.25. The new section could be inserted as section
13A, on the following lines, in the Hindu Marriage
Acti—

“173A. In any proceeding on a petition for a
decree of divorce, except where the. petition
is founded on the ground* mentioned in
clause (ii), clause (vi) or clause (vii) of
sub-section (1) of section 13, the court
may, if it considers it just to do so having
regard to the circumstances of the case,
pass instead a decree for judicial separa-
tion.”

1. Section 2301, H.M.A.
2. See discussion as to section 13 H.M.A. and cruelty.
3. See, for example, recommendation as to section 13 and

yenereal disease. (Hindu Marriage Act).
4. The references are to the existing clauscs.


CHAPTER 8

Jurisdiction and procedure under the Hindu
Marriage Act

8.1. We now proceed to consider several questions Introdve-
concerning jurisdiction and procedure under the Hindu ‘ory.
Marriage Act.1

Section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act is as follows:

“19, Every petition under this Act shall be Court to
presented to the district court within the wich
local limits of whose ordinary original civil should
jurisdiction the marriage was solemnized bemade
the husband and wife reside or last resided
together.”

" 8.2, We are of the view that this section is defec- Defects
tive in several respects. In the first place, it does not °f,!¢
take sufficient account of cases where one of the Section.
parties does not reside in India, or his whereabouts

are unknown, The place of sclemmnisation of marriage

or the last matrimonial home—two of the tests given

in the section—may not turn out to be satisfactory,
because both may have ceased to be of any impor-

tance to the parties, in these days of mobility of popu-

Jation. The place where the parties are both
residing—which is the third test—is inapplicable on

the facts. For such cases, a more satisfactory test
should be devised.

Courts have found a way out. Reading sections
19 and 21 of the Hindu Marriage Act and sections
3 and 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure together, the
Court (it has been held) will be justified in holding
that the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure
are also applicable? to application under the Hindu
Marriage Act, and the Court within whose jurisdic-

“TL. See also Chapter 2, for proposals of the Ministry of Law.

{a) Hariram Dhalumal Karamchandani vy. Jasoti, AAR.
1963 Bom. 176,

(9) M. Gomathi v. S. Natarajan, (1973) 1 M.L.J. 246.
73


74

tion the defendant is residing will have jurisdiction.
However, it is desirable to make the section com-
prehensive.

8.3. In the second place, the word “together” is
to be read only with the words “last resided”, and
that should be made clear. There are also a few
other points, which we shall explain in due course?.

8.4. We are, therefore, recommending a redraft®
of the section, The following explanatory comments
may be useful for understanding the salient points of
the revised section.

The following comments explain each head of
jurisdiction under the new section:

Clause (a)—See s. 19, H. M. A. and s, 31(1)
S. M. A.

Clause (b)—This head of jurisdiction is not found
(in that form) either in the Hindu
Marriage Act or in the Special
Marriage Act. It follows the princi-
ple behind section 20 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, under
which (inter alia), the defendant's
residence confers jurisdiction on the
court. Section 29(1) of the Parsi
Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936,
may also be compared. The defen-
dant cannot have any ground of com-
plaint by reason of this head of
jurisdiction. It will be more rational
than the present head of jurisdiction
relating to the place where “the
husband and the wife’ reside. There
is no reason why the law should
insist that both parties should reside
at the venue.

1. Para 8.5, infra,
2, Para 8.4, infra,
3. Pera 8.9, infra.


75

8.5, It may be noted that the words “together” (in

section 3, Divorce Act), do not go with the words

_ “husband and wife reside”, and the same would be

the position under the Hindu Marriage Act. Hence,

the present formula cannot be supported, even on the
basis of matrimonial home also.

An illustration will help to explain the matter:

Wheré the marriage was solemnised within the
jurisdiction of court ‘A’, and the parties last
resided together in the jurisdiction of court
*B’, but the husband now resides in the
jurisdiction of court ‘C’ and the wife now
resides in the jurisdiction of court ‘D’, the
case would not be satisfactorily covered by
the existing provision in the Special Marriage
Act or the Hindu Marriage Act, which
drives the parties to court A or court B
Such a case will be covered by proposed
clause (b), which authorises the filing of
a petition in the court within whose juris-
diction the respondent is residing. In the
absence of such a provision, the parties (in
the above illustration) have to go cither to
court A or B—even though neither of the
partics is staying there now.

8.6. Clause (c)—This is found in section 19 of
the Hinde Marriage Act and section 31(1) of the
Special Marriage Act.

_ Where the husband and wife are residing in the
same place at the time of presentation of the petition,
clause (b) will apply.

8.7 and 8.8. Clause (d)—-While Clause (a) to (०)
above will meet normal situations, there may be situa-
tions which are not covered by them.

Clause (d) takes care of one of them, and is new.
It is found (in a different form) in the Parsi Marriage
Act? .

1. See ALR, 1949 All 421 (reviews case law).
2. Section 29(3), Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936
7 M of Law]74-—6.


76
Recom: 8.9. In the light of the above discussion, we recom-
to amend ‘end that section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act
Section 19, should be revised as follows:—

Revised section 19, H. M. A.

“Every petition under this Act shall be presented
to the district court within the local limits
of whose ordinary original civil jurisdic-
tion—~-

(a) the marriage was solemnized, or

(b) the respondent is residing at the time of
the presentation of the petition, or

(c) the parties to the marriage last resided to-
gether, or

(d) the petitioner is residing at the time of the
presentation of the petition, provided the
respondent is, at that time, residing out-
side India, or has not been heard of for
seven years by those who would naturally
have heard of him if he were alive.”

कण 8.10. Section 20(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act

provides as follows:—

“20. (1) Every petition presented under this
Act shall state as distinctly as the nature of
the case permits the facts on which the
claim to relief is founded and shall also
state that there is no collusion between the
petitioner and the other party to the
marriage.”

As regards the “statement” zequired under the latter
half, decrees of nullity should be excluded.4 We re-
commend accordingly.

Section 8.11. and 8.12. In order to avoid multiplicity of
21A (New), proceedings and inconvenience to parties, and also to
enable one court in one proceeding to go into the

1, See discussion as to $. 23 H.M.A.


77

entire marital life of the parties, we recommend the
insertion of the following new section in the Hindu
Marriage Act.

Section 21A, (New)

“Where—

(a) a petition under this Act has been presen-
ted to the district court having jurisdic-
tion by a party to a marriage praying for
a decree for judicial separation or for
divorce on any of the grounds specified
jn sub-section (1) of section 10 or section
13, as the case may be, and

(b) thereafter, another petition under this Act
praying for a decree for judicial separa~
tion or of divorce has been presented by
the other party to the marriage on any
ground, whether in the same district: court
or in a different district court, in the same
State or a different State.

then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),—

(i) ifthe petitions are presented to the same .
district court, both the petitions shall be
tried and heard together by that district
court;

(ii) if the petitions are presented to different
district courts, both the petitions shall be
tried and heard together by the district
court in which the petition praying for a
decree for judicial separation or of divorce
was presented earlier; and, for this purpose,
the court competent under the Code of
Civil procedure, 1908, to transfer, to the
district court in which the petition presented
earlier is pending, the petition presented
Tater, shall exercise its power so to transfer
the petition.”

8.13. The need for amending the Hindu Marriage Section
Act and eliminating unnecessary and long waiting 218 (New?
periods laid down in respect of judicial separation and


mendation.

78

subsequent divorce has been emphasised by a Member
of Parliament, who has stated’—

“I know personally many young mea and women,
specially women, whose lives have been
ruined because of the law’s proverbially long
delays.”

8.14, Similar views have been expressed in sugges-
tions made by private individuals.

8.15. We are of the view that in order to expedite
the proceedings, the following provisions are required
(compare the provision in the clection law).? .

(i) A petition should be disposed of within six
months of service of notice.

(ii) An appeal should be disposed of within,
three months of service of notice.

8.16. The following new section is, accordingly,
recommended for insertion in the Hindu Marriage
Act:— .

“21B, (1) The trial of a petition under this Act
shall, so far as is practicable consistently
with the interests of justice in respect of the
trial, be continued from day to day until
its conclusion, unless the Court finds the
adjournment of the trial beyond the follow-
ing day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded.

(2) Every such petition shall be tried as ex-
peditiowsly as possible, and endeavour shail
be made to conclude the trial within six
months from the date on which notice of
the petition is served.

(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard
as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour
shall be made to conclude the hearing with-
in three months from the date on which
notice of the appeal is served.

“Tr Sugeestion dated 19th December, 1970 from Shri Madhu
Limaye, M.P.—Legislative Department file No. 14(4)68-Leg. 2.

2. ef. section 86(6) and (7), Representation of the People
“Act 1951,


79

8.16A. There is one other matter in respect of Section
which a provision can be usefully borrowed from the (New Docu.
election law. The Representation of the People Act mentary
has the following provison? as to documentary evi- पं पैदल)
dence:—

“93. Notwithstanding anything in any enactment
to the contrary, no docament shall be in-
admissible in evidence at the trial of an
election petition on the ground that it is
not duly stamped or registered.”

Since, in matrimonial proceedings, the court is re-
quired to play a role different from that in the trial of
an ordinary civil suit, such a provision would be use~
ful in the Hindu Marriage Act; it would facilitate subs-
tantial justice being done between the parties by
ascertainment of the truth.

§.16B. We, therefore, recommend that the follow- Recom
ing new section should be inserted in the Hindu ™"*Ho™
Marriage Act:—

“J1C. Notwithstanding anything in any enact-Documen-
ment to the contrary, no document shalt be "i Evie
inadmissible in evidence at the trial of & हु
petition under this Act on the ground that
it is not duly stamped or registered.”

8.17. We now note a suggestion made to us to Injunction
insert a new provision empowering the court to issue “revert
an injunction te prevent the removal of a child pend- of child.
ing disposal of the petition. In England, at any time
after filing a petition for divorce, and notwithstanding
that® the petition has not been served. the petitioner
may apply ex parte to a Judge for an injunction res-
training the respondent or any other person from

1. Section 93, Representation of the People Act, 195)
2. See para 1.21, Supra,
3 Divoree Rules : Rule 55; Rayden on Divorce (1967) page


Suggestion
not accept-
ed.

Section 22

Recom-
mendation.

80

removing any child of the family (i) out of the juris-
diction of the court, or (ii) out of the custody, care
or control of any person named in the application*,

8.18. The application is to be made in open court.
If an injunction is issucd, restraining any person from
removing a child out of the jurisdiction of the court,
notice should be given to the Passport Office that a
passport should not, without leave of the court, be
issued in respect of that child*.

Some such provision, it was suggested, would be
uscful in our Act.

8.19. We have considered the matter, but do not
8९० the need for a specific provision. We would
leave this matter to the inherent powers of the Court.
We think that Court has an inherent power to pass
such order.

8.20, Holding proceedings in camera and publica-
tion of such proceedings are matters governed by
section 22. We think that the holding of proceed-
ings in camera should be obligatory in ail matrimonial
cases, whether or not the parties so desire or the court
thinks it fit.

We are also of the view that the publication of such
proceedings should be prohibited, and permission for
publication should be granted only in respect of
judgment of High Courts.

8.21. We, therefore, recommend that section 22
should be revised as follows:

“99. (1) Every proceeding under this Act shall
be conducted in camera,. .and it shall
not be lawful for any person to print’ or
publish any matter in relation to any such

1. (a) Fabbri v. Fabbri, (1962) | AUE.R. 35; (1962) 1 W.L.R.1

(b) Romilly v. Romilly, (1962) Times, May 26th; for later
proceedings, see (1962) Times. July 34st; (1964) Prokate
22; (1963) 3 W.L.R. 732; Rayden on Divorce(1967)

page 707.
2, Practice Note (1963) 3 All E.R. ०6 (Direction No. 24).



शा

“proceeding, except a judgement of the High
Court printed or published with the previous
permission of the Court.

(2) If any person prints or publishes any maiter
in contravention of the provisions contained
in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thousand
tupees.”

8.21A. We have already recommended that? an Section
express exception removing the bar under section 23(1)(a)
23(1) (a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, should be made
where a marriage is sought to be avoided on the
ground of unsoundness of mind.

8.22. Section 23(1) (०) of the Hindu Marriage Act
Provides that the court shall decree relief under the
Act only if it is satisfied that “the petition is not
presented or prosccuted in collusion with the respon-
dent.” It is difficult to understand the applicability
of this provision in relation to a proceeding for setting
aside a void marriage under section. 11, under which
a miartiage can be set aside on the ground of polygamy,
prohibited degrees, or sapinda relationship. Na
matrimonial offence is involved here, and the only
questions of fact to be decided are questions concern-
ing the subsistence of a prior marriage or the existence
of the prohibited relationship. At the most, it can
be said that parties who wish to avoid their marriage:
may invent some set of facts to mislead the court that
such prior marriage or prohibited relationship existed.
This is very unlikely. On the other hand, where the
Parties discover that they are related within the pro-
hibited degrees, they would often like to act in co-
operation with each other. rather than in opposition
to each other. It may be noted that in England?, it
was expressly provided that “collusion shall not be 2
bar to the granting of a decree of nullity whether the
marriage took place, or the Proceedings were instituted,
before or after the commencement of this Act,”

1. Para 3.15 Supra.
2, Section 6(1), Nullity of Marriage Act, 1971. (Ene.),



Section
23(2)--
Recom-
mendation.

Section
23(3) (new).

82

We are of the view that a similar provision (as to
nullity) should be incorporated, and recommend that
section 23(1) should be amended accordingly.

8.23. Under section 23(2), before proceeding to
grant any relief under this Act, it is the duty of the
court to make every endeavour to bring about recon-
ciliation, in every case where it is possible to do so
“consistently with the nature and circumstances of the
case.” From the words which we have quoted, it would
appear that where relief is applied for on the ground
of conduct not dependent on fault but on some other
factor which is constituted by a disease or similar cir-
cumstance, an attempt at reconciliation would not be
obligatory. We think that it would be appropriate to
make this explicit, and, with this object, we would
like to exclude, from the mandatory provision in sec-
tion 23(2), cases where judicial separation or divarce
is applied for on the grounds mentioned in section
13(1), clauses (ii) to (vii) of the Act. We recom-
mend accordingly.

8.24. While section 23. sub-section (2). imposes
a duty on the court to effect reconciliation, it is silent
about the machinery for doing so. It is desirable that
for the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about
such reconciliation, the court, (if it thinks it just}
should have power to refer the matter to any person
(named by the parties in this behalf or nominated by
the court, if the parties fail to name any person). Such
person could report to the court as to whether a re-
conciliation can be, and has been, effected.

The following sub-section should be added in ser-
tion 23 to achieve this object :

(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bring-
ing about such reconciliation, the court
may, if the parties so desire or if the court
thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn
the proceeding for a reasonable period not
exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter
to any person named by the parties in this
behalf or to-any person nominated by the
court if the parties fail to name any person,


83

with directions to report to the court as to
whether a reconciliation can be and has
been, effected, and the court shall, in dis-
posing of the proceeding, have due Tegard
to the report.”
8.25. Section 25(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act Section
reads thus :

“25. (1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under
this Act may, at the time of passing any
decree or at any time subsequent thereto.
on application made to it for the purpose
by cither the wife or the husband, as the
case may be; order that the respondent shall,
while the applicant remains unmarried,
pay to the applicant for her or his mainte-
nance and support such gross sum or such
monthly or periodical sum for a term: not
exceeding the life of the applicant as, hav-
ing regard to the respondent’s own income
and other property, if any, the income and
other property of the applicant and the con-
duct of the parties, it may seem to the court
to be just, and any such payment may be
secured, if necessary, by a charge on the
immovable property of the respondent.”

8.26. This sub-section raises scveral questions. In
the first place, the condition that the applicant must
“remain unmarried” is not intelligible in the case of
a decree of judicial separation or a decree of restitu-
tion, because the parties to such 2 decree remain
“married”,

The Special Marriage Act has a provision for main-
tenance?, but it does not contain the above condition,

8.27. The above condition should, therefore be Recon
removed from sub-section (1) of section 25. The mendation
court has to revoke the order on re-martriage? under the condi- 7
section 25(3), and that is enough. ing rerare

_ thage.

व. Section 370), SMA.
2. See para 8.29, infra.


Recom-
mendation
to add

“cireum-
stances”
in section
2501).

84

8.28. We also recommend that the word “circum-
stances” should be added in sub-section (1), of sec-
tion 25 where it enumerates the considerations to be
borne in mind while deciding alimony. The considera-
tions to which the court is to have regard (as at pre-
sent enumerated) are pecuniary (income and pro-
perty) or moral (conduct), but there may be other
circumstances, e.g., the health of the party applying
for maintenance, or his or her age. This is, perhaps,
implicit, but can be made explicit by amending sec
tion 25(1).

8.29. There are two circumstances in which a court
is bound to rescind its order for permanent alimony
and maintenance under sub-section (3) of section 25.
The first is where the party in whose favour the order
is passed remarries, and the second is, where the party
does not remain chaste. The first case presents no
difficulty, but the second case does. The difficulty
arises in this way. Unchastity leads to cancellation of
the order, if the unchastity is subsequent to the dec-
ree. Therefore, unchastity before the decree has, in
some cases‘, been construed as disentitling the wife to
any maintenance under section 25. Thus, indirectly,
the mandatory provision as to subsequent unchastity
reflects on maintenance to a party being allowed
at all, where the party had been unchaste before the
decree.

8.30. Now, it may be noted that such a harsh
view is consistent neither with modern attitudes, nor
with ancient doctrine*, The Divoree Act* contains no
such limitation.

8.31. A decision of the Court of Appeal in Eng-
land—Clear v. Clear!,—is sometimes cited to support
the view that an adulterous wife is denied mainte-
nance. That decision, however, takes no such extreme

1. Rajugupatan ४. Rajannna, (1966) Kerala Law Times 891,
A.LR. 1967 Ker 181 (Vaidyalingam 1), cited with agreement
in Sardar Lal v. Vishoni. AAR. 1970 J. & K. 150.

2. For the Hindu Law, see Amar Kanta v. Sovena, ALR.
1960 Cal. 438,

3. Section 37, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.
4, Clear ४, Cleav (1958) 2 AIL E.R. 353, 35°

358(C, A).


85

view. In fact, the discussion in the judgment makes it
very clear that, (i) the matter is within the discre-
tion of the Court: (ii) the discretion is exercised on a
variety of factors; and (iii) the conduct of the parties
is onc of them. The case law referred to in that very
judgment brings out the wide discretion of the court.

8.32. Subsequent English cases do not take a sub-
stantially different view!. In Iversion’s casc*, Lately J.
made it abundantly clear. He said :---

“In practice, a wifé’s adultery may or may nat
disqualify her. from succeeding in her application tor
maintenance and may or may not reduce the amount
allotted. At one end of the scale her adultery may in-
deed disqualify her altogether. It may do so, for
example, where it broke up the marriage, where it 15
continuing and where she is being supported by her
paramour. At the other end of the scale, her adultery
will not disqualify her and may have little, if any, in-
fluence on the amount. Where (as in this case) a wife,
after doing all she can to persuade her deserting hus-
band to return to her and their children, in her lone-
liness lapses and commits two isolated acts of adul-
tery, I cannot believe that Parliament intended the
court in weighing ‘the conduct of the Partics’ to ad-
judge that such a wife should receive 10 niaintenance
or indeed that her maintenance should be reduced sub-
stantially, if at all. [ know of no support for such a
Proposition in the reported cases.”

In Spence ९, Spence*, a contention that by her sub
sequent adultery the wife forfeited right to mainte-
nance was rejected.

J. (a) Iverson v, Iverson, (1966) 1 All
1168, 11718 (Laiey J);

(b) Courtney v. Courteny, (1966) 1 All E.R, 53; (1966) 2
W.LLR. 524;

AR, 258: (1966) 2 W.L.R.

(c) Miller v. Miller, (1961) Probate 1; (1960) 3 AH E.R,
115;

(d) Medlicott v. Medlicott, (1962) 1 All E.R. 449; (1962) 1
W.L.R, 136, C.A, (Adultery by wife afier decree);

(e) M.V.M., (1962) 2 All E.R. 895; (1962) 1 W.L.R, a437
2, Inverson vy. Inverson, (1966) 1 All E.R. 258,
3. Spence v. Spence, v. (1964) 3 AIL E.R. 61.



Recom-
mendation,
regarding
section

25(3).

Section

278 New)
Properiy
presented

by parents
of other
party.

86

8.33. Apart from this, it appears to us that the
ends of justice would be sufficiently met if the court
is given a discretion, instead of being burdened with
a duty, to cancel the order for maintenance in case of
subsequent unchastity; and we recommend that sub-
section (3) of section 25 should be amended on the
above lines. It may be noted that such an amendment
will override the view taken by some of the High
Courts! that a woman once divorced on the ground of
proved unchastity should be “left to the resources of
her own immorality and should be refused the lawful
means of support by passing a decree for maintenance
in her favour.”

8.34. It has been stated? that blackmail often
plays its ugly part in litigation for matrimonial relicf.
It has been suggested that if it is laid down that what-
ever is given by the wife’s parcnts to the parties should
go to the wife, and vice versa, it will put an end of
blackmail in many cases.

Apart from this aspect of blackmail, it appears to
us that where the marriage comes to an end (or other
relief is granted under the Act) shortly after the
solemnization of the marriage, justice requires that the
court should have power to direct retum of the pro-
perty presented by the wife’s parents to the husband
or by the husband’s parents to the wife.

Broadly stated, our proposal, therefore, is this. If
the proceeding under this Act is instituted within six
months of the solemnization of the marriage, the
court should have power, if it considers it necessary
to do so in the circumstances of the case, to make
such provision in the decree as it deems just and pro-
per with respect to any property presented at or
about the time of marriage to either party by the
parent of the other party.

1. Sardari Lai v. Vishani, A.T.R. 1970 Jammu & Kashmir
150, 152, agreeing with Sachindra v. Bandmali, AAR. 1960
Cal, 438. .

2. Suggestion of Shri Vayallar Ravi, M.P., in Legis. Deptt.
Diary No. D. 1547/73-Leg. I dated 20-10-73.


87

For this purpose, “parent” will include a persoa
standing in the relationship of a parent, where the
parents are dead or out of India. “Property” should
not include articles which the court regards as of
trifling value.

8.35. We, therefore, recommend that the follow-Recom-
ing section should be inserted in the Hindu Marriage ™*ndation.
Act, for this purpose:—

“27. In any proceeding under this Act insti-
tuted within six months of the solemnization
of the marriage, the court may, if it considers
it necessary to do so in the ciccumstances 0:
the case, make such provisions in the decree
as it deems just and proper with respect ta
any property presented at or about the timc
of marriage to either party by a parent of
the other party.

Explanation.—In this section, —

(i) “parent” includes a person standing in the
relationship of parent, where the parents are
dead or out of India ;

(i) “property” does not include articles which
the court regards as of trifling value,”

8.36. Under section 28, so far as is material, “all Section
decrees and orders made by the Court in any proceed- 28.
ings under this Act... may be appealed from under

any law for the time being in force :

Provided that there shall be no appeal on the sub-
ject of cost only.”

A controversy arose in the past with reference to
this part of the section, the question being whether
this section itself confers a right of appeal, or whether
the reference to “any law for the time being in force”
implies that a right of appeal must be sought ia some
other law. As the language of the section is not very
clear on this point, and has been criticised judicially:

1, For an analysis of ord ५18 see para 8,38, infra.


Analysis
of

orders.

88

the matter requires examination, Almost all High
Courts now take the view that the right is conferred
by section 28, The case law on the subject is review-
ed. exhaustively in the Andhra Pradesh Full Bench
decision? and in a recent Bombay 08४८२,

8.37. It would appear that most of the remedies
conferred by the Hindu Marriage Act (to be pursued
by a petition) being of a special character, it would
be meaningless to expect that the right of appeal in
relation to orders under the Act would be available
in any other law. ‘The Code of Civil Procedurc® could
not have anticipated the subsequent passage of the
Hindu Marriage Act. The narrower view would roake
it difficult to apply section 28. Similar language is
used in the Indian Divorce Act‘, and the uniform in-
terpretation on that section is that Act itself creates
the right of appeal®. The Special Marriage Act*, uses
also similar language, and does not seem to have
been interpreted differently from the provision in the
Divorce Act. .

At the same time, it appears to us that an omnibus
right of appeal against orders is not necessary. and is
likely to delay the proceedings. Generally speaking, an
appeal against orders of an interim nature should be
exchided.

8.38. It may be noted that the Court is empowered
to pass orders under the following sections of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955:—

Section Nature of order

22 (0) Order to hold proceedings in camera and crder
with regard to printing or publishing of
such proceeding.

24, Maintenonce order pendente fite and expenses
of proceedings.

. Kutumbrao Vs. Sesharatnamamba, A.L.R. 1967, Andhra Pra-
desh, 323, 328 (Full Bench).

. Madhukar ¥ Maihi (April 1973) 75 Bom. L. R. 311 (9.8)
. Section 104 and Order 43, C.P.C.

. Section 55, Indian Divorce Act, 1969.

. A. ४. B. (1898) LL.R. 22 Bombay 612.

. Section 39, Special Marriage Act, 1954.

ayawy


89

265 0) Order for permanent बाज and imainte-
nonce at the time of the passing of any
decree or subsequent thereto.

25 (2) Verification, modification, or rescission of
any order made under sub-section (1).
25 (3) Rescission of the order in certain circumstances.
26 (i) Interim order with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of minor
children ;

Gi) provision in the decree itself for such
matters 4

(iii) the court may also revoke, suspend 0:
vary aay such orders and provisions pre-
viously made.

As can be seen from the above, the Court can
pass-orders which are either of a permanent or interim
nature,

8.39. Our proposal is that with respect of interim
orders under this Act, there should be no appeal.
Interim orders are only for a period of timz and
could, if necessary, be reviewed by the Court. Such
appeals usually lead to delay. In other words, appeals
should lie only in respect of decrees and orders of a
permanent nature.

Therefore, the appeal should (so far as orders
ate concerned) be restricted to :—

iy orders under section 25.

Gi) orders under section 26 which are perma-
nent and not interim. हु

8.40. In order to expedite the disposal of the litiga-
tion, we also recommend that the period of limitation
for appeals under the Act should be 30 days.

R41. Section 28 should, in so far as it relates to Recom-
appeal, be revised’ as under, in the light of tho above Tesdstion.
discussion :—

“28(1). All decrees made by the court in any
proceeding under this Act shall, subject to

i, Execution should be dealt with in a separate section.


(2)

(5

(4

)

)

90

the provisions of sub-section (3), ‘be appeal-
able as decrees of the court made in the
exercise of its original civil juzisdiction, and
such appeal shall lie to the court to which
appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of
the court given in the exercise of its original
civil jurisdiction.

Orders made by the court in any proceed-
ing under this Act under scction 25 or sec-
tion 26 shall, subject to the provisions of
sub-section (3) be appealable if they are
Not interim orders, and such appeal shall lic
to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie
from the decisions of the court given in
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.

There shall be no appeal under this section
on the subject of costs only.

Every appeal under this section shal! be in-
stituted within a period of thirty days from
the date of the decree or order”.

Section 28A should be inserted as follows to deal
with the enforcement of decrees and orders:—

“28A, All decrees and orders made by the court

in any proceeding under this Act shall be
enforced in the like manner as the decrees
and orders of the court made in the exercise
of its original civil jurisdiction for the time
being are enforced.”.


CHAPTER 9
Special Marriage Act.

9.1. Iu this Chapter, we shall deal with the amend- Introduc-
ments required in the provisions of the Special 77:
Marriage Act, 1954, in addition to those already
dealt! with in connection with the proposals of the
Ministry of Law.

The Special Marriage Act, 1954, occupies a signi-
ficant place in Indian statute law. While introducing
the Bill in the Lok Sabha. the then Law Minister.
“Shri C. C. Biswas, stated :—,

“Tt is an attempt to lay down a uniform territorial
law for the whole of India?”

From this point of view, the Act is of considerable
legal interest.

9.1A. The amendments which we are going to
Propose in this Chapter, broadly speaking, fall into one
or the other of the following categories :—

(a) amendments needed in order to introduce
uniformity where necessary and reasonable
between the provisions of the two Acts
covering ‘the same points. (either as they
exist at present, or as they are proposed
to be amended) ;

(b) amendments needed by way of additional
Provisions similar to the additional provi-
sions proposed to be inserted in the Hindu
Marriage Act;

(०) amendmeits. needed in other provisions of
the Act on the merits®,

“I. Chapter 2, supra.
2. Lok Sabha Debates (1954), Vol. 5, Part'IT, Col. 7797.
3. For example, sections 19 to 21, Special Marriage Act.

91
7 Mof Law/4—7


Section 19,
Special

Marriage
Act.

92

Tn so far as the Special Marriage Act deals with the
ceremonies of marriage and connected matters, the
provisions—as the very title of the Act indicates—are
of a specialised character, and the question of bring-
ing uniformity between the two Acts does not, in
gencral, arise. Nor have any suggestions been made
for amending those provisions on the merits, We
have, therefore, to concentrate on provisions connected
with the special consequences of the marriage and
matrimonial relief.

9.1B. Section 4 of the Special Marriage Act lays
down the Section 4B, conditions for  solemnizine
@ marriage under the Act. One of the conditions, as
stated in clause (9), is that “neither party is an idiut
or lunatic at the time of the marriage.” We have.
while discussing the corresponding provision of the
Hindu Marriage Act, recommended a re-draft!, and
we recommend that section 4(b) of the Special Mar-
tiage Act should also be revised on the same lines

» 9.2. Section 19 of the. Special Marriage Act. is as
follows :—

“The marriage solemnized under this Act of any
inember of an undivided family who pro-
fesses the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain reti-
gion shall be deemed io effect his severance
from such family.” .

This section corresponds to section 22 of the Spe-
cial Marriage Act, 1872, which was inserted in 1923,
and its principal object is to replace co-parcenary rights
and other rights concerning the Hindu undivided
family by a position under which the person marrying
will become a divided co-parcener. The — section
creates a statutory severance of a person married under
this Act from the joint family of which he might have
been till then a member. At the time when this sec~
tion originally came on the statute book (i.e. in 1923)
special marriages were rare, and the prejudice against
them supplied some cause for visiting such marriages

1, See recommendation as to section S(ii), H.M.A.



93

with the compulsory consequence of severance from.
the family. It appears that in the discussion on the
1923 Amendment to the Special Masriage Act, 1872
(then in force), this section occupied a prominent
place. Dr. Gour (who had sponsored the amendment

Act) says! :—

"The orthodox members of the Select Committee

had proposed this clause as a deterrent
against persons resorting to such martiages.
But the present writer accepted it as a happy
release from a continued union in which
embarrassing situation might be created by
the orthodox members of his family. contest-
ing his right in his property by survivorship
cor inheritance, in which casc the misfortunes
of the widows married under the amended
Act and their children would be aggravated
because of the persons marrying under the
amended Act having to declare that
they, professed the Hindu religion, and
since the fex loci is construed by the Privy
Council in a limited sense as noted under
that Act, a Hindu marrying under the Act
docs not stand to gain by continuing to re-
main a member of the co-parcenary. But
so far as his own rights are concerned, he
Temains entitled to all those rights of inberit-
ance to his other relations, near and remote
as if he had never married under the Act.”

9.3, We have also taken note of the

discussion Discussion

relating to the Bill which ted to the present Act. Thoin the
Joint Committee, in their report, note as follows as

regards the provisions of this section? :—

“Ciguse 19 (oid clause 18).—The Joint Comratt-

tee gave very anxious consideration to this
clause as that had been made the subject
of attack in many of the opinions received
on the ground that it penalises marriages

2. Joint Committee Report (on the Bitt which led to tie Act,
of 1954), cited in Chandbri Specie) Martiage act, page 65.


No deterent
regards.

Scheme pro-

posed as
regards
section 19.

94

under this law. After careful consideration
the Joint Committee have decided to retain
this clause in its original form, particularly
because it has the desirable effect of simpli-
fying the law of succession. Were the clause
to be omitted, the share of the joint family
property of a person marrying under this
law will necessarily have to devolve on the
survivors, which would mean that the daugh-
ters will be left out of account. Moreover,
one of the chief reasons why persons marry
under this law is that in case of intestate
succession, the Succession Act will apply
and it would be extremely inconvenient to
have different laws of succcssion applicable
to different types of property, Severance
from the joint family does uot, of course,
prevent the parties from reuniting if they
so desire.”

9.4. We have carefully considered the matter, and
we think that no “deterrent” is required against special
marriages. A provision of the nature contained in
section 19 is certainly not required where both the
parties are Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs or Jains.

So far as the desire to protect the ~ position of
daughters is concerned, the passing of the Hindu
Succession Act removes the difficulty. because they are
given the right to succeed under that Act, and, where
a female is alive!, property does not pass by survivor-
ship, but it passes by succession. Secondly, so far as
the desire to maintain one system of succession for
all properties is concerned, we are not disturbing that
principle, as we propose to exclude®, from section 21,
Special Marriage Act, marriages where both the parties
are Hindus.

9.5. The scheme which we have in mind is, in other
words, this—

(i) Where the persons marrying are Hindus,
Buddhists, Sikhs or Jains, the marriage

1. Section 6, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
2. Para 9.11, infra.


95

‘should, in no case, result in a severance of
status. The law otherwise applicable—ie.
the Hindu law—will continue to apply, both
as regards undivided property and as regards
divided property.

(1) Where, of the persons marrying, only one—-
the male coparcener—is a Hindu, and the
other spouse is a non-Hindu, the Indian Suc-
cession Act will continue to apply and there
will be severance also.

We are also aware that besides the two situations
mentioned above, there is a third situation, where
neither party is a Hindu. This could arise if the
Person marrying i.e. a Hindu Coparcener, has chang-
ed his religion before marriage. In such a situation,
section 19 does not, by its terms, apply. His “pre-
marriage” conversion may, of course, result in sever-
ance, apart from the statutory provision in section 19.

It may be noted that the embracing of Christianity
by a person effected a division of status. This was
the decision of-the Privy Council in Abraham v.
Abraham'. Here, section 19 is not of any relevance.

We are accordingly proposing a new section? to
override section 19 in cases where both the patties
are Hindus.

9.7, Section 20 of the Special Marriage Act runs§ection 20
as follows :— Marriage
Act,
“20. Subject to the provisions of scction 19, any

person whose marriage is solemnized under
this Act, shall have the same rights and shall
be subject to the same disabilities in tegard
to the right of succession to any property
as a person to whom the Caste Disabilities
Removal Act, 1850, applies.”

1. Abraham ०. Abraham, (1861-1963) 9 MLA. 195; 1 WR”
4:2 Sar. 10:1 Suther S01/(P.

2. 568 section 21A proposed. in para 9.12, infra



Effect of

conversion
on proprie-
tary rights.

96

9.8. It may be stated that the Caste Disabilities ctc.
Act, 1850 (referred- to in section 20), protects those
persons who—

(a) have renounced a religion ; or

(b) have been excluded from the communion of
any religion ; or

(c) have been deprived of ९8४९1.

As regards these three categories of persons, the
Act provides that “so much of any law or usage
as inflicts on any person forfeiture of
rights or property?, or may be held in any way 1o
impair or affect. any right of inheritance by reason
of his or her renouncing or having been exclided
from the communion cf. any religion, or being de-
prived of caste, shall cease to be enforced” in any
court of law.

9.9. But for the Act of 1850, conversion would
affect rights to property. In a very early Madras
3, for example, the plaintiff had renounced his
religion in the year 1839, and his mother sold a pro-
perty in the year. 1846; it was held that the plaintiff,
having lost his rights by his conversion, could not
sue to set aside the sale. (The 1850 Act, not having
retrospective effect, was inapplicable)‘.

The Act of 1850 abrogates the rule by which an
apostate (or a person deprived of caste) lost certain
rights"-*, The Act applies only to protect the actual
person, and not his children’.

1. For histroy of the 1850 Act, see Keery Kohitance v. Moni
Ram Koleta, (1873) 19 Suthern | and Weekly Reports 367.
378, 400.

2. There is some controversy as to whether the correct text is
“rights of property" or “rights or property”.

3. Case No. 99 of 4858 reported in Rulings of the Court of
Sudder Udalut, 1858 00 1862 (August), (Madras) at page
94 referred 10 in Ranganatha Malian v. Kathyayan (1966),
Kerala LJ. 73. 75.

4. Cf. Ranbir v. Joginder, ALR. 1940, Al 134, 140

5. Honamma v. Tinannuchal (1877) 1. LR. 1 Bom, 559.

6. For previous Regulations see Nowruz All v. Aziz का
(1876) 11 Punj. Record, Civil Judgment No. 124, pages 253,
255, 264, 265,

7. Mitar Sen v. Mukbul Hassam, AAR. 1930 ए, 0. 251, ST IA
313 (P.C.) (Lord Atkin).



97

‘The result of reading section 20 of the Special
Marriage Act, 1954 with the Caste Disabilities Remo-
val Act, 1850 is that a person does not, by reason
of his marriage under the Special Marriage Act, forfeit
his existing interest in the joint family property. oF
jose the right of inheritance to other members of the
family, whether sych right arises before or after the
marriage. But, the operation of section 19, (previ-
ously section 22) of the Special Marriage Act must
be bore in mind. By virtue of that section, the
right of survivorship is completely extinguished. and
there is a compulsory severance from the other mem-
bers. Even under the Special Marciage Act of 1872,
it was held? that—survivorship is not saved by the
Act of 1850, or by the Special Marriage Act. This
is now more clear, because section 20 is made subject
to section 19 (It was not so in the 1872 Act}.

9,10. This discussion becomes necessary because we Recom-

have to consider the question whether the amendment mendation.
which we recommend in section 192 (so as to restrict
its scope) necessitates any change in section 20. We
fave come to the conclusion that this in itself neces-
sitates no such change. Section 20 is subject to the
provisions of section 19, and that position will con-
tinue. Where section 19 as modified applies, there
will still be a severance of status; and that special
consequence of the martjage will override section 20.
But so much of section 20 as creates a disabilicy
should be excluded where both are Hindus. In such
cases, there is no justification for creating any disability.
We recommend accordingly’.

9.11, Under section 21 of the Special Marriage Act Special
(so far as is material). snecession to the property of riage.
the parties marrying under the Act and to the property “
of the issue of such marriage shall be regulated by
the Indian Succession Act, 1925, notwithstanding that
under that Act (i.e. under the Succession Act), there

1, 0 Girdharilel v. Fakirchand, AJR, 1955 Madhya Bhacat
448, 153, para 12.

(b) Swbdbapya v, Rangava, AIR. 1927 Mad, 883, para 12.
2. See recommendation as io section 19.
3. See section 21A (proposed), para 9.12, infra.


Recom-
mendation
for insert-

98

are certain restrictions with respect to its application
to members of certain communities. This section, of
course, does not alter the general family structure
between the person marrying under the Act and his
sont, It may, incidentally, be noted that when a
person is converted, succession to him is governed by
the law applicable in his religion?.

In our opinion, it is desirable to exclude from the
scope of this section cases where both the parties
are Hindus. In such cases, the law of succession
otherwise applicable should continue to apply. We
see no reason why the fact that the parties choose
to marry under the Special Marriage Act should make
a difference in such cases i.e. where both are Hindus.
We recommend? that such cases should be excluded
from section 21.

9.12. In the light of the above discussion’, we
recommend that section 21A should be inserted in

ing Section the Special Marriage Act as follows :— _

214.

Section 22,
‘Special
Marriage
Act,
(Restitu-
tion).

“21A. Where the marriage is solemnised under
this Act of any person who professes the
Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religion with
a person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist,
Sikh or Jain religion, sections 19 and 21
shall not apply and so much of section 20
as creates a disability shall also not apply.”

9.13. Section 22 of the Special Marriage Act deals
with the restitution of conjugal rights. Withdrawal
from society without reasonable excuse furnishes the
cause of action for claiming this relief. We are of
the view that it would be made clear that the burden
of proving reasonable excuse should be on the oppo-
site party®. We recommend that section 22 should
be amended accordingly.

1, Sridharan vy. CLT. ALR, 1970 Mad, 292, 294; (1970)
2 MLL. 334.

2. Mittar Sen v. Maghu!l Hasan, A.I.R, 1930, P. C. 251.

3, See section 21A, $.M.A. (proposed).

4, Section 12, Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
5, C.f. tecommendation as to section 9, H.M.A,


99

9.14, Section 24(1) of the Special Marriage Act Section
relates to proceedings for obtaining a decree of nullity “Speciat

of marriage. It does not contain an express jimita- M
tion. that the petition can only be filed by a party to
the marriage. This- should be mentioned’. Also,
it should be provided? that both the parties should
be alive when the petition is filed.

9.15. Section 27(1) (a) of the Special Marriage Act

farriage

Section

deals with adultery as a ground of divorce, This 27(1)(a),
ground should be re-formiulated on the lines® of the Special

corresponding ground as proposed in the Hindu 4.
Marriage Act.

Marriage

ct,

9.16, Under section 27(1) (b) of the Special Mar- Section
mage Act, desertion is a ground of divorce. The 270) 0)
SMA.

Tequirement has been thus stated :—

“(b) [the respondent] has deserted the petitioner
without cause for a period of at least. three
years immediately preceding the presenta-
tion of the petition ;”

We are of the view that the period should be two
years—the period which we have recemmended in
relation to the corresponding provision in the Hindu
Marriage Act‘, and we are also of the view that the
definition of “desertion” should be adopted from the
Hindu Marriage Act*.

Accordingly, we recommend that section 27(1) (b)
should be revised so as to read—~

“(b) has deserted the petitioner for a period of
not less than two years immediately pre-
ceding the presentation of the peti-ion”.

. Cf section 11, HMA.
C.f, recommendation as to section 11,QM.H.A.

. See recommendation as to section 13(1)0). Hind Marriage
Act; Para 7, 12, supra.

4. Cf. recommendation as to section 13, Hindu Marriage Act,
with reference to deseriion.

j. Section 100) Explanation, H.M.A.

fp oe

»


Section
21 0001५

100

And the following Explanation should be inserted at
the end of section 27 :—

“Explanation —In this section, the expression
“desertion” means the desertion of the peti-
tioner by the other party to the marriage
without feasonable cause and without the
consent or against the wish of such party,
and includes the wilful neglect of the peti-
tioner by the other party to the marriage,
and its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions shall be construed accordingly.”

9.17. Under section 27(1) (0) of the Special Mar-
it is a ground of ‘divorce that the respor-

“(c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment
for seven years or more for an offence as
defined in the Indian Penal Code (Act 45
of 1860) ; °

Provided that divorce shall not be granted on
this ground, unless the respondent has prior
to the presentation of the petition undergone
at least three years’ imprisonment out of the
said period of seven years”,

Imprisonment as a ground of divorce has a history. ©
From the Byzantine civil law, the Church’ accepted
certain grounds of divorce (high treason, disappear-
ance or desertion, and supervening impotance), and
tejected insanity, leprosy, long imprisonment?, and
incompatibility. This ground has found a place in
the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act},

We ate of the view that the proviso to the clause,
under which the respondent must have undergone at
least three years imprisonment. is uncalled for. The
proviso gives some time for reflection, but we think
that that should be left ta the parties. In on view,

1, Lever written by Archbishoa Germanos and printed as Ap-
pendix 1 to The Church and Marriage (19351, pp. 558, as
cited in Putting Asunder (London, 5.P.C.K. 1986) page 82.

2. Emphasis supplied.
3. Section 32if), Parsi Marriage & Divorce Act, 1936,



101

the proviso unreasonably delays institution of proceed-
ings, in a case where, if the innocent party has at all
any cause for seeking divorce, the waiting period serves
not much useful purpose. Cases where the sentence
is set aside or reduced (on appeal or otherwise) do
not also justify a statutory waiting period. In prac-
tice, it is unlikely that the aggrieved party will rush
to court when an appeal is pending. The proviso
should, therefore, be deleted.

9.18. One of the grounds of divorce mentioned in

Section

section 27 of the Special Marriage Act is that the 2!(I)(d).

tespondent has “since the solemnization of the mar-
riage treated the petitioner with cruelty.” This is in
clause (d). .

Jn conformity with our recommendation as to the
corresponding provision in Hindu Marriage Act, we
recommend that the words “since the svlemnization
of the marriage” should be deleted, as unnecessary}.

9.18A. Under Section 27(1)(e) of the Special Section
Marriage Act, a petition for divorce can be filed on 4 (0-

the ground that the respondent “has been incurably
of unsound mind for a continuous period of not less
than three years immediately preceding the presen-
tation of the petition.” In conformity with the change
which we have recommended? in the corresponding
provision in the Hindu Marriage Act, the minimam
period for which the insanity should have continued
should be removed. The clause should, therefore,
read—

oe * sys
“(e) is incurably of unsound mind”.

9.19. Section 27(1) (f) of the Special Marriage Act
allows a petition for divorce to be presented on the
ground that the petitioner has, for a period of not
less than three years immediately preceding the pre-
sentation of the petition, been suffering from venercal
discase in a communicable form, the disease not hav-
ing been contracted from the petitioner. In conformity

1. Cf. discussion as to section 10 and section 2.13, Hindu M:
age Act, with reference to cruelty and insanity.

2. Sce discussion as to section 13, H.M.A.

Section
27601) (0).


Section
27008).

Section 27,
Recom-
mendation.
to and
new
ground.

Section
(New).

102

with our recommendation as to the corresponding pre-
vision’, in the Hindu Marriage Act, we recommend
that from section 27(1)(f) of the Special Marriage
Act, (i) the period should be removed, and (ii) the
requirement that the disease should not have been
contracted from the petitioner, should also be removed.

9.20. Under section 27(1) (8) of the Special Mar-
riage Act leprosy is a ground of divorce if the respon-
dent “has for a period of not less than three years
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition
has been suffering from leprosy, the disease not having
been contracted from the petitioner.

In conformity ‘with our recommendation as to? the
corresponding provision in the Hindu Marriage Act,
we recommend that the period should be removed.
The clause should, therefore, be revised so as to read
as follows: —

“has been suffering from leprosy, the disease
not having been contracted from the peli-
tioner; or”

921. Non-resumption of cohabitation after an
order for maintenance should be added as a ground
for divorce (by the wife) in section 27 of the Special
Marriage Act, on the lines of the corresponding pro-
vision recommended? in the Hindu § Marriage Act.
We recommend accordingly.

9.22. On the lines of the new section which we
propose in the Hindu Marriage Act', a new section
should be inserted as follows, in the Special Marriage
Act also:—

“in any proceeding on a petition for a decree
of ,divorce except where the petition is
found on the ground mentioned in clause

1, See discussion as to section 13, Hindu Marriage Act, with re-
ference to venereal disease.

2. See recommendation as to section 13, Hindu Marriage act,
with reference to leprosy.

3, of. discussion as to section 13(2), Hindu Marriage Act.

4, of. section 13A, proposed to be inserted in Hindu Marriage
Act.



103

“(h) of sub-section (1) of section 27, the
Court, may, if it considers it just to do so
having regard to the circumstances of the
ease, pass instead a decree for judicial
separation.”

9.23, Section 29 of the Special Marriage Act, (re-
lating to the remarriage of divorced persons) should 29.
be deleted, as we have already? recommended.

9.24. Section 30 of the Special Marriage Act deals section
with remarriage after divorce. As already recom-3%
mended,? in this section the period of one year
should be deleted.

9.25. Section 31(1) of the Special Marriage Act Section
deals with venue, and should be revised on the lines 34).
of the corresponding provision? in the Hindu Marri-
age Act, as proposed to be revised.

9.26. Section 33 of the Special Marriage Act re-
Jates to proceedings being held in camera. वी. should Section
be brought into line with the corresponding provision
in the Hindu Marriage Act, as amended in accord-
ance with our recommendation.*

9,264. Section 34(1)(b) of the Special Marriage section
Act refers to ‘adultery’, As we have recommended Go.
a re-formulation of this ground of divorce,® the rele-
vant words in section 34(1) (0) should also be suit-
ably amended

9.27. Section 34(2) of the Special Marriage Act, Section
dealing with reconciliation, should be brought into 34(2) and
line with the recommendation made by us as to the 3415)
corresponding provision® in the Hindu Marriage Act.

Also, a new sub-section should be inserted, te em-
power the court to seek the help of a third party in

3, Para 2,46(0).

2. Para 2,466).

3, See recommendation as to section 19, H.M.A.

4, See recommendation as to section 22, H.M.A.

5. See recommendation as to section 27019), S.M.A., Para

9.45, supra.
6 See recommendation as to section 23(2), Hindu Marriage
ct.



Section
35.

Section
3703).

Section 39.

104

jts endeavour at reconciliation, on the lines of the
new sub-section, proposed! in the corresponding pro-
vision in the Hindu Marriage Act.

9.28. Section 35 of the Special Marriage Act (re-
lief to the respondent), should be re-drafted on the
lines of the new provision? on the same subject which
we have recommended in the Hindu Marriage Act.

9.29, Section 37(3) of the Special Marriage Act
provides as follows:—~

(3) If the district caurt is satisfied that the
wife in whose favour an order has been
made under this section has remarried ot
is not leading a chaste life, it shall rescind
the order.”

This sub-section should be revised so as to sub-
stitute a discretion in case of unchastity. In this
connection, our recommendation as to the corres-
ponding provision® in the Hindu Marriage Act may
‘be seen.

In section 37(1) “circumstances” should be. add-
edt

9,30. Section 39. of the Special Marriage Act,
reads: —

“Al dectees and orders made by the court in
any proceeding under Chapter ए or Chap-
ter VI shall be enforced in hke manner as
the decrees and orders of the court made
in the exercise of its original civil juris-
diction ate enforced and may be appealed
from under the Jaw for the time being in-
force:

Provided that every such appeal shall be insti-
tuted within a period of ninety days from
the date of the decree or order.”

7, See recommendation as to section 23(3)(New), Hindu Marri-
age Act.

2, Section 23A, HLM.A, (proposed).

3, See recommendation as to section 25(3), Hindu Marriage
te

4, of, section 250), Hiodu Marriage Act as proposed.


105

This provision is in Pari materia with section 28
of the Hindu Marriage Act. The words in the Hindu
Marriage Act are “may be appealed from under any
law for the time being inforce”. In the Special
Marriage Act, the word used is ‘the’ instead of ‘any’.
But there is no substantial difference in the language
of the two provisions.* .

Under the Hindu Marriage Act®, an appeal lies
against an interim order passed under section 24 of
the Act, and similarly, it has been held? that an ap-
peal lies against an interim order under section 36,
Special Marriage Act. The language of the section
is, thus, defective, inasmuch the same controversy
could arise under this section as has arisen under the
corresponding section in the Hindu Marriage Act. It
should, therefore, be revised on the lines of the sec-
tion in the Hindu Marriage Act, as proposed to be
amended'.

9.31.-The section in the Special Marriage Act docs
not exclude appeal on the point of costs—a limita-
tion which is found in the Hindu Marriage Act*, and
which should be incorporated in the Special Marriage
Act also.

9.32. The section in the Special Marriage Act has
a proviso laying down a period of limitation of
ninety days. This should be reduced to 30 days’.

9.33. We, therefore, recommend that section 39
of the Special Marriage Act should, in so far as it
relates to appeal, be revised as follows:—

“39(1)7 All decrees madc by the court in any
proceeding under this Act shall subject to

1, See Maharaj Singh v. Uma Singh, A.T.R, 1169 All, 603, 604
2, Smt. Sarla Devi v. Sri Balwan Singh, A.L.R. 1969 All 601.
3, Maharaj Singh v. Uma Singh, A.LR, 1969 ZAIL 603, 604.
4, See discussion as to section 28, Hindu Marriage Act.

5, Section 28, H.M.A.

6, Sce discussion as to section 28, Hindu Marriage Act.

7, Execution should be dealt with in separate section.

Recom-
mendation,


106

the provisions of sub-section (3), be ap-
pealable as decrees of the court made in the
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction,
and such appeal shall lie to the court to
which appeals ordinarily lie from the deci-
sions. of the court given in the exercise of
its original civil jurisdiction.

“(2) Orders made by the court in any proceed-
ing under this Act under section 37 or
section 38 shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (2), be appealable if they
are not interim orders, and such, appeal
shall lie ta the court to which appeals ordi-
narily lie from the decisions of the court
given in the exercise of its original civil
jurisdiction.

(3) There shall be no appeal under this section
on the subject of costs only.

(4) Every appeal under this section shalt be in-
stituted within a period of thirty days from
the date of the decree or order.”

9.34. A new section to the effect that petitions bet-
ween same parties shall be tried together should be
inserted in the Special Marriage Act, on the lines of
the corresponding provisions? recommended in the
Hindu Marriage Act. .

9.35. On the lines of our recommendation as to
Hindu Marriage Act a new section should be inserted
in the Special Marriage Act to provide that—

(i) petitions under the Act should be disposed
of within 6 months, and

Gi) appeals should be disposed of within 3
months on the lines of the corresponding
provisions proposed to be inserted in the
Hindu Marriage 4०९,

1, of. section 21A, H.MLA. (proposed).

2, See section 218, proposed to be insected in the Hindu Matri-
age Act.


107

9.36. A new section as to documentary evidence Section
should be inserted in the Special Marriage Act, of (Docu.
the lines of the corresponding provision proposed in mentary
the Hindu Marriage Act’. evidence!

1. ef. section 21-C, H.M.A. (as proposed).
1s 4AMof 1.3 & CAIND'76


Section
S(ii),
HMA.

Section

S(iii) and

S(vi),
LMA.

Section
901),
HLM.A.

Section
9(2),
HLM.A.

Section
10(1) (3),
HM.A.
Gudicial
separa-
tion—
venereal
disease).

CHAPTER 10
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND
CONCLUSIONS

Our recommendations and conclusions are sum-
marised below: —

HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955

Section 5(ii), E.M.A. relating to lunacy or idiocy
at the time of marriage. should be amplified and re-
vised as recommended?.

The suggestion made with reference to section
S(iii) and 5(vi) of the Hindu Marriage Act that the
breach of the condition as to minimum age under the
Hindu Marriage Act should render the marriage
voidable, is not accepted?.

With reference to section 9(1), Hindu Marriage
Act the burden of proof of reasonable excuse for the
withdrawal of society should be on the respondent
to a petition for restitution of conjugal rights*.

Section 9(2), Hindu Marriage Act which restricts
the defences to a petition for restitution of conjugal
tights, should be deleted*.

Cruelty simpliciter should be a ground for judicial
separation, under the Hindu Marriage Act®.

See below, under section 1301) 09), Hindu
Marriage Act.

1. Para 3.19.
2, Para 3.23,
3. Para 4.12.
4, Para 4.9
5. Para 2.2.

108


109

Section 10(1) should be revised, so as to refer Section
to section 13(1)7, 10(1).

(i) The proposal to remove the words “on the Section 11,
petition of either party” from section 11, H-M.A.
Hindu Martiage Act, is not approved?.

(ii) It may be expressly provided that after the
death of a party, a petition under section
11, Hindu Marriage Act, cannot be filed.

The condition as to imoptence in section 12(1) 2,
(a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, should be re-drafted, प्र
so as to lay down that the marriage has not been
consummated owing to the impotence of the res-

pondent!.

In place of the word “fraud” in section 12(1) (०), section
Hindu Marriage Act, the words “or by fraud as to पा
the nature of the ceremony or as to any material fact :
or circumstance concerning the respondent”, should
be substituted®.

The suggestion that pre-marital pregnancy should section
be made a ground of divorce by the innocent wife of 12(1) (१),
the guilty husband who had intercourse (leading to /+M.A-
such pregnancy) with another woman, is not accep-

ted’,
In section 12(2) (b) (iii), of the Hindu Marriage section
Act, for the words— Ow)
iti),
HLM.A,

“the ground of the decree” the words “said
ground” may be substituted’.

1, Para 5.2,
2, Para 2.7.
3. Para 6.2.
4. Para 6.3.
5. Para 6.20.
6, Para 6.7.

. Para 2. 7A.
7M of Law/74—-9


Section
13(12 0),
H.M.A.

Section 15
(1) Git),
HLM.A,
(Unsound-
ness of
mind as a
ground of
divorce).

Section 13
(1) (४),
HMA.
C¥enereal
disease as
a ground
of
divorce).
Section
1361),
HMA.

Section
13(1),
HLM.A.

110

Section 13(1)(i), Hindy Marriage Act (living in
adultery as a ground of divorce) should be revised
so 3६ to read as follows: —

“Gi has, after the solemnization of the masti-
age, had voluntary sexual intercourse with
any person other than his or her spense’”

The minimum period of three years, imposed on
the right to seek divorce, should be done away with-
in section 13 (1) (iii), Hindu Marriage 207,

The proposal to add a restriction that the venereal
disease was not contracted from Lhe petitioner, is not
accepted, In. section 40£1)(d) —(Judicial  separa-
tion) alsa, this restriction should be removed".

The fact that the respondent has treated the peti-
tioner with cruelty should be a ground for divorce,
in the Hindu Marriage Act‘.

(i) In section 13(1), Hindu Marriage Act a new
clause should be added as follows:—

“has deserted the petitioner for a period not
Jess than two years immediately preceding
the presentation of the petition, or”

(ii) The following Explanation should be inserted
at the end of section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage
Act.

“Explanction—In this section, the expression
“desertion” means the desertion of the peti-
tioner by the other party to the marriage
without reasonable cause and without the
consent or against the wish of such party,
and includes the wilful neglect of the peti-
lioner by the other party to the marriage,

» Para 7.42,
. Para 7,73,
. Para 2.10.
Para 2.17.

who!

-


111

“and ils gramatical variations and cognate
expressions shall be construed accord-
ingly?”,

The suggestion to add. as a ground of — divorce
under the Hindu Marriage ‘Act, wilful refusal to con-
summatc a marriage, is not accepted?.

In section 13(1A), Hindu Marriage Act, the 89
period should be reduced from two years to one HMA.”

year®,

In section 13(2), Hindu Marriage Act, provision Section
for divorce at the instance of the wife after obtaining Bas
a decree or order for maintenance should be inserted

on the lines recommended*

A new section should be inserted in the Hindu Ssetion
Marriage Act to empower the court, in any proceed- HM.a.
ing on a petition for a decree of divorce, to pass in-
stead a decree for judicial separation, in certain
cases*,

Section 14, Hindu Marriage Act should be delet- Section 14,
00० HLMLA,

. (Bar
against
divorce
within first
three years

of mar-
riage).
The proviso to 5. 15, Hindu Marriage Act should section 15,
४] iG ELMLA,
be deleted’. {Prohibi-
lion against
Te-marriage
‘within one
year),
1, Para 7.16,
2, Para 7,22 and 7.23.
3, Para 2.18,
4. Para?
5. Para 7.24 and 7.25,
6, Para 2.31

7. Para 2.32.


Section

16, H.M.A.
(Legiti-
macy of
children).

Section
19, HLM.A.

Section
214
(New)
HMA.

112

Section 16, Hindu Marriage Act, may be re-cast
as recommended?.

Section 19, Hindu Marriage Act should be revised
as under:—

“Byery petition under this Act shall be presen-
ted to the district court within the local
limits of whose ordinary original civil juris-
diction—

(a) the marriage was solemnized, or

(b) the respondent is residing at the time of
the presentation of the petition, or

(c) the parties to the marriage last resided
together, or

(d) the petitioner is residing at the time of
the presentation of the petition. provided
the respondent is, at that time, residing
outside India, or has not been heard of
for seven years by those who would
naturally have heard of him, if he were

alive?.”

In order to avoid multiplicity of proceedings and
inconvenience to parties, and also to cnable one
court in one proceeding to go into the entire marital
life of the parties, the insertion of the following new
section in the Hindu Marriage Act is recommended®.

Section 21A (New)
Where-—

(a) a petition under this Act has been presented
to the district court having jurisdiction by a party to
a marriage praying for a decree for judicial separa-
tion or of divorce on any of the grounds specified
in sub-section (1) of section 10 or sub-section (1)
of section 13, as the case may be, and

T. Para 2.42.
2, Para 8.9
3, Para 8.12.


113

(b) thereafter, another petition under this Act
praying for a decree for judicial separation or of
divorce has been presented by the other party to the

marriage

on any ground, whether in the same dis-

trict court or in a different district court in the same
or a different State. then subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2),—-

(i) if the petitions are presented to the ‘same

Gi)

district court, both the petitions shall be
tried and heard together by that. district
court 5

if the petitions are presented to different
district courts, both the petitions shall be
tried and heard together by the district

‘court in which the petition praying for a

decree for judicial separation or of divorce
was presented earlier; and, for this purpose,
the court competent under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, to transfer to the
district court in which the petition presen-
ted earlier is pending, the petition presen-
ted later, shall exercise its power so to
transfer the petition”.

The following new section should be inserted ip
the Hindu Marriage Act:

“21B (1). The trial of a petition under the Act

(2)

shall, so far as is practicable consistently
with the interests of justice in respect of the
trial, be continued from day to day until its
conclusion, unless the Court finds the ad-
journment of the trial beyond the follow-
ing day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded.

Every such petition shall be tried as expe-
ditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made to conclude the trial within six
months from the date on which the notice
of the petition is served on the respondent.

Section
218,

1 है
(New).


Section
21.C,

(New)

Suggestion
as to
power to
issue in-
junction.
Section.

22, MA.

Section
23(1) (a),
HMA.

114

(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard
as expeditiqusly as possible, and endeavour
shall be made to conclude“the hearing with-
in three months from the date on which
the notice of the appeal is served on the
respondent.”?

The following new section should be inserted in
the Hindu Marriage Act?:

“21C. Notwithstanding anything in any enact-
ment to the contrary, no document shall be
inadmissible in evidence at the trial of a
petition under this Act on the ground that
it is not duly stamped or registered”.

The suggestion to insert a new section authorising
the court to issue an injunction to prevent the re-
moval of a child from India is not accepted.®

Section 22 of the Hindu Marriage Act should be
revised as follows:—

“22. (1) Every proceeding under this Act shall
be conducted in camera......... and it shall
not be lawful for any person to print or
publish any matter in relation to any such
proceeding, except a judgement of the High
Court printed or published with the pre-
vious permission of the court.

(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter
in contravention of the provisions contained
in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thou-
sand rupees.”*

In regard to s. 23(1) (9), Hindu Marriage Act, an

“express exception removing the bar under s. 23-

(1){a) should be made where a marriage is sought
to be avoided on the ground of unsoundness of
mind.5

1. Para 8.16.

2. Para 8.16B,

3, Para 8.19,

4, Para 8.21.

5. Para 3.15 and 8.21A.


Sanaa seine

115

In regard to s. 23(1) (०), Hindu Marriage Act, Section
collusion should not be a bar in a petitions for nullity BCI Ce)
under the Hindu Marriage Act.t

From the mandatory provision, (for reconciliation) Section
in section 23(2), Hindu Marriage Act cases where 23Q),
judicial separation or divorce is applied for on the
grounds mentioned in section 13(1), clauses (ii) to
(vii) of the Act, should be exchided.?

A sub-section should be added in section 23, Section
‘Hindu Marriage Act’ empowering the court to seck RG):
the help of a third party in its endeavours at reconci- H.M.A.

Jiation.?

Provision for counter claim should ‘be inserted in Ssetion
the Hindu Marriage Act, as recommended.* Facey
HLM.A.,

Section 25(1)—-The condition about the party re Section
maining unmarried is inappropriate in regard to pro- 25(1), and
ceedings for judicial separation and restitution. It
should be totally removed.5

The word “circumstances” should be added.®

Section 25(3)—A discretion to the court should
be substituted in place of the present duty to cancel
the order of maintenance in case of subsequent un-
chastity.

The following new section should be inserted in Section

the Hindu Marriage Act.§ (New).
HLM.A.
“274. In any proceeding under this Act, insti-
tuted within six months of the solemniza-
tion of the marriage, the court may, if it

|. Para 8.22.
. Para 8.23,
|. Para 8.24,
Para 8.45,
Para 8.27.
Para 8.28,
Para 8,33.
. Pata 8.35,


Section 28,
HMA.

116

considers it necessary to do so in the
circumstances of the case, make such pro-
vision in the decree as it deems just and
proper with respect to any property pfe-
sented at or about the time of marriage to
cither party by a parent of the other
party.
Explanation. —1n this section,—
(i) “parent” includes a person standing in the

relationship of a parent, where the parents
are dead or out of India;

(ii) “property” does not inchide articles which
the court regards as of trifling value.

Section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act should, in
so far as it relates to appeal, be revised? as under,
in the light of the above discussion?:—

“28, (1) All decrees made by the court in any pro-
ceeding under this Act shall, subject to the provisions
of sub-section (3), be appealable as decrees of the
court made in the exercise of its original civil juris-
diction, and such appeal shall lie to the court to which
appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court
given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.

(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding
under this Act under section 25 or section 26 shall,
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be appeal-
able if they not interim orders, and such appeal shalt
lic to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from
the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its
original civil jurisdiction.

(3) There shall be no appeal uader this section on
the subject of costs only.

(4) Byery appeal under this section shall be insti-
tuted within a period of thirty days from the date
of the degree or order”.

1, Execution should be dealt with in separate section.
2 Para 8.41.


117

Section 28A should be inserted as follows in the Section
Hindu Marriage Act to deal with the enforcement of E444.
decrees and orders".

284, “28A. All decrees and orders made by the
court in any proceeding under this Act shall be en-
forced in the fike manner as the decrees and orders
of the court made in the exercise of its original civil
jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.”

SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954

The definition of “district court” in the Special Section
Marriage Act may be revised on the lines of the cor- 77 # पु
responding definition in the Hindu Marriage Act. es

Section 4) Of the Special Marriage Act should Seption
‘be revised on the same fines as 5. 6 (7), Hindu Mar- sv4—
riage Act. Idiocy or

दि Yunacy.

As to sections 19, 20 and 21, §.M.A. an exception S$. 19 to 21,
should be made by inserting s. 21A as recommended, SMA A
to exclude marriages where both parties are Hindus (New)
ete.*

The burden of proving reasonable excuse for with- Section 22,
drawal from society should be on the respondent to MAL
a petition for restitution under section 22, Special
Marriage Act’,

Section 24(1) of the Special Marriage Act, which Sectioa
relates to proceedings for obtaining a decree of nullity au pe
in respect of void marriages, should be confined to
‘cases where either party makes such a petition, and
both are living".

Section 26, Special Marriage Act (Legitimacy of Section 26,
children) should be revised on the lines of the cor- SMA.
responding section—section 16, Hindu Marriage
Act,.-as recommended to be revised in this Report’.

1. Para 8.41
Para 2 .46(8)
, Para 9, 18.
Para 9.2 (0 9. 12,
. Para 9.13.
५ Poza 9.14,
. Para 2.46 (b).

Naa aw


118

Section The clause regarding adultery as a ground of

21000: divorce-—section 27(1)(a)—should be re-formulated

(adultery), in terms of the clause regarding adultery in section
13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, as recommended
to be revised’.

Section In regard to desertion as a ground of divorce under

- 370). the $.M.A., the period should be reduced from 3

(Desertion) years to 2 years, and “desertion” should be defined
as in s, 10(1) Explanation, Hindu Marriage Act’.

Section The proviso to 5. 27(1) (०), Special Marriage Act,
27). requiring that imprisonment for at least 3 years should
ता have been undergone, should be deleted*.

Section The words “since the solemnization of the marriage”
88200: should be removed from s. 27(1) (9), Special Marri-
us age Act which deals with cruelty as a ground of di-

vorce*,

Section In section 27(1) (9) of the Special Marriage Act,

8४2५0: the requirement of minimum period for which the
unsoundness of mind should have lasted, should be
deleted’.

Section In section 27(1)(£), Special Marriage Act, the

2700 period should be removed, as also the requirement
Venereal that the disease should not have been contracted from

Disease. the petitioner®.

Section The period should be removed from s. 27(1) (9):
270) @), of the Special Marriage Act’.

(Leprosy). . पक्ष)
Section Non-resumption of cohabitation after a decree or
27, an order for separate maintenance: should be added
S.MLA. rn * ५, .
(New as a ground of divorce in the Special Marriage Act.
ground to
“be added). . _ _
हे 1, Para 9,158.

2. Para 9.16.

3, Para 9.17.

4, Para 9.18,

5, Para 9.18A.

6, Para 9.19 .

7, Para 9.20.


119

on the lines s. 13(2), Hindu Marriage Act as recom-
mended to be revised in this Report. The ground
should be available only to the wife.

A new section should be inserted in the Special Section
पु . C 2754 2
Marriage Act for empowering the Court to grant sepa- SMA. £
tation in place of divorce in certain cases, on the (New)-
lines of the new section to be added in Hindu Marriage
Act on the subject?

Section 29, Special Marriage Act corresponding to Section
section 14, Hindu Marriage Act should be deleted®, ०
tion against
हि divorce.
within 3
years)

In sectign 30 of the Special Marriage Act the period Section 30
of one year for re-marriage after divorce, correspond- ** “A.
ing to the period in section 15, proviso, Hindu Mar-
tiage Act, should be removed‘.

Section 31, Special’ Marriage Act (venue) should Section 31,
be revised on the lines of revised s, 19, Hindu Mar- 5-4.
Tiage Act5,

Section 33, Special Marriage Act should be revised Section 33,
on the lines of section 22, Hindu Marriage Act, as SMa d
proposed to be revised®. ings
camera).

In section 34(1)(b), Special Marriage Act the Section
word ‘adultery’ should be replaced by suitable words BGO),
referring to that ground as recommended to be re- वी:
formulated’. पु

Section 34(2), Special Marriage Act should be Section 34,
amended and a new sub-section should be inserted, Se i
on the lines of the amendment proposed in section liation).

Para 9.21 and 2.46 (०).

Para 9.22.

Para 9.23 and 2.46 (d).

Para 9.23, 9.24 and 2.46. (e)
Para 9.25,

Para 9.26.

Para 9.26A.

Ao hey


Section 35,
SMA.

Section 37,
SMA.

Section 39,
S.M.A.

Section
402

5.6.8.
(New).

‘Section
40B

SMA.
(New).

Section

400,

S.M.A.
| New).

120

23(2), Hindu Marriage Act and the new sub-section
proposed to be inserted in section 23, Hindu Mar-
tiage Act, respectively’,

Section 35 of the Special Marriage Act should be
revised on-the lines of the new section as to counter
claim, proposed to be inserted in the Hindu Marriage
Act®.

Section 37, Special Marriage Act should. be revised on
the lines of the amendments proposed in section
25, Hindu Marriage 40४,

(i) Section 39, Special Marriage Act should be
revised on the lines of section 28, Hindu
Marriage Act as proposed be revised.

(ii) Appeal on costs should be disallowed.
(iii) Limitation for appeal should be 30 days‘.

A new section should be inserted in the Special
Marriage Act so that petitions between same parties
shall be tried together, on the lines of section 21A,
Hindu Marriage Act, as proposed’.

A new section should be inserted in the Special
Marriage Act be provide as follows* :—

(i) Petitions should be disposed of within 6
taonths of service of notice.

(ii) Appeals should be disposed of within 3
months of service of notice. See section
218, Hindu Marriage Act as proposed.

A new section as to documentary evidence should
be inserted in the Special Marriage Act to the effect
that admissibility of documents shall not be affected

Para 9.27.
Para 9.28.
Para 9.29.
Para 9.33.
Para 9.34.
Para 9.35.

awe ee


121

by absence of stamp or registration, This will be
on the lines of the corresponding provision to be in-
serted in the Hindu Marriage Act?,

We would like to place on record our warm appre-
ciation of the valuable assistance we have received
from Mr. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commis-
sion in the preparation of this Report.

P. B. Gajendragadkar » Chairman

PL छू, Tripathi Member

S$. S. Dhavan ' Member

$. P. Sen-Varma Member '
P.M. Bakshi sereees. Member-Sectetary.
Dated : New Delhi

+ the 6th March, 1974,

Ss
1, Para 9.36,



APPENDIX—1

LETTER FROM THE MINISTER OF LAW,
JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS

D.O. No. F. 14(4) /68-Leg. वा

New Delhi-110001.
January 17, 1974.

My dedr Chairman,

Various suggestions for amending the Hindu Mar-
riage Act, 1955 and the Special Marriage Act, 1954
were received in the past from some Members of Par-
jiament and the general public. Those suggestions
were examined and a draft Bill was prepared incor-
porating some of the main amendments proposed to
the Hindu Marriage Act and the Special Marriage Act.
A copy of the draft Bill is enclosed.

2. The amendments proposed in the draft Bill
mainly seek to liberalise the divorce provisions so as
to reduce the period of waiting for divorce after a
decree of judicial separation or restitution of conjugal
rights and to eliminate the period of restriction for
remarriage after divorce. On the basis of the obser-
vations made by the Madras High Court in its two
judgments, Lakshmi Ammal vs. Ramaswamy Naicker,
ALR. 1960 Madras 6 and Gowri Ammal vs. Thulasi
Ammal A.LR. 1962 Madras 510, suitable amendments
have also been proposed in sections 11 and 16 of the
Hindu Marriage Act and in the corresponding provi-
sion in the Special Marriage Act, 1954.

3. A proposal for making suitable provision in law
to provide relief to parties under an obligation to give
maintenance under Section 488 of the Criminal Pro-
cedure Code was received from some Members of

122


123

Parliament. Provision has been made in the draft Bill
to permit a right of divorce only to the wife against
the erring husband. The Commission may, however,
consider the question whether, in such circumstances,
the husband against whom the order for separate main-
tenance has been passed may also be given the right
to petition for divorce, having regard to the fact that
the parties are practically living apart, This sugges-
tion has not been incorporated in the Bill, but may
be considered by the Commission.

4. As the matter is of sufficient importance, I feeF
the same may be examined by the Law Commission.
I shall be grateful if the matter is processed in the
Commission on a priority basis and a report forwar-
ded to the Government at an early date.

5. The relevant files of the Ministry are being sent
separately to the Commission.

With warm personal regards.

Yours sincerely,
Sd/- H. R. Gokhale

Dr. P. B. Gajendragadkar,

Chairman, -
Law Commission,
New Delhi.

Encl : As above.


‘Short title,

Amend-
ment of
section 10
of Act 25
of 1955.

Amend-
ment of
section 11,

Amend-
ment of
section 12.

Amend-
ment of

section 13.

APPENDIX—2

BILL FORWARDED BY THE MINISTRY OF
LAW

THE MARRIAGE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL,
1974
A
BILL

further to amend the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and
the Special Marriage Act, 1954

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fourth
Year of the Republic of India as follows :— |

1. This Act may be called the Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 1974. पु

2, In section 10 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
(hereinafter referred to as the Hindu Marriage Act),
in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely :—~

“(b) has, after the solemnization of the mar-
riage treated, the petitioner with cruelty ;

©

or’,

3. In section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the
words “on a petition presented by either party there-
to,” shall be omitted.

4. In section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, in
clause (b) of sub-section (2), in sub-clause (9),
for the words “the grounds for a decree”, the words
“the said ground” shall be substituted.

5. In section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act,—
(a) in sub-section (1),—

(1) in clause (०), after the words “in a com-
municable form”, the words “the disease

124


”

125

not having been contracted from the
petitioner” shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (vii), the word “or” shall be in-
serted at the end;

(iii) after clause (vii), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely :—

“(viii) has, after the solemnization of the mar-
riage, treated the petitioner with cruelty.” ;

(b) in sub-section (1A), in clause (i) and (ii)
for the words “two years”, the words “one
year” shall be substituted ;

{c): in sub-section (2),— ©

G@) in clause (ii), the word “or” shall be in-
serted at the end ;

(ii) after clause (ii), the following clause shal!
be inserted, namely :—

“(iii) that an order has Been passed against
the husband by a Magistrate awarding
separate maintenance to the petitioner,
and the parties have not had marital inter-
course for three years or more since such

+ orders.”

6. In section 14 of the Hindu Marriage Act,— Amend-
Ment of
(a) for the words “three years have elapsed”, section 14.
in both the places where they occur, the
words “one year has elapsed” shall be sub-
stituted ;

(0) for the words “three years”, wherever they
occur, the words “one year” shall be sub-
stituted.

7. In section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the Amend-
proviso shall be omitted. बी 015,


‘Legiti-
macy of
children
‘of void
and
voidable
marriages.

‘Insertion
of new
section.
23.4.

Relief to
respondent
on peti-
tions for
divorce,

126

8. For section 16 of the Hindy Marriage Act, the
following section shail be substituted, namely:—

16. (1) Where a marriage is null and void on
any ground specified in section 11, any child of such
marriage, whether born before or after the com-
jmencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 1974, shall be treated as the legitimate child
of his parents, whether or not a decree of nullity is
granted in respect of that marriage, if at the time of
the act of intercourse resulting in the birth (or at
the time of of the celebration of the marriage, if
later) both or either of the parties reasonably beli-
eved that the marriage was valid.

(2) Where a dcerce of nullity is granted in respect
of a voidable marriage under section 12, any child be-
gotten or conceived before the decree is made who
would have been the legitimate child of the parties to
the marriage if at the date of the decree it had been
dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be deemed
to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree
of nullity.

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as conferring upon any child of a marriage
which is void or which is annulled by a decree of
nullity under section 12, any rights in or to the pro-
perty of any person other than the parents in any casc
where, but for the passing of this Act, such child would
have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any
such rights by reason of his not being the legitimate
child of his parents.”.

9. After section 23 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—

23A. If in any proceeding for divorce under _ this
Act, the respondent opposes the relief sought on
the ground of the petitioner’s adultery, cruelty or de-
sertion, the Court may give to the res-
pondent the same relief to which he or — she
would have been entitled if he or she had presented a
petition seeking such relief.”.


127

10. In the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (hereinafter Amend.
referred to as the Special marriage Act) in section 2, ment of
for clause (e), the following clause shall be substitut- of Act 43
ed, namely:— of 1954.

“(e) “district court” means, in any area for which
there is a city civil court, that court, and in
any other area the principal civil court of
original jurisdiction, and includes any other
civil court which may be specified by the
State Government, by notificatién in the
Official Gazette, as having jurisdiction in res-
pect of the matters dealt with in this Act;’.

नर

11. For section 26 of the Special Marriage Act, the Substita.
i i 7 . ti
following section shall be substituted, namely; — section For
पर section 26.

“26. (1) Where a marriage is null and void on Legiti-
any ground specified in section 24, any child of such macy of
marriage, whether born before or after the com- of void
mencement of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, and te
1947, shall be treated as the legitimate child of his marriages.
parents, whether or nor a decree of nullity is granted
in respect of that marriage, if at the time of the act
of intercourse resulting in the birth (or at the time
of the celebration of the marriage, if later) both or
either parties reasonably believed that the marriage

was valid.

(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in res-
pect of a voidable marriage under section 25, any
child begotten or conceived before the decree is made
who would have been the legitimate child of the
parties to the marriage if at the date of the decree it
had been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be
deemed to be their iegitimate child notwithstanding
the decree of nullity.

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed as conferring upon any child of a marriage
which is void or which is annulled by a decree of
nullity, under section 25 any rights in or to the pro-
Perty of any person other than the parents in any case

"where, but for the passing of this Act, such child


Amend-
ment of

section 27.

Amend-
ment of

section 29.

Amend-
ment of

section 30.

128

would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring
any such rights by reason of his not being the legiti-
mate child of his parents.”.

' 411A. In section 27 of the Special Marriage Act,—

(a) in sub-section (1), the words “and by the
wife on the ground that her husband has,
since the solemnisation of the marriage, been
guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality” shall’
‘be omitted;

(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-
section shall be inserted, narpely:—-

“(3) A wife may also present a petition for
divorce to the district court on the ground—

G) that the husband has, since the sole--
mmisation of the marriage, been guilty of
rape, sodomy or bestiality; or

(ii) that an order has been passed against the
husband by a magistrate awarding sepa-
rate maintenance to the petitioncr, and
the parties have not had marital inter-
course for three years or morc since such:
order.”.

12. In section 29 of the Special Marriage Act,—

(a) for the words “three years have passed”, in
both the places where they occur, the words
“one year has elapsed” shall be substituted;

(9) for the words “three years”, wherever they~
occur, the words “one year” shall be substi-
tuted.

13. In section 30 of the Special Marriage Act, the
words “and one year had elapsed thereafter but not.
sooner” shall be omitted.

MGIPRRND—7 M of Law/74—Sec. 1 N.S.—-28-6-74—2,000