LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTH REPORT

ON
REGISTRATION ACT, 1908

1957


by

CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
New Dewi,

July 13, 1957.

Suet AsHox Kumar Sen,
Minister of Law,
Government of India,
New फशफमा,

My Dear Minister,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Sixth Report of
the Law Commission on tite Registration Act. -

2. At its first meeting held on the 17th September, 1955, the Com-
mission decided to take up the revision of the Registration Act and
entrusted the task to a Committee consisting of Dr. N. C. Sen Gupta
and Shri V. K. T. Chari. -

- 3. The consideration of the subject was initiated by Shri Chari
who formulated a scheme for the revision of the Act. The principles
underlying the scheme were discussed at meetings of the Statute

“Revision Section held on the 14th April, 1956, and the 10th J ‘une, 1956.

It was also decided that Shri P, Satyanarayana Rao, the senior
Member ef the section of the Commission dealing with Statute Revi-
sion should assist the Committee in drawing its report. A draft Report
Prepared on the basis of the scheme and the discussions thereon was
thereafter circulated to all the Members of the Commission and their
views were invited thereon. These views with the draft Report were
discussed at meetings of the Statute Revision Section on the 29th
December, 1956 and the 9th February, 1957. Some of the suggestions
made by Members at these meetings were accepted and it was left
to the Chairman and Shri P, Satyanarayana Rao to finally settle the
Report in the light of the discussion,

4. Dr, N.C. Sen Gupta has signed the Report subject to a separate
note, a copy of which has been annexed to the Report.

5. The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services rendered
by its Joint Secretary, Shri D. Basu, in connection with the prepara-
tion of the Report.

Yours sincerely,

जि, C. Setatvap.
179 M. of Law--t.


~APPENDIX 1
-APPENDIX It

APPENDIX LI

«APPENDIX IV

CONTENTS
REPORT

History of legislation 2. 9,"
Existing system -

Analysis of the existing Act.

Scheme adopted for revision .

Examination of the provisions of the Act, indicating the
changesrequired ~ .  . was

APPENDICES
Proposals as inserted in the body of the existing Act .
Explanatory notes on sections of Appendix I

Comparative Tables—- . पु पु न न पु पु

‘Taste A-~-Showing the sections in the
sxisting Act and the corres-
ponding sections in Appendix

Tage B—Showing the sections in Ap-
pendix I and the correspond-
ing sections in the existing
Ach. . + wee

Suggestions in respect of other Acts...

NOTE BY DR. SEN GUPTA. न . . .

Paces
2
2-3
3-6
6-8

8--39

40-72
73783
84—91

84—85

8691

92-93

94-105


REPORT OF THE LAW COMMISSION ON THE
REGISTRATION ACT

1. The system of registration of documents was in History of
vogiie in British India from an early date. It was first !ssislation
introduced in Bengal by Bengal Regulation XXXVI of
17 (0: in Bombay by Regulation IV of 1802 and in Madras
by Regulation XVII of 1802. These Regulations applied
not only to the Presidency towns but also to the moffusil.
‘The Regulations in the three different Presidencies were
more or less in the same form. Taking Madras Regulation
XVII of 1802 (as printed in Clarke’s Regulation, 1848) as
an example, we find that a Registrar was appointed for
each zilla, It authorised the Registrar and required him
‘to register the following documents:

(1) Deeds of sale or gift of lends, houses and other
real property;

Deeds of mortgage on land, houses and other

real property, as well as certificates of the dis-

charge of such incumbrances;

(3) Leases and limited assignments of land, houses
and other real property, including generally, all
conveyances used for the temporary transfer of
real property;

(4) Wasseathnamas or Wills;

(5) Written authorities from husbands to their wives
to adopt sons after their (husbands’) demise.

(2

Section 6 of the Madras Regulation was similar in terms
to the corresponding provisions of the Bombay and Bengal
Regulations, (Mulla’s Commentary on the Registration
Act, Fifth Edition, at page 210, sets out in full Section 6
of the Bombay Regulation). This was the most important
Provision of these Regulations. Firstly, it provided that
every deed of sale or gift registered under the Regulation
‘would invalidate any unregistered deed of the same nature
whether executed prior or subsequent to th® registered
deed. Secondly, it provided that every registered mort-
gage deed would have priority - over any unregistered
mortgage deed whether executed prior or subsequent to
the registered mortgage. Thirdly, it stated that the object
of the two preceding rules was to prevent persons being


&

Existing
system,

2

defrauded by purchasing or receiving in gift or taking in
mortgage real property which may have been before sold,.
given or mortgaged, and that persons would never suffer
such imposition when they are apprised of the previous.
transfer or mortgage of the property. It, therefore, pro-
vided that if the buyer, donee or mortgagee had knowledge
of the previous sale, gift or mortgage, the rule of invalida-
tion dr priority mentioned in the previous two clauses
would not apply. ’

2. This system, subject to certain modifications intro-
duced by Act I of 1843, continued in force till the Registra-
tion Act, XVI of 1864 was enacted except in Bombay where
an important change was introduced by a Regulation of
1827. Section 13 of that Act provided that certain docu-
ments shall-not be received in evidence in any Court or
be acted upon by any public officer unless the document
shall have been registered. [This section corresponds to
clause (c) of the present section .49.and the documents
listed therein correspond to the documents specified in
clauses (a), (b), (०) and (0) of sub-section (1) of the
present section 17]; It may be noted that this section itself
did not specifically say that these documents must be com-
pulsorily registered but the same result was secured by
means of the sanction of refusing to receive in evidence
such documents, if unregistered. It was Act KX of 1866
which provided, for the first time, that instruments of the
four classes mentioned therein must be registered,

3. It will thus be seen that the system of registration
which was introduced in 1793 remained an optional system
till 1866. From 1866 certain classes of documents were
required to be compulsorily registered. The Act of 1866
was replaced by Act III of 1877 which was amended from
time to time till it was replaced by the present Act XVI
of 1908.

4. The Indian Registration Act, 1908 applied to the
British Indian Provinces and, after the coming into force
of the Constitution, to the corresponding Part A and Part
C States. By १९६ ITT of 1951 the Act-was made applicable
to Part B States also. We have not thought it necessarv
to enquire into the system of registration in vogue in Part
B States before 1951 as it would not seem to be of any

practical value in relation to the revision of the Act which.

now extends to the whole of the territory of India excluding


3

only the State of Jammu and Kashmir (to which State the
relevant legislative power of Parliament does not extend).

5. The sections of this Act may be broadly grouped
under three heads. The first head relates to the documents
which are registrable under the Act. The second relates
to the procedure to be followed for getting a document
registered under the provisions of the Act. The third deals
with the administrative machinery provided under the Act
and the respective duties of the different classes of officers.
This classification leaves out of consideration the provisions
relating to penalties etc.

6. The documents registrable under the Act fall under
three categories, In the first category come documents
relating to transactions which, according to the substan-
tive law, can be effected only by registered instruments.
It is hardly necessary to point out that che feyistration
Act does not lay down that any transaction, in order to be
valid, must be effected by a registered instrument. What
it provides is that when there is a written instrument
evidencing a transaction, it must, in certain cases, be regis-
tered, while in other cases, it may, at the option of the par-
ties, be registered, in the manner Iaid down in the Act.
The obligation to get a transaction effected only by a regis-
tered instrument is laid down by the substantive law.
Thus, the Transfer of Property Act requires that sales,
mortgages, exchanges, gifts and leases can be effected
only by registered instruments subject to an exception in
case of some transactions relating to immovable property
of less than Rs. 100 in value. Similarly, the Trusts Act
requires that a trust in respect of immovable property
shouid be created only. by an instrument in writing and
registered. The substantive law, however, does not pro-
vide the machinery for. effecting registration. It is the
Registration Act which provides the machinery for effect-
ing registration and the parties to registrable instruments
must necessarily have recourse to the provisions of this
Act.

7. Under the substantive law, certain transactions can
be effected without a writing e.g. partitions, teleases,
settlements ete. But if the transaction is evidenced by a
writing and relates to immovable property, the Registra-
tion Act steps in and clauses (0) and (९०) of section 17 (1)
require registration of such documents, subject to the

Analysis of
the exis-
ting Act.


4

exceptions specified in sub-section (2) of that section. If an
authority to adopt is conferred in writing, other than a
will, it is also required to be registered jsec. 17 (3)).
These documents fall under the second category.

8. It is open to the parties, if they so choose, to get
certain documents registered at their option and this is
permitted by section 18. Wills need not be registered
but it is open to the parties to get them registered under
the provisions of the Act. Such documents come under
the third category.

9. The Act further’ provides for the consequences of
non-registration of documents (sec. 49) and the effects of
registration (secs. 48 and 50).

10. To enable a person to get a document registered
under the Act, certain conditions have to be fulfilled and
certain formalities observed. The document must contain
a description of the property and has to be presented for
registration in the proper registration office within the
time limited by the Act. The details regulating presenta-
tion, such as time for presentation, place of presenta-
tion, persons entitled to present a.document and the mode
of enquiry before the Sub-Registrar, sre ali dealt with in
various parts of the Act. When the Sub-Registrar refuses
registration, an appeal to the Registrar is provided in Part
il of the Act, If the Registrar also refuses registration,
a suit under Sec. 77 can be filed within thirty days of his
order for-a direction that the document be registered. This,
in brief, is a summary of the procedure laid down by the
Act. ,

11. The Act also prescribes the machinery for the
administration of the Act. The administration of the Act
is the duty of each State Government. Each State is divi-
ded for the purposes of the Act inte districts and sub-
districts. At the apex of the administration is the Inspector-
General of Registration and under him there are a Regis:
trar for each district and a Sub-Registrar for each sub-
district. Besides these, there is a provision for the appoint-
ment of Inspectors of Registration-offices. These appoint-
ments are to be made by the State Government.

12. The Registers to be maintained by the registering
officers are enumerated in Section 51 as Books 1 to 5.
Indexes to Books 1 to 4 have to be maintained by the regis-
tering officers. The contents of these Indexes are specified


हू

in section 55. The object of these books is not only to
preserve an authentic record of the copies of the documents
registered but also to afford facilities to persons interested
in making a search in respect of title to immovable pro-
perty. To make the registry as complete as possible,
section 89 of the Act provides that copies of certain orders,
certificates and instruments, though not required to be
registered under the Act, are to be sent to the registering
‘officers concerned and they are to be filed in Book 1 which
pertains to non-testamentary documents relating to im-
movable property. This Book is intended to furnish as
complete a history of the title to immovable Property as
possible. Section 87 of the Act cures any defects in the
appointment of officers or in the observance of the _proce-
dure relating to the registration of documents.

13. Books 1 and 2 and Indexes relating to Book 1 are
epen to inspection by the public who are also entitled to
copies of the entries therein. With regard to Book 3, only
the executants (or their agents) are entitled to copies
during their lifetime but after their death any person is
entitled to copies. Book 4 contains documents registered
under section 18 which do not relate to immovable pro-
perty and any person executing, or claiming under, the
document or his agent or representative is entitled to
copies of the entires therein (section 57). Book 5 relates
to deposits of Wills. Book 1 is the important register
maintained in respect of non-testamentary instruments
relating to immovable property. When a document is
registered, an endorsement is made on the document, denot-
ing the register number and the Book and the volume in
which it is registered, in the following form—

“Registered as document No. 1443 of 1948, Book 1,
Vol. IT, pp. 646 to 649.”

14. From this brief survey of the provisions of the Act
it is clear that the object of the Registration Act is to pre-
serve an authentic record of the terms of documents so that
if a document be lost or destroyed or misplaced, a certified
copy from the register can be obtained. Registration also
facilitates the proof of execution of a document as its exe-
cution is admitted by the executant, before the Sub-
Registrar. Yet another ‘useful purpose that registration
serves is to enable any person intending to enter into any
transaction relating to immovable Property to obtain


6

complete information relating to the title ta such property
and for this purpose to lock into the register and obtain
certified copies of the documents.

15. Though some sections of the Act have been amended,
no revision of the Act has been attempted. We consider
that the time has now atrived for a complete recasting of
the Act.

16. It would have been better had the substantive law
provided that transactions relating to immovable property,
such as partition, release and surrender, should be effected
only by registered documents. If a registered document
were made obligatory in such cases, disputes relating to
these matters would be reduced to a minimum. But these
ate not matters whieh can be provided for in the Regis-
tration Act. They will require attention when the reform
of the substantive law is considered.

Scheme is 17 Before dealing with the changes we recommend in

adopted for the Registration Act, it is necessary to advert briefly to the
general scheme of revision adopted by us in Appendix I
which embodies our proposals. We have re-grouped the
sections of the Act in such a way as to make its scheme
logieal and clear. The scheme is as follows:*

(86०४, 4-2) Part 1—This Part contains the usual provisions relat-
ing to the short title, extent and commencement of the
Act, and the definitions.

(Secs. 17-18), Part IL—The substantive provisions relating to regis-
trable documents are contained in this Part.

Part वी न this Part we have grouped together all the
provisions dealing with the procedure for registration of
documents and the effects of registration and non-
tegistration. The sections have been divided under the
following sub-heads, arranged in Chapters.

(Secs. ~22), fag
हे 2) (3) Conditions to be fulfilled by a document before

it is presented for registration.

(sees. 23 (b) Presentation of a document ie. time for and

(9-9). place of registration and persons entitled to
present documents for registration.

ie 3435, (०) Procedure to be followed after a document is

74-77). presented for registration.

* The sections referred to in the margin ere the existing sections,


प्र

(a) Procedure on admitting the document to regis- {Secs, 5202)
tration. ०), 58-62].

- (९) Procedure to enforce attendance of parties and (Secs, 36439,
witnesses and power to examine them, 3)

(f) Procedure to be followed when a document is (Sees. 64-67)
registered at a place where the whole or a part
of the property is not situate.

(8) Effects of registration and non-regisiration and {Secs.
itregularities not affecting the validity of regis- Sec.
tration.

Part iV.—This Part provides for the filing in Book 1 of (sec. 89).

the copies of certain documents other than those which are
registered. 1६ should be mentioned here that we have not
only enlarged the sgope of the existing provision in section
89 hy including in its ambit additional documents but also
improved the procedure, with the object of obviating the
necessity for the registration of such documents, at the
same time making the Registry as comprehensive as
possible so that it may afford complete notice regarding
transactions affecting immovable property. The pro-
cedure we recommend is that when a copy of such a
document is received from a court or a public officer, it
should not only be filed in Book 1, as at present, but a
memorandum of such a document should also be prepared
and entered in Book 4 and all the entries in Book 1 should
be transcribed in the Index.

Part V.—This Part deals with the Procedure to be fol- eee

lowed in making deposits of Wills and for the destruction
of Wills lying unclaimed for a number of years.

Part VE—This Part deals with the establishment of

Tegistration offices and matters connected therewith, which
have been sub-divided under the following heads, in
separate Chapters:

(a) Registration Officers, powers and duties of regis- (Secs 3-8,
tration officers and establishment. of the Tegis- 63-69).
tration offices.

(b) Register Books and Indexes, Sets, ShoS4y

” (0) Fees for registration, searches and copies, (Secs, 7-80).


(Sees. 81-84)

(Secs. 69.85-
86, 38, 90 sions, ;
'

on.

Examination
of the pro-
visions of
the Act, in-
dicating the
changes re-
quired,

Sec, 1.

Provisa to
See, (2),
Omitied.

See. 2.

“Addition”,

&

Part VII—This Part includes the provisions relating to
penalties.
Part VIIIl—This Part deals with Miscellaneous provi-

18. In making our proposals, we have taken into consi-
deration the suggestions received by us and have given
effect to such of them as we considered useful. Special
reference may be made to one suggestion which has
received our particular consideration. It was suggested
that panchayats should be empowered to register docu-
ments of a simple nature and that, if the experiment
succeeds, their powers should be enlarged gradually. We
do not think that it is expedient or practicable to adopt
this suggestion. The members of panchayats would have
no knowledge or experience of the procedure to be fol-
lowed in the registration of documents. The experiment
will entail considerable expense for providing the staff
and equipment necessary to register the documents and to
maintain the several Books and Indexes required by law.
The offices of Sub-Registrars are so distributed within the
districts as to be within easy reach of persons intending
te register documents and no particular inconvenience has
been brought to our notice in this behalf. We are, there-
fore, unable to accept this suggestion*.

19. We now proceed to examine the provisions of the
Act seriatim, pointing out the problems which have arisen
and indicating, broadly, our proposals for their solution,

Part L—Preliminary

20. We are of the opinion that there is no reason why
State Governments should be given the power to exclude
amy areas from the operation of the Act.

We, therefore, recommend that the Proviso to sub-
section (2) of section 1 be omitted.

21. The more important of the changes which we re-
commend in the definition clauses contained in section 2
are as follows:

(A) In the definition of ‘addition’, the reference to
‘caste’ has already been omitted, by the Indian Registra-

“Dr. Sen Gupta, however, takes a different view and has dealt with the matter in ‘his
ote which forms a part of our report.


9

tion (Amendment) Act (XVII of 1956). The reference to
‘rank and title’ should also be omitted in view of our pre-
sent social structure and the constitutional provision in

regard to the conferment of titles. It is also necessary
to provide that in the case of a married woman, her

husband's name should also be stated.

(8) The defination of “immovable property” in clause
16) should be redrafted so as to make the meaning clear
and to enable a separate definition of movable property,
which is, in fact, a counter-part of the definition of “im-
movable property”, to be omitted.

There is a conflict of views on the question whether
standing timber’ when it is not intended to be severed
immediately should be treated as movable or immovable.*
We are of the view that for the purpose of this Act, stand-
ing timber should not be regarded as immovable property
whether such timber is intended to be severed immediately
or not. It may be noted that the definition of “immovable
property” in the Transfer of Property Act excludes stand-
ing timber. .

in accordance with the prevailing judicial opinion, it
should be made clear that fruits upon and juice in trees
shold not be considered as immovable property, whether
thew exist at the date of the contract or are to grow in
future?

Hardship is caused where machinery embedded in or
attached to the earth is sold without the land and is
treated as immovable property. The purchaser has to pay
stamp duty on the value of the machinery as well as the
Jand and get the document registered at considerable
expense. To avoid this hardship we consider that it should
be made clear that machinery embedded in or attached
to land, when dealt with apart from the land, should be
regarded as movable property and not immovable pro-
perty.

i may be necessary to redraft the definition of
“tamovable property” in the Transfer of Property Act
so as to bring it in consonance with the definition of im-
movable property suggested by us for the purposes of this
Act.

(C) The existing definition of “lease” which includes
“an agreement to lease” gave rise to conflicting decisions

“Immovable
property”?
Sec. 2(9),
[omitted]

“Lease”.

1 Scom Chettiar v, Santhanathan Chettiar, 20 Mad, sO
3 Raja Devi v. Yaqub, (1925) 47 All, 738.


“‘Represen-
ative”,

10

until the law was settled in Hemaniakumari’s case* by the
Privy Council, Dealing with this provision their Lordships
stated, .

“An ‘apreement for lease’, which a lease is by the
statute declared to include, must, in their Lord-
ships’ opinion, be a document which effects the
actual demise and Operates as a lease...,., In
the context where it occurs and in the statute in
which it is found”, (the agreement for lease),
‘must in their opinion relate to some document
that creates a present and immediate interest
in the land’”,

If, in the context of this definition, an “agreement to
lease” is 10 be understood as interpreted by their Lordships,
it is unnecessary to retain this expression in the definition;
for, an agreement to lease is, practically, a lease. It has
been accepted by subsequent decisions that lease in the
Registration Act bears the same meaning as in the Transfer
of Property Act*, We have, therefore, omitted from
the definition of lease an “agreement to lease” and adopted
the definition of lease given in section 105 of the Transfer
of Property Act,

(D) Sections 40 and 41 of the Act do not exclude the
operation of section 32. Therefore, a will or authority to
adopt can be presented for registration after the death of
the testator or the donor of the authority to adopt.
Difficulty, however, arises when the donee of the authority
is a minor and is incapable of presenting the deed of autho-
rity to adopt. The minor may be an adopted son himself,
or the widow of the donor, having no natural guardian or
certificated guardian. In a case of the former class, the
Privy Council held, in Venkatappayya v. Venkata Ranga?
that though the ties in the natural family were severed,
the natural father of the adopted boy could validly present
the document for registration*t. The improper. presentation
of a document is a defect of a radical nature which renders
the document void, It is not a defect in procedure curable
under section 87 of the Act®. We have enlarged the scope
of the present definition to get over this difficulty, [We
have also proposed that such defects should be curable
under section 87],

2 Hemantakumari ए. Midnapur Zamindary Co, 47 Cal. 485 (B.C)
y 75.

5 janakinath v. Mahendranaray, 57 Cal. 7

३ Venkatappayya ४. Venkata Raga Ue Roe Mad, 175 (0.0)

५ Labshimapathi Raju'v. Seethayra’ विज 2 MILT 126,

+ कर कप, Abdur Rahim, 23 All. 233 B.C.) Also see foo--ncte at page 144 of
Mutlla’s commentary,


Ik

'

It has been suggested that instead of a relation of the
minor, a de facto guardian may be allowed. to act on behalf
of the minor. But the Muhammadan law does not recog-
nise a de facto guardian as has been held in Imambandi’s
case: A de facto guardian has been recognised in
Hindu Law but the nature of the acts of management
from which an inference of guardianship can be drawn
has not been clearly laid down. Further, section 11 of
the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 (Act
XXXII of 1956) now provides that a de facto guardian shall
not be entitled to deal with the property of a minor.
Hence, the suggestion cannot be accepted.

22. There is no definition of the word “resides” in the
Registration Act and there is doubt as to whether resi-
dence includes temporary residence. Since the word
“resides” or similar words occur in other Acts as well,
we recommend the insertion of a definition of the word
“resides” in the General Clauses Act, 1897, on the lines of
Explanation I to section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908. :

23. A suggestion was made that the words “instrument”
and “document” should be defined and that only one of
these words should be used throughout the Act instead of
both of them as at present. The word “document” is
already defined in section 3(18) of the General Clauses
Act. It may be noticed that in the Registration Act, the
word “document” is used throughout in a wider sense
while the word “instrument” is used in sections 17 and
18 with reference to documents which are  registrable.
“Instrument” has, in the context, a restricted meaning.
It refers to a document which effectuates a transaction.
No inconvenience has so far been felt by the use of the
two words in the Act. We are, therefore, of the view that
it is unnecessary to define an instrument.

Part I—Of the Registration Establishment

24. Sections 3 to 16 deal with the registration establish-
ment. We recommend no major alteration in this group
of sections. but only consequential and verbal changes.
However, we are not in favour of the retention of the
elause in section 10(1) which provides for the exercise
of the functions of the Registrar by the District Court dur-

*Instru-
ment” a
“Document”

Secs. 3-16.

1 Tmambandi v. Mustaddi, 45 C71. 878 (P.C.).


Sec. 17 (1)
fa).

Sec. 17 (1)
* (0).

12

ing a temporary vacancy. There is no reason why there
should be any difference in this Tespect between the areas
dealt with by sub-sections (1) and (2) of the section. We

Part I1L—Of Registrable Documents

25. Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 17 refers.
only to gifts of immovable property. Under section 123.
of the Transfer of Property Act, a gift of immovable pro-
perty can be effected only by a registered instrument,
Clause (a) was first introduced before the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882 when oral gifts of immovable property
Were valid, but, if made in writing, required registration,
We propose to substitute 8 new clause (a) which is wider
in seope and includes in it all documents which are
required to be registered to afford validity to the transae-
tions effected thereby,

26. Clause (b) requires registration of certain instru-
ments in respect of any right, title or interest of the value
of rupees one hundred and upwards affecting immovable
Property. We consider that the time has come for remov-
ing the exemption in respect of instruments where the
value of the right, title or interest dealt with is below one
hundred rupees. If this exemption is removed it would
mean that even for transactions of smaller value there
wil have to be documents requiring both stamp duty
and registration fees, This cannot, however, be effect-
ed by a mere change in the Registration Act, with-
out amending the Transfer of Property Act under which
a sale or mortgage does not require even a writing if the
value of the property is below one hundred rupees. The
question whether this limit should be removed from the
Transfer of Property Act is one which requires careful
consideration as it involves question of policy. It is not
possible to anticipate our conclusion on this question and
we, therefore, recommend that this provision in section
17(1)(b) of the Registration Act may be retained for the
present,

27. Under clause (b) as it stands, any document creat-
ing a right, title or interest for a consideration of less than
Rs. 100 does not require registration even though the-


13

value of the immovable property in respect of which such
right ete, is created is higher than Rs, 100, This does not
eause any difficulty in the case of mortgages where the
principal amount is less than Rs. 100. But the position
becomes anomalous when, for example, a transaction
relates to a right of way or easement where the value of
the right is less than Rs. 100 but that of the immovable
property is much more than Rs. 100. We think it neces-
sary to provide that any document which creates such a
right over immovable property of the value of Rs. 100
or more should be registered. This will not affect the
stamp duty, since, for the purposes of the Stamp Act, the
value of the right alone is to be taken into consideration.

28. In the case of an assignment of a mortgage there
is a conflict of opinion as to the test to be applied for
determining the value for the purpose of registration.
The generally accepted view is that the consideration for
ine assignment deed should be the criterion. The
solitary exception to this is the view taken by the Punjab
High Court? In order to resolve this conflict we recom-
mend that an Explanation be added to the effect that in
the case of an assignment of a mortgage the consideration
for the deed of assignment should he deemed to be the
value for registration.

29. We consider that it is not necessary to retain clause
(c). Two views have been taken on the scope of this
clause. The first is that even if the transaction is evidenc-
ed by a registered instrument, the receipt of payment of
money under such document should be registered, if the
payment is made on account of the creation, declaration
ete, of any right, title or intcrest specified in sub-clause
(b). The other view is that it applies only to transactions
to which clause (b) will not apply as in the Punjab where
the Transfer of Property Act is not in force and oral sales
and mortgages are possible. If, in the receipt, a recital is
made that the amount. was the consideration on account of
the creation etc., of a right, tille, or interest in immovable
property the document would according to the Punjab
High Court, require registration even though the transac-
tion itself was oral® The better view seems to be that

Sec. 171) (०)
(Omitted).

Oy Satra ४. Visram, (1872) 2 Bom. 97; Subramaniam v. Perumal (3895)18 Med. 454

2 Ram Sarup ४. Mubrab, (1908) PR. No. 1, put.
3 Sher v. Muzaffar, (1920) 1 Lah.
179 M. of Law—2.



14

taken by the Full Bench of the Patna High Court in
Chamroo v. Stephen,' viz., that where there is already a
registered sale deed the subsequent receipt acknowtedging
payment of consideration on atcount of the creation of
the right does not require registration. If the Transfer of
Property Act is extended to all the States including the
Punjab, there will be no need to retain clause (c), even
for cases where sales and mortgages are oral.

80. Our recommendation, therefore, is that the Trans-
fer of Property Act should be extended throughout India,
and that section 17(1)(c) of the Registration Act should
be omitted. If our recommendation to so extend the
Transfer of Property Act is not aecepted, clause (0) of
the sub-section should be redrafted so as to make it clear
that it does not apply to receipts in respect of transactions
already regisered under clause (b}.

Seog). 31, Leases of immovablé property from year to year
a or for any period exceeding one year or reserving a
yearly rent, can be created. under section 107 of the
Transfer of Property Act, only by a registered instrument.
Section 17(1)(d) of the Registration Act requires that
leases of immovable property from year to year or for
any term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent
should be registered. The language, it will be noticed, is
similar to the first paragraph of section 107 of the Trans-
fer of Property Act. At first sight it would seem that the
provision in section 170) (१) was unnecessary as there
was already a requirement of registration under the
‘Transfer of Property Act and that the case would be
covered by clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3
which we have proposed in Appendix I. However, sec-
tion 117 of the Transfer of Property Act makes an excep-
tion in favour of agricultural leases and there is no re-
quirement! under the substantive law that, such leases
should be in writing, If they are in writing, they have
to be registered. If clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 17 is omitted and clause (b) of that sub-section
is retained, all agricultural leases—even leases for periods
shorter than a year if in writing, would become register-
able. Such a change would obviously be undesirable.
The cxisting exemption can be maintained only by
retaining clause (d) of section 17(1) and requiring
registration of leases of immovable property from year

TY Chamroo ए. Steplien, (igaty 25 Pat. 523.


15

to. year or for any term exceeding one year or reserving
a yearly rent. This would exclude other agricultural
leases, such as Jeases from month to month or for a term
of a year or less than a year. There is a Proviso to sec-
tion 17(1) which empowers the State Government to
exempt from the operation of the sub-section leases exe-
cuted in any district or part of a district the terms granted
by which do not exceed five years and the annual rents
reserved by which do not exceed Rs. 50. This is an
enabling provision for the benefit of agriculturists and
should be retained to obviate the necessity of getting
such leases registered. We, therefore, recommend that
both section 17(1) (9) and the Proviso should be retained.

32. Clause (e) relates to non-testamentary instru-
ments transferring or assigning any decree or order of a
court of any award when such decree, order or award
affects or purports to affect immovable property of the
value of Rs. 100 and upwards. The clause, as it now
stands, would cover all decrees or orders whether execut-
able or not and alse awards. If the decree or order is an
executable one, it will attract the provisions of Order 21,
rule 16, C.P.C. under which the transferee will have to
produce the instrument of assignment before the execut-
ing court and apply for execution, in the same manner as
a decree-holder, after getting the transfer. recognised
by the Court. That rule provides that the assignment
should be in writing. The further requirement of regis-
tration seems to be unnecessary as the Court will have
in any case, to inquire into the validity of the assignment
even if the assignment is registered under the Registra-
tion Act, though, of course, registration might give
some additional weight to the assignee’s case. We have,
therefore, excluded from this clause executable decrees
and orders. It is, however, considered that if, under
Order 21, rule 16, C.P.C., a provision be added making it
obligatory on the part of the assignor to report the assign-
ment te the Court after notice to the judgment-debtor
within three months from the date of the assignment, the
requirement of registration would further lose its force.

+

33. Clause {e) places awards on the same footing as
decrees or orders of court. In view of the provisions of
the Arbitration Act of 1940, this requires consideration,
Before this Act, an award itself created rights and a suit
could be filed to enforce such an award. In such circum-

Sec,
aa उप्र (2


Sec. 17 (2)
@.

16

stances the award itself was a document declaring or
creating rights and a transfer of such an award would
undoubtedly amount to a transfer of the rights under it.
Under the Arbitration Act, 1940, the award has no such
effect and a suit to enforce it is not maintainable (sec. 32).
It is to be filed in Court under section 14 and a judgment
has then to be passed in terms of the award (sec. 17), The
result of these provisions is that it is the decree passed
by the Court that creates tights and not the award, and
if the award is not followed by judgment and decree, it
becomes useless. If, however, there is an assignment of
the inchoate rights under the award, such an assignee
may take appropriate steps under the Act. Hence, it
would appear to be unnecessary to provide for the com-
pulsory registration cf an assignment of an award. We
recommend that the words “any award” in clause (e)
be omitted. है

34. We now pass on to sub-section (2) of section 17.
Clause (1) of this sub-section exempts composition deeds
from the purview of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section
(1). A composition deed may create a trust in respect of
immovable property or movable property exclusively
or may include both. It has been decided by the Privy
Council in Govind Ram v. Madan Gopal that a composi-
tion deed which creates a trust in respect of immovable
property requires registration on the ground that the
exemption in the Registration Act does not override the
requirements of a valid trust under the Trusts Act. We,
however, think that a composition deed creating a trust
filed in the insolvency proceedings and accepted by the
Court need not be registered and it would be sufficient if
a copy of the document is sent to the Sub-Registrar to be
filed under section 89, There may be another class of
composition deeds which deal with immovable property
without creating a trust, as, for example, when a debtor
distributes his land in small parcels to various creditors
in satisfaction of their claims against him. We are hot
in favour of extending the said privilege to such docu-
ments, as they affect rights in immovable property and
we think that they should be covered by clause (b) of
section 17(1). In cases where the composition deed
relates to movable property, there is no need for regis-
tration. Hence, if the exemption in section 17(2)(i) he
omitted, all composition deeds relating to immovable

= Govid Ram ¥. Madan Gopal, 72 LA. 76: (1945)All. 241.


17

Property, whether creating a trust or not, would be
caught by clause (b) of section 17(1) except those which
are taken out of it by the exception which we have
provided in proposed section 3(2) (f) (read with section
42) of Appendix I. We have made a provision for sending
a copy of a composition deed in respect of immovable
Property which is accepted by an Insolveney court, to
the Sub-Registrar (under section 42 of Appendix 1). Such
4 composition deed need not be registered. We, there-
fore, recommend that, clause (i) of section 17(2) be
omitted.

35. In view of section 82 of the Companies Act, 1956, Sec. 77 (2)
which lays down that a share in a Company is movable Batted)
property, it is not necessary to retain clause (ii), We
recommend that it be omitted.

36. Clause (iii) should be retained with verbal See. 17 (2)
changes. , (ai)

37. Clause (iv) may be redrafted as “any endorsement Sec. 17 (2)
upon or transfer of such debenture”. The rest of the 7०५
clause may be omitted to make the meaning clear. The
real intention of this clause is to exempt the transfer of
debentures which come within the purview of clause
(iii) from the requirement of registration.

38. A suggestion has been made that documents falling 5
within clause (v) should be made compulsorily registr- ()
able. We do not consider that there is any justification
for making this change. There is no need to have two
registered documents in Tespect of transaction. The
clause should, therefore, remain as it is,

17 (2)

39. Clause (vi) of section 17(2) is a Somewhat curious Sec. 17 (2)
provision. It proceeds to create an exception to clauses '@

{b) and (ec) of sub-section (1) of the section in the case
of certain decrees or orders of court, on the assumption
that there is a provision requiring dcerses or orders 16
be registered. But section 170) (8) and (९०) refer. only
to non-testamentary instruments, and a decree or order
cannot by any stretch of language be said: to be a non-
testamentary instrument. This clause was (amended in
1929 to get rid of the effect of the decision in Hemanta-
kumari’s case! which laid down that where there is a com-
promise which is recorded and made a decree of the court,
whether the property covered by the compromise relates
to the subject-matter of the suit or is ST Hmmchona Ae ES outside it, there is it, there is

(Omittea).

1 Hemantakumari v. Midnapur Zemindary Co., 47 Cal. 485 (495-496) 0,


Sec. 17 (2),
ii), a
Gx), res ४71)
(ait)

Sec. 1742)

"18

no need to register the compromise, as if is exempted
under section 17(2) (vi).

We, however, think it unnecessary to insist that 2
decree or order of a cour: relating to immovable property’
outside the suit should be registered and it would be suffi-
cient in our opinion if a copy af such decree or order is
sent to the Sub-Registrar having jurisdiction under section
89 of the Act (wide sec. 42 of Appendix I).

Clause (vi) should, therefore, be omitted.

40. Clauses (vii), (viii), (ix), (xa) and (xii) will
also be covered by the new provision proposed by us in
section 3(2) (f}, read with section 42 of Appendix I. These
clauses should, accordingly, be omitted,

41. Clause (xi) should be retained with the omission
of the words at the end “when the receipt does not pur-
port to extinguish the morigege.” A mortgagee may,
while receiving the last payment due on the mortgage or
any sum lesser than the mortgage-debt, issue a receipt
acknowledging the discharge of the debt in full by such
receipt. There is no reason why the veceipt should
become compulsorily registrablo merely beeause it also
states the fact that by the payment recited therein the
debt is finally extenguished. Any person who has notice
of the registered mortgage will naturally inquire whether
it is extinguished or not. Strictly speaking, it is not the
receipt acknowledging the discharge of the debt which
extinguishes the security but the fact of the discharge of
the debt. It would accordingly, appear to be unnecessary
to require the registration of receipts in such cases.

42, We have created a new exception in respect of the
counterpart of a lease where the lease corresponding
thereto has itself been registered vide section 39) (त)
of the proposal. We have no doubt adopted the definition
of Tease in section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act:
but we have not extended the procedure of executing a
Tease contained in section 107 of the Transfer of Property
Act to“all'leases. The Transfer of Property Act does not
apply to all the States, for example, the Punjab and also
does not apyly to agricultural leases (vide section 117).
Thus, there is s possibility of leases being executed
which dc not fall within the provisions of the Transfer
of Property Act and they may have counterparts. If the
4९४8९ itself is registered, there is no necessity in such


[9

cases to require these counterparts also to be registered.
Hence the necessity for the new provision.

43. The Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 17 Pal to Sec,
should be retained. We propose that sub-section (3) be 7
retained,

44. An oral authority to adopt is valid under the law,
but if it is in writing other than a Will, it requires regis-
tration. The substantive law should be altered by pro-
viding that an authority can be conferred only by a
writing, which should be registered except where the
writing is a Will.

One of us, Dr. Sen Gupta, thinks that in view of ¢he
provisions of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956 (Act 78 of 1956) a widow does not need the authori-
ty of the husband to make a valid adoption. The position
does fot, however, appear to be clear having regard to
the language of the Act; we have thought it advisable
therefore to retain the provision.

45. Incidentally, a question as to age arises in connec-
tion with a Will. A Hindu can confer an authority to
adopt even if he has not attained the age of majority of
18 or 21 as the case may be, under the Indian Majority
Act. At what age he can make a Will is a question of
substantive law. In our view, the age at which a Hindu
would be competent to confer an authority to adopt shall
be the same whether the authority to adopt is conferred
by a Will or a deed.

46. It has been suggested that a deed of adoption
should be made compulsorily registrable. But unless the
substantive law is altered by providing that a registered
instrument shall be required io effect an adoption so that
the only evidence of an adoption can be a registered in-
strument, we do not think that such a provision can be
appropriately enacted in the Registration Act. The docu-
ment we have in. mind is a document which merely
receipts the factum of adoption and creates the status of
the adopted son but does not declare or create interest in
any specific properties. It may be mentioned that the
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, recently
passed by Parliament, does not go so far as to provide
that an adoption can be made only by a registered instru-
ment but it offers an incentive towards registration by
creating a presumption of a valid adoption in cases where

Sec. 17 (3),


Sec, 18 [cls.
(2)-(०)]
(Omitted).

Secs. 19-22.

Sec. 23 A
<Omitted),

20

the adoption is evidenced by a registered deed. Section
16 of the Act says—

“Whenever any document registered under any law
for the time being in force is produced before
any court purporting to record an adoption
made and is signed by the person giving and
the person taking the child in adoption, the
court shall presume that the adoption has been
made in compliance with the provisions of this
Act-unless and until it is disproved.”

It would be easy to take another step forward and
provide that adoptions shall be made only by a register-
ed document.

47. Section 18 provides for what is generally referred
to as optional registration, that is, for cases in which a
person may get a document registered even thougif such
registration is not compulsory under section 17, This
being fhe scope of section 18, we consider that clauses
(a) to (e) are unnecessary as each of them is only the
obverse of a corresponding clause in section 17. There-
fore, the purpose of section 18 would be served by retain-
ing clause (f), with verbal alterations,

48, Excepting verbal changes, particularly in sub-
sections (2) and (3) off section 21, no other change is
required in these sections. But we propose to put them
under a new sub-head, viz.—‘Conditions of admissibility
for registration” (vide Chapter I of Part III of Appendix
T).

Part IV.—Time of Presentation.

49. We consider that the period of four months provid-
ed for presenting documents for registration should be
reduced to one month. This would reduce the opportuni-
lies to bring antedated deeds into existence. It is also
desirable that registration should be prompt. No serious
hardship is likely to be caused, as there is a power. to
excuse delay (sec. 25), and we are also recommending
a reduction in the amount of the fine. The period of four
months in the Proviso should, however, be retained, as it
relates to copies of decrees or orders which may take
some time to prepare.

50. We recommend that section 288 may be omitted.
We have provided that any irregularity or defect with


21

respect to the person who presents a document should not
invalidate the registration.

There is, therefore, no neces-
Sity for re-registration.

51. Consequential changes have to be made in section
24, The reference to re-registration should be deleted;

and the period of four months should be reduced te one
month,

52. It is quite inequitable to levy a heavy penalty in
respect of documents presented for registration after t
prescribed time. A multiple of the registration fee will
usually be very high, as the fee for registration is in most
States an ad valorem fee. We, therefore, recommend
that the fine payable under section 25(1) should not be
more than ten rupees in addition to the registration fee
payable. The wording of the section is also not happy.
The words “owing to urgent necessity” are not appro-
priate and should be substituted by the words—“On pro-
per cause being shown”,

53. Section 26 should be retained, with verbal changes.

54. A suggestion has been made that persons taking
under a Will should be compelled to present it for regis-
tration after the death of the testator within a specified
period. We are not inclined 10 accept the suggestion.
Section 27 should remain as it is.

Part V.—Place of Registration.

55. Section 28 specifies the place where a document re-
lating to immoveable Property should be registered. It
has to be presented for registration in the office of the
Sub-Registrar within whose sub-district the whole or some
portion of the property to which such document relates
is situate. The expression “some portion” has been un-
derstood to mean any portion and not a substantial por-
tion’. In the undermentioned Privy Council Case?
the property which gave jurisdiction to the Sub-Registrar
was 500 sq. yds. whereas the other properties included in
the document were extensive and of the value of several
lakhs of rupees. If the Registrar has no territorial juris-
diction to register a document, the registration is void.
Such a defect is treated as going to the root of the matter,
not being curable under section 87 as a defect in proce-
dure. Parties have to choose the Sub-Registrar before
whom they should present the document in cases where

11, Hari Ram v, Sheadayal Maly प्‌ All पक कप पा Hari Ram v. Sheodayal Mal, 11 All. 536 (J

Sec. 24.

Sec. 25.

See. 26.

Sec. 27.

See, 28.


22

different items of property comprised in the document
are situate in different jurisidictions. To secure yegistra-
tion at a nearby office, as is evident from the reported
decisions, which are numerous, the parties have resorted
to the objectionable device of including a fictitious, non-
existing or insignificant item of property in the deed to
enable the Sub-Registrar of their choice to register it.
Under the law, as it stands today, it is open to the parties
to the deed or strangers to impeach the registration on
the ground that it is void, as these devices have been held
by the Privy Council to be a fraud on the registration
law.

56. Of the decisions of the Privy Council, it will be
convenient to refer first to Harendra Lal Chowdhwri ए.
Hari Das', the leading case on the subject. The registra-
tion of a mortgage deed was secured in that case by in-
cluding an item of property described by metes and bounds
and also referred to as No. 25, Guru Dag Street in
Calcutta. There was no such property in Calcutta and
the mortgagor had never any title io the property so
described by metes and bounds. This item of property
was a fictitious item, deliberately included by the parties
to obtain registration of the document in a Sub-Registrar’s
office situate nearby. The other properties included in the
deed were outside the jurisdiction of the Sub-Registrar
who registered the document. The registration was held
to be void on the ground that the Sub-Registrar had no
jurisdiction to register the document. In Biswanath v.
Chandra*, the property which gave jurisdiction to the
Sub-Registrar was not fictitious. The mortgagor, with a
view to obtaining registration, purchased an insignificant
share of a village and included it in the mortgage deed.
The only object of the purchase, it was found, was to get
the document registered in a Sub-Registrar’s office nearby
and there was evidence to the effect that the mortgagee
never took possession of the purchased property and, in
fact, never intended to have any interest in it. The Judi-
cial Committee invalidated the registration, holding that
the case stood on the same basis as the previous one‘,
even though the property was in existence. These deci-
sions? were reviewed by the Judicial Commitee in Col-
lector of Gorakhpur v. Ram Sundar’, known as the

1,

3,
4

Harendra Lal v. Hari Das, (1914) 41 Cal. 972 (P.C.)
3, Biswanath v. Chandra, (1921) 48 Cal. so9 (PC.
Hatendra Lal . Hari Das. (1914) 41 Cal. 972 (P.C.)
Collector of Gorakhpur v, Ram Sunder, (1934) 56 All. 468 (P.C.).


23

Gorakhpur case. ‘In ‘that ease, the item included for the
purpose of registration was a platform situate in a walled
garden to which there was no access and which was not
capable of any enjoyment. The Judicial Committee held
that the principle applied:to cases where the deed, though
relating to an existing property, did not relate to a specific
property for any effective purpose of enjoyment or use.
This principle was again applied By the Privy Council in
Inuganti Venkatarama v. Sobhandari! where also there
was an existing property, being a site of 1 sq. yd. out of
a larger extent. The case was held to be covered by the
decision in the Gorakhpur case, and the registration was
held to be void. There are also a number of decisions of
the High Courts in India to the same effect. The point for
consideration is whether such unsatisfactory consequences
can be avoided in cases where the parties havo resorted
to such a device merely in order to avoid the necessity of
going to a distant place for registration. It is inequitable
and unjust that the very persons who were parties to the
transaction and secured registration by such a device
should later be allowed to impeach the registration as
being a fraud on the registration law. As long as rights
of third parties are not affected no harm is Ekely to be
caused by recognising registration effected by a resort to
such devices. Nobody would be prejudiced by registra-
tion under a different jurisdiction, because there is Pprovi-
sion in the Act for sending copies of the document to the
respective Sub-Registrars within whose jurisdiction the
various items of property to which the document relates
are situate. However, registration under a different juris-
diction is sometimes resorted to also with a view to de.
feat the rights of third parties, especially when there is a
race between two rival purchasers of the same property
from the owner. The owner may give an unrogistered
sale deed to-A and later give another ante-dated sale deed
to B and have it registered in an office far away, by in-
cluding in it a fictitious or non-existent or insignificant
item of property so as to withhold knowledge of the
transaction from the prior purchaser. No machinery is
provided under the Act for an elaborate enquiry by the
Sub-Registrar to verify whether the Property comprised
in the deed exists within his jurisdiction. In og country,
there is no registry of titles of property as in some of the
Continental countries. It is, no doubt, true that in sur-
veyed areas there are land registers and in municipal areas

1, Iunganti Venkacarama v. Sobhandari, (1936) 59 Mad. $39


24

there are municipal registers. But it is common knowledge
that these registers are not kept up-to-date and do not
always show the real state of the title, as benami transac-
tions are recognised by the law. There is, therefore, no
means of easily ascertaining the existence or otherwise of
the property specified in the document which is relied on
for conferring jurisdiction on the Sub-Registrar.

In view of these difficulties, it seems to us that the
only safe rule to adopt is that if the Sub-Registrar is
prima facie satisfied regarding the jurisdiction to register
the document and registers it, such registration should
not be allowed to be impeached on the ground of want of
jurisdiction by the parties to the transaction. But if by
obtaining such registration third parties who had no
notice of the transaction are affected, such persons should
be permitted to establish that their rights are not affected.
This principle was adopted by the Madras High Court in
Venkataswami v. Venkata Subbayya’. A person who
alleges his own baseness ought not to be heard and if two
persons are in pari delicto, the person in possession should
not be disturbed, .

57. We, therefore, suggest ihat the following prin-
ciples should be given effect to:

(1) The Sub-Registrar should have jurisdiction to regis-
ter a document if any item of property specified in the
document exists within his jurisdiction, whether the
parties intended to transfer it. or not and even if it is in-
significant in extent or value;

(2) if no property exists within his jurisdiction, the
Sub-Registrar should refuse registration;

(3) if the Sub-Registrar bona fide believes that the pro-
perty exists within his jurisdiction and registers the docu-
ment, the registration should not be invalidated even
if ultimately it turns out that the property was non-exis-
tent or fictitious, provided that, if by the inclusion of a
fictitious or non-existent or insignificant item, third par-
ties not having notice of the transaction thereby are
affected such registration shall not affect the rights of
such third parties; <

(4) The parties to the registration should not be entitled
to impeach the registration on the ground that the item
which gave jurisdiction to the Registrar to Tegister the

1. Venkataswami v. Venkata Subbayya, (1932) 55 Mad. 507,


weer

- 25

document was either non-existent or fictitious or insigni-
ficant-

58. Since section 40(1) specifies an instance where a
document can be presented to any registering officer irres-
pective of his local jurisdiction, it would be proper to
bring that instance into section 28 by way of an exception
to the general rule Jaid down therein.

59. No change in principle is required in sec. 29, but we
propose to combine it with section 28, with verbal changes.

60. Sub-section (1) of section 30 is unnecessary in view
of the extended powers proposed to be given to all Regis-
trars. With regard to clause (2), the present position
is that only the Registrars of districts of the three Presi-
dency towns are entitled to register documents without
regard to the situation of the property in any part of India.
Tt has been suggested that this power should be extended
to a Registrar having jurisdiction over the ‘capital town
of any State in India. We consider that the power should
be given to all Registrars and not merely to those having
jurisdiction in State Capitals. Under section 67, when a
registration is made by a Registrar in whose jurisdiction
no part of the property is siluate, or only some portion
or item is situate, the Registrar is required to send memo-
tanda to the other Registration officers within whose
jurisdiction any part of the property is situate. We intend
to provide that the memoranda so sent should be entered
in the relevant Book and Index. There should, therefore,
be no objection to our proposal to extend the power under
sub-section (2) of section 30 to all District Registrars.

Part Vi—Of Presenting Documents for Registration

61, Section 32 is intended to specify the persons who
should present documents for registration, while section
31 deals with the office at which the registration has to
be made. But while section 31 does not mention “presen-
tation”, a reference to presentation is made in section 32
and exceptions are also provided therein. We consider
that “presentation” which is a formal act and the initial
step in registration should be mentioned in section 31
itself.

62, Consequent upon the mention of ‘presentation’ in
section 31, as suggested by us, some verbal changes will

See. go. (1).

Sec. 29,

Sec. 30 [sub-
sec, (1),
omitted].

Sec, 31.

Sec.3 2.


Sec. 33.

Sec. 34.

Sec. 35.

26

have to be made in section 32. Thus, the words “at the
proper registration office’ and the reference to section 31
in the exceptions under seétion 32 have to be omitted.
The reference fo section 89 is unnecessary because that
section relates to the sending of copies of orders for filing
and not for registration. The reference to section 88 which
exempts various public officers from personal attendance
at the office of the Registrar for registration, may be
retained. The provision in section 40 relating to Wills and
authorities to adopt should be incorporated into section 32.

63. It has been suggested that the provisions relating
to execution before the Registrar should be relaxed in the
case of Powers of Attorney. As a power of attorney is

granted for the very purpose of admitting documents ex-
ecuted by Pardanashin ladies and others who cannot at-
tend in person, we do not approve of this suggestion. The
present procedure enables the Registrar or Sub-Registrar
concerned to be satisfied that the original has been execut-
ed by the donor of the power. .

64, Excepting some. verbal alterations, no change is
required in section 33.

65. The list of sections subject to which the provisions
of section 34 are to operate will have to be altered in view
of the re-arrangement proposed by us. The Proviso should
also be amended on the lines suggested in reference 10
section 25(1), excepting that the maximum period under
the present Proviso should be two months. Provision will
also have to be made for cases where the executants do
not appear within the specified period. We suggest that
in such cases the Registrar should make an entry to that
effect on the document and return it without registration
to the party who presented it.

66. It is common knowledge that a person relying on
a document required by law to be attested is often called
upon to prove due attestation after a long lapse of time.
In very many cases the attestors would not be alive. If
none of them is alive an almost impossible burden is cast
on the person relying on the document to prove due attes-
tation. There are reported decisions in which a plea of
want of attestation has been successful in such circum-
stances, the courts being bound to give effect to such a
technical plea in view of the existing law. To,avoid such
difficuities, we suggest that there should be an inquiry


27

at the stage of registration as to the due attestation of
the document and that the registration of the document
should raise a presumption of its due execution and at-
testation. In order to carry out this suggestion, a specific
provision should, we think, be made #0 the effect that
the registering officer should read over and explain to
the executant the nature of the document before enquir-
ing of him whether it was executed by him or not, and
that the admission of execution should be endorsed only
after the document has been read over and explained.
Such a provision will embody the existing practice.

A provision should be made at the appropriate place
that in every case where attestation is required by law, at
least one attesting witness should be examined at the
time of registration. The execufant who would be
examined about the cxecution of the document should
also he asked about the signature of the attesting wit-
nesses and his answers should be recorded. It should
further be provided that the Registering Officer should
decline to register, if attestation is not proved, in the
Same manner as he does when execution is denied.

If the requirement of examining an attesting witness
is introduced in the Registration Act, it will be necessary
to make consequential amendments in section 68 of the
Evidence Act.

67. Sections 71 to 77 lay down the procedure to be
followed when a Sub-Registrar refuses to register a
document. Logically, these provisions should come after
section 35 and we suggest a re-arrangement, accordingly.
The contents of sections 71—77 will be dealt with here-
after.

Part VII.—Of Enforcing the appearance of Executants
and Witnesses. \

68. Sections 36 to 39 relate to the procedure for enfore-
ing the va earance of parties and witnesses, while section
63 related to the power of registering officers to examine
parties and witnesses. These sections should be grouped
together. No change is necessary in these sections. }

69. A suggestion has been made that the existing
system of serving summons through the Revenue Depart-
ment should be given up. It has, however, been pointed
out by the State Governments that the texisting system

Secs, 71-77.

Secs, 3639


Sec. 4०

Sec. 41.

Secs. 43--46.

28

seems to be working well. If the suggestion were to be
carried out, it would involve the appointment of a sepa-
rate Process-serving establishment which, as the experi-
ence in the Civil Courts shows, may not be very satis-
factory. The suggestion cannot, accordingly, be accepted.

Part शा.--07 Presenting Wills and Authorities to Adopt.

70. There is no justification for 8 separate Part for
these two kinds of documents. We have already consi-
dered section 40 in connection with sections 28 and 32 and

Suggested that it should be incorporated into. those
sections,

71. No change is Tequired in sub-section (1) of section

41. But it should be transferred to the,Part which deals.

with presentation and registration in general. Similarly,
sub-section (2) of section 41 should be incorporated, in
sub-section (3).0f section 34.

Part [X.—Of the Deposit of Wills

72. It has been pointed out that numerous sealed
covers containing Wills have accumulated in registration
officers, no person having come forward to claim those
documents. Under the existing Act, when an application is
made for a copy of the Will after the death of the testator,
the Will is copied in Book 3 and the Registrar has to re-
deposit it thereafter [Section 45(2)]. It is only when a
court summons the Will that the original Ieaves the
Registrar’s office. Under the present system, it may
happen that even when there is a Will, the man’s estate
may be dealt with, without any reference to the Will.
To remedy’ this situation, we think that suitable amend-
ments should be made in sections 42—46 on the following
lines:

It should be provided that at the time of the deposit
under section 42 the testator shall also endorse on the
cover the name and address of the person to whom the
original document shoald be delivered on tha testator’s
death. In order to ascertain whether the testator is
alive or dead, every Registering officer should, on the
first day of 100) every year, send a notice to every
depositor and the person entitled to delivery of the
document on the ¢estator's death requiring them to
furnish their address. If as a result of such notice or in
any other manner, it comes to the knowledge of the


29

Registrar that the testator has died, the Registrar should
after making an entry as to the death of the testator and
the nature of the information on which he has acted,
open the cover in the presence of a Judicial officer not
below the rank of a subordinate judge. After opening
the cover he should issue a notice to the executor, if any,
and also to such other person or persons deriving any
substantial benefit under the Will, as the two officers may
determine, informing them about the existence of the
Will and giving them notice that they should take appro-
priate steps within a period of six months, failing which
the ‘Will would be liable to be destroyed. The actual
destruction should, however, be made in accordance with
the provisions of the Destruction of Records Act, 1947,
after due notification and until actual destruction it will
be open to the parties concerned to take such steps as
they could have taken under the Act before the expiry of
the six months.

Part X.—Of the Effects of Registration and Non-
registration.

73. Section 47 may be retained as itis. There is a
conflict of views 1—4 on the question whether, for the
purposes of deciding a fradulent preference under the
Insolvency Law, the tranfer should be deemed to have
been made on the date of the instrument or on the date of
the registration. We consider, however, that this is a
matter to be dealt with by an amendment of the relevant
provisions of the Law of Insolvency and not of the Regis-
tration Act,

74, Section 48 states that in case of competition bet-
ween a registered document and an earlier oral agree-
ment or declaration relating to such property, the regis-
tered document shal] prevail, unless the oral agreement
or declaration has been accompanied or followed by
delivery of possession so as to constitute a valid transfer
under the law. The reference, obviously, is to sale of
immovable property of the value of less than Rs, 100/-
which, under the Transfer of Property Act, can be effected
either by a registered instrument or by an oral sale
followed by delivery. The section is, however, defective

Sec, 47.

Sec. 48.

1, Iewarayya ¥. Subbanna, (939) 58 Mad. 166.

2. G. W. Godbole ए. Marotisa, (1937) Nag. 403.

3. Rama Nanda v. Pankaj, (1938) 2 Cal. 27%.

4. U on Maung v. Matme Shae, ATR 1937 Rang, 446 (FB) [Vide
Registration ‘Act, sth Bd., p. 7

179 M. of Law—3.

also Mulla,


30

in so far as it overlooks the provisions of section 27(b) of
the Specific Relief Act, under which an earlier oral
agreement would prevail against a subsequent registered
deed if the subsequent purchaser is not bona fide
purchaser without notice of the earlier agreement. The
Proviso to section 48 makes an exception in favour of a
mortgage by deposit of title-deeds, but, in view of what
has just been stated, another exception has also to be
made in respect of the case referred to in section 27(b)
of the Specifie Relief Act.

Sec, 49.10. 75, Clause (a) of section 49 provides that an unregis-

and Fro- tered document shall not affect any immovable property

ted], comprised therein, if such document is required to be
registered by any law. The decisions under cl. (c) have
uniformly Jaid down that the unregistered document
ean be adduced in evidence for any purpose other than
that of affecting the immovable property. But there has
been a divergence of judicial opinion as to the extent
to which evidentiary use may be made of documents which
purport to affect immovable property. In one line of
cases it has been held that a covenant, such as a personal
covenant in a mortgage deed, can be proved, but where
the transaction is indivisible, that is to say where there is
no separate evidence of the loan or payment cther than
the deed itself, such loan or payment cannot be proved
by the documents alone. We see no reason for maintain-
ing this distinction as it is highly technical and gives
relief to a person who has got secondary evidence while
denying it to a person who has the primary evidence,
namely, the document itself. Cases such as Sambayya v.
Gangayya? stand on a different footing, since what was
sought to be enforced in that case were the rights or
obligations contained in the deed which would arise only
if the deed were valid. There is another line of cases
which hold that an unregistered document can be used
to prove matters like the character of possession, status,
acknowledgment ete.

76. Clause (c) in its present form, a couched in a
Janguage which prohibits the reception of the unregis-
tered document as evidence of any transaction affecting

जन Muruga v. Subba, (1951) Mad. 473 (F.Boe
2. Sambayya ¥. Gangayya, (1890) 13. Mad. 308.


31

‘the property. It must be noted that even if the document
cis received in evidence it will merely prove that there
was a contract or agreement which, however, did not
ripen into a valid transaction affecting the immovable
~property, for want of registration, Such evidence, even
if let in, will be ineffective to create any right, title or
interest in immovable property. On the other hand,
“we consider that it should be open to the parties to prove
‘the document itself in order to bring before the Court the
‘best evidence relating to what was in fact done and if
it falls short of a valid transaction relating to the
immovable property, the rights based upon contract, such
as, refund of money or damages and the like, should be
‘capable of being enforced by the Court without, however,
in any way validating the transaction or enforcing any
right, title or interest in the immovable property, What
has to be made clear is that the unregistered document
shall not in any way be used to establish a right, title or
interest in immovable property! on the basis or a trans-
action which requires a registered document or in respect
‘of which a document, if there be one, requires compul-
sory registration whether by section 17 or by any other
law. This object could be secured simply be retaining
‘clause (a) as it is, since we have put in a definition of
‘affect immovable property’, amplifying the meaning of
that expression. Once this is made clear, neither clause
(९) nor the reference to “collateral transaction” in the
Proviso will be necessary. The rest of the Proviso will
also be unnecessary, since under section 49 as modified
by us, the unregistered document will be admissible
‘to prove the contract though not the title to property,
We are also recommending some other changes in this
‘connection, in section 50, to give a complete view of the
‘law.

77. While section 48 deals with the question of priority
“between an earlier oral agreement and a subsequent
registered document, section 50 deals with the question
of priority between two documents,—the earlier unregis-
“tered and the later registered. But the section, as it
-stands, does not take cognizance of the provisions of
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act. An excep-
‘tion should, we think, be engrafted in favour of a person
~who is in possession of property under an unregistered

See. 50.

1 Muruga v, Subba, (1951) Mad. 473 (F.B.).


Secs. 53-54

$2

document ana whose rights are protectea under section.
53A of the Transfer of Property Act. Similarly, another’
exception should be made to ensure that though the un-
registered document may not affect the property comprised:
therein, the person in whose favour such document was.
execuied would be entitled to enforce the contract em-
bodied in the unregistered document in a suit for specific’
performance, provided the subsequent purchaser was-
affected with notice of the prior agreement, as envisaged.
by section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act.

Part XI—Of the Duties and Powers of Registering
Officers.

(A) As to the Register-books and Indexes

78. We recommend no change in sub-section (1) of’
section 51 except that in regard to Book 2 the wording of
the section should be suitably altered so as to enable a
record to be kept of the Sub-Registrar’s order of reference
to the Registrar and his reasons for the order. We further:
suggest that in the offices of Registrars, there should be
maintained a similar book in which may be recorded his
reasons for refusal to register. In sub-sections (2) and (3),
certain verbal changes are necessary,

79, A suggestion has been made by several registering:
officers and others that a provision should be made for the:
recopying of books and indexes when the books are in.
danger of being destroyed or becoming illegible. The State
of Bombay and some other States have already made provi-
sion in this regard by way of amendments. The necessity:
for such a provision is obvious. We recommend the addi-
tion of a new sub-section containing suitable provisions,.
in sections 51 and 55.

80. Section 52 deals with several matters: (1) the:
endorsements to be made on documents when they are-
presented [clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1)], (2) the-
copying of documents in the books after admission to
registration, and (3) the authentication of the books. We
consider that these different matters should be separately
provided for in the respective Chapters dealing with pre-
sentation, the procedure on admitting to registration, and
Register-Books, as shown in Appendix 7,

81. No change is recommended in sections 53 and 5.


33

82. By way of implementing the scheme recommended.
‘by us under section 89, we recommend that in section 55 it
should be provided that in Tespect of all memoranda
forwarded under the provisions of the Act an entry should
be made in Index No. वा, giving the particulars of the docu-

ments in relation to which the memoranda have been
received. The actual memoranda and copies will, how-

-ever, continue to be filed and kept separate as part of
Book 1,

83. We also consider that the power conferred upon the
Inspector-General by sub-sections (3) and (6) of section 55
-should properly belong to the State Government.

84. No change is recommended in section 57.

(8) As to the Procedure on admitting to Registration,

85. No change is recommended in the text of sections 58
~to 62.

86. Section 63 has already been dealt with by us, in
-Para. 70, ante.

(C) Special Duties of Sub-Registrar.
(D) Special Duties of Registrar.

87. Sections 64, 65, 66 and 67 require the transmission of
‘eertain memoranda and copies by the registering officers
where the property is situated elsewhere. All these provi-
sions should be grouped together in one section under a new
‘head. We also recommend that there should be specified
forms prescribed for all memoranda. As regards copies,
Wwe have already recommended, under section 55, that the
“contents thereof should be reduced to the form of memo-
randa and the particulars of all the memoranda should be
entered in Index No, II.

(E) Of the Controlling Powers of Registrars and
Inspectors-General.
88. No change is necessary in section 68.

89. Section 69 deals with the power of the Inspector-
‘General of Registration to superintend and to make rules.
We are of the opinion that the power to make rules should
be vested in the State Government, while the power of
superintendence should remain with the Inspector-General.

98. Section 70 relates to the power of the Inspector.
*General to remit fines. We do not think it necessary to

Sec. $5.

Sec. 57,

Secs. 58—62.

Sec, 63.

Secs. 64-07

Sec. 68.
See. 69.

Sec. 70
mi



Sees, 71-77.

Secs, 72-73
(Omitted),

Sec. 74.

Sec. 75.

Sec. 77

34 -

give him this power as we have recommended that the
fine should not exceed Rs. 10. This section may, therefore;
be deleted.

Part XII—Of Refusal to Register.

91. We have already suggested that sections 71 to 77,.
which lay down the procedure to be followed after refusal
to register, should be placed after section 35. Besides, some
other changes appear to be necessary in the provisions con-
tained in this group of sections.

92. We are of the opinion that the procedure for appeal
in case of refusal by the Sub-Registrar should be replaced’
by a simpler procedure. We consider that there is no need
to provide for an order of refusal by the registering officer
and then an appeal or application to his superior officer
against that order. It would be conducive to expedition
and simplicity if, instead of refusing to register any docu~
ment and driving the parties to an appeal or application,
the Sub-Registrar himself refers the matter to the Regis-—
trar to whom he is subordinate. The Registrar would then
follow the procedure laid down in section 74 of the Act.
If the Registrar, on enquiry, refuses to register, such order
will be subject to the result of any suit which may be filed
under section 77, In view of this recommendation, sections
72 and 73 will have to be omitted.

93. No change is necessary in section 74.

94. Section 75 requires that if the Registrar decides in
favour of registration, the document should be presented
by the party to the Sub-Registrar within 30 days thereafter.
We would, however, recommend that in such eases the
Registrar may himself send the documents directly to the
Sub-Registrar and at the same time direct the parties to be
present before the Sub-Registrar within a specified period
for registration in default of which registration would be
finally refused.

95, There is a conflict of decisions between the Madras
High Court, on the one hand, and the Allahabad and
Calcutta High Courts, on the other, regarding the rights of
a person who, having presented a document and having
been refused registration, does not pursue the remedy under
section 77. The Madras High Court in Satyanarayena v.
Chinna Venkata’ held that if, after setting the machinery

1 Satyanarayan v. Chinna Venkata. (1926) 49 Mad. 302.


35

of registration into motion, a person does not pursue it
to its logical conclusion by filing a suit under section 77, he
is thereafter precluded from enforcing other remedies to
which he may be entitled under the law. The Allahabad
and Calcutta High Courts’, however, held that such a per-
son is, nevertheless, entitled to specific performance of
the agreement which is the basis of his unregistered sale
deed. Recently the Madras Hight Court has, in Venkata
Subbaiah v. Venkatarathnamma’*, followed its earlier
decision®, and held that the law had not been altered by
the addition of the Proviso to section 49 of the Registration
Act by Act XXI of 1929, There would appear to be nothing
in the language of section 77 to justify the view taken by
the Madras High Court that section 77 excludes other
remedies. It would also be inequitable to compel a
person to pursue a useless remedy, where the original
vendor has by a subsequent deed conveyed his rights in
favour of a third party. It is clearly necessary, in such
an event, that the rights of the persons should be adjudi-
cated in a properly constituted suit in the presence of
the third party who has acquired rights subsequently and
obtained a proper conveyance. We think that the view
taken by the Allahabad and Calcutta High Courts is
sound, and a Proviso should be added to section 77, to
give effect to that view.

Part XIIL—Of the Fees for Registration, Searches and
Copies

96. Section 78 enables the State Governments to pres-
cribe the fees for registration etc. This has resulted in
varying scales of fees. We consider that this is a matter in
which there should be uniformity and suggest that the
Union Government shoutd be given this power. There are
complaints that registration fees are unduly high in some
States. Being a fee, it should be commensurate with the
expenses of the department and even though a higher fee
be leviable on documents of higher value, there should be
a ceiling. No other change is necessary in sections 78 to 80.

Part XIV.—Of Penalties

97. Sections 81 to 84 deal with penalties, prosecutions
ete. Under Section 83 there is a conflict of decisions as to

Secs. 78--80

Secs. 81--84

1 Amer Chand y. Nathu, (1910) 7 A.L.J. 683; Surendranath v. Gopal Chander, (1910)

12 C.LJ. 464.
2 Venkata Subbaiah Seip emaatarathnamma, LL.R. (1954) Mad. 775.
3 Satyanarayana v. Chinna Venkatarao, (1926) 49 Mad. 202.


Reece a

36

whether private prosecutions for offences under the Act
lie notwithstanding the language of the section. The
Calcutta, Madras, Bombay and Nagpur High Courts have
taken one view,' while the High Court of Allahabad has
taken a different view.” We are of the opinion that private
prosecutions should be done away with as they are likely
to result in harassment of parties. We have re-drafted the
section accordingly,

Part XV.—Miscellanecus.

Secs. 8 86. 98. No change is necessary in sections 85 and 86.

Sec, 87,

99, The provision in section 87 should be enlarged to
cover defects in regard to presentation and persons pre-
senting and the section should be transferred to the Part
on Registration,

In Jambu Prasad v. Muhammad Aftab Ali Khan; the
Privy Council took the view, that as presentation goes to
the root of registration, registration of the document should
be deemed to be void, if there is no proper presentation.
But this view was later relaxed by Lord Phillimore, in
Bharat Indu v. Hamid Ali’ The reason assigned was
that when a document is presented in the presence
of the executant (as happened in that case), no
objection to its presentation shouid thereafter he
allowed to be raised and that that defect should not be
allowed to invalidate the registration. In our view,
whether the executant or any other party to the document
was present or not at the time of registration, once regis-
tration is effected, these persons should not be allowed
10 go behind the registration on the ground of want of
due presentation and such defect, if any, should be cured
by section 87. Ifa person executes a document in favour
of another and sends it for registration through a person
having no authority and the document is registered, the
executant should not be permitted thereafter to take
advantage of the want of authority of the person who
bresented the document for registration. If, on the other
hand, the document is presented on behalf of the claimant,
the executant or his agent will be present at the time of
the registration to admit its execution. If he does not

7 Gopinath रे Kuldip Singh, 11 Cal, 566 (F.B); In re Pirana Nadothi, 7 Mad. Bio
Eriperor v. Yesa Nana, I.L.R. (1937) Bom. 359; Onker y. Emperor, LL.R. (1945)

eg, 542,
2 Emperor v. Muhammad Mehdi, ८1 All, 472 FB
3 Jambu Frasad v. Muhammad Afiah Ali Khon,

4 Bharat Indu v. Hamid Ali, 42 All, 487 @.C)

42.
37 49 P.C.:


387

‘object to the registration at that stage on the ground of
‘want of authority for the presentment, he should not be
allowed later to take such a technical objection and in-
validate registration. We, therefore, recommend that
“such a defect should be regarded as curable under section
87, once the document is registered without objection.

100. To the list of officers in section 88 should be added
the presiding officers of courts.

101. Section 89 provides for the despatch of copies of
-decrees etc. by public officers. In our opinion, registration
under the Registration Act should operate as a complete
and effective notice concerning title. All the documents
-affecting title to immovable property must be brought
within the purview of the Registration Act. The document
may be registered under the Act, or a memorandum of the
document may be filed in accordance with the provisions
of section 65 and 66, or the document may be entered in
Book 1, in the manner laid down in section 89. For this
purpose, as we have stated at the outset, it will be neces-
Sary to enlarge section 89, by adding to the list of documents
of which copies have to be sent to the registering officer.
Bringing in all such documents under section 89 would
not put the parties to any additional expenditure as they
are not required to get them registered under the Act;
only the particulars of them will be entered in Book 1
~which pertains to non-testamentary documents relating to
immovable property.

102. Copies of ali decrees or orders of a Court affecting
immovable property situated anywhere within India
‘Should also be sent by the Court to the Registrar or Regis-
trars in whose jurisdiction the property or properties are
situate.

103, We have accepted the suggestion that Courts
should send copies of plaints in suits involving immovable
Property to the registering officer concerned in order that
parties concerned may have notice of the pending list. It
should be provided that the plaintiff should file with his
plaint extra copies of it and that on receipt of such copies
from the plaintiff, the Court shall send the same to the
registering officers concerned. A registering officer receiv-
ing such a copy should then file the copy in Book 1 and
also prepare a memorandum thereof and get it copied in
Book 1. We further recommend that this procedure should
be extended to memoranda of appeal, and that, in order to

Sec, 88.

Sec, 89.


Secs, 90-1.

38

implement this scheme, appropriate rules should be insert-
ed in the Code of Civil Procedure, requiring a schedule of
property to be given in every memorandum of appeal
relating to immovable property.

104, The definition of notice in sec. 3 of the Transfer
of Property Act was extended by the Amending Act of
1929, by including in it a provision that registration would
be noticed not only where the instrument was actually
registered under any of the provisions of the Registration
Act but also where a memorandum of such registered
instrument was filed before a Sub-Registrar in the manner
provided by sections 65 and 66. But the definition does not
make it clear whether documents sent to the registering
officer under section 89 and filed by him in Book 1 would
also have the effect of notice of such documents as affect-
ing title [see Mulla, Registration Act, 5th Edition, p. 294,
citing (1882) 2 A.W.N. 51 and (1908) P.R. 143 (F.B.)]. It is,
therefore, necessary to make the matter clear by enacting
a provision on the lines of section 90 sub-section (2), giving
an entry in Book 1 the same effect as if the document was
registered in accordance with the provisions of the Regis-
tration Act. If it is further provided that copies of all
documents affecting title have to be compulsorily sent to
the Registrar under section 89, for being filed in Book 1,
and that memoranda of such documents should also be
entered in Book 1, the registry would afford a complete
history of the title to every parcel of immovable property
in the district and would enable, a person to get definite
information relating to it. If a search in the Registry is to
be effective, the register must be as complete as possible.
The above-mentioned lacuna in the definition of notice
under the Transfer of Property Act is probably due to an
oversight and the question of amending that definition will
have to be considered at the time of the revision of that
Act. Meanwhile, it will be sufficient to introduce the pro-
posed changes in the Registration Act.

105. Sections 90 and 91 should be retained, with verbal
changes.

106. With a view to present a clear picture of the re-
commendations made by us in this Report, we have made
alterations giving effect to them in the text of the existing
Act as shown in Appendix I.


39

Appendix II gives explanatory notes on each section of
Appendix I, indicating the changes recommended by us.

Appendix III contains two comparative Tables—Table
A shows the sections in the existing Act with the corres-
ponding sections in Appendix I, while Table B shows the
sections in Appendix I (with a Table of Contents) and the
corresponding sections in the existing Act.

Appendix IV contains the suggestions made by us in
respect of other Acts, in the various paragraphs of the
Report.

M. ९. SETALVAD,
(Chairman)

M. C. CHAGLA,

K, N. WANCHOO,

P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,

N. C. SEN GUPTA,*

V. K. T. CHARI,

7. NARASA RAJU,

G. S. PATHAK,

S. M. SIKRI,

G. N. JOSHI,

N. A. PALKHIVALA.

(Members)
K. SRINIVASAN,

DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries,

Bomzay,
The 13th July, 1957.

*Dr. Sen Gupta has signed the report, subject to the Note appended at the end


APPENDIX I

Proposals as. inserted in the body of the. existing Act

(This is, however, not to be treated as a Draft Bill}

{Corresponding Sections of the existing Act are noted
in the margin, and additions to the provisions of the exist-
ing Act are shown in the text in italics, wherever
possible.] 1

THE REGISTRATION ACT. 13———_.
Part [
PRELIMINARY

‘Short title, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Registration Act, 19—.
extent and

mene (2) It extends te the whole of India except the
{Sec, 1] State of Jammu and Kashmir. * * *

(3) It shall come into force on.

Definitions यु 2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in

{Sec. 2} the subject or context,—
(1) “addition” means the place of residence, the
[cl @j. profession or trade .............. of a person
described, ..........---- his father’s name, or

where he is usually described as the son of
his mother, then his mother’s name and, in the
case of a married woman, het husband’s name:

[New] (2) “affect immovable property”: A document is
deenied to affect immovable property if it pur-
ports or operates to create, deciare, assign, limit
or extinguish, whether in present or in future,
any right, title or interest, whether vested or
contingent, to or in immovable property;

[cl @ {3) “book” means any of the register-books required
2 to be kept by this Act and includes a portion
of a book and also any number of sheets con-
nected together with a view to forming a book
or portion of a book;

कक ae re



4l

(4) “district” and “sub-district” respectively mean (Cl. (७)
a district and sub-district formied under this Act;

(5) “endorsement” and “endorsed” include and apply [Cl (s)].
to an entry in writing by a registering officer on
a rider or covering slip to any document tendered
for registration under this Act;

(6) “execution” means the act of voluntarily signing [New]
a document having understood the contents
thereof;

(7) “immovable property” includes land, buildings, (Cl. (6)]-
benefits to arise out of land and things attached
to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything
—_________-attached to the earth, hereditary

allowances, rights to ways, lights, ferries and
fisheries but does not include:—

(a) standing timber, growing crops or grass
whether immediate severance is intended or
not,

(9) fruit wpon and juice in trees whether in exist-
ence or to grow in future, and

(c) machinery embedded in or attached to the
earth. when dealt with apart from the land;

(8) “India” means the territory of India excluding [Cl 6(A)}-
the State of Jammu and Kashmir;

(9) “lease” has the sanie meaning as in the Transfer |Cl. Wi.
of Property Act, 1882 and includes a counterpart;
part;

(10) “minor” means a person who, according to the [टा, (8)
personal law to which he is subject, has not
attained majority;

(11) “preseribed” means prescribed by the rules [New]
made under this Act;

(12) “representative includes— [Cl (गे
(a) in the case of a minor, his guardian; or, in his
absence,

(i) any near relation of the minor; or,

(ii) if the minor is an adopted son, any near
relation in the adoptive or natural family;
or,


Documents
of which
registra-
tion is com~-
pulsory.

[New]
{Bee 17 Q)

‘Sec.
Sey? ©

$8ec. 171)
©}.

[New]

{Expl, to Sec,
417@))

42

(iii) if the minor is a widow, any near relation
in the family of the father or husband,
being in each case a relation not having any
interest adverse to that of the minor; or,

(0) in the case of a lunatic or idiot, the committee
or other legal curator.”
Part IT
REGISTRABLE DOCUMENTS
3. (1) The following documents shall be registered,....
namely:—

Aa) instruments which under any law require regis-
tration for giving validity to the transactions
effected thereby;

(b) other non-testamentary instruments which
affect immovable property. of the
value of one hundred rupees and upwards;

{c) leases of immovable property from year to
year, or for any term exceeding one year, or
reserving a yearly rent:

Provided that the State Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, exempt from the opera-
tion of this clause any lease executed in any district, or
part of a district, the terms granted by which do not
exceed five years and the annual rents reserved by which
do not exceed fifty rupees;

(a) non-testamentary instruments transferring or
assigning any decree or order of a Court............
other than an executable decree or order, when
such decree or ordet! affects immovable property
of the value of one hundred rupees and
upwards.

Explanation (i)—For the purposes of cl. (0) of this sub-
section, the consideration specified in a deed of assign-
ment of a mortgage shall be deemed to be the value of the
property.

Explanation (4i)—A document purporting or operating
to effect a contract for the sale of immovable property
shall not be deemed to require or ever to have required
registration by reason only of the fact that such document
contains a recital of the payment of any earnest money or
of the whole or any part of the purchase money.


oo

43

42) Nothing in.......... sub-section (1) applies to: (865,47)
(a) any debenture issued by any Joint Stock
Company and not affecting immovable pro-
perty except in so far as it entiles the holder
to the security afforded by a registered instru-
ment, whereby the Company has mortgaged,
conveyed or otherwise transferred the whole
or part of its immovable property or any
interest therein to trustees upon trust for the

benefit of the holders of such débentures; or
Sec, 17(2)

any endorsement upon or transfer of such [pes
debenture. ............. ; or

(b)

‘Sec,
(c) any endorsement on a mortgage-deed acknow- [See 172)

ledging the payment of the whole or any part
of the mortgage-money, and any other receipt
for payment of money due under a mortgage
beeen eee 3 or

{New]
(व) a counterpart of a lease where the lease
corresponding thereto has itself been regis-
tered, or
(९) any document not itself affectig immovable con 172)

property............ > but merely creating a right
to obtain another document which will, when
executed, affect such property; or

[New]

(7) any decree or order, instrument, document,
certificate, plaint or schedule of property.
attached, copies of which are required to be
sent to the Registering Officer under Section

42 of this Act and to be filed in Book 1.

(3) Authorities to adopt a son, executed after the first [See 77]
‘day of January, 1872, and not conferred by a will, shall
also be registered.

4. Any document not required to be registered under Documents
Section 3 may also be registered under this Act. registration
is कप

ec. 7;
Part TIT जनक है

REGISTRATION

Chapter I—Conditions of admissibility for registration. Document:
5. If any document duly presented for registration be in languags

in a language which the registering officer does not un- staod by

‘derstand, and which is not commonly used in the district, be iciial


[Sec. 19].

Documents 6. (1) The registering officer may, in his discretion,
containing ‘ in which
interlinea- Yefuse to accept for registration any document in whic!
ons, any interlineation, blank, erasure or alteration appears,
blanks, रे ;
erasures unless the persons executing the document attest with:
or atter- their signatures or initials such interlineation, blank, era-
[Sec. 20). sure or alteration.
(2) If the registering officer registers any such docu--

ment, he shall, at the time of registering the same, make

a note in the register of such interlineation, blank,

erasure or alteration,
LA 7. (1) No non-testamentary document relating to im--
and maps) movable property shall be accepted for registration unless:
or plans.

44

he shall refuse to register the document, unless it 98:
accompanied by a true translation into a language com--

monly used in the district and also by a true copy.

tse. 29 0 it contains a description of such Property sufficient to

[See, 21 (2),

modified]

Sec, 21 (3,
tesdigesy »

[Sec 21 (q)]

[Sce. 22(2),
modified)

‘Time _ for
presenting
ocumenis,

[Sec. 23].

identify the same,

(2) Houses and lands in Municipal areas shall be
described by the area, boundaries, municipal town
survey number, the municipal door number, if any, and.
the streets or roads, if any, they abut. ’

(3) In all other places, houses and lands shall be des-

eribed by theix area, boundaries, survey number or
paimaish or other like number, if any, and, whenever it
is practicable, by reference to a Government map or
survey, .
(4) No non-testamentary document containing a map
or plan of any property comprised therein shall be ac-
“cepted for registration unless il is accompanied by a true
copy of the map or plan, or, in case such property is:
situated in several districts, by such number of true
copies of the map or plan as are equal to the number:
of such districts:

Provided that so the failure to comply with
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall not
disentitle a document to be registered if the description
of the property to which it relates is sufficient to identify
that property,

Chapter II.—Presentation.
8.(1) Subject to the provisions contained in this:
chapter, no document other than a Will shall be accepted’

जन te pee ee

ne ee जन के ०-1 >++-++-


45

for registration unless presented for that purpose to the
proper officer within one month from the date of its
execution;

Provided that a copy of a decree or order may be
presented within four months from the day on which the
decree or order was made, or where it is appealable
within four months from the day on which it becomes
final i

(2) A will may, at any time, be presented for deposit [Sec.27]
or registration ............

9. Where there are several persons excuting a docu- Documents
ment at different times. such document may be presented by severallfy

for registration.......... within one month from the date श्र
of each execution. times,

[Sec. 24.]

10. (1) If.... ..any document executed, or copy of Extension
a decree or order made, in India, is not presented for of Bene foe
registration within the period hereinbefore provided, the tion
Registrar may, on proper cause being shown, extend the मिली
time for presentation by a period not exceeding four
months, on payment of a fine not exceeding ten rupees in

addition to the proper registration fee.

(2) An application for such extension of time when
filed before a Sub-Registrar shall forthwith be forwarded
to the Registrar to whom he is subordinate.

11. When a document purporting to have been exe- Documents
cuted by all or any of the parties out of India is not our of
presented for registration till after the expiration of the
time hereinbefore provided in that behalf, the registering
officer, if satisfied—

Sec. 26}

(a) that the instrument was so executed, and

(b) that it has been presented for registration within
four months after its arrival in India,
may, on payment of the proper registration-fee, accept
such document for registration.

12. (1) Save as ............ otherwise provided in this Place of
chapter, every document, shall, so far as it purports to Preene-
effect’ immovable property, be presented for registration [Sec. 2828
in the office of a Sub-Registrar within whose sub-district ™*téed]
the whole or some portion of the property specified in

179 WM. of Law—4.


{Sec. 40,
Inpart]

[Sec. 29,
modified)

[New] j

Presentation
at private
residence,

46

the document, or, where the document refers to more
than one item, any of the items specified in the document,
is situate. ' |

(2) A will or an authority to adopt may be presented
for registration to any Sub-Registrar or Registrar.

(3) Every document, not being a document referred to
in sub-section (1), and a copy of a decree or order, may
be presented for registration either in the office of the
Sub-Registrar in whose sub-district the document was
executed or the original decree or order was made, as
the case may be, or in the office of any other Sub-Regis-
trar under the Government of the State where all the
persons executing or claiming under the document or
decree or order, desire the same to be registered.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1) ,--

(a) after a document is registered, no party thereto
shall be entitled to question the validity of its registration
on the ground that the Property which purported to give
jurisdiction to the Sub-Registrar to register it either did
not exist or was fictitious or insignificant or was not in-
tended to be conveyed;

(b) 4 document the registration of which is secured
by the inclusion of a non-existent, fictitious or insignificant
portion or item shall not in any manner affect the rights
of 6 person who was not a party thereto and acquired
rights in the property without notice of the transaction to
which such document relates.

13. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12,
any Registrar may receive and register any document
cee eeeneee without regard to the situation in any part of
India of the property to which the document relates, if he
is satisfied that there is sufficient cause for doing so,

14. The presentation, registration or deposit of docu-
ments under this Act shall ordinarily be made only at the
office of the officer authorised to accept the same for regis-
tration or deposit:

Provided that such officer may, on proper cause being
shown, attend at the residence of any person desiring to
present 2 document for registration or to deposit a will
and accept for registration or deposit such document or
will. है


at

15. Except in the cases mentioned in section 73 लक to
cette ne cece te नल नि: ; every document to be registered documents
under this Act, whether such registration be compulsory for regis-
or optional, shall be presented........ [Sec. 32

and 40,

(a) in the case of a document other than a will or modified]

authority to adopt,

0) by some person executing or claiming under the [Sec. 32 @]
same, or, in the case of a copy of a decree or
order, by any party to the proceeding or some
person claiming under the decree or order, or

(ii) by the representative or assign of such person, [Sec. 32 (b)]
or < 1

1
(iii) by the agent of such person, representative or

assign, duly authorised by power-of-attorney in
accordance with the provisions of the next
section. !

[Sec. 32. (0)]

(b) in the case of a will, by the testator, or after his Bee. 4 Os
death by any person claiming as executor or otherwise
thereunder, and

Sec. 1s
(c) in the case of an authority to adopt, by the donor, pe @

or after his death by the donee or the adoptive son, or his
representative, as the case may be.

16. (1) For the purposes of section 15, the following Fowers of

powers-of-attorney shall alone be recognised, namely— Tocognises
for the

(०) if the principal at the time aforesaid does not Purposes

of section

power-of-attorney resides in any part of India 1६,
in which this Act is for the time being in force, [Sec. 33].
a power-of-attorney executed before and authen-

ticated by the Registrar or Sub-Registrar within

whose district or sub-district the principal
resides;

(०) if the principal at the time aforesaid resides in
any other part of India in which this Act is
not in force, a power-of-attorney executed before
and authenticated by any Magistrate;

(c) if the principal at the time aforesaid does not
reside in India, a power-of-attorney executed
before and authenticated by a Notary Public cr
any Court, Judge, Magistrate or any Consular
Representative of the Union Government: ..


48

Provided that the following persons shall not be requir—
ed to attend at any registration office or before a Magis-
trate for the purpose of executing any such power-of-
attorney as is mentioned in clauses (9) and (b) of this
sub-section, namely: —

(7) persons who, by reason of bodily infirmity, are
unable without risk or serious inconvenience se
to attend;

(ii) persons who are in jail under civil or criminal
process; and

(1) person exempt by law from Personal appear-
ance in court. है

Explanation:—In this sub-section, “India” means India,
as defined in cl. (28) of sec. 3 of the General Clauses Act,
1897 (X of 1897).

(2) In the case of every such person as is mentioned
im clause (a) of sub-section (1), the Registrar or Sub-
Registrar, or, in the case of clause {b) of sub-section (1)
the Magistrate, as the case may be, if satisfied that the
power-of-attorney has been voluntarily executed by the
Person purporting to be the principal, may atiest the same
without requiring his personal attendance at the office or
court aforesaid,

(3) To obtain evidence as to the voluntary nature of
the execution, the Registrar or Sub-Registrar or Magis~
trate may either himself go to the house of the person
purporting to be the principal, or to the jail in which he
is confined, and examine him, or issue a commission for
his examination.

(4) Any power-of-attorney mentioned in this section
may be proved by the production of it without further
proof when it purports on the face of it to have been
executed before and authenticated by the person or court
hereinbefore mentioned in that behalf.

Duties ofree 17. (1) The day, hour and place of presentation, and

sisterirg the signature of every person presenting a document for
कम registration shall be endorsed on every such document at

cament the time of its presentation.
pre पु
हा Fe) (2) A receipt for such document shall be given by the

registering officer to the person presenting the same.


49

Cuaprer II]—Procedure for Registration.

18. (1) Subject to other provisions contained in this Appearance
‘Bart and in sections 42, 44, 46, 73 and 76, no document peers
shall be registered unless the persons executing such decu- pened,
ment or their representatives, assigns or agents authorised [S*: 34]
as aforesaid, appear before the registering officer within
the time allowed for presentation under sections 8, 9, 10
and 11:

Provided that, if..........., all such persons do not so
appear, the Registrar may, on proper cause being shown,
extend the time for appearance by a period not exceeding
two months, on payment of a fine not exceeding rupees
tea in addition to the fine, if any, payable under section 10.

(2) Appearance under sub-section (1) may be simul- [Sce. 34(2)}
taneous or at different times,

(3) Any application for extension of time under the [Sec. 34 (4)]
proviso to sub-section (1) may be filed before the Sub-
Registrar who shall forthwith forward it for disposal to
‘the Registrar to whom he is subordinate. पु

(4) If, within the period allowed for appearance or [New]
extended under sub-section (1), and two months there-
after, the executant or executants, being the persons pne-
Seating the documents, do not appear, the registering
officer shall make an entry to that effect in the document
and return the same to the party.

(5) Nothing in this section applies to copies of decrees [Se*: 34 (5/1
or orders.

19. If all the persons executing the document or their Enquiry

हि . . fore regis-
representatives, assigns, or agents duly authorised appear tration,
personally before the registering officer.......... he shail rd @
satisfy himself:— (13 (७), 47

(a) ia the case of any person appearing personally on 3403)
before him, as to his identity; (b)]

(b) in the case of any person appearing as repre- [Scc. 34 (3)
sentative, assign or agent, as to is right to ©
appear; and

(c) in the case of a will or an authority io adopt [Sce, 41 (2)]
presented........ by any person other than the
testator or donor, as to the death of the testator

. or the donor and the right of the person present-
ing such will or authority to present the same.


bid) N
Procedure 20. (1) The registering officer, on being satisfied as.
on admis- हि
sion etc. atoresaid, shall—
[New] (4) read over the document and explain its contents

to the executants or their representatives, assigns or
agents, as the case may be, and

(b) inquire whether or not such document was

[Sec 34) (i) executed by the persons by whom it purports’
to have been executed, and
[New] (ii) attested according to law by persons by whom

it purports to have been attested, where such
attestation is required by law.

Bee die (2) On the admission of the execution of the document
~ by such person and on proof of such attestation, the regis-
tering officer shall register the document as to the person
admitting execution, in the manner hereinafter provided,

Explanation: —Attestation shall not be deemed to have
been proved unless one attesting witness at least has been
called for the purpose of proving due execution, if there

(New! be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of
any registering officer or court and capable of giving
evidence.

[Sec. 35 (2), (3) Every Registrar or other registering officer shall,

modified! ४ vs + हि

[See. ey subject to the provisions of this Act, have power to examine
any person and to compel him to give evidence for the
purposes of this Act, as if he were a civil court.

Pre rocodure 21. (1) If any person by whom the document purports
ofexcu- to be executed.

tion ete.

(See 3503) (i) denies its execution, or

ie 10, Gi) is dead and his representative or assign denies

its execution, or

(iii) appears to the registering officer to be a minor,
an idiot or a lunatic, or
(New} (iv) does not appear before the registering officer
within the time allowed for appearance, or
(०) if the attestation of the document is not proved
m eases where such attestation is necessary for
the validity of the document,

INew;

i


51

the registering officer, if he is a Sub-Registrar, shall not
register the document—
(a) as to the person so denying or dead or failing Sec. का
to appear or appearing to be a minor, an idiot or ™
@ lunatic, as the case may be, or
(b) where attestation has not been proved,

but shall refer the document to the Registrar, in the
manner provided in subsection (2):

Provided .. . that the State Government may, Beep Bs
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any Sub-
Registrar named in the notification shall........ exercise
the powers of a Registrar for the purposes of this suh-
section and of sections 22 and 23. Bee. ag”

(2) Evey Sub-Registrar making a reference under sub-
section (1) shali—

(a) make an order recording his reasons therefor,

(b) on application made by any person executing
or claiming under the document furnish him,
without payment and unnecessary delay a copy
of the order giving reasons,

(०) direct the parties by notice in writing to appear [New]
before the Registrar on a specified day,

(d) forward the document together with his order [New
thereon and the relevant records to the Registrar
to whom he is subordinate, and

(e) make an entry in Book 2. [New]

22. (1) .......... On receipt of the records sent by the Procedure
Sub-Registrar under the preceding section, or where any Registrar.
of the contingencies specified in sub-section (1) of section eroded)
21 arises in respect of a document presented for registration
to himself, the Registrar shall, proceed to enquire whether
the document was executed by the persons purporting to
have executed the document and whether the other
requirements of law to entitle the document to registra-

tion have been complied with.

(2) If on such enquiry, the Registrar finds that the [See.7s (7)]
document has been executed and that the other require-
ments of law have been complied with, he shall order the
document to be registered.

(3) The Registrar shall forward the order directing Bead at?
registration to the Sub-Registrar who made the reference


[Sec. 75 Gi

[Sce. 75 (4).
in part]

[865 76 (1)
modified]

[Sec. 76(2;]

Suit in case
af order of
refusal by

Registrar,
[See. 72473]

[Sec. 77(2)]

52

in respect of the document, who shall then carry out the
order, following, so far as may be practicable, the,proce-
dure provided in Chapter IV for the registration of such
document,

(4) Such registration shall take effect as if the docu-
ment had been registered when it was first duly presented
for registration. ‘

(5) The Registrar may............ direct by whom the
whole or any part of the costs of any such inquiry shall
be paid, and such costs shall be recoverable as if they had
been awarded in a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (ए of 1908).

(8) If, on enquiry under sub-section (1) of this section,
the Registrar finds—

(a) that the document has not been executed by
the persons purporting to have executed the
same, or

(0) that the attestation has not been proved where
attestation is required by law for the validity
of the document, or

(०) that the person purporting te have executed the
document appears to be @ minor, un idtat or a
lunatic,

he shall make an order of refusal and record the reasons
for such order in Book 2A and, on application made by
any person executing or claiming under the document,
shall, without unnecessary delay, give hira a copy of the
reasons so recorded.

(7) No appeal shall lie from an order of refusal made
under sub-section (6) of this section.

23. (1) Where the Registrar refuses to order the docu-
ment to be registered, ........ any person claiming under
such document, or his representative, assign or agent, may,
within thirty days after the making of the order of refusal,
institute in the Civil Court, within the local limits of
whose original jurisdiction is situate the offica in which
the document is sought to be registered, a suit for a decree
directing the document to be registered in such office if
it be duly presented for registration within thirty days
after the passing of such decree.

(2) The provisions contained in sub-section (3) of
Section 22 shall, mutatis matandis, apply to all decuments



53

presented for registration in accordance with such decree,

and, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
document shail be. receivable in evidence in such suit.

Provided that failure to file a suit or the dismissal [New]

of a suit filed under this section, shall not disentitle a
party to any other remedy which he may be entitled to,

on the basis of the unregistered document.

24. A will or an authority to adopt, presented for regis~ Registration
tration by the testator or donor, may be registered in the ow पक
Same manner as any other document. opt.

wadopt,
c sts . . [Sec 40 C0}
HAPTER 1V.—Procedure on admitting to registration.

25. Subject to the provisions contained in section 30, Copying of
every document admitted to registration and every memo- the doctiment
randum of document received shall, without unnecessary randum.
delay, be copied in the book appropriated thereof accord- Pa 520)
ing to the order of its admission,

26. (1) On every document admitted to registration particulars
(other than a copy of a decree or order), and on every tp Pe en
copy sent to a registering officer under section 42, there documents
shall be endorsed from time to time the following parti- sdmited to:
culars, namely:—

(a) the signature and addition of every person
admitting the execution of the document, and,
if such execution has been admitted by the
representative, assign or agent of any person,
the signature and addition of such representa-
tive, assign or agent;

(b) the signature and addition of every person
examined in reference to such document under
any of the provisions of this Act; and

(९) any payment of money or delivery of goods or
documents made in the Presence of the regis-
tering officer in reference to the execution of
the document, and any admission of receipt of
consideration, in whole or in part, made in his
presence with reference to such execution,

(2) if any person admitting the execution of a docu-
ment refuses to endorse the same, the registering officer
shall nevertheless register it, but shall, at the same time,
endorse a note of such refusal,

27. The registering officer shall affix the date and his Endorse-

signature to all endorsements made under section 17 and $e dated


and singed
by register-
ing officer.
[Sec, so}

Certificate
of regist~
ration,
[Sec. 60]

Endorse-
ment and
certificates
to be copied
and docu-
ment 1९५
turned.
{Sec. 61]

Procedure
‘on present-
ing docu-
ment in
language
unknown,
to regis~
tering
Officer.
[Sec. 62]

Power to
administer
oaths and
record
substance

54

26 relating to the same document and made in his presence
on the same day.

28. (1) After such of the provision of section 18 to
21 and 26 and 27 as apply to any document presented for
registration have been complied with, the registering
officer shall endorse thereon a certificate containing the
word “registered”, together with the number and page of
the book in which the document has been copied.

(2) Such certificate shall-be signed, sealed and dated
by the registering officer, and shall then be admissible
for the purpose of proving that the document has been
duly registered in the manner provided by the Act, and
that the facts mentioned in the endorsements referred
to in section 27 have occurred as therein mentioned.

29. (1) The endorsements and certificate referred to
and mentioned in sections 27 and 28 shail thereupon be
noted in the margin of the Register-book, and the copy
of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 7 shall
be filed in Book 1.

(2) The registration of the document shall thereupon
be deemed complete, and the document shall then be
returned to the person who presented the same for registra-
tion, or to such other person, if any, as he has nominated
in-writing in that behalf on the receipt mentioned in
section 17.

30. (1) When a document is presented for registration
under section 5, the translation shall be transcribed in
the register of documents of the nature of the original,
and, together with the copy referred to in section 5 shall
be filed in the registration office.

(2) The endorsements and certificate respectively
mentioned in. sections 27 and 28 shall be made on the
original, and, for the purpose of making the copies and
memoranda required by section 36 and 65 the translation
shall be treated as if it were the original.

Cuaprer V.—Power to examine and enforce ihe appearance
~ of executants and witnesses.
31. (1) Every registering officer may ...........+..4-
eben eee eeee administer an oath to any person examined
by him under the provisions of this Avt.


55

(2) Every such iofficer shall also.............. record of statement.
a note of the substance of the statement made by each Fe. 63]
such person, and such statement shall be read over, or,
if made in a language with which such person is not
acquainted, interpreted to him in a janguage with which
he is acquainted, and, if he admits the correctness of
such note, it shall be signed by the registering officer.

(3) Every such note so signed shall be admissible for
the purpose of proving that the statements therein
recorded were made by the persons and under the cir-
cumstances therein stated,

32. If any person presenting any document for regis- Procedure
tration or claiming under any document, which is capable appear-
of being so presented, desires the appearance of any ance of
person whose presence or testimony is necessary for the or witness
registration of such document, the registering officer (3 पक"
may, in his discretion, call upon such officer or Court as ”
the State Government directs in this behalf to issue a
Summons requiring him to appear at the registration
office, either in person or by duly authorised agent, as
in the summons may be mentioned, and at a time named
therein.

33. The officer or Court, upon receipt of the fee pay- या or

able in such cases, shall issue the summons accordingly, issue and

1 us
and cause it to be served upon the person whose appearance carvive of
+ +. summons,
is so required, [Sec. 37].

34. (1) (a) A person who by reason of bodily infirmity Persons
is unable, without risk or serious inconvenience, to appear exert

at the registration-office, or appearance
At registra-
(b) a person in jail under civil or criminal process, iSee omer.

है + Bec.

or

(९) persons exempt by law from personal appearance
in Court, and who would but for the provision next
hereinafter contained be required to appear in person: at
the registration office, shall not be required so to appear.

(2) In the case of every such person the Registering
Officers shall either himself go to the house of such
person; -or to the jail in which he is confined, and examine
him or issue a commission for his examination.

35. The law in force for the time being as to Law as te

जल व es,
summonses, commissions and compelling the attendance contin


hd witness
Sec. 39§

Procedure
where
document
relates to
Jand in
several sub-
districts,
[Sec. 64,
modified}

[See, 6 (1)

156८, 65(2)]

[Secs. 66 and
67)

[Secs. 66(1),

[Secs. 66(2),
67]

56

of witneses, and for their remuneration in suits before
Civil Courts, shall save as aforesaid and mutatis mutandis,
apply to any summons or commission issued and to any
person summoned to appear under the provision of this
Act.

CuapTeR VI--Procedure where a document is registered
at a place where the whole or part of the
property is not situate.

36. (1) Every Sub-Registrar, on registering a nen-
testamentary document relating to immovable ‘Droperty
not wholly situate in his own sub-district, shali. make a
memorandum thereof in the prescribed manner, and send
the same together with the endorsement and certificate,
if any, thereon to every other Sub-Registrar subordinate
to the same Registrar as himself in whose sub-district
any part of such property is situate and such Sub-
Registrar on receipt of the memorandum shall file it in
Book 1 and also get it copied therein.

(2) Every Sub-Registrar on registering any such docu-
ment relating to property situate in more districts than
one shall also forward a copy thereof together with any
endorsement and certificate (if any) thereon and a copy
of the map or plan (if any) mentioned in section 7, to
the Registrar of every district in which any part of suc
property is situate, other than the district in whieh his
own sub-district is situate.

(3) The Registrar, on receiving a copy referred to in
“sub-section (2), shall file in Book 1 the copy of the docu-
ment and the copy of the map or plan (if any), and shall
forward a memorandum of the document in the prescribed.
manner to each of the Sub-Registrars subordinate to him
within whose sub-district any part of the proverty is
situate; and, every Sub-Registrar receiving such memo-
randum shall file it in Book 1 and shall also get i+ copied
thérein.

(4) (a) Every Registrar, registering any non-testamen-
tary document affecting immovable property, shall forward
a memorandum of such document, in the prescribed
manner to each Sub-Registrar subordinate to himself in
whose sub-district any part of the property is situate.

(b) The Registrar shall also forward a copy of such
document and of the endorsements and certificate of re-
gistration together with a copy of the map or plan (if any)


57

mentioned in section 7, to every other Registrar in whose
district any part of such property is situate.

(९) Such Registrar on receiving any such copy shall
fite it in his Book 1, and shall also send a memorandum
thereof in the prescribed manner to each of the Sub-
Registrars subordinate to him within whose sub-district
any part of the property is situate.

(d) Every Sub-Registrar receiving any memorandum
under this sub-section or preparing a memorandum under
sub-section (1) shall file it in his Book 1 and shall also get
it copied therein.

CuarTer VII-—Effects of registration and non-registration.

37. No document required to be registered under this
Act or under any earlier law providing for or relating to
registration of documents, shall

(a) affect any immovable property comprised there-
in, or

(b) confer any power to adopt, unless it has been
registered.
© + “ .

38. A registered document shalt operate from the time
from which it would have commenced to operate if no
registration thereof had been required or made, and not
from the time of its registration,

39. All non-testamentary documents duly registered
under this Act, and relating to any property whether
movable or immovable, shall take effect against any oral
agreement or declaration relating to such Property, except
where the agreement or declaration has been accompanied
or followed by delivery of possession and the same cons-
titutes a valid transfer under any law for the time being
in force:

Provided that a mortgage by- deposit of title deeds as
defined in section 58 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
(IV of 1882), shall take effect against any mortgage deed
subsequently executed and registered which relates to the
Same property:

Provided further that the rights of a person under a
registered document against any prior oral agreement or
declaration relating to such ‘property shall be subject to
ine Provisions of section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act,

77. .

15९०, 66(3,}

[See, 66(4)],
modified]

Effects of
non regittra-
tion [Sec. 49.
modified]

Time from
which re-
gistered
document
operates,
[See. 47]

Registered
documents:
relating to
property
whento
take effect
againstoral
agreements.
[Sec. 48]

[New]


58

Certain 4 40. (1) Every document of the kinds mentioned in sub-
focaments section (1) of section 3............ Shall, if duly registered,
relating to take effect as regards the property comprised therein
totake . हि +

effectag- against every unregistered document relating to the same
ainst un- property, and not being a decree or order, whether such
registered . हि

documents, Unregistered document be of the same nature as the regis-

[Sec.so()] tered document or not:

Provided that the person in possession of the property

[New] under an unregistered document prior in date, would be
entitled to the rights under Section 53A of Transfer of

Property Act if the conditions of that section are fulfilled:

[New] Provided further, that the person in whose favour an
unregistered document is executed would be entitled to
enforce the contract under the unregistered document in
@ suit for specific performance against a person claiming
under a subsequent registered document, subject to the
provisions of Section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act.

[Sec. 5० (2)] (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) applies to leases exempted
under the proviso to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section
3, or to any document mentioned in sub-section (2) of the
same section, or to any registered document which had
not priority under the law in force at the commencement
of this Act.

186०, 50, Explanation.—The expression “unregistered” for the
Expl.J purpose of this section means not registered under this
Act or under any earlier law relating to the registration

of documents.
Ieregulatities 41. (1) Nothing done in good faith pursuant to this Act
ing validity or any Act hereby repealed, by any registering officer,
oftegis- shall be deemed invalid merely by reason of any defect

[see 37, in his appointment or procedure.

(2) Any defect in or the want of authority of a person
[New] to present a document shall not, by itself. render invalid
the registration of the document or the transaction

effected by it.

PART IV

FILING OF DOCUMENTS AND COPIES IN BOOK 1
Copies of 42. (1) Every public officer or court passing any decree
oe or order, or making or accepting any instrument or docu-
documents ment, specified in this sub-section and affecting immov-

Sar Rt able property, shall send a copy of such decree or order


59

or instrument or document, as the case may be, to every registering
registering officer within the local limits of whose juris- [Sec. 89.
diction the whole or any part of the immovable property modified]
specified in such decree or order or instrument or docu-

ment is situate:

(a) an order granting a loan or an instrument of Secs 20
collateral security granted under the Land Im- (x3, Oh
provement Loans Act (XIX of 1883); or an
order granting a loan under the Agriculturists’

Loans Act (XII of 1884) or an instrument for
securing repayment of the loan made under that
Act;

(b) an instrument of partition made by a revenue [Sec. 17 (2)
officer; vit]

4c) an order under the Charitable Endowments Act, [gec. 17 (2)
(VI of 1890) vesting any property in a Treasurer (#)]
of Charitable Endowments or divesting any such
Treasurer of any property;

(व) a grant of immovable property by or on behalf (85; 17 (2)
of the Government,

(९) a decree or an order of a court, including a dec- {se 1702)
ree or order upholding the possession of a modified]
defendant under section 53A of the Transfer of
Property Act;

(£) a security bond executed in favour of a court or [New]
of a public officer in his official capacity:

(8) a composition deed accepted by 6 court in insol- fees, 17 (2)
vency proceedings; and i.

(h) a certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of [Se¢s. 89(2)
any property sold in public auction by a civil 172) Rin
court or a revenue or other public officer in his
official capacity.

(2) Eevery court ordering the admission of a plaint or 1New]

; @ memorandum of appeal, in which an interest in, or right

or title to, immovable property is in controversy, shall
send, to every registering officer within whose jurisdiction
any part or item of the property is situate, a copy of the
plaint or memorandum. of appeal, as the case may be, with
such other particulars as may be prescribed.

(3) Every registering officer receiving such copy of @ (New)
‘decree, order, instrument, document, certificate, plaint or
memorandum of appeal, as the case may be, shall file it


[New

Depasit
of wills,
(Sec. 42]

{New}

Procedure

on deposit

of wills,
8००. 43]

Withdrawal
of sealed
cover.

[Scc. 44]

Procedinigs
no death of

depositor.
(See. 45)

60

in Book 1 and shall prepare a memorandum in such form.
as may be prescribed and the provisions of section 36 shall
apply to such memorandum.

(4) The fiting of the copies received under this section
shall, for the purposes of this Act and of Section 3 of the
Transfer of Property Act, have the same effect as if the
document had been reaistered under this Act.

PART V
DEPOSIT AND DESTRUCTION OF WILLS

43. (1) Any testator may, either personally or by duly
authorized agent, deposit with any Registrar his will in a
sealed cover superscribed with the name of the testator
and that of his agent (if any) and with a statement of the
nature of the document.

{2) The testator shall also endorse on the cover the
name and address of the person to whoni the original docz-
ment should be delivered after registration thereof, after
his death.

44. (1) On receiving such cover, the Registrar shall,
if satisfied that the person presenting the same for deposit
is the testator or his agent, shall transeribed in his took.
5 the superscription aforesaid, and shall note in the
same book and on the said cover the year, month, day and
hour of such presentation and receipt and the names of
any persons who may testify to the identity of the testator
or his agent, and any other inscription which may be on
the seal of the cover.

(2) The Registrar shall then place and retain the
sealed cover in a fire-proof box,

45. If the testator who has deposited such cover wishes
to withdarw it, he may apply, either personally or by
duly authorised agent, to the Registrar who holds it im
deposit, and such Registrar, if satisfied that the applicant
is actually the testator or his agent, shall deliver the ctver
accordingly.

46. (1) Lf, on the death of a testator who has deposited
a sealed cover under section 43, application be made to the
Registrar who holds it in deposit to open the same ani if
the Registrar is satisfied that the testator is dead, he shall
in the applicant’s presence, open the cover and, at the
applicant’ expense, cause the contents thereof to be


61

«copied into his Book 3, and then deliver the deposited Will
‘to the nominee of the testator or his representative,

(2) If, in respect of any will deposited, no steps are [New]
“taken by the testator or other person under section 45 or
-sub-section (1) of this section, the Registrar shalt follow
the procedure hereinafter provided for the disposal of such
‘will or sealed cover.

47, (1) Nothing hereinbefore contained shall affect Saving of
‘the provisions of section 294 “of the Indian Succession Act, स्पा हि
1925 or the power of any court by order to compel the and powers

‘production ot any will. Rents

(2) When any such order is made, the Registrar shall,
‘unless the will has been already copied under section 46,
open the cover and cause the will to be copied into his
‘Book 3 and make a note on such copy that the original
has been removed into court in pursuance of the order
aforesaid.

48. (1) Any will in deposit with a Registrar at the Destruction
“commencement of this Act and any will hereafter depo- Bacal
sited may be destroyed after following the procedure
hereinafter provided, if the will is not registered before
such destruction, *

(2) Every registering officer shall on the Ist day of
July in the year next ajter the commencement of this
Act and on the Ist day of July in every succeeding third
year, send by post a notice to every depositor and his
nominee, inquiring about the depositor's present address
‘and shall enter on the cover and in his registers any new
address supplied in response to such notice.

(3) If, as a result of such notice or in anay other man-
ner, the Registrar is satisfied that the testator has died,
the Registrar shall, after making an entry in his books as
‘to the death of the testator and the nature of the infor-
“mation on which he has acted, open the cover in the pre-
‘sence of a juricial officer (not below the rank of a sub-
ordinate judge). He shall thereupon issue a notice to
the executor, if any, and also to such other person or per-
sons deriving any benefit under the will as the two officers
may deiermine, informing them about the existence of
the will and also that unless steps are taken within a
period of six months therefrom for registration of the
will, the document shall be liable to be destroyed.

179 M. of Law—5,


Inspector-
General of
Registra-
tion.

[Sce. 3]

Districts
and sub-
districts.
[See. 5]

Registrars
and Sub-
Registrars
and their
Offices.
[Sec. 700]

[Sec. 7(2)]

62

(4) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified
in the notice, until the will is actually destroyed im
accordance with the provisions of the Destruction of
Records Act, 1917 (V of 1917), the registration of the same
can be effected, at the request of the person entitled’
thereto, on payment of the proper charges.

PART VI
REGISTRATION ESTABLISHMENT

Chapter I—Registration Officers and Registration Office
Establishment.

49. (1) The State Government shall appoint an officer
to be the Inspector-General of Registration for the terri-
tories subject to such Government:

Provided that the State Government may, instead of
making such appointment, direct that all or any of the
powers and the duties hereinafter conferred and imposed.
upon the Inspector-General shall be exercised and per-
formed by such an officer or officers, and within such
local limits as the State Government appoint in this.
behalf.

(2) Any Inspector-General may hold simultaneously
any othe r office under the Government.

50. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the State Gov-
ernment shall form districts and sub-districts, and shall
prescribe, and may alter, the limits of such districts and
sub-districts.

(2) The districts and sub-districts formed under this
section, together with the limits thereof, and every alte
ration of such limits, shall be notified in the Official
Gazette.

(3) Every such alteration shall take effect on suck
day after the date of the notification as is therein men—
tioned.

51. (1) The State Government shall establish in
every district an office to be styled the office of the
Registrar and in every sub-district an office or offices to
be styled the office of the Sub-Registrar or the office of
the Joint Sub-Registrars.

(2) The State Government may amalgamate with ary
office of a Registrar any office of a Sub-Registrar subordi-


63

nate to such Registrar, and may authorise any Sub-Regis-
trar whose office has been so amalgamated to exercise
and perform, in addition to his own powers and duties,
all or any of the powers and the duties of the Registrar
to whom he is subordinate:

Provided that no such authorisation shall enable a
Sub-Registrar to hear a reference made by himself under
this Act. है

(3) The State Government may appoint officers,.
नल in accordance with the rules prescribed therefor, to
be Registrars of the several districts and Sub-Registrars
of the several sub-districts, formed as aforesaid, res-
pectively.

52. (1) The State Government may also appoint Inspectors

18००. 6}

officers, to be called Inspectors of Registration-offices, of Regis-
and may prescribe the duties of such officers, Beers
ec.

(2) Every such Inspector shall be subordinate to the
Inspector-General.

53. The Inspector-General shall exercise a general powers of
superintendence over all the registration offices in the Mspector-

ae General
territories under the State Government. 10 super-

in 7

54.(1) Every Sub-Registrar shall perform the duties of stration
his office under the superintendence and control of the (eso o,
Registrar in whose district the office of such Sub-Registrar in part]
is situate.

(2) Every Registrar shall have authority to issue Powers of
(whether on complaint or otherwise) any order consistent Registrar to
with this Act which he considers necessary in respect of tend and
any Act or omission of any Sub-Registrar subordinate to Sab Region
him or in respect of the rectification of any error regard- tars.
ing the book or the office in which any document has Mee, 68}
been registered.

55. When any  Registrar.........-....... ig absent other- Abse
wise than on duty in his district, or when his office is oe.
temporarily vacant, any person whom the Inspector- #
General appoints in this behalf......... --shall be the Regis- modified]
trar during the said absence or until the State Govern-
ment fills up the vacancy.

Nice of

36. When any Registrar is absent from his office 00 Aosence of
duty in his district, he may appoint any Sub-Registrar or Registrar

other person in his district to perform, during such his dis-
absence all the duties of a Registrar... 0.0.00. (See. r1]


Absence of
Sub-Re-
gistrar or
vacaricy in
his office.
{Sec. 12)

Reports to
State Go-
Vernment
of appoint
ments un-
der sec-
tions 55.
56 and 57.
{Sec. 13(1}]

Establish-
ments for
registeting
offices.
(Sec. 14)
[Sec. 16(1)]

[Sec. 16 (2)]

[See. 16(3)]

Seal of Re-

gistering:
ficers.

(Sec. 15)

Register
‘books to
be kept

in the seve-
ral regis
tration
Offices,
[Sec. 1561),
modified]

. 64

57. When any Sub-Registrar is absent, or when his
office is temporarily vacant, any person whom the
Registrar of the district appoints in this behalf shall be
the Sub-Registrar during such absence, or until the
vacancy is filled up.

58. All appointments made under section 55, 56 and
57 shall be reported to the State Government by tne
Inspector-General.

+ © *

59. (1) The State Government may allow proper esta-
blishment for the several offices under this Act.

(2) The State Government shail provide for the office
of the every registering officer the books necessary for
the purposes of this Act.

(3) The books so provided shall contain the forms
from time to time prescribed by the State Governmeat,
and the pages of such books shall be consecutively num-
pered in print, and the number of pages in each book
shall be certified in the title page by the officer by whom
such hooks are issued.

(4) The State Government shall supply the office of
every Registrar with a fire-proof box, and shall in each
district make suitable provision for the safe custody of
the records connected with the registration of documents
in such district.

60. The several Registrars and Sub-Registrars shall use
a seal bearing the following inscription in English and in
such other language as the State Government directs: —-
“The seal of the Registrar (or of the Sub-Registrar)
OF. जा
Chapter Il.—Register books and indexes
61. (1) The following books shall be kept in ‘che
several offices hereinafter named, namely :—-
A—In all registration offices:
Book 1—‘“Register of non-testamentary documents
relating to immovable property”;
Book 2—‘Record of reasons for referring a docu-
ment to the Registrar by a Sub-Registrar”;
Book 3—“Register of wills and authorities to
adopt”; and


65

Book 4—"Miscellaneous Register”.
B—In the offices of Registrars:
Book 2A—“Record of reasons for refusing to
register”,
Book 5—Registrar of deposits of wills”.

(2) (a) In Book 1 shall be entered all documents [Sec 51(2),
registered under section 3 and 4 which relate to immov- ™bed)
able property and are not wills and also memoranda
prepared under section 42 or receiwed under section 36.

(b) Copies of decrees, orders, instruments, documents [New]
or certificates received under section 42 shall be filed in
Book 1.

(3) In Book 4 shall be entered all documents registered [Ses 51(3)]
under section 4 which do not relate to immovable pro-
perty.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require [Sec. 51(4)]
more than one set of books where the office of the
Registrar has been amalgamated with the office of a Sub-
Registrar.

(8) If, in the opinion of the Registrar, any of the books [New]
mentioned in sub-section (1) is in danger of being destroy-
ed or becothing illegible wholly or partially, the Registrar
may, by a written order, direct such book or portion there-
of, as he thinks fit, to be recopied an authenticated in
such manner as may be prescribed and the copy prepared
and authenticated under such direction shall for all pur-
poses of this Act and of the Indian Evidence Act 1872
(Act I of 1872), be deemed to be the original book or por-
tion and oll references in this Act to the original bool shall
be deemed to be to the book or portion so recopied and
authenticated.

(6) All such books shal] be authenticated at such [See 52(2)]
intervals and in such manner 88 is from time to time pres-
eribed by the State Government.

62. All entries in each book shall be numbered jn a Entries 10
consecutive series, which shall commence and terminate be numbered

ansecuti-
with the year, a fresh series being commenced at the valy a
beginning of each year. [See 53]

68. In every office in which any of the books herein- Current in-
before mentioned are kept, there shall be prepared cur~ dese aad
rent indexes of the contents of such books; and every tlcrcin.
entry in such indexes shall be made, so far as pravticable [8०० 54]



[Indexes to

contents.
gee 5503]
Sec. $52),

[See. 55(3),
moditied]

(Sec. 53 का]

[Sec. 555):

(8०८. 55(०).1

Registering
officers to
allow ins-
Pections

of certain
books and
indexes,

66

immediately after the registering officer has copied op
filed a memorandum of the document to which it relates.

64. (1) Four such indexes shail be made in all regis~
tration offices and shall be named respectively, Index
No. 1, Index No. II, Index No. Il] and Index No. IV.

(2) Index No. I shall contain the names and additions
of all persons executing and all persons claiming under
every document entered and every memorandum copied
or copy filed in Book 1, together with such other particu~
lars as may be prescribed in respect of the documents cr
copies filed in Book 1.

(3) Index No. 1 shall contain such yarticulars relat.
ing to the property included in every such document and
memorandum, as may be prescribed.

(4) Index No. TIT shall contain the names and addi-
tions of all persons executing every will and authority
entered in Book 3, and of the executors and persons res-
pectively appointed thereunder, and, after the death of
the testator or the donor (but not before), the names and
additions of all persons claiming under the same.

(5) Index No. IV shall contain the names and addi-
tions of all persons executing and of all persons claiming
under every document entered in Book 4.

(6) Hach index shall contain such other particulars
and shall be prepared in such form, as the State Govern-
ment from time to time directs.

(7) If in the opinion of the Registrar, eny of the in-
dexes mentioned in sub-section (1) is in danger of being
destroyed or becoming illegible wholly or partially, the
Registrar mey, by a written order, directs such index or
portion thereof, as he thinks fit, to be recopied in such
manner as may be prescribed and copies so prepared shall
for the purposes of this Act and cf the Indian Rviderce
Act, 1872 (Act I of 1872) be deemed to be the original
index or portion and all references in this Act to the
original index or portion shal! be deemed to be references
to the indexes or portions prepared as aforesaid,

65. (1) Subject to the previous payment of the fees
payable in that behalf, Books 1 and 2 and the Indexes.
relating to Book 1 shall be, at ail times, open to inspection
by any person applying to inspect ihe same; and, subject
to the provisions of section 30, copies of entries in such


67 1 of

‘books shall be given to all persons applying for such. and to give
50165. copies of
(2) Subject to the same provisions, copies of entries in isco. 37]
Book 3 and in the Index relating thereto shall be given
‘to the persons executing the documents to which such
entries relate, or to their agents, and after the death of
the executants (but not before) to any person applying
for such copies.
(3) Subject to the same provisions, copies of entries
in Bock 4 and in the Index relating thereto shall be given
‘to any person executing or claiming under the documents
to which such entries respectively refer, or to his agent
-or representative.
(4) The requisite search under this section for entries
in Books 3 and 4 shall be made only by the registering
-officer,
(5) All copies given under this section shall be sign-
‘ed and sealed by the registering officer, and shall be
admissible for the purpose of proving the contents of
‘the original documents.

Cuapter III.—Fees for registration, searches and copies.

66. The Union Government shall prepare a table of fees pe
tees payable— Union

Govern-

(a) for the registration of documents;

(b) for searching the registers;

(c) for making or granting copies of reasons,
entries or documents, before, or after registra-
tion;

sand of extra or additional fees payable—
(वे) for every registration under section 13;

ment,
[Sec. 78]

(e) for the issue of commissions;
(f) for filing translations;
(g) for attending at private residences;

(h) for the safe custody and return of documents;
and

(i) for such other matters as appear to the Union
Government necessary to effect the Purposes of
this Act.

67. A table of the fees so payable shall be published Publication
‘in the Official Gazette, and a copy thereof in English and आन]


the vernacular language of the district shall be exposed
to public view in every registration office.

Fees payable 68. All fees for the registration of documents under

toe ee" this Act shall be payable on the presentation of such.
[Sce: 80] documents.

PART VI
PENALTIES

Penalty for 69. Every registering officer appointed under this Act
chao and every person employed in his office for the purposcs
gopying, 5 of this Act, who being charged with the endorsing, copy
or registering ing, translating or registering of any document presented.
foguments, or deposited under its provisions endorses, copies, trans-

to injure lates or registers such document in a manner which he
[8.० 81} knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to:

cause, or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
cause, injury as defined in the Indian Penal Code (XLV
of 1860), to any persons, shall be punishable with impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or
with fine, or with both. पु

Penalty for 70, Whoever—

making

false stare- (a) intentionally makes any false statement, whether

Tivering on oath or not, and whether it has been record-

false co- ed or not, before any officer acting in execution

translations, of this Act, in any proceeding or enquiry under

ease pee this Act; or

and aber (b) intentionally delivers to a registering officer, in

TSec. 82] any proceeding...........a false copy or transla-
tion of a document, or a false copy of a map or
plan; or

(c) falsely personates another, and in such assumed
character presents any document, or makes anv
admission or statement, or causes any summons
or commission to be issued, or does any other
act in any proceeding or enquiry under this
Act; or

(6) abets anything made punishable by ihis Act;

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or

oe with both.
आह 71, (1) No proseeution for any offence under this Act

गाल shall be commenced save by or with the permission of the


69

Inspector-General, or the Registrar or the Sub-Registrar, Hens, "
in whose territories, districts or sub-district, as the case veh

may be, the offence has been committed,

(2) Offences punishable under this Act shall be triable
by any Court or officer exercising powers not less than
those of a Magistrate of the second class.

72..(1) Every registering officer appointed under this Registering,
Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the piicers ro
meaning of the Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860).

public
servants.

(2) Every person shall be legally bound to furnish [Sec. 84]
information to such registering officer when required by
him to do so.

(3) In section’ 228 of the Indian Penal Code (XLV of
1860), the words “judicial proceeding” shall be deemed to
include any proceeding under this Act.

PART VIIL
MISCELLANEOUS
73. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act Regisiration
it shall not be necessary for— of docu:
(a) any officer of Government, or any presiding sated by sy
officer of a court, ment Off.
cers orf,
(b) any Administrator-General, Official Trustee or cer-ain
Official Assignee, or public
(९) the Sheriff, Receiver or Registrar of a High 0० 88]
Court, or
(a) the holder for the time being of such other

public office as may be specified in a notification
in the Official Gazette issued in that behalf by
the Union or the State Government, to appear
in person or by agent at any registration office
in any proceeding connected with the registra-
tion of any instrument executed by him or in
his favour, in his official capacity, or to sign as
provided in Section 26.

(2) Any instrument executed by or in favour of an
officer of Government or any other person referred to in
sub-section (1) may be presented for registration in such

manner as may be prescribed.

(3) The registering officer to whom any instrument is
Presented for registration under this section may, if he


Destruction
of unclaim-
ed docu-
ments,
18८०. 55]

Registering
officer not
liable for
things dona
fide done
or refused
in his offi-
cial capa-

{[Sec. 86]
Power of
State Go-
vernment
to make
rules.
[New]
[Sec. 69 (1),
modified!

Cl. (a)]

[Cl (b)]

[CL (था

[Cl (®]

{Cl 8)]

[Cl. (eg)]

[Ct (0]

(New]

70

thinks fit, refer to any Secretary to Government or to such,
Officer of Government or other person referred to in sub-
section (1) for information respecting the same and, on
being satisfied of the execution thereof, shall register the
instrument.

74, Documents (other than wills) remaining unclaimed
in any registration office for a period exceeding two years
may be destroyed, after such notice as may be prescribed.

75. No registering officer shall be liable to any suit,
claim or demand by reason of anything in good faith done
or refused in his official capacity.

76, (1) The State Government may make rules for the
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act,

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera-
lity of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely: —

(a) providing for the safe custody of books, papers
and documents;

(b) declaring what languages shall be deemed to be
commonly ‘used in each district;

* * *

(c) regulating the exercise of the discretion reposed.
in the registering officer by section 31;

(व) regulating the form in which registering officers
are to make memoranda of documents;

(e) regulating the manner of copying and authenti-
cation by Registrars and Sub-Registrars of the
books, or portions thereof, kept in their respec-
tive offices under section 61.

(f) regulating the manner in which instruments
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 73 mav
be presented for registration;

(g) declaring the particulars to be contained in
indexes Nos. 1, II, III and IV respectively;

(h) regulating the manner of recopying the Indes-es
Nos. I, If, HI and IV respectively and portions
thereof, under section 64;


‘ हि D

{i} regulating the manner of issuing the notice [New]
referred to in section 74;

(j) declaring the holidays that shall be observed in (C.@]
the registration offices;

(k) regulating the recruitment and promotion of [New
Sub-Registrars and Registrars and regulating
the duties of such officers; and

Q) generally, regulating the proceedings of the [CL (ij
Registrars, Sub-Registrars and other registra-
tion officers. पु
(3) The rules so made. Shall be published in the |Sec. 69 (2),
Official Gazette, and on publication shall have effect as if modified}
enacted in this Act.

77. (1) Nothing contained in this Act or ix the Indian Exemption
Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), or in the Indian Singments
Registration Act, 1877 (IIE of i877), or in the Indian erecuted
Registration Act, 1871 (VIII of 1877), or in any Act there- favour
by repealed, shall be deemed ta require, ot to have at any of Govern
time required, the registration of any of the following [Sec. 90]
-documents ot maps, namely :—

{a) documents issued, received or attested by any
officer engaged in making a settlement or revi-
sion of settlement of land revenue, and which
form part of the records of such settlement; or

(b) documents snd maps issued, veccived or
authenticated by any officer engaged on behalf
of Government in making or revising the sur-
vey of any land, and which form part of the
record of such survey; or

{e) decuments which, under any jaw for the time
being in force, are filed periodically in any
Tevenue-office by patwaris or other officers
charged with the preparation of village records;
or

(९) Sanads, imams, title-deeds, grants and other
documents affecting immovable property, made
by Government;

fe) notices given under section 74 or section 76 of
the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 (Bombay
Act V of 1879), of relinquishment of occupancy

by occupants or of alienated land by holders of
‘such land.



Inspection
and copies
of such

documents,

[Sec. 92-31

72

(2) All such documents and maps shall, for the pur-
poses of sections 37 and 39, be deemed to have been and
to be registered in accordance with the provisions of this.
Act.

78. Subject to such rules as are prescribed and the pre-
vious payment of such fees as are fixed in this behalf, all
documents and maps mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (०)
and (e) of sub-section (1) of section 77, and all registers
of the documents mentioned in clause (d), shall be open
to the inspection of any person applying to inspect the
same, and, subject as aforesaid, copies of such documents
shall be given to all persons applying for such copies.


APPENDIX 1

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON SECTIONS OF

APPENDIX I

[The corresponding sections of the existing Act are
referred to as “existing” sections.]

Section 1 reproduces existing section 1 with the omis-
-sion of the word “Indian” in sub-section (1) and of the
Proviso to sub-section (2).

Section 2 corresponds to existing section 2.

Clause (1) reproduces the existing definition of “‘addi-
tion” with two modifications—

(४) It has been provided that in the case of a
married woman her husband’s name should be
shown.

(9) The words “rank and title” have been omitted.

Clause (2) gives a new definition of “affect immovable
property”. We have adopted this definition in order to
avoid repeating in every section the long clause “which
purport or operate ......... declare etc.” and to give effect
to our views in Para 27.

Clause (3) reproduces exisiing clause (2) with verbal
-alterations, to make the definition of “book” more explicit.

Clause (4) reproduces existing clause (3).

The definition of “district court” in existing clause (4)
has been omitted in view of the change recommended in
-section 55, corresponding to existing section 10.

Clause (5) reproduces existing clause (5).

Clause (6) adds a new definition of “execution” to
make it clear that execution imports not merely that a
“person signed a document but also that he signed it after
understanding its contents.

Clause (7) vedrafts the existing definition of “immoy-
-able property” in existing clause (7) in order to make the
meaning clear and also to dispense with a separate

3


vA

definition of “immovable property”. The contents of ex.st-
ing clause {#) have been added to the definition of
“immovable property” by way of exceptions (aj and (b),
while (¢) introduces a new exception relating to machine‘y.

Ciause (8) reproduces existing clause (6A).

Clause (5) substitutes existing clause (7) in order to
adopt the definition of “lease” as given in the Transfer of
Property Act, omitting “an agreement to lease’ from
the definition.

Clause (10) reproduces existing clause (8). The defini-
tion of “movable property” in existing clause (9) has been
omitted in view of the proposed definition of “immovable
property”, as already stated.

Cleuse (11) is new, As in other recent Acts, it defines
“prescribed” as referring te rules made under the Act.

Clause (12) redrafts existing clause (10) in order to
make the definition of “representative” more explicit and
comprehensive.

Section 3 and 4 contain the substantive provisions
relating to registrable documents.

Section 3 corresponds fo existing section 17, with the-
following changes—

In sub-section ({1}.—clause (a) has been substituted
by a mew clause which is wider in scope and includes in
it all documents which are required by the substantive
law to be registered for giving validity 40 the transacticn
effected thereby.

Changes have been made in existing clause (9) in view
of the new definition of “affect immovable property”.

Existing clause {c) has been omitted.

Clause (c) reproduces existing clause (व), The Proviso-
which stands at the end of sub-section (1) of the existing’
section has been made a Proviso to the new clause (c),
for, it refers only to leases.

Clause (d) corresponds to existing clause (९), omitting
executable decrees and awards.

Two Explanations have been added to sub-section (1
Exolanation (3) is new, “kt seeks t2 resolve the ecnf
judcizial apinion ss ta the test to be applied cor devermiring



13

the value for registration in case of assignment of @
mortgage,

Explanation (ii) reproduces the Explanation to existing
sub-section (2).

Sub-section (2) corresponds to existing sub-section (2),
with the following changes—

Existing clause (i) relating to composition deed has
been omitted except in so far as it has been included
under the new scheme embodied in section 42 (correspon-
ding to existing section 89).

Existing clause (ii) relating to shares in a company has.
been omitted.

Clauses (a) and (b) correspond to existing clauses (iii)
and (iv), with verbal changes.

Clause (2) reproduces existing clause (xi) with the
omission of the words “when the receipt does not purport
to extinguish the mortgage.”

Clause (d) is new. It provides that though the regis-
tration of ‘lease’ includes a ‘counterpart’, the counterpart
shall not require registration where the lease correspond-
ing thereto has itself been registered.

Existing clauses (vi) to (xa) have been omitted in view
of their inclusion in the mew scheme proposed under
section 42 (corresponding to existing section 89) and this
has been made clear by tke inclusion of a new clause (f)
in section 3(2).

Sub-seetion (3) reproduces sub-section 3 of existing
section 17.

Section 4 corresponds to clause (f) of existing section
18. Clauses (a) to (९) have been omitted as unnecessary.

Sections 5—7 include those provisions which lay down
the conditions which must be fulfilled by a document
before it is presented for registration.

Section 5 reproduces existing section 19,

Section 6 reproduces existing section 20.

Seetion 7 corresponds to existing section 21 with the
following changes—

Sub-sections (2) and (3) have been redrafted in order
to make them more explicit. In sub-section (3), the word

“territorial division and superficial contents” have been
replaced by more definite expressions.


76

After sub-section (4), a proviso has been inserted, एटा
includes the contents of sub-section (2) of existing section
22,

Sub-section (1) of existing section 22 has been omitted
as unnecessary in view of the changes made in section 7
(corresponding te existing section 21).

Sections 8—17 group together all the provisions relating
to presentation.

Section 8 combines existing sections 23 and 27.

Sub-section (1) corresponds to existing section 23, sub-
stituting a period of ome month for four months for
presenting a document. No change has been made in the
Proviso.

Sub-section (2) reproduces existing section 27 with
verbal changes.

Existing section 23A has been omitted.

Section 9 corresponds to existing section 24, omitting
the reference to re-registration and substituting the period
of one month for four months, in consequence of the
changes already made in section 8 (corresponding to
existing section 23).

Seetion 10 corresponds to existing section 25. Apart
from verbal changes—

(a) The words “urgent necessity or unavoidable
accident” have been substituted by “on proper cause seing
shown”,

(b) in place of a fine “not exceeding ten times——
--". “not exceeding ten rupees” has been provided.

Section 11 corresponds to existing section 26.

Section 12 corresponds to existing section 28 with the |
following changes :— है

Sub-section (1) corresponds to existing section 28 with
verbal changes.

Sub-section (2) takes out a part from existing section
40, in order 10 include the case of will or authority to
adopt in the present context of presentation for registra-
tion,

Sub-section (3) combines the contents of sub-sections
(1) and (2) of section 29,

Sub-section (4) gives effect to the principles formulated
in Para 59 of the Report.


id

Section 13 corresponds to existing section 30, with the
omission of sub-section (1), in view of the power being
conferred on all Registrars, in the new provision.

Section 14 corresponds to the existing section 31 with
the insertion of the words “presentation” at the beginning.

Section 15 combines existing section 32 and that portion
of section 40 which relates to the persons who can present
9 document for registration with consequential changes.

Section 16 corresponds to existing section 33 with verbal
changes.

Section 17 incorporates the provisions contained in
clauses (a) and (9) of sub-section (1) of existing section
52, to give a connected account of presentation for regis-
tration.

Sections 18-24 comprise the provisions relating to the
procedure to be followed after a document is presented
for registration.

Section 18 corresponds to section 34 with the following
changes.—

Sub-section (1) corresponds to existing sub-section (1)
with alterations which are necessary in view of the changes
made in section 10 (corresponding to existing section 25).
Existing sub-section (3) has been transferred to sections
19 and 20.

Sub-section (3) reproduces existing sub-section (4) with
verbal changes.

Sub-section (4) is new and provides what the Registrar
should do when, within the time allowed, the executant or
executants do not appear.

Section 19 makes a new provision relating to inquiry
before registration, by combining the contents of existing
sections 34(3)(b)(c) and parts of 35({1)(a), 41(2).

Sections 20 and 21 split up the provisions ielating to
procedure (a) where the persons executing the documents
admit execution and (b) where they deny it,—which are
now combined in existing section 35,

Section 20 relates to admission.

Sub-section (1) corresponds to existing section 34(3)(a)
with the following changes—

(a) in clause (a), a provision has been made for
reading over the document.

179 M. of Law—6.


8

(b).a new provision relating to inquiry about attesta-
tion has been inserted.

Sub-section (2) corresponds to sub-section (1) of exist-
ing section 35, including a new Explanation which requires
that at least one attesting witness must be examined by
the registering officer for the purpose of proving due
execution.

Sub-section (3) enlarges the scope of sub-section (1) of
existing section 35 by stating that a registering officer has
all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of
examining or enforcing the attendance of any person,
which follows from sub-section (4) of existing section 75.

Section 21 relates to the procedure on denial of execu-
tion.

Sub-section (1) corresponds to sub-section (3) of exist-
ing section 35, with the addition of the cases of non-
appearance of the executant as well as failure to prove
attestation as grounds of refusal. It also provides for a
reference to the Registrar instead of making an order of
refusal. हि

Sub-section (2) then provides what steps the Sub-
Registrar shall take when he decides to make such a
reference and this sub-section roughly corresponds to a
portion of sub-section (1) of existing section 71.

Section 22 lays down the procedure that the Registrar
has to follow not only where he receives a reference under
the preceding section but also where the document is
presented to himself for registration, and adopts the
relevant provisions in existing sections 74, 75 and 76.
Existing sections 72 and 73 have been omitted for the
reference proposed is to take the place of appeal and appli-
cation which are provided by the existing sections 72 and
73.

Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of existing section 76 has
been omitted, as the exception mentioned therein has
become unnecessary in view of the changes made in
section 13 (corresponding to existing section 30).

Section 23 reproduces existing section 77 with the
addition of a Proviso which seeks to settle a difference of
judicial opinion, by making it clear that the failure to
file a suit under this section does not disentitle the party
to any other remedy to which he may be entitled, on the


79

"basis of the unregistered document, e.g., specific perfor-
mance.

Section 24 reproduces sub-section (1) of existing secticn
41,—-sub-section (2) having already been incorporated in
‘section 19,

Sections 25 to 30 deal with the procedure to be followed
‘on admitting a document to registration.

Section 25 corresponds to existing section 52 (1) (०),
with the inclusion of memoranda of documenty received,
in view of the changes introduced in section 42 (corres-
‘ponding to existing section 89).

Sections 26, 27, 28, 29 and 30 correspond to existing
sections 58, 59, 60, 61 and 62, with verbal changes.

Sections 31-35 put together all the provisions which
relate to thé examination of executants or witnesses by a
registering officer and his power to enforce their atten-
-dance.

Section 31 corresponds to existing section 63 with the
change that in sub-section (2) it has been made obligatory
on the part of the registering officer to record the sub-
~stance of the statements made before him.

Sections 32, 33, 34 and 35 reproduce sections 36, 37, 38
and 39.

Section 36 combines in itself all the provisions contained
in existing sections 64, 65, 66 and 67 which lay down the
procedure to be followed where a document is registered
at a place where the whole or a part of the property is
not situate. Verbal changes have been made in order to
bring the provisions into conformity with the new
‘scheme under section 42 (corresponding to existing section
89).

Sections 37 to 41 include the provisions relating to the
effects of registration and non-registration.

Section 37 corresponds to existing section 49 with the
‘following changes: —

(a) The reference to the provisions of the Transfer of
-Property Act has become unnecessary, since clause (a) of
section 3(1) as proposed by us, includes the documents
‘which are required to be registered by the Transfer of
‘Property Act. .

(b) Clause (९) and the Proviso have been omitted, for
the reason given in paragraphs 75 and 76.


80

Section 38 reproduces existing section 47.

Section 39 reproduces existing section 48 with the
addition of a second Proviso, which refers to the provisions.
of section 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act.

Section 40 corresponds to existing section 50 with the
following changes—

In sub-section (1), two Provisos have been added to-
reserve the rights conferred by sections 53A of the Transfer
of Property Act and 27(b) of, the Specific Relief Act. In
sub-section (2) and the Explanation, verbal changes have
been made.

Section 41 incorporates the provisions contained ir
existing section 87, with the addition of a new sub-section
which makes it clear that any defect in or the want of
authority of a person to present a document shall not,.
by itself, render invalid the registration of the document
or the transaction effected by it.

Section 42 enlarges the scope of the existing section
89 and places it in a separate Part.

Sub-section (1) corresponds to existing section 89 with.
modifications.

Clause (a) combines sub-sections (1) and (3) of existing:
section 89.

Clause (b) relates to an instrument of partition which:
is mentioned, in clause (viii) of sub-section (2) of existing”
section 17, while clauses (c) and (व) include the documents
which are specified in clauses (xa) and (vii) of sub-section.
(2) of existing section 17.

Clause (e) corresponds to clause (vi) of sub-section (2)-
of existing section 17, including a reference to decrees
which give effect to section 538A of the Transfer of Property
Act.

Clause (1) contains a new item relating to a security”
bond executed in favour of a court or a public officer,
because it is also a transaction affecting immovable pro-
perty, which should be on the register.

Clause (g) corresponds to clause (1) of sub-section (2):
of existing section 17, with the changes indicated in
Paragraph 33.

Clause (h) refers to a certificate of sale which is men-
tioned in sub-sections (2) and (4) of existing section 89 as:


81

छह as in clause (xii) of sub-section (2) of existing section
17.

Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) are new.

Sub-section (2) has been inserted to include a plaint
and a memorandum of appeal relating to immoveable pro-
perty and a schedule of such property attached by a court
‘or a public officer.

Sub-section (3) states what steps shall be taken by the
Tegistering officer who receives any such document cr
<opy as mentioned in the preceding sub-sections.

Sub-section (4) is intended to fill up the lacuna in the
‘definition of “notice” in section 3 of the Transfer of Pro
perty Act and also to provide that the filing of a copy of
a document under section 42 shall have the same effect
as registration.

Sections 43 to 47 correspond to the provisions relating
to the deposit of Wills and contained in existing sections
42 to 46, with the following changes:

In Section 43, which corresponds to existing section 42,
a new sub-section has been inserted, requiring the testator
to endorse on the cover of a deposited Will the name and
address of the person to whom the original document
‘should be delivered after the testator’s death.

In section 46, sub-section (1) corresponds to sub-section
(1) of existing section 45. Sub-sections (2) and (3) are
new and provide for the disposal of the sealed covers.

Sub-section (2) of existing section 45 has been omitted
as a re-deposit has become unnecessary in view of the
procedure for destruction which has been Provided in the
mew section 48.

Seetions 49 to 60 correspond to the provisions relating
40 the registration officers and their office establishment.

Section 49 reproduces existing section 3.

Section 50 reproduces existing section 5.

Section 51 combines existing sections 6 and 7.

Section 52 reproduces existing section 8,

Section 53 incorporates that portion of sub-section ql)
of section 69 which deals with the power of superinten-.
denee belonging to the Inspector-General.

Section 54 reproduces existing section 68 which deats
with the power of superintendence belonging to the Re-
gistrar.


82

Section 55 conibines the provisions of sub-sections (1५
and (2) of existing section 10 with the omission of reference
to the Judge of the District Court in sub-section (i)
of existing section 10.

Section 56 corresponds to existing section 11 with the
omission of the exception mentioned at the end of the
existing sub-section.

Seetion S57 reproduces existing sectian 12,

Seetion 58 corresgctds tc existing section 13 witn the
omission of sub-section (2), which is considered unneces-
sary.

Section, 59 combines existing sections 14 and 16.

Section 60 reproduces existing section 15.

Sections 61 to 85 include the provisions relating to
registered books and indexes.

In Seetion 61—

Sub-section (1) corresponds to sub-section (1) of exist
ing section 51 with consequential changes whieh are neces-
sary owing to the substitution of ‘reference’ for an order
of refusal,

Sub-section (2) corresponds to sub-section (2) of existing
sec 1 with changes which are necessary in view cf
the provisicrs in section 42.

Sub-sections (3) and (4) reproduce sub-sections (3) and
(4) of existing section 51.

Sub-section (5) is new. It provides tor copymg and
authentication of books when they are in danger of being
damaged.

Sub-section (6) incorporates the provisions in sub-section
(2) of existing section §2.

Sections 62 and 638 reproduce existing sections 53 and
54, respectively.

Section 6a corresponds to existing section 55, with
consequential changes. At the end of the section. a new
sub-section has been inserted, Providing for the copying
cf indexes when they are in danger of being damaged.

Section 65 reproduces existing section 57 with a conse-
quential change in sub-section (1).

Sections 66 to 68 reproduce the provisions in existing
sections 78 to 80, with the substitution of the Union Gov.
ernment instead of. the State Government, in section 6%
(corresponding to existing section 78). :


83

Sections 69 to-72 correspond to existing sections 81 ta
84 with changes in sub-section (1) of section 71 {which
corresponds to existing section 83) to indicate that there
should be no prosecution for an offence under the Act
on private complaint,

Sections 73 to 78 contain the residuary and miscellaneous
provisions.

Section 73 corresponds to existing section 88 with the
inclusion of the presiding officer of a Court in clause (a),
and the Union Government in clause (d) of sub-section

41).

Section 74 corresponds to existing section 85 with the
additional requirement of notice

‘

Section 75 reproduces existing section 86.

Section 76 corresponds to the existing section 69
relating to the rule-making power, with the fallowing
changes:

It is provided, in a new sub-section, that instead of
the Inspector-General the State Government is
to have the power to make the rules.,

Sub-section (2) reproduces the several clauses of sub-
section (1) of the existing section 69 with the
following changes: Clause (a) has been omitted
because the reference to “territorial divisions” has
been omitted from sub-section (3) of section 7
(corresponding to sub-section (3) of existing section
21). Clause (d) has been omitted in view of the
changes made with respect to fines in sections 10
and 18 (corresponding to existing sections 25 and
34),

Clauses (h), (i) and (k} are new. They are conse-
quential to the changes made ‘in the several
substantive provisions. mentioned therein.

Sub-section (3) reproduces sub-section (2) of existing
section 69, with the omission of the requirement
of approval since, under the revised section, the
rules will be made by the State Government

- itself,

Section 77 corresponds to existing section 90 and section
78 corresponds to existing section 91, with verbal changes.


APPENDIX वा
COMPARATIVE TABLES
"TABLE A हु
Showing the sections tn the existing Act and the corresponding sections in Appendix I

Corresponding Correspor ding
Existing section section GE Existing section section Ge
any) io any) in
Appendix वा Appendix 1
1 2 1 2
1) : . . . 1) 19(2Xix) . . व. 42(9[वो
12) - -+ - - 1(2) ए7(22(2) fff 42178
Prov 5 Lk Omtirred TGA FL) gate)
13) - . पु » 13) 1306 611॥ पु पु ~ 32%)
Pe 6) 49) सहज) 26)
2 Dok aR Expl. 0.) ; 301, Expl (0)
2 Do kt Loo
#8 RE ROR CR CME
2G). ee 25) yt
206) . . पु 2 gm. पर पु न रे
2668) . 1 -+- - CRD 20 Doe
27) पु पु + 269) 21. पु पु पु » 77238)
208) - 0... CED) aro. *५॥ ५. कमाए:
2091 Sone Omitted 22(23 =. 0. Proviso 107
0) - - 2K) Be BOD
Bef 49 77 1 Owzitted
a(Repealed) 2S 4 दि 8
a : 5163) ab. . : . . ou
7.0! बात) 27५9. 5 9 ५5४ - हे
है. - ५४३ 5 2 ner 5 : : एप
gRepealed) © we डक) sat
ee . . : . 8 Ee पु . : Omitted
0 कट ze) 1. 1 te
x न 2 1 1 ७. - asta
r x3 . 7 . . Srnitted Ea) . पु . . 1 Savy
mel. ५5 - 370) उडण ५. ५ rca itt)
tee 60 व... - - - - 76
16. . 59(20(3)% Baty पु : + 181)
inttxa) - पु . : 34(2) . . . + 18)
x7tb) = = 27010) 34908) - न. गण)
ae). -+ -+- Opmittad 315 5) ३. ५9 +-+ -+ 79)
एक) se - 32 iat Ho) ०5 ने 294 8
Tx) rr:
Pee oD! NO, Prev Eris Sol ft aes
: 3st, . दि + ३202)
पा 45 iS . . . . इज
2. a3 Fe Sf at
») froviso 1 . . «  Ongtteed
3(2%e) Proviso 2 . . » 210t) Prov,
न ». अ2[10(९३ 36 - : + . + 32
. « 4a2tetd) 37. . - . _ 3B
= + 42.12) BB. ee उ4



85

I 2 t 2
39. . . : - 35 6901)(6) « : : « 7520०
4. : . . » 12(2)3rs(b}(e)  69C1N - . : + 75209)
aur). . : 2 24 69(1)(g) : न पु 14440
ara). . : + 797०) 69(1)(88) पु : . 28020
42. . पु पु + 43) 6901)0) « पु पु ». 76218)
4B. . : : - 44 69010) - पु . ». 70200)

हु : पु + 45 69000) « : : + 75(230)
4st) - न पं + बुत 692) न न + 76505)
4502) . . . . Omitted FO. : . . . Craited
46. 47 साहा) पु . 2६2)
47 38 712) Omitted
4B 39 qz- Omitted
9 37 23. : Cmtitted
Prov. Omitted 7 कक +. Badd)
50. 49 7823) - . ». 22(2)(3)4)
ST. ५ पु : « 6700(20(30/(% 754, पु पु न ». 205» (2209)
Sz) . : ~ EERE) पु न न Cmitted
Batritc) ol 3s FEA) fe 2
52(a) 6166) TE, : +
53 - 62 प्रा
54 - 63 7
ss. 64 9
56 (Repeated) न 80
37 . 65 81
sR. 26 82
59. 27 33
60. 28 84
छा. 29 85
62 - 30 86
63 3I 87 पु पु :

64. : + 3600 Be. BB
65. . » 36(2)3) 89) - : - 42119)
66. . . पु « 36(4) $3) पु पु न + 420th)
67. + 864) 893). ee 4279)
68. . . . - 54 804). न पु » 42100)
6901). - पु . = §3576(2) 90. पु पु पु > 77
3108] ०. - - 7७2) क्र BB
59) ss. 76200) 92 (Repealed) - .

Gol). . पु « Omiteed Repealed) -
BBS न 5 + « Omitted 93 REP >



86

‘TABLE B

Showing the sections in Appendix I and the corresponding sections in the existing Ac:

Section orresporang
in. Contents section i the
Appendix] existing Act.
I 2 3
Paar 1
PRELIMINARY
i Short पर, extent and commencement. -

2 Definitions पु . +
(0 “addition - os
(21 “affect immovable property” -

(3) “book” :

(a) “districr® and “sub-district”

(3) “endorsement” and “endorsed”?

(७) “execution” : पु पु
(7) “Immovable property”. . .
(8) “Tredia® :

i) “tease” Do
(10) “minor’ पु .
ita) prescribed’ . गा
(12) “representative? ५ . . . .
ड़
Part IT

REGISTRABLE DOCUMENTS

3 Documents of which zagistration js compulsory 17, modified

Expl. to 17(2}

Sub-sec. (2):—

Ce SCC
cL db). . . . + . 372)Civ)
ele). - + न . - - Y7l2}Gsip
PC >>. |. | *- New
adie. व ०७ 451 - - पाया
16) Fo New

Sub-se.3) eT न 17G)

4 Documents of which registration is optional... 1&1), modified
Part HIT

REGISTRATION

(Caapren I.—Conditions of adnsissibility for registration

5 Documents in language not understood by Registering
Officer. oe



87

10
I
12

33
4
15

16

17

18

20

2
Documents containing interlineations,blanks,crasures
or alterations . . . . .
Description of property and maps or plans.
Sub-sec. 8 पु . . .
Sub-sec, (2) . पु . . . .
Sub-sec. (3) पु . . . . न
Sub-sec. (4) + . . . .
Proviso |. . . . . .
CHAPTER 11.—Presentation
‘Time for presenting documents. .
Sub-sec. (1) . पु .
Sub-sec, (2)
Documents executed by several persons at different
times 2 *« .
Extension of time for presentation . .
Documents executed out of India . .
Place of presentation . पु . +
Sub-sec. (3) + +
Sub-sec. ie . .
Sub-sec. soe

Sub-sec. (4) . - .
Registration by Registrars in certain cases
Presentation at private residence...

Persons to present documents for registration -

cl. (ay
cl (by. न .
hid. : +

Powers-of-attorney recognisable for purposes of Sec~

tion Is : . . .

Duties of Registering Officers when document preset

ted . . . .

Craprer IL].—Procedure for registration

Appearance of parties . . . .
Sub-sec, (1). . . .
Sub-sec. (2) . न
Sub-sec. (3) Dt
Sub-sec. (4). : . .

“Bub-sec. (5) :

Enguiry before registration 2.

Para. . - . a + .

गढ़) ५ 951 51 51 *॥

०) 2. eee

cit) 2 - - ee
Procedure on admission of execution etc.
Sub-sec, (1) -—

वि

ol. ७0

ch cb) GY
Sub-sec, @) :

Expl. : :
Sub-sec. (3)

20

at and 22, modified.
21(1)

लिन modified
21(3), modified
21(4)

22(2), modified

23 and 27
23
27

24

25, modified

26

28, 29 and 40 (1),.
modified

28, modified

40, in part

29, modified

New

30(2), modified

3r

32 and part of 4c:

32

40(2), in part

40(2), in part

B

$2(1)(a)Xb)

34, modified

उप)
34(2)
3444)
New
3405)
34(3000) (०), 35018),

3501)(9), in part

34300)
3413०
412)

3403)@)
Ne
35(1), modified

New
35(2), modified
73(4), in parc



88

2 3
21 Procedure on denial of execution etc, ५ . - 35(3), and 71
Sub-sec. hw »

. . Fe /(&)--(०,
cls. ess . . so oe)
cls, (a), (९, 35(3), modified,

Sitb-sec. (2:
c@, (by 2. we. खत), modified
els, (९), (१% (९) . . . . vy New
22 Procedure before the Registrar. . . + 7475, 76 modtied
‘Suts-see. (1) . . + . न + 74 modified
Sub-sec, (2) न . - + : : + 74 (2)
‘Sub-sec, (3) . यु . . : : - 75(2), modified
Sub-sec. (4) . . . . . . + 753)
Sub-sec, (53 . : . : . : - 75(4}, in part
Sub-sec. (6) | ० + -+ + - - 76607), modified
Sub-see. (7) LC)
23 Suit in case of order of refusal by Registrar. . modified
Sub-sec, (10 . . + THI)
Sub-sec, (2) . . . . : 772)
Proviso : New
24 Registration of Wills and authorities to adopt | बात)

Hager IV.—Procedure on actnrining to registration

25 Copying of the documents or memorandum. > 52(t){c)

26 Particulars to be endorsed on documents admitted to
registration >

27 Endorsements to be dated and signed by the Registering
Officer

28 Certificate of Registration

29 Endorsements and certificate to be copied and decu-
ment returned ,

30 Procedure on presenting a document in language ४:४-
‘oown ro che Registering Officer

59

CHAPTER V.—Power to examine and enforce rhe appearance of execurants and
wttresses.

a2 Power to administer cachs and record substance of

statements 63
32 Procedure where appearance of exccutant or witness:
isdesired. + 36

33 Officer or court to issue and cause service of

suUTMONS . हु - 37
34 Persons exempt from appearance at Registration Office 3%
‘Law as to summons, commissions and witnesses - 39

CaarTen V1.—Procedure where a documenc is registered at a place where
the whole or part of the property tr net ituated

36 Procedure where documentrelates to landin several

district and sub-districts  . + 64,65,.66_ and 67
Sub-sec. | . . . . - . + 64, Modified
Sub-sec, (2' +63)

ena करो
Soe ee ne
: Dot (2), 67

. 2
. + 6604), modified



89

37

38
39

40

43

45

47

Cuaprer VII,-- Effects of Registration and Non-Registration

Effects ofnon-registration . . +. + + 49, modified
‘Time from which registered document operates «47
Registered documents relating to property when to take
effect against oral agreements =.
Proviso « . . . . . . New
Certain registered documents relating to land to take
effect against unregistered documents . + « §0
Sub-section(f) =. se -+ 5०7
Proviso 1,2 - . . . . . . Ne)
Sub-section(2) eee S002) हि
Explanation. . . ‘ . . . Expl to 8. 50, modi-
Irregularities not affecting validity of registration . 87 हु
Sub-sect on ( . . . जे - 3
Sub-section(2) 5 fee ON
Part IV
FILING OF DOCUMENTS AND COPIES IN BOOK I
Copies of Srders certificates cic., to be sent to regis-

teringofficrs =.) et 89, modified, 17(2))

(vi (xa), (2
fied.

Sub-section (1):—

ले, कुछ. - - ee + 58209) 1712) (कफ)
कक) + - -+ - - 5 - (CCI)
co g + + + ¥7(2yxa)
I. . * . » + . . 1 ‘2)vii)
al. & Foe tee we Se) modified
a@ Dot [ff 1720), modified
. + + . »  17%2)0), mo;
1. ® न : . + 89(2),(4), 77 (2) Cai).
Sub-sections(2)—(@) swe New
Part V
DEPOSIT AND DESTRUCTION OF WILLS
Deposit of Wills. 5 + es s+ 2, Mooddified
Sub-section ® . . . . . .
Sub-section (2, . . . . पु . New
Procedure on deposit of Wills 9.  - 5 + 43
‘Withdrawal of sealed cover « . + . न 44
Proceedings on death of depositor . . . « 45 (7)
Sub-section (1) . . . . . . 45
Sub-secton (2). sews Ne
Saving of certain enactments and powers of courts . 46
Destruction of Wills . + >> _ Nem



Parr VI
REGISTRATION ESTABLISHMENT
Chapter I.— Registration Officers and Registration Office Establishment

49 Inspector-General of Registration . : . +3
50 Districts and sub-district: . . . . - 5
5X Registrars and Sub-Registrars and their offices + 6&7
Sub-section (1) . पु पु + : + 700
Subsection (2) 6 eee)
Sub-section(3) . oe 6
52 Inspectors of Registration Offices . पु » 8
53 Powers of Inspector-General to superintend Registra- .
tion Offices. 6901), inpart
54 Powers of Registrar. to superintend and conrol sub-
Registrars. न + 68
55 Absence of Registrar of yancancy in his office + 10
56 Absence of Registrar on duty in his district fee

57 Absence of Sub-Registrar or vacancy in his office . 12
58 Reports to State Government of appointments under,

sections 55, 56nd 57. 1361)

$9 Establishments for Registration Offices . + 14 & 16
‘Sub-section (1) 1 1 og
‘Sub-section (2) . . . पु . « गा
Sub-section (3) पु न . + . » 16(3)
Sub-section (gi | |] SD - 764)

60 Seal of Registering Officers « . . . - TS

Cuaprer [.— Register Books and Indexes

6i Register Books wy be kept in the several offices... «51, modified, 522)
‘Sub-section (1). D1 1), me
Sub-section (खोल (a) |] ] |} Lulz, modified

cc) 2) ) lL New

Sub-section(3) ५५.५ + gt)
फट हे... SD ५)
Subsection छू Dot Dot
Sub-section (6: . . . . + §2(2)

€2 Entries to be numbered consecutively. . - 53

63 Current indexes and entries therein 5 ws 54

64 Indexes to be made by registering officers and their

contents . 55, modified

Sub-section (1) . . . . . ~ 5500) i
Sub-section (2)? २... ५० DD 55025, modified
Subsection 3), | + + + + 53) modified
Sub-tection (3)... ५» + + -+- - SaaS
Sub-section (5)... ss. -+- - इड9
Sub-section (6) =.) ५1 lL 5४७)
Sub-section (7) . . . . . » New

65 Repistering officers 10 allow ingpe inepection of certain books
and indexes and to give certified copies of entries. 57



91

Tt 2
Criapter IIl—Fees for Registration, Searches and Copies
66 Fees to be fixed by Union Government. =... 78.
67 Publication offees =. we wk + 79
68 Fees payable on presentation see $9
Part VII
PENALTIES
69 Penalty for incorrectly endorsing, copying, translating
or registering documents with intent to injure =. 81
70 Penalty for making false statements, delivering false
copies of translations, false personation, and abet=
ment . . + न 82
71 Registering Officer to commence prosecutions . » 33
72 Registering Officers to be deemed public servants. &4
Part VIIL
MISCELLANEOUS
73 Registration of documents executed by Government
Officers or certain public functionaries . .
74 «Destruction of unclaimed documents . . ~ 85
75 Registering Officer not liable gor things bonafide done
or refused in his official capacity कि 86
76 Power of State Government to make rules. —. 69, modified
Sub-section (1) पु - . New
Sub-section (2) Dl 21D 6901), moditis:
Chay. + -+ + -+ - 69099)
Gite. FD ath
Cli). . : . . . 69(10९) ३
CL (व) + 690d
Cl. (e) + 69128)
Ch (0) + 691Xge)
Cl. (8) 69(1)60)
Cl, (a) New
Ch Nero
cag. + 69100)
a. : oan)
|. . . . . पु : 69(1)G)
Sub-section (3) . . . व : . 69 (2), mod fie i
77 Exemption of certain documents executed by or in
favour of Government पु . 90
78

Inspection and copies of such documents... or



APPENDIX IV
SUGGESTIONS IN RESPECT OF OTHER ACTS

I. Civil Procedure Code—(1) Order 21, Rule 16 should
be amended to make it obligatory on the part of the
assignor of an executable decree to report the fact of
assignment to the court, after notice to the judgement-
debator, within three months from the date of assignment.
[Para 32].

(2) Suitable provision should be made in Order 41, rule
1 of the Code requiring that where the subject-matter
of appeal is immovable property, the memorandum of
appeal shall contain a schedule of such property, with @
description sufficient to identify it. [Para. 103].

IL. Evidence Act—In view of the recommendation that
at least one attesting witness should be examined by the
registering authority at the time of registration of a
document, consequential amendment should be made in
section 68 of the Evidence Act. [Para. 66].

UL Insovency Acts—Appropriate amendment should
be made in the Law of Insolvency to settle the conflict of
decisions relating to fraudulent preference. [Para 73].

IV. Transfer of Property Act—(1) The Act should be--
extended to the whole of India. [Para. 30].

(2) The definition of “immovable property” in section
3 of the Act should be amended so as to bring it into con-
formity with the definition proposed for the Registration
Act. [Para. 21 (8)1.

(3) The definition of ‘notice’ in section 3 of the Act
should be amended to provide that the filing of a document
er a memorandum in Book 1, would be equivalent te
registration for purposes of notice under the Transfer of
Property Act. ([Para. 104].

(4) While revising the Act, it is to be considered
whether it should be provided that any transaction affect-
ing immovable property, irrespective of the value of the

92


3

property or consideration, shall be effected by crly &
registereé@ instrument. [Paras. 16, 26].

V. Hindu Lew.—(1) Tt should be provided that, unless
conferred by will, an authority to adopt shall be made
only by a registered document. [Para. 44}.

(2) It should be provided that the age of majority for
the purpose of conferring an authority to adopt should be
the same whether the authority is conferred by will or a
deed. [Para. 45].

(3) It may be provided in the Hindu Adoptions ard
Maintenance Act, 1956 that adoptions under the Act shell
be made only by 8 registered document. [Para, 48].

VI. General Clauses Act—A definition of the word
“resides” may be included in the General Clauses Act on
the lines of Explanation I to section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, (Para. 22].

VW Law —i


Note BY DR. पं. ८, SEN GUPTA
1. REGISTRATION BY PANCHAYATS

I regret that I cannot agree with the opinion of my colleagues
against providing for registration by Panchayats in a limited number
of cases at the discretion of the State Government which I had made
and which is dealt with in paragraph 18 of the Report. The principal
reason assigned for holding this opinion that it is not practicable
does not convince me. I may goint out that my suggestion was that
in a limited number o2 cases where the document relates to tke
land wholly within the jurisdiction of the Panchayat and which o1e
acceptable to both the parties, the State Government may authorise
the Executive Officer of such Panchayats, as they think fit, to register
the document. I pointed out that there would be some advantages

of having such documents registered by presentation to the Pancha-
yats where the State Government considers it practicable. 1 did not

contemplate that the Panchayat should have any power to refuse
registration. In cases where the document is not admitted, the person
presenting it would be referred to the Sub-Registrar and where the
document is registered, the Panchayat would enter the particulars
of the document in a general register of documents received and
after making an endorsement of registration send it over to the
Sub-Registrar who will take further steps.

The advantages of this procedure would be—

1. In respect of transfers of land within the jurisdiction. it
would provide the Panchayat with a record of all tran-
sactions recorded in their office.

2. When an execution of a document is admitted, this prece-
dure would obviously simplify the process of regis(ra-
tion, particularly as the Panchayat is generally likely
to know the executant personally.

3. The chance of falsely alleging or denying execution where
the document is presented as soon as possible after
execution to a Panchayat who is near at hand would
be smaller, and

4, Incidentally it could possibly add to the revenues of the
Panchayat to some extent.

Tt has been said in the report—(1) The members of the Pancha-
yats have no knowledge or experience of the procedure to be

94


95

followed in the registration of documents. (2) If the experiment
were to be tried, it would entail considerable expense for providing
the staff and equipment necessary to register the documents and to
maintain several books and indexes as required by law. Upon the
suggestion as made by me above, these arguments would be of no
avail. For (1) in the first place, the certificate of registration of a
document on admission of parties known to the Panchayat does not
require much expert knowledge or experience, (2) the maintenance
of the several registers would be made by the Sub-Registrar when
the document after registration is forwarded to him, (3) The cost
of maintenance of a staff for this purpose would surely not be
excessive and, whatever the cost, against it would be set off the
reduced cost in the Sub-Registrar’s office by reduction of work.

It is, however, said that the offices of the Sub-Registrars are so
distributed in the districts as to be within any easy reach of persons
intending to register documents and no special inconvenience is
noticed in that behalf. I think that this dictum is not founded upon
any investigation. The offices of the Sub-Registrars are not always
very near at hand and are sometimes 7 or more miles away without
any Railway communication and the necessity of a long journey
often delays the registration of documents after execution.

Further, it is open to the State Government, if it thinks fit, under
section 6 of the Act to appoint particular officers of the Panchayat
as Sub-Registrar under special rules.

During the discussion on this matter it was apparently suggested
by the Chairman that somehow this is not in accordance with
Article 40 of the Constitution. I do not see how this suggestion in
any way conflicts with Article 40 which is only a directive principle
recommending that the Panchayat may be utilised to function as
units of self-Government. I should think that that is precisely what
is intended to be done by my suggestion. I think, therefore, that
power should be given to the State Governments to authorise an
officer of the Panchayat to act as ex-officio Sub-Registrar in respect
of documents relating to lands within their jurisdiction under
special rules to be framed by the State Government.

II. “COUNTERPART” OF LEASE

In Section 3, Sub-section (2) clause (d) appears to be ‘mis-con-
ceived, The definition of ‘lease’ in the Transfer of Property Act has
been adopted and therefore the agreement to lease has been
omitted from the definitions. Under the Transfer of Property Act,
a lease is an instrument which is to be executed by both parties.
There cannot, therefore, be a counter-part to such a lease. There
may be a duplicate or copy. Therefore, there does not seem to be


96

any justification for saying that the counter-pari of a lease which
has been registered need not be registered. This clause should be
omitted. I am not satisfied-with the reasons given for refusing to
acespt my suggestion, An agriculiural lease is no daubt exempted
from the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act,—so that there
may be agricultaral leases which need not be in writing and also
teases which are in writing but not registered. But if for that reason
an exemption has to be made, it ought to be expressly made, for
instance, by a clause in the proposed section 3,—a second proviso
to the effect that leases for agricultural Purposes shall not be com-
pulsovily registerable—unless so required by the State Law.

With regard to the non-applicability of the Transfer of Property
Act to some areas, such as, the Punjab, I am afraid, there is mix
conception. In order to make this definition applicable, it is not
necessary that the Transfer of Property Act should be applicable
in any particular area. By, the force of this definition itself, for the
purposes of registration, the definition of the Transfer of Property
Act must be deemed to be incorporated in the present Act and the
fact that the Transfer of Property Act does not apply would be
absolutely immaterial, I do not understand how a counter-part
can be regarded as a ‘lease’, A Kabuliot, a Pattah or an Amalnama,
which were considered to be lease under sec, 2(7), were so consi-
dered because the execution of a lease by both the lessor and the
Tessee was not then required. Now if it does not create any interest
in immovable property by itself, there is no reason why it should
be registered at ell.

Further, a ccunter-part implies the existence of another docu-
ment of which it is a counter-part, I could have understood it if a
‘ease’ is executed in two counter-parts, both together may have to
be registered.

The effect of this definition by including eounter-part of leases
within the definition of ‘Lense’ is to make a counter-part of the
lease even when it is governed by the Transfer of Property Act
registerable, which I think would not have been contemplated.
Because such a counter-part would simply not be a lease at all
under the Transfer of Property Act.

गा. AUTHORITY TO ADOPT.

Section 17 clause (3) requires an instrument giving the autho-
गए to adopt a son after the first day of January, 1872 to be regis-
tered and it has been ineorporated in the proposed section 3 sub-
section (3). This, however, should be deleted now as under the
Hindu Adoption Act, the adoption by a woman after the death (or

even before the death) of husband, does not require the authority
of the husband or anybody ‘else.


o7

It has been suggested that the position that a widow does not
need the authority of the husband to adopt has not been made clear
by the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act. I have read section
8 and other provisions of that Act carefully. I do not agree that the
matter is at all in doubt having regard to the provisions of section
5(1). 7 fe eee

IV. “REPRESENTATIVE” OF MINOR.

Section 2(12) gives a new definition of the term “Representa-
tive”. In the Act, as it is, the word “representative” is not exhausti-
vely defined. It only states that it “includes” the guardian of a
minor and a committee or other Curator or a lunatie or idiot.

That clause has been proposed to be modified substantially. In
the case of a minor the representative is said to include, in the
absence of the guardian, (i) “any other near relation of the minor”,
(ii) if the minor is adopted any near relation within the adoptive
or natural family and (iii) if the minor is widow, any neaz relation
in the family of the father or husband being in each case a relation
not having any interest adverse to that of the minor.

I regret that I cannot agree to this change. The question of the
meaning of the word “Representative” arises principally under
section 32 (also section 34) of the present Act and under the pro-
posed section 15 which provides that a document may be presented
for registration by the representative or assign of any party to the
document. Under the present Act that representative is said to
include the guardian-of a minor. That does not mean that the
minor may not be represented by anyone else and the Judicial
Committee has observed in one case that the definition of a repre-
sentative does not make it equal to a guardian, but says that it
includes a guardian and in particular circumstances of the case it
might be that in the absence of a legally appointed guardian, the
particular relation could be regarded as a representative. But to
say that it might be presented by “any near relation” is going too
far, The degree of nearness of the relationship is not specified,
Therefore, it comes to this that practically any relation may come
forward and present the document although the minor concerned
is living with another relation who looks after all his affairs. In the
next place, the presentation of a document is a responsible act
which binds the person on whose behalf it is presented and section
32 as well as the proposed sec. 15 require that where it is not pre-
sented by the executant or representative it should be presented by
a person under a legal power of attorney, That it should be left
virtually to any relation in the case of a minor to present it would
make the provisions altogether too wide. In explaining this provi-
sion in page 10 of the report, reference is made to the Privy Council
decisions in 52 Madras 175 referred to above which only said that


98

in the particular circumstances of the case where there was no one
else, the natural father of the boy given in adoption validly pre-
sented the document for registration.

With reference to the suggestion of a de facta guardian being
substituted for a near relation, reference is made to the fact that
in Muhammedan Law according to Imamandi’s case, a de facto
guardian was not capable of disposing of the property of the minor.
With regard to Hindu Law it has been pointed cut that there are
authorities to say that a certain acts of a de facto guardian may
validly bind the minor, But under the Hindu Minority and Guar-
dianship Act of 1956 it has been provided that a de facto guardian
is not entitled to deal with the property of a minor. Therefore, it
is said that the suggestion could not be accepted.

Now if de facto guardian is to be rejected on the ground that
under the law, a de facto guardian cannot deal with the property
of a minor, how is a near relation in a better position? There is no
Jaw which says that any relation or a “near relation’ can dispose
of the property of a minor. It is only in peculiar circumstances
when the minor was living under the care of a particular person,
that the decisions under the Hindu Law recognise the power of the
de facto guardian to bind the minor. But a relation or a near rela-
tion is nobody, and under Mohammedan he is of course nobody,
unless appointed guardian by Court.

I am of opinion that the definition should be left as it is and the
responsible act of presenting a document for registration should not
be left at large, as suggested by the amendments. Nevertheless, there
may be special circumstances in representation by a particular rela-
tion with whom and under whose care the minor is living and in such
cases, the decision of the Privy Council would be sufficient to
enable the Court to say that there is a good presentation.

Incidentally I may note that in discussing this matter the report
refers predominantly to the authority to adopt. It has been over-
looked, I am afraid that, undet the Hindu Law of Adoption, as now
enacted, no authority to adopt would ever require registration for
women are capable of adopting without any authority to adopt.

If an amendment is at all considered necessary, it would be
enough to add to the definition of “representative” a clause saying
that where a minor has not a legal guardian, any person who may
in the cireumstances be regarded as a de facto guardian may present
a document for registration. The fact that under the Muhammedan
Law as well as under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act,
a de facto guardian cannot dispose of the property of a minor would
not affect the right of such a person to present a document for


99

registration if that is expressly provided in this Act. It would be
a special provision which would override the general Law.

V. SECTION 28; PROPOSED SECTION 12

I am afraid, I cannot quite agree to the proposed amendment of
section 28 by making it possible for registration uf a document to be
valid, because a property purports to be included in the document,
“whether the parties intend to transfer it or not and even if it is
insignificant in existence or value”. The reasons given do nct appear
tu be convincing. .

In the first place, the Act which says that the Registrar should
have jurisdiction only if there is some property affected. by. the
document within his jurisdiction would stultify itself if it is said at
the same time that the registration would be good where a document
is registered without such jurisdiction; because the property sought
to be included in the document was not intended to be transferred
or that the property does not exist Secondly, such registration would
be valid according to the summary of the principles, if the Registrar
bona fide believes that the property exists within his jurisdiction
even if it ultimately turns out that the property was non-existent or
fictitious. An exception is made where it is proved that the parties
thereby intended to defraud a third party. The bona fide belief of the
Registrar may be difficult to prove at a time when the matter comes
before the Court. And when the matter is before the Court, and upon
the evidence it is proved that the property sought to be transferred
is non-existent or fictitious, it would be against all principle to say
that the registration would nevertheless be valid. The exception in
the case of fraud on third party is no protection. There can seldom
be any honest reason for not registering a document where it ought
to be registered. But at the same time it would be difficult to prove
that there was an intention of defraud a third party. In any event it
is also against principle. Where the deed obviously includes property
which it is proved does not exist, why should the person who
challenges the deed be required to adduce evidence of a suppressed
intention to a defraud a third party. One should think that the mere
fact that the Act was sought to be defrauded would raise a presump-
tion against the bona fides and it would be on the person who insists
upon the validity of the deed to prove bona fides.

The next principle namely that parties to the registration should
not be entitled to impeach the registration is understandable, on the
basis of the principle of estoppel. But the parties to such an
instrument do not always deal with one another at arm’s length
and the purchase may perhaps have taken the document in good
faith upon the representation of the vendor that this property does
exist and belongs to him without further enquiry. Where estoppel


300 है ‘

can be established, assuredly, the party against whom it is estab-
lished cannot take advantage of his false representation. But apart
from that, it cannot be laid down as a general proposition that none
of the parties to the transaction who may not have been dealing
with one another at arm’s length should not be allowed to challenge
the transaction on the ground of want of jurisdiction in any case.

Laoking at the proposed section, as amended, I think the proper
way to attain the objects sought would be to alter the first proviso
by saying that after the document is registered, the party thereto on
whose representation the non-existent or fictitious property has been
included shall not be permitted to challenge the validity of the regi
tration by reason of the property being made the basis of the jurisdic-
tion of the Sub-Registrar. It will be noticed, however, that the section,
85 now drawn up, does not quite accord with the proposals in para-
graph 67 of the report inasmuch as the registration is valid only if
the property specified in the document or any of the items specified
in the document is situated within the jurisdiction of the Registrar.
It does not speak of the Sub-Registrar being bona fide of the opirion
that the property exists.

One of the reasons assigned for the amendment proposed in para-
graph 56 is that there is no machinery provided under the Act for an
elaborate enquiry by the Sub-Registrar to verify whether the property
comprised in the deed exists within his jurisdiction, That is perfectly
true. But that is no reason for saying that a document which is prov-
ed to be without jurisdiction should nevertheless become valid. It is
quite true that the Registrar cannot make any elaborate enquiry to
find out whether the property comprised in the deed exists within his
jurisdiction. That would be a matter for the Court to determine when
the document is challenged, and the Court can have no difficulty in
determining this fact upon evidence adduced, The present registra-
tion law does not require the Registrar to make enquiry as to the
existence of the property; he will register a document if a property
is stated to be within his jurisdiction. The question whether it is so
or not would be a matter to be decided in a suit where the document
is challenged. In other words, the present Act does not require the
Sub-Registrar to come to any judicial finding with regard to the
existence or non-existence of the property. That would be left to be
determined in a suit, where the deed is challenged. I do not under-
stand my colleagues to suggest that in every case the Registrar will
scrutinise all the properties and come to some finding as to whether
the property exists or not. Registration of documents might be inde-
finitely delayed if this was to be done by the Sub-Registrar in the case
of every document brought before him.

My colleagues seem to assume that in every case where the
validity of the registration is challenged, by reason of fictitious


101

property being included, the property may have been ‘so included.
for registration in an office near at hand. I do not see any justifica-
tion for holding this view. There is no difficulty about registering
a document by a power of attorney or taking out a commission to
examine the executant. Why should people who want to register
a document enter into the shady device of including fictitious
property when it could be otherwise duly registered by a mere
power of attorney. I think, therefore; that the reasons given in
paragraphs 55 and 56 are by no means convincing.

Looking at the cases where the registration has been invalidated
for the properties being not in fact in existence or within the juris-
diction, quite a number of them are cases where fictitious property
has been included not for the convenience of registration but to create
jurisdiction of the Original Side of the High Court within whose
jurisdiction the property. meant to be transferred does not lie. One
would think that this for one is not a device which should receive
encouragement from the legislature.

VI. PROPOSED SECTION 20.

The amendments made in sections 34 and 35 by the proposed
section 20, in my opinion, require too much of the Sub-Registrar.
Section 20(1) (a) requires that the Registrar shall read over the docu-
ment to the executants etc. This might make the burden of the
Sub-Registrar excessive. Many of the documents presented for regis-
tration are exceedingly prolix and as the proposed clause stands, the
Registrar will have to read the whole of it including the Schedules
which may run to fifty pages, for instance. At this rate a reason-
ably busy Sub-Registrar will find it impossible to get through his
work for the day. I think where the executants are literate and
admit the execution, no question of reading over should arise. In
-other cases there. must be an endorsement or solemn affirmation by
4 person who has read over and explained the document and that
would be sufficient. The utmost that can be expected of the Regis-
trar is to state the nature of the document whether, for instance, it
is a mortgage or a Deed of Partition or Conveyance and to ask
whether the document purporting to be such has been executed.

Then under section 20(b) (ii), the Registrar is expected to be satis-
fied that the document requiring to be attested has been attested
according to law. That is a function which cannot be expected to be
duly performed by the Sub-Registrar in many cases. Whether a
particular. attestation fs a proper and legal attestation is a question
which-ought to be left to the Court to decide when the matter comes
up before it. If there are the required number of witnesses signing
as such, the Registrar may proceed on the basis that there has been
proper attestation, without deciding the question as to whether-that-
is proper attestation. That would imply the Registrar to take
179 M. of Law—8,


102

evidence as to whether the witnesses signed after the executant and’
whether they saw the executant sigh or got his admission and
whether the executant say the witnesses signing. It is not necessary
for the purposes of registration that these things should be deter-
minded by the registering officer. If the Registrar accepts the
attestation after being satisfied, as required by the proposed section,
it would not shut out the question of attestation if the matter comes
before the Court. There the fact has got to be established on
evidence. It is true that where a document has been registered,
there will be a presumption that if the document requires attesta-
tion, it has been attested, but only a presumption, and the whole
thing is left open for the Court to decide. I do not see what useful
purpose can be served by putting further burden on the Registrar
when, if the document is disputed in court, it will have to be estab-
lished by evidence and there would be no presumption of attestation
arising if the dispute is raised.

It may be noted that the question whether upon the facts proved
a document can be held to have been legally attested is one which
may have to be determined not upon the statement of the attesting
witness alone but very often after an elaborate examination of
witnesses to the cireumstances of execution. The weighing of the
evidence of, may be a number of witnesses and the determination
of the question of law whether the circumstances proved constitute:
legal execution and attestation is not within the province of the
tegistering officer, and, as my colleagues emphasise in another
connection, there does not exist the machinery for an elaborate
investigation of this matter.

Under sub-section (2), Explanation, it is, however required in
order to prove attestation that one attesting witness at least be
called for the purpose of proving due execution, if such attesting
witness is alive. If the document is disputed in Court, it cannot be
proved unless one attesting witness at least comes before the Court,
if one is alive. But why should the attesting witness be required to
attend before the Registrar also, It may be difficult in many: cases
to get witnesses to attest document if it means that he has also to-
go to the Registrar at the time of registration, and as I have
suggested, it serves no useful purpose. I think, therefore, that these
amendments should not be made.

I could understand, and probably even support a proposal that
attesting witness should be required to sign a proper attestation
clause, a form of which may be set out in the Act. A declaration or
a solemn affirmation in the attestation clause signed by the witness.
ought to suffice for registration without any necessity of dragging
him before the Sub-Registrar.


103

VU. PROPOSED SECTION 21,

The amendments made in section 34(3) by the proposed section
21 also require further consideration.

Under the present law, a document can be refused registration if
its execution is denied or if the executant is found by the Registrar
to be a disqualified person, Clauses (iv) and (ए) provide tha: if the
-executant of the document does not appear before the Registering
+ Officer within the’ time allotted or if the attestation of the document
is not proved where attestation is necessary, registration would be
refused and in the case of absence of attesting witnesses, the provi-
:sion is that there shall be a reference to the Registrar.

Tf a document has been executed by: a person but he does not
present it for execution within the time, the law allows the person
in whose favour the document has been executed to present it for
‘registration. The document may be registered, under certain
circumstances, even though the executant does not appear. The
executant will, of course, be called upon to appear and admit or
deny the execution, but if the executant does not appear within

time, it would be unfair to the person in whose favour the docu-
ment has been executed and who has taken all the necessary steps
‘for registration to be refused. It is not clear whether, if the
-executant does not appear within the time allowed, any #urther
-extension of time for his appearance can be given. The utmost that
ean be suggested is that in such a case, the matter would be referred
to the Registrar who has the necessary power to register a docu-
ment in such circumstances after taking evidence. See proposed
section 22 corresponding to section 74. It is still more unfair that
merely because attesting witnésses do not appear though bcth the
parties to the document appear, there should be a reference to the
“Registrar. The attesting witness has no interest in the transaction
and he may easily fail to appear to even deliberately refuse to
sappear. There is no reason why the parties to the Deed should
suffer on this account. I think these amendments should ot be
made. I am afraid my colleagues mix up the authentication of the
execution of the document, which is the proper function of regist-
ration with a decision about its validity.

VI. SECTIONS 48 and 50 (PROPOSED SECTIONS 39 and 40).

I do not agree to the suggestions in paragraphs 74 and 77 of the
Report. The proposals there only mitigate the mischief of sections
48 and 50 which, in my opinion, ought to be omitted altogether.
“Section 48 is a survival of the Act of 1866 and section 50 of the Acts
of 1864, 1866 and 1871 and successive amendments have been made
in the original sections in order to provide against the operation of
‘the section in certain specific cases. The last of the amendments in


LO

section 48 introducing a proviso was made only; in 1929. What is:
now proposed is to add further exceptions in the case where, under
sec. 27(b) of the Specific Relief Act, earlier oral. agreements prevail
over a subsequent registered document. We are left, therefore,
in this section with a very tenuous survival of the original section
which was enacted at a time when registration of documents was.
optional and not as provided in section 17 of this Act and the other”
Acts. Now section 17 is proposed to be expanded so as to include
virtually all documents relating to immovable property, excepting.
a few, and there does not seem to be any justification for provid-
ing for priority of registered documents over unregistered ones, which
ex hypothesi are in themselves perfectly good and effective instru--
ments.

On principle, this seems to be wrong. The prior document or oral
agreement, where permissible, transfers a right to the transferee.
Therefore, as a matter of substantive law, the tranferor would
have no right to transfer the same by any subsequent docu--
ment. If he makes a subsequent transfer and offers it for registration.
and gets it registered, he is simply transferring something which he
has not got. Therefore, there can be no question of the prior trans:
fer being superseded by the subsequent transfer which, in point of”
principle, was an absolute nullity.

And of course we. have got to consider the door to fraud tha’ this
may open. A man may have transferred a small property bona fide’
to another on receipt of proper consideration, deferring only
delivery of possession—by mutual consent or from considerations
of convenience. Under section 50, even delivery of possession
would be no protection. These sections would leave it open for a
fraud being perpetrated upon the original transferee by getting”
a new registered document executed for the same purpose in favour’
of somebody else and it will be remembered that neither this section
nor any other law specifically provides for any re-imbursement of the:
first transferee for the costs incurred by him.

Again, the unregistered instrument may be in respect of a small’
part, valued at less than Rs. 100, of a much larger property and a’
subsequent instrument for transfer of the entire property: is made.
The retention of this section means that the good title obtained by”
the first instrament would be extinguished by the subsequent
document.

On the other hand, I can hardly imagine any real advantage by
retaining these sections, when, under the law as proposed, virtually
every document of importance would be compulsorily registrable. I"
do not understand either that these sections are intended to be
applied to nullify gifts under the Mahomedan law which are ever
now valia if made by word of-mouth followed by possession, by the
mere execution of a subsequent registered deed.


105

Considering, therefore, that the sections are against all principles
and likely to open the door to fraud in the few cases in which the
sections would be applicable now, I think the only feasible course is
to repeal these sections altogether which are really anachronisms, so
that the principle of priority as between twe valid documents being
determined solely by priority in time should have full force.

In my opinion, therefore, the proposed sections 39 and 40 should
be deleted altogether.

TX. PROPOSED SECTION 42—(2), (3) & (4)
FORWARDING OF PLAINTS & MEMORANDA OF APPEAL.

I find it diffieult to understand the necessity of forwarding the
plaints or Memoranda of Appeal to the Registrar. The filing of a
piaint does not affect title to any immovable property, and the
record made under the proposed section from the plaint would be
of no use whatsoever except to show that a suit has been filed claim-
ing a right in respect of the property. If it is only for the purpose
of giving notice to any party dealing with the property that there
is a suit pending which might affect his title under the proposed
deed, it is superfluous, as the doctorine of lis pendens is, for very
good reason, not dependent upon notice. In the next place, so far
as Memoranda of Appeal are concerned, it is even more useless.
The Memorandum of Appeal does not necessarily contain any des-
cription of the property involved which is only to be found in the
plaint or the decree, if any. By itself it will convey nothing with
respect to the property which is the subject matter of the appeal.
-I should think, therefore, that the provision with regard to this
document is unnecessary and will encumber the records of the
Registration Office. It is enough that decrees in suits are sent to

the Registrar.

GMGIPND—NS—179 M of Law— 1009,