LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTIETH REPORT

ON

THE GENERAL CLAUSES ACT, 1897
MAY, 1974

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS


Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15

Appendix

CONTENTS

Preliminary
Statutory Interpretation.

Definitions

Commencement

Part of Statutes

Repeal and Amendment

Temporary Acts

Other General Rules of Construction
Corporations

Provisions concerning the Government
Powers and Functionaries

Statutory Instruments

Severability

Offences under Several Enactments

Miscellaneous

Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments to the existing Act

30
36
4
48

55

88


D.O. No. F. 1(1)/73-L.C.
P. B. Gajendragadkar
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
‘A’ Wing, Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-1.
May 21, 1974.

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 60th Report of the Commission on the
General Clauses Act-

As the Commission has pointed out in the first Chapter of the Report, a draft Report on
the subject, containing tentative proposals, had been prepared by the previous Commission and
circulated for comments to State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other inter-
ested persons and bodies. Replies had been received in response to the said draft; but, no fur-
ther action was taken by the previous Commission and no report submitted in that behalf.

As you are aware, after the present Commission was constituted, it was engaged in dealing
with more urgent work and when that work was completed, it decided to take up the present
subject for study. A fresh draft Report on the subject was then prepared by the Member-
Secretary, Mr. Bakshi for discussion. This draft was fully considered by the Commission and
in the light of the discussion, it was revised and ultimately finalised. While doing so, the
comments received on the earlier draft have been duly taken into account.

The Commission hopes that the recommendations made in the present Report would help
rationalise some of its important sections and clarify the law by removing ambiguities where
they existed and recommending the addition of certain new sections.

Yours
Sd/-
P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR
Hon’ble Mr. H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Government of India,
New Delhi.


CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY

1.1. This Report deals with an enactment which is not confined to a particular branch subject-
of the law, but applies to all its branches. It is concerned with the General Clauses Act, matter
1897. Report.

1.2. Revision of the General Clauses Act was referred to a previous Law Commission in Reference
1959 by the Ministry of Law? (Legislative Department). The Commission commenced a study 10 the ion.
of the subject, and had to consider one important preliminary question? relating to the effect
of revision of the Act on the operation of article 367(1) of the Constitution. This question
was, after considerable discussion, settled, and the way was cleared for proceeding with a
revision of the Act. In due course, a draft Report containing tentative proposals on the subject
was prepared, and approved for circulation, and circulated by the previous Commission for
comments to State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other interested persons
and bodies.

But the work of finalising the draft Report was not concluded and so, the report on this
subject was not forwarded by the Commission to the Government.

Since this problem has remained with the Commission for quite some time, we thought
that we should now take up the task, as the more urgent matters, which claimed our attention
during the last two years or more, have now been dealt with, and our Reports in respect of
them have been forwarded to the Government.

The Member-Secretary to the Commission prepared for our consideration a fresh draft
Report, after a study of the Act and also after taking into account the comments received on
the proposals of the earlier Commission. This draft Report was treated by us as a working
paper for our discussion.

We ought to add that we have examined the Act section by section, and have considered
the question whether any section requires to be amended or revised, or any new provision
requires to be added.

1.3. The objects of the Act are several, namely, (1) to shorten the language of Central Obiects of
Acts ; (2) to provide, as far as possible, for uniformity of expression in Central Acts, by giving हु
definitions of a series of terms in common use; (3) to state explicity certain convenient rules
for the construction and interpretation of Central Acts; and (4) to guard against slips and
oversights by importing into every Act certain common form clauses, which otherwise ought
to be inserted expressly in every Central Act. Of course, in the above statement, when we
refer to Central Acts, we also include Regulations and Ordinances, and statutory instruments
made under Central Acts, Regulations and Ordinances.

1.4. The General Clauses Act, thus, makes provisions as to the construction of General Tmportance

Acts and other laws of all-India application. Its importance, therefore, in point of the number General
7 [805८8

of enactments to which it applies, is obvious. Clan

1, 28th September, 1959.
4, Para 1.27 to 1.31, infra.


tance of
uniformity.

Importance
of statute
Taw today.

Legislation

pal means
of growth.

2

Much more, however, can be said about the importance of an interpretation Act, which
has been called the “Law of all Jaws”. In so far as certainty in the application of the law is a
desideratum itself, an interpretation Act seeks to introduce that certainty, in the limited sphere

in which it operates.

1.5. One of the objects of the Act, as already pointed out above, is to shorten the language
of statutes and to achieve, as far as possible, uniformity of expression in such language. Its
importance is evident from what Bentham said?:

“The language of error is always obscure and indefinite. An abundance of words
serves to cover a paucity and a falsity of ideas. The oftner terms are changed,
the easier it is to delude the reader. The language of truth is uniform and
simple. The same ideas are always expressed by the same terms.”

But for the control exercised by the General Clauses Act over statutory language. it would
have been a “free for all” affair so far as the use, meaning and interpretation of words and

language in our statute law are concerned.

1.6. It is desirable, in this context, to emphasise the importance of statute law today. It
was towards the end of the last century, that the present General Clauses Act was enacted ;
statute law did not then possess, in its volume and range, the importance which it now possesses,
though, of course, much of the Jawyer’s law had been codified in India by that time. Since
1897, the number of statutes and statutory instruments has multiplied every year, As the
position stood towards the end of 1971, there were about 700 Central Acts of permanent
duration, and the number of statutory instruments issued under these Acts would run literally
into thousands. Litigation involving questions of statutory construction, constitute now the bulk
of the total litigation in India. Jt is, therefore, obvious that an enactment which is intended
to deal with the process of interpretation of statutes, is now of much greater importance than it

could have been in the last century.

1:7. Pound has called attention to the fact that legislation is the principal characteristic
and means of growth in mature legal systems”. As has been observed? National development,
as we understand it in the world today, involves a vast amount of governmental planning “and
Programming, not only to expedite the process of development, but to direct their course along
desired lines. A great volume of legislative enactments is required to validate plans and
programmes and the actions necessary for their implementation. For these reasons, enacted or
statutory Jaw has acquired predominant importance in modern developing nations.”

“Taken by itself, statutory law, that is, law consciously and purposely adopted to meet
social needs as they arise, is certainly a higher stage of legal development than customary law.
....Not a few of us may look forward to a time when with us, as with most other Western

Nations, practically all law shail be statutory*.”

The importance of increase in the tempo of legislative activity was stressed, in the United
States, by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. He pointed out that the proportion of cases
coming before the United States Supreme Court which did not involve statutory issues. had
fallen from 40 per cent in 1875 to 5 per cent in 1925, and almost to zero in 19475. 7

1, Bentham Theory of Legislation (Hildreth’s Edition), 1904, rage 87.

Pound, “Sources and Forms of Law”, (1946) 22 Notre Dame Lawyer 1, cited in Sands, “Statutory Construction
and ‘National Development,” (1969) 18 L.C.L.Q. 206.

Sands, “Statutory Construction & National Development”, (1969) 18 I.C.L.Q. 206, 210.

Ernest Bruncken, “The Common Law and Statutes”, (1920) 29 Yale L.J. 516, 522.

+“ Reflections on the Reading of Statutes”, Sixth Annual Benjamin N. Cardozo Lecture deli-
rot tafore tne Aesouiation of the Bar of the City of New "York, March 18, 1947; (1947) 2 Record of the Assn.
of the Bar of the City of New York, No, 6 (1947) : 47 Columbia L, Rev. 527 ; quoted by Sands, “Statutory

Construction and National Development”? (1969) 18 I.C.L.Q. 206, 210.

wee


3

1.8. It should be pointed out that legislation has not been regarded always as a mere
supplement to, or taking out of common law or customary law. On the contrary, an older view
was that enacted law was the normal type, and customary law a mere makeshift to which men
resorted, for want of enactment, to prevent a failure of justice. Roman law after Justinian was
a body of enactments, and this idea is very prominent from the sixth century to the rise of the
school at Bologna in the twelfth century.*

The Roman Jurist Gaius? classified statutes as one form of “law”, and Justinian’s Corpus
Juris was, as legislation of the Emperor, regarded as binding statute law for centuries on the
continent. For some time, even a view prevailed that the rules of the common Jaw had their
origin in forgotten statutes. It was the rise and development of vigorous body of judge-made
law in the King’s courts, and the paucity of legislation from the time of Henry the 2nd until
Henry the 8th, which rendered legislation unimportant in the growing period of the English legal
system.*

1.9. The tide has now turned again. In any modern society with an aspiration for the im-
provement of the conditions of the life of the people, legislation is par excellence the source of
Jaw. Therefore, importance of the General Clauses Act, having regard to the growing impor-
tance of legislation in society, is obvious.

Maine put the matter Iucidly when he stated® :

“The capital fact in the mechanism of modern states is the energy of legislatures.” As the
development of law goes on, the function of the judges is confined within growing limits; the
main source of modifications in legal relation comes to be more and more exclusively the
legislature.°

We are making these observations in order to emphasise the importance of the General
Clauses Act.

1.10. It is not, of course, implied that the General Clauses Act, or, for that matter, the Inter-
pretation Act of any other country, codifies all the ‘rules’ of statutory interpreation. The so-called
rules of interpretation are really in the nature of guide-lines,” and are not to be treated as
mathematical formula. In fact, even the definitions contained in the General Clauses Act (and
_many of the general rules of construction which are incorporated in it) apply only where the context
does not otherwise require. This shows that the Act itself does not purport to treat rules of con-
struction as categorical imperatives.

1.11. Even so, the value and utility of the General Clauses Act is considerable, because
it not only constitutes the reference book of the judge when dealing with statutes, but serves
as the draftsman’s labour-saving device. It lays down rules which would have been tedious to
repeat in every statute, thus shortening the language of legislative enactments-

The aspect of shortening the language has been emphasised again and again in the speeches
relating to the General Clauses Act, 1868 and General Clauses Act, 1897, in the course of the
legislative proceedings. It has also been referred to by the Supreme Court.®

1, Pound, “Common Law and Legislation’’ (1907-1908) 21 Harvard Law Review 383, 388.

3, Gaius 1. 2.

3, Janka, Law and Politics in the Middle Ages, p. 1.

4. See Pound, “Common Law and Legislation”, (1907-1908) 21 Harvard Law Review 383, 389.

5, Maine, Early History of Institutions, Lect. xiii, cited by Pound, Common Law & Legislation (1907-1908) 21
Harvard Law Rev. ९, 383, 402.

6, Sidgwick, Elements of Politics, 2 ed.
7, See also para 2.8, infra.
8, Subramaniam ४. Official Receiver, Ad.R. 1953 5. 0.1.

15-MofLaw/74—2

Act not
intended
to codify
tules of
interpreta-
tion.

Shortening
the language.


implifica-
जाय
anguage-
portance
if.

istory.

Jistorical 4
yackground-
English

Act.

distorical
—Indian
Act

of 1868,

Act of 1889
ind Act

of 1897
Present
Act).

4

1.12. The importance of simplification in language should not be under-estimated. As
has been observed by the Canadian Law Commission:1-?

“A part of the task (of Law reform) involves making the laws more understandable
and more meaningful to the average citizen. Thus, a specific effort must be
made, not only to improve law in its substance, but to reduce legal complexity
and technicality. This will require a study of topics that, on the surface, may
appear technical, but that, in fact, affect, in telling ways, the realisation through
law of the aspirations of the average man and woman for fair treatment for
themselves and for others.”

1.13. A few other points of a general nature may now be dealt with. It may be con-
venient to begin with the history of the Act. It would appear that the idea of having a device
for shortening statutes could be traced to Bentham and to those who took up the criticism of the
legal system made by Bentham.*

1.14. In England, the first interpretation Act, known as Lord Brougham’s Act, was passed
as far back as 1850. In 1889, the Act was replaced by the Interpretation Act. This Act is
the source of subsequent Interpretation Acts, not only in England, but also in other countries
of the Commonwealth.

1.15. The provisions of Lord Brougham’s Act,* with a few additions, were adopted in
India, and enacted as the General Clauses Act, 1868 (1 of 1868). A Bill on the subject had
been conceived of much earlier, but it could not be prepared for various reasons, chief among
them being the impression that such a Bill might possibly be suggested by the Indian Law
Commissioners.5 Ultimately, the Bill leading to the Act of 1868 was drafted by Whitley Stokes.
In drafting the Bill, Stokes drew not only upon the earlier English statutes on the subject, but
also upon the illustrations of rules of construction prepared by Arthur Symonds.®

The Act of 1868 was of a measure of a limited character. It was incomplete; but, in so
far as the ground covered was concerned, it worked “fairly well”. It considerably shortened the
language of subsequent Central Acts. Its utility made the legislative Department think of mak-
ing useful additions to it. A supplementary General Clauses Act was later enacted as the General
Clauses Act, 1887 (1 of 1887). This Act was drafted by Sir C. Ilbert. वाला described the
process by which he arrived at the list of additions proposed, in the following words.”

“The additions which I propose to make are based on personal experience during the
last few years. I have had a list prepared of the special definitions inserted in
Acts of Council and I find on examination of this list that there are some dozen
or so of these definitions which might with advantage be generalised and added
to the list contained in the Act of 1868.

I also propose to generalize certain provisions which have so frequently recurred in

recent Acts as to have become what conveyancers call ‘common form’ ”.

1.16. In 1889, a comprehensive and consolidating Act on the subject was enacted in
England. Our General Clauses Act, 1897, is largely modelled on that Act. It consolidates
the two earlier enactments of 1868 and 1887, and includes a few new provisions taken from
the (English) Interpretation Act, 1889.

Law Reform Commission of Canada, Research Program 1, (March 1972) page 7.
See also para 2.6, infra.

Carr, “The Mechanics of Law-making”, (1951) Current Legal Problems , page 122.
Para 1.14, Supra.

Gazette of India, August 24,1867, page 1220.

whitley Stokes Anglo Indian Code (1887) Vol 1, page 485

Legislative proceedings (1886), page 305

sways VN


Ne

5

1.17. Every State has its own General Clauses Act,? which applies to State Acts. The
lead in this matter was taken by the former Presidencies of Bombay, Bengal and Madras. The
earliest Act on the subject was Bombay Act 10 of 1866. The first General Clauses Act in
Madras and Bengal was enacted in 1867 (Madras Act 1 of 1867 and Bengal Act 5 of 1867).

1.18. The Central Act of 1897 has stood the test of time. Its value in avoiding super-
fluity of language in statutes has been commended by courts. There can be no better testi-
mony of its utility than the fact that courts have, on considerations of equity, justice and good
conscience, thought fit to extend its principles not only to subordinate legislation,? but also to
private documents.* The Act has also served as a model for all States General Clauses Acts.
Lastly. the Act has been expressly applic. to the interpretation of the Constitution* by article
367 of the Constitution.

1.19. Since the passing of the Act, however, far-reaching changes have taken place in this
country. The constitutional sct-up has altered completely after the attainment of independence,
and the volume of legislation has increased considerably. The range and variety of the new
legislation has given rise to substantial changes in legislative practice. The quantity of sub-
ordinate legislation has also assumed large proportions. Some provisions of the Act of 1897
have come up for judicial consideration. A few of them have given rise to conflict of views.

No large-scale revision of the General Clauses Act has so far been undertaken. Certain
minor amendments were made by the amending Acts of 1903 and 1936. In addition, by various
Adaptation Orders, the Act was, from time to time, amended to bring it in conformity with
Government of India Act, 1935 and with the Constitution. But the scope of such amendments
was necessarily limited. Time has come when the Act should be completely reviewed, so as
to bring it in line with the fundamental constitutional changes and the new trends in legislative
practice.

1.20. Before making our detailed recommendations for revision of the Act, we consider
it necessary to examine a few preliminary questions. One such question relates to the form which
the proposed changes should take. The basic question is whether there should be one interpreta-
tion Act, or whether there should be two Interpretation Acts. Need for making a choice in this
respect arises because a view has been put-fourth that the present General Clauses Act should
continue for the interpretation of the existing Central Acts etc. and a new full-fleged interpretation
Act should be proposed for the interpretation of Central Acts etc. to be enacted hereafter.

In this connection, we may note that in the proposals for revision of the Act, circulated
by the earlier Commission,’ one suggestion was that there should be two-Acts.—the present
Act may be preserved for existing Central Acts etc. and a new Interpretation Act may be enacted
to apply to new enactments. But it should be added that the Commission had no opportunity
of taking a final decision in the matter; and, in fact, because of its pre-occupation with urgent
work, the matter remained undisposed of when the term of the Commission came to a close.

1.21. We have carefully considered the matter in all its aspects, and are inclined to take
the view that the simultaneous existance of two interpretation Acts is likely to create unnecessary
complications. Citizens as well as lawyers will be required to make themselves familiar with both
the Acts, for a considerable time to come, because it is unlikely that all the existing Central Acts
will be removed from the Statute Book within a reasonably foreseeable future. Diversity of judi-
cial interpretation in respect of two sets of identical provisions may also create problems, and

1, See para 1.33, infra also.

3, Para 12.22 to 12.26, infra.

3, Para 6,21 A and 6.22, infra.

4. Article 367 of the Constitution, para 1.27, infra.
5, Para 1.2, supra.

State Acts,

Utility
of the
present
Act.

Need for
change.

Whether
there
should be
one Act
or two
Acts.

One Act
preferred.


Homo-
eneity of
Central
cts
assed.

ince

Form of
the proposed
egislation.

Amending
Act
referred.

Broad
considera-
tions
borne in
mind when
revising
the Act.

6

such diversity will harm the uniformity of the law. It would, thus, be a serious anomaly if the
Statute Book were to have two General Clauses Acts for the interpretaticn of Central Acts. हु

No doub:, the initiation of a totaily new interpretation Act (with only prospective effect)
has an advantage inasmuch as the redical changes will not apply to existing Acts. But the same
object could, in a fair measure, be achieved by suggesting new provisions for incorpration in
the present Act, at the same time making those new provisions prospective, The proposals for
having two Acts does not, in this respect, have any peculiar merit.

1.22. It may be stated that though, during the period since 1868, there were different Cons-
titution Acts in force at different times, yet Central Acts passed since 1868 have a certain amount
of homogeneity. Hence, it is logical to have one Act for their interpretation. As regards the
new provisions to be inserted in the Act, care is being taken to ensure that such of them as are
likely to create any difficulty will be prospective only. For all these reasons, we think that the
alternative of having one Act, is not likely to create any serious practical difficulty. In any
case, the advaritage of having one Interpretation Act for all Central Acts far outweighs the slight
disadvantage that certain difficulties may possibly arise in a few odd cases in discerning which
provisions apply to which Central Act.

1.23. There is another preliminary question to be considered. Assuming that there is to
be one Interpretation Act? what should be the form which the proposed legislation should take ?

The new legislation can possibly take one of the following forms :—

(i) An amending Act; or

Gi) A new Act which will apply to all Central Acts, whether passed before or after
the commencement of the new Act.

1.24. We prefer the first course, namely, an amending Act. The General Clauses Act, 1897,
already makes a distinction between (a) Central Acts made after the 3rd January, 1868 (the
date of commencement of the General Clauses Act, 1867); (b) Central Acts and Regulations
made after the 14th January, 1887; and (c) Central Acts made after the 11th March, 1897 (the
date of commencement of the Act of 1897). To these categories will be added one more cate-
gory, namely, Central Acts and Regulations made after the commencement of the amending Act.
This may appear to be complicated; but it cannot be avoided. The complicated structure is
already there in the existing Act. What the amending Act will do is only to add one more cate-

gory.

1.25. This disposes of the preliminary questions. So far as the revision of individual sec-
tions of the Act is concerned, we have borne in mind a few broad considerations which we may
now mention. In the first place, where a particular section of the Act has led to a conflict of
decisions, or other difficulties of interpretation, we have tried to settle the law. Secondly, apart
from such conflict or difficulties, where the particular provision was found to be juristically
wrong’, we have tried to set right. Thirdly, we have recommended the addition of new
provisions‘ where the gap in the existing law was found to cause difficulties in practice.

1.26. It will be apparent from the following Chapters of this report that the recom-
mendations that we have made are not numerous or radical. This is a tribute to the draftsman-
ship of the present Act, which has stood the test of time for three quarters of a century.
On the whole, the provisions of the Act have caused no serious difficulty’. No doubt, a

1, See para. 1.22, infra.

3, Para 1.22, supra.

3, E.g., section 3—“affidavit”.

4, E.g., the proposed provision as to temporary Acts, Chapter 7, infra.
5, See para. 1.18, supra.


7

certain amount of technical languag: bound to recur in an Interpretation Act, as the subject-

matter deals with abstractions familiar to lawyers but rot to laymen. One cannct, therefore.

expect here the excellence of limpid language found in, say, continental Codes, and in some
© of our own laws.

However, at some places, the legislative style was tortured! and left scope for improvement.
We hope that in the recommendations made by us, we have been able to arrive at a statement of
Jaw which, on the whole, can be described as clear, simple and precise

1.27. There is a constitutional question which we would like to dispose of at the outsct. {erpretation
It concerns the interpretation of the Constitution, and can be appropriately mentioned in connec- Constitu-
tion with the revision of this Act. The question? ari mainly, from the language of article (00:

- 367 of the Constitution, which reads as follows :—

“Unless the context otherwise reanires, the General Clauses Act. 1897, shall, subject
to any adaptations and modifications that may be made therein under article 372,
apply for the interpretation of this Constitution as it anplies for the interpretation
> of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India.”

Since this article refers to “an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India”. the query may

४7 be raised if it is permissible to modify or revise the General Clauses Act, lest such modification
or revision should introduce complications in the literal application of article 367. In other words,
the question is whether amendments concerning the existing General Clauses Act, in so far as the
Act applies to Central Acts, would, in any manner, dislocate the operation of that Act in relation
to the Constitution. That is the question to which we address ourselves.

1.28. It appears to us that there should be no such difficulty. Any amendments, additions y,
or deletions which may be made in the General Clauses Act, 1897, would not affect the Consti- difficulty
tution. Interpretation of the Constitution will continue to be governed by the General Clauses 'Kel¥:
Act, as in force immediately before the Constitution’, The Act.cannot be so repealed or
modified as to affect the interpretation of the Constitution.

1.29. It may be stated that the concluding words in article 367—“as it applies for the inter- Debates
pretation of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India”,—were added in the Constituent in the

* Assembly, by an amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar, who thus explained their utility*: Roastitvent

“The point is this, that the General Clauses Act applies to Acts, Regulations and Ordi-
nances. It is, therefore, necessary to say to which class of these laws this will
apply. That is the reason why the amendient is proposed.”

Shri T. T. Krishnamachari made the position clear :

beeen eee what we want is that only those particular portions which refer to Acts
‘ should apply, so far as this particular clause is concerned.”

The concluding words of article 367 do not, therefore, mean that the General Clauses Act
should be preserved for all times in its pre-1950 form. The Act can be revised or modified
but the unmodified Act will continue to govern the interpretation of the Constitution.

1.30. Will section 8 of the General Clauses Act, which provides that when an enactment Effect of
is repealed and re-enacted, references to the old enactment will be construed as references to the section 8
‘e-enacted one, make any difference ? We do not think so. It should be noted that the words gnarticle

1. E.g. section 6A, para 6.10, infra.

2. Ata very early stage of consideration of this Act before a previous Law Commission, this query was dealt

3, Subject to adaptations made under article 372 of the Constitution.
4, Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 1X, Part 111, pages 1€41-1€42, discussicn relating to articl 3¢



Conclusion.

Title of
the Act.

State laws.

8

“unless the context otherwise requires” (in article 367)! mean that the General Clauses Act,
section 8, is to be excluded. Even by its terms, section 8 of the General Clauses Act will not
apply to the Constitution, because expression “enactment” (which occurs in section 8) would
not take in the Constitution, which is not an “enactment”. The Constitution is supreme and is,
in fact, the foundation of all enactments.

1.31. Our conclusion, therefore, is that the revision or amendment of the General Clauses ©
Act, 1897, will not, in any way, affect the operation of article 367; and the General Clauses Act,
(897 as it stood immediately before 26 January, 1950 (subject to adaptations made under the
Constitution) will continue to apply.

1.32. In many countries, Acts similar to the General Clauses Act are called Interpretation
Acts. But, as the provisions of the General Clauses Act (whether relating to definitions aud
meanings of words and terms or dealing with construction and interpretation) are, so far as may
be necessary, common to every Central Act, the title “General Clauses Act” is not less appro-
priate than the title “Interpretation Act”. For this Teason, and also because this title has been
in vogue for more than a century, we do not recommend any change therein. The Supreme
Court had perhaps, this in mind when it observed in the case of Chief Inspector of Mines xf
K. ८, Thapar?: ,

“Whatever the General Clauses Act says, whether as regards the meanings of words ort
as regards legal principles, has to be read into every Act to which it applies.”

1.33. It may also be noted that though Act does not, in terms apply to State laws, it is
evident that the State General Clauses Acts should conform to the General Clauses Act of 1897,
for, otherwise, divergent rules of construction and interpretation would apply, and. as a result,
great confusion might ensue. Thus, excepting a few provisions in the Central Act, such as
those contained in section 5, nearly all its remaining provisions are as appropriate for State
Act and Ordinances as for the Central Acts and Ordinances and, have, in fact, been adopted
in all the State General Clauses Acts. The result has been that a certain amount of uniformity
has been achieved in the language of the entire body of statute law of this country.

1. Para 1.27, supra.
2. Chief Inspector of Mines v. K.C. thapar, (1961) 2 S.C.A. 86, 89; AIR 1961, SC 838, 843 (Das Gupta).


CHAPTER 2
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION

2.1. In this Chapter, we propose to refer to certain general aspects of statutory interpreta- Introduc-
tion. tory.
2.2. Interpretation is as old as language. Elaborate rules of interpretation were evolved Interpreta-
even at a very carly stage of the Hindu civilisation and culture. The rules given by Jaimini, the wo "id as
author of the Mimansat Sutras, originally meant for the Srutis, were employed for the interpreta- language.
tion of the Smritis also. All the commentators and writers of Nibandhas invariably adopted these
canons of interpretation for their own purposes, so much so that these interpretations or comments
sometimes became more difficult and abstruse than the original texts commented upon’. K.A.

Nilkanta Sastry, a distinguished scholar, has observed?:
>

पु “With reference to the system of Jaimini (Mimansa) it has for its main object, the
determination of doubtful points in the elaborate rituals enjoined by the Vedas

Y by discussion and interpretation. It raises and answers, incidentally, some ques-
tions of great interest.”

The importance of avoiding literal interpretation has also been stressed in one of the ancient
text books® :

“Merely following the texts of the law, decisions are not to be rendered, for, if such
decisions are wanting in Equity, a gross failure of Dharma is caused‘.”

The Bhavishya Purana® has an apt verse dealing with the rule to be followed for the resolu-
tion of conflict between Smriti and Artha as well as for the resolution of inconsistency between
the rules of the Smritis themselves.

And Kalidas has described, in ringing words which have become immortal, the indissoluble
_ link between “word” and “meaning®”.

. According to Narada’, when Smritis and Artha Sastra are inconsistent, the presumption
of Arthasastra is superseded by Smritis*. 1n case of mutual inconsistency, however, that rule
is authentic which is in accord with equity.

2.3. Interpretation, thus, is a familiar process of considerable significance. In relation to Interpreta-
statute law, interpretation is of importance because of the inherent nature of legislation as a tion of
source of law. The process of statute making and the process of interpretation of statutes take Sinportance

+ place separately from each other, and two different agencies are concerned. An interpretation

Act serves as the bridge of understanding between the two.

+ 1. ULC, Sarkar, Epoche in Hindu Legal History (1958), page 167.
2. K.A. Nilakanta Sastry, “‘Mimamsa Doctrine of Works” (1921) Indian Antiquary p. 211.

3. Brihaspati.
4. केवलम्‌ शास्त्रमाश्रित्य न करतंव्यों हि निर्णय: यूक्तिहीने विचारेत्‌ धर्मज्ञानि: प्रजयते

5 eid विरोधेतु श्रथंशास्त्रस्य बन्धनम्‌ परस्हर विरोंधेतु युक्तियुक्तो विधि: ata: भविष्यपुरा
6 बागर्थाविवः संपकपों वागथंप्रतिप्रतपे जगतः frat ee पार्भवीपरमे att

7. Narada Ch. 1, verse 40. |
8. Translation by Dr. Ludo Rocher, Vyavahar Chintameni of Vachaspati (Chent.1956).

9, घुमंशास्त्न विरोध तु युक्तियृक्तो विधि: स्मुनः


A process of
finding out.

Aids to
interpreta-
tion.

Object of
Tnterpreta-
tion Act
to standar-
dise the
interpreta-
tion.

Not

rossible to
codify rules—
Acharya’s
suggestion
not

accepted.

10

Judicial determination of questions of !aw requires the use of materials of various types,
depending on the nature of the question. In the interpretation of statutory provisions the material
used will naturally have a sharply Iegal character, as distinct from the application of a general
common law doctrine where it may have a more diffused character. In statutes, greater precision
is, therefore, required. The process of interpretation is more legalistic and makes more inten-
sive use of the legal technique in statutory interpretation, as contrasted with the application
of common law rules.

2.4. No idea is exactly what it appears in the linguistic form in which it is expressed’.
There is always something which is behind the linguistic form, and which goes deeper: and it
is the function of interpretation to see that this is made explicit. In this process (which is a
process of finding out), we come to grips with the subject in all its wealth of inter-relations, and
with particular aspecis which, perhaps, we never suspected to exist, though they are closely bound
up with the ideas.

2.5. In this process of interpretation, several aids arc used. They may be statutory or non-
statutory. The former category (statutory aids) is illustrated by the General Clauses Act, and
by specific definitions contained in individual Acts, as also by certain provisions of a general
nature which are, for example, contained in the Indian Penal (000९९, and are relevant to the cons*
truction of penal enactments. The latter is illustrated by common law rules of interpretation (in-
cluding certain presumptions relating to interpretation), and also by case-law relating to the in-

terpretation of statutes.

Holland has dealt with the function of interpretation at length. For the present purpose, it
js sufficient to mention that he has drawn a clear distinction between “authentic” interpretation
on the one hand and other aids to interpretation, on the other hand.

2.6. An interpretation Act is, thus', one of the aids to interpretation. The primary pur-
pose of an interpretation Act is to standardise the interpretation. The importance and utility
of this aspect should not be under-rated. The avoidance of uncertainty as to the meaning of
statute law helps the average citizen, by reducing the scope for ingenious argument. It is,
therefore, an effort to simplify and “demystify” the substantive law®,

2.7. It is obvious that all “rules of interpretation” cannot be codified. Some rules are only
guidelines, as we have already stated’, A suggestion was made by the later Professor Acharya
in his Tagore Law Lectures on Codification in British India?, that the scope of the General
Clauses Act should be extended so as to make it a comprehensive code on the interpretation
of statutes. This suggestion is, no doubt, attractive at first sight ; but a close scrutiny will
reveal its impracticability. It is not possible to incorporate, in an Interpretation Act, the
rules of interpretation enunciated in the text books on the subject. One of the main reasons for
having an Interpretation Act is to facilitate the task of the draftsman in preparing parliamentary
legislation. The courts also have recourse to Interpretation Acts to interpret statutes ; but they
do not confine themselves to these Acts, They certainly take the aid of accepted rules of

interpretation as laid down in decided cases.

Moreover, a certain degree of elasticity is necessary in this branch of the law. Rules of
construction of statutes are not static. Aims and objects of legislation will be better served
by appropriate judicial interpretation of the law, rather than by rigid provisions in the laws
themselves. At present, Judges have a certain amount of latitude in the matter, which enables

_ Paule Preire’s article in 1970 Seminar “Tomorrow began yesterday”’ (Educ. International).
. Chapters 2 to 4, Indian Penal Code.

. Holland on Jurisprudence.

Para 2.5, supra.

Sce also para 1.8, supra.

. Chapter 1, supra.

. Acharya, Codification in British India, pages 189, 191.

vee

ae


11

of each statute. If

them to do justice, after taking into consideration the nature and characte:
ity in this branch of

the rules of construction are given a statutory form, the consequential rigi
the law is likely to do more harm than good.

2.8. For example, the maxin—“Expressio unius exclusio alterius”—has been thus commen-
ted upon by Max Radin? :

“So far from being logical, as some courts have called it, it illustrates one of the most
fatuously simple of logical fallacies, the ‘illicit major’, long the pons asinorum of school-boys?.
And yet, in a widely used cyclopaedia* there are at least seven hundred cases cited in which
the maxim has been applied or explained.

“Tt has been called an axiom by the House of Lords, and it has been said of it that no
maxim is of more general and uniform application.t Yet, in the same case in which the House
of Lords called it axiomatic’, it was disregarded ; and the first case of its ‘application’ cited
in the Corpus juris is a case in the United States Supreme Court in which it was rejected.”®

How various and variable such considerations are is graphically illustrated by a collection
of the various canons of construction by Karl Llewellyn and Charles Driscoll’. Each rule of
construction of statutes, it is stated, is answered by a counter-rule. Each thrust is met by a
parry.

Some rules of law can be fixed and certain, but it is clear, as Aristotle realised®, that there
is a “whole class of matters which cannot be decided. ...properly by rules of law”. To meet
this difficulty®, “Law trains the holders of office expressly in its sprit, and then sets them to
decide and settle those residuary issues ‘as justly as in them lies'!®”.

2.9. Statutes are the expressions of the will of an authority constituted by society to announce
general obligatory legal rules. The binding force of statute law attaches to the formula in which
the law is expressed!!. The task of interpretation of a statute is of extracting, from the formula,
all that it contains of legal rules, with a view to adapting it, as perfectly as possible, to the facts
of life??. Therefore, the insertion of rigid rules may go against the very concept of interpreta-
tion.

Moreover, with the passage of time, there may be changes in the meaning of words. As
has been stated'3, “some words are confined to their history, while some are starting points for
history.”

To quote Lord Reid’,
“All these canons of construction give a lot of material for people who like dealing

with them, but I do not think they are more than guides, and guides which take
you a very short way.”

2.10. However, where there is a conflict of judicial opinion on a specific question, it is
both proper and necessary to resolve the conflict. In suggesting the incorporation of new
rules of construction, we have followed this principle.

Max Radin, “Statutory Interpretation”, (1929-1930) 43 Harv. L. Rev. 863, 875.

 ¢. f. Jevons, Elementary Lessons in Logic (1918), 132.

. (1921) 25 Corpus Juris, 220.

See Saunders v. Evans, (1861) 8 H.L. Cas. 721, 727.

Saunders v. Evans, (1861) 8 H. L, Cas. 721.

United States v. Barnes. (1912) 222 U.S. 513.

K.N. Llewellyn, “Better Theory of Legal Interpretation”, (1950), 3 Vend. L. Rev. 395, 401-406.
Aristotle, Politics, III, XV, 5. 6.

B. E. King, Review of Levi's Introduction 1९ Legal Reasoning, (1953) Cam. L. J. 126.

10. Aristotle, Politics 111, XVI, 5. 5.

17 Geny, Methode, Part III, C.1., cited in Stone, Legal System, (1964), page 216.

12. Stone, Legal System, (1964) 0. 216.

13. Frankfurter, “Reading of Statutes”, cited in Stone, Legal System, (1964), page 351, footnote 29.
14. Lord Reid in (1955) Australian Law Journal 221,

15 M of Law/74—3

जम छमे ७०

Statutes to be
adopted to
facts of life.

Specific

niflicts
to be set
right.


Tnterpreta-
tion Acts
and the
common
law.

Interpreta-
tion may
partake

of the
character
of law-
making.

Judicial

12

2.11. Provisions in interpretation Acts can, in respect of their relationship with the Com-
mon Law, be analysed thus. First, there are provisions which declare the law. In many
instances, such provisions simply state the rule of law announced by the courts in their de-
cisions,’ with the result that the general principles of the construction of statutes are, in effect,
codified. Jn other words, the statute will simply state the rules of law already declared and
applied by the courts, Where this is the case, obviously, the statute has very little, if any,
effect upon the judicial attitude.

Secondly, there are various statutory rules of construction which embody efforts of the
legislature ‘o correct constructions which it has deemed erroneous. Such rules seek to sub-
stitute new rules of construction for existing ones, and thereby alter the common law.

‘Thirdly, there are statutory rules of construction which add to the common law. We have
not referred to the above aspect merely as one of academic interest. It helps to elucidate
one possible channel in which the reform of the law could be directed,—the confirmation or
modification of rules of interpretation laid down by courts, or the addition of rules on matters
which have not so far come up before the courts.

2.12. It is, of course, well-recognised that interpretation is not merely a process of spell-
ing out the meaning by set guidelines. Sometimes, it has to partake of the character of law-
making.

While the judiciary would not have much scope for law-making where the language is
clear and the purpose of the statute is definite, its scope for law-making is undisputed when the
statute itself consciously delegates the creation of the norm of the judiciary.

Interpretation is not pure mathematics, where the answers given by every person to the
particular mathematical problem must tally with each other if the answers are correct. As
we shall show lJater,? a certain amount of latitude is left to those who have to interpret and,
to this extent, interpretaion resembles law-making.

Morris Cohen pointed out, “You cannot construct a building out of the rules of architec-
ture”.® As Judge Learned Hand! said,—

“Of course, it is true that the words used, even in their literal sense, are the primary,
end ordinarily the most reliable, source of interpreting the meaning of any writ-
ing: be it a statute, a contract, or anything else. But it is one of the surest in-
dexes of a mature and developed jurisprudence not to make a fortress out of the
dictionary.”

2.13. Julius Cohen? has distinguished three main situations covered bv the loose term
“judicial law-making” relating to statutes—(i) One is very rare, namely, the usurpatory kind,
where the clear ‘language and purpose’ of the statute are subverted and replaced by the court’s
own policy. (ii) a second (non-unsurpatory) kind is where, for some reason, the legislator
has (in cffect) consciously delegated norm-creation to the judiciary, whether because flexi-
bility of administration is required as in the Sherman Anti-Trust Law), or because conflicting
views and interests within the legislature prevent agreement on anything but vague expression
(iii) The third is where there is neither clarity of language and purpose, nor a conscious dele-
gation, but single vagueness or ambiguity, or internal inconsistency of language, affecting the
statutory words. In this, as distinct from the first two kinds, the judicial search is for /egislative
meaning, and, thus, for legislative policy. The judicial task, in cases of this third kind, is to

1. See Crawford, Statutory construction, (1940) pages 751-752.
2. Para 2.13, infra.
3. M. R. Cohen, Social Order, 173.

4. Cabelly, Markhans, 148 F 2d 737 (2nd Cir 1945) cited in Friedmann, Legal Theory, (1867). rage 458.

5. J. Cohen, “Judicial Legislation”, (1961) 36 Indiana 1.J.414, 419,422, cited in Stone, Legal System
(1964), 353.



13

mend the Icgislative expression so as to yield a solution that can reasonably be attributed to
the legislature, whether by surface search of the syntax, by reading in the context of the whole
statute. by probing for a principle which the statute expresses, or for hints of the legislator’s
purpose, consciously or unconsciously held by him.

2.14. Thus, it will not be sufficient merely to define the concept as a matter of semantics,
or to describe or explain it by taking its implications, as a given-fact. The interpreter has
to adopt a position of commitment towards the Act which he is to interpret.

This is not to say that the interpreter should start with pre-conceived atutudes. Julius
Stone has observed, that’ in most questions of statutory interpretation which are likely to come
before an appellate court, there is involved an important element of evaluation, of deciding
what is the more desirable result which can be brought within the verbal framework of the
legislator’s expression. If the Court is not engaged in legislation, it is, at any rate, as Professor
Cohen has suggested,” engaged in “legisputation.”

2.15. The central aim in the “administration of a statute is to discover or formulate, as
well as give effect to, principles or formulas for elaborating the purposes bearing upon the
statute”. And in this view, the principles when discovered are thereafter to be applied as in-
tegral principles of the law. Judicial interpretation of statutes, and judicial law-making by
statutory analogy, are in other words, to be seen as one process, and not as contrasted.*

We have made these observations to define the scope of interpretation in general. We
shall now procced to specific topics arising out of the General Clauses Act.

1, Julius Stone, Legal System (1964), page 352 and footnote 35.

2. Cohen, “Judicial Legisputation and the Dimensions of Legislative meaning”, (1961) 36 Indiana L.J.
414, 423, esp. 414 and 419.

3. J.P. Witherson, The Essential Focus of Interpretation” referred to in Stone, Legal System (1964), page
352, footnote 35.

Duty of
interpreter
to position
to

taken,

Administra-
tion of
statutes-
central aim.


Introductory,

Section _
3—opening

line—amend-

regarding,

Sectior 3(1)—
“abet”.

Section 3(2)~
“act”,

day

Section
3¢

3) “affi-
vit”

CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS

3.1. Three sections of the General Clauses Act,—sections 3, 4 and 4A,—contain general
definitions. Not many general observations as to these definitions are required, since most of
the points which we have to deal with, concern matters of detail pertaining to particular words
and expressions defined in the various clauses of these sections. In gencral, however, it may
be observed that when a particular word or expression which has not been defined in the Gene-
ral Clauses Act, comes to be used with increasing frequency so as to become the current coin
of the legislature, opportunity should be taken to consider whether it should not be defined in
the Interpretation Act, so as to ensure uniformity,—provided, of course, it is first assured that
the expression is used in a broadly uniform sense and has thus become a term of art. We
have, in suggesting amendments in these sections, kept this consideration in mind.

३.18. It may be noted that section 3, which is the principal section containing definitions,
applies to the General Clauses Act itself and to post-1897 Central Acts and Regulations.

Now, we are recommending the insertion, in the section, of a few new definitions, and some
of them may not be appropriate for applying to existing Central Acts and Regulations. These
will be enumerated in a separate section,’ and it is desirable to make it clear that section 3
will be subject to that section. Accordingly, we recommend an amendment of the opening
line of section 3, as follows :—

Section 3 (opening lines)

In section 3, before the words, “In this Act,” the words, figure and letter “subject to the
provisions of section 3A.” shall be inserted (2

3.2 Section 3(J} defines the expression “abet”. It needs no change. We have taken
into account the decisions on abetment under the Penal Code, but they do not necessitate any
change here.

3.3. Section 3(2) defines the expression “act”. It needs no change.
3.4. Section 3(3) reads thus:

“affidavit” shall include affirmation and declaration in the case of persons by law allowed
to affirm or declare instead of swearing.

The definition is inaccurate, because it seems to equate “affidavit” and “oath”, as the word
“oath” is defined also? in the same terms. What an “affidavit” really means is the written state-
ment made on oath (or on a solemn affirmation etc.), and not the affirmation or oath itself.

Etymologically, the root of the word “affidavit” is the medieval Latin “fidus”, which means
trust. From this root, the word “aftidare” was derived in medieval Latin, and it meant “has
Stated on oath”. From that, the word “affidavit” is derived. Hence, the dictionary meaning of
“affidavit” is a written statement confirmed by oath, to be used as judicial proof’. According to
Wharton®, “affidavit” is a written statement sworn before a person having authority to adminis-
ter an oath.

1. See section 3A (proposed), Para 3.96, infra.

2. See new section 3A.

3. Section 3(37).

4. Concise Oxford Dictionary (1964), under “affidavit” page 27.
5. Wharton, Law Lexicon (1953), page 38,

14


15

3.5, It may be noted that in England, the practice of taking evidence by affidavits originated origin of
in the Court of Chancery. Following the practice of the civil law, the Court of Chancery, for many practice.
centuries, decided causes upon affidavit evidence, with only occasional oral cross-examination.*

+ For example, the rule in force in Chancery*, in 1861, provided that “it shall not be competent for
the plaintiff or any defendant to require, by notice or otherwise, that the evidence to be adduced
shall be taken orally”. As regards oral evidence, for some time. English law allowed only oaths.
The position was later altered by statutes, which allowed affirmations’.

Even recent English practice indicates that the word “affidavit” is generally used to denote
a statement in writing on oath (or on affirmation). Thus, the rules of the Supreme Court‘ provide
that every affidavit shall be instituted in the cause or matter in which it is sworn, and that affidavits
must be confined to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove. These rules
also speak of the affidavits being “filed” (in the Registry), prohibit alteration in affidavits except
under certain conditions and so on.

Similarly, the County Court Rules® provide that affidavits shall be expressed in the first per-

1 son, drawn up in paragraphs and numbered, and made by some person who has knowledge of the

facts etc. These provisions are, unfortunately, not noticed by text-book writers on the interpre-

tation of statutes when they discuss the meaning of affidavit. The Bankruptcy Rules have simi-

Yr lar provisions®. The important point to be made is that “affirmation” and “declaration” primarily
denote a substitute for the formality of oath.

3.6. Indian legislative practice also regards “affidavit” as referring to the written statement tngian
“on oath” etc., and not to the oath or affirmation. In our procedural codes,—for example, practice.
in the Code of Civil Procedure’—“affidavit” means not the process or ceremony (oath or
affirmation) but the document which is on oath or affirmation. In the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1898, section 539, both the words “affidavit” and “affirmation” were used, but in the new
Code’, only the word “affidavit” is used, in conformity with the draft suggested in the Law Com-
mission’s Report’.

3.7. In the Oaths Act, in the provision’? conferring power to Oaths Act administer oaths or
affirmation for the purpose of affidavit, the language used (so far as is material), is as follows: —

. “...any court, Judge, magistrate or person may administer oaths and affirmations
for the purpose of affidavits, if empowered in this behalf—

(a) by the High Court, in respect of affidavits, for the purpose of judicial proceed-
ings ; or

(b) by the State Government, in respect of other affidavits.”

Under the same Act", a witness, interpreter or juror may, instead of making an oath, make
an affirmation. }orms of oath and affirmation are also given in the Schedule to the Act, read
with section 6. ‘Shis discussion is intended to show that the word “affirmation”, in the majority
of Indian statutes refers usually to the formality substituted for the word “oath”. Hence, the

word “affirmation” is not appropriate to denote the writing.
< -

1, Best, Law of Evidence (1922), page 102, paragraph 118.

2. Chancery Consolidated Orders, 1861, Order 19, rule 3, quoted in Best, Law of Evidence (1922), page 102,
footnote,

३, The principal Acts relevant to affirmations are the Oaths Acts, 1888 and 1961. Eng.
om 4. Order 38, rules 2 and 3, R.S.C. (Eng.)

5. Order 20, rule 19, County Court Rules (Eng.)

6. Bankruptcy Rules, 1952, Rules 55-60 (Eng.)

7. Order 19, rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

8. Section 297, Cr. P.C., 1974.

9. Law Commission, 41st Report, Vol. 1, page 355, para. 46.4.

10. Section 3(2), Oaths Act, 1969.

11, Section 5, Oaths Act, 1969 (Central Act 44 of 1969).


Recommendation

Section 33A)—
definition of
‘aircraft’ (New).

Section 3(5)
“British India.”
Section 3(6)
“British
possession”.
Section 3(7)
“Central Act”.
Section 3(8)
Definition of
“Central
Government”.

Section 3(9)
“Chapter.”

Section 3(10)
“Chief

Controfling
Revenue
Authority”.
Section 3(10A)
Definition of
“Clause” (new).

16

3.8. We accordingly recommend a re-draft of the definition to indicate-the meaning accura-
teiy, on the following lines :—

REVISED SECTION 3(3)

(3) “affidavit”? shall mean a statement in writing purporting to be a statement of
facts, signed by the person making it and confirmed by him by oath.”

The Act does not define the expression “aircraft”, which is now frequently used
in Central Acts. 10 is necessary to define it in the General Clauses Act.

Section 2(/) of the Indian Aireraft Act, 1934, provides that “aircraft? means “any
machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from reactions of the air, and includes
balloons, whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines.” Section 2(i)
of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, is in the same terms. The Indian Carriage by Air Act,
1934 aves not contain any definition of “aircraft”. Section 4(ii) of the Air Force Act, 1950,
defines “aircraft” as including “acroplanes, balloons, kite balloons. airships, gliders or other
machines for flying.”

We recommend that on the lincs of the definition in the Indian’ Aircraft Act, 1934, a
definition of ‘aircraft’ should be inserted in the General Clauses Act. It will be as follows:—

(3A) “aircraft” shall mean any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere
from reactions of the air, and shall include balloons, whether fixed or free, airships, kites,
gliders and flying machines.

3.10. Section 3(4) defines the expression “barrister”. It needs no change.

3.11. Section 3(5) defines the expression “British India”. It needs no change.

3.12. Section 3(6) defines the expression “British possession”. It needs no change.

3.13. Section 3(7) defines the expression “Central Act”. It needs no change.

3.14. In the definition of “Central Government”, in section 3(8), we propose no change.

3.15. Section 3(9) defines the expression “Chapter”. It needs no change.

316. Section 3(70) defines the expression “Chief Controlling Revenue Authority”. It needs
no change.

3.17. A new definition of the expression “clause” is proposed to be added. Just as the
expression “section” and “sub-section” have been defined in the existing Act1, it would be
convenient to define the expression “clause” as well. This will standardise the use, of these
devices also. It will be as follows :-—

Section 3(10A) New
“(LOA) ‘clause’ shall mean—

(a) a sub-division of the sub-section in which the word occurs, or

(b) where there is no sub-section in the section, a sub-division of the section in
which the word occurs.”

1. Section 3(54) and 3(61).



17

3.18. In section 3(11), which contains the definition of “Collector”, the expression Section
“Presidency Towns” should be replaced by a specific mention of the three cities (Bombay, “Collector”.
Madras and Calcutta). An amendment is recommended for the purpose. The revised clause
should be as follows :

Revised section 3(11)

3(11) “Collector” shall mean...the chief officer-in-charge of the revenue adminis-
tration of a district, and shall include the Collector of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay :

3.19. Section 3(12) defines the expression “Colony”. It needs no change. Section
312)
“Colony”.
3.20. Section 3(/3) defines the expression “commencement”. It needs no change. Section
Certain points as to the date of commencement are discussed later.* “Commencement”.
3.21. Section 3(/4) defines the expression “Commissioner”. It needs no change. Section
“Commisioner”.
3.22. Section 3(/5) defines the expression “Constitution”. It needs no change. Section

“Commissioner”.

3.23. Section 3(/6) defines the expression “Consular Officer”. There has been an inter- Section 3(16)
national Convention on the subject. In the light of the provisions of the relevant convention®, we Gensler

icer”.
recommend that the expression ‘consular officer’ should be re-defined as follows* :

“Consular Officer” shall mean any person entrusted with the exercise of consular
functions, irrespective of his designation, and shall include Consul-General, Consul, Vice-
Consul and Consular Agent.”

3.24. A definition of the expression “daughter” is proposed to be added, as a useful pro- Section 316A)
vision, on the lines of the existing definition of ‘son’. The adoption of daughters is permitted ‘daughter’ Cnew)
in certain cases.4 It is felt that section 13(7), under which words of the masculine gender are
taken as including the faminine gender, may not necessarily have the effect of extending the
definition of ‘son’ to the construction of the word ‘daughter’. We, therefore, recommend insertion
of the following new definition.

Section 3(16A) (New)

(16A) “daughter”, in the case of any one whose personal law permits adoption, shall
include an adopted daughter:*

3.25. A definition of the expression “day” is proposed to be added. Such a definition will Section 3(16B)
be similar to the existing definition of “month”. The proposed definition follows the existing Definition of
statutory precedents®, and will be as follows :

Section 3(16B) (New)
(168) “day” shall mean a period of twenty-four hours beginning at mid-night.

3.26. A definition of the expression “diplomatic officer” is desirable, on the pattern of the Section 3(16C)
definition of “consular officer” in section 3(16). as proposed to be amended. It may be noted “Diplomatic

1, See discussion under section 5 in Chapter 4, infra
2. Vienna convention on Consular Relations, 1963, Article 1(1) (०),

3. The draft is based on the Ministry of External Affairs’ letter (S. No. 207) No. D-2319/L&T/63 (No. 4/451(2)
63 dated 6-3-1963, to the Law Commission.

4. See sections 7 and 8, Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, (76 of 1956).
5. This amendment should not apply to existing Acts. See section 3A (proposed).
6, (a) Section 2, Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).

(b) Section 2, Weekly Holidays Act, 1942, (18 of 1942).
(c) Section 2, Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1952).
(d) Section 2, Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).


Section 3(17)
District
Judge.

Case-law as
to the

“District
Judge”.

Question of
persona designata,
in relation to
District

Judge.

18

that there is an international Convention! on the subject. In the light of the relevant convention,”
we recommend that the expression ‘diplomatic officer’ should be defined as follows:

Section 3(/6C) (New)

(760) “diplomatic officer” shall mean a member of the staff of a diplomatic mission
having diplomatic rank, and includes an ambassador, high commissioner, envoy, minister

and charge d'affaires ;
3.27. The definition of “District Judge”, in section 3(/7), is as follows :—

“District Judge” shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of Original jurisdic-
tion, but shall not include a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra-ordinary
original civil jurisdiction.”

This definition uses the words “shall mean”, and not the words “includes” or the words “shall
include”. Therefore, if the definition, as it is worded, is taken literally, no one except “the judge
of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction” can come within it. The use of the article
“the” before the word “Judge” (in the definition) is significant. It has a specifying or particularis-
ing effect, as opposed to the indefinite and generalising force of “a”, and denotes that it is not
any Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction that can be termed as a District
Judge, but that only the sole presiding Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jyrisdiction can
be called a District Judge. This was the view taken in a Madhya Bharat case.?

3.28. The contrary view has, however, been taken in an Assam case. holding that “District
Judge” in section 7(3)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act includes an Additional District Judge
by virtue of this clause.®

Of course, the definition of the term “District Judge” cannot be used for finding out the
meaning of the term “District court.” But, where the term “district judge” is used, difficulty
is created by the conflict of views referred to above.

3.29, The question, therefore, usually arises whether a statutory provision which confers
powers on a “Dis‘rict Judge” refers to the District Judge as a persona designata, or, whether it
refers to him as the presiding officer of the cour. In the latter case, the usual provisions applicable
to the district court apply. According to Osborn’s Concise Law Dictionary’, 5 a persona designata
is “a person who is pointed out or described as an individual, as opposed to a person ascertained
as a member of a class, or as filling a particular character.” When a special or local law provides
for an adjudication to be made by a constituted Court— that is, by a Court not created by a
special or local law, but to an existing Court—the special or local law, in fact generally enlarges
the ordinary jurisdiction of such a court. ‘Thus, where a special or local statute refers to a
constituted court as a court, and does not refer to the presiding officer of that court, then the
teference cannot be said to be a persona designata. But the reverse proposition,!® that where
the reference is to the presiding officer of a court, it is intended to be taken as referring to him
as a persona designata and not as a court, may or may not be true.

Contrast the definition in the Diplomatic Officers (Oaths and Fees)etc. Act, 1948 (41 of 1948) and section 2 of
the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954).

Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, 1963, Article 1(1)(d).

Mangharam v. K. के, Kher, A.1.R. 1956 M.B. 183, 187.

G. C. Bezbarna v. State, A.1R. 1954 Assam 161, 165, para 9.

For the recommendation relvant to the definition, see infra para 3.30.

D.CS. Bureau ¥. United Concern, A.1.R. 1967 Mad, 381, 384, para 6 (reviews cases) (Case under section
62(1), Copyright Act)

Osborn, Concise Law Dictionary, 4th Ed.

8. Rain Chandra Aggarwal v. State of U.P., A.1.R. 1966 S.C, 1888.

9. Ram Chandra Aggarwal v. State of U. A.LR. 1966 S.C, 1888,

10 .Sce Bimla Rani V. BM, Finance, AIR 1972 All. 242, 245.

avaey oo

2



19

3.30. In order to avoid doubts on the points discussed above, and to resolve the conflict of Recommendation
views, it is desirable to provide that the expression “district judge” does not include an additional
judge of the district court. We recommend an amendment as follows :—

Revised Section 3(17)

(17) “District Judge” shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdic-
tion, but shall not include—

(a) An Additional Judge of such Court, or

(b) the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra-ordinary civil jurisdiction.

3.31. We now come to the definition of “document”. The definition of “document” will Section | हि

be better understood if four elements are studied separately. The first is the concept indicated 3(18) de 7
by the word “matter”, which may be described as the “mental element”. The matter recorded “document”.
on the document here means an idea,—what is regarded in Copyright law as the proper sub-
ject-matter of copyright. The second element of the definition is indicated by the words “written

etc.”. This may be called the manual (or mechanical) element; and coupled with this is

the third element of symbols, indicated by letters, figures or marks. These symbols have mean-

ing only because they are intended to be used, or may be used, for the purpose of recording the

idea represented by the first element. Finally, there is the substance upon which these pro-

cesses are brought to bear, i.e., upon which the mental element is recorded (by mechanical

means) through symbols. This last one is the material—a purely physical object.

It is a defect in the present definition that it defines a “document” in terms of what has
been described above as the mental element. The ordinary meaning of the expression “docu-
ment” is the material or substance upon which (as explained above) the other processes operate.
Notwithstanding the fact that a similar defect is found to exist in the definition in the Indian
Penal Code, and in the Evidence Act, and notwithstanding also the fact that the present defi-
nition has been there for almost a century, we consider it proper to modify it so as to bring it
nearer to the reality. The starting point for the definition should be the substance.

3.32. With reference to some of the processes enumerated above,” certain observations. are Four
in order. So far as the word “matter” denoting the intellectual or mental element, is concerned, Processes.
nothing further need be said.

So far as the manual process of recording the matter is concerned, the present wording is
somewhat narrow, inasmuch as it does not cover the act of inscribing. It is considered that
when a matter is inscribed on metal or stone or even on paper, the process can better be called
“inscribed” rather than “written” etc., though, perhaps, the word “expressed” might cover it.
The illustrations to the definition in the Indian Evidence Act show that such inscriptions are
“documents”. The word “written” does not occur in the Evidence Act or in the Penal Code;
it can, however, be retained here, as useful, The word was added in the General Clauses Act
at the Select Committee stage. The definition of “writing” may also be seen.

In addition to the process of writing, describing etc. specifically enumerated, the definition
should, in our opinion, be widened to include such new processes as may, or may have already,
come into existence for the purpose of recording an idea.

These processes could be divided into two classes—(a) processes analogous to writing,®
etc., and (b) processes not analogous to writing etc. We think that all such other processes
should be brought within the fold of the definition.

3.33. We next come to the third element of a “document”, namely, the symbols. Here,
the present definition is confined (at least on one view) to the specific types of symbols enume-
rated therein. We are of the view that this part of the definition should be widened so as to

1. Para 3.27 and 3.28, supra.
2. Para 3.31, supra.
3. See definition of “writing.”

15 M of Law/74—4


Stephen's
definition.

The words
“which is
intended
etc.”
examined.

Admissibility
of tape-
recordings.

40
include (a) symbols analogous to those which are already mentioned, and (b) methods which
are not analogous to symbols, but which can come into existence later or may have come into

existence already. No doubt, this last mentioned category is wide, but we have particularly in
mind Cinematography films and tape-records* (these are merely examples).

Incidentally, we may mention that both the words “figure” and “marks”, used in the present
definition, are ambiguous. If only the numerical figures are intended, then paintings would be
left out. If, again, only visible marks conveying the idea by themselves (and without further
efford) are intended, then mechanical recordings are left out. What the Penal Code describes
as “visible representations”? should be covered.’ as also what may be called acoustic represen-
tations.

Finally, the substance upon which all these processes take place should, as we have already
indicated,‘ be the starting point for the definition.

3.34. Stephen’s difinition in his Digest of Evidence’ is simpler. He definies “document”
as any substance having any matter expressed or described upon it by marks capable of being
read. The definition is useful as making it clear that the substance constitutes the document.

The definition by Stephen is, however, narrow, in one respect. It lays emphasis on what
can be read. Stephen was, perhaps, thinking of the conventional method of writing, which is
the normal device adopted by literate persons to communicate their ideas—including, of course,
printing.

3.35. So much as regards the principal elements of the definition of document. Now, a
verbal point may be mentioned. The words “which is intended to be used or which may be
used for the purpose of recording that matter”, in the existing definition raise one question.

Are these words to be read with—
(i) ‘matter’, or
(ii) ‘letters, figures or marks’, or
(iii) ‘means’.
(iv) ‘substance’ ?

The first interpretation would involve repetition of ‘matter’, which makes it meaningless.
The second interpretation is a plausible one, but the, the plural “letters” etc..goes ill with
the singular “which is”. The third also suffers from the same defect, as “means” has been used
in the plural in the definition. The fourth is in harmony with the singular. Since it is the ex-
pression “which is” which has caused difficulty, it is proposed to make it plural, and to link it
up with “means”. The means could be used, or are intended to be used, for recording the. idea.

3.36. The (Indian) Official Secrets Act, 1923, defines “document” as including a part of
document. But such 2 clarification appears to be unnecessary in this Act. ne

3.37. As regards tape-recording,® we may note that they have now been in commercial
use for many years, and they have been held by the Supreme Court to be admissible in evi-
dence? in several cases. The question whether they are “documents” was not at issue in. those
cases,®

1. Asto tape-record”, see para 3.37, infra.

2. Sections 124A, 153A, 499, L.P.C.

. See also para 3.38 infra.

. Para 3.31, supra.

. Stephen’s Digest of Evidence, Article 1.

. Para 3.33, supra.

(a) Pratap Sink v. State of Punjab, (1964) 2 S.C.R, 733 A.LR. 1964 S.C. 72, 86, para 15.
(b) R.M. Malkani v. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 157 (reviews cases).

(a) Yusuffalli v. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 147 (V. 55) ; (1967) 3 S.C.R. 720,
(b) Manindra Nath v. Biswanath, 67 Cal. W.N, 191.

(०) Rup Chand v. Mahabir Prasad, A.X.R, 1956 Punj. 173.

eo

2 RAS


te

21

In Australia, the problem was exhaustively argued in R. v. Travers,* and the New South
Court? of Criminal Appeal there held that a record of a conversation (or of any other event)
was just as admissible as an accoustic reproduction, and that the rules which related to the supp-
lementing of the senses by the use of scientific instruments should be applied to recordings of the
type in question, From this decision, the High Court refused special leave to appeal.®

3.38. In England, section 6(1), Evidence Act, 1938 provides that “document” includes
books, maps, plans, drawings and photographs. Although the definition is plainly not exhaustive,
‘a view has been expressed that it is doubtful whether a tape-recording, or a computer print-out,
would be held to be a document within the Act. The Criminal Evidence Act, 1965, under
which “document” includes “any device by means of which information is recorded or stored”,

is more up to date.

In India, in the Press Emergency Powers Act,* it is expressly stated that “document” in-
cludes also any painting, drawing or photograph or other visible representation.

3.39. Finally, it may also be useful to add an Explanation that the means employed for
forming the letters ctc. should be immaterial.

3.40. In the light of the above discussion, the following re-draft of the definition of “docu-
ment” is recommended: —

‘document’ shall include any substance having any matter written, expressed, inscribed,
described or otherwise recorded upon it by means of letters, figures or marks or
by any other means, or by more than one of these means which are intended to
be used or which may be used for the purpose of recording that matter.

Explanation.—It is immaterial by what means the letters, figures or marks are formed.”

3.41. Section 2(19) defines an “enactment”. The decided cases on this expression, which
‘occurs in several sections of the Act,® are fairly numerous. For example, it has been held that
an “enactment” would include any Act (or a provision contained therein) made by the Union
Parliament or the State Legislature. Again, since “enactment” is defined to include also any
provision of an Act, section 6 would apply to a case where not only the entire Act is repealed,
but also where any provision of an Act is repealed.”

3.41A. The expression “enactment” occurs at several places in the General Clauses Act.
Some of the important sections’ using the expression are as follows: —

Section 6-—Repeal of an enactment—effect of.
Section 8--Construction of references to repeated enactments.
Section 12—Duty to be taken pro rata in enactments.

Section 26—Provision as to offence punishable under two or more enactments.

५ R.v. Travers (1958) $.R. (N.S.W.) 85.
See—(a) 31 Aust. L.J. 895 ;
(0) 37 Aust, LJ. 145.
See (1957) 98 C.L.R. 674.
Section 2(6), Press Emergency Powers Act, 1931 (repealed).

See, infra, para 3.41A.

State of Punjab Sukh Deo Sarup Gupta A.1.R. 1970 SC 1661, 1942, para 3, affirming A.IR. 1965 Punj. 399.
Godhra Electricity Co. y. Somalal, A.I.R. 1967 Guj. 772, 776, para 6. है
The list is illustrative only.

v

eran Pye

Recom-
mendation.

Section
3(19)-
“enactment”.

Sections
containing
the expres-
sion “enact-
ment”,



Section 8 and
“Enactment”,

22

Questions of the application of the definition of “enactment” in section 3(19) can arise in
telation to all these section. A discussion of such questions in relation to two important sec-
ticns--sections 6 and 8—is offered below.

3.42. The operation of the definition of “enactment” in relation to the repeal of a law (seo-
tion 6 of the Act) may be illustrated by analysing certain frequently recurring situations con-
cerning repeal.

(a) A Central Act may, for example, repeal a State 0०. It may repeal or have the effect
of repealing, (because of the generality of the words employed), a law in a Native State which
was not described as an “Act”. This situation arose, for example, when the Special Marriage
Act, 1954, repealed not only the Special Marriage Act, 1872, but also “any law corresponding
to the Special Marriage Act, 1872, in force in any Part B State” etc.?

(b) A Central Act may, similarly, have the effect of repealing a Portuguese or French law
because of the generality of the words employed.

(c) Again, a Central Act may repeal a British Statute applicable to India. Many of these
were repealed in 1960, on the recommendations of the Law Commission.? A few still survive.

(d) Then, a Central Act may repeal a State Act as in force in a Union Territory by virtue
of the notification made by the competent authority under the relevant law.

These cases do not exhaust all the situations. But the point intended to be made is that
in most of them, the law repealed is one which does not find specific mention in the definition of
“enactment” in the General Clauses Act.

3.43. The approach adopted by the draftsman with reference to repeal (and savings requi-
site on repeal) can also be usefully illustrated. Sometimes, for example, the draftsman may
assume that the repeal section (section 6) applies to the situation.t Sometimes, the draftsman
Provides that the provisions of section 6 “shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding law
as if such corresponding law had been an enactment”.5 Sometimes, where section 6 would
not definitely apply, because the language used is not “repeal”, but the formula used is, “cease
to be in force”, the draftsman merely introduces a brief saving as respects “anything done or
any action taken” under the law which is to cease to have effect.6 Sometimes, the draftsman
provides not merely for the application of section 6, but also for the application of the whole
General Clauses Act, by providing that “the provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897,
shall apply to the repeal of the said Act as if the said Act were a Central Act.”7

Sometimes, the draftsman reproduces almost the entire substance of section 6, General
Clauses Act.®

3.44. The matter ‘can also be considered in relation to section 8. Section 8 provides that
where an enactment is repealed and re-enacted, references to the repealed enactment in other

- instruments shall be construed as references to the re-enacted one. The expression “enactment”

in section 8 came up for consideration before the Supreme Court.? The material facts were
these: Under the East Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, section 6 read with Schedule 8,
entry 37, the following goods were exempt from tax:—

“All goods on which duty is, or may be, levied under the Punjab Excise Act, 1914.”

For example, see section 2501), Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1964).

. Section 51(1), Special Marriage Act, 1954.

}. Fifth Report of the Law Commission.

. For example, section 25(1) , Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).

. Section 51(3), Special Marriage Act, 1954.

Section 26, Comptroller & Auditor General, etc. Act, 1971 (56 of 1971).

Section 45(2), Haryana and Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1970 (16 of 1970) {repealing a Punjab Act.)
For example, section 87, Andaman and Nicobar Co-operative Societies Regulation, 1973 (3 of 1973), [repealing
the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 in relation to Andaman and Nicobar].

). State of Punjab v. Sukh Dev Sarup Gupta, A.1.R. 1970 S.C. 1641, 1642, para 3.

SA AVAWNS

2°


23

In 1955, Parliament enacted the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act.
Section 21 of the Act repealed any State law corresponding to the Act, in force in any State.
The question arose whether the exemption from sales tax could be claimed in respect of goods
on which duty was levied under the Central Act of 1955. The argument of the State was that
since the exemption in Punjab Act of 1948 referred to the “Punjab Excise Act. 1914”, which
had now been repealed, no exemption could be claimed. The State further argued that section
8 of the General Clauses Act (relating to construction of references to re-enacted Act) did
not apply, because the Act repealed was not a Central Act and, therefore, was not an “enactment”.
The Supreme Court rejected this argument and held that section 3(19) of the General Clauses
Act did not contain any limitation that it would apply only to Central Acts.

3.45. Since an Ordinance is “promulgated” and not “enacted”, the Rangoon High Court Ordinances
observed? that an Ordinance is not an “enactment”, and the High Court felt “considerable hesita- as falling
tion” in holding that the repeal of an Ordinance would attract the usual provisions regarding “enactment”.

repeal of enactments.

It has now been held that the expression “enactment” includes an Ordinance, so that
section 8 applies where a Central Act repeals and re-enacts an Ordinance made by the
President.”

3.46. In order that the definition of “enactment” may indicate more accurately what its
true scope is, it needs to be re-drafted. The definition should be framed in wide terms, so 38 t0 dation as ४०
include (i) Central Acts, as well as all (ii) State and Provincial? Acts, and (iii) Acts of former definition of
Indian‘ States, and also (iv) All Regulations and Ordinances, whether made after or before “enactment”.
the Constitution.® It should also cover laws of French etc. possessions,® which were passed
when those possessions were not part of India.

Specific mention of Regulations of the Bombay etc. Code should be omitted, as unnecessary
at the present day. We, therefore, recommend a re-draft of the definition of “enactment” as
follows :—

Revised section 3(19)

3(19) “enactment” shall include any law passed or made by any legislature or other authority
acting in a legislative capacity, and shall also include any provision contained in any such law,
but shall not include a statutory instrument,

3.47. Section 3(20) defines the expression “father”, and needs no change. Section 3(20)
“father”.
Section 3(21)
“financial year”.
Section 3(22)
“good faith”.
Section 3(23)
हे . “Government”,
3.51. Section 3(24) defines the expression “Government securities”. It needs no change. Section 3(24)
“Government

3.48. Section 3(21) defines the expression “financial year”. It needs no change.
3.49. Section 3(22) defines the expression “good faith”. It needs no change.”

3.50. Section 3(23) defines the expression “Government”. It needs no change.

3.52. (a) The existing definition of “High Court” does not cover criminal proceedings. It sorties

may be noted th that the General Clauses Bill of 1897 (as introduced) contained a separate “High
clause for cri proceedings also. But the Select Committee rejected® this change, stating that

(25)

1. S..K. Roy Chowdhury v. The King, A.1.R. 1941 Rangoon 1, 4 (Roberts C.J.).

2. Hareobhai v. State, A.1.R. 1967 Guj. 227, 245, para 29.

3. Cf. para.3.42(a) supra.

4. Cf. para. 3.42(b) supra.

5. Cf. para. 3.45 supra.

6. Cf. para. 3.42(c) and (9) supra.

7. For a full discussion as to good faith’ See A.I.R. 1969 Bom. 127.

8. Gazette of India, 6th March, 1897 Part V, page 77 (Report of the Select Committee).


Section 3(26)
“Immovable
property:

Section 3(27)
“Imprisonment.”

Section 3(28)
“India”.

Section 3(29)
“Indian law”.

24

the arrangements relating to the Recorder of Rangoon and Criminal Courts in Burma were
complicated. This reason does not hold good now.

(b) The definition in section 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, provided that
where, with reference to criminal proceedings, no High Court is established in any part of India,
the expression “High Court” means such officer as the State Government may appoint him
in that behalf. This provision, however was obsolete.

We think that there is no need to exclude criminal proceedings from the definition at this
stage. Also, instead of defining a “High Court” as the highest court of appeal etc. and then
excluding the Supreme Court by express words, it is preferable to re-draft the definition so as
to include the court of Judicial Commissioners wherever they exist.

(c) In the light of the above points, a revised definition of the expression “High Court’?
is recommended as below:

Revised section 3(25)

3(25) “High Court’, used with reference to civil or criminal proceedings, shall mean the
High Court or the Court of Judicial Commissioner having jurisdiction over the part of India
which the Act or Regulation containing the expression operates;

3.53. Section 3(26) defines the expression “immovable property.” It needs no change.

3.54. Section 3(27) defines the expression “imprisonment”. It needs no change.
3.55. Section 3(28) defines the expression “India”. It necds no change.

3.56. Regarding section 3(29), which defines “Indian Law”, there is a suggestion! to be
considered.

Sub-section (1) of section 4A of the General Clauses Act, 1897, makes applicable to
“Indian laws” certain definitions contained in the General Clauses Act. The term “Indian law”
is defined in clause (29) of section 3 of the Act as follows—

“Indian law’ shall mean any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, Rule, order, byelaw or other
instrument which before the commencement of the Constitution had the force of law
in any province of India or part thereof, or thereafter has the force of law in any
Part A State or Part C State or part thereof, but does not include any Act of Parlia-
ment of the United Kingdom or Order in Council, rule or other instrument made
under such Act.” ~ हु

It will be apparent from the above definition (of the expression “Indian law”) that it will
apply only to laws in force in any area which immediately before Ist November was included ina
part A State or Part C State, but not to laws in force in any area which, immediately before that
date, was comprised, in a Part B State. Now, in almost all Madras Acts, expressions such as
“Central Government”, “State Government”, “Official Gazette”, “High Court” etc. are used with-
out specifically defining them in the respective Madras Acts, and these expressions will, by virtue
of sub-section (1) of section 4A, have the meanings assigned to them in the General Clauses
Act. The question arises whether the definitions of various expressions enumerated in section
4A(1) will apply to a Madras Act extended to the Kanyakumari district and the Shencottah
taluk of the Tirunelveli district (which district and taluk were immediately before the Ist
November, 1956, comprised in a Part B State, namely, Travancore-Cochin.) As the position in
this respect is not very clear, the suggestion is that the position should be clarified.

3.57. We have given thought to the suggestion,” but we think that the better course, at
this stage, would be for each State Legislature concerned to deal with the matter and to. make

1, Suggestion of the Government of the (erstwhile) State of Madras.
2. Para 3.56, supra.


25

a suitable provision for the interpretation of laws of a (former) Part A State extended to
the area of a (former) Part B State. In so far as these laws relate to matters within the State
List, an amendment to be made in the General Clauses Act cannot apply to those laws. As
regards matters in the Concurrent List, not many State laws would have been extended to
those areas, because, cn most matters included in the Concurrent List (e.g. registration, succession,
procedure and the like), the position is that under the Part B States Laws Act or similar other
laws, the relevant Central Acts on various subjects now extend to those areas, and the General
Clauses Act, 1897 applies to those Central Acts for interpreting those Central Acts. Even as
regards other maters in the Concurrent List, where the relevant Central Acts are not extended,
no serious difficulty should arise because the analogy of the General Clauses Act can be invoked.

3.58. Section 3(30) defines the expresion “Indian State”. It needs no change.

3.59. Several points require discussion regarding the definition of “local authority” in section
3(31).

(1) Specific mention of Cantonment Board should be made.
(2) “Municipal Corporations” should be added.

But it appears unnecessary to add specifically “municipality” or “local Board” and other
authorities etc. referred to in the Bombay General Clauses Act or in the Constitution, Seventh
Schedule, State List, item 5. These may be left to be covered by the residuary words.

Even though a municipal committee may have a corporate personality, ordinarily the two
(corporation and the committee) are understood to be distinct from each other, and their
respective structure, powers and other matters indicate the difference in status. The distinction
between “corporation” and “committee” corresponds to actual reality.

(3) The words referring to “body of Port Commissioners” may be retained. In some
places (९.8. Bombay), there are Port Trustees. But it is considered unnecessary to mention
them? specifically.

(4) Regarding the words “other authority” ..... ”, in the definition, it has been held
that? a body of Port Commissioners is a local authority, irrespective of whether it controls or
is entrusted with “the control and management of a municipal” etc. fund or not. It was observed
that it is only in the case of other authorities that the requirement expressed by these words is
to be satisfied.

(5) This part of the definition should be re-drafted, by taking in all authorities entrusted with
local self-government or village administration.

(6) It has been suggested that the definition should include “any authority declared to
be a local authority under any enactment”. But this does not appear to be necessary. Such
declarations are not frequent, at least in Central Acts.

(7) It may be noted that village Panchayats have been held to be local authorities.
We recommend a re-draft incorporating the above points on the following lines :—
Revised section 3(31)

3(31) “local authority” shall mean a municipal corporation or committee, a district
board, a cantonment board or a body of port commissioners, or any other authority
constituted for the purpose of local self-government or village administration ;

3.60. Section 3(32) defines the expression “Magistrate”. It needs no change.

1, Contrast section 3(27) of the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904.
2, Offelal Assignee v. Trustees of the Port Trust, Madras, A.I.R. 1936 Mad. 789, 791.

Section 3(30)
“Indian State”.

Section 3(31)
“local
authority”.

Section 3(32)—
“Magistrate”,


Section 3(33)—
“master”.
Section 3(34)—
“merged

territories”.
Section 3(35)—
“month”,

26

3.61. Section 3(33) defines the expression “master”. It needs no change.
3.62. Section 3(34) defines the expression “merged territories”. It needs no change.

3.63. The Act defines a “month” as a month reckoned according to the British calendar.
The definition is inaccurate. The word “British” should, in this definition, be replaced by the
word “Gregorian”.+ “British” is not an accurate description.?

The English, Australian and Canadian Act define a “month” simply as a calendar month.
But it may be noted that there are no other calendars in vogue in these countries.

It may be noted that the calendar now used for civil purposes throughout the world is
called the Gregorian Calendar,* after Pope Gregory XIII, who introduced it in the 16th century.

The immediate predecessor of the Gregorian calendar was the Julian calendar (called
after Julius Caesar). That calendar itself has a history, and can be traced ultimately to
Egypt. 7

Throughout the Republican period, in Rome, the year normally contained 355 days, the
months being 29 or 30 days in length. An additional month, consisting sometimes of 27 days
and sometimes of 28 days, was inserted, when considered necessary, after 23 February, the
five last days of February being then omitted. The additional month was generally inserted
in alternate years, but the decision as to when it should be inserted 189 with the pontifices,
The pontifices often used to manipulate unscrupulously the lunar calendar to their own advantage:
if it was desired to prolong or shorten the term of office of a magistrate or to arrange an election
some time that appeared favourable, the calendar was adjusted to suit. It was to end such
abuses that Julius Caesar decided upon a reform of the calendar ; at the time of his pontificate,
the seasons had shifted about two months from their proper positions. He called in the
assistance of the Greek astronomer, Sosigenes of Alexandria ; and the calendar was modified
into what is very much like its present form. (Sosigenes himself took the idea of a solar
calendar from Egypt). The lunar month was thrown over completely. The normal year was
to contain 365 days, an additional day being inserted every fourth year, thus giving an average
length of the year of 3654 days, in close agreement with the length of the tropical year.

The calendar year now became, for the first time, purely solar, and there was no tendency
for the seasons to drift about.

3.64, The Julian method provided a calendar whose length closely approximated to the
tropical year. Its device of ‘intercalation’ was also convenient. But the basic defect was that,
in taking a period of 3654days as the length of the tropical year, it over-estimated this length
by a little more than 11 minutes 15 seconds or, more exactly, by 0.0073 days. Thus, although
the error amounted only to one whole day in 128 years, it was constantly increasing, and
over a long time became troublesome. This deficiency showed up in due course, so that
further reform became imperative because of criticism by astronomers.

The Vatican made several unsuccessful efforts to reform the calendar. In the 16th
century, after further criticism, the Vatican again made an effort to reform matters, and this
time it was successful. Pope Gregory XIII approached the governments of the principal states
of the Holy Roman empire, and all agreed to accept his alterations. He then promulgated
a new calendar, known as the Gregorian (or New Style) calendar, in a brief issued in March,
1582. It was adopted, in due course, in several other countries.

3.65. Great Britain took a long time to make the change. It was in 1751 that a Calendar
(New Style) Act was passed,‘ and the Gregorian calendar was thereforth ordered’ to be used
for all legal and public business.

1. Compare section 25 of the Limitation Act.

2: Compare also the defnition in the Jaromu and Kashmir General Clauses Act, 1877 (20 of 1877),
which uses the word “Gregorian.”

3. Encyclopaedia Britaunica, Vol. 4, page 611.

4. The Calendar (New Style) Act, 1751. हु

5. C. R. Cheuey (Ed.), Handbook of Dates for students of English History (1945.)


27

In order to substitute “Gregorian”, we recommend as follows :—
Section 3(35)—definition of ‘month’
In section 3(35). for the word “British”, the word “Gregorian” shall be substituted.

3.66. Section 3(36) defines “movable property”, and needs no change.

3.67. Section 3(37) defines “oath” as including a solemn affirmation or declaration in
case of persons by law allowed to do so. But it does not provide that the oath should be
taken before a competent authority. We recommend that the definition should be re-drafted
as follows so as to bring out this idea :

“(37). “Oath” shall mean an oath taken before a competent authority with reference to
the Oaths Act, 1969, or any other law for the time being in force, and shall, in
the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing, include
affirmation or declaration made before a competent authority with reference to that

Act or law”.
3.68. Section 3(38) defines the expression “offence”. It needs no change.

3.69. and 3.70. Section 3(39) defines the expression “Official Gazette”. It needs no
change.

3.71. Section 3(40) defines the expression “Part”. It needs no change.

3.72. Section 3(41) defines the expression “Part A State”. It needs no change . It is
useful only for existing Central Acts and Regulations.

3.73. Section 3(42) defines the expression “person”. It needs no change.

3.74. Section 3(43) defines the expression “Political Agent”. It needs no change.

3.75. A definition of the expression “prescribed” is proposed to be added. It is the usual
practice to insert a definition in each Central Act to the effect that (in that Act), the word
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under that Act. It will be convenient to insert
this definition in the General Clauses Act, so as to shorten the language of Central Acts.

Section 3(43A) (New)

3(43A) “prescribed” shall mean prescribed by rules made under the Central Act or
Regulation in which the word occurs ;

3.76. Section 3(44) defines the expression “Presidency town”. It needs no change.

3.77. Section 3(45) defines the expression “Province”. It needs no change.

4.78. Section 3(46) defines the expression “Provincial Act”. It needs no change.

3.79. Section 3(47) defines the expression “Provincial Government”. It needs no change.

3.80. A new definition of the expression “public” is proposed to be added. It follows
section 12 of the Indian Penal Code, and section 3(26) of the Madras General Clauses Act,
1891, but the words “or section” (of the public) have been added in order to make it

comprehensive. The new definition should be as follows :

15 M of Law/74—5

Section 3(36)—
‘movable
property’.

Section 3(37)—
“oath”.

Section 3(38)—
“Offence”,

Section 3(39)—
“Official
Gazette”,
Section 3(40)—
“Part”.

Section 3(41)—
“Part A State”.
Section 3(42)—
“person”.

Section 3(43)—

3(43A)—
Definition of
“prescribed”
(New)

Section 3(44)—
“Presidency
town”.

Section 3(45)—
“Province”.

Section 3(46)—
“Provincial Act”.

Section 3(47)—
“Provincial
Government”.
Section
3(47A)—
“public” (New)


Section 3(48)-—
“public
nuisance”.
Section 3(49)--
“registered”.
Section 3(50)—
“Regulation”.

Section 3(51)—
“rule”.

Section 3(52)—
“schedule”.
Section 3(53)--
“Scheduled
District”.
Section 3(54)—
“section”.

Section 3(55)—
“ship”.

3(56)—

3(57)—

Section 3(58)—
“State”.

Section 3(59)—
“State Act”.

Section 3(60)—
“State
Government”.

Section
3(60A)—
“statutory
instrument”
(New).

Section 3(61)—
“sub-section”.

Section 3(62)--
“swear”.

Section
3(62A)—
“Temporary
Act” or
“Temporary
Regulation”.

28
Section 3(47A) (New)
3(47A) “public” shall include any class or section of the public ;

3.81. Section 3(48) defines “public nuisance”, and necds no change.

3.82. Section 3 (49) defines the expression “Ri *, and needs no change.

3.83. Section 3(50) defines the expression “Regulation”. It needs no change.
3.84. Section 3(51) defines the expression “rule”. It needs no change.
4.85. Section 3(52) defines the expression “schedule”. It needs no change.

3,86. Section 3(53) defines the expression “Scheduled District”. It needs no change.

3.87. Section 3(54) defines the expression “section”. It needs no change.
3.88. Section 3(55) defines the expression “ship”. It needs no change.
3.88A. Section 3(56) defines the expression “sign”. It needs no change.
3.88B. Section 3(57) defines the expression “son”. It needs no change.
4.88C. Section 3(58) defines the expression “State”. It needs no change.

4.88D. Section 3(59) defines the expression “State Act”. It needs no change.

3.88E. No changes are proposed in the definition of “State Government”, in section 3(60).

3.88F. A definition of “statutory instrument” is proposed to be inserted’, as a useful
provision. The new definition should be as follows :

Section 3(60A) (New)

3(60A) “statutory instrument’ shall mean a rule, notification, bye-law, order. scheme,
form or other instrument made under an enactment ;

3.89. Section 3(61) defines the expression “sub-section”. It needs no change.

4.90. Section 3(62) defines the expression ‘swear”. It needs no change.

| or “temporary Regulation” has been used in a

3.91. The expression “temporary Act’
ta definition of that expression in section 3.

few proposed sections,” and it is proposed to inser
The new definition should be as follows :

Section 3 (62A) (New)

3(62A) “Temporary Act” or teniporary Regulation” shall mean a Central Act or Regula-
tion, whether made before or after the commencement of the Constitution, which

is to cease to have effect or cease to operate on a particular day or on the expiration
of a particular period or on the happening of a particular event ;

{Existing section 3(62A) to be renumbered as section 3(62)]

1. See also Para 12.2 infra.

osed), Chapter 7, infra.

2, e. g., section relating to the expiry of temporary Acts (prop


29

It needs no change, Sevtion

3.92. Section 3(62A) defines the expression “Union Territory”
except renumbering. The renumbering is required because of the insertion of a new definition | CoA) as
ft “temporary Act”. Section
3(62B)—
Union
हि ह Territory’.
3.93. Section 3(63) defines the expression “vessel”, It needs no change. Section 3(63)—
vessel

3.94. Section 3(64) defines the expression “will”. It needs no change. ae 3(64)—
3.95. Section 3(65) defines ihe expression “writing”. It needs no change. Section 3(65)—
Section 3(66)—

3.96. In section 3(66)—definition of the expression “year’—the existing word “British” ~year"—
should be replaced by the word “Gregorian”, which is the accurate word. ‘Ihe revised definition smendment
recommended.
should be as tollows :—

Revised section 3(66)

3(66) “year” shall mean a year reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.

3.96A. We have finished discussion of section 3, which contains the principal definitions. (tion 34—

The section applies to the General Clauses Act, 1897, and to Central Acts passed thereaier. Non-application

We are recommending the insertion of certain new definitions. Some of them may not be % Seton 3
appropriate for existing laws. Hence, in respect of them, ai exception is required to the
general provision in section 3. Lor that purpose, we recommend a new section as follows :-—
Section 3A (new)
3A. The definitions in section 3 of the following words and expressions, that is to say,
(i) “daughter”,
do not apply to—
(a) this Act so far as it relates to the period before the day* of. or
(b) to any Central Act or Regulation made before the..... day® of..
1974.
3.97. No changes are required in sections 4 and 4A. Section 4
and 4A.

3.98. A new section dealing with grammatical variations and cognate expressions is section 4B—

proposed to be added. Grammatical
Variations

and exclusion

3.99. It will also be useful to provide that definitions are sudjcct to a different intention oe definitions

in the context. Such a provision will shorten the language of Central Acts. Henceforth, it (New).
will not be necessary to insert, in the definition clause in each Act, any words excluding a
contrary intention in the context. The new section skould be as follows :
Section 4B (New)
“4B. In every Central Act or Regulation, made on or after the .........-0- 20005
day of

where a word is defined.
(a) the word shall have the meaning assigned by the definition, unless the context

otherwise requires ;
(b) grammatical variations of that word and its cognate expressions shall have corres-

ponding meanings, unless the context otherwise requires.

1, Section 3(62A) is to be added
See para 3.91. supra

2. See para 3.1A, supra.
3. Cf. discussion as to section 3(35)—month”, para 3.63, supra.

4. Date of commencement of amended Act. ‘
5. Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered.
6. Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered.



Section $--
Commencement
of Acts.

Position
in England.

CHAPTER 4

COMMENCEMENT
Introductory.

4.1. Sections 5 to 13 of the Act contain—as the heading above these sections shows—
general rules of construction, other than definitions. These sections fall under two broad groups.
First, there are sections’ dealing with the commencement and repeal of enactments. Secondly,
there are sections? which provide for other general rules of construction. The first group is
the more important of the two, in point of quality, because it deals with the life of enactments.
The second deals with certain matters of detail, such as, time, distance, rate of duty, gender
and number, and the like.

We shall first deal with the sections in the first group, and then proceed to the second
group. Certain new matters, not dealt with in the present Act, will then be dealt with. In
the present Chapter, we concentrate on the commencement of Acts, Regulations and Ordinances.

Commencement

4.1A. Section 5(1) of the Act provides that where any Act of Parliament is not expressed
to come into “operation” on a particular day, it shall come into operation on the day on which
it receives the assent of the President. The section also deals with pre-Constitution Acts, but
we are primarily concerned with Acts of Parliament.

4.2 In England, before 1793, by a legal fiction an Act of Parliament took effect from
the first day of the session. But, in order to abolish a fiction “so flatly absurd and unjust”,®
the Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act, 1793 (c. 13), enacted that the Clerk of
Parliament should endorse, on every Act, immediately after its title, the date of its passing
and receiving the Royal assent. This endorsement is part of the Act, and is the date of
its commencement, when on other time is provided.‘

Before the Act of 1793, the rule was this: When no date was fixed, an Act came
into force on the first day of the session in which it was passed, and consequently, all Acts
passed in the same session were considered to have received the royal assent on the same
day. This was based upon a legal fiction, according to which the whole of a session of
Parliament was regarded as having been held on its first day. This meant that if a statute
passed on the last day of the session made a previously innocent act criminal or even capital,
all persons who had been doing it during the session, while the act was still innocent, would
be liable to suffer the punishment imposed.* This rule was obviously inconvenient by reason
of its retrospective operation, and was often found to work injustice ; where two Acts passed
in the same session were repugnant, it was, as Lord Tenterden pointed out.*® impossible to
know which of the two ought to be held to repeal the other. This rule was abolished by the
Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act, 1793, as already stated.

In England, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the expression “the passing of
this Act,” in a statute, means the date of royal assent, and not the date fixed by the Act
at which all or certain parts of it are to come into operation.?

1. Sections 5 to 8.

2. Sections 9 to 13.

3. 1 BI. Comm. 70 n.

4. Tomlinson v. Bullock, (1879) 4 Q.B.D. 230, 232 (Lush and Mellor JJ.).

5. See the case of Attorney General v. Panter (1772) 6 Bro. P.C. 486.

6. Rv. Middlesex, (1831) 2 B&Ad. 818, 821, 36 RR 758. 7

7. See Ex D. Rasbleigh, In re Dalzell, (1875) 2 Ch. 9. 9, followed in R. ९. Smith (1910) 1 K.B. 1725.

30


31

4.3. The Canadian Interpretation Act has a provision similar? to the English Act of 1973
quoted below? :—-

“The Clerk of the Parliaments shall endorse on every Act, immediately after the title
thereof, the day, month and year when the Act was assented to in Her Majesty's name ;
such endorsement shall be taken to be a part of the Act, and the date of such assent shall
be the date of the commencement of the Act, if no other date of commencement is therein
provided.”*

4.3.A. As already stated‘, the present rule in England concerning the commencement of
statutgs is, that in the absence of a specially appointed day, statutes commence their operation
upon receipt of the Royal assent. Unless a new statute provides otherwise, the old law remains
applicable to all events occurring before the commencement of the new statute.

4.38. The Indian provision in section 4 follows the English law. But it should be pointed
out that the date of assent is not the only alternative in regard to commencement of an Act.
Sir Cocil Car® has expressed the view that “in the rush of modern law—making, many laws
tumble out of the oven half-baked ;"~-not only in the sense that the country may not be ready
for them, but also in the sense that administrative preparations and the making of delegated
legislation may be necessary to bring statute into force. It may be noted that such special
cases are dealt with by postponing the commencement of the Act to a date to be fixed later.

As already stated. there are several alternatives as to commencement.

(a) In the first place, a specific future or past date may be mentioned in the Act itself
as the date on which the Act shall come into force or shall be deemed to have come into
force. In the former case (future date), the Act is prospective in its operation ; in the latter
case (past date), it is retrospective in its operation. ‘Thus, the recent Code of Criminal
Procedure® received the assent of the President on the 25th January, 1974, but section 1(3)
of the Act specifically lays down that it shall come into force on the Ist day of April, 1974.

(b) In the second place, no specific date may be mentioned in the Act, the date may
be left to the Central Government to be appointed’ by notification in the Official Gazette.
This device has been called by Sir Cocil T. Carr! as the “appointed day” clause device. This
device is resorted to when postponement of the commencement of an Act is necessitated by
reason of appointments to be made under the Act, or rules to be framed thereunder and
other preliminary arrangements to be carricd out for the proper and effective functioning of
the Act, or by reason of any change being made by the Act in status or rights the effect
of which it is desirable to delay, or by reason of new conditions being imposed on a section
of the public which makes it desirable, that they should have time to adjust themselves to
the new law. In this connection, Sir Cocil Carr remarks* “When Parliament makes big
constitutional or administrative changes. it is convenient to take time over the various stages
rather than to bring them into force immediately on the passing of the Act or upon any hard
and fast date. Such a device is particularly useful and appropriate to the introduction of—

(a) constitutional changes. for example, those made by the Acts which respectively
created the Dominion of Canada in 1867, the Commonwealth of Australia in
1900 the Union of South Africa in 1909 and those made by the Government of India
Act 1919 and the Government of Ireland Act of 1920; and

1. Para 4.2, supra.
2, Section 5(1), Canadian Interpretation Act.

3. See also para 4.15, infra.

4. Para 4.2 supra

5, Carr, Concerning Lnglish Administrative Law (1941). pages 42, 43.
6. The Code of Criminal Procedure. 1974 (2 of 1974).

7. Carr, Delegated Legislation.

8. Carr, Delegated Legislation.

Provision
in Canada.

Present rules
in England.

Several
alternatives

as to
conimencement.


Provision in
State General
Clauses Acts.

Practice in
Rome and
France.

English
theory.

Question
whether date
of publication
should be
substituted —
considered.

Change in sec-
tion 5(1) not
recommended as
to date of com-
™mencement.

32

(b) administrative changes, such as, those occasioned in England by the local Govern-
ment Acts of 1888 and 1894, the Education Acts of 1902, 1903 and 1918, the
Patents and Designs Act of 1919, the establishment of a Public “Trustee (see 6 Ed.
VII, Ch. 55) or the inter-departmental transfer of powers under the 1919 Acts
which created the Ministry of Health, the Scottish Board of Health and the Ministry
of Transport . a

(c) Then, in the third place, the “appointed day” device can be quite frequently ela-
borated by providing that different days may be appointed (a) for different purposes
and for different provisions of the Act, or (b) for different areas, or (c) for
different persons or classes of persons. For example, part of the Government of
India Act, 1919 came into force on January Ist, 1920; other parts came into
force on successive dates during April, July and December of that ycar, while the
remainder was finally brought into force by the beginning of 1921, on one date
for Madras and the Central Provinces, on another date for Bihar and Orissa, on
a third date for Bombay and the rest of India. Provision for a similar gradual
enforcement of the Government of India Act, 1935 was made in that Act.t In
this fashion, in the majority of the post-independence Central Acis, the “appointed
day” device has been adopted. A mere look at the Statute Book will show this.

4.4. We may note that some of the State General Clauses Acts provide that an Act
shall come into force on the day on which the assent of the Governor thereto is published

in the Official Gazette.

4.5. In ancient Rome, a Senatus Consultum had no force till deposited in the Temple
of Saturn.?

4.6. In France, the President of the Republic promulgates laws, within the fortnight following
their final adoption, and transmission to the Government.* The act of promulgation is definitely
part of the legislative process. A statute is made known to the public by publication in
the “Bulletin Des Lois” or “Journal Official”. The Code Napoleon,‘ declared that laws were
binding from the moment their promulgation could be known, and laid down various dates
when promulgation was to be deemed to have taken place.

4.7. The English theory, however, is different. “Every man in England”. says Blackstone,
“is, in judgment of law, party to the making of an Act of Parliament, being present there at
by his representatives.”

4.8. Keeping in mind the position as discussed above, we have cxamined the question
whether the provisions" in section 5(1) should be modified so as to provide that Central
Acts shall come into force on the date of publication? in the Official Gazette. In fact, that
was the provision proposed in the draft Report which had been circulated for comments
by the previous Commission.

4.9. Having regard to various important considerations, and after careful examination of all
aspects of the matter, we have come to the conclusion that the present position as laid down in
section 5(1) should not be disturbed. In fact, because of the present practice, no hardship
is caused. There is no statutory obligation to publish Central Acts in the Official Gazette,
except that gazette copies of Acts are prima facie evidence of the correctness of the texts
thereof." But. in practice. Central Acts are always published in the Official Gazette without

1. Section 320, Government of India, Act. 1935.

2. Levy 394, 5९०. Suet Aug. 94.
3. Article 10, French Constitution, 1958.
4, Article 1, Code Napoleon.
5. 81. Comm, (F) 183.

6. Para 4.1A, supra.

7. cf. Parada, Supra

8. Sections 81 and 84 of the Indian Evidence Act, 187,



are, however, needed in section S(1). For the wards
into force” should be used, in conformity with the phraseology generally adopted in Central into operation”
Acts.” to be modified.

33

delay, and generally on the same day on which the assent of the President to these Acts is
received. Publication in the
the first Law Member to the Government of India. observed in one of his Minutes—

fazette is the most authentic form of publication, As Macaulay,?

“And what docs promulgation mean ? It means, if I understand its sense, the
Publication of a law in an authentic form. The publication of a law in the gazette
will henceforth be 8 publication in an authentic form and will therefore be a promulga-
tion.”

4.10. This finishes the point of substance conecrning section S(1). Certain verbal changes verbal changes

‘come inta operation”, the words “come in section 5—
words “come

“coming into

imes,! stinclion is souehr ma stween “coming into force” an i ’
4.11. Sometimes.’ a distinction is sought to be made between coming into force” andl force’ “coming

“coming into effect’, but such a distinction is ror usually observed in practice. As to the into eifect” and
expression “at once” which is occasionally uscd in commencement clauses Gin State Laws
the under-mentioned case may be seen.*

y, “at once”,

4.12. To make section 5(1) comprehensive in relation to the date of commencement of Regulations and

Ordinances—

Regulations and Ordinances, we recommend the insertion of a sub-section to the effect that Commencement

af,
(i) Ordinances shall come into force on their promulgation ; ard (ii) Regulations shall come
into force on their making.

4,124. We now come to section 5€3) which deals with the time of commencement. This Section-5(3)-
time-of commen-

sub-section has a history, It had been held in England that an Act which comes into operation
on a given day becomes law as soon as the day commences, and every event which occurred
during the day would be an event which took Place after the passing of the Act. If the Act
received the Royal assent on the 10th August, the passing af the Act would, in contemplation
of law, take place immediately on the beginning of the day. That is what the court held, and,
to emphasise the point, it stated that the Act commenced as soon as the clack had struck
twelve on the night of the 91h August.” This later Proposition was adopted in England in
the’ Interpretation Act, and is to be found in section 5163) of our Act.

cement.

In a Madras case’, the question to he considered was whether an arrest made at 4.30 ot
5 AM. in the morning of the 23rd Januaty, 1947 in’ pursuance of Madras Ordinance 1 of
1947, was legal, and it was held that although the Ordinance was published in the Official
Gazette Jate in the day on the 23rd January, it must be deemed to have had effect from mid-
night of the night between 22nd and 23rd January. ‘This, in substance. is an explanation of

section 5(3).

4.12B. In one of the comments received on the draft Report circulated by the previous section 5 and

esi Lat ade* that the cliuse as ime of comm t of time of commen-
Commission, a pic has been made* that the clause a to the ti ९ encement of an coment vericle

Act may offend article 20(1) of the Corstimtien. se far as penal Acts are concerned. The 20(1) considered

1. Macaulay, Minute No. 5 of the 14th June, 1835.

2. Also sce sections 6(a), 12, 24, 24, General Clauses Act
3. See Adarsh Bhandar v. Sales Tax Officer, AAR. 1957
4. Ta re Veerabhadrayya, AAR. 19350 Mad. 243, 226.

5. Tomtilsonv. Bullock, (1878) 4 0.8. 230, 232.

6, Tomilsouv. Bullock, (1878) 4 (3, 8, 230, 233

7. Chenchiah ९, Commissioner of Potice, ALR. 1948 Mad. 258.

8. Commend of Shri R.L. Narasinharn, as Chief Justice of the Orissa High Court,

All. 475, 483, para 62, second sub-paragraph.



Time of com-
mencement of
provisions of an
Act

Printed date of
assent Presump-
tion.

Provision 38 to
commencement
of Ordinances
and Regulations.

Mandatory pro-
vision to print
date of assent
not suggested.

Recommendation
regi
section ooh

34

Poim made is as follows : Supposc an act which is otherwise lawful is made an offence by
a particular statute of the Icgislature, and that statute comes into force say, at 10 A.M. Under
the clause, it is deemed to have come into force from the midnight of the previous day. Suppose
the act, which has now become an offence, was committed ut, say, 6 A.M, on that day. Then,
by virtue of the proposed clause, ihat act will become an offence, though article 20(1) of the
Constitution prohibits retrospective penal legislation. This is the point made in the comment.
It is emphasised that in article 20(1), the words used are “at the time of the commission of
the Act,” and not “at the dare of the commission”. The suggestion is that in the proposed
clause, it may be made clear that it does not apply to statutes or statutory provisions relating
to the creation of offences for the first crime.

4.12BB. We have considered the suggestion carefully. While we appreciate that article
20(1) of the Constitution has to be borne in mind, we do not think that it is necessary, for
that reason, to exclude, from the proposed clause, statutory provisions creating an offence for
the first time. The clause has the advantage of laying down a general rule as to the time
of commencement, and it would be a convenient rule. In so far as a particular statute creates
an offence, it will be read as subject to article 20(1) of the Constitution. Tbe contitutional
provision is paramount to the statutory provision in section 5(1). An express exception is
not required. From the point of view of drafting, a specific exception will make the provision
very cumbersome.

4.12C. Some difficulty may arise where an Act is to have extra-territorial application, in
a place where the standard time 15 different from the time of the country where the Act is
passed. The crucial test is the dare prevailing in such place? Such extra-ordinary and rare
situations also need noi come in the way of the proposed provision as to the time of commence-

ment.

4.13. So much as regards the time of commencement of an Act. We are of the view
that the time of commencement of 6 provision of an Act should also be defined. Such a
provision will be useful for cases where the different provisions of an Act come into force
on different dates. We are recommending an amendment of section 5 accordingly.

4.14. A presumption as to the printed date of assent (in respect of Acts) would alsa be
useful.

4.144. A provision as to the commencement of Ordinances and Regulations is also
proposed, as it would be useful.

415. A further provision requiring the Government to print the date of assent to each
Act was suggested during our discussion. We arc, however, of the view that such a Provision
may not be appropriate in the General Clauses Act. Provisions on the subject contained in
the Canadian Act, section 5(1), and the Australian Act, section 6, were considered by us.
The English statute of 1793, and its history? were also borne in mind. We, however, feel
that the suggested provision may create complications, and are not inclined to recommend its

insertion.

4.16. In the result, we recommend that section 5 should be amended to carry out the
points discussed above.* The revised section should be as follows.

1. Rev. ¥. Legan, (1957) All, E.R. 688 (Court Martial Appeaf Court).
2. Cf, para. 4.36 supra.

3, Para 4.2, supra,

4. Para 4.4 10 4.16, supra.


35

Revised seciion 5°

“5. (1) Where any Central Act is aot expressed to come into force on a particular day, Coming into

then it shall come into force— enactments.

(i) int the case of a Central बल made before the commencement of the Constitu-
tion, on the day on which it reecives the assent of the Governor-General ; and

(#) in the case of an Act of Parliament, on the day on which it receives the assent of
the President.

(2) Where an Ordinance promulgated or Regulation made by the President on or after
day of. 2 is not expressed to come into

! force on a particular day, then it shall come into force on the day on which the Ordinance is
promulgated or the Regulation is made, as the case may be.

. (3) Unless the contrary intention is expressed, every Central Act, Ordinance, or Regula- ~
tion or provision thereof shall be construed as coming into force immediately on expiration
of the day preceding the beginning of the day on which it comes into force.

(4) The date appearing on the copy of a Central Act printed by or under the authority
of the Central Government immediately after its title shall be evidence that such date is the
date on which the Governor-General or ihe President, as the case may be, gave his assent.”

1. Thé revised sub-section (1) will apply 10 existing Acts also.
‘ 2, Date of commencement of amendment Act to be entered.

15 M of Law/74—6



Introduction.

Section-SA (new)
Marginal notes.

Qualified view.

Opposite view.

CHAPTER 5
PART OF STATUTES
Marginal notes

5.1. The Act does not contain any detailed provisions relating to the use in interpretation
of marginal notes, headings, punctuation and the like. In view of the obscurity of the position
as regards some of these matters, we propose to devate this chapter to a consideration of the
question whether specific provisions on the subject are needed.

5.2. From time to time, controversies arise as to how far a marginal note (or side note)
can be used in interpreting a section.

In 1904, Lord Me Naghten, sitting in the Judicial Committee hearing an appeal from
India, stated,! “It is well-settled that the marginal notes cannot be referred to for the purpose
of construing the Act.” He regarded the contrary opinion as “having originated in mistake.”
Nevertheless, the contrary opinion seems to have persisted amongst lawyers, and resort is often
sought to be made to the side note in construing the section.

From time to time, legal journals in India and elsewhere have alsa discussed this question.?

8.3. There exists also a qualified view, namely, that where the text of the statute 18, in
any respect, ambiguous, help can be sought from the marginal note. According to this view,
while marginal notes could not be used for interpreting or curtailing the provisions of a section
where its meaning is plain, those notes could be used to clear an ambiguity,s or to furnish
some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the section.

5.4, For example, in a Gujarat Case,> it was stated that the marginal note to a scclion
supported the construction placed by the court. The court observed, “No doubt, the marginal
note cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing a section, but it certainly furnishes
some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the section. The marginal note to section 89
clearly indicates that the object and purpose of the section is to effect termination of dispropor-
tionately excessive voting right in existing companies. There are no words in the marginal note
limiting the object and purpose of the section to termination of disproportionately excessive
yoting rights only in respect of preference shares. The marginal note also thus indicates that
section 89(1) applies to all existing shares whether they be preference shares or equity shares.”

5.5, As against this, there are cascs holding that a marginal note cannot be referred to
for the purpose of construing 2 statute.* or that they cannot control the meaning of a section?

हु 1. Thakurni Balraj Kunwar रे. Rao Jagat Pai Singh, (1904) 31 L.A. 132, 141 (2.0.4.
2. See for example, comments as to marginal notes in
(a) (1934) 149 LC.6;
(by (1934) Bom. LR. 100.
(०) (1934) 67 Mad. 1... 35,

(७) (1934) 4 All. WAR, 25.
Moilel Electric OH Mill v. Corporation of Calcutta, A.LR, 1960 Cal. 338, 389.

3.

4. Sarsf Shah ¥. State of Andhra Pradesh, ALR. 1963 A-P. 314.

5. Juvan Singh रे. Balbhadra Singh, AJ.R, 1963 Guj. 209, 219 (P.N. Bhagwati J.).

& Commissioner of Income-tax v, Akmedbhai Umarthal & Co., (1950) S.C.R, 335, 353; ALR, 1950 8.0.
134, 141.

+, Nallnaktwa Bysack v. Shramsunder Haldar, (1953) S.C.R. 533, 538; ALR. 1953 S.C. 148, 150.

36


37

5.6. In general, courts in England and Austrialia held that the marginal notes cannot Position ia Eng
be used as a means of finding the true meaning of a section when the meaning of that section प्रा,
is in doubt.2. Indecd, in some cases, Parliaments have passed Acts which seem designed to
Make sure that the marginal notes will not be used to find the meaning of the section. For

example, the Victorian Parlia~sent bas passed an Act,? stating that :

inal notes nor the foot-notes to any such Act other than any
shall be a part thereof.’

“Neither the mar:
annual appropriation

In India, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha has also ruled‘ that marginal notes do not form
part of the Act.

5.66. In an earlier English case," Phillimore, L. J. had observed, “I am aware of the
general rule of law as to marginal notes, at any rate in public general Acts of Parliament, but
that rule is founded, as well be seen on reference to the cases, upon the principle that these
notes are inserted not by Parliament nor under the authority of Parliament but by irresponsible
Persons. Where, however......... the marginal notes are mentioned as already existing and
established, it may well b= that they form part of an Act of Parliament.”

3.7. But, in a fairly recent English case? Harman L. J. said, “I have always been Recent English
brought up to believe that to interpret an Act of Parliament by the side notes to the sections “न
is quite inadmissible, although there are judicial pronouncements seeming to show that judges
have not always refrained, as in my judgment they should, from giving some weight to them.”
In a latter case,’ it was held that the marginal note is not to be regarded as a legitimate aid to
construction.

Contrary decision,* therefere, appear to be cut of tune with well-settled principle.

3.8. In fact, in a judgment of the House of Lords,® Lord Reid specifically rejected the
admissibility of side notes as an aid to construction.

5.9. On principle, the rule that a marginal note is not relevant for the interpretation of
a legal provision applies as much to the constitution as to an ordinary law.

5.9. But, so far as ordinary Acts of Parliament are concerned, it is desirable to settle Need to re-ettle
the law—or, if one prefers that expression—to re-settle the law.2° The reason given usually the law.
for not treating marginal notes as part of the Act and as not admissible in interpretation is
that the Legislature does not discuss them when discussing the Bill, and that they are never
put to vote and can be amended under the authority of Government without reference to
Parliament.

1. See, for example, Mixow v. Attorney-General, (1930) 1 Ch. 566, 593, (per Lard Hanworth MLR);
{Sundersoz v. Fotheringham, (1885) 11 Y.L.R. 190; Darke v. Thornton, (1883) 1 Q.L.R. 159.

2. Ats Interpretation Act, 1958, section 11(2), (Victoria).

3. See also section 13(3) of the Austrian Act.

4. See the rulings given by the Speaker on the 7th February 1950 and 10th February 1960 (Lok Sabha
Debates—Part वा, dated 7th February 1930, pages 409-419) (during discussion on the Delhi Road Transport
Authority Bill and the Undosirable Immigrants (Expul sioa from Assam) Bill respectively.

5. Re. Working Urban Councit Act, (1914) 1 Ch. 300, 322.

6. Parsons v. Laboratories (B.U.N.) Ltd., (1963) 2 All E.R, 658, 674.

7. Uddiny. Associated Portland Cement, (1965) 1 All. E.R. 347, 349,

है. Stephens v. Cuckfield Rural Disteicr Counwit (1960) 2 Q.B. 373.

9. Chandler v. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1962) 3 W.i.R. 694, 705( H.L.) See also para 5. 10, infra.

10. Para 5.2, supra.


Recommendation
as-to-marginal
notes.

Marginal note
not part of enact-
ments.

Section 5B{new)
Headings.

38

We would, however, like to point out that apart from this, there is a more substantial
season. The reason is that the marginal note is intended merely to give a brief indication of
the matters dealt with in the provision against which it appears, and is not intended to give
an exhaustive picture of the section, In fact, logically, it is difficult to see how a marginal
not (even if it purports to give a complete picture of the section) can be taken into account
in construing the section, because, then we would have not one but two parallel provisions
on the same subject at the same place. However careful the draftsman may be in framing
the marginal note, it is impossible for him to put everthing in jt. By its very nature, it isa
compressed gist of the section. It is not intended to have a legal effect. It is an extra-legal aid
inserted for convenience.

5.10, Judicial evolution has itself failed to yield any reasonably certain test. In addition
to the cases already cited,! we may refer to @ fairly recent decision of the House of Lords,?
where Lord Reid and Lord Upjohn have, as to the proper use of marginal notes, expressed
views which, to some extent, run on divergent lines. It may incidentally be noted that in
India, Central Act 1 of 1854 was the first Act? introduced and passed in Council which

contained marginal notes.
5.11. We are, therefore, of the opinion that a specific and categorical provision to the
effect that marginal notes do not form part of the Act is required, for the reasons stated above.

We recommend accordingly. We also recommend a provision to the effect that marginal notes
may be corrected or amended under the authority of Government. The new section to be

inserted will be as follows :—
Section 5-4 (New)

S-A. The marginal note appended to any provision of any Central Act or Regulation,
and the reference ta the number and year of any former law in the margin against any such
provision,

(a) shall form no part of the said Central Act or Regulation, as the case may
be;

(b) shall be deemed to have been inserted for the sake of convenience only;
and

(c) may be corrected or amended under the authority of Government.

Headings

511A. We think that opportunity should also be taken of making it clear that the headings
of the Parts or Chapters into which any Central Act or Regulation is divided shall be deemed
to be part of the Act or Regulation. Since' a controversy has arisen in England on the point,

this clarification is desirable.

Lord Reid said,’ in the House of Lords :

[७ scope of the sections which follow it, but there is
८ of these sections may have been widened by amend-
to the scope of sections, for it can do no more than

“A cross-heading out to indicate th
always a possibility that the scope of on
ment. - But a side-note is a poor guide
indicate the main subject with which the section deals.”

1. See para 3.2, supra.
2. D.P.P. v. Sclntieder, (1969) 3 All Eng, Report 1649, 1651, 1657.
3. Central Act 1 of 1854 related to acquisition of fand.
4 See, D.P.P. v. Schmieder, (1969) 3 AITE.R, 1640, 1641, 1657 (H.L.).
S, D.P.P, ५. Sehuieder, (1969) 3 AILELR, 1640, 1647, 1643, 1644, 1650 (House of Lords).


39

Lord Hodsen said, “...although there are no cross-headings in the Act of 1928 whereast
the corresponding section of the Act of 1948, section 322, appears under the cross-heading
“offences antecedent to or in the course of winding up” the construction of the relevant section
ought not to be governed ultimately by a consideration of cross-headings even though some
attention may be paid to them.........

Viscount Dilhorne said :

“I do not consider that it is proper to infer from the tile to a part of the Act and from
this cross-heading that the scope of the subject is limited as the respondent contends. while
I would not suggest that, when one is considering an Act of Parliament, one is not entitled
to Iook at the title given to a part of the Act and to cross-headings, the weight to be attached
to them is, in my opinion, every slight and less than that which should be given to a preamble.
In Chandler v. Director of Public Prosecution,® Lord Reid said that side note to a section
cannot be used as an aid to comstruction. 1 agree. A marginal or side-note is inserted by the
draftsman as an indication, but not as a definition, of ihe contants of the section.

“Similarly, in my view, the title givea to a part of an Act and the cross-heading to a
modern Act, which are inserted by the drailsman and not subject to amendment by the members
of either House, are no more than guides to the contents of the part or of the sections which
follow. They are not meant to control the operation of the enacting words and it would be
wrong to permit them to do so.”

Lord Upjohn said :

“Tt must always be remembered that cross-headings, punctuations and marginal notes are
not part of the Bill passing through Parliament in this sense that they cannot be debated and
amended as the Bill passes its various stages, in marked contract to the preamble and the
long title. These cross-headings and marginal notes are put there in the first place by the
Parliamentary draftsman, but as the Bill proceeds may be altered (probably in consultation with
the draftsman) by the officials of Parliament to accord with amendments made to the body
of the Bill as it progresses.

&,,,....--००००----- what cole do cross-headings play in the construction of the Act ? In my
opinion, it is wrong to confine their role to the resolution of ambiguities in the body of the
Act when the Court construing the Act is reading it, though to understand it, it must read
the cross-headings as well as the body of the Act and that will always be a useful pointer as to
the intention of Parliament in enacting the immediately following sections. Whether the cross-
heading is no more than a pointer ot label or is helpful in assisting to construe or even in
some cases to control the meaning or ambit of these sections must necessarily depend on the
circumstances of each case, and I do not think it is possible to lay down any rules.”

5.12. Similar controversy is likely to arise, in our courts and a specific provision is
desirable. We, therefore, recommend insertion of the following new section :—

Section 5B (New)

The headings of the Parts or Chapters into which any Central Act or Regulation is divided
Shalt be deemed to be part of ihe Act or Regulation, as the case may be.

Recommendation
as to headings.

Headings part
of enactments.

5.13. Another allied question is regarding punctuation. Broadly speaking, the accepted Punctuation.

view is that in modern times, punctuation forms part of an enactment, and regard should.
accordingly be had to it in construing the enactment. It is not, however, possible to be very

nies Act, 1928,
2. Chandier v. D.P.P. (1963) 3 AUER. 140.



40

precise or dogmatic in this regard. ‘he fact that punctuation has, for some time past, been
.a part of the statute as enacted by the Legislature, is important as indicative of the value of
punctuation marks as an aid in construction. Its use, however, seems to be limited to an
obscure or doubtful provision of law, and, of course, the assistance to be derived from punctua-
tion marks in interpretation will depend much on the accuracy and corractness with which they
have been used. Until 1849, in England, statutes,—i.e., the Bills engrossed on parchment,
were not punctuated,’ but the position is different now.

5,14, It is often stated that good drafting should eliminate the need for punctuation, But
perfect draftsmanship is an ideal which is rarely realised. Though not often used, punctuation
is a guide in interpretation, but has to be resorted to cautiously. It is a minor element in the
construction of a statute.

Karl N. Lewellyn? has given illustrations with regard to canons of construction. One of
them is—punctuation marks will not control the plain and evident meaning of language. This
is all that can be said on the subject with confidence.

5.15. In one of the comments’ on the draft Report which was circulated by the previous
Commission, it was stated that it is desirable to insert a separate provision dealing with the
principles of construction of punctuation in statutes. The old rule that punctuations are made
by the printer and should not be taken notice of during construction,® (it was stated) seems
no fonger in force, Since punctuations in the statules are put by the drafismen, and are paseed
by the legislatures and in some recent decisions, the Supreme Court also has taken note of
punctuations while construing the statutory provisions, the suggestion is that “it is better to
clarify the law on the subject.”

We have already stated the position above? and we do not think that any specific provision
in this regard would be appropriate.

1. (a) Burrow v, Wadkir (1858) 116 R.R, 1.
(७) 8. ५. Olehem (1852) 21 L.7.M.C, 134.

2, (a) Ashwini Kumar v. Arubinde Bose, (1953) 5.0,8. 1, 41, ALR. 1952 8.८. 369, 383.
{by Shambhu Raddy ¥. Chalanuna, हरि, 1966, Mys. 311.

3. Lewellyn, ‘Remarks on the theory of Appellate Devision and the Rules or canuns about how statutes are
to be construed” (1950) 3 Vanderbilt Law Rev. 395.

4, Comment of Shri &-L. Narasimhan, as Chief Justice of the Orissa High Court.

5. Inland Revenue Commissioner ए- Hinchy, (1960) A.C. 748, 765,

6. Note in (1959) L.Q.R. referred to.

7, Para $.14, supra.



CHAPTER 6
REPEAL AND AMENDMENT
Repeal

6.1. In the last chapter we have dealt with rules relating to certain parts of statutes. We now Repeal
come to more important questions concerning repeal and amendment.

6.2, Section 6 of the Act deals with repeal. Its main object is to reverse the common law Section é-effect

tule that a repeal obliterates the statute for all purposes for the future, Though this section is of repeal.

one of the most important scctions in the code. and contains a pravision of frequent application

a study of the decided cases up-to-date shots that the problems that have arisen as to repeal

are (i) either outside the section, or (£2 concern the application of the provisions of the sec-

tion, or (iii) concern the effect of a separate repeal clause in a particular Central Act. These

problems cannot be avoided or minimised by an amendment of scction 6, because their solu-

tion does not lie in any general rule.

6.3. The question that arise (in relation to repeal) outside section 6 felate usually to the Problems ar
effect of a particular enactment as attracting the provisions of section 6. to Tepeal, om

side section 6.
6.4. The entire problem of determining the extent to which existing legistlation is repealed Legislative-inte-
by subsequent statutes ultimately resolves itself into one of legislative intent.? nt.

As Mr. Justice Story said,? it is not suffcieat “to establish that subsequent laws cover some
or even all of the case provided for (by the prior Act}, for, they may be merely affirmative,
or cumulative or auxiliary.” The intention of the legislature to tepeal “‘must be clear and mani-
fest”. Questions concerning this legislative intent to repeal and the extent of the repeal are
obviously incapable of being solved by a general rule .

6.5, It may be noted that section 6 would apply to a case of repeal even if there is a simul- Avplicability of
taneous new enactment, unless a contrary intention appears from the new enactment.‘ The section 6 in oa
Consequences laid down in section 6 of the General Clauses Act will follow, unless as the sec- ment.
tion itelf says—a different intention appears. In the case of a simple repeal,
there is scarcely any room for the expression of a contrary intention. Of
course, when repeal is fcilowed by fresh legislation on the same subject, one would undoubtedly
have to look to the provisions of the new Act—but only for the purpose of determining whether
they indicate a different intention. It cannot, therefore, be said, as a broad proposition, that
section 6 of the General Clauses Act is ruled out whenever there is a repeal of an enactment
followed by a fresh legislation. Section 6 would be applicable in such cases also, unless the
new legislation manifests an intention incompatible with or contrary to the section. Such in-
compatibility would have to be ascertained from a consideration of all the relevant provisions
of the new law, and the mere absence of a saving clause is, by itself, not material.

6.6. There is one important matter concerning implied repeals, which needs to be Section 6 and
mentioned. By its terms, section 6 does not state that it applies also to implied repeals, and, implied repeals.
for some time, the Supreme Court also kept the question open.” In 1964, the question came

1, Para 6.3, infra.
2. Wood ९, U.S., 10 L. ed, 987, 253

3 Red Rock v, Henary, 27 L. ed, 251, 253.

4. Mis Munskilal Bemram v, S.P, Fain (1971) 28.C.3, 307,

5. Trust Mai Lackhmi Siatkot Bradei ए, Amritsar Improvement Trust, A.LR, 1963 S.C. 976,

41



Section 6A.

42

up before the Supreme Conrt in these circumstances.1 The Orissa Mining Areas Development
Fund Act, 1952 (an Act of the Orissa State Legislavure) was, by rcason of the passing of
the (Central) Mines & Minerals (Regulation and Development} Act, 1957, superseded. The
latter Act bad no express repeal clause, but since the regulation of mines and the development
of the minerals to the extent provided in the Act was taken under its control by the Union
by a declaration in * section 2 thereof, this consequence necessarily followed.

6.7. Posing the question whether the expression “repeal” in section 6 was of sufficient
amplitude to cover implied repeal, and noting the absence of dircet authority on the point in
England or in the United States, the Supreme Court took the view that the principle underlying
section 6 was that every latter enactment which supersedes an carlier one or puts an end
to the earlier state of the law, is presumed to intend the continuance of rights accrued and
liabilities incurred under the superseded enactment, unless there are sufficient indications express
or implied in the later enactment, designed to completely obliterate the earlier state of the
law.

6.8. The Court then examined the question whether this principle could or ought to be
limited to cases where a particular form cf words is used to indicate that the earlier law has
been repealed, and made the following pertinent observations :—

“The entire theory underlying implied repeals is that there is no need for the later
enactment to state i express terms that an earlier enactment has been repealed by
wsing any particular sct of words or form of drafting, but that if the legislative
intent to supersede the carlier Jaw is manifested by the enactment of provisions as
to effect such supersession, then there is in law a repeal notwithstanding the absence
of the word ‘repeal’ in the later statute. Now, if the legislative intent to supersede
the earlier law is the basis upon which the doctrine of implied repeal is founded,
could there be any incongruity in attributing to the later legislation the same intent
which section 6 presumes where the word ‘repeal’ is expressly used ? So far as
statutory construction is concerned. it is one of the cardinal principles of the law
that there is no distinciion or difference between an express provision and 8 provi-
sion which is necessarily implied, for it is only the form that differs in the two
cases and there is no difference im intention or in substance. A repeal may be
brought about by repugnant legislation, without cven by reference to the Act
intended to be repealed, for once legislative competence to effect a repeal is posited
it matters little whether this is done expressly or inferentially or by the enactment
of repugnant legislation.”

6.8. Before we conclude our discussion of this section, we may point out that the concluding
words of this section “as if the repealing Act or Regulation had not been passed” are its key
words. As the Supreme Court observed,? “The last nine words. ....are the key words, and
mean that in respect of rights, cbligations and liabilities acquired, accrued or incurred under
the earlier Act, the repealing Act need not be read and legal proceedings and remedies are to

continue under the repealed Act according to its tenor.”

As the section is quite comprehensive in its scope and content, we do not think that any
change is called for in it.

Amendment

6.9. We now come to amendment of Acts. Section 6A is as follows :—

“6A, Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act
repeals any enactment by which the text of any Central Act or Regulation was

Sate of Orissa v. M.A. Toolock & Co., ALR. 1964 S.C. 1284, 1294, paragraph 21.
2. The declaration was with reference to the Constitution, Union List, entry 54.
4. ALN. Channiah v. A. Batchachanian Sahib (decided in January 1963).

saan, aca!

mo
#


43

amended by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, then, un-
Jess a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any
such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time
of such repeal.”

6.10. Slight verbal changes in this section (section 6A) are proposed, in order to describe Verbal-changes.
more precisely the enactment to what the section applies.

6.11. (9) We also recommend an exception regarding temporary Acts. A temporary Exception-
amending Act, which amends a permanent Act, should die on its repeal: that is to say, the Tecommended
for temporary

amendment should come to an end with the repeal of the amending Act. Acts (in sece
tion 6A)

(b) Where a temporary Act amends a temporary Act, and the amending Act is repealed,
the principle of section 6A may apply. But it is unnecessary to encumber the section with any
elaborate provision on that point

6.12. While on the subject of temporary amending laws, we may refer to the situation of Ordinance-ame-
an Ordinance amending a temporary Act, which arose in a Supreme Court case.' In that case, nding Acts.

the enactments involved were—

(1) the Defence of India Act, 1939 (a temporary Act), (ii) the amendments thereto by
Ordinance No. 12 of 1946, and (iii) the Repealing and Amending Act No. 2 of 1948 (which
repealed the Ordinance and repealed the Defence of India Act also). On the repeal of the
amending Ordinance. the amendments made thereby (in the nature of savings for rights, liabilities
ete.) were held to have died. The non-applicability or otherwise of section GA was not consi-
dered,” perhaps because the section does not find a mention in section 30 dealing with Ordi-

nances,

We have considercd the question whether it is necessary to make a provision on the subject.
Tf the effect of the formal repeal of a law amending a temporary law is to destroy the amend-
ments made by the amending law. some practical difficulties could arise, and one way to solve
them would be to provide (in the clause under discussion) that it applies also to an Ordinance
amending a temporary Act, when the Ordinance is repealed. We have, however, after careful
consideration, decided not to encumber the section with such complications.

6.13, Amendments made by Ordinance would not, therefore, fall within the purview of this
clause.

6.14, The topic of temporary amending Acts, in relation to their expiry (as distinguished Temporary
from their repeal), is one which will be referred to later.* ASS Ess
.

6.15. The word “text” in section 66 has been construed by the Supreme Court in Jethanand’s yeaning of

case? as meaning “subject or theme”. The argument there advanced was that this word related {he ord

to the phraseology and the terminology used in the Act, but not to the content of that Act. This section 6A.
argument was negatived. (The case related to the amendment made in the Wireless Telegraph
Act, 1933, by the amending Act of 1949, which was repealed in 1952).

615A. In another Supreme Court case, Om Prakash v. State of U.P.,* relating to the Expi
Prevention of Corruption Act, it was held that section 409 of the (ndian Penal Code was not Peed
repealed by section 5 of the Prevention etc. Act. even impliedly. The question was, thus, one amending
of repeal. But the following observations made by the Court are of interest with reference to

temporary amending Acts:

"683, 685, para. 8.

1. State of U.P. ५. Jagamandar Das, ALR. 1934 §,
2. Para 6. 158 infra.
3, Jethanand v. State of Dethi, ALR, 1960 $.C. 89, 92; 1 S.C.R, 755, 761
Om Prakash v. State of U.P., A.LR, 1957 5.0, 458. 463, (1957) S.C.R, 423, 424 (Govinda Menon 7.)

+

15 M of Law/74—7


Recommen-
dation.

Repeal of
law making
textual
amendments
in other
laws.

Section 6B
(new)—
Reference to
Acts etc.
with title
amended.

Reference to
Act ete.
with short

tide amended.

Section 77
Revival of
repealed Act.

Section 8—
Introductory,

44

“Before we advert to the Indian cases, the first thing that has to be remembered in this
connection is that, the Prevention of Corrupiion Act being a temporary one, the
Legislature would not have intended in the normal course of things that a temporary
statute like the one in question should supersede an enactment of antiquity, even
if the matter covered the same field. Under section 6(a)? of the General Clauses
Act, if by ciflux of time, the period of a temporary statute, which bad repealed an.
earlier statute, expires, there will not be a revival of tie earlier one by the expiry

of the temporary statute.”

6.16, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 6A should he revised
as follows.

Revised section 6A

Where any Central Act or Regulation (other than a temporary Act or Regulation) amends
the text of any Central Act or Regulation by the express omission, insertion or substitution of
any matter, and the amending Central Act or Regulation is subsequently repealed, then, unless a
different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any such amendment
made by the Central Act or Regulation so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.

6.17. to 6.20. We propose a new section to provide that where the title of any Central
Act or Regulation is amended, then reference to that Central Act or Regulation by its old title,
in any other enactment Act or Statutory instrument, shall be construed as references to it with

its new title. The utility of such a provision is obvious.
‘The new section should be as follows :—
Section 6B( New).

“6B. Where the short title of any enactment, being a Central Act or Regulation, is
amended, then, references to that Central Act or Regulation by its old title in any
other enactment or any statutory instrument shall, unless a different intention appears,
be construed as reference to it with its new title.”

Revival of repealed Acts.

6.21. Under section 7, in any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of
this Act, it shall be necessary, for the purpose of reviving, either wholly or partially, any
enactment wholly or partially repealed, expressly to stale that purpose.

‘The section seems to need no change.

Reference to repealed Acts

6.21A. We now come to section 8, sub-section (1) which is as follows :—

tral Act or Regulation made after the commencement of
with or without modification, ‘any provision of &
other enactment or in any instrument to
vent intention appears, be construed as

“Where this Act, or any Cen!
this Act, repeals and re-enacts,
former enactment, then references in any
the provision so repealed shall, unless 2 diffe:
references to the provisions 50 re-enacted.

This section, though simple in its main principles, has given rise to a number of questions.
Some of them do not necessitate any change, but all of them illustrate its importance.

"पर छाप the court bad section 6A in mind.



45

6.21B. Section 8(1), it should be pointed out, deals with the reference or citation of one
enactment is another without incorporation. The meaning and effect of incorporation by reference
of one statute into another has been examined in several cases, which point out this limitation of

section 8.

22 Even so, the scope of section 8 is wide. For example when an Act passed hy the
Union Parliament repeals’ a State Aci, then also section 8 applies; there is nothing in section 8
to indicate that “former cnactment” means only a Central Act.

6.23. It may also be noted that section 8 does not require that the later Act repeating and
re-enacting an earlicr Act should be u repealing and amending Act.* It does not matter that
the new Act is not a repealing and amending Act, but an Act to define and amend the law relating
to the particular subject. Alf that the section required is that a Central Act should repeal and
re-enact a former enactment, cither with modification or without it.

6.24. The expression “instrument” in the section has also given rise 10 a few interesting
cages.

6.25. In a Bombay case,* it was stated that the word “Instrument”, in its ordinary meaning
means a document of & formal legal kind, which creates some right ot liability. It is usually
used in the sense of a document executed by or between the parties, An order of a Court cannot

be said to be an instrument.

In an earlicr Bombay case," the High Court was not satisfied that an order of delegation
can be deemed to be an “instrument” within the meaning of section 8; and it was conceded that
it cannot be regarded as an enactment.

6.26. But the Supreme Court has now held? that the word “instrument” (in section 8)
includes the President's order under article 359(1) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court,
while so holding, noted that the word “instrument” is some-times taken as meaning a formal
document creating a right or liability fater partes. The Supreme Court added:

धर ...But in the context of the General Clauses Act, it has to be understood as
including reference to a formal legal writing like an order made under a statute
or subordinate legislation or any document of a formal character made under
constitutional or statutory authority, We have no doubt in our mind that the
expression “instrument” in section 8 was meant to include reference to the Order

made by the President in exercise of his constitutional powers.”

6.27. In a Delhi case,® an important point concerning section 8 arose. A notification issued
by the State Government of Maharashtra had recorded the consent of the Maharashtra State to
the investigation by the Delhi Special Police Establishment of offences specified in a notification
of the Government of India (issued under section 3 of the Delhi Special Police Hstablishment
Act), The notification of the Government of India was later repealed, and a new one’ in
supersession of it issucd. But the Maharashtra State did not issue a fresh order notifying its
consent with reference to the revised notification of the Central Government. Consent of the
State Government was, nevertheless, held ६0 continue to be valid for purposes of the revised

notification also.

1. Collector of Customs, Madras v. Nathelia Samnathu Chatty (1962) 3 S.C.R. 786; ALR, 1962 8.९. 316.
2, Stare of Punjab v. S.D.S. Gupta, ATR. 1970 S.C. 1641-1642, para 4.

3. See Narayan v. Surandranath, AAR. 1972 Orissa 115, 117.

4, Bombay Chronicle v. V.B.Poklar, (1961) 63 Bor. LR. 812, 814 (Chainani C.J., Chandrachud J.).

5, Jowell v. Jodrell, (1869) L.R. 7 Eq. 461, 463,
6. Emperor y. Rayangonda Kitgangonda, AAR. 1944 Bom, 259, 263; 46 Bom. LR. 495.
7. Mohan Chowdhury ¥, Chief Commissioner, Union Territory of Tripura, A.LR. 1964, 5.0.

para 11.
8. Advance Insuratce Co. ९, Gurdasimal, AAR. 1969 Delhi 330, 347, para. 33 (DB.).

173, 178, 179,

Distinction
between
incorporation
and mere
reference,

Wide scope
of section 8,
(State Act).

Section 8
not confined
to repealing
Acts,

Meaning of
“instrument”
in section 8.

Supreme
Court's
view.

Reference
in one
statutory
instrument to
another
statutory
instrument,


Need to
make the
Janguage
explicit.

Need to
zonfine the
amendment to
statutory
instruments.

Section 8 and
Successive
repeals.

Recommenda-

tion to amend

section 8.

46

6.28. The High Court observed :—

“Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the said Notification issued under
section 3 has since then been repealed and superseded by another Notification though
in the New Notification also all the offences which are dcing investigated in the
present case are included. Learned counsel, however, argues that the repeal of the
Notification under section 3 which was referred to in the consent letter prevents
the Special Police from investigating this case. We see no force in this argument.
The principle of section 8 of the General Clause Act would apply here The letter
of consent referred 10 the Notification under section 3 which was in force when the
consent letter was issued. The repeal of the said Notification and the issue of
a new one in supersession of it would be like the repeal and re-enactment of a
statute. Under section 8, the reference to the repealed enactment thereafter is to
be construed as a teferonce to the re-enacted provisions. For the same reason, the
reference in the consent letter would have to be construed as a reference to the
Notification which has repealed the Notification referred to in the consent letter.
It would be contrary to all principle to take the view that the State Government
has to go on issuing new letters of consent merely because ‘the Central Government
chose to issue new Notification under section 3

In fact, the State Government may refuse to issue a new fetter of consent on the ground
that it wanted the consent to be restricted to the offences mentioned in the Wolification
referred to in the consent letter. The superseding Notification may contain additional
offences to the investigation of which the State Government may not wish the consent.
In our opinion, therefore, the letter of consent continues to be valid, and it is so
valid in the present case.”

6.29, We agree with the conclusion reached by the High Court? But we think that it
would be better to make the language of the section explicit on this point.

630, At the same time, it is desirable to confine the proposed amendment to statutory
instruments! The General Clauses Act is not concerned with documents other than statutes and

statutory instruments.
Successive repeals

6.31. We may, at this stage, deal with successive repeals. In the Allahabad case,*
Chandra Bhushan v. Gayatri Devi, the question arose whether section 8 of the General Clauses
Act could be pressed into service in construing section 13, Court Fees Act, which refers to
section 351 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1859. The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has repealed
and re-enacted (in Order 41, Rule 23), the provisions of scetion 562 of the Code of 1882.
The Code of 1908 did not itself repeal the Code of 1859. it repealed the Code of 1882, which
had repealed the Code of 1877, which, in turn, had repealed the Code of 1859, The High
Court held that section 8 of the General Clauses ‘Act was of no assistance in such a situation.

It would be desirable to cover such a situation by making an explicit provision on the
subject.
Recommendation as to section 8.

6.32. & 6.33. In the light of the above discussion,’ we recommend that section 8(1) should
be revised, and section 8(1-A} inserted, as follows: —

+ Emphasis supplied.

Para 6,28, supre.

_ See supra para 6.24.

” Chandra Bhushan v. Gayatri Devi, ALR. 1969 All 142, 152.

| Para 6.28 10 6.31, supra.

rr ०5


“8(1) Where this

47

Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement
of this Act, repeals and re-enacts, with or without modification, any provision of a
former enactment, then rejerences fu any other enactient ar in any statutory
instrument to the provision so repeated, or to the provision of any former enactment
repealed and re-enacted by the vision sa repeated, shall, witess a different
intention appears, be construcd as references to the provision so re-enacted.”

“C1-A) Where diy statutory tnsirimient rescinds and re-incurporates, with or without

modification, any provision of a former Statutory instrument, then references in any
enactment or in any other statutory instrument to the provision so rescinded, or to
the pravision of any former statutory instrument rescinded and ve-incorporated by
the provision so rescinded, shall, uatess a different intention appears. be construed
references to the provision so re-euccted.”



Section 8A
enew)—
Expiry of
‘Temporary
Acts.

Perpetual and
temporary
Acts.

English law.
as to repeal.

Effect of
repeal and
effect of
expiry.

CHAPTER 7
TEMPORARY ACTS
INTRODUCTORY

7.1. We now proceed to discuss a subject which is not dealt with in the present Act, the
expiry of temporary Acts. We propose a new section on the subject.? It would be desirable to
explain the background of the new section in some detail,

At present, in the absence of provisions as to the expiry of temporary Acts, considerable
difficulty arises. No doubt, in cach particular Act which is intended to be temporary, usually a
saving clause is inserted; but, there might be cases where the draftsman omits to do so through
inadvertence. Since the situation is a recurring one, it would be convenient if the General
Clauses Act contains a suitable provision.

The mailer requircs a dstailed discussion of several aspects.

7.2. “Every statute for which no time is limited is called a perpetual Act,” as the supreme
Court observed:? A perpetual Act continues in force until it is repealed. It is, however, to be
noted that no statute can be literally perpetual, that is to say, incapable of being repealed.

Temporary Acts are those on the duration of which some limit is put by the Legislature.
They continue in force (unless sooner repealed) until the expiration of the time fixed for their
duration. The Corpus Juris Secundum' defines a temporary statute as one which is limited
merely in its duration. or which is limited in its operation for a particular period of time after

its enactment.

Repeal and expiry compared

73. Under the law of England, as it stood prior to the Interpretation Act of 1889, the
effect of a repealing statute was to obliterate it as completely from the records of Parliament ‘as
if it had never been passed, except for the purpose of these actions which were commenced,

prosecuted and concluded while it was an existing law.?

To obviate the results which would follow a repeal without more, a practice came into
existence in England of inserting a saving clause in the repealing statute with a “view to preserving
rights and liabilities already acerued or incurred under the repealed cnactment. Later on, to
dispense with the necessity of having to insert a saving clause on each occasion, section 38(2)
was inserted in the Imerpretation Act, 1889." Section of our Act corresponds to section 38
of the English Act, dealing with repeal.

7.4. ॥ the effect of the repeal of n staiute (without a savings clause) was to obliterate the
repealed statute as completely trom the records of Parliament as if it had never been passed,”
the effect of expiry of a temporary statute also could not, in principle, he in any way different.
The decided authorities* show that the general rule in regard to the expiration of a temporary

_ Section 8A(new).

. Para 7.11, infra,

५ Hansrat Moolii v. State of Bombay, AUR 1987 SC 497, 500, Para. 14.
५ Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol. 82, 9, 980.

५ See ATR. 1955 8.0. 84, 87.

ALR. 1998 S.C. 84, 87.

7. Para 7.3, supra.

8. fa) ALR. 1947 EC 38, 4,

ib) ALR, 1959 5.0. 609, 619,

के (ले मी पर ए 15५

48



49

statute is that (unless the statute contains some special provision to the contrary). after a
temporary Act has expired, no proceedings can be taken upon it and it ceases to have any
further effect. Therefore, offences committed against temporary Acts must be prosecuted and
punished before the Act expires, and as soon as the Act expires, any proceedings which are
being taken against a person will ipso facto terminate.

In one judgment’ of the Supreme Court, the repeal of a perpetual statute is almost equated
with the expiry of a temporary statute. It is observed. “when a statute is repealed or comes
to an end by efflux of time, no prosecution for acts done during the cantinuance of the repealed
or expiried Act can be commenced after the date of its repeal or expiry, because that would
amount to the enforcement of a repealed or dead Act.”.

7.46, It may, in this connection, be stated that Lord Thring? called attention to the
advisability of including, in any tempocary Act which imposes penalties, a provision that offences
and obligations incurred before ihe expiration of the Act might he punished or enforced after-
words, Perhaps, in pursuance of this advice. British and Indian statutes have used, in relation
to the expiration of a temporary Act. the expression ‘except as respects things dane or omitted
to be done’, so that offences and obligations incurred under a temporary Act might be punished
or enforced even after its expiry. Even the Constitetion of India, in articles 249(3), 25012),
357(2) and 358, has used this cxpression. ‘The Government of India Act, 1935, used this
expression in section 192(4). It is on the basis of this expression that the House of Lords held
in Wicks y. Director of Public Prasecutions that the expiration of the Emergency Powers
(Defence) Act, 1939 did not affect the lability to punishment under the statute or the prosecution
of legal proceedings for the purpose of inflicting that punishment. There are two Supreme Court
cases explaining the meaning of the expression ‘thing done’.s-°

The above discussion is intended to show the need far a savings provision as to the effect of
expiry of a temporary Act.

Present position—Need for amendment

7.6. In the United Kingdom, there is no statutory provision concerning the effect of expiry.
At common law, the effect of expiry of a temporary statute is, in each case, a matter of
construction."-7 The savings provision applicable by section 33(2) of the Interpretation Act,
1889 (U.K.) in case of repeal’ does not apply on the expiry of an Act, of its own force.

Current English legislative practice is to apply the repeal clause. The following is one
example :*
“(2) Upon the expiry of this Act, section 38(2) of the Interpretation Act shall apply
as if this Act had been repealed by another Act.”

The correct position in relation to temporary Acts was stated by Spens CJ. in J. K. Gas

Plant v. King Emperor,” in which he cited with approval the following passage from Craies on

Statute Law.?t

1, ALR, 1954 S.C, 683, 685.
2. Thring, Practical Legislation, page 100,
3. Wicks v. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1947) 4.C, 362 (HLL.).
4. Universal Imports Agency v. Chief Controtler, ALR, 1961 5.0. 41.
5. French India Importing Corporation v. Chief Controller, AAR. 1961 $.C. 1752.
6. See—-
(8) Stevenson v. Oliver, (1841) 8 M & W 234, 240, 241;
(0) Spencar v. Hooton (1920) 37 T.L.R. 280, 282;
(©) Wicks v. Director of Public Prosecutions (1947) A.C. 362.
7. As to the general rule, see para 7.4, supra.
8. Para 7.3, supra.
9, Section 9, Control of Liquid Fuct Act, 1967 (Eng,).
10. J.K. Gas Plant v. King Emperor, (1947) 52 C.W.N. (F.R.) 25.
11. Craies, Statute Law (Fourth Edn. p. 347; Sixth Edn. p. 4081.

Advice of Lord
‘Thring.

No statutory
provision in
U.K. as to
expiry.


Repeal of
perpetual Act
and expiry
of temporary
Act-Similarity
between.

Provision
in Bil
of 1897,

Position as
to expiry

of temporary
Acts in

India.

50

_unless it contains some special provision to the contrary, after a temporary
Act has expired. no proceedings can be taken gpon tt and it ceases to have any
effect. Therefore, offences committed against temporary Acts must be prosecuted
and punished before the Act expires, and as soon as the Act expircs any proceeding
which are being taken against a person will ipso facto terminate.”

7.6. Thus, a perpetual Act and a temporary Act stand on the same footing. first, when they
are in force, and secondly, when a permament Act is repealed or a temporary Act expires by
efflux of time, as the case may be, Then, the question arises whether x2 should have a general
saving clause to deal with the expiry of a temporary Act more or [css like the one which has
already been provided for in section 6 in relation to repeal. As in the case of repeal without a
saving clausc.? so in the case of expiry* of a temporary Act without a saving clause, it is not
difficult to conceive how, such an expiry might result in defeating the obiect for which the tem-
porary Act was enacted, Regard being had to the fact that the legislative power in the exercise
of which a temporary Act is enacted is the same as in the case of a perpetual Act, there cannot
by any insuperable or inherent difficulty in a temporary Act creating tights surviving beyond the

actual expiry.

7.7, 1६ may be mentioned here that a provision on this subject was made in the General
Clauses Bill, 1897, as originally intreduced,? but it was dropped at the Select Committee stage.*

In deleting the provision, the Select Committee observed :--

“Tt may be that without any provision it would be held that the effect is the same when
an enactment expires as and when it is repealed; but, on the other hand, it is
conceivable that there might be cases in which, for example, it would be better not
to allow a person to be proceeded against after the expiry of a temporary and
possibly very stcingent cnactment, although he acted in contravention of it during
the period for which it was expressed to endure.”

With respect, we do not think that the reasons given by the Select Committee of 1897,
quoted above for the deletion of the provision, are sound.

The first assumption in the Committce’s observations, equating the repeal of an enactment
with its expiry, has not been accepted either in Indian® or in English* law. The second proposi-
tion, referring to some ‘very stringent’ enactments, seeks to make an exceptional case the basis
for a general rule. We find it dillicult to conceive of cases where the legislation would intend
and provide that an offence committed against the temporary Jaw may cease to be punishable on
its expiry. On principle, even if a law is stringent, an offence committed during its operation

should be punished even after its expiry.

7.8. The position in Indian law as to the effect of the expiry of temporary Acts, which we
have already discussed,” is thus understood :*

. Para 7.4, spit,

. Para 7.5, stipe
See Clauve 6(2), General Clauses Bill, 1897, Gazette of India, Part ५, pages 25.37, dated 6th Feb., 1897 and

erry

Notes at pages 38.40,

Report of the Select Committee, Gazette of India,
See para 7,8, infra.

See para 7.9, infret.

Para 7.3 and 7.4, supra

See—
(a) Krishaan ¥. State of ‘Madras, AR. 1951 S.C. 301, 304 (19511 S.C.R. 621; (per Patanjali Sasiri J.).

(b) Stare ¥. Jagamandar Das, AAR. 1954 S.C. 683; (1955) SC 3539.

Part V, pages 77.78. dated 6th March, 1897.

PADS

(ch State of Punjab v. Mohar Strgh, (1955) 8.C.R. 85;
(a) Gopichand v. Delhi Administration, AAR. 1959 S.C, 609.


Te आता ee

51

Unless the temporary Act contains some special provision to the contrary, no proceeding
can be taken upon a temporary Act after its expiry, and it ceases to have any further effect.
Therefore, offences committed against temporary Acts must be prosecuted and punished before
the Act expires, and as soon as the Act expires, any proceedings which may have been taken
against a person will ipse facie terminate

7.9, The position in England is the same.t-?

7.10. In drafting an Act which is to expire after a certain period, care must, therefore, be Care ‘om
taken, as the law stands at present, to provide that any right, obligation or penalty accrued or drafting.
incurred during the period of the operation of the Act shall not be affected, and that any investiga-
tion, legal proceeding or remedy in respect thereof may be instituted, continued or enforced, and

such penalty imposed, as if the Act had not expired.

7.11. The failure to insert a proper saving clause has sometimes resulted in a serious offence Failure to
going unpunished. An instance in point is the case reported in State of Uttar Pradesh v. insert gaving
Jagamander Das3. It is true that there was considerable delay on the part of the investigating of.
agency in that case; but, if there had heen a general saving provision in the General Clauses Act.

the serious offence in that case would not have gone unpunished.

7.12. The usual practice of inserting a saving clause in temporary Acts,* and the serious Specific pro-
consequences which result where such a saving provision is either not inserted or is inadequate," vision needed.
would, in our opinion, justify the inclusion in the General Clauses Act of a general provision
dealing with the effect of expiry of temporary Acts. We are conscious that we are recommending
a radical change: but we are satisfied that the ends of just require it.

Outlines of amendments

7.13. Having discussed the need for a provision dealing with the. expiry of temporary Acts, Outlines of
we now proceed to consider the lines on which it should run. new provision
relating to
expiry of
temporary Acts.
7.14. We have a precedent in section 6, which deals with repeal. In general, principles Principles
which apply in the case of repeal of a permanent Act should, on so far as the nature of a temporary 5 ally

Act permits apply to its expiry. applicable.
There are two ways of utilising section 6 for the purpose:

(i) a section applying section 6 (which deals with repeal) to temporary Acts on the lines
of current English procedure,* or

(ii) a self-contained section which will reproduce the contents of section 6 in relation
to temporary Acts.

Of course, whichever course is adopted, it will have to be borne in mind that some parts of
section 6 cannot be applied to temporary Acts. Thus, clause (a) of section 6, regarding non-
revival of a repealed Act, should not apply in the case of expiry of temporary Acts. If section
6{a) is applied, the result might be that where a temporary Act repeals any provision of a
permanent Act, the repealed provision will not revive on the expiry of the temporary Act,—a
situation which may be, and usually is, contrary to the intention of the legislature. But there is
no difficulty in applying the other clauses of section 6 to the expiry of temporary Acts.

1. Wicks v. Director of Public Prosecations, (1947) A.C, 362 (HLL).
2, Sce also para 7.5, supra.
3. State of U.P. v. Jagmaudar Das, ALR, 1954 8.0. 688; (1955) 5.C.A. 539.
4, Para 7.4, supra.
5, Para 7. 11, supra.
6. Para 7.5, suprie
15 M of Law'74—8


Form of
amendment
considered.

Self-contained
section
preferred,

Express pro-
vision to the
contrary pro-
vided for.

Expiry of

Ordinances.

52

7.15. The question, then, is whether section 6 should be applied by reference—[alternative
(i) above!J—or whether the new section should be self-contained—falternative (ii) above.}

7.16. We think? that it would be more convenient to have a self-contained section as to the
effect of the expiry of temporary Acts, instead of applying. by reference, the section relating
to repeal—though the letter was the course proposed in the General Clauses Bill, 1897,3-4
Referential legislation leads to unforeseen difficulties, and we think that in the case of an important
provision like the one under consideration, such a position should be avoided. We may observe
that the provision which we recommend will be the converse of the constitutional provision®
barring 8 prosecution for an offence under a law not in force at the time when the offence wes
commitied notwithstanding the later enactment of such a law. Under the proposed section it
will be permissible to prosecute a person for an offence committed while the law was in force,
notwithstanding the later expiry of that law.

7.17. We have made the proposed new scction subject to an express provision to the
contrary. No doubt, as we have already stated,® it is difficult to conceive of cases where the
legislature would intend that an offence against a temporary law should, after its expiry, cease
to be punishable. Normally, the expiry of an Act should not prevent prosecutions thereunder.
However, since the scheme af the Act is to leave scope for a different intention in every provision,
it appeared to us that an exception should, in the new section, be made at least for express
provision to the contrary.

7.18. While we have thought fic to apply, with modifications, the provisions of section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897, 10 the expiry of temporary Acts.? we have not extended this
principle to the expiry of Ordinances. Under article 123(2) of the Constitution an Ordinance
ceases to operate on the expiry of six weeks from the re-assembly of Parliament. To a layman,
an Ordinance shares the same character as a temporary Act. The words “cease to operate”
in article 123(2) have not been judicially interpreted. But it seems that at the expiry of six
weeks, an Ordinance is completely obliterated from the Statute Book, except for the saving
expressly made by the Constitution. Tt may be pointed out that article 123(2) does not use
the words “except as regards things done" etc. The Supreme Court in State of Orissa v.
Bhupendra Kumar,® made the following pertinent observations .

“Tt is true that the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act in relation to the
effect of repeal do not apply to a temporary Act. As observed by Patanjali Sastri,
J. as he then was, in है, Krishan v. State of Madras,® the general rule in regard to
a temporary statute is that in the absence of special provision to the contrary, proceed-
ings which are being taken against a person under it will ipso facto terminate as
soon as the statute expires. That is why the Legislatures can, and often does, avoid
such an anomalous consequence by enacting in the temporary statute a saving provision
the effect of which is in some respects similar to that of section 6 of the General
Clauses Act. Incidentally, we ought to add that, it may not be open to the Ordinance
making authority to adopt such a course because of the obvious limitation imposed
on the said authority by Article 213(2)(a).”

In this position, we think that it will not be safe to apply the provisions of section 6 of the
General Clauses Act to the expiry of Ordinance, and it is doubtful if ihe proposed section (88
the effect of expiry) car be legally made applicable, in view of the provisions of the Constitution.

1, Para 7.12, supra.

2. See also para 7.20, tafra.

3, Section 6(2) of the General Cluuses Bill, Gazette of India, 1897 (6th Feb. 1897), Part V, pages 25-37.
4, See also para 7.7, supra.

5, Article 20 of the Constitution.

6. Para 7.7, supra.
7
8.
9

. Para 7.13 to 7.17, supra.
. State of Orissa v. Bhupendia Kumar, AR, 1962 8.0. 952.
ही. Krishan y. State of Madras (1981) $.C.R. 621; ATR, 1951 S.C. 301.


53

Qualitatively, an Ordinance ceasing to operate under the Constitution difers from a temporary
Act which expires by afflux of time. Parliament never applied its mind to the Ordinance which
ceased to operate under the Constitution.

Reconmiendation

7.19. In the light of the above discussion, the new section what we recommend will deal
with the effect of expiry of temporary Acts only,

Some of the noteworthy points in connection with the proposed section may be repeated,
for convenience: .

(i) The proposed section will not apply to the expiry of Ordinances.t

(ii) Assistance has been taken in drafting the scction from section 6. But clause (a)
of section 6 (regarding non-revival) has not been adopted. since it should not apply?
in cases of expiry?

(ili) Instead of merely providing that section 6 will apply ia relation to expiry. the proposed
section re-states the provisions intended to he applicable on expiry.*

It may again to pointed’ out that the mere application of section 6 of the General Clauses
Act to a temporary Act (without reproducing, iwith adjustments, the detailed savings), would
create difficulties, and may not produce the desired result. As was observed in a Calcutta case,
where a temporary Act is repealed and replaced by a new Act, section & of the Bengal Generat
Clauses Act (which corresponds to section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897) may not achieve
the object of saving the operation of the temparary Act, because ihe expression “as if the repealed
Act had not been passed” can be construed in a rather norrow manner. It would save the life of
the Act only for the period upto the date of expiry. in the sense that its subsequent expiry is not
to be taken as having wiped it off completely as if it had never been born. Whatever was done
during its duration will not be re-opened. and that would be the only effect of the expression;
once the date of expiry is gone, the temporary Act would have expired, and the words “as if
the repealed Act etc.” would not authorise any action after its expiry, because of the ordinary
Principles applicable as to the effect of expiry of temporary Acts.

7.20. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the following new section:—

Section 6-A (New)

8-A. Where a temporary Central Act or a temporary Regulation made on or after the. .
day Of. eee s+. expires, then, in the absence of an
express provision to the contrary, the expiry shall not effect—-

(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, the temporary
Act or Regulation;

(0) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired. accrucd or incurred under the
temporary Act or Regulation;

(०) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred under the temporary Act or
Regulation;

3, See para 7,18, Supra
2. See discussion in para 7.14, supra.

3. Hence section 30 will not mention the new section.

4. See discussion in para 7.16, supra

also para 7.16, supra

6. Tarak Chandra Mukherjee and others ४. Ratan Lal Ghosal and others, ALR. 1957 Cal 257,
7. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted.

Salient points
of the
recommendation.

Recommenda-
tion,

Effect of

expiry of
temporary
Act.


Section 8-3 (New)
Time of expiry
etc.

Time of expiry
of temporary
Acts etc,

Position as to
expiry of Ordi-
nance.

54

(व) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment 25 aforesaid; and any such
investigation legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed. as if the temporary
Act or Regulation had not expired.

Time of Expiry

7.21. As regards temporary Acts, there is another point to be considered. Just as the
exact time of the commencement of an enactment is dealt with in section 5, it is desirable
that the exact time of the expiry of a temporary Act should also be laid down, A new
section on the subject is, therefore, recommended.

7,22, The new section will be confined to new Acts, as the formula cmbodied in it
may not fit in with some of the temporary Acts already passed.’ The section should be as
follows: —

Section 8-S (New)
8-0, Where a Central Act or Regulation made on or after the .......-++++++ day of
esseecaaaeeseneaaeenee is expressed? to expire, lapse or otherwise cease to have effect on
a particular day, then it shall, unless the contrary intention is expressed, be construed as
ceasing to haye effect immediately on the expiration of the day immediately preceding that
day.

7.23. Section 4(2) of the Canadian Uniform Interpretation® Act provides that “where
an enactment is expressed to expire, lapse or otherwise cease 10 have effect on a particular
day, it shall cease to have effect immediately on the commencement of the following day.”
‘The section which we proposed will express the same idea but will adopt the language
used in section 9(3).

7,24. The new section will not be applicable to Ordinance promulgated by the President
under article 123 of the Constitution. Such Ordinance either (i) lapse on the expiry of six
weeks from re-assembly of Parliament, or (ii) come to an end by virtue of disapproval by
Parliament, or (iii) terminate on withdrawal.

7.25, First, when the Ordinance ceases to operatc on the expiry of six weeks, article
123(2)(a@) of the Constitution comes into play, under which the Ordinance “shall cease to
operate” at the expiration of six weeks from the re-assembly of the Parliament.

{The Rangoon High Court has held,* after discussion of the case-law, that as the law
does not take into account fractions of a day, an Ordinance promulgated under section 41(2) (a)
of the Government of Burma Act, 1935 (25 Gee. 5, ch, 22) (which provided that an Ordinance
shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature)
expired on the mid-night of 28-29th March, 1940, (which is six wecks from mid-night of
15-16th February, 1940, the Legislature having re-assembled on 15th February, 1940). The
Court negatived the contention that, as the House had ye-assembled at 11.00 A.M. on the
15th February, 1940, therefore, the Ordinance expired at 11.00 A.M. on the 28th March].

7.26. Secondly, if the Ordinance comes to an end because of disapproval by both Houses,
then under article 123(2) (a), last portion, is ceased to cperate “upon the passing of the
second of those resolutions”.

7.27. Thirdly, regarding withdrawal of an Ordinance under article 123(2) (6), the with-
drawal can be made “at any time” by the President.

ELC. See Delhi Control of Building Operations Act, 1967.
Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted.

| Driadger, Composition of Legislation (1956), page 256.
UL v. U Chit hlaing ALR. 1941 Rangoon 5, 14, expressly approved on this point im ALR. 1941,
Rangoon, 49, 50.

pir

ros



CHAPTER 8

OTHER GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Expressions connected with time

BL. We have so far discussed some important general rules of construction. In this Introductory:
Chapter, we shail deal with other general rules of construction, We first take up expressions
connected with time.

82. Section 9, deals with the commencement and termination of time, is really Section 9—
confined to only two expressions, namely, “from” and “to”. Stated in a simplified form, the particular expres
proposition enacted in the section is that if the legislature uses the expression “from” a series “to”.
of days (or any other period of time), the first day in that series (or period) is to he
excluded ; and similarly, if it uses the expressions “to” a series of days or any other period
of time, the Jast day in that series is excluded.

8.23. It should be noted that the preposition “from” used in connection with an event The expression
may have various meanings. These are three possible points of time on and from which the owen eee
change in law (indicated by the substantive words which are preceded by this preposition) analysed.
could take effect? in such cases. The first is that moment of time when the event takes place.

The second is the commencement of the day on which the event takes place. The third is
the end of that day, (or the beginning of the next day which describes precisely the same
point of time).

Barwick C. J. has dealt with the matter elaborately, in the Australian case of Associated
Beauty Aids Private Ltd v. Commissioner of Taxation® and stated the position in these words :

“There is no general rule as to the consequence of the use of the preposition
‘from’, whether it be in the computation of the period of time, or in any other con-
nection. In general, in computing a period of time from a date, the period will commence
at the end of the day of that date, but there is no universally operating rule to that
effect, see, for example, the illustration given in the note at p. 1068 of the report
ot R. v. Stevens and Agnew ® (1804), 102 E.R. 1063, and Wilkinson v. Gaston.*

When, as here, a change is to take place from a stated time, the general “rule”
as to the computation of a period of time is not of direct significance, though it is
illustrative of the separating effect of the preposition “from”. In my opinion, it does
not usually have an inclusive but rather an exclusive or separatist quality. But ua-
questionably it may have either. Thus, the preposition derives its relevant quality from
the context in which it is found, which includes the purpose which the document in
which it is found is evidently designed to effect.”

8.2B. Two aspects of the matter should be noted at this stage. For the specific situation Two sspects
dealt with in section 9, the rule enacted in that section prevails, and the first day is excluded. of the matter.
In situations not dealt with in section 9, however, the question is to be decided as one of
construction as the positive provision in section 9 is not, in terms applicable.

1. ef, analysis in Assaciazed Beauty Aids Pvt. Lud. v. Commissioner of Taxation, (1965-66) 39 A.L.LR, 20, 21
(Barwick CJ).

2. Associated Beauty Aids Pvt, Lid. ५४. Conunissioner of Taxation, (1965-66) 39 A.L.J.R. 20, 21.

3. R. ¥, Stevens and Aguew, (1804), 102 E.R. 1063, 1068.

4. Wilkinson v. Gaston, (1846) 9 0.8, 137, 115 E.R, 1227,

55


56

Para. 8.25 contd. A Madras case—In re Courr fees'—illustrates the position. In that case, a question
arose as to the interpretation of a notification of the Provincial Government, published in the
Gazette of May Sth, which contained rules imposing higher court fees on plaints. Did the new
scales apply to suits instituted on that day? That was the precise question, The words of
the notification were. “that the amendments do come into force from the date of publication
in the Gazette”. Did those words mean ‘on and after that date",—thus incleding the 5th
May—or did they mean “after that date”,—thus cxcluding May, the Sth. The majority took
the former view. Sehwabo C.J. said, “In every case, the word “from” preceding a date may
have onc of 1७० meanings, namely, on and after, that is, including the named date, or merely
after. that is, excluding the named date ; it is necessary to look av the context and the cir-
cumstances of cach case to arrive at the true construction. But | think further that, unless
there arc valid reasons to the contrary, certain rules may be stated thus: (a) that, if the
named date is the “beginning of a definize limited period™ that is, when there is a terminus
ad quem as well as a terminus व. quo, then prima facie the first day is excluded ; (b) that, if
the named date is the beginning of un indefinite period, then, prima facie, the first day is
included. “i am of opinion ¢hat in ordinary plan English, unless there is anything indicating
the contrary intention in the context, “from a named date” means “on and after that day”.

In the same case*, Courts Trotter J. elaborated the position thus :—

“Where a statute fixes only ite terminus a quo of a state of things which is envi-
saged as ta last indefinitely, the common law rule obtains that you ought to include
fractions of a day and that statute or order or regulation takes effect from the first
moment of the day on which it is enacted or passed, that is to say, from the mid-night
“of the day preceding the day on which it is promulgated”; on the other hand, where
a statute delimits the period marked both by व terminits a gto and a terminus ad quer»
the former is to be excluded and the latter to be “included in the reckoning.”*

Krishnaswami Aiyar J., however, took the view that the notification took effect only on
the next day, ie. on the 6th May.

‘We are referring to this case for its discussion of the principles,—though the case fell
outside the terms of section 9, because there was no “series of days or other period of time”

as is contemplated by section 9.

‘Layman’s under- 8.3. We have considered at some length section 9 in so car as it deals with the expres-

standing different sion “from”, which, under the section, excludes the first day. This is also the rule in England,
laid down judicially, and we do not wish to disturb it, as it has been in operation for almost
a century. Nevertheless, we would like to point out that this is uot the layman: ufderstanding
of the word. In ordinary usage—whether in conversation or in correspondence or even in
formal documents-—one regards the day mentioned as included in the period which begins
from a particular day, and the object of using “from” is to link the period with that day.
The dominant idea, in section 9, on the other hand. is of detaching the period from that day.

Other expressions 8.4. Besides the expressions provided for in section 9, modern legislative phraseology has

relatingtotime. occasion to. use many other expressions dealing with the commencement or termination of

7 periods of time; and it appears to be desirable,—in so far as it is practicable—to lay down
certain rules as to the effect of those words and expressions, sa as to have a uniformity of
interpretation, which is one of the objects of the Act. Acting on this principle, we shall deal
with a few words and expressions, such as, “clear days”, “within” etc.

1. In re Court fees, A.LR. 1924 Mad. 257.

2, Emphasis supplied.

3. Inve Court fees, ALR. 1924 Mad. 257

4. See also Halsbury, 3rd ६9... Vol. 32, page 138.

ech

peng,


57

8.5. (a) As regards the phrase “clear days”. which is often employed in statutes, it is “clear days”.
well settled that where this phrase is used. the time is to be reckoned exclusive of both the
first and the last day.?

(b) Where. however, the cxpression used is something else than “clear days” (or “at
least” or “not less” so many days), ihe gencral rule obtaining at present seems to be that
the first day is included, and the Jast day excluded.?

8.6. As to the expression “within. .......of”, reference may be made to the Allahabad “Within......
case of K. N. Pandey v. 5. £. Saxena.* In that case, an application for substitution under कण
section 110(3) (०) of the Representation of the People Act was required to be filed “within
14 days” of the publication of the notice of withdrawal of candidature. On this statutory lan-
guage the first day was held to be excluded. It was noted that section 9 of the General Clauses
Act could not apply, as the word “of” was used But the court placed reliance on the principle
of section 12¢/), Limitation Act.

8.7. (8) The expression “within................after” came up for consideration in a“within after"

Bombay case The words used were “within [5 days ‘after’ the date of declaration of the and within
election result’. The date of declaration was held to be excluded, because 15 days coutem-
Plated are after thar day.

(b) The words ‘within 15 days fram ie due date of payment”, occurring in section
12-A(1) of the Bihar and Orissa Motor Vehicles Act, 1930, were held, in an Orissa case,®
to mean 15 clear days excluding the day on which the tax become due.’ In another deci
sion®, it was held that the words “within a month” should ordinarily be construed as excluding
the date on which the order was passed, and would mean an interval of one clear month.

8.8. It is only when the word “fram” is used (with reference to the computation of a "From"
particular period} that the date from which the computation is to begin is excluded from 29d “ending
the computation.? But, if the expression in such context is either “beginning with” or “ending
with”, then those dates are not required to be omitted from the computation.*

3.9. It may, incidentally, be mated that section 9 of the General Clauses Act has been Section 9 applied
applied for computing the periad of limitation also," for computing
8.10. While it is not cur intention to codify all the numerous points summarised above, Amendments
we think it proper to give statutory recognition to some of them. The amendments which ™commended.
we recommend in section 9 will be apparent from the draft.'’- We may also mention that we
propose to extend the section to statutory instruments.

8.11. Recent legislative usage occasionally employs the- verbal device “both days inclusive” “Expression
it would, we think, be convenient if, in order to recognise this device, the General Clauses bath days
Act suitably spells out the consequences of usiag it. Where a period from a specified day °
to a specified day is referred to and the formula “both days inclusive” is used, the period should
include both the days. This is tie proposition to be enacted. We recommend the insertion

in section 9 of a suitable provision in this behalf.
1, Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1952), Vol. 1, page 500, item No. 16.
2. Radcliffe v. Bartholonuer (1892) 1 KB. 160

3. KN, Pandey ४, S.L. Saxenc, AAR, 1959 AlL 54, (1958) A.LJ, 678, 680.

4. Manjuli v. Civil Judge, ALR. 1970 Bom. 1. 8, para 18.

5. Padmacharan v. S.C. Pabe, A.LR. 1965 Orissa 71, 72, Para 2 (Narasimhan C.J. aod Barman J.).
6. Ma-iaids Suku v. Lat Sadananda Singh, ALR. 1952 Orissa 279.

7. Para 8.2, supra,

8. Natho v. Sitat Prasad, ALR. 1969 Pat. 310,
9. Bhogilal Pandya v. Maharawal Laxman Stugh, AJR. 1968, Raj. 145.
10, See draft Bill. at the end of his Report, and also para 8.12, infra.
11. Also

part 8.01, infra



58
Recommendation 8.12. In the light of the above discussion, section 9 should be revised as under :---
section 9.

Revised section 9
Expressions of 9(1). In any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the commencement of this Act,
time. or in any Statuiory instrument made thereunder, it shall be sufficient—

(a) to use the word “from” or the word “alter” for the purpose of excluding the first
in a series of days ;..-...+----+

(b) to use the word “to” for the purpose of including the last in a series of days......

(1A) in any Central Act or Regulation made on after the ....- bee e eee e ences day of
1 or in any statutory instrument made thereunder, it shall be

oe पु
sufficient-—
(a) 10 use the word “on” for the purpose of including the day on which a period

is expressed to begin ;..

(b) a use the word “with” jor the purpose of including the day on which a period
is expressed te end ;..

(०) in relation ta the interval between fwo events—

(1) to use the words “clear days” or the words “at Jeast” or “not less than” ‘a
specified mumber of days, for the purpose of excluding the days on which the
events Aappen ; and

Gi) merely to specify the number of days for the purpose of excluding the day on
which the first event happens and including the day on which the second event

happens.
(1B). Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the.......+ deen
day रण... बन लिन 2 or in any statutory instrument made under any such Central Act

or Regulation, a period from a specified day to a specified day is referred to, followed by
the words “both days inclusive”, the period shall include both the days.

(2) Sub-section (1) applies also to all Central Acts made after the third day of January,
1868, and to all Regulations made on or after the forteenth day of January, 1887, and to
statutory instruments made under such Central Acis or Regulations.

Section 10. 8.13. This disposes of section 9. Section 10 provides that where any act or proceeding
: is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any court or office on a certain day or within a
prescribed period, and the court or office is closed on that day or on the last day of the
period, the act or proceeding can be done or taken on the next day afterwards on which

the court or office is open.

Section 10 8.14, It may be noted that the section has been applied to a provision where the period
applicable where was described as “not later than”. A similar provision in the U.P. General Clauses Act was
faz than” Weed. applied to the time-limit fixed for pronouncing the award of an industrial tribunal.?

1. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered.
2. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be inserted.
3. Vishwantitra Press v, Workers of Vishwamirra Press, ALR. 1953 8.९. 41,

we --+


59

8.15. It may also be noted thal the expression “office? in this section docs not mean Meaning of

the office of a court.? Section 10,

8.16. We propose ta exteml section 10 to statutory instruments. Tt has been pointed out Fatension to
in a Full Bench decision of the Allahabad High Court ८!

that section 4. Limitation Act. and instruments
4 s. 10, General Clauses Act. give expression to the general principles of law enunciated by the "commended,
maxims “lex non cogit ad impossibitia’—the law does not compel a man to do that which
he cannot possitly perform.—and “actus curive neninem gravabit’—an act of the court shall
prejudice no man. “These sections do not in any way extend the period of limitation, nor
do they furnish any data for campuration of time ; they merely embody a rule of elementary
justice that if the time allowed by statute 10 do an act or to take a proceeding expires on a
day when the court is closed. it may he done on the neat sitting of the court.”

In a number of other ca it has been peinted out that section 4. Limitaiion Act. and
section 10, General Clauses Act embody the general principles enshrined in the two maxims
“Tex non cogit ad impossibilia cud Actus curiae nominem gravabit.” Fven if section 4, Limita-
tion Act is not applicable as contended by the appellant, the respondents can invoke section
10 of the General Clauses Act. If neither of the provisions can assist ihe respondents, they
fa can still invoke the general principles embodicd in the two provisions.”

8,168, In a Supreme Court case." section [0 was applicd to statutory rules. Section

. 81(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, enacts that the election petition may be

Presented “within such time as may be prescribed.” Rule 119 of the rules under the Act
provided a time limit, but uscd the words “not later than 14 day. The Court observed-—

“It is obvious that the rule-making authority could not have intended to go further
: than what the section itself had enacted, and if the language of the rule is construed
| in conjunction with and under the coverage of the section under which it is
framed, the words “not later than fourteen days”. must be held to mean the
same thing as ‘within a period of fourteen days’. We entertain no doubt that the
Legislature usecl both the expressions as meaning the same thing, and there are,
accordingly, no grounds for holding that section 10 is not applicable to petitions

{ falling within rule 119.”
|

Later, the Court described section 10 as “a beneficient enactment.”

8.17. We also propose to substitute the word “specified” for the word “prescribed” in
section 10, since the word “prescribed” will now have a special meaning.®

8.18. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 10 should be Recommendation
revised as follows :— a8 to section 10.

Revised section 10

10(1). Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this
Act, or by any statutory instrament made under any such Central Act or Regulation, any
act or proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any Court or office on a
certain day or within a specified period, then, if the Court or office is closed on that day
. or on the last day of the specified period, the act or proceeding shall be considcred as done or

taken in due time if it is done or taken in the next day afterwards on which the Court or
office is open.

i, Lachehmievar Prasad ५. Gividhar? Lai, AJR. 1939 Pat. 667 (F.B.).
2. Raia Pande v. Sheepugan Ponde, ATR. 1942 AN 427, (F.B) (per Dar J).
3. Balkvishna ¥. Tina (1911) 7 Nag, LR. 176; 12 1.0, 8105 aad Dhanusingh ६. Keshoprasad, AR. 1921 Nag.
246, referred to in Rewbie y. Prabhakar, ALR. 1955 Nag. 300, 301,
. 4, Harinder Singh «. Karneit Singh, ATR. 1957 8, ए, 271, 273 (Venkatarama AiyerJ.),
5. See section I—" prescribed”.
15 M of Law/74—9



Section 10A
(new) Standard
Time.

Reference to
time.

Section 11—
Distance and
Rate.

Section 12.

Section 13—
Gender and _
number.

Merit of the
provision.

60

Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any act or proceeding to which the
Limitation Act, 1963, applies.

(2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the
fourteenth day of January, 1887 and to statutory instruments made under such Central Acts
or Regulations.

8.19. Section 10A is a new section which we propose to add.) It is a provision 88 to
standard time, which would be a useful provision.? The following section is recommended.

Section 104 (New)

10A. Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after thE... 6. eee ae .
day Of vccccececreeeeee 197 ,5 any reference to 4 specified time of the day
occurs, then such time shall, unless i is otherwise specifically stated, mean the

Indian Standard Time.”
Distance and rates of duty
8.20. Section 11 is as follows :—

“11, In the measurement of any distance, for the purpose of any Central Act or Regu
Jation made after the commencement of this Act, thav distance shall, unless a
different intention appears, be measured in a straight line on a horizontal place.”

It needs no change.

2.21, Section 12 provides that duty shall be taken as pro rata in enactments. This section,
which is based on section 4 of the General Clauses Act of 1868, is ultimately derived from
an Act of 1849, which contained a similar provision. [t needs no change.

Number and gender

8.23. Two rules of interest to grammarians—both subject to the context—are incarporated
in section 13. The first says that words imposting the masculine gender include females.
The second provides that words in the singular include the plural, and vice versa, The object
of both is to facilitate shortening of the language of enactments, by enabling the draftsman
to avoid the tortuous process of mentioning the female of the species whenever he frames 8 pro-
vision applicable to living beings, or of mentioning the plural whenever he uses a word in the .
singular and vice versa.

8.24, The merit of these two provisions is obvious. Of course, the resultant brevity is
purchased at a price, because, as is shown by the fairly large number of reported cases on
the section, it is often not easy to decide whether, in a particular statutory provision, the
context should be taken as jndicating a contrary intention. Some of these cases have even

gone to the Supreme Court.®

1, Compare section 37 of the Australian Act.

2. Compare also section 3 of the Factories Act, 1948.

3, Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered.

4. Central Act 5 of 1849. .

5. {a) The Regional Settlement Commissioner, Jaipur and others v. Sunder Das Bhasin, AR. 1963 8.6. 181;

(1963) 2 S.C.R. 534
(को The Management of Indian Cable Co. Lid, Calcutta v. Its workmen (1962) Suppl. 3 S.C.R. 589, 601, 620.

tc) Mis. Dhandnia Kedia & Co., ¥. The Commissioner of Income-tax, A.LR. 1959 S.C. 219, 222.
{d) Newspapers Lid. v. State Industvial Trtounal & Others, ALR, 1957 S.C. 532, 536.


61

And, there have been recent decisions’ of the High Courts also. But this cannot be
avoided. For this reason, no substantial change is suggested in the section.

8.25. In one of the cases before the Supreme Court,—Regional Settlement Commissioner Section 13.
vy. Sunderdas?—telating to rules made under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha- and rules,
hilitation) Act (49 of 1954), section 13 (of the General Clauses Act) was held not to apply to
the particular cules, in view of the context. But the general question whether the General
Clauses Act applied at all to subordinate legislation was not considered.

8.26. Certain verbal changes are, however, proposed in section 13, which should be Verbal changes
revised as follows :— . techonss cata

Revised section 13
(1) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words Gender and
importing the masculine gender shall include females. Number.

(2) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words
in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the

singular.

1. Bg. (a) A.LR. 1964 Punj. 87, 89;

(b) A.LR. 1970 Punj. 81, 84.
2. Regional Settlement Commissioner, Jaipur v. Sunderdas Bhasin, ALR. 1963 5.0. 1B1-(1963) 2S.C.R, 534.


Encorporation.

Section 13A
(New)—Effect

of incorporation—
Recommendation.

Offences by
companies.

CHAPTER 9
CORPORATIONS

9.1. In this Chapter, we deal with certain matters relating to corporations.

9.2. Whenever an enactment has to incorporate a body of persons, it has to expressly
provide, in a separate section, for many matters dealing with the effect of incorporation. Since
enactments incorporating bodies are now increasing in number. it is considered that a provision
in the General Clauses Act on the subject would serve a uscful purpose. A new provision
as to the effect of incorporation is, therefore, recommended as follows :—-

Section 134 (New)

“134, Where by or under aiv Central Act or Regulation nade on or after the

day of . any association or body of persons is
constituted a bedy corporate, then, wiless a different intention appears, that body
corporate

(a) shail have perpetual succession, and a common seal with power to alter or change
the seal;

(0) may sue and be sued by its corporate name :
fc) shall have power——
Gi) te coniraet hy 1s corporate naite ;

(ii) te acquire, hold er dispese of property, whether movabie or immovable.”

9.3, There is another matter relating ta corporations which may be considered. In Acts
of Parliament containing penal provisions, there is often to be found a section relating to
oftiences by companies, The section is usually in the following terms (slight variations are
sometimes found).

“Offences by companies: (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a
company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company
for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be procceded against and punished accordingly :

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, not being a person in charge of and
responsible to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission
of the offence, shall, if it is proved that the offence has been committed with his consent or
connivance or that the commission ef the offence is attribulable 10 any neglect on his part,
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and

punished accordingly.

1. Date of commencement of amendment Act to be inserted.

62


63

Explaration.—For the purpose of this section,--

(a) “company” means any beds corporate und includes a firm or other association of
3 persons, and

(0) “director”, in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.”

9.4. We have considered the desirability of including such a section in the General Recommendation.
Clauses Act, and have come to the conclusion that it would be proper to do so. We have
made a similar recommendation in our Report? on ‘Social and Economic Offiences’. We
recommend accordingly that the following section should be inserted in the Act :---

Section 1344 {New}

(1) If the person committing an offence under any Central Act or Regulation made on offences by
or after the ... day of... = is a company, then, unless companies.
a different intention appears, the company as well as every person in charge of,
f and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the
commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person Table
to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his know-
ledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.

(2) Where an offence under any such Act or Regulation has been committed by a
company, then, unless a different intention appears, any director, manager, secretary
or other officer af the company, not being a person in charge of and responsible
to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of
the offence, shall if it is proved thal the offence has been committed with his
consent or connivance or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any
neglect on his part, also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,—

{a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association
. of persons, and

{b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

4. 47th Report.
2. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted



Introductory.

Statutes in
derogation of
sovereignty.

Effect of growth
of democracy.

Distinction bet-
ween Governmen-
tal and other
functions.

CHAPTER 10
PROVISIONS CONCERNING THE GOVERNMENT

10.1. We now proceed to consider certain topics relating to the position of the Government.

10.2, One of the most interesting problems which have arisen in Constitutional Law
concerns the effect of statutes in derogation of sovereignty. How far does a statute bind the
Government? For some time, a view prevailed that the sovereign remains unaffected by the
general words or language of a statute." The rule had, pethaps, its origin in the English
Common law immunity of the Crown ; this immunity had first attached to the personal character
of the King as the sovercign, and later extended to other sources of the law-making and law
enforcing power. The conflicting theories of sovereignty affecting this problem need not detain
us. What necds to be noted is that the doctrine that the state is not bound by statute except
in certain cases is, speaking historically, associated with the institution of monarchy.

10.3. With the growth of democratic institutions and the realisation of the need to give
adequate protection to the citizen even against governmental activities, a movement
for giving more adequate and better defined remedies against the State gained
gromd in various countries. The Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, in England, and
the Federal Tort Claims Act, in the United States of America, illustrate the growing trend to
make the Government liable for various kinds of illegal acts. Reference may also be made
to the Law Commission’s Report? on State [ability in Tort. These developments are not to
be viewed in isolation, but as a part of the process of the gradual erosion of the prerogative of
the executive. Because of the growing number of welfare activities of the State, the matter

has assumed great practical importance.

The question of the position of the State in regard to statutes, is a fact of the above
subject, and is onc of steadily increasing importance. As is often pointed out, the problem
is one of a determining how far the prerogative of the State, js consistent with the need for
full liability of the State, particularly because every day the State engages in activities com-
parable with those of the citizens. The common law presumption, that the State is not bound
by a statute except by express mention or by necessary implication, is no longer justifiable. It
may be that this presumption is supported by the old positivist theory which regaided law as &
command issued by superior to an inferior. If so, it is out of date now.

10.4. Sometimes, a distinction js sought to be made between functions which are “necessarily
and inalienably”* governmental functions (on the one hand) and other functions, and it is empha-
sised that in the case of the former, the special position of the State should continue, But our
experience of the working of the similar distinction which was observed (for some time) with
reference to goverumental liability in tort, shows that such a distinction, even if theoratically
justified, would not be workable, because it lacks precision. In fact, even in other countries, such
distinctions bave been criticised by the academic world.’

Soe para. 10.7, infra.
. Borchard, “Gavermment responsibility in Tort” (1926) 36 Yale Law Journal 1, 17.

Ist Report of the Law Commission (State liability in tort).

” ७०० First Report of the Law Commission (State liability in tort), page 3.
{ab Fvic.dmana, “Legal Status of Incorporated Public ‘Authorities, (1948) 22 Australian Law Journal 7, 12;

4Shield of the Crown’, (1950) 24 Australian Law Journal.

Wie wo

(को rieimann,
64 .

neti ens,


65

10.5. In the United States. one of the well-known supporters of the doctrine of “irresponsi- we nce Holmes
bility” of the State was Justice Holmes, who stated that there could be no legal “right” against fo Mere can fe
the State, which itself made the law on which the right depended. In onc of his letters to Laski? gan against the
Holmes stated that he could not understand how an instrumentality established by the United है
States to carry out its will, should undertake to enforce something that is against fis will, “Ie
seems 10 me like shaking one’s fist ut the sky, when the sky furnishes the encrgy that enables one
to raise the fist.”

16.6. But, if this argument is accepted, and carried ¢o its logical conclusion, the camprehen- Ruk of law
sive and positive rule of law cannot survive. “IF you just make one exception to the principle of दिला बल
legality, you cannot tell where it may lead yon."® The matier, therefore, requires a fresh look.

10.7. So much as regards the justification for considering the subject. We may now discuss Rule in  Eugland
the present position. The rule in England is that in the absence of an express provision to the con- pad in India.
trary ot of necessary intendment to the contrary, the Crown is net bound by a statme. This rate
prevailed in India also for a long time-

But the Supreme Court of India, has now held‘- that this rule of the common law of England
does not apply to India after it became a Republic. We think that this view of the Supreme Court
should be codified. We would, moreover, state that where there is no express provision, in the
Particular statute as to whether it binds the Government but reliance is placed on “neecssary
implication”, the Court has to go through the entire Act, in order to determine whether the Act
is binding om the Government. Untit the matter has been examined by a Court, no one can say
with certainty whether an Act (which does not make an express provision on the subject) binds
the Government. This position is obviously unsatisfactory. In the modcrn welfare Stale, the
activities of Government have increased considerably. A member of the public dealing with the
Government is, therefore, entitled to know, without going to a court of law, whether a particular
Act binds the Government or not. Hence the only exception shauld be for cases where there is
am express provition in a statute to the effect that it does not bind the State.

10.8. We need not refer to all the cases of the High Courts. Some are mentioned in the
foot-note."

We, therefore, recommend that a section should be inserted in the General Clauses Act to
the effect that. in the absence of a contrary express provision, every Act of Parliament shall be
binding on the Government, Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of a new section as fol-
lows :

Section 13B (New)

“13B. In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, every Central Act or Regulation Government to
ख़बर on or ajter the........day of...... 197.8 shall be binding on the government.” be bound,

10.9. Jt may be interesting at this stage, to refer to the ancient Indian theory on this point. Position in anci-
A = हि ४, ent India,
According to some scholars, support can be found in some ancient Indian texts for the theory

. Kawananatoav, Polyilank, (1307), 205 U.S. 349, 353.
» Holmes Laski letters, (Howe Ed. 1952), Vol. 2, page 822.
Duguil, a3 quoted in Schwarts, Introduction to American Administrative Law (1958), page 215.
}. Stare of West Bengal v. Corp. of Caleutta, A.LR. 1967 S.C. 997.
|. Union of India ¥. fubb, A.LR. 1968 S.C, 360.
. For High Court decisions see para 10. 7A, inte.
7 (a) Bax? Ainrik Singh v. Union of india, (1973) 75 Punj. LR. 1 FB).
[ए) AMP. fadustries (P) Lia. v. State of Kerala, (1971> K.L.R. 128.
tc) Stare of Mysore v. R.G. Kuléarni (1971) 73 Bom. L.R. 723, A.LR, 1972 Bom. 93.
(७) Unian af India v. Sugrabat, ALR. 1969 Bom. 13,
4e) Colectar South Arcot v. Meduthachartar, ALR. 1972 Mad. 148.
8. Dile ofc ou azacoment of amendment Act to be entered.

कफ के फल


Section 13-C
(New) —
Priority debts
due io the
Government.

Position ps to
taxes—-Supreme
Court judgment.

Limitations indi-
cated by Supreme
Court.

Debts other than
taxes,

Areas not
forming part of
British India.
Relevance of
doctrine that
Crown is not
bound,

66

that the law, being of divine origin, bound the king and the subjects alike. However, we do not
Propose, to express any opinion in this matter, because. before we do so, an examination
of the problem involving further study in depth will be required. and we think tat such exami-
nation is not necessary for the purposes of this Report.

10.10, We have already dealt with one question concerning? the Government. Another ques-
tion relevant to ihe position of the Government concerns the priority of debts due to the Govern-
ment. In general, the Government has preference in respect of the payment of debts due to it.
As carly as 1868, in a judgment discussing the entire history of the Royal prerogative in this
respect, the High Court of Bombay® laid down that ॥ judgment debt due to the Crown is entitled
to the sume precedence in execution as a judgment debt in England due to the Crown, provided
there is no special legislative provision affecting that right in the particular case.

But there are certain refinements and limitations as to this doctrine. which require to be
considered,

10.11. So far as income-tax arrears are concerned, it has been held by the Supreme Court*
that the Government of India is entitled to claim priority over debts duc from the citizen to unsecur-

ed creditors.

The basic justification for the claim for such priority. according to the Supreme Court, rests
on the well-recognised principle that the State is entitled to raise money by taxation, because,
unless adequate revenue is received by the State, it would not be able to function as a sovereign

Government at all.

10.12. Nevertheless, while laying dowa his principle, the Supreme Court® was careful to
indicate the poxsible Timitations of the doctrine. Briefly, these limitations were : first, that the
judgment (of the Supreme Court) was limited ta arrears of income-tax; secondly, that the question
whether the same common law doctrine applied to those parts of India which were previously
comprised in the former Indian States may need separate consideration, and thirdly, that a parti-
cular statute may affect the prerogative right of the State.

10.13. The question whether the priority applies to debts other than taxes has been the sub-
ject-matter of some controversy® amongst the High Courts. The Bombay High Court has answered
it in the affirmative’, while the Calcutta High Court has taken a different view.*

10.14. It may be noted that there is no proot that the doctrine of priority of Crown debts
was given judicial recognition in the territory of the Hydcrabad State period to January 26,1950.°

10.15. Another aspect of the matter which requires consideration is, whether the well-known
decision of the Supreme Court,‘ holding that the common-law doctrine that the Crown is not
bound by the statute is not the law in force in India, has any bearing on the operation of the
doctrine of priority of Crown debts. The Bombay High Court!? has held that there is no warrant for
treating the two principles on the same footing. The High Court took the view that the doctrine
that Crown is not bound by statute is archaic and undemocratic, while the principle of the priority
of Crown debts is “baxed on equity and justice. and serves an important public purpose.”

1. (a) PN. . Hindu Jurisprudence, page 31.
(b) Dr. S. K. Ayangat, Introduction to Dikshitar, Hindu Administrative Institutions, pages 32, 33.
fe) N.N. Law Studies in Ancient Indian Polity, page 135.

2, Para 10.1 lo 10.9, supra.

4 Secretary of State for India v. Bombay Landing and Shipping Company, (1868) 3 BH.CR, 23.

4, Para 10.12, infra.

5. Builders Supply Corporation ¥. Union of India, (1965) $6 L.T.R. 91, 96 10 98 (S.C.).

6. See Untion of India v. Official Assignee, (1970) 73 Bom. Law Reporter 623, 628, 632.

7. Soe Union of fndia v. Official Assignee, (1970)73 Bom. Law Reporter 623, 628, 632.

8. Murliv. Asoanml & Co, ALR, 1955 Cal. 423.

9, Coflectar, Awrangahad v. Central Bank, A.LR. 1967 S.C. 1831.

10. State of West Bengal v. Cxtparation of Cateutta, ALR. 1967 S.C. 997. Para 10.7, supra.

11, Union of India ¥. Official Assignee, (1970) 73 Bom. LR. 623.

जन ee त+5+ 5 -


i

67

10.16, The above dis
of the priory of the cebts duc te Ge

arent. for several reasons, —

(Othe possible Hirdia

Supreme Court!;

एड on the decirine, referred to even in the judgment of the

Gi) ihe practical importance of one of the possible limitations. same!
tion of the doctrine in relation to ceb!s ether than taxes ३

the opera-

Gil) the carflict of decisions belween che Bombay and Calcutta High Court on the
last-mentioned point?;

(1४) the Guestion of effect of the Supreme Court judgme:
effect of statutes on the Government on the docirine of priority

at relating to the binding
+ and

(४) the urcertain positian as to how fae the doctrine of priority of debts due to the
Government is applicable to territories not formerly comprised in British India‘.

10.17, Befure a conclusion can be reacted as 10 the proper rule to be enacied in this respect,
it is essential 10 go into the possible justifications for the rule of priority

The first gencral justificatian is that the State should be able to discharge its primary govern-
mental functions. anc funds are needed for this purpose.

As the Supreme Court has observed? :--

“It is essential that as 2 Sovercign, the State should be able to discharge its primary
governmental functions and in order to be able to discharge such functions efficiently, it
must be in possession of necessary funds, and this consideration emphasises the necessity
and the wisdon: of conceding to tbe Siete the right to claim priority in respect of its tax
dues”.

In a Bombay case,° it was observed, “Fven in a democracy and even under socialism the
State must have certain rights arc privileges. The Stale has to govern, the 51810 has to find money
to be used for sociafistic principles and Courts have always given every facility to the State to
realise money which are not ccllected tor any private purpose but are intended for the public
cofier and which are ultimately intended for the public need. This principle, which has been
accepted by cur Courts, is not a principle which is peculiar to British jurisprudence”.

10.18. The ९
the King and the

The following statement, to be fornd in Coke’s Commentary on Lit
in a Bombay case.” may be referred to in this context :—

end justification for the rule of priority is the doctrice that where the title of
of w subject concur. the King’s title must be preferred.

ation, which was quoted

. his prerogative, regularly is t be preferred, in payment of his
. hefure any sublect. alkhough the King’s debi er duty be ihe latter; and the
reasea hereof is: for that te sanees vivis est jandamentum belli et firmaiientum pacis.

pty Cacparatine ५. Union uf India, (1965) 55 LTR. 91,96 to 98, Para 10.12, supra.
ad 1 19. supra.

Para 10. 15, supra.
a Para 10.17, and 10.14, supra

5 aeation y, atest of India, (1965) 56 LTR. 91, 103 15.0.)
४. Bow aes, (1954) 57 Bon. LR. 345, 364 (Chagla CL).

५ Boantry Loan bing and Sitaping C7. (1853) 5 8,80२, 21. 1३

2 Bass af be

15 M of Law/74—10

sion will chow chur ikere is need to seule the Jaw on the sabject ih

Need for settling
ie law.

Possible justifi-
cation for the
cule of priority
considered——Dis-
charge of gov-
ernmental func-
tions,

Paramountcy of
f the
State,


Public welfare.

Priority justified
at present day
only for taxes.

Recommendation.

68

Coke pointed out this right is based upon the Latin maxim Quande jus domini regis et subditi
concurrent, jus regis preferferri deber. (Where the ude of the King and ibe vile of a subject
concur, the King’s tile must be preferred).

16.19. The third justification for priority of Government’s debts is the aspect ef public
welfare.

A full Bench of the Madras High Court! has pointed out that the rule is based upon an
important doctrine of public welfare.

“This rule may be said to be the outcome of the maxim salus populi suprenia lex (regard for
the public welfare is the highest law). It is but natural that a debt at large, should be preferred
to the debt of a single creditor.”

10.20. As against these possible justifications, it must be remembered that every rule of
priority created inequality and in a democratic country, provisions creating inequality can ‘be per-
mitted only within reasonable and justifiable limits. Having regard to these considerations, it
appears to us that the principle of priority can, in modern times, be justified only to the extent to
which it can be said to serve 8 public purpose.* Such a public purpose can be predicated in
respect of taxes and fees duc ta the State, So far as taxes and fees are concerned, it is undeniable
that the princinle is necessary for the working of the governmental machinery. For that reason,
the claims of ihe unsceurcd creditors have to yield to those of the Staie, At the same time, there
is a basis for treating debts other than taxes and fees on a footing different from taxes. It is an
accident that the particular debt accrues to the State. The general cule that nonce should have
special privileges should be allowed to operate in the case of such debts.

10.21. Accordingly. we recommend the insertion of the following section.
Section 13C (New)

“13C. In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, a debt due to the Government

under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the.......- day ०. . ,..197.......- 8
shall have priority over other debis not secured by a mortgage or charge, if the debt is in the nature
zherwise.”.

Hog fax or fee, but nes

Bank Ltd., (1962) 44 LT.R. 189, 195 (Mad) (F.B.)

1. Catlector of Tiruchirapalli v. Trinity
2. Cf para 10.19, sapra.
2. [1-12 of commencement of amending Act to be entered.

जज


i
i

डे

4

section have brought out a few aspects of the application of the section. We propose to extend

CHAPTER 11
POWERS AND FUNCTIONARIES

11.1. Provisions us to powers and functionaries are contained in sections 14 to 19 of the
Act, and we deal with them in this Chapter.

11.2, Section 14 provides that where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the com Section 515,
mencement of this Act, aay power is conferred, then, unless a diffcrent intention appears, that {Gry instruments

power may be exercised from time to lime as occasion arises. recommended.

The section does not mention statutory instruments, but it has been held‘ to apply to them.?
We think that it will be useful to codify this interpretation, by including statutory instruments
expressly in seclion 14, and we recommend its extension accordingly

11.3. There is another point concerning section 14. While the section provides that powers Recommendation
conferred by slatute are cxercisable from time to time (unless a different intenticn appears from tion 14 to duties.
the context), it is obvicus that the position regarding duties imposcd by statuie should noi be dis-
similar. According!y, we rccommend that the section should be extended to duties also and
revised as {cllows.

Revised section 14

14. (1) Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act
or by any statutory instrument made thereunder, any power is conferted or any duty imposed,
then unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercised, and that duty shall be
Performed, from tite to time as occasion requires.

(2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the four-
teenth day of January, 1887, ard to statutory instruments made thereunder.

11.4. Section 15 provides that where, by any Central Act, or Regulation, 2 power to appe'nt Section 15—Re-
any person to fill cay office Gr execuie any function is conferred, then. unless it is otherwise commendation td
expressly provided, any such appointment (if it is made after the commencement of this Act) tory instruments

may be made either by name, or by virtue of office. Some of the more recent decisions? on the

this section also 10 statutory instruments. The section should be revised as under —

Revised section 15

; 15. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, or by any statutory instrument made there-
under, a power to appoint any person to fill any office or execute any function is conferred then,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided, any such appointment, if ii is made after the commence.
meat of this Act, may be madr either by name or by virtue of office.

| Shanmughané Transport v. Kanju Chetviar, AAR, 1971 Mad, 37, 39. para. 4 (Alagitiswami J).
. State of UP. 5. Baburanr, ALR. 1961 5.0, 751, 761, relied on. दि . i

|. (a) Abdut Hussate ९. State af Gujarat, ALR. 1968 S.C. 432 ;
(0) PP. ४. Shrt Rambhadray, ALR. 1960 2.7, 282,
(०) PLP. ५. Shatk Sheriff, ALR. 1965 A.P. 372,
(d) Jayantilat v. Union of indie, ALR. 1970 Guj. 103, 117.
fe) State ६. Sake, ALR. 1970 Tripura 1.

iy

3.

69



Section 16.

Section 17601)

Saction 18.

Section 18—
Recommenda-
tion.

7

11.5. Section 16 provides that power to appoiit includes power to suspend or dismiss. Tt
needs no change.

11.6, Section 17(1) reads as follows :—

“17, (1) In any Central Act or Regulation made aiter the commencemeni of this Act, it
shall be sufficient, for the purposes of indicating the application of a law to every
person or number of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, to mention
the official title of the officer af present executing the functions, or that of the officer by whom
the functions ace commonly exccuted.”.

The words “at present” are not very happy. We, therefore, propose a small verbal change
and recommend that section 17(1) should be revised as follows :— .

Revised section [7(1)

“17, C1) In any Central Aci or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, it
shall be suflicient, for the purpose of indicating the application of a law to every person or
number of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, to mention the official
title of the officer executing the functions. af the time when the Central Act or Regulation is made,
or that of the eflicer, by whom the functions are commonly executed.”. .

11.7. Section 18 deals with the powers of a successor to an office. It needs no change.

11.8. The Act is silent as to the exercise of powers by delegates. We think it desirable to
make it clear that where a power is delegated and the exercise of the power is dependent on the
opinion of the authority on whom the power is conferred, the opinion to be formed (as a condition
precedent) will be that of the delegate. We recommend the insertion of a new section for the
above purpose on the following lines: —

Section 18A (new)

18A. Where, under any Ceniral Act or Regulation made on or after the... फिर wanes
[0 >>, or under any statutory instrument made there-
under, :-— :

(a) the exercise of a power or discharge of a function by a person or authority is depea-
dent upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of that person or authority in relation
to any matter, aad

(b) that power or function has been delegated in pursuance of such Act or Regulation or
statniory instrument, then, save as is otherwise expressly provided by such Act or
Regulation or statutory instrument, the power or funciion may be exercised or dis-
charged hy the delegate upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of the delegate in
relation to that matter. 4

It may be noted that a similar point arose in Hazrat Syed Shah v. Commissioner of Wakfat
where the Supreme Court approved the observations made by Lord Benning in Mungoni’s case
and stated that where powers and duties were inter-connected and it was not possible to separate
‘one from the other in such a way that powers might be delegated while duties were retained and
vice versa, the delegation of powers took with it the dutics.

1, Date of Amendment Act 10 be entered.
2, Hazrat Syed Shah, v. Commissioner of Wakfu, ALR. 1952,8.C. 1086.
3, Edward Mungoniv. A.G. of Novthera Rhodesia (1960) A.C, 336; (1960) 1 AN E.R, 446 (HLL).


7

FL

11.9. Section 19 de

js with the powers of official chicls and subordinates, 1t needs no change. Section 19.

i140. When maiters of form prescribed by a statute are departed from, nice questions as Sein 190
to the effect of such departure arise. In general, courts take a common sense view, and disregard Deviation from
minor deviations not affecting the substance. It is time that statutory recognition is given to what for) in da-
the courts do in practice, by ६ suitable provision in the General Ciauses Act. The procedural tion,

Codes already contain provisions achieving ihe same result’. A new provision? as the effeet of

deviation from form is, therefore,’ recommended as follows!;—

Seciian 194 (New)

“9A. Whenever a form is prescribed for or specified for any act by ay Central Act or
Regulquion, or by any stanvory instrument made thereunder, then, save as is otherwise expressly
provided by such Central Act or Reguiation or hy such siatutory instrument, any deviations there-
from neither affecting the substance nor calculated to mistead, shall not render the act er form
invalid."

11.11. We cousidered the question of inserting a prov
following lines :—-

ion vs to ancillary powers, on the Ancillary
powers.

“Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, made after the - oday Of ..... eee
power is conferred on a person, officer of functionary to do or enforce the doing of
any act ता thing, ail sucli powers shall be deemed to be slso cunforred as are aeces-
sary to enable the person, officer or functionary to do or enfovce the doing of the
act or thing.”

We have, after careful consideration, come 10 the conclusion that it is not unlikely that such
a provision may be abused, and so we ure against its insertion.

1. (a) Sections 533 10 537, Code of Criminal Prozzdure, 1898: (७) Section 99, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
2. Cf. Russel, Legislative Drafting and Forms, (1933), page 585, Model Interpretation Act, Clause 29.
3. Compare section 199), Uniform Interpretation Act, (1956), page 269.

4, See also section 30 of the Travancore-Cochin General Clauses Act, £125 (7 of 1125).

5. New section 19.4 can 49:79 to existiag Acts also,



CHAPTER 12

STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS

iniroductory
Introductory. 12.1. Sections 20 10 24 of the Act contain provisions as to statutory instruments (subordi-
nate legislation),
Nations ques: 12.2. Various questions have occupied the attention ot academic writers and of the judiciary
Subordinsic. = in regard to delegated legislation. Of these questions, the following are relevant with reference to

kegislation. the General Clauses Act :

(a) Various forms of statutory instruments and questions of nomenclature—
(i) rules? of general application ;
(it) orders, (usually issued by the Government on particular matters) ;
(iii) by-laws (usually applicable to limited 10241 areas) ;
(iv) schemes (usually containing elaborated provisions) ;
(४) forms ;
(vi) notifications.

A convenient name covering all these, would be obviously desirable, and we are sug-
i gesting the expression “statutory instrument?”.

(9) Procedure for. making subordinate legislation -
(i) Antecedent publicity ;
1611 की Consultation ;
Gii) Subseauent publication,
(c) Control of Parliament over statutory instruments----
Laying before Parliament®.
(d) Construction of statutory instruments—
(1) Construction‘ ;
Gi) Power to issue rules etc. to include power to add etc.* ;
Gii) Construction of provision in the parent Act for publication® ;

(e) Inier-relationship between the parent Act and the statutory instrument—
(i) Making of rules etc. between passing and commencement” of the parent Act +
(ii) Continuation of orders etc. under a repealed law*.

we are mentioning these topics here. to show the importance of the subject.

. Rules generally to carry out the purposes are dealt with in Utah Construction, 39 ALL. J.R, and in Jacob 40
ALAR.

. See recommendation relating to the expression ‘Statutory instrument” in Chapter 3.

No provision at present.

| Section 20.

Section 21,

Section 23.

Section 22.

. Section 24.

PAREN

72


73
Law rot standardised as 10 safeguards

12.3. The law relating to subordinate legislation in India has not yet been standardised in Law relating
all its aspects. A cursory survey of the various Central Acts conferring power to make rules, peered
“% — segulations etc. reveals that until recently, the Legislature did not follow any particular pattern, standardised.

with reference to various matters concerning subordinate legislation. This itself indicates the

desirability of having standard and uniform safeguards. ‘

12.4. It may also be noted that during recent times the discussion has centred more round
Safeguards in regard to delegation than round the standards laid down by the legislature while
delegating its powers. It was observed by the distinguished American Writer Davis, in 1958 :—

of safeguards.

“The protection of advance legislative guidance is of little or no consequence as compared
with the protection that can and should be provided through adequate procedural
safeguards, appropriate legislative supervision or re-examination, and the accustomed
scope of judicial review.”

. be With this. we may compare the following comment made by the same writer in® 1965 :—

“The impact of the Treatise has been rather substantial in its recommendation to state
courts that the test of validity of delegation ought to have more to do with safeguards
than with standards. The cases reviewed in this Supplement show that the standards
test is on the way out, and the safeguards test is in the accendancy.”

12.5. Having regard to what is stated above, it appears desirable that the General Clauses Need to
Act shonid contain certain safeguards in respect of suberdinate legislation. Different safeguards sefeguards.
are provided in different Central Acts. It would therefore. be advisable to standardise some of
the indispensable safeguards, and to incorporate them in the General Clauses Act. This will not
only: Igad to uniformity, but will also shorten the language of individual Acts, and save cases of
any fai vertent omission of the draftsman to provide such safeguards in a particular Act. Where
it is felt that such safeguards are not necessary, an express excmption can be given in the Act.

Two important safeguards in respect of subordinate legislation

e _ 12.6. The two safeguards that appear to be essential in respect of subordinate legislation Tei

are :०-+

- (a) publication of statutory instruments*, and

i , (b) legislative scrutiny of statutory instruments‘.

The first refers to the immediate stage. The second relates to a later stage. We shall now
i proceed] to deal with these safeguards.

Publication end commencement

12.7. First, as regards publication of statutory instruments", some of the Acts conferring 3 safgsuard of
* power‘to make rules are silent with regard to publication*. The rest of the Acts do require some एए १
sort of publication. A large majotity of them require publication in the Official Gazette. Here
again, no uniform formula is adopted. In some Acts, all that is stated is that the rules shall be .

1. Davis, Administrative Law Treatise, (1958), Vol. I, page 98.

1 7 2. Davis, Administrative Law Treatise, (1965) pocket Part, page 55, para. 2.17, cited in Jaffe and Nathanson,
‘Administrative Law, Cases and Materials (1968), page 93,

3. Para 12.7 et vey. infra.
4. Para 12.19, et seq, infra.
5. Para 12.6, supra.
6. E.g. (a) Section 11), Census Act, 1948 (37 of 1948).
{b) Section 133), Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956).



74

published in the Official Gazetle.’ In some other Acts, rules are required to be made by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette? There is another category under which rules are not to have effect
until they are published in the Official Gazette.’

‘There is yet another variation of the formula, which provides that the rules shail be published
in the Official Gavetie and shall thereupon have effect ‘as if enacted in the Act’. [2.g., see set कि
§9(5), Mines Act (25 of 1952) |. It is. thus, clear that the present law relating to publication ef
subordinate legislation is unsatislactory. It will be instructive in this connecion to consider the
position in some Commonwealth ceutitries and in the U.S.A.

1051 i 12.8. In England, before 1893. subordinate legislation was required to be published in ihe
11 oe London Gazette; and (as Carr had observed) was ‘buried rather than revealed,‘, in the volumi-
nous misceilaneous contents of the Gazette. The Rules Publication Act, 1893, provided for publi-
cation of statutory rules by the Queen’s Printer. Under this Act, the rules and orders, with some
exceptions, were to be sent to the Quacen’s Printer and to be numbered by him and, subject to
regulations, printed and put on sale: “Tt is true that not all rules and regulations were printed,
but every instrument which was officially numbered was mentioned in a classified list at the end

of the annual volume of the. Statutory Instruments printed by the Queen’s Printer. The Com- ;
mittee on Ministers’ Powers, while reviewing the working of the 1893 Act, recommended that
the publication should be made a condition precedent for the coming into force of all instruments
except those that have been published in draft under the pre-publication rules and subsequently
: issued in substantially the same form as in the draft. In such cases the Committee recommended
i that the public notification of the enforcement would be sufficient. Nothing came out of these
reconimendations till the end of the second world war. In 1946, and Act was passed, called the
_ Statutory Instruments Act, which repealed and replaced the 1893 Act. This Act repeated the
provisions of section 3 of the 1893 Act as to publication, und provided* further that “it shall be
: a defence to prove that the instrument had not been issued by his Majesty’s Stationery Office at the
date of the alleged contravention......- "A serious drawback of the English system is that

| publication is not made a condition precedent to the operation of the statutory instruments.*

Position in 12,9. In Australia, section 5 of the Rules Publication Act, 1903-1939, provided that an instru-

‘ Astral ton, ment of subordinate legislation should be numbered, printed and made available for sale by the

Government Printer. The same section also provided for publication, in the Australian Gazette

<7 of a notice that a rule has been made and that copies. thereof would be available for purchase

हु at specified places. Tt may he noted in this connection,’ that the provisions of section 5 of the

(Australian) Rules Publication Act. 1903-1939, have to be read with section 48 of the Acts.

Interpretation Act, 1901-1966, which makes a general provision for compulsory notification

jn the Gavette of the making of all regulations. Thus, in Australia publication of delegated

unless there is a specific exemption in any Particular Act. In fact,

publication is not only compulsory, but also a condition precedent for the coming into force

of subordinate legislation. Until 1937, no regulation could take effect unless it had been published

: but in 1937 some exceptions based on administrative convenience, and, broadly speaking, not

i involying the rights of individual citizens, were provided for under this rule? The Austrafihn
system has, for obvious reasons, won universal acclaim.

legistation is compulsory,

Position iH 5... 12.10. In New Zealand, until as late as 1936, there was no provision requiring the sepaqate
New ae publication of delegated legislation, Whenever provision was made for publication of regulations
made under a particular enactment, they were published generally in the New Zealand Gazette,

See section 36, Central Excises etc. Act, 1944 (1 of 1944).
See section 41, Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962).
Section 3611), Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act, 1923 (6 of 1923).
Carr: Concerning English Administrative Law, (1941), page 57.
Section 3-Statutory Instruments Act 1946 (English) .
Kerselt : Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Lesislation, (1960), page 8.
" हल; Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Legislation, (1960), page 9.
" enjafield and Whitmore, Australian Administration Law (1971), page 106.

OU कफ फीकी 2 ० 5



ii. ne

iene, eee

जा
¥

=

75

and in a manner not very much different from that which obtained in England prior to 1893.
For the first time in 1936, an cnacin:ent of a limited character was passed, dealing with publication
of subordinate legislation. Section 3 of the Regulations Act, 1936, provided that all regulations,
except those cxempted by the Attorney-General, should be published. -

42.11. In Canada, until the passing of the Regulations Act, 1947, there was no legislative

~prosision requiring systematic publication of delegated legislation. It was only after the furore

which the notorious Ottawa Espionage Investigation of 1946 created, that the question of syste-
matic publication of rutes came to be considered seriously. A Royal Commission was appointed to
go tnto the matter, and ultimately the Statutory Orders and Regulations Order, 1947, was passed-
Most of the provisions of this Order were enacted in the Regulations Act of 1947. This Act appiies
only to instruments made in the exercise of the legislative power or to regulations for the contra-
vention of which a penalty of fine or imprisonmeat is prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
Certain exceptions are made even to this rule. but generally speaking, the Act covers all instru-
ments likely to prejudice the rights of individuals and personal freedom. The Act provides for a
system of revision, recording, numbering and publication of the various regulations. It is not
Decessary to go into details of the Act. A significant provision of the Act! is to the effect that no
persén shall be convicted for an offence consisting of a contravention of any regulation that was
not published in the Gazette of Canada except where the regulation was one which was exempted
from the operation of the rule as to publication or where it is proved that on the date of the
alleged contravention reasonable steps had been taken for the purpose of bringing the purport
of the regulation to the notice of the public or the person charged. This provision is similar to
that ¢mbodied in section 3 of the (English) Statutory Instruments Act? of 1946. Thus, in Canada,
1 ix England, publication is not a condition precedent to the coming into force of subordinate
gslation, but non-publication, is a defence.

12.12. In the United States of America, Congress enacted, in 1935, the Federal Register Position in U.S.A.

Position in
Canada, a8 to
publication.

Act,® which was an aftermath of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Pariama Refining Co. v. Be publica-

Byag‘-' It provides for a system of publication of ali Federal Regulations, Rules and Orders of
ry sete application, and for their legal effeet. Under the Act, all Federal subordinate legislation
should be published in an official publication called the Federal Register. This Act anticipated
the English and the Canadian Acts, on the subject of publication and specifically provided that
a “dpcument”, i.c. Rules and Regulations and Orders required to be published under the Act
“shall not be valid as against any person who has not had actual knowledge thereof” until it had
been filed for publication.* है

12.13, Taking all the circumstances into consideration, we are of the view that the safe-guard Desirability व
ling publication is required; though, in owr view, it should apply to statutory rules and Publication,

weiter ws and general orders of the Government only, and should not extend to other forms af
4u¥osdinate legislation. Rules and bye-laws and general orders are the most common form of
suvedinate legislation which affect citizens in the same way as an Act of Parliament. This 18,
however, not true of other forms of subordinate legislation, such as, orders, which are inconse-
quential from the point of view of the public, and relate to individuals only. A general extension
of the safeguard of publication to all forms of subordinate legislation is not, therefore, necessary
it ama in , in certain cases, even give rise to practical difficulties. We have no doubt that where

dinate legislation other than rules or bye-laws or general orders affects the public, the

partidular enactment which permits the making of such legislation will make special provision far

its pdblication in the most suitable manner.

|. Section 6.3 (Canada) Regulations Act, 1947.
2. Para 12.8, supra.
3, The Federal Register Act, 1935.
4. Panama Refining Co. 5. Ryan. (1935) 293 US. 388.
5. See, now, the Administrative Procedure Act, (1966) 5 (6.2, seetions 552 and 553.
6. Newman, “Government and Ignorance” (1950) 63 Harv. L. Rev. 929. .
15 M pf Law/74—11



Importance of
proper publica-
tion.

Importance stres-
sed by the Sup-
reme Court.

Recommendation
as to publica-
tion.

Amendmest gl
vp.
jaw. pens .

‘Copies of sub-
ordinate legisla-
tion to be 01896
available. ©

76

12.14. As observed by Kersell,’ “if a legislature realistically expects such legislation made
under its authority to be effective and also controllable, it must make minimal provisions for
publicity and for ‘laying’ so that it may know what has been done under the powers delegated to
it.” The importance of proper publication of subordinate legislation cannot, therefore, be over-
emphasised. If, as is well recognised, subordinate legislation has the [ull effect of Jaw, it is only
elementary justice that those who are sought to be affected by it should become aware ar i
existence. As Carr, in his evidence before the Committee on the Minister’s Powers observed
forcefully,? “it would be undesirable if it could be said that obscure Clerks in Whitehall
forth streams of departmental legislation which nobody had any means of knowing. This
be the method attributed to Calligula of writing his laws in very small characters and al i
them up on high pillars the more effectively to ensnare the people.” These observations apply
with equal force in the context of subordinate legislation. .

42.15. In Harta y, State of Rajasthan, the Supreme Court had occasion to draw atteasiga,
to the basic need for due publicity of laws." Bose J. observed :-- wet

०० we are of opinion that it would be against the principies of ‘natural jystice te
permit the subjects of a State to be punished or penalised by laws of = shay
have no knowledge and of which they could not even with the exercise of reg
diligence have acquired any knowledge. Natural justice requires that before a id
can become operative, it must be promulgated or published. It must be broad
in some recognizable way so that all men may know what it is; or, at the [
least, there must be some special rule or regulation or customary channel by, bt
through which such knowledge can be acquired with the exercise of due and eee
nable diligence. The thought that a decision reached in the secret recestes
chamber to which the public have no access and to which even their accroded
representatives have no access and of which they can normally know nothing, ‘
nevertheless affect their lives, liberty and property by the mere passing of a Resolution
without anything more is abhotrent to civilised man.” :

af
Bose 1. also made a passing reference to the Code Nepoleon of France, the first article of

which provides that law are executory by virtue of the promulgation thereof and that they shell
come into effect from the moment at which their promulgation can become known.

12.16, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend? that the commencément jt
statutory rules, bye laws and general orders should not take place before their publication.

12.17. It may, incidentally, be pointed out that such an amendment will fill in a gap ede by
present law as regards orders. Accarding to the Allahabad High Court,’ where 2 statutery
does not indicate its date of commeacement, it does not become effective. The only consequedde
of the order being published in the official gazette is that it comes into being as a piece of syb-
ordinate legislation on the statute Book. From this, it would not follow that it pe ae lp .
with immediate effect. The High Court pointed out that Acts of the Central an 5 ne
into force on assent, because the General Clauses Act says so. This judgment | हे

we have stated above.

1

12.18, While on the subject of publication, we should also refer to another im
needled in regard to access to subordinate kegislation. Difficulty is often experienced in k aed
printed copies of subordinate legislation. In England, and in some other comnjonwesll
countries, there is a statutory provision that printed copies of subordinate legislation shoul ite

1. Kerseel : Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Legislation (1960), page 6. a"
2. Sir Cecil Carr's Evidence, cited in Schwartz: Introduction to American Administrative Law, (1958), page 7].
3. Harla v. State of Rajasthan, ALR. 1951 8.0, 487. : :
‘4. See propased section as to the commencement of rules etc. (Para 12.44 B, infra).
5. (a) State v. Bansidhar, ALR. 1969 Alt. 184, 186 ; (D.C. Uniyal J.)

(b) State v. Ram Chand, AJR. 1966 All, 526 (0.9).


n
available for sale to the public. Such a statutory provision can, at best, be directory only. We

think that adequate steps should be taken for ensuring that ptinted copies of subordinate legis-
lation are available to the public at all times.

Parliamentary Controt

: 12.19. We now come to another safeguard pertaining to subordinate legislation, namely, Recommendation; .
parliamentary control over subordinate legislation. Parliamentary
12.20. In all democratic countrics, Parliament exercises control over subordinate legislation. sl
In England, there are elaborate provisions on this subject in the statutory Instruments Act, 1946. ae to हुआ
In India, the Ministry of Law in consultation wilh the Committee of Luk Sabha on subordinate by Central Gov-
Legislation’ had evolved a model clause on this subject, which is inserted in every Act of Parliament erament.
| thay permits the making of subordinate legislation. We recommend? that this clause (with some
j slight variations) should be ineluded in the General Clauses Act.

12.21, In this connection a difficult question which arises is as to the propriety of providing Rules by State by.
हे for laying on the table of Parliament of rules framed by a State Government under a Central Act. Goveramiat, 2
The problem has been considered in detail by the Committee of the Lok Sbha on subordinate
Legislation ; and in the light of the discussions with the relevant authorities, the Committee came
to the conclusion that the best course would be to request the state Governments to have laws
enacted, by their legislatures, to provide for laying of the rules framed by them before their
respective legislatures.
* We do not express any view on this matter, because we think that so far as Acts of Parliament
bad concerned, no satisfactory provision can, for the reasons mentioned by the Committee on cone
ubbrdinate legislation, be made in such Acis regarding rules made by a State Government.

Application of the General Clauses Act to subordinate legislation

+ 12.22. We now consider the question of application of the General Clauses Act to sub- Application of 5
ordinate legislation. Causes Act to

“12.23, We have given careful consideration to the question whether the whole Act should is
apply to subordinate legislation and we have come to the conclusion that the Act should not, whole AGE to अ
in terms,® apply to such legislation. The practice in the Government of India is that subordinate lation.
Seen ion is first prepared in the administrative Ministry. It is then sent to the Legislative : रा
8; nt (of the Ministry of Law) for scrutiny only. At the stage of scrutiny, it is difficult i
for the Draftsman in the Legislative Department to recast the original draft in the light of the
Clauses Act, Moreover, subordinate Iegislation is of various kinds. Rules made under
bps nen te constitute only one form of such legislation. Such rules may, for convenience, be called
“subordinate legislation of the first degree”.
1 Sometimes, orders are made under a rule, and, further, there are orders made under such
1 orders. These may be called “subordinate legislation of the second” and of the “third” degrees, हि
, respectively. A common illustration of such subordinate legislation may be found in the various .
orders made under the Defence of India Rules. Subordinate legislation of the second and third earn
degrees is not always sent to the Legislative Department for scrutiny.

“i Tris also to be borne in mind that subordinate legislation is not expected to be drafted with
that care which is bestowed on the drafting of. statute of Parliament. A rigid application of the ;
Geseral Clauses Act to subordinate legislation, is, therefore, likely to create some unforeseen हे

¢onjplications. Moreover, no practical difficulty has arisen in the interpretation of subordinate

Tegiélation.

:

1. See para 12.45, infra.

2, See also para 12.47 infra,
3. See also para 12.26 infra.

हि

न



|
|
i

i
i

subordinate legis-
lation,

Supreme Court's
approach,

Changs got
‘sul .

Foints concern-

with subotdi.
nate legislation.

Section 20--
Recommendetion.

Construction of
statutory instru-
ments.

Section 21.

A Supreme Court
cast,

78

12.24. While the courts have refused to apply the General Clauses Act to subordinate legis
lation,—In terms, they have resorted to the principles of the Act in construing such legislation.
The Madras High Court expressed itself! in favour of the view that on principles of justi aut
and good conscience courts have to apply the principles underlying the provisions of Genes
Clauses Act to the construction of statutory rules. In a Calcutta case,” a similar view was taken.

12.25. The Supreme Court had occasion to consider* the question whether the provisions
of section 38 of the (English) Interpretation Act, corresponding to section 8 of the General Clausen
Act, could be applied to construe a Charter constituting a High Court. Marajan J. (as he thea.
was) observed:—

“Assuming, however, but net conceeding that strictly speaking the provisions of the
Interpretation Act and the Gencral Clauses Act do not, for any reason apply, we
ste no justification for holding that the principles of construction enunciated $e thes,
provisions have no application for construing these charters.”

12.26. In view, however of the nature of subordinate legislation and the legislative practi
followed in drafting such legislation, as mentioned in the above discussion,’ it is desirable that
there should be a certain amount of flexibility in applying the rules of interpretation fo such
legislation. Hence, no categorical provision as to the application, to subordinate. legislation,
of all the rules in the General Clauses Act, is recommended. Wherever necessary, we havp
considered the desirability of extending individual sections to statutory instruments.

Individual sections relating to subordinate legistation

12.27. We shall now deal with the amendments required in individual sections of the Genezal.
Clauses Act, relating to subordinate legislation.

12.28. Section 20 deals with the construction of orders etc. issued under enactments. In
this section, instead of the existing expressidns referring to notification, order, rule and bye-laws
etc. the comprehensive expression “statutory instrument”® is proposed to be used. We thorefiow
recommend that section 20 should be revised as follows:

Revised section 20

20. Expressions used in a statutory instrument made under a Central Act or ior H
shall, uniess the context of the statutory instrument otherwise requires, have the same ret; है ५
meanings as in the Act or Regulation, हे

12.29. Section 21 provides that power to issue notifications, orders, rules or 8४9८-२१
includes power to add to, amend, vary or rescind notifications, orders, rules or bye-lawa. Thit
section sometimes gives rise to problems in its application to orders ‘issued under steltebes.
Where the making of orders is circumscribed by conditions, the question arises how far ordems:
amending the original order have to comply with these conditions.

12.30. The difficulty is illustrated by a judgment of the Supreme Court." The facts: in i
case were these. In exercise of a statutory power, Government took over the management’ ही
_an undertaking, and vested its control in “X”. One of the conditions for thé exetcie of है|
power was that the management was not previously being carried out properly. This domdition:

— ~ eran SPE
1. Inve. Chockalingam, A.LR. 1945 Mad. 521. :
2. Benaori Lal v. Emperor, A.LR. 1943 Cal. 285.
3. N.S. Thread Co. v. Fames Chaick, A.LR. 1983 8,0, 357, 360.
4, Para 12.22, supra.
5
6.

. of. para 12.2, supra.
K. का. Khaitan v. Union of tndia, A.1.R. 1957 8.C. 676, 685, (1957) 5.C.R. 1052, 1073



9

was present when the original order was passed. Subsequently, it was decided to transfer the
management from X to Y, and an amending order was issued accordingly. The question arose
whether, at the time of the amending order, the condition that the management was not previously
being conducted properly should have been complied with.

The Supreme Court upheld the legality of the order; but the reasons given revealed a
cdnflicting interpretation of the section. $. K. Das J. adhered to the strictly literal construction
Of the words “subject to the like.....................conditions,” and maintained that these words
j applied in all situations and had been complied with in the case before the court. Sarkar J.
put a limited constrution upon them, and observed that these words meant that after the amending
Order is issued, all the provisions which would have governed the original order would govern the
amending order also; for example, provisions limiting the duration of the original order.

Such difficulties will be avoided if the section is made subject to a different intention.

| ‘fhe application of the whole section may be excluded by a context. For example, where
a municipal corporation is superseded for a particular period, the supetsession cannot be extended,
t » because the enactment concerned does not contemplate an amendement in such a case.)

It is also desirable to substitute the expression statutory instrument in this section.*

: 12.31. In the light of the above discussion we recommend that section 21 should be revised Rocemmendiien.
» as follows: —

Revised section 21

i 21. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make a statutory instrument is Power to amend

i conferred, then, unless the context otherwise requires, that power includes a power, “tory instra-
7 7 ik . oy . diti 7 ment.

: exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions (if any),

| to add to, amend, vary or rescind the statutory instrument so made.

1.32. Section 22 provides for the making of rules of bye-ldws and issuing of orders between Secton 22.
the passing and commencement of an enactment.

12,33, Some verbal changes are proposed in section 22.3 In an Allahabad case,* a similar Atlababad case.
Fr provision was relied upon to support a notification which was issued on the 31st March, 1956,
but which said that the amendment would ‘come into effect’ en Ist April, 1956. The actual
decisign in that case was, that the corresponding section of the U.P. General Clauses Act did
not apy to the facts of the case, as the whole Ordinance (according to the majority jadgment)
came force immediately on 31st March, 1956, but no action could be taken under the
provisions amended by the Ordinance before the next day.

2.34, Incidentally, it may be noted that section 22 of the U.P. General Clausese Act. 1904, U. P. Amend-
as atignded by scction 22 of Schedule II of the U.P. Repealing and Amending (Second) Act, "at referred to.
1956, ‘(passed as Act 5 of 1957), has added certain words,

After the words “application of the Act”, the words “or in rhe exercise of any power
+ exerci we thereunder or under any enactment thereby amended”, have been added. But, in
i the bad case cited above,® these words, though referred to, were not apparently relied
upon by the Counsel for the State. After this judgment was pronounced, a validating Act was
passed by the U.P. Legislature, but it was held to be futile.*.

aa -
J, Gopal Jaya Ram v. State of Madhya Pradesh. A.1.R. 1951 Nagpur 181, 183, para 6.
2. of para 12.2, supra.

4. Para 12.35, infra.

4. Adarsh Bhandar v. Sales Tax Officer, ALR. 1957 All. 475, 483, pata 52.

5. Adarsh Bhandar v. Sales Tax Officer, A.1.R. 1957 All 475, 482, para 36.

6. Bengali Mal v. Sales Tax Officer, A.LLR. 1958 AN. 478.



1
||

Recommendation.

Making of rules
or bye-laws and
issuing of orders
between passing
and commence-
ment of Act.

Section 23 to be
extended to all
statutory instru-

ments.

Section 3 (5).

i

Gujarat Case.

80
The Supreme Court upheld a later validating Act' on the subject.

The point of interpretation of the U.P. General Clauses Act was not, however in issue before
the Supreme Court. रू

12.343. Orders of a substantive nature are not governed by the section, and, on iA i
reasoning, it has been held? that a detention order under Act 61 of 1962, made prior to: the
commencement of that Act, could not be justified under this section.

12.348. Where a particular part of an Act comes into force at once, and authorises “the
making of the rules, then obviously, the rules can come into force though the other parts do.
not come into force’. है

12.35. We recommend only verbal changes m section 22, which should be revised -#s
follows:—

Revised section 22

“22, Where, by any Central Act or Regulation which is not to come into force isnmedigtply
on the passing or making thereof, a power is conferred— हे

(a) to make a statutory instrument, of

(b) to issue orders with respect to—

(4) the application of the Act, or Regulation.
(ii) the establishment of any court or office, or

(iii) the appointment of any Judge or officer thereunder, or

iv) the person by whom or the time when, or the place where, or the manner. in
which, or. the fees for which, anything is to be done under the Act or Regalatipn,
then, that power may be exercised at any time after the passing of the Agteor
muking of the Regulation, but statutory instruments or orders 30 ny ie or
issued shall not take effect ‘till the commencement of the Act or Regulation, or,
where all provisions of the Act or Regulation do not come into force al He
same time, then till the commencement of the relevant provision. he

12.36. As regards section 23, we propose to extend it to all statutory instruments, anid के :
to cases where a provision of an Act is not to come into force immediately. ma 3

12.37, Sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of section 23 lay down details as to the manner
of complying with the requirement for pre-publication, and have not raised any serious Foil 7 .
Sub-section (5}, however, has given tise to some difficulty. This sub-section provideh) aa
follows:— .

“(3) The publication in the Official gazette of a rule or bye-law purporting ta nari #न
tmade in exercise of a power to make rules or bye-laws after previous 4 |
shall be conclusive proof that the rule or bye-law has been duly made.”

12.38, In a Gujarat case, it was held with reference to section 23(5) that the amet
authority must purport to make rules after previous publication, and the words
have been made”, must go with the exptession “after previous publication”. Tt was ‘statedl 4

कि ar DLS

1. 7, #. Jute Mulls ५. U. P, (1962) 2 8.C.R. 1. we

2. Kenkateswarlu y. Superintendent; Central Jail, Hyderabad, A.LR. 1953 S.C, 49, 50,
3. Kandaswami v. Emperor, (1918) LL.R. 42 Madras 69, 73 , Napier J.

4, See C. J. Shah ९, Chhabatal, (1968) Cr. L.J. 253, 254, para 1. (Gujarat).

oA


81

since section 23 prescribes the lengthy procedure of previous publication, sub-section (5) dispenses
with proof that such procedure has been followed, only in cases where the rules purport to be
made after previous publication. Thc actual decision in this case was over-ruled by a later
decision of the same High Court ;+ but the construction placed on sub-section (5} was not
discussed in the later case.

12.39. It is, of course, obvious that the presumption as to the rules or bye-laws having Presumption 89
been “duly made” does not mean that the rules cannot be assailed if they are in excess of, or to Tduly made
. repugaant to, the parent Act, or if the rules are otherwise invalid.

|

12.40. Also, the words “conclusive proof” do not exclude the power of judicial review by Meaning of
the High Court. proof”.

Ta fact, the view taken appears to be? that even apart from the power of the High Court,
the onder can be challenged for want of notice.

12.41. The existing section is confined to tules and bye-laws. We propose use of the Other changes 1०
words “statutory instruments”, to cover all such instruments. commended in

Certain other verbal changes are also proposed in the section, in order to simplify it.*

12.42. It may be noted that section 1 of the Rules Publication Act, 1893. in England, Position in Eng-
conthined a provision for compulsory pre-publication in respect of those statutory rules to lead 35 to re:
. Which the section applied. That Act has, however, been repealed by section 12 of the
Statugory Instruments Act, 1946. Section 4 of the latter Act does not appear to contemplate

comppisory pre-publication.
12.43. Accordingly we recommend that section 23 should be revised as follows: — Recommendation.

t 1 Revised section 23

23. Where.......... any Central Act or Regulation confers on any authority power to Making of sta-
दि make a statutory instrument subject to the condition of the statutory instrument utory 20177
being made after previous publication. then the following provisions shall apply, publication.

namely:—

fe

(a) the authority. .. Shall first publish a draft of the proposed instrument (s. 2361) jad 1
for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby, together with a* 55035
notice specifying the date on or after which the draft will be taken into
consideration;

(0) the publication shall be made in such manner as the authority deems to be
sufficient, or, if the empowering provision in the Act or Regulation 'so requires, 9. 2302)]
in such mamner as the Goverment concerned directs ;

(ce) ..

. any objection or suggestion .......... received by the authority
we ..from any person with respect to the draft before the date specified Qs. 236001 हि
के in the notice shall be considered by it, and, where the statutory instrument is :
to be made with the sanction, approval or concurrence of another authority, 4
also by that authority, before the instrument is finally made :

Ces

=

the publication in the official gazette of a statutory instrument purporting to
have been made after previous publication in exercise of a power to make
such statutory instrument shall be conclusive proof that the statutory instrument
has been made in compliance with the provi with the isions of this section.
1, MR. Pandya v. Chimanial, ALR. 1968 Guj. 80, paras. 33 and 14. .
2. Awosnobile Transport Rajasthan Ltd., v. The State of Rajasthan, AT.R. 1962 Raj. 24,

3. See para 12.43, infra.

aA



82

Section खिला 23 at (12.44. As to statutory rules, and bye-laws as already stated’ we propose a new provision,

and publication Providing for (i) publication of rules, and (ii) the date of commencement in relation to rales

seamey and bye laws, Attention may be drawn, in this connection, to the recommendation made in an
हु earlier Report? of the Law Commission, where a reference is made to the (English) St ३४१

Instruments Act of 1946, and io the necessity of ensuring proper publication of stati jf
instruments and other connected matters.

12.444. We also think it desirbale to provide that retrospective operation cannot be eyo

Retrospective
operation. to such rules and bye-laws without express authority.
Recommenda- 12,44B. We therefore recommend that regarding publication and commencement* of rules

tion to insert bye-laws and general orders of the Central Government and their respective effect,5 the following
section regard- . . _

section eatin 2eW section may be inserted:
and commence-

Fiala of nie, “934. (1) Every rule made ar bye-law approved or general order issued by the Central
general orders Government on or after the ........ day Of ......0. ® under any Central Act
of the Central or Regulation—

vernment.

(8) shail be published in the official gazette, and

{b) shall, in the absence of an express provision to the corurary either in the m@ees
bye-law or general order or in the Central Act or Regulation under which & is ibe
or approved or issued, come into force on the day on which it is published ix:
official gazette. obo

(2) No such rile or bye-law or general order shall come into force from a date

earlier than the date on which it is made or approved or issued by the Centaal
Government, unless the Central Act or Regulation under which it is made or
approved or issued expressly confers a power to give it such effect.

: “Explanation.—In this section, the expression —‘general order” means an order which
affecis the public.” : .

Laying of guke— 12.45. We also propose a new provision as to the laying of rules before Parliament Bs
rover! aready stated."

Tt may be noted that the existing formula (found in most recent Acts) was evolved after a
series of discussion in the Lok Sabha Committee* on subordinate legislation.

The proposed new section will apply only to rules made by the Central Goverament.

_ We ate adding that annulment or modification made in the rule so laid should be published
in the gazette.
. Para 12.16 supra,
14th Report, Vol. 2, page 707, pam 25.
Also see para 12.14 supra.
Para 12.44, supra.
Para 12.44A, supra.
Date of commencement of the amendment Act to ‘be entered.
Para 12.20, supra.
See the/fallowing Reports of that Committee:
6) Fitst Report First Lok Sabha) ee 3, Para 14.

0 Third Report (ist Lok Sabha), May, 955, page 7. para 36.
Gii) Sixth Report (Ist Lok Sabha) ‘22nd December, 1956, pages 13 and 14, para 77 to 30.
Gv) Fifth Report (and Lok Sabha) 5th May, 1999, pages है and 9, para 41 to 44 and page 26.
(जे Seventh Report (2nd Lok Sabha), pages 7 and 8, para. 4219 45.

SaAaweepe



83

12.46, It may also be of interest to note here that Madhya Pradesh General Clauses Act* feommende
makes specific provision for standardising the procedure to be followed, when any Madhya aot
Pradesh Act directs that a rule be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly. पु

+. 12.47. We recommend that the new section should be as follows: —

Section 23B

sailed

23B. (1) Every rule made under any Central Act by the Central Government on oF Rules to be laid
. after thes, ose. OY Of ccc rece eee 2 shall be laid, as soon as may be after

it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period

of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive

. sessions ; and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive

sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both

: Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereofter have effect

only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however wat

पिन any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of

i : anything previously done under that rule. : ‘

(2) Every such modification or annulment shall be published in the official gazette. Modification.

12.48. In section 24, which provides for the continuance of notifications etc. issued under 27777: 2
a. .ugpgaled law, certain verbal changes are recommended, namely, the substitution of the i
campntieasive expression ‘statutory instrument’ in place of rules, ete. Our recommendation, ~
therefdre, is as follows:-— .

aa Section 24

: Im section 24, for the words “notification, order. scheme, rule, form or bye-law",
i wherever they occur, the words “or statutory instrument” shall be substituted.

+, Apes. In section 25, reference to the new Code of Criminal Procedure ‘should 96 ६ ५ as
substituted. Our recommendation, therefore, is as follows:— .

Teo Section 25
fag ‘ 7
i + Im section 25, for the words* “the Code .of Criminal Procedure for the time being in
vf force”, the words, and figures and comma “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974”
shall be substituted.

है Section 244, Madbya Pradesh General Clauses Act.
2. Insert date of commencement of amending Act.
3. This can apply to existing Acts also,

15 M of Law/74—12

ede. toot oe eae nee ee अजय:


+ यदि 1 या

CHAPTER 13

SEVERABILITY

13.1. We now deal with a matter of constitutional significance, relevant to the General
Clauses Act. पु

Severability—the problem

Question of 13.2. The question relates to “severability”. In countries having a rigid constitution, the
HY of possibility of a statute being declared void is, in general, implicit. Now, a statute may be
partidlly valid (being in part in conformity with the Constitution), and partieily mvalid (|
int part in conflict with the Constitution). Judicial determination of invalidity of thé whole
ig rare, but fot so rare is the judicial determination of invalidity of a part of the Act. Th
such cases, the question arises whether the invalidity of a part of the Act affects the entire Act,
so that the Act fa'ls as a whole, or whether the valid portion survives. The broad principle, fon डे
the valid portion can so survive, is now recognised in almost all countries which have a Ti

ee" °~ Constitution. An
| 0 rare i 43.3. In India, the possibility of partial invalidity is implicit, at least in respect 4
a at with fundamental rights, because, under ‘article 13(2), a, law inconsistent with
+ tion, rights is void “to the extent of the inconsistency”. The question that arises is how far# eo

be severed into portions which are void and those which are not.

Soomnry के 13.4. in R. M. D. Chamarbaugwalla v. Union of India* the Supreme Court discussed the ©
: question of severability at length. The Court also summarised certain rules of construction laid

| . down by the American Courts, in regard to the question of severability’of a statute. (fer the pip-

ह pose of determining the question of its constitutional validity). It is not necessary.te quote hee
the, discussion in full. It is sufficient to state that judicial decisions in India, have, & at
‘cllowed his judgment. Broadly speaking, if a part of an Act is void, the rest is‘ not

if it can be separated. .

Position in 13.5, In Canada, a similar principle is recognised. ‘The doctrine was stated as follows® 4
Canada. “Thus sort of question arises not infrequently and is often raised (as in the present a ap
हु by asking whether the legislation is intra vires ‘either in whole of in part,’ but this does not mé

order to determine whether the Legislature would be acting within its powers if i reed
remains, The real question is whether what remains in is so imextri
bound up with the part declared invalid that what remains cannot in-
: dependently survive, or, as it has sometimes been put, whether on a fair review of the whofe
| पर matter, it can be assumed that the Legislature would have enacted what survives without engat-
ing the part that is ultra vires at all.” .

that-when Part If is declared invalid, what remains of the “Act 18 to be examined bit by | 5

General ptin- 13.6. The general principle, thus, is that as far as possible, total invalidity of an Act shonid
ciple, be avoided. The observation of Cardozo (sitting in the New York Court of ieee +
“Jaws are not to be sacrificed by courts on the assumption that legislation is the play of
and fancy.....-.eeeee eee Our right to destroy is bound by (the) limits of necessity.

Our duty is to save unless in saving we pervert.”—is true of the approach of courts in relagipn
to partial invalidity also.

1. RMD. Chamarbaughwalla पर. Unior of India, ALR. 1957 S.C. 628, 636, 637 ; (1957) 8.C.R. 930.

2, Reference re-Alberta Bill of Rights (1947), A.C. 503 (९.02. . i we

3. People v. Knapp, (1920) 230 N.Y. 48, referred to in Stern, “Separability and separability chtuses 429907
51 Harvard Law Review 76, 100, footnote 110.

84



85

13.7. In the U. 5. A., the broad principles as to divisibility or indivisibility were at, first Broad Priegiples
referred to only in Mr, Justice Sutherland's opinion’ in an early case, and these have gradually yg. 4° to 19
‘woime’ t6 be accepted by the entire Court. Mr. Justice Butler mentioned them in Champlin Refin-

ing Co, v. Corporation Commission,” Mr. Justice Roberts relied upon them in the Raifroad
Retirement case,* and in the Carter case,* even the dissenting Justices seemed to approve of
them.

13.8. But the contours of this broad principle are not so well defined, and its practical is tor
pen igation is not very easy. Primarily, this question belongs to the domain of constitutional
fave" bat justification for adverting to this subject in a discussion of the law of interpretation arises
by-reason of the fact that in some countries, there have come to be inserted what are known as
‘Separability” or “severability” clauses. .

13.9. Before proceeding to discuss the form and content of such clauses, it would; be Three sicuations.
desirabl to mention that the problem of separability arises in three types of situations,

* ridthelty* :--

() Part of the Act is invalid as to all possible applications of the Act,—i.e. as to all
possible areas.

(ii) Whole Act is invalid, but the invalidity is confined to a part of all possible “appli-
cations”; and ‘

(iii): Part of the Act is invalid, and that too in relation to only a part of the possible
“applications”. . yas

BALA; “Severability” clauses, broadly speaking, provide that if any part of the Act is found raided हि।
to be-invalid, the remainder of the Act should nevertheless be upheld. As has been pointed out, clauses, .
the agthority of a court to eliminate the invalid elements and yet to sustain the valid elements, are
not rfaity-derived from the Legislature, but from powers inherent in the judiciary. The utility
of the see clause lies in its replacing the presumption which would be otherwise appli-
Sbies shat the statute was meant to be indivisible. Tltis presumption is replaced by a presump- दि
‘favour of severability.» As Justice Brandeis stated, in case often cited, such a clause
ee gule of construction, which may aid-in determining the legislative intent, “but it is

‘merely; not an inexorable command”.*

kh t .41.A scverability clause may be general in form, in. the sense that it merely provides Forms of save
‘thatthe invalidity of one part of the Act shall not affect the rest. Or, the clause could be specific.

iEhe ¢:paravility clause would, then, refer to the particular sections of the Act or to those appli- ral and Special.
cations of the Act which the legislature really intended’ to stand alone (in case of a declaration

of invalidity of the remainder). हु

३.12. A fow hypothetical examples will ilustyate what is stated above, One possible for Examples
for_a seyerability clause could be as follows :—

“The provisions of Chapter ... are severable, und if any of its provisions or theiz-appli- Special fanns.
cations are held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, dhe
decision of the court shall not affect.or inypair any. of the remaining provisions, ;.. of
‘applications of the Article.” ‘

_ rt

To Witttanis भू. Standard Oi! Co. (1929) 278 U.S: 235:-- -- oo रे

2. Champlin Refining Co. v. Corporation Commission, (1932) 286 U.S. 210, 234.

3. Railroad Retirement Board v, Aiton R.R. (1935) 295 U.S. 330, 369.

4, Carter v. Carter Coal Co. (1936) 298 U.S. 238, 312, 321, 384.”

5. William y. Standard Oil Co., (1929) 73 Lawyer's Ed. 287> :

6. Dorchy v. State of Kaisas, (1924) 68 Lawyers Ed. 686.



‘General form.

Provision in
Australis.

meat

86
Another possible form is the following :—

“Jf any provision of this Act or the application thereof to any person or ciraugyp-
tances is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or anos i

of the Act which can be given effect to without the invalid provision or alee
nnd, to this end, the provisions of this Act are severable.” pal

Another form would be :

“Té any part, section, sentenge, ot clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged vaid it
no effect, such decision shall pot affect the validity of the remaining portions
ordinance. For the purposes of this section, $€९1015. . , ,... .. .. ce *+०+०+-०+-*म!
expressly considered to be separable.”

There is yet another form suggested by a writer? :— हे

“If a part of this Act is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from the iva कहा
remain in effect. If a part of this Act is invalid in one or more of its applications,
part remains in effect in all valid applications that are severable from tye invalid
applications.”

13.13. The Australian interpretation Act has this provision®. “Every Act shall be read esd
construed subject to the Constitution, and so as not to exceed the legislative power of the Comp-
monwealth, to the intent that where any enactment thereof would, but for this Section, have
construed as being in excess of that power, it shall nevertheless be a valid enactment to the extent
to which it is an act in excess of that power.”

13.13A. This section was first inserted in the (Australian) Acts Interpretation Act in 1930.
‘The provision was described at the time as being one “mainly directed against the dovtrina of
inseverability”. दि

It was explained, in the course of the second reading speech in the Senate, as .fallows —

“Where a measure deals with a subject as to which legislative power is divided between
the Commonwealth and the States, and the line of demarcation between the. res
“powers of the Commonwealth and the States has not been completely Inid
it has been found necessary, in certain cases such as the Navigation to
provision, in terms similar to those appearing in clause 23 of this ato
the intention of the legislature not to exceed its powers and to secure the i :
of the Bill up to the limit of those powers and no further. 7080 ht
considered, protects the Act in which it appears from being declared "मात: न
where any portion of jt would, but for this provision, have been capable of -
unconstitutional construction.”

- “The High Coust (of Australia) held in 1910 that where the valid and invalid provisions of
an Act are inseparable or ‘wrapped up in the same word or expression’, the whole ‘myst Sa:

“The argument of inseparability was in 1921 used against the Navigation Act set Ne
and Hunter River Steamship Co. Ltd.,.and ,others v. “the Attorney-General jor .the
wealth and another’, The fact that the Ast-contained 8 provision which is now
made common to Commonwealth legisiation was the reason given why the argument filed,
accordingly, certain sections of the Act were declared to Temain effective to the i
Timit decided-by-the- court.” : -

1. Dickerson, Legislative Drafting (1954), Page 110.

2. Section 15A, (Australian) Acts Intefpéstation Acts, 1901-1957. है

३. (a) Bootmakers Case, 11 C.L.R. 1, 54, 55; हे
(0) Onners of S.S. Kalibia ५. Wilson, 11 CLLR. 689, 713.

4. Newcastle etc. v. AG. for the Commonwealth 39 CLR. 357.



87

13.14. Where general form? of severability clause is adopted, there is a practical difficulty, Ditty ot uty of ot
inasmuch as it will be necessary for the court to consider whether the severability clause itself severability
applies or not to a particular provision. clause.

हि It would appear that the utility of such a clause would be very limited ; and however careful
the drafting may be, it may not be easy of application.

48.15. The form could be more specific. But the use of the specific separability clause? may Commedia is"
be open to objection, as it would call the attention of critical lawyers to those provisions of & « spectal form
new law which are deemed by the legislature itself to be most susceptible to constitutional attack. clause.
itso, it might conceivably make judicial approach more inclined to hold invalid the particular
provisions ieferted to. At the same time, it may be more useful than a general severability

13.16, In the United States, one writer has remarked? that separability provisions arc-now
significant only because of their absence. “Like articles of clothing, if they are present, little हि
* attention is paid to them, but if they are absent, chey may be missed.”
; Conclusion
. ME ices’
13\L7, We have, on a consideration of various aspects of the matter as discussed above, Conclusion.
come to the conclusion that there is no need to insert such:a clause in our General Clauses Act.

_ be Para 13. 12, supra,
2. Para 13, 12, supra.
3, Robert Stern, “separability and separability clauses" (1937-38) 51 Harvard Law Review 76, 122.

%



|

English law.

ith

7 a matter dealt with in section 26 of the Act, which reads as follows :— -

CHAPTER 14

OFFENCES UNDER SEVERAL ENACTMENTS

14.1. In this Chapter we deal with acts or omissions constituting offences-under emactments,—
yo qa

ae ee
“26. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, पर
the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either ar any.,gf
these enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offenge.

‘The latter part of the section is important, concerned as it is with several interesting doct-
rinés-of criminal jurisprudence, including, in particular, auérefois convict and dikradié aout
and the protection against double jeopardy. The protection against double jeopardy is vital
in our Constitution’, in Article 20(2), which reads as follows:— Con है cat nsie

“No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than ones.”

14.1A. The fundamental principle of the plea of autrefois acquit as laid down by the judges
of England in 1796? and as stated by writers earlier than that date, has been consisténtly Ediowed.
Tt was thus stated in 1848 in BROOM’S EEGAL MAXIMS (2nd Edn.) p. 2575 320

“and this plea is clearly founded on the principle, that no man shall be placed in peril-at
legal penalties more than once upon the same accusation—nemo debt bis pusiri pro
uno delicto.” हु : ~

The general principle that a man must put twice in peril for the same offence has
been held by the English Courts to be applicable even where the previous acquittal or conviction
was in a foreign country*, In 1918, this principle was applied‘ by the Court of Criminal Appeal
in a case where the accused, a Belgian Army Officer, had been acquitted by a Belgian Court Mas
tial in a trial held in Calai

It may be noted that this principle of the common law was extended by section 33 of the
English Interpretation Act to statutory offences®.

There are similar statutory provisions on the subject in section 30 of the (Australian) Apt
Interpretation Act, 1901 to 1957 and in the Canadian Law*.

14.18. Historically, the famous conflict between Henry II and Archibishop Becket" con
stitutes a debate regarding double jeopardy. In the Constitution of Clarendon issued by Heary
TI in 1164, in Clause वा, Henry If proposed that an ecclesiastical clerk who was accused of
felony was first to be brought into the King’s courts to plead to the charge and establish that he
was a clerk; then, without a trial in the King’s courts, he was to be taken by a royal officer to de

1, Article 20(2), »
2. Rv, Vandercomb and Abbott, (1798), 2 Leach at 0. 720, cited in D.P.P. v. Connelly (1964) 2 All BR;
at 0. 416.
3, #. ५. Roche (1775) 1 Leach 134, 164 English Reports 169 (Acquittal by a Dutch Court in South Africa),
4. Riv. dughet, (1918) 13 Criminal Appeal Reports 101. हे
5, R. ५. Thomas, (1950) 1 King’s Bench 26,
6. Section 11, Criminal Code (Canada).
7. See generally— .
(@) Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law, Vol. 1, page 439 1 ;
(0) Holdsworth, History of English Law, 7th Bdn. (1956), Vol. 1, pp. 615 1.



89

ebeiesiiettcal courts for trial, and, if convicted and degraded there’, he was to be returned to the
King’s courts to be sentenced according to law?. Becket had a fundamental objection to’ this

scheme.

Becket opposed the proposal on the ground that further punishment in the King’s Courts
would violate the maxim Nemo bis in idipsum—no man ought to be punished twice for the same
offence. .

£14 continental law’, the concept is referred to as Non Bis in Idem, and has been traced to
itt #lUption by Justinian.*

14.2, In India the rules of criminal process, known to lawyers as autrefois acquis and autrer Autrefois
fois canvict, find expression in the Code of Criminal Procedure, and are considered so important 2275.
that n:separate Chapter was assigned to them in the Code of 198. The principle on which the viet, i
roles tedt is—a ‘man may not be put twice in jeqpardy for the same offence’’. Sle 20(2).

‘The provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure® is very elaborate. For our presetit pur.
pose, section 300(1) is of great importance. Tt reads as follows :—

"3900(1) a person who has 00०8 been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an

हर offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such conviction or
‘acquittal remains in force, not be lidble fo' be: tried again for the same offence, nor
on the same facts for any other offence for which a different charge from the one
thade against him might have been made under sub-section (1) of section 221, of
for which he might have been convicted under sub-section (2) thereaf.”

od $ The ‘provision in section 26.of the General Clauses Act is based on the same principle.
Beeiit ix act confined to the situation where there has been a prior proceeding, and would appear
tes¥gevide enough to bar simultaneous double prosecutign also.

1428. A provision analogous to the latter part of section 26 is to be found in section 71 section 71,
of the Indian Penal Code also’. We need not discuss it in detail. LPC.

14.2B. Of course, it should be pointed out that section 26 has a positive as well as a negative Two parte
cautebt,, The positive or permissive content is in the. earlier part, where there is 4 liability to be 9f section
के Eee and punished under either of the two enactuttents, or any of more than two enacthents and nese
tive or prohibitive part is in the latter part of the section, under which there’ is.7om-
"to be punished twice for the same offence. We shall discuss the principle of this part

of the section.

“* 14.3. The principle that no person shall be vexed twice for the same crime was described ‘The plea
हे | Hodson in Connelly v. D.P.P.,® “as one which is firmly-established in our law. but, as. are _
भू sdifhoritie tities show, is not easy of consistent application”. What is meant or involved in the:
woud “the same crime”? It is in answer to is* question that so much difficulty has arisen;
aa, 0 quote Lord Hodson again, “so much ar; mett has been entertained down to the present
day not only in this country, but in other countries where the common law prevails”.
2 ३. $ | Oe

Ushed.

_1. Degradation was a punishment,

छू See Richardson and Sayles, The Governance of Medieval, England from the Conquest to Magna Carta
[Bdinburgh, (1963), pp. 289, 306.]

4, See Bartkus v. Hinoie, (1959) 359 U.S. 121, 154, ope ia 3. .

3." (8) Justinian, D. 48, 27.2 and c. 9, 2.9, quoted in ‘Researches in International Law (1935) 29 Ameri-

can Journal of Ynternational Law, Supplement p. 437, 602 | हु

(0) Jolowies, Roman Foundations of Modem Law (1957), p. 81, 94.

5. See Archbold, Criminal Pleadings, ete, (1966) page 122, paragraph 436 and page 130, paragraph 453.

6 Section 300, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974.

% See section 71, 2nd para. 1.7...

8. Connelly v. D.P.P, (1964) 2 AN ELR. 401, 428 (ELL). —


90

The classic statement of the principle is to be found in Hawkins* Peas of the Crown',.amd
is ds follows:

“that a man shall not be brought into danger of his life for one and the same offence,
more than once.” .

“From whence it is generally taken, by all the books, as an undoubted contequengs,
that where a man is once found ‘not guilty’ on an indictment or appeal free from error, and
well commenced before “any court which hath jurisdiction of the cause, he may, by the- common
law, in all cases whatsoever, plead such acquittal in bar of any subsequent indictment. ex: apy:
for the same crime”. This lucid statement by Hawkins, has never cxcelled, though it i
often elaborated?.

14.4. In order to constitute the “same crime”, the essential ingredients should be the oe

In E. v, Kupferberg?, for example, an acquittal on a charge of conspiring to contravene 8 reg
Jation was held not to found a plea of autrefois acquit on a charge of aiding and abetting पके.
contravention. A. T. Lawrence, J. said : .

“For a plea of autrefois acquit to be maintainable, the offence of which the scent
, has been acquitted and. that with which he is charged. must. be the: same in
: sense that each must have the same essential ingredients*, The facts which cal
| stitute the one must be sufficient to justify a conviction for the other.”

po है
: 14.5. The statement of the law by Hawkins’ was approved in D.P.P. v. Connelly*, with
: this comment :

“The phrases ‘the same essential ingredients’ and ‘the facts which constitute’ ake to be
noted. They denote and, in ny: view, correctly denote an entirely: differgnti skye

: tion from that which merely involves that the same facts may be. relevent in: compe!
: of two charges, or that some evidence which is given in one case may again be
given as being relevant ig anotHer.” न

A conviction or acquittal, then, bars punishment for the “same offence”.

Provisfoa a 14.6. The Constitution, Article 20(2)%, does not, in terms, mention a oy 1
Provliloa TW the but the Code of Criminal Procedure docs®, and the Code goes on to explain in ¢ |
Procedure, implications of the expression ‘same offence’. Six illustrations form part of this ant

plaining, in concrete form, the different situations which the Courts may have to dealt

TE ke
14.6A. Going back to section 26, we may note that the section presents a number of
ae" ambiguities. Is it, for example, permissible-to prosecute a person under all the enactipents—.
that is to say—to frame a charge for each of the offences? It is usually =
charge can be framed for each of the afitaces,—subject to the provision regarding ma:
punishment. However ambiguity in thig regard is caused by the words. “either of 1a
the earlier part of the section’. The secpnd ambiguity—though a slight ५
whether the limit regarding punishment applies at the same prosecution, or whether
to successive prosecutions, or whether it applies to both. The word “twice” is aaa

प्‌ Hawkins, Pleas of the Crown [18th Edn, (1824) Vol. 2, p. 515] cited in Connelly v. D.P.P. (196 ZAVER.

401, 428 GL).
2. Bug. Miles (1890) 24 Q.B.D. 423, 431; (Figyetcins 7). ve,
3. है v. Kupferberg, (1918) 13 ct. App. Rap. 146, 168'quoted in Connelly v. D.P-P. (1964) 2 ANTE, 401,424,
4. Emphasis supplied. 1
5. Para. 14, 3, supra.
6. D.P.P. v. Connelly, (1964) 2 AT W.R. 401, 428'(ELL.). =

7. Para, 14.2, supra. ponding
8. Section 300, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 {and corres} provision in the 1898 Code—o.s403).

9. The section is quoted in para. 14.1, supra.

‘


91

whether multiple punishment is possible. Ambiguity in chis regard is ercated by the phrase
“fyumished wwice”. In one of the Andhra Pradesh cases—In re Bapaniah' decided under the
section, it has been stated : :

“Tt is left to the prosecutor or the authority concerned to choose under which enactment
or enactments an offender shall be prosecuted when the act or, omission alleged against him
constitutes an offence under two or more enactments. But in the event of the prosecution
being launched under two or more enactments, the punishment should be under one alone of
those enactments.” The point was also adveried to in a judgment of the Supreme Court—
Balish ए. Bangachari®, A considcration of the section in some detail would, therefore, be useful
with reference to the problems that have arisen.

14.7. It may be stated that these three ambiguities* are really facets of the obscurity which Two 3 to

exists on the major question whether prosecution and punishment under both the enactments हक समान con-
are permissible. stituting thé sume
offence. . दि ८

In this context, two situations have to be considered separately! The first situation is
where an act made by, two more statutory provisions (“enactments”), really constimtes the
“same offence’,—Here, though the legal labels given to the offences are different, the ingredients
thereof are indentical®. It is by reason of the accidents of legislation that thc act happens to
fall under two cr more enactmeats®, Such cases, though infrequent, can arise because of the
fact that one aspect of the act is dealt with more prominently in one enactment, while another
aspect is given prominence by another enactment. Essentially, there is only one culpable act;
and, though different legal labels lead to two or more “offences”, the offender should not re-
ceive puhishment for more than one of them. They are not distinct.

i4.8. The second situation’ is where acts made penal by two or more statutory provisions (ii) Acts consti-
(“enactments”) constitute really distinct offences. Some of the ingredients are common, but toting distinct of
they are not altogether identical’. The offences being distinct, it is logical to permit separate difference 10 :8- हे
punishments. At the same time, to avoid oppressiveness®, the aggregate of such punishments aredi i
should dot exceed the maximum prescribed for the most serious of the offences of which the

offender is convicted. 5

It a provision could be framed on the above lines, it would be just in its substance, and
more cléar in its form than the present section. We shall make our recommendation on this
basis atthe appropriate place’*, But we would like to explain in some detail the significance
of the two situations referred to above.

14,9. At this stage, we may State that in order to make the provision in section 26 more Separate
clear, itis desirable to deal in separate sub-sections with the general rule and the rule applicable subsections
10 # spqcial situation. The general principle should be that where an act or omission is made
punishadle under two or more cnactments, the offender shall be liable to be punished under

1, dere Bapaniah, ALR. 1970 A.P. 47, 55, paragraph 18 (Venkateswara Rao J.).
2 अगवा v. Rangachari, ALR, 1969 S.C. 701; para, 14.15, ह्ीच:

3. ie a 14.6, supra.
4. Cf, 4lnd Report (Penal Code), page 75, para 3.72, (discussing section 71, Penal Code).
5. (3) Cf Emp. v. Bhogilal, AJR. 1931 Bom. 499 ;
&) Durga Charan v. Issnuessin, ALR. 1948 Cal. 6.7, (Wrongful confinement for purpose of extortion—
sections 147 and 384, LP.C.).

6. See also (a) Batiah v. Rangachari, A1.R. 1969 5.0, 701 5
(b) Hari v. State of Maharashira, 73 Bom. LR. 891.
7. See 42nd Report, page 76, para. 3.73, and also page 422, proposed section 36.
8. Sec illustrative case 10 para. 14.10, infra. .
9, See, in particular, para. 14.12, tra.

10. Para. 14.18 infra.
15 M of Law/74—13



92

any one, but not under more than one, of those enactments', if the ingredients are identifical.
As regards the special situation, namely, where the same act or omission constituting an offence
under any other enactment or enactments, it conjunction with any ingredient ot ingredients the
rule should be that prosecution and punishment for each of such offences is permissible, but the
aggregate of the punishments is not to exceed fhe punishment awardable for the most serious of

the offences.

In practice, most cases would fall under the special situation, and the object of making
the position clear as regards this special situation is that if cumulative punishments were allgwed
without any limitation as to the quantum in the aggregate, there will be hardship and oppres-

sion.
The matter could be illustrated from a few decided cases.

14.10, Under the Opium Act, for example, possession of opium and transport 50 opus
(contrary to the provisions of the Act or any other enactment relating to opium or contrary to
rules framed under the Act), are two separate offences. Mere possession of opium may not, on
the proved facts of a particular case, involve any question of transporting it. Tf ’so, ob हे का
only one offence. Similarly, the transport of opium may not include the element of p He
in every case. A person may transport opium through various agencies, and yet not है
possession of it at the time it was transported. In such a case, there is only one offence. Hut 4
person may transport opium, and also be in possession of it. In such a case, that person would
be guilty of two offences,—transporting opiym, and being in possession of it®. But justice requires
that the punishment for the two offences should not exceed that preseribed for the higher of tte
two offences, because the offences are neatly the same, though not identical, and it would Be
oppressive if the aggregate punishment exceeds the maximum punishment for them.

14.11, In this connection, we may also refer to the important Supreme Court case of State.
of Bombay ए. 5. L. Apte*. The charge in that case was under section 405, LP.C.4 and s, 105,
Insurance Act, The Court regarded the two offences as distinct. The analysis by the Court

may be quoted—

“(1) Whereas under section 405 of the Indian Penal Code the accused must be ‘en-
trusted’ with property or with “dominion over that property”, under section: 105
of the Insurance Act the entrustment of dominion over property is unnecesonty; it
is sufficient if the manager, director etc. “obtains possession” of the property. ..

(2) The offence of criminal breach of trust (section 405 of the Indian Penal Code) is
not committed unless the act of misappropriation or conversion or “the disposition
in violation of the law or contract”, is done with a dishonest intention; but section
105 of the Insurance Act postulates no intention, and punishes as an offence the
more withholding of the property—whatever be the intent with which the same
is done; and the act of application of the property of an insurer to puyposes
other than those authorised by the Act is similarly punishable without reference
to any intent with which application or misapplication is made. In these clrpum-
stances, it does not seem possible to say that the offence of criminal breadh of
trust under the Indian Penal Code is the “same offence” for which, the rbgpon-
dents were prosecuted on the complaint of the company charging them with an
offence under section 105 of the Insurance Act.”

1. This does not rule out separate heads of charges, for clarity,

2. See discussion in Puranmal v. Stare of Orissa,"A.LR. 1958 S.C. 338,
३. State of Bombay. v. S.L- Apte, ALR, 1961]S.C. 578, 581,"para.f15

4, Section 405, LP.C.—Criminal breach of trust.


93
a
14.12, There is another Supreme Court case, Roshan Lal v. State of Punjab,* which is पैन Supreme 5
relevant to this point, When a person causes the evidence of the two offences under sections noo
330 and 348, Penal Code to disappear, by burning the body of a person alleged to have been and 345, LPC.
tortured, does he commit two separate offences under section 201 of that Code? This was the 301, section
है question dealt with by the Supreme Court, which held :

“Now, by the same act, namely burning of the dead body of Raja Ram, the appellant
causes the evidence of two offences to disappear.

“Taking a strict view of the matter, it must be said that by the same act the appellants
committed the offences under section 201. The case is not covered either by
section 71 of the Indian Penal Code or by section 26 of the General Clauses
sections, But, normally, no court should award two separate punishments for
Act, and the punishment for the two offences cannot be limited under those
the same act constituting two offences under section 201. The appropriate
sentence under section 201 for causing the evidence of the offences under section
330 to disappear should be passed, and no separate sentence need be passed

5 Be : under section 201 for causing the evidence of the offence under section 348 to
disappear.”
ad This case emphasiscs the aspect of oppression.

14.13. The absence of the requirement of “same offence” is illustrated by a Mysore case,

Gandhi रे, State of Mysore? The appellant in both the appeals was the same person. He had Mysore case,

been सुपर under section 161, Indian Penal (0008 of having accepted a bribe of Rs. 250/- yection 161,

| and serttanced to fine and imprisonment. He was also (at a subsequent trial) tried for the offence section 5,
Penal-Code.

of criminal misconduct as defined in section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and
convicted under section 5 of the Act, and sentenced to fine and imprisonment. The Special
Judge pad ordered that the sentence, of imprisonment on the second conviction should run con-
currently with the earlier. This was an appeal against this conviction and sentence.

i न .
It was urged by counsel for the appellant that since the accused was convicted under
| section 161, LP.C. for the acceptance of the bribe of Rs. 250/-, he could not again be convic-
j ted Es section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act. Reliance was placed in support of
i this argument on section 26 of the General Clauses Act and on Article 20(2) of the Constitu-

tion. argument was rejected, and it was held by the Mysore High Court that the “prohi-
bition is not against punishment more than once, for different offences”. In that connection,

* the coyrt added :

“fhe offence punishable under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code is different from the
offence of criminal misconduct punishable under section 5(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act,
though it may be that some of the ingredients of these two offences are common’.

Following a Supreme Court case," the High Court held that the offence created by section
5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was “an offence unknown to any of the provisions of the
Indian Penal Code dealing with bribery or corruption.” Therefore, the offence under section
5(1)(0) was quite distinct from the offence under section 161, LP.C. And, since they were dis-
tinct offences, scction 26 of the General Clauses Act, was held not to apply-

1 On this reasoning, conviction under 5. 5 was upheld.

1. Roshan Lal v. State of Punjab, A.LR. 1965 5.0, 1413, para. 15.
2,, Gandhi v. State of Mysore, A.LR. 1960 Mys. 111 (D.B.).
3. Venkataraman v. The State, ALR, 1959 5.0. 107.

. [ee ee


: 94
गज 14.14, It may be pointed out that this Mysore case would fall within the second category*
: of offences which, being not the same but being distinct, could be punished separately. 10 -this
case, for the conviction under section 161, ILP.C. (which provides for imprisonment of either
description upto 3 years or fine or both), the accused had been sentenced to one year’s itigo-
rous imprisonment and a fine of Rs, $,000/-. On the conviction under section 5(2) of she
Prevention of Corruption Act (which provides for imprisonment of upto 7 years and fine), he*
had been senienced to one year's rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 75,000/-. Therefore,
the aggregate did not exceed the punishment that could be awarded for any one of such
offences,

A case of 14.15. In Baliah v. Rangachar# the Supreme Court was concerned with simultansous

sicnultaneers prosecution. The precise question was whether the appellant could be prosecuted both under
section 177, Indian Penal Code (False information to public servant) and section 52 of the
Income Tax Act,* 1922 (which was in force at the material time) at the same time. Te was
argued on behalf of the appellant that in view of the provisions of section 26 of the General
Clauses Act, the appellant could be prosecuted either under section 52 of the 1922 Act, or
under section 177, Indian Penal Code, but not under both ihe sections at the same time. The
court was unable to accept this argument as correct. After quoting section 26, the एप्प
observed :

“A plain reading of the section shows that there is no bar to the trial or conviction
i of the offender under both enactments, but there is only a bar to the punishment
of the offender twice for the same offence. In other words, the section provides
that where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two enactments, the
offender may be prosecuted and punished under either or both the enactments
but shall not be liable to be punished rwice for the same offence. We adcord-
ingly reject the argument of the appellant on this aspect of the case.”

Object of 14.16. The amendment which we propose to recommend in section 26 is intended to
amendment, clarify the position on the important points discussed above. As already stated,* it is desir-

able to deal separately with two situations—first where the ingredients of the two offences are
1 the same, and secondly where the ingredients are not identical.

Conclusion and 14,17. In conclusion, we wish to add that we have given serious consideration to the

recommendation. problems posed by the present form and language of section 26, and have decided to recommend
an amendment with a view to avoiding ambiguity or obscurity and making the position clégr in
respect of offences falling under the two situations to which we have referred. The ambnd-
ment will, we hope, advance the cause of justice by ensuring that even if the case falls under
the second situation, there will be a safeguard against oppression.

In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 26 should be revised as
under :

Revised section 26

. (1) Where an act or omission is made punishable under two or more enactments, the
Hl offender shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),° be liable to be punished undétany
i one, but not under more than one, of those enactments.

| Para. 14,7 and 14.8 supea.

Baliah प. Rangachari, ALR. 1969 S.C. 201, 706, para. 6.

५ Section 52, Income Tax Act, 1922—False verification in a statement of income.

Paras, 14.7 to 14.9 supra.

"fa the alternative, the words “and the offences are not distinct” could be used in'sub-s2-tion (1) instead ef the

: words ‘subject to the provisions of sub-section (27, पु

wee yo



95
(2) Where
(a) an act or omission constitutes an offence under one enactment, and

(b) the same act or omission, in conjunction with any other ingredient or ingredients,
constitutes an offence under any other enactment or enactments, then the offender
may be prosecuted and punished for each of such offences, but the aggregate of
the punishments shail not exceed the punishment which could have been awarded
for the most serious of the offences.



Tutroductory

Section 25.

Provisions in
the

Recommendation
as to section 25.

Two limbs of
section 27.

Section 114
Evidence Act.

7

CHAPTER 15
MISCELLANEOUS ¥

15.1 The last 6 sections of the Act,—Sections 25 to 30-—contain miscellaneous provisions. - 7 3
Some of these—e.g. sections 26 and 27—are, however, of frequent application, and therefore, है | q
of sufficient practical interest.

15.2. Section 25 provides for the recovery of fines. The section refers, inier alia, to
sections 63-70 of the Indian Penal Code. The Law Commission, in its Report oa the Indian
Penal Code, considered these sections of the Code. The recommendations of the Law Commission
regarding these sections do not, however, require any substantial change in section 25 of the
General Clauses Act.

15.3. The procedure for the recovery of fines is dealt with in section 386 of the? Criminal
Procedure Code of 1898. The Law Commission, in its Report on the Criminal Procedure Code*,
has dealt with this section. But the recommendations made in that Report also do not necessi-
tate any change in the General Clauses Act.

15.4. The only change required in this section is verbal, namely, in place of reference to
the old Code of Criminal Procedure, the reference to the current Code should be substituted.

15.5. Section 26 has already been dealt witht.

15.6. Section 27, which relates to service by post, consists of two limbs, dealing respect-
vely with the mode of service and with the time of service. Under the first limb of the section,
for the purposes of an Act authorising or requiring a document to be served by post, service
shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting by registered-
post a letter containing the document. This deeming provision, of course, applied unless a
different intention appears. But there is mo express saving for cases where the contrary is
proved.®

Under the second limb of the section, the service shall be deemed to have been effected at
the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. This deeming
provision applies, unless the contrary is proved, and unless a different intention appears from
the context. पु

15.7. Although the presumption under section 27, General Clauses Act,® can arise only
when the notice is sent by registered post, there may arise a presumption under section 114,
Evidence Act, when notice is sent by ordinary post.’ But the presumption so arising is rebut-
table.

. 42nd Report, pages 66-68.
. See now the corresponding provision in the Code of 1974.

won

. 418 Report, Vol. 1, pages 243-246.

|. Chapter 14, supra.
1, See pare 15.9 infra,

. para 15.6, supra.
. Section 114, illustration Cf, Evidence Act.

जज फू. we


|
|

97

15.8. Reference should also be made to section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act. Othe sone need
‘Under that section, the lessor can determine the Tease by a notice to quit, and one of the modes section 106, 4
of service of such natice is sending it by post to the party intended to be bound by it There TPA.
are similar provisions in certain other Central Act.

15.9. Now, it is obvious that though the first limb of section 27 of the General Clauses

Act is not expressed to be subject 10 proof to the contrary, it is intended to be so. It is not as
if evidence in rebuttal of the presumption given in the section could be given only as to the
second limb (the time at which the letter is deemed to have been delivered), and not as to the
main presumption of service. Unfortunately, however, the section does not say so; and though
it seems to have been assumed in a decided case,” it is desirable to make the section, in its
ficst limb, subject to proof to the contrary.

| 15.10. If (as is suggested above), the deeming provision in section 27 is subject to evi- Gi) Recommen:
dence to the contrary in both cases,* it would also be desirable to replace the words “deemed” the words “shall
by the usual formula “shall be presumed”. That formula is more appropriate for indicating be presumed.”
that the presumption is rebuttable.

15.11. Controversies also arise as to whether proof of this or that fact is sufficient to rebut Case law as to
the presumption under section 27. Some of the cases relating to the rebuttal of the presump- What proof
tion are noted in the footnote." It may not, however, be convenient to lay down any detailed
rules in this regard.

15.12. It seems to have assumed that section 27 applies to statutory instruments. This (i) Recammen
dation to cover

should be expressly provided for. all statutory
. instruments.

15.13, When a registered letter is refused by the. addressee, is it permissible to draw the हुए Refosal—
presumption referred to in section 27 of the General Clauses Act or in section 114, illustration .
(0, Evidence Act, or both? On this point, there seems to be a conflict of decisions.

?

One view is that the presumption under section 114. Evidence Act can be drawn,® in case

ofjrefusal by the addressee.

Another view that even section 27, General Clauses Act, applies in such case.7 The
third view is that neither section 114 nor section 27 applies.8 The case-law is reviewed in a
Madras case,* and in a Calcutta case.1° .

1. See, para 15.6, supra. हि
2, Jankiram Naidu y. Atunegha (1970) 2 M.L.S. 535, 538.
3. See, para 15.9, supra.
4. Cf. sections 3 and 4, Evidence Act.
+ 5.8) Sarkar Estates Prt. Lid. ¥. V.K. Iron works Ltd. A.LR. 1961 Cal. 439, 442, para 3-4 (Refusal to accept)
{b) Sukumar v. Naresh Chandra, कर, 1968 Cal. 49;
(c} (1970) AILLJ, 455,

6. Gona Ram vy. Dhulwati, ALR. 1970 All, 446, 450, 451, para 23-25 (and the Calcutta, Punjab and Madras
cases cited therein).

4. (a) Dwarka Singh १. Raton Singh (1969) AT! L.J. 849;
(0) Bachata! v. Lachman, ALR, 1938 All, 338.

8.(a) Vaman Vithal v, Khanderao, A.LR, 1935 Bom, 247;
(8) Jankiram v. Damodar, ALR; 1956 Nag. 266.

9. Bappayya V. Verkatarahan, A.J.R. 1953 Mad. 884, 887, para 9 to 13 (Rajamannar CJ. and Venkatarama
Aiyar J.)

10. Nirmal Bala v. Provot Kumar, (1948) 52 C.W.N. 619


Recommendation
to remove
conflict.

Section 281).

Section 29.

98

15-14. It is obviously desirable that this conflict should be resolved. The presumption
under section 114, Evidence Act, should, in our view, continue to be permissible; but, section
27, General Clauses Act, should not apply in, case of refusal by the addressee. It is better
to leave the court free to draw or not to draw the presumption, where the letter has been re-

fused.

For the above purpose we recommend an amendment of section 27 as follows :—
Revised section 27

27(1). Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act
or any statutory instrument made thereunder authorises or requires any document to be served
by post, whether the expression “serve” or either of the expressions “give” or “send” or any other
expression is used, then, unless a different intention appeats, and unless the contrary is proved,
the service shall be deemed— ,

(४) to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting by registered post, a
letter containing the document, and .

(b) to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the
ordinary course of post.

(2) “Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to a letter, which the addressee has refused
to accept but in such cases it shall be open to the Court to draw or not to draw any such presump-
tion as it may think fit to draw under section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having
regard to the circumstances of the case.”

15.15. Under section 28(1), “in any Central Act or Regulation, and in any rule, bye-law,
instrument or document, made under, or with reference to, any such Act or Regulation”, any
enactment may be cited by reference to the title or short title (if any) conferred thereon or by”
yeference to the number and year thereof. There is also a provision as to citation of a provision
of an enactment.

The sub-section can be usefully extended to statutory instruments.

For the above purpose, we recommend that section 28(1) should be tevised as below.

Revised section 28(1)

“(1) In any Central Act or Regulation, and in any statutory instrument, or document, made
under, or with refetence to, any such Act or Regulation—

(a) any enactment may be cited by reference to the title or short title (if any) conferred
threon or by reference to the number and year thereof, and

{b) any provision in an enactment may be cited by reference to the section ot sub-
section of the enactment in which the provision is contained.”

15.16. Section 2° contains savings for previous enactments, rules and bye-laws. It needs
no change. हु



wt

99

45.17. We recommend the insertion of a new section to provide that the provisions of this Section 29.4
Act (as amended respecting the construction of new Central Acts etc.) shall not affect the Sayings for i
construction of existing Central Acts. It will be on the following lines :— ना:

Section 294 (New) '

298. The provisions of this Act respecting the construction of Central Acts or Regulation Saving tor a
made on or after the........6055 day Of ccc cece ccneee 1 shall not affect the construction made before ©
of any Central Act or Regulation made before that date, although the Central Act or Regulation amendment. . §
is continued or amended by any Central Act or Regulation made on or after that date.

15.18. Section 30 provides that the expression “Central Act”, wherever it occurs in this Section 30.
Act, shall be deemed to include an Ordinance made and promulgated by the President.

An exception is made in respect of section 5 of the Act (which deals with commencement).
In agdition to this, an exccption for the new section which we are recommending? regarding the
expiry of temporary Acts, is required?. :

Section 30 also provides that the word “Act” in certain specified provisions, includes the
Ordinances referred to above. No change appears to be required in this part of the section.

In the light of the above discussion we recommend that section 30 should be amended
as under*:—-

Section 30

In section 30 of the principal Act, after the word and figure “section 5”, the words, figure
and letter “and section 8A” shall be inserted.*

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable assistance we have
received from Mr. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in the preparation of this

Repprt.

P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman
है P. K. Tripathi Member
“s. 8..Dhavan . Member
S. P. Sen-Varma Member
P. M. Bakshi Member-Secretary
Bewd.: New Delhi

the 20th May, 1974.

1, Date of comméncément of imendment Act to be entered.
vt 2. Section 8A (cew).
, 3. See discussion relating to section 8A, Chapter 7 supra.
2°" 4. This is consequential 00 new section 8A,
5. Section reference in this amendment (referring to effect of expiry) should be cheoked up है, there is a change
15 M of Law/74—14

1 ce


100
REPORT ON
GENERAL CLAUSES AC”
APPENDIX,
Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendmenis to the exisung अल,
Noie: This is a tentative draft only.
Section 3, opening lines

[ch, 3] In section 3, before the words, “In this Act”, the words, figure and letter “Subject to the
Provisions of section 3A”, shall be inserted?.

Revised section 3(3)

{ch. 3] (3) “affidavi?’ shell mean a statement in writing purporting to be a statement of facts,
signed by the person marking it and confirmed by him by oath.” .

i (3A) “aircraft” shall mean any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from
| reactions of the air, and shall include balloons, whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and
i fiving machines.

Section 3(10A) (New) हे
{ch. 3] After clause (10), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :—.

“(10A) ‘clause’ shall mean—

(a) a sub-division of the sub-section in which the word occurs, or

i (9) where there is no sub-section in the section, a sub-division of the section in which
the word occurs,

Revised section 3(11) वि

1 teh. 37 3(11) “Collector* shall mean..... ....-the chief officer-in-charge of the revenue.
administration of a district, and shall include the Collector of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay :

Revised section 3(16)

[ch. 3] 3(16) “Consular Officer” shall mean any person entrusted with the exercise of consular
functions, irrespective of his designation and shall include Consul General, Consul, Vice Consul
and Consular Agent :

Section 3(16A) (New) है

{ch. 3} (168) “daughter”, in the case of any one whose personal law permits adoption, shall: inolatle
an adopted daughter*:

Section 3(168) (New)
(168) “day” shail mean a period of swenty-four hours beginning at

| खफा गा
1. (४) The amendments regarding definitions will apply to existing Acts, unte¥t atletwist

® In the case of a few definitions intended % be prospective only, it is necessary to insert a suitable

new section to indicate that they are prospective, ‘Ste’ proposed section 3A, oF,
| existing
| (b) As regards amendments in provisions, other than definitions, the amendments will apply to existing
! + Acts, unless othersise indicated. : ,
हु हु 2. The reference in the margin in rectangylar brackets indicate the seleyant chapter in the Report.
3. Sed new section 34. * . है हा
4, This amendment should not apply to existing Acts. See section 3A (proposed).



हट

at

101
Section 3(16C) (New)

(160) “diplomatic officer” shall mean a member of the staff of a diplomatic mission having
diplomatic rank, and includes an ambassador, high commissioner, envoy, minister and charg-
daffairs :

Revised section 4(17)

(17) “District 10086" shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, (कक, 31
but shall not include —

(a) an Additional Judge of such court, or
(b) the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra-ordinary civil jurisdiction.
Revised section 3(18)

“document” shall include any substance having any matter written, expressed, inscribed ; fen, 4]
described or otherwise recorded upon it by means of letters, figures or marks or by any other
means, or by more than one of these means, whick cre intended to be used or which may be
used for the purpose of recording that matter.

Explanation.—-lt is immaterial by what means the letters, figures or marks are formed.”

Revised section 3(19)

3(19) “enactment” shall include any law passed or mude by any legistaiure or other autho- ch. 3]
rity acting in a legislative capacity, and shall also include any provision contained in any such
law, but shall not include a siatutery insirument +

Revised section 3(25)

3(25) “High Court”, used with reference to civil or criminal procecdings, shall mean the [ch. 3]
High Court or the Court of Judicial Commisioner having jurisdiction over the pact of India in
which the Act or Regulation containing the expression operates ;”

Revised section 3(31)

3(31) “local authority” shall mean a municipal corporation or committee, a district board, {ch. 3)
a cantonment board or a body of port commissioners, or any other authority constituted for the
purpose oj local self-government or village administration ;

Section 3(35)—definition of ‘month’
In section 3(35), for the word “British”, the word “Gregorian” shall be substituted. Ich. 31
Revised section 3(37)

“(37) ‘oath’ shail mean an oath taken before a competent authority with reference to the (ch. 31
Oathsi Act, 1969, or any other law for the time being in force, and shall, in the case of persons
by Jaw allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing, include affirmation or declaration made
before a competent authority with reference to that Act or law.

Section 3(43A) (New)

3(43A) “prescribed” shall mean prescribed by rules made under the Central Act or Regu- Ich.
lation in which the word occurs ;

Section 3(47A) (New)

347A) “public” shall include any class or section of the public
7" M gf Law/74—15

ee



i
i

!
i
|
|]
i
\.
:

{ch. 3]

[ch. 3}

Ich. 31

Ich. 3]

Ich, 3]

oming ito

force of :
enactments,

102

Section 3(60A) (New)
3(60A) “starutory instrument” shail mean a rule, notification, bye-iaw, order, scheme,
form or other instrument made under an enactment ;

Section 3(62A) (New)

3(62A) “temporary Act” or “temporary Regulation’ shall mean a Central Act or Regula-
tion, whether made bejore or ajter the commencement of the Constitution, which is to cease to
have effect or cease to operate on a particular day or on the expiration of a particular period oar
on the happening of a particular event; °

{Existing section 3(62A) 10 be renumbered as section 3(62)]
Revised section 3(66)
3(66) “year” shall mean a year teckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.

Section 3A (New}

3A. The definitions in section 3 of the following words and expressions, that is to say,"

(i) “daughter”,
do not apply to—

(a) this Act so far as it relates to the period before the............... day® ॑.............-«
or

(b) to any Central Act or Regulation made before the ............ day* of......
seen eee » 1974,

Section 4B (New)

After section 4A, the following section shall be inserted, namely :—

“4B. In every Central Act or Regulation, made on or OPE eee eee ee
weenie day of te 4, where a word is defined,

(a) the word shall have the meaning assigned by the definition, unless the context
otherwise requires ; :

(b) grammatical variations of that word and its cognate expressions shall have corres-
ponding meanings, unless the context otherwise requires.

Revised section 5°
“5. (1) Where any Central Act is not expressed to come into force on a particuiar day,
then it shall come into force— :
0) In the case of a Central Act made before the commencement of the Constiqayipn.
1 on the day on which it receives the assent of the Governor-General : an@
(i) in the case of an Act of Parliament, on the day on which it receives ‘the ages |
of the President.

a

1, > List to be given.

2. Date of commencement of amended Act to be entered,

4. Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered.

4. Date of commencement of amending Act,

5, The revised sub-section (1) willapply to existing Act also. ©


103

+(2) Where an Ordinance promulgated or Regulation made by the President on or after
the A a) ,) is not expressed to come into force
on a particular day, then it shall come into force on the day on which the Ordinance is
promulgated or the Regulation is made, as the case may be.

, (3) Unless the contrary intention is expressed, every Central Act, Ordinance, or Regulation
or provision thereof shall be construed as coming into force immediately on expiration of the
day. preceding the beginning of the day on which it comes into force. ’

(4) The date appearing on the copy of a Central Act printed by or under the authority
of the Central Government immediately after its title shall be evidence that such date is the
date on which the Governor-General or the President, as the case may be, gave his assent.”

Section S-A (New) :

नि [Ch,
5-A. The marginal note appended to any provision of any Central Act or Regulation, and Mavginal note

reference to the number and year of any former law in the margin against any such provision,— pot part of

(a) shail form ne part of the said Central Act or Regulation, as the case may be;

(b) shall be deemed to have been inserted for the sake of convenience only; and

(०) may be corrected or amended under the authority of Government.

Section SB (New)

हा [eh. |
! The headings of the Parts or Chapters into which any Central Act or Regulation is Heading Ss
pal

a ३ . y rt
dinded shall be deemed to 6 part of the Act or Regulation, as the case may be. enactments.
Revised Section 6A

Where any Central Act or Regulation (other than.a temporary Act or Regulation) amends [Ch. 61

thd text of any Central Act or Regulation by th ission, inserti itution Geen 1,

3 tex ५४ mutt ct or Regulation by the express omission, insertion or substitution making textual 11

of any matter, and the amending Central Act or. Regulation is subsequently repeated, then, unless amendinents in
ihe jifferent intention appears, the repeal. shall not affect the continuance of any such amendment eres:

nade by the Central Act or Regulation so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.

Section 6B (New)

After section 6A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely,?— [ch. 6]

“6B. Where the short title of any enactment, being a Central Act or Regulation, 18 Reference to
amended, then, reference to that Central Act or Regulation by its old title in any other enact- Actetc, te a
mént or any statutory instrument shail, unless a different intention appears, be construed as With sbpe i
references to it with its new title.” -

Section 8(1) should be revised, and section 8(1-A) inserted, as follows :— i .
i

: “8(1) Where this Act, or ary Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement
of this Act, repeals and re-enacts, with or without modification, any provision of a former enact-
mént, then references in any other enactment or in any statutory instrument to the provision

1. Date of comasncement of amendment Act to be entered.
2. This new section can apply to existing Acts.



Ich. 7]
Effect of expiry
of temporary
Act

{Ch. 7]
Time of

expiry of
iemporary Acts
etc,

104

so repealed, or to the provision of any former enactment repealed and re-enacted’ by the
provision so repealed, shall, unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to
the provision so re-enacted,

(1-A) Where any statutory instrument rescinds and re-incorporates, with or without modi- v ह
fication, any provision of a jormer statutory instrument, then references in any enactment or in aol
any other statutory instrument to the provision so rescinded, er to the provision of any former
Statutory instrument rescinded and re-incorporated by the provision so rescinded, shall, unters
a different imention appears, be construed as references to the provision so re-incorporated.”

Section 8-A (New)

8-A. Where a temporary Central Act or a temporary Regulation made on or after the
day of........../ ’...expires,t then, in the absence of an express provision

to the contrary, the expiry shall not affect—

(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered, under the temporary
Act or Regulation ; .

(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the
temporary Act or Regulation ; हर

(०) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred under the temporary Act or Regu-
lation ; or

{d) any investigation, legal procecding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, ५
obligation, liabitity, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such |
investigation, legal procceding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, Qh
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the temporary
Act or Regulation had not expired.

Section 8-B (New)

8%. Where a Central Act or Regulation made on or after the.. vine
a .. "७७-०० नल is expressed? to expire, lapse or otherwise cease to have effe¢t

on a particular day, then it shall, unless the contrary intention is expressed, be construed és.
ceasing to have effect immediately on the expiration of the day immediately preceding that day.

Revised Section 9

Act or Regulation made on or after the commencement of thie:

9(1) In any Central दि
strument madé thereunder, it shall be sufficient—

Act, or in any statutory in

boot ag
(a) to use the word “from” or ihe word “after” for the purpose of excluding ttl 4
first in a series of days; . . «

(b) to use the word “to” for the purpose of including the last in a series df

days .. + 1

L. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted,

2. Date of com nzaz: nant of amending Act to be inserted.


PLL enema waitin’ me

3

wh,

105

(1A) In any Central Act or Regulation made on or after फीट... लि लिन तहत
day of. ....... 62.2500. 197 ,) or in any statutory instrument made thereunder,

it shall be sufficient— 4

(a) to use the word “‘on" for the purpose of including the day on which a period
is expressed to begin ;

(b) to use the word “with” for the purpose of including the day on which a period
is expressed to end ; .

(९) in relation to the interval between two events—

(i) to use the words “clear days’ or the words “at least” or “not less than”
28 specified number of days, for the purpose of excluding the days on which
the events happen ; and .
a)
Gi) merely to specify the number of days for the purpose of excluding the day
on which the first event happens and including the day on which the second
event happens.

(1B). Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the....... (५०००८
day of 2 or in any statutory instrument made under any such
Central Act or Regulation, a period from a specified day to a specified day is
referred to, followed by the words “both days inclusive’, the period shall include
both the days.

(2) Sub-section (1) applies also to all Central Acts made after the third day of January,
1868, and to all Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of January, 1887, and to
statutory instruments made under such Central Acts or Regulation.

1 Revised section 10
- 10(1). Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of tis {Ch, 81

Act, jar by any statutory instrument made under any such Central Act or Regulation, any
act का proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any Court or office on 8
certain day or within a specified period, then, if the Court or office is closed on that day
or oh the last day of the specified period, the act or proceeding shall be considered as done
ot iqkpa in due time if it is done or taken जा the next day afterwards on which the Court
or office is open : पर

Provided that nothing in this section shal] apply to any act or proceeding to which. tha.
Limitation Act, 1963, applies. .
eg है
77 \2). This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the.
fourteenth day of January, 1887 and to statutory instruments made under such Central Acts
or Regulations.

_ 1. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered.
2. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted.
15 M of Law/74—16

a SC


[Ch. 3].
Reference to
time.

| Tacorporation.

ECh. 9.
Offences by
companies.

106
Section 10A (New)

After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :—

“10A. Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the.........06424
पंच लै., .....०..--.-...-. 197," any reference to a specified time of the day
occurs, then such time shall, unless it is otherwise specifically stated, mean the
Indian Standard Time.”

Revised section 13

(1) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words
importing the masculine gender shall include females.

हि (2) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words in
the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular.

Section 13A (New)

“134. Where, by or under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the......
day of 2 any association or body of persons is constituted

न
a body corporate, then, unless a different intention appears, that body corporate

(a) shall have perpetual succession, and a common seal with power to alter or change
the seal ;

(b). may sue and be sued by its corporate name ; i
(c) shall have power—

(i) to contract by its corporate name ; . .
(ii) to acquire, hold or dispose of property, whether movable or immovable.”

Section 13AA (New)

(1) If the person committing an offence under any Central Act or Regulation made |

on or after the .............. day एैँ. ...........- ३ is a company, then, unless a differeat
intention appears, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the
company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shail be liable to be proceeded against and punished:
accordingly.

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liabk:

“to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge ar

that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Where an offence under such Act or Regulation has been committed by a company,
then, unless a different intention appears, any director, manager, secretary or other officer |
the company, not being a person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the cond:

Gf its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall, if it is proved that the offence.
has been committed with his consent ot connivance or that the commission of the offencp.
is attcibutable to any neglect on his part, alsq be deemed to be guilty of that offence and ¢qhall be:
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. पु ch

rs

1. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered.

2. Date of commencement of amendment A ct to be entered.

3. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted.

|


107
Section \3AA (New) Contd.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other associdtion of
persons, and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

Section 13B (New)

413B, In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, every Central Act or Regula- igh 10 . 10). :

tion made on or after thé... day of.
Governmeni.”

197 4, shall be binding on the ote
bound.

Section 13C (New)

43C. In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, a debt due to the Government [Ch. 101:
under any Central Act or Regulation made on or Ofter #॥2.........-----० day of*.
न्ल्ल्ज्ल्न्ल्ः , shall have priority over other debts not secured by a mortgage or charge, if t
ds in the nature of व tax or free, but not otherwise.”

debt
Revised section 14,

14, (1) Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of thiS‘[ch 11}
Act o by any statutory instrument made thereunder, any power is conferred or any duty imposed,
then, unless a different intention appears, that power may be exercise, and that duty shall be
perjormed from time to time as occasion requites. न

“1 €2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the
fourteenth day of January, 1887, asd fo statutory instruments made thereunder.

Revised section 15

15. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, or by any statutory instrument made there- (ch. 11)
under, a power to appoint any person to fill any office or execute any function is conferred,
then, unless it is otherwise expressly provided, any such appointment, if it 18 made after the
commencement of this Act, may be made either by name or by virtue of office.

Revised section 17(1).

17. (1) In any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act. it ten 11)
mae sufficient, for the purpose of indicating the application of a law to every person or

का का of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, to: mention the

Offeial title of the officer executing the functions, at the time when the Central Act or Regulation

is made, or that of the officer by whom the functions are commonly executed.

Section 18A (New)

18A. Where, under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the ..
ae 8, or under any statutory instrument made thereunder,—

५ day (eb. 11)

(a) the exercise of a power or discharge of a junction, by @ person or. authority. is devendent-
upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of that person or authority in relation te any matter.
and

1, Date of commencement of amendment Act to be entred.
2, Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered.
3. Date of Amendment Act to be entered.

2 . - i. wilds : ae be


108

(b) thet power or function has been delegated in pursuance of such Act or Regulation or
Statutory instrument, then, save as is otherwise expressly provided by such Act or Regulation or
stajutory instrument, the power or function may be exercised or discharged by the delegate
upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of the delegate in relation to that matter.

Section 19A (New)

“194. Whenever a form is prescribetl or specified for any act by any Central Act or Regue
lation, or by any statutory instrument made thereunder, then, save as is otherwise expressly
provided by such Central Act or Regulation or by such statutory instrument, any deviations theré-
from neither affecting the substance nor calculated to mislead, shall not render the actior form
invalid. ve

Revised section 20

20. Expressions used in @ statutory instrument made under a Central Act or Regulation
shall, unless the context of the statutory lnstrument otherwise requires, have the same respective
meanings as iri the Act or Regulation.

Revised section 21 हे +

21. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make a statuiory instrument is
conferred, then, wnfess the context otherwise requires, that power includes a power, exercisagle
im the like maauer and subject to the like sanction and conditions (if any), to add to, akend,
vary of rescind the statutory instriement so made. नह

Revised section 22
“22. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation which is not to come into force imamediately
on the passing or making thereof, a power is conferred-- :
(a) to make a sfatutory instrument, or
(b) to issue orders with respect (0--
1.9) the application of the Act, or Regulation... .,
(#) the establishment of any ¢ourt or office, or
(iii) the appointment of any Judge ar officer thereunder, or

(iv) the person by whom or the time when, or the place where, or the manner in as
or the fees for which, anything is to be done under the Act or Regulatién,
that power may be exerrised at any time after the passing of the Act or ataling ial
the Regulation, but statutory instruments or orders so made or issued shall: not. taj
effect till the commencement of the Act or Regulation, or, where atl provisions af Wir.
Act or Regulation do nat coma inge force at the same time, then tilt the comnamee-
ment of the relevant provision.

Revised section 23

23. Where ..... any Central Act or Regulation confers on ary authority power 10 “4! aan |
2 statutory instrument subject to the conflition of the statutory instrument being mde. .
previous publication, then the following provisions shall apply, namely :— Pe

(a) the authority ....... stiall first publish a draft of the proposed instrument for the
information of persons likely to be affected thereby, together with a notice specifying the date om
or after which the draft will be taken into consideration ;

1. New section 194 can apply toexisting Acts also.



109

(०) the publication shall be made in such manner as the authority deems to be sufficient, ७. 23020.
of, if the empowering provision in the Act or Regulation so requires, in such manner as the
Govetament concerned directs ;

(०) 5५० any objection or suggestion ...., received by the authority .... from any ७. 23(4)).
person with respect to the draft before the date specified in the notice shall be considered by it,
and, where the statutory instrument is to be made with the sanction, approval of concurrence of
dither authority, also by that authority, before the instrument is finally made;

sonny

(@ the publication in the official gazette. of a statutory instrument purporting to have
been made ajter previous publication in exercise of @ power to make such statutory instrument
shall be conclusive proof that the statutory instrument has been made in compliance with the

provisions of this section.

Section 23A (New)
Publication and commencement of rules, bye-laws and general orders

haga. (1) Every rule made or bye-law approved or general order issued by the Central {ch. 12]
Govdrnment on or after the ...... day of .......% under any Central Act or Regulation—

(a) shall be published in the official gazette, and

a

(b) shall, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary either in the rule or
bye-law or general order or in the Central Act or Regulation under which it is made
or approved or issued, come into force an the day on which it is published in the
official gazette.

162) No such rule or bye-law or generat order shall come into force from a date earlier
than: the date on which it is made or approved or issued by the Central Government, untess the
Le Act or Regulation under which it is made or approved or issued expressly confers a power
6 inte. in such effect.

_ Explanation.—In this section, the expresion “general order” means an order which affects
the pablic.

Section 23B

4ऊ. (1) Every rule made under any Central Act by the Central Government on or - after (ch. 125
कह .......... AV. ieee cee ts 2 shall be laid, as soon as may he after Rules tobe
it isimade, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days मर before
whidh may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions; and if, before the
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agrée in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not
be’ juadé, the rule shall thereafter have effect dnly in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be, so however that any such motlifieation or anrulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

(2) Every such modification or anmulment shall be published in the official gazette.
. Section 24
In section 24, for the words “notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law”, wherever
they occut, the words “or statutory instrument” shall be substituted.

&. Date of commencement of the amendment Act to be entered.
2, Insert date of commencement of amending Act.



; Teh. 14)

Ich. 14)

[ch. 15]

[ch. 15]

accept but in such cases. it shall.be open to the Court to draw or. not to draw.-any- suafs-pre- a

110 |

Section 25

In section 25, for the words? “the Code or Criminal Procedure for the time being in force”,
the words, and figures and camma “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974” shall be substituted. ¥

Revised section 26
“(1) Where an act or omission is made punishable under two or more enactments, the H

offender shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2)*, be liable to be punished under any
one,-but not under more than one, of those enactments. : {

(2) Where—

(a) an act or omission constitutes an offence under one enactment, and

(0) the same act or omission, in conjunction with any other ingredient or ingredients,
constitutes an offence under any other enactment or enactments, then the offender श्र
may be prosecuted and punished for each of such offences, but the aggregate of the
punishments shall not exceed the punishment which could have been awarded for the,
most serious of the offences. ~

Revised section 27

_ 2761) ‘Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act or
any statutory instrument made thereunder authorises or requires any document to be served by
post, whether the expression “serve” or either of the expression “give” or “send” or any other
expression is used, then, unless a different intention appears, and unless the contrary is proved,
the service shall bc deemed—

(a) to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting by registered post, a
letter containing the document, and

(b) to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the f)
ordinary course of post.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shalt apply to a letter, which the addressee has refused to

dimption as it may think fit 10 draw under section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having:

régard to the circumstances of the case.” ‘

Revised section 28(1)

(1) In any Central Act or Regulation, and in any statutory. instrument, or document, made. if
under, Or with reference to, any such Act or Regulation ; pon ad डे

. 4 : के
(a) any enactment may be cited by reference to the title or short title (if any} conferred
thereon or by reference to the number and year thereof, and .

(b) any provision in an enactment may be cited by reference to the section or sub-
section of the enactment in which the provision is contained.”
a : foe हु

.... . eT

1. This can apply to existing Acts also.
2. Inthe alternative, the words “and the offences are not distinct” could be used in sub-section (1) instead of
the words “subject Lo the provisions of sub-section (2).” पु


lil

Section 294 (New)
eh, 15]

“9, The provisions of this Act respecting the construction of Central Acts or Regulations as dee
made on or after the ........ day of ........ shall not affect the construction of any Central enactments
Act or Regulation made before that date, although the Central Act or Regulation is continued made before
or amended by any Central Act or Regulation made on or after that date.” है

. Section 30

In section 30 of the principal Act, after the word and figure “section 5”, the words, figure
and letter “and section 8A” shall be inserted.*.®

‘ वि

t 1. Date of commencement of amendment Act to be entered,

हि This is consequential on New section 8 A.

3. Section reference in this amendment (referring to effect of expiry) should be checked up if, thereis a
change in numbering.

N

MGIPRRND— 15 M of Law/74—Sec I@ay}—15—11—74-—2,000