LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT

ON

CERTAIN PROBLEMS CONNECTED WITH
POWERS OF THE STATES TO LEVY A TAX
ON THE SALE OF GOODS AND WITH THE
CENTRAL SALES TAX ACT, 1956,

May, 1974


Chanter No.

1A
18.
‘en
1D.
LE.

Ww

7

12.

CONTENTS,

Subject-magter

Inteoguctery, ek,

The scone for levy or sales tax by State Government.

Taxability of Warks contracts.

Hire-purchase transactions 2)

Sales af controlled commoditics.

Sale by Associations to Members, rn
Some general observations as to taxation an sale

Evasion of Central Sales ‘Tax by means of transfer
of goods from one State to another, on what pur-
parts (0 be consignment transfer or a transfer to
another branch of the same institution.

Sales ia (he course of Import—Khosla’s Case, y

Conflicting decisions of the 0007७ as to the Central
Saies Tax in regard tothe scope of the penal pro-
visions of that Act. . see

Punishment for evasion of Sales Tax. + .

Disposal of excess amounts collected by a dealer
from a customer as sales tax.

Establishment of check-posts for preventing evasion
and ensuring better collection of taxes on the sale of
goods.

Other questions—Definitions. . . .
Section 8 and the rate of tax. . . . पु
Retrospective restrictions under articles 28603). .

Conclusions. . . . . . . .
Summary of conclusions and recommendations. .
Note by Shri $. P. Sen Varma. . . . .

Pages
» ot
7

. 2
2

- 4
1 45
49

- a
. 72
- ur
» 16
» 142
. 153
+ 158
+ 166
» a

174

175

« 187


P. B. Gajendragadkar D.O. No, F.2(4)/73-L.c.
LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
‘A’ Wing, Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-1.
May 21, 1974.

T have grcat pleasure in forwarding herewith the 61st Report
of the Commission on certain problems referred by you to the
Commission by your D. O. fetter No. F. 352/PS/MLJ/73 dated
the 12th April, 1973.

Having regard to the nature of the subject and its importance,
the Commission first made a preliminary study of the said prob-
lems and framed a Questionnaire in respect of them. This
Questionnaire was scnt to the Ministries concerned, the State
Governments, the High Courts, Bar Associations and other in-
terested persons and bodies. The replies received in response to
his Questionnaire were then duly considered by the Commission
and the draft Report on the subject was prepared by the Mem-
ber-Secretary, Mr. Bakshi, and discussed by the Commission.
After the discussion, the Report was finalised.

One of us, Mr, S. ए, Sen-Verma, has signed the Report, sub-
ject to a separate note ; which deals with the problem posed by
section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act.

I may add that some of the problems, on which recommen-
dations have been made by the Commission in this Report, are
complex and vexed; but the Commission hopes that its relevant
recommendations may afford a satisfactory solution which may
help solve the difficulties mentioned by you in your letter.

With the forwarding of this Report, the present Com-
mission will have completed seventeen Reports since it began to
function on the Ist of October, 1971. As you know, some of
these Reports are short documents, because they deal with speci-
fic problems which, in the opinion of the Commission, needed
carly legislative solution.

Yours
Sd/-
(P. B. Gajendragadkar)
Hon'ble Mr. H. R. Gokhale,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

New Delhi-1.
Encl: As above.


1 पु

Tatro—1. The genesis of this Report lies in a letter received
by us from the Minister of Law and Justice, which is reproduced
below :-—

“As you are aware, the Government had the advantage of

obtaining the views of the Law Commission on more
than one occasion in connection with certain problems
arising out of the levy of sales tax and particularly
central sales tax. The principles sct out in the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act, 1956, for determining when a sale
or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State
trade or in the course of import or export of goods
into or from India were laid down on the basis of the
recommendations contained in the Second Report of
the Law Commission. Similarly, certain problems
arising out of the decision“of the Supreme Court in
K. 6. Khosla’s case were considered by the Law Com-
mission in its 30th Report.

2, Experience in working of both State Sales Tax and Cen-

tral Sales Tax has thrown up certain problems which
are of importance not only from the point of view of
the proper administration of the sales tax laws but also
for raising the resources necessary for development
activities

3, As you are aware, the scope for the levy of sales tax by

State Governments has been restricted in respect of
works contracts, hire-purchase transactions and also
on the transfer of controlled commodities by virtue of
statutory orders.

4. Certain State Governments have stated that Central sales

tax is being evaded by means of transfer of goods from.
‘one State to another on what ptaports to be cunsign-
ment transfer or a transfer to another branch of the
same institution. A suggestion has been made that
such transfers should themselves be made liable to
tax. A view has also heen expressed that scetion 5
of the Central Sales Tax Act as interpreted by the
Supreme Court in K, 6, Khosia’s case unduly res-
tricts the taxing powcr of the State.

Genesis,
ant
points
referred

to the
Commission.

ua


Scope of
the Re-
port.

Constitu-
tional
position:

2

5, In the administration of Central Sales Tax also there are
conflicting decisions of the courts as to the scope of the
penal provisions of that Act. Tt may also be neces-
sary to consider whether the provisions with regard
to penalties for the evasion of sales tax should not be
amended so as to do away with the concept of mens rea
or to bring it in line with the recommendations made
by the Commission with regard to offences under other
fiscal laws.

“6. alsa understand that difficulties are being felt with
regard to certain other matters such as the disposal
cof excess amounts collected by a dealer from a custo-
mer as sales tax and the cstablishment of check-posts
for preventing evasion and the better collection of taxes
on the sale of goods.

7. Some of these issues are of considerable importance in
the day-to-day administration of sales tax and are of
importance to the State and to the public alike. A
specific reference to some of these problems was made
at the meeting of the Ministers for sales tax of the
States in the Northern Zone.

8. [ shall, therefore, be grateful if the Commission could
look into these and other related problems arising out
of the administration of Centrel Sales Tax and the con-
stitutional restrictions on the imposition of sales tax
by State Government.”

Intro.—2. This Report, thus, deals with certain problems
connected with—

(a) power of the States to levy a tax on the sale of goods;
(b) the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

Neither the entire subject of Sales tax, nor the whole field
of the power referred to above, is intended to be covered in this
Report. Nor will the Report cover the whole of the Central
Sales Tax Act. It is cofined to certain specific problems.

Inteo.—3. The letter of reference’ mentions several topics.
Before discussing them, a few words about the power to levy
2 tax on the sale of goods would be relevant. Under the Cons-
titution, the power to levy tax on the sale or purchase of goods

1, Para Intro. 1. Supra.


3

is referrable to the legislative power vested in the States, by
virtue of the specific entry in the State list? But the pawer to
levy such tax on inter-State sales is vested in the Union Parlia-
ment.* Again, there are certain restrictions on the powers of
the States, We shall presently procecd to cxplain this appa-
rently complex scheme. The reasons for such a complicated
scheme will also be apparent from the discussion that follows.

Intro. The legislative authority! cf the States to impose a
tax on sales and purchases is restricted by three limitations con-
tained in articles 28601) (a), 286(1)(b) and 286(3) of the
Constitution respectively. These limitations overlap to some
extent; but they are cumulative, and the legislative power to tax
may be exercised only if it is not hit by any of the limitations.

There are general limitations in articles 301 to 304, but they
are not material for our purpose.

Tntro.—5, Before 1956. therc was a fourth limitation as to
inter-State sales and purchases. After 1956, this limitation assumed
the form of absence of a power to tax inter-State sale or pur-
chase, and the power is now exclusively vested in the Parliament®,

The three limitations relate to —

(i) tax on sales in the course of import or export;
(i) tax on sales outside the State; and

Gii) tax on sale of essential goods.

The main purpose of the limitation regarding tax on sale or
purchase in the course of import or export is to protect interna-
tional trade from taxation by States.

The main purpose of the limitation on the power of the
States to tax sales or purchases outside the State is to prevent
the imposition of an unduly heavy burden upon the consumer by
muhtiple taxation upon a single transaction of sale*.

Constitution, 7th Schedule, State List, entry 54.
Constitution, 7th Schedule, Union List, entry 924

See para [ntro, 12, infra

Para Intro, 3, supra.

Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Union List, entry 924,
¢.f. Bengat Timber Trading Corporation ¥. C.S.T. ALR. 1967 S.C.
(348, (249; (1967) 2 S.C_R. 547 [on the ald article 286 (1)7,

Limitations
on States
powers.

“


4

‘The object of the third limitation—as to taxation of sale or
purchase of essential goods—is obvious.

The abject Intro —6. In considering the various topics? on which the
of consti Commission's views have been sought, these objects of the Consti-
restrictions. tutional restrictions as to fiscal powers will have to be borne in

mind.

Two Madras cases? have explained in detail the scheme of
the taxation of sale of goods before and affer the Couxstitution,
and under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. We need not go
into those details here.

The Intro.—7. Coming now, te the matters raised in the lener of
mes reference, (*) we can broadly classify them into the following
ference. categories: —

{a) Points requiring amendment of the Constitution—parti-
cularty, State List, entry 54, which prescribes the taxing
power of the States in respect of tax on the sale of
goods;

(०) Points not requiring amendment of the Constitution,
but requiring amendment of certain statutory provisions
passed in pursuance of article 286 of the Constitution,
such as sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Central Saics Tax
Act. 1956.

(०) Paints requiring amendment of the Central Sales ‘Tax
Act, 1956, in respect of matters other than those men-
tioned in (b) above (e.g. punishment for the evasion
of tax).

Points at (8) and (b) involve constitutional questions.

Poiats or Intro—8. The various points that arise for consideration
umerated. — from the letter of reference* can be enumerated as follows: —

(9) ‘The scope for the levy of sales tax by State Government,
in respect of works contracts, hire-purchase transactions
and also on the transfer of controlled commodities by
virtue of statutory orders.

1, Para. 10110. |. supra.

2 fa) Laven & Tonbvo Lids. foint Commercial Tex Offcer, (1972)
2 MEd. 552: 967) 20 S.T.C. 150.
(9) Sitalokshnu Mills Lid. ¥. Depaty C.F. 1969) 2 MALS, 25

3. Para, Intro. supra.
4. Para. Intrn., supra.


3

(1) Evasion of Central Sales Tax by means of transfer of
goods from one State to another, on what purports to
be a consignment transfer or a transfer to another branch
of the same institution.

(iii) Whether section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, as inter-
preted by the Supreme Court in K. 6. Khesla's case,
unduiy restricts the taxing power of the States.

(iv) Conflicting decisions of the Courts as to the Central

sales tax in regard to the scope of the penal provisions
of that Act.

(v) Whether the provisions with regard to penalties for the
evasion of the sales tax should not be amended, so 85
10 do away with the concept of mens rea or to bring
them in line with the recommendations made by the
Law Commission with regard to offences under other
fiscal laws,

(vi) Difficultics felt with regard to certain other matters.
such as, the disposal of excess amounts collected by a
dealer from a customer as safes tax.

(vii) Establishment of check-posts for preventing evasion
and better collection of — taxes on the sale af goods.
We shall discuss them serially in due course,

Intro.—9. 007 Report deals with issues which have been ex-
pressly referred to us by the Minister of Law, Justice and Company
Affairs by his letter dated 12th April, 1973! as well as issues
which arise therefrom. Before we proceed to deal with these
issues, we ought. in fairness, to point out that the ultimate de-
cision of most of these issues will involve considerations of policy
of a complex political and economic character. The area cove-
red by these considerations, however, is outside our inguiry. and
our Report will be confined to the legal aspects of the issues
under inquiry; and our recommendations and suggestions will
be based on certain assumptions made by us from the relevant
statements in the communication of the Minister for Law,
Justice and Company Affairs. We shall refer to these assump-
tions in due course, when we deal with the serveral issues seri-
ally. We thought it necessary to make this observation, in order
to avoid any misunderstanding about the scope of our inquiry
and about the character and cffect of our recommendations and
suggestions,

Sep 303 [13. i, supra.

Policy
matters
outside
the in-
quiry.


6

Analysis Intro.—10. An analysis of the long title of the Central Safes
Central Tax Act will indicate the principal purposes of the enactment.

Sales Tax = These are—
ch.

(}) to formulate principles for determining when a sale or
purchase of goods takes place—

(a) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce (sec-
tion 3), or

(b) outside a State (section की, or

fe) in the course of import inte or export from India
(section 5);

(2) to provide for the—
(a) levy (sections 6 & 8),

(b) collection [section 9{1) and 9(2)1, and
{c) distribution [see, section 9(4)] of taxes on sales at
(1) above, and sale of goods declared to be of spe-
cial importance in inter-State trade or commerce,
and

(3) to declare certain goods to be of special importance in
jnter-State trade or commerce [section 14] and

{4) to specify the restrictions and conditions to which State
laws imposing taxes on the sale or purchase of such
goods of special importance shall he subject [section
15]

The remaining sections of the Act relute to ancillary matters
or confer powers, ¢.g., section 1 (giving the short title, ete),
section 2 (giving definitions), section 7 (providing for registration
of dealers), sections 9A, 10 and 11 (banning the collection of
tax except by registered dealers, enumerating offences and pro-
viding for penalty, coguizance, etc.,) section 12 (providing for
indemnity to officers), section 13 (granting a rule-making power)
and section 16 (repealing an earlier Act declaring certain goods
to be essential commodities).

We now procced to discuss the questions referred to us, and
such other matters as have raised difficulties.


CHAPTER [

The scope for the levy of sales tax by State Governments

1.1, We deal, in this Chapter, with the scope for the levy of Introductory
sales tax by State Governments. We shall deal iater in detail
with the power to tax three specific transactions.—works contracts
hire-purchase transactions, and the transfer of controlled com-
modities by virtue of statutory orders.

1.2. The three transactions? mentioned above may appear Absence
to be unconnected with one another. But certain legal issues of element
are common to them. These issues arise out of the concept of of pro-
sale as known to the general law of sale of goods,—particularly, एटा oral
the passing of property and the consensual element in a sale. The element.
total absence of these elements, or their presence in an inperfect
form, has raised questions as to whether the transactions are tax-
able as sales.

1.3. The Constitution does not define the expression “sale”. Definition
Inthe Sale of Goods Act?, a contract of sale is defined as in the

__ Sale of
follows: Goods

“4 contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby the seller aa
transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer
for a price. Thece may be a contract of sale between one part-
owner and another”.

The Act makes it clear that “a contract of sale may be ab-
solute or conditional®.”

The difference between a “sale” and an “agreement to sell”
js also Jaid down in the Act*. ‘Where, under a contract of sale,
the property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer
the contract is called a sale, but where the transfer of the property

५ Para. Vt, supras

ida 4(1), Sale of Goods Act, 1930.
on 4 (2}, Sale of Gaods Act, 1930.
a 4 (3), Sale of Geods Act, 1930.

7



Power of

states to
levy tax on
“Sale” —
meaning
attributed 10
sale,

‘Sale under
the English
Act.

§

in the goods is to take place al a future time oF subject to some

condition thereafter to be fulfilled, the contract is called an
agreement ta बला.

As to when the agreement ripens into a sale, the Act provi-
des :+

“An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses
or the conditions are fulfilled subject to which the
property in the goods is transferred.”

Passing of property thus plays an important part in the concept
of sale of goods under the Act.

1.4, The power of the States to Ievy a tax on the sale or
Purchase of goods is to be found in the Constitution, 7th Sche-
dule, State List, entry 54. The Supreme Court* has consistently
held that the expression “sale of goods”, as uscd in the legisla-
tive entries in the Constitution and in the Government of India
Act, 1935, bears the same meaning as it has® in the Sale of
Goods Act, 1930,

Therefore, while the State Legislature may, under the State
List, entry 54, legislate in respect of the serics of acts beginning
with an agreement of sale between parties competent to contract
and cesulting in the transfer of property from one of the parties
to the agreement to the other for a price (and matters inciden-
tal thereto), it cannot levy a tax on a transaction which is not a
“sale” within the Sale of goods Act.

1.4A. In England the Sale of Goods Act defines a contract
of sale of goods as!

“a contract whereby the seller transfers or agrees to trans~
fer the property in goods to the buyer for a money
consideration, called the price.”

1. Section 4 (3), Sale of Goods Act, 1930.
4, (a) State of Madras v. Gannon Dynkerley & Co, Ltd. (1959) 5.C.R
379; A.LR. 1958 S.C. 560;
(b) New Indian Sugar Mills v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar
(1933) Supp. 2 S.C.R. 459; A.L-R. 1963 S.C. 1207;
(©) Bhopat Sugar Industries v. $.T.0. (1964) 1 S.C.R, 481; ALR.
1964 S.C. 1037.
3, As to the Sale of Goods Act, sce pata 1.3, Supra.

4. The Sale of Goods Act, 1893, section 1(1) and 1(3) (Eng).



ae
he

guods” had a narrow m

9

The Act gives different names to the two transactions: —

“Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods
is wansferred from the seller to the buyer the contract
js called a salc; but where the transfer of the property
in the goods is to take place at a future time or subject
to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled the contract
is called an agreement to seli.”

1.48. It would appear that at common law also, ‘sale of Sale under
ning, and the passing of property—im- common law.
mediately or at an appointed time—was of the essence of the
transaction, As the Indian Contract Act! (as originally enacted)
provided,—"Sale is the exchange of property for a price. [t in-

volves the transfer of tke ownership of the thing sold from the

seller to the buyer”.

1.5. It may be that the arrow concept of sale in the com- Narrow
mon law, and in the statute based thereon*, is due to the fact concept of
that sale was originally a “cash and carry” transaction. Perhaps, हे
the most dramatic illustration of the difficulties in breaking with
the past in this respect is the long struggle of warranty law with
the principle of caveat empior—the principle that “he who docs
not open his eves, opens his purse”,—a maxim reflecting 2 phase
in the history of sales Jaw when a vale was a “cash and carry”
transaction".

This may account for the fact that the emphasis is on the
passing of property,—though the position in regard to payment
of the price and other aspects has undergone modification.

1.54, This requirement as to the passing of property being Some tran-
essential, it is well-established* that a transaction lacking transfer Which do
of property cannot be taxed as a sale by creating a legal fiction not amount
in the shape of a deeming clause which seeks to extend the con- * “6
cept of ‘sale’.

2. Para 1.44 and 1.48, Supra,
3, (a) Hamilton, “The Ancient Maxim Caveat Emptor,” (1931) 40 Yale
LJ. 1133.
(b) Kessler, “Protection af the Consumer" (1964-65) 74 Yale L.J.
262, 263.
4. Dy CTO. ५. 8७27 titia Le
2 S8.C.R. 421,

A.L.R. 1963 S.C. 838, 840; (1968)


No property
passed in
bire-pur-
chage and
building
contracts.

Certain
transactions
not to be
regarded as
sale.

Definition of
‘sale’ in the
Central
Sales Tax
Act.

1G

1.6. Since the expression “sale of goods” in the Consurution,
State List, eniry 54, has the same meaning as in the Sale of
Goods Acts’, a hire-purchase agreement is nol @ sale?, as 80
property passes in such transaction until the option to purchase
is exercised and the other terms of the agreement fulfilled®, Simi-
Jarly, in a building contract which is entire and indivisible, there
is no “sale” of goods*. It is a contract of works’, involving skill
and labour, and not directly pertaining to the transfer of property
in goods in specie. Consignments of goods by a principal to his
agent is also not a sale, there being no passing of property for
a price’ from one person to another.

1.7. Several other transactions fall outside the concept of
“sale” because of the absence of the essential requirement of
sale. For example a transaction between an hotelier and a resi-
dent customer of the hotel is one of “service”, and is not taxable?
under the head of “sale of goods”, if there is a consolidated
charge for boarding and lodging-

‘The allotment of the goods of a firm amongst its partners, on
the dissolution of the firm, also does not amount to a “sale”. A
provision in a Bombay 4०१, in so far as it purported to tax such
allotment. was held? to be ultra vires the State Legislature.

1.8. We may now refer to the definition of ‘sale’ in the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act, The Act defines ‘sale’ as followst®:—

“ ‘Sale’, with its grammatical variations and cognate expres-
sions, means any fransfer of property in goods by one
person to another for cash or for deferred payment or

4. Para 1.4, Supra,

2, KE. Johar & Co, ४. Dy, €.7.0, AAR. 1963 S.C. 1082, 1089;
(1965) 28.0. R.112,

3, See Chapter 1-B, infra. (Hite-putchase).

4, State af Madras v, Gannon Dunkerley & Co. A LR. 1958 S.C, 560,
677; (1959) S.C.R, 379.

5, See Chapter 1-A, infra (Works Contract).

6, See Chapter 2, infra (Consignments).

7, Assuctated Hotels of India Ltd, ९. Exctse & Taxation Officer, Sinta
ALR, 1966 Punj. 449, 454 (0 458, para 18 to 35.

8, Section 26(3), Bonsbay Sales Tax Act, 1963 (3 of 1953).

३, State of Gujarat v. MIS. Ramaniel & Co., ATR, 1965 Guj.
60, 69, para 17-18,

19, Section 2(u), Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.



i

for any other valuable consideration, and includes a
transfer of goods on the hire-purchase or other system
of payment by instalments, but does not include a
mortgage ot hypothecation or a charge or pledge on
goods.”.

We shail discuss in detail certain clements of this definition
Tater’,

1.9. This, in brief, is the meaning given to the expression Should the
sale of goods”, (a) with reference to the constitutional compe- नि of
Y tence of the State Legislatures to levy a tax thereon and (b) in widened”
the Central Sales Tax Act.

-?

The question that now falls to be considered is:—

Is it desirable to extend the scope of taxability under the
head of ‘tax on the sale or purchase of goods’? The
question has several branches. Each of them requires
full discussion,

Para 13.11, infra (Hire Purchase)

20M. of Law/74—2


Introductory.

Hudson's
definition
of building
contracts,

Works, the
essential
feature,

New Works
or repairs.

CHAPTER LA

TAXABILITY OF WORKS CONTRACIS

Tnireductory

1A.1. Having discussed generally the power of the States,
we now discuss the legal position regarding taxability. of works
contracts in particular. A typical example of a works contract is
8 building contract, which could be usefully considered in some
detail.

Building contracts

1A.2. According to Hudson :+

“A buliding or engineering contract may be defined, for the
purpose of this book, as an agreement under which a person (in
this book called variously the builder or contractor), undertakes
for reward to carry out for another person (variously referred to
as the building owner or employer), works of a building of civil
engineering character.”

1A.3. The essential nature of the contract is the carrying out
of works,?

14.4, A works contract may comprise new works, and also
repairs, for example, the operations of the Central Public Works
Department are divided primarily into two categories, “original
works” and “repairs”. It has been stated’ that “original works”
comprise all new constructions, whether of entirely new works or
of additions and alternations to existing works or replacement or
remodelling of existing buildings. Repairs include operations
undertaken to maintain buildings and works in proper condition.
The works on which expenditure does not exceed Rs. 75,000

1, Hudson, Building & Engineering Contracts, (1965), page 1.
2, See also para 14-7 and 14-20, infra,
३, Report of the study Team on CPWD (July 1965), page 13,

12


13
are classified as micor works and those on which it excecd ९
Rs. 75,000 as major works. Ali original works and repairs cost-
ing more than Rs. 5,000 aad relating to Central Civil buildings
are to be executed through the agency of the Central Public
Works Department. Prior concurrence of the Ministry of Works
and Housing is necessary for entrusting civil works to any agency
other than the Central Public Works Department.”.

14.5. Materials do constitute a valuable part of the total Materials
cost of works. And that is why the question often arises whether axaluatle
a works contract can be treated as a sale for the purposes of cost.

laws taxing sales.

14.6, It bas been estimated, in the case of works construct- Materials a
ed for the C.P.W.D. utat materials and stores account for nearly
two-thirds of the cost of works? (In the case of departmental CP.W.D.
execution of works, the Government has to arrange for all the re- ment santa
quirements of materials and stores).®

Difference between “works and sale”

1A. 7. The primary difference between a contract for work Difference
(ot service) and a contract for the sale of goods is that in the for- contract of
mer there is in the person performing the work rendering a works und
service, no property in the thing produced as a whole, even if a for rast
part or even a whole of the materials used by him may have
been his property. *-%. Eventually, the property passes ;१ in the
generality of building contracts, the agreement between the par-
ties is that the contractor should construct a building according
to the specifications contained in the agreement, and in consi-
deration therefor, he should receive the payment as provided
therein. There is, in such agreement, neither a contract to sell
the materials used in construction, nor does property pass therein
as movables. The materials pass to the owner of the building
only as an accretion te the building. A contract for the sale of
materials cannot be implied from such an agreement.

1 Report of the 51909 Team ०9 C.P.W.D. (uly 1965), page 78,

2, Report of the Study Tean on C.P,W.D, (uly, 1965) page 71.
As to the practice regarding payment, 5०६ para 1A-18 infra,

4, CS.T, ४. Puenshattam Premji. (1970) 26 §.T.C. 38, 41

S22 also 9014 16-27, infra.

6, State af Madeas v, Gitaan Denteviey, (1958) ALR. 1958 S.C. 560
(on appeal from A.1.R, 1954 Mad. 1130).



14

Splitting up 14.8. Where the contract is indivisible, it cannct be split up,
by acest and even the fact that the asscssee has split it up for his own
* purposes is immaterial.?

1A.9. Gannon Dunkerley’s case? is an example of taxation

Gannon .

Dunkerley's of composite contracts, involving the supply of goods und servi-

case. ces, It is the leading case, holding that States cannot tax works
contracts.

Ia Guntur Tobacco case* various aspects of a contract of
work were thus dealt with :—

“A contract for work in the execution of which goods were
used may take one of three forms. The contract may
be for work to be done for remuneration for supply
of materials used in the execution of the works for #
price; it may be a contract for work in which the use
of materials is accassory or incidental to the execution
of the work; or it may be a contract for work, and
the usc or supply of materials, though not acccssory
to the execution of contract, is voluntary or gratituous
In the last class there is no sale, because, though
property passes it docs not pass for a price, whether
a contract is of the first or the second class must
depend upon the circumstances; if it is of the first, it
is a composite contract for work and sale of goods;
where it is of the second category. it is a contract for
execution of work not involving sale of goods.”

Two typesof 1.11. Work contracts, thus are of various types. For the
cts where the present purpose, it is sufficient to state that where the question

clement of whether 8 particular contract of work is taxable by the States

be split as a contract of sale arises, one has to distinguish between.
up and contracts in which the element of sale is divisible and contracts
एफ. गा which such element cannot be split up and which are, there-
be. fore, indivisible. Briefly, the position is as follows: —

(a)Where the agreement constitutes a single contract (as
above), it is not open to the State ‘to split up’ the

1, (@) C.S.T. ४. Asha Watch Co. (1971) 28 S.T.C. 395 (Gujarat) :
(0) Variety Body Builders v. C.S.T. (1971) 28 S.T.C. 339 (Gujarat).
2, State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. ALR. 1958 S.C. 560
(1959) S.C.R. 379
3, Government of Andhra Prades ¥. Guntur Tobacco Ltd., (1965)
16 S.T.C, 240 at page 255 S.C.)


15

agreement inte its component parts, i.e. to single out
that which relates to the supply of materials and to
impose a tax thercon treating’ it as one of sale.

(b) Where the contract is one for the execution of work
for a lump sum as offered by a tender and accepted
by the contractor, no separate agreement for the supply
of materials is involved, *,* even though there is a term
in the agreement that the property in materials would
pass to the employer as soon as the goods were
brought to the site by the contractor.

(c)Partics may, however, enter into distinct and separate
contracts, one for the transfer of materials for moncy
consideration and the other for payment of the remu-
neration for services and for work done.*

{d)The burden of showing that a works of service contract
involves a taxable sale of the materials used is upon
the taxing authorities, and the burden is not dis-
charged by merely showing that property in goods
which belonged to the party performing the service or
executing the contract stands transferred to the other
party.

Position in some other countries

1A.12. The position in Australia in this respect may be con-In Austra-
trasted. In a new South Wales case," the Supreme Court of New ™
South Wales held, that the agreement between the parlies was
one to do certain work and to supply certain materials, and not
an agreement for the sale or delivery of the goods.?

3, State uf Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley. ALR. 1948 S.C. 560.
2. Peare Lal ९. State of Punjab (1958) 9 S.T.C. 412 (8.C.).

3, Carl Stil’s case, ALR. 1961 S.C. 1615, 1619.

4. State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley, AIR. 1958 5.0. 560.

3, Government of Andhra Pradesh v. Guat Tobacco Ltd. (1985) 16
$.1.0. 240, 255 (8,८.).

6, Sydney Hydraulic aid Central Engineering Co. ४... Blackwood &
Son, 8N.S.W.SR. 10.

7, Leving’s Commonwealth Sales Tax Law and Practice (1950) page 77.


. 16

In 1932, the Legislature’ intervened, and enacted, in the
statute of 1930, a new provision, section 3(4), in the following
terms*:—

“For the purpose of this Act, a person shall be deemed to
have sold goods, if, in the performance of any contract
(not being a contract for the sale of goods) under
which he has received, or is entitled to receive, valuable
consideration, he supplies geods the preperty in which
Gthether as goods or in some other form} passes,
under the terms of the contract, io some other person.”

After this, the question arose in faier case whether? a con-
tractor who fabricated piles and uscd them in construc-
ting a bridge was liable to pay sales tax on the value
of the piles. The majority of the court held that
though there was, in fact, wo sale of the piles, in law
there was one, by reason of section 3(4) of the Aet.

Passing of property

The post 14.13. A treatise which deals with the practice in respect of
won re building contracts* states the position as to the passing of property
passing of (Cio the materials) in works contracts, in these words :—
Property,

“Materials brought on to the site by the contractor remains
his properiy, in the absence of a provision to the con-
trary, until they become affixed to the land ie, are
built into the works,5-°, whereupon they become the
property of the owner of the freebold.? If the employer
has an estate or interest less than the freehold, he en-
joys the property duting such estate or interest. In the
case of ships the property passes when the matcrials

3, See State of Madras ¥. Gannon Bumkerlay & Co. AT.R.1958

S.C, 560, 570.

Section 3(4), Commonwealth Sales Tax Act (Australia),

|. MLR, Hornibrook, (Priv) Lid. २, Federal Commissioner of Toxation
(1939) 62 CLLR. 272, 281.

', Keating, Buitding Contracis (1955) page 96.

. Keating, Building Contracts (1955), page 96

, Tripp ९... Armitage,(1839) 4M & W. 687.

. Elwes v. Man, (1802) 3 East 38

wos

MOD oa om


17

are fixed, ‘or, in a reasonable sense, made party of the

corpus’.

14.14. It is, however, stated in the same treatise.2 “I is com-
mon to have a clause which purports to vest. materials and some-
times plant in the employer before they are fixed. The principal
objects of such a clause are to provide a security to the employer
for money advanced and to enable the employer to obtain the
speedy completion of the works by another contractor in the
event of the original contractor’s default, by providing materials
and plant on the site teady to use free from the claims of the ori-
ginal contractor, and his creditors, or his trustee in bankruptcy
or liquidator, Whether or not the clause achieves its purpose
depends upon the words used.? If the formula used is “the mate-
rials shat become and be,’ or “be and become” the property of
the emptoyer, then normally “the clause means what it says, opera-
tes according to its tenor and effectively transfers the title.

Ji, on the other hand: words like ‘considered to be’, are
used, the clause may be ineffective to achieve its pur-
pose, the property may remain in the contractor.*

1A.15. Clause 11 of the form of the Royal Institute of Contract

Britisb Architects’ may be referred to, in this connection :— form of
yal
“Clause 11—Unfixed materials when taken into account हक 37177
be the property of the employer. Architects.

Where in any certificate of which the Contractor, has receiv-
el payment the Architect has in accordance with clause 24(b)

1, Seuth v, Moore (1896) 11 App. Cas, 350, 381, (H.L.). for other cases
on ships, see Re Salmon and Woods, ex, p. Gould, (1885) 2 Morr.
Bkptcy. Cas 137; Reid ४, Macheth & Gray (1904) A.C. 323 (HLL).
Re Blyth Ship Building ete. Co, Let. (19261 Ch. 494 (C.4 ).

है, Keating, Building Contracts (1955), page 97.

3, See, e.g. clause 11, R.TLB.A. form qinfia).

4, Bennett etc, Ltd. v. Sugar City, (1951) AC. 786 (P.C.).
S. See Reeves ¥. Barlow, (1884) 12 0.8 13, 436 (C.A.).

*. (a) Bennett ete. Ltd. ४. Sugar City, (1951) A.C. 786, 814,
(b) Re Winer ex p. Bolland, (1878) 8Ch. D. 225.

7, Keating, Building Contracts (1955), page 230.


Provision.
in another
form ado-
pled by

Association
of sub-

contractors.

‘When does
property
in materi-
als pags.

18

of these Conditions included the value of any unfixed materials
and goods intended for, and placed on or adjacent to the Works,
such materials and goods shall become the property of the Em-
ploycr and shall not be removed except for use upon the Works
unless the Architect has authorised in writing such removal, but
the Contractor shali remain responsible for loss or damage to the
same.”,

1A.16. Another form (adopted by the Association of sub-
contractors) has this clause? :—

“Vesting of Materials :

11.—All plant, materials and equipment of any kind whatso-
ever which are brought on to the site by the Contractor but arc
aot intended for incorporation in the Works shall remain the pro-
perty of the Contractor in any event. Any materials, fitments or
other goods delivered to the site for incorporation in the Works
shall remain the property of the Contractor and shall not be-
come the property of the Employer until whichever is earlicr
of the following Gmes :—

(a) When the same have been incorporated in the Works,
or

(9) When the same have been paid for in full (subject only
to the deduction of such sums as the Employer may be
entitled to retain in accordance with the provisions of
clause 12 hereof).

without prejudice to any other rights or remedies the Contractor
shall have a lien on any unincorporated materials, fitments or
goods which may have become the property of the Employer for
the amount of any unpaid portion of the Contract price due to
the Contractor.”

1A.17. It is not always easy to determine when the property
in the materials passes in a Works. Contract; this is because pay-
ment is not usually made in a lump sum.

1, Keating, Building Contracts (1955), page 310—311.


19

1A.18. Take, for example, the practice in the Central Public Practice

Works Department, which has been thus deseribed!-2: “A, Con- in C.P.W.D,
tractor is required to submit 2 running bill each month on or before

the date fixed by the Engincer-in-charge for all works executed

in the previous month and the Engineer-in-charge has to take

or cause to be taken the requisite measurements for the purpose

of having the bill verified and the claim, to the extent admissible,
adjusted, as far as possible before the expiry of 10 days from
Prescatation of the bill. If the contractor does not submit the

dill within the time fixed, the Engineer-in-charge may depute

a subordinate, within 7 days of the date fixed to measure the work

in the presence of the Contractor whose countersignature to the
measurement list will be sufficient warrant and the Engineer-in-
charge may prepare a bill from such a list.”

Tests adopted

1A,19. It may sometimes be difficult to decide whether a Tests for

contract is of works or of sale. Several tests are adopted,* for the distinguish-
है oe पं ing between

Purpose,—e.g. one test is whether Primarily the transfer of the workscom

movable article is taken as such, or whether the transfer is only tracts and

ancillary to another contract. Another test is whether the article **!*

supplied has itself a general market. A contract to produce photo-

gtaphs of a particular person is, for cxample, one of works,*

because the photographs would have no general market, The

Production is really of a work of art requiring skill."

1A.20. It has been stated that states are faced with several States _
problems’ owing to the extension of the Principle to other cases faceg with
involving “body building”.

Whether amendment needed

1A.21. It is in this background that we have considered the Conctusion.
question whether the power to tax indivisible contracts of works
should be conferred on the Sates,

1. Report of the Study Team on Central Public Works Department
(1965), page 82,

2. AS to C.P.W.D. works in general, sec Para 14.6, supra.

4. Soe also pura 14.7, supra,

4. 8. €. Kame v. Assistant 8.7.0. (1971) 28 S.T.C. 1, 3 (MLD).

3, CST. ४, Patel ludia Lid. (1971) 28 S.T.C, 516 (Bombay) (Mody 0.3.
aod Chandrachud J.)

5. Camera Hause v. State of Maharashira, ALR. 1956 Bom, 437
(Abhyankar & Vimadalal JJ) (Reviews cases).

7, Notes in the Ministry of Finance,



20

In our view, in its judgments on this question,
the Supreme Court, with respect appears to have
adopted an unusually restricted interpretation of the
expression “sale”. It is true that the expression “sale” is not
defined in the Constitution—but, it is a well-recognised canon
of construction that the words used in the three Legislative Lists
should receive the widest possible interpretation and it was, we
venture to suggest, somewhat inappropriate to have taken
recourse to the narrow definition of the word “sale” contained
in the sale of Goods Act for the purpuse of interpreting that
expression occurring in the state List, entry 54. That is the
principal juridical ground on which we have expressed our
preference! for the transfer of the power to tax such contracts
to the State Legislatures. We ought to add that before the judg-
ment of the Supreme Court was pronounced? “sale” was usually
regarded as including works contracts, and works contracts were:
as such, regarded as falling within the power of the States to
tax under State List, entry 54, and taxes on that basis were being
levied and recovered.

1A.22. The present pesitiot on the subject and the possible
alternatives, may be briefly stated thus :—

{i)The Union has the power to tax works contracts: under
Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Union List, entry 97.

(ii) The power to tax iater-State works has not, so far, been
exercised by the Uuion, and the definition of ‘sale’ in
the Central Sales Tax Act docs not include Works con~
tract.

Gii) The power to tax works contracts within the State also
vests in the Union, under Union List, entry 97 (as ine
terpreted in the judgments of the Supreme Court}.

Before the judgments of the Supreme Court, however, sale
was usually regarded as including a works contract. The ques-
tion is ultimately one of policy, but the Commission would pre-
fer restoration of the power to the States.

Narrow interpretation of the expression “sale” was not the
practice before the Supreme Court judgments. Entries in the legis~
lative list, should receive a broad interprctation. Fine nuances

1. Para 1.22, supre.
2. Gannon Dunkertey's case.


2

anced not be material. The transactions resemble sale in substance.
Hence, the power should be given to the States.

Hf this alternative is adopted, there are several drafting devi-
ces open, ¢.g.:—-

(a} amending State List, entry 54, or
(09) adding a fresh entry in the State List, or

(९) inserting in article 366 a wide definition of “sale” so as
to include works contracts.

The Commission prefers the last one. It would avoid multi-
ple amendments,

Gv) Whether the course at (iii) should be adopted or not,
is a matter of policy. involving financial and political
implications.

(v) In the alternative, power to tax intra-State works con-
iracts could (if a policy decision to that effect is taken
by the Union), be exercised by the Union, and the
necessary law passed. The proceeds of the tax imposed
thereunder could, then be distributed to the State Arti-
cle 269 may have to be amended in that case.

(vi) Whether the course referred to at (v) above, should be
adopted or not, is again a matter of Policy, involving
financial and political considerations,


Nature
of hire-
purchase
under the
Indian
Act

CHAPTER 1B

HIRE-PURCHASE TRANSACTIONS

Introductory

1B. 1. In this Chapter, we shall deal with the question of
tax on hire-purchase transactions. Before dealing with the
position regarding tax on such transactions, it is desirable to
refer briefly to the nature of hire-purchase.

Nature of hire-purchase

1B. 2. The definition of hire-purchase agreement in the
recent Indian Act? dealing with hire-purchase is as follows :-—
“{¢) ‘hire-purchase agreement’ means an agreement under
which goods arc let on hire end under which the
hirer has an option to purchase them in accordance
with the terms of the agreement and includes an

agreement under which—

{i) possession of goods is delivered by the owner
thereof to a person on condition that such person
pays the agreed amount in periodical instalments,
and

(ii) the property in the goods is to pass to such person
on the payment of the last of such instalments,
and

(iii) such person has a right to terminate the agrec-
ment at any time before the property so passcs ;”

In the same Act, “hire-purchase price” is defined as
follows:—

(9) “hire-purchase price” means the total sum payable
by the hirer under a hice-purchase agreement in

1. Section 200) and 2(d), Hire-Purchase Act, 1972 (Central Act 26 of

1972).
[ft has not yet becn brought into force].

- 22



23

order te complete the purchase of, or the acquisition
of property in, the goods to which the agreement
relates ; and includes any sum so payable by the
hirer under the hice-purchase agreement by way of
a deposit or other initial payment, or ercdited or to
be credited to him under such agreement on account
of any such deposit or payment, whether that sum
is to be or has been paid to the ewner or to any
other person or is to be or has been discharged
by payment or money or by transfer of delivery of
goods or by any other means ; but does not include
any sum payable as a penalty or as compensation
or damages for a breach of the agreement”.

1B. 3. A hire-purchase agreement may be distinguished pistinction
* between

from certain other types of credit transactions. re
hire-pur-

First, there are “credit sale” agreements. A credit sale chase and
agreement in the present context may be defined as art un-condi- agreements.
tional contract for the sale of goods, under which the whole or sees
part of the purchase price is payable by instalments.> We are हु
fot concerned with credit sales where the entire price is payable
in one instalment. We are concerned with credit sales with
price payable in instalments. The contract for the sale is “un-
conditional”, in the sense that the property in the goods is
transferred to the buyer under the contract. If the transfer of
the property is to take place at a future time, or subject to some
condition thereafter to be fulfilled,? then the agreement is not
a credit sale agreement, but @ conditional sale. Credit sales
are distinct from hire-purchase agreements, because, in a credit
sale, the buyer is 2 person to whom the property has been trans-
ferred ; he is not a hirer of the goods, but the owner. A credit
sale resembles a hire-purchase, inasmuch as the price is payabie
‘by instalments.

Jt is obvious that the seller under a credit sale takes a risk,
because in case of default by the buyer, his only remedy is to
sue the buyer, for the price.

1B. 4. Next, we must distinguish an agreement of 8 CON- Condi
ditional sale from a hire purchase. A conditional sale agreement tional
may be defined? as an agreement for the sale of goods under which Sale-

AG. Guest, Law of Hire purchase (1966), page 14, paragraph 32.
Compare the Sale of Goods Act.

As to conditional sales, see para 1B.4, infra.

A.G. Guest, Law of Hire-purchased (1986), page 15, paragraph 33.

Seppe


24

the purchase price or part of it is payable by instalments, and the
property in the goods is to remain in the seller (notwithstanding
that the bnyer is to be in possession of the goods) until such
conditions as to the payment of instalments or otherwise, as
may be specified in the agreement, are fulfilled. Property docs
uot pass immediately, but remains in the seller during the con-
tinuance of the agreement. To this extent, such agreements
resemble hire-purchase. But the distinction is that the buyer
under a conditional sale is bound to buy the goods, while, in
the case of a hire-purchase, the hire-purchaser has the right to
elect whether he will buy the goods or return them to the
seller.

वा should be noted that though the seller in a conditional
sale remains the owner, the buyer (in a conditional sale) is
a person who, “having agreed to buy goods”, obtains with the con-
sent of the seller possession of the goods and, therefore, he can
pass a good title to third parties.*

Chart 1B. 5, The following chart will show the similarities and

Showing differences between hire-putchase and other transactions :—
difference.

Credit Sale Conditional Outright Hite-
with price payable sale sale purchase
in instalments
(i) Property Property does Property passes Property does
passes not pass imme- immediately. not pase imme-
immediately. diatly. diately.

Gi) Possession — Possession Possession Possession
transferred. — teansferred. transferred. transferced.

(iii) Obligation Obligation to Obligation to No obligation to
to buy exists— buy exists. buy carried out buy, though
in fact there by sale. there is an
is already a option to buy.
sale.

{iv) Price pay- Price payable Price already Price payable
able by in- by instalments. paid. by instalments,
stalments,

(२) Buyer can Buyer can pass Buyer can pass Buyer cannot pass
pass title to title Lee v. title to third title because he
third parties. Busler2 parties. has not agreed

ta buy, (Helby 3-4

v. Mathews),

1. Sce the sale of Goods Act.

2. Lee v, Butler, (1893) 2Y.B. 311.

3. Helby v. Mathews, (1895) AC. 471.

4° See also Butterworth v.Kingsway Motors, (1954) 1 W.L.R. 1286.



25

1B. 6, In an outright sale, of course, the property passes Outright
immediately, and the obligation to buy has been carried out and, ©:
therefore, it is distinct from a hire-purchase.

IB. 7. At this stage it may be relevant to say a few words Nature of
about the nature of the rights passing under hire-purchase, interest
While, traditionally, a hire-purchase agreement has not been re- Birespure
garded as 3 mortgage or security transaction, a different view
seems to have been taken in practice. Professor A. G. Guest has
said,’ “It would be realistic to accept that the rights of a hirer
under a hire-purchase agreement must now be regarded as a
valuable species of property.” Jt may be noted that the hire-pur-
chase legislation of the States in Australia docs recognise the
“property” of hirers.*

18. 8. For example, section 9 of the Hire-purchase Act,
1960 (New South Wales), refers to the assignment of “the right,
title and interest” of a hirer. The English decision in Wickham
Holdings+ rejected “the nakedness of thé hirer’s property rights”,
Tn an earlier English case,> the rights of hirers had been recog-
nised. The recognition of the property rights of a hirer is equally
discernible in another English case®, The recent Indian Act also
tecognises certain rights of the hirer?.

Taxability of hire-purchase transactions-Position in States.

1B. 9, Taxability of hire-purchase transactions (under the Taxebility
power to levy a tax on the sale or purchase of goods) can be of hire pur-
considered separately with reference to :-— sactions.

(1) position as regards power of the States;
(2) position under the Central Satcs Tax Act;

(3) position as regards the Union Territories.

1B, 9A. Hire-purchase (until its fructification in sale) is a the States
mere baflment, and is not analogous to sale, Property may ulti- a ol
mately pass to the hirer ; but that is problematic, and dependent ween hire:

on the volition of the hirer’. The essence of sale is the passing purchase
= —— —— —— a 3 न
‘urrespondence”, (1970) 44 Aust. L.J. 296.

See R. Baat
AG. Guest, Note in (1962) 73 L.Q.R. 30,33,

R. Baxt “Carcespandence™, (1970) 44 Aust. 1..1. 296.
ckham Hakdings, (1967) 1 W.L.R. 295.

# Co. ४. Coz. (1914) 1 1८, 8. 244.
Spellman ९. Spetimas (1961) 1 ए...२. 921.
Hireparchase Act, 1972 (Central Act 26 of 1972),

3 Para 1-8-18-5 supra.



Position
as suml-
marised.

Position
under the
Central
Sales Tax
Act.

26

of property, which is absent in the case of hire-purchase (until
its ultimate fruition). The hirer enjoys the use of the goods
until determination of the agreement ; but the title to goods still
remains in the owner.

Tt is because of this difference between hire-purchase and
sale that the constitutional power of the States to levy a tax on
the sale or purchase of gocds! has been construed as net in-
cluding a hire-purchase which does net result in sale.”

Tf a hire-purchase results in sale, sales tax is undoubtably
leviable by the States. No doubt, it is difficult to determine the
“sale price” for the purpose of the sales tax law,® but this has
no bearing on the question of legislative competence.

1B. 10. The position as regards the power of States to levy
a tax on hire-purchase can be briefly stated as follows :—

(a) The States cannot tax hire-purchase transactions not
resulting in sale *

(0) The States can tax hire-purchase transactions restlt-
ing in sale, but only to the extent to which the tax
is levied on the sale price®, the sale price in this
case being a notional figure which has to be calcu-
Jated according to the criteria legally permissible*.

It would appear that (as of 1966) the Sales Tax Acts of
some States included, within the expression “sale”, hire-purchase
ete, with a non obstante clause. But this provision must be read
as subject to what is stated above.

Position under the Central Sales Tax Act

1B.11. The definition of “sale” in Central Sales Tax Act,
which we have already quoted’, is as follows® ;—

“(g) ‘sale’, with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, means any transfer of property in goods
अंछापाऊ, व्यपशडद,.....$फ || —
K.L, Johar ¥. Dy.C.7.0., ALR. 1964 8.2. 1082.
See para 18.26, infra.
Para 1B.9A., supra.
K.L, Johar v. Dy. C.T.0., AAR. 8.C. 1082.
Pera 1 B,25 and 1 8.26, infra.
Para—8. supra,
Section 2(g), Central Sales Tex Act.

ee ee


27

by one person to another for cash or for deferred
payment or for any other valuable consideration,
and includes a transfer of goods on the hire-pur-
chase or other system of payment by instalments,
but docs not include a mortgage or hypothecation of
or a charge or pledge on goods.”

it is obvious that in the earlier part of the definition, transfer
of ‘property’ is required | but, in the latter part (the inclusive
part), transfer of ‘goods’ is enough, and transfer of ‘property’ is
not required. It is, therefore, a plausible view to take that hire-
purchase not resulting in sale is also covered by the definition.

1B. 12, The question whether the Centra Sales Tax Act
applies to a hire-purchase not resulting in sale has indirectly
come up for discussion in two cases before the Supreme Court.
Jn one of themt (which related actually to works contracts},
the argument was advanced that because the Central Sales Tax
Act was wide enough to caver such hire-purchase, it showed that
the legislative entry relating to power to tax (inter-State) sales
or purchase should also be widely construed ; and if that was
so. then the Icgislative entry regarding taxation of (internal)
sale or purchase (Slate List, entry $4), should also be widely
coustrucd so as to include works contracts. The argument did
not succeed. The Supreme Court pointed out that there was
a difference in the position regarding Parliament's power and
power of the States. So far as Parliament was concerned, it
could tax hire-purchase not resulting in sale under the residuary
power.

1B. 13. In another case,? the validity of the Bengal Finance
Sales Tax Act, 1947 as extended to the Delhi Union Territory,
was in issuc, in so far as the provision in that Act taxing hire-

Discussion
in Supreme
Court
cases a8

to Central
Sales Tax
Act

Defivition
in Bengal
Actas
extended Lo
Delhi as in

purchase not resulting in sale was concerned. The Supreme 195:

Court upheld its validity, and again pointed out that Parliament's
power of levying taxes was wider than that of the States. The
Court further pointed out that this had already been held in
Mithan Lofs case® where it was stated that under article 246(4)
1. Gannon Dunkerley’ s case, QWorks Contracls), ATR. 1958 S.C. 560
(on appeal from A.LR. 1954 Mad. 1130).
Instahuent Supply Ltd. cuse, ALR. 1962 S.C. S.
reversing Le nee Supplies Ltd, ALR. 1986 Pan
7 Lal's cuss, ALR. 1953 5-0. 682, 635, (Warks Contracts).

F4—3.

59, Para 13,

20 M oof Lal


Doubt aris-
ing due to
absence of
non-obstante
clanse not
shares.

Position in
‘Union Ter-
ritories—
Delhi,

28

of the Constitution, Parliament’s power was untrammelled in rela-
tion to Part C States—now Union territories.

An argument was then advanced that since, in other Pari C
States, such sales were not taxed, there was discrimination
against traders in Delhi. The Supreme Court rejected this argu-
ment, first on the ground that there was no evidence that in
other Part C States such sales were not taxed; and secondly by
observing that the Central Sales Tax Act levied tax on such
hire-purchase also throughout India. With respect to the second
reason (pertaining to the Central Sales Tax Act), it may be
permissible to point out that the Central Sales Tax Act relates
only to inter-State sales.

Thus, the position is that while there is no reported case
directly relating to the scope of “sale”? in the Central Sales
Tax Act (in relation to hire-purchase), we can draw assistance
from the views of the Supreme Court which were expressed in
dealing with the question of the validity of the Act, giving thst
expression a wide scope.

1B. 14. A doubt was expressed during our discussion as to
whether the absence of a non-obstante clause in the definition
of “sale” in the Central Sales Tax Act* makes any difference.’
We have, however, after careful consideration, come to the con~
clusion that the words “transfer of goods” are clear enough to
cover hire-purchase not resulting in sale,

Position in Union Territories—Dethi

1B, 15. By way of example of taxation on hire-purchase
transactions in a Union Territory, we may take the case of Delhi
to which the Bengal Finance ete. Act extends. In a judgment
rendered? in 1962, the definition of sale was quoted as follows;
and, apparently, this was? the definition as it stood in 1954.

“ Sale’ means any transfer of property in goods for cash
or deferred payment or other valuable consideration,

See on this peint, para 1B.15, infra.

Para 18.11, supra.

Para 18.11, supra,

Para 18,11 supra.

Such non obstanre clause is found in some State Acts.

Instaiment Supply Ltd. care, A.1.R, 1962 8.C. 53.

See Instalment Supply Lid. v. State of Delhi, ATR. 1956 Punj.
177, para 2.

noes


के

29

including a transfer of property in goods involved
in the exceution of a contract, but dees not include
4a mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge.

“Explanation —A transfer of goods on the hire-purchase
or other instalment system of payment shall, not-
withstanding that the seller retains a title to any
goods as security for payment of the price, be deem-
ed to be a sale.”

1B. 16. With reference to this definition, the Supreme Court
observed :

“Tt is clear from the definition that it includes not only
what may be compendiously described as a. sale
under the Sale of Goods Act, but also transactions
which, strictly speaking, are not sales, not even
‘contracts of sale’ but only contain an element of
sale, that’ is, the option to purchase, and that is the
reason why the Explanation ends with the words
“be deemed to be 2 sale”, thereby indicating that a.
legal fiction has been introduced into the concept
of ‘sale’ as ordinarily understood. The Explanation
has included, within its amplitude, a mere transfer
of goods without the transfer of title to the goods,
if it is in the course of an agreement of the nature
of ‘hire-purchase’ or other instalment system of pay-
ment.”

1B.17. It was argued that the Explanation had the effect of
extending the concept of “sale” to what, in law, was not a real
sale and therefore, it was unconstitutional. This argument was
rejected by the Court. It was pointed out that under article 246
(4) of the Constitution, it was Parliament which had the power
to legislate for Part C States, that the power was untramelled
by the limitations prescribed by article 246, clause (2) and (3),
or State List, entry 54, that the power of Parliament was plenary
and absolute, subject only to such restrictions as are imposed by
the Constitution, and there was no restriction which was mate-
tial to the present question. It was, therefore, competent for
Parliament to impose a tax on hire-purchase transactions for
Part C States and to impose it under the name of “sales tax”.

1, fustatmont Suopty Private Ltd. v. Union of ladia, ALR. 1962 S.C.
53, $7, para 5,


Definition
in Bengal
Act as
extended
to Delhi
before
1959,

30

1B. 18. The Court stated that in Mithan Lal's case,’ a simi~
Jar question had arisen, namely, whether Parliament can cnact 8
law imposing tax on the supply of matcrials used in building
contracts in Part C States. It had been held by the Court, for
the same reasons, that it was within the competence of Parlia-
ment to impose such 8 tax. The Court also observed that the
decision in the State of Madras v. Ganneou Dunkerles & Co.
(Madras) Ltd.,2 was inapplicable in relation to Part C States.
That decision had been given on a statute passed by the Provincial
Legislature under the Government of India Act, 1935, and it had
been pointed out in that case that the power of the Provincial
Legislature to impose a tax on sakes under Provincial Entry 48
in Schedule VII of the Government of India Act, 1935, did not
extend to imposing & tax on the value of the materials in build-
ing contracts which are entire and indivisible.

1B. 19. The definition of “sale” in the Bengal Finance
(Sales Tax) Act, 1941, as extended to Delhi. was as follows
before 1959 :—

“(g) ‘sale’ means any transfer of property in goods for
moncy consideration and includes a transfer of pro-
perty in goods supplicd in the execution of a contract
but does not include a mortgage, hypothecation, charge
or pledge ; and any grammatical variation of the ex-
pression ‘sale’ shall be construed accordingly.

Explanation 1.—A transfer of goods on hire-purchase
of other instalment system of payment shall, not-
withstanding that the seller rctains a title to any
goods as security for payment of the price, be
deemed to be a sale.

Explanation 2.—A sale shall be deemed to have taken
place in the State of Delhi if the goods are actually
delivered in the State of Delhi as a direct result of
such sale for the purpose of consumption in the
State of Delhi, notwithstanding the fact that under
the general law relating to the sale of goods the
property in the goods has by reason of such sale
passed in another State.”

Mituan Lal v. The State of Dethi and amatuer, ALR. 8. C. 682
SEC. आर,
2. Gannon Dunkerley & Cos case (1956) SCR. 379, 9 8.T.C, 353.



31

1B. 20. In 1959. the Explanation relating to hire-purchase Amend:
Gin the Bengal Act as extended to Delhi) was removed by a mento
Central Act. The Statement of objects and Reasons to the Bill

which ied to the Amendment Act stated? :

“Sub-clauses (८) and (d)—The definitions of ‘sale’ and
‘sale price’ have been revised so as te be in con-
formity with the definitions in the Central Sales Tax
Act, 1956.”

‘The definition as substituted was as follows :—

“(g) ‘sale’ with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, means any transfer of property in goods
by one person to another for cash or for deferred
Payment or for any other valuable consideration,
and includes a transfer ef goods on hire-purchase
or other system of payment by instalments, but does
not include a mortgage or hypothecation of or a
charge or pledge on goods.

Explanation.—A sale or purchase of goods shall be
deemed to take place inside the Union territory of
Delhi if the goods are within that territory :--

Gi) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at
the time of contract of sale is made; and

Gi) in the case of unascertained or future goods at
the time of their appropriation to the contract of
sale by the seller or by the buycr, whether assent
of the other party is prior or subsequent to such
appropriation,”

1B.21. ‘This then is the present position as to hire pur- Present
chase. position.

Need for amendment

18.22. We have made an attempt to analyse the legal posi- Confr-

tion, in order to bring out certain aspects which appeared to re- ment of
guire emphasis. matter of

policy.

1. Central Act 2% sf 1959,



Tease
treated

as sale in
Austratia,

Constitu-
tional
aspects,

Effect of
judgment
in Johar's
case,

32

Whether or not the power to tax hire-purchase transactions
(not resulting in sale) should be conferred on the States is a

matter of policy. :
Gii) Financial

There may, lastly, be a financial justification for levying a
tax on hire-purchase, the object being to augment the revenues
of the States. This is a matter of policy, and would require de-
tailed examination of a financial character.

* 1B. 23. It may be noted that in Australia, a lease of goods
is treated as a sale, and the lessor incurs tax Kability at the time
the lease is entered into.*

As regards hire-purchase, in Australia,? the sale value of
goods leased under a “hire-purchase agreement” is equal to the
“fair wholesale value” of the gouds.

The sale value of goods leased under any other type ot
arrangement is the amount which, in the Commissioner's opinion.
is fair and reasonable having regard to the terms and peried of
the Tease and to the wholesale market value of the goods, In
all cases, sale value does not include any amount payable in
respect of sales tax, but any excise taxcs on the goods are in-
cluded.

1B. 24. Whether financial needs require such an extension
of the power of the States is a question of policy. But, assuming
that financial needs so requixe, there are certain constitutional
aspects which may be dealt with.

1B. 25. The effect of the judgment in K. L. Johar & Co.'s
case* is to reduce the base on which sales tax is payable. A
tax on hire-purchase can be levied on the full value of the hire-
purchase transaction by the Union under the residuary power—
Union List, entry 97. The “purchase ingredient” of the hire-
purchase transaction is, however, within the States’ legislative
competence, and it is possible to argue that unless resolutions
are passed by State Legislatures under article 252(2) of the

1, World Tax Series—Taaation in Australia, (1958), page 30 para

2, Workd Tax Series—Taaation in Australia, (1958), page 82 para

3, KE, Johar & Co.¥. Dy. €.T.0., ALR. 1963 S.C. 1082, 1089,
(1963) 2 8,८1९, 112,

i2,3


33

Constitution the Centre may oot have the power to levy a tax
on the full value, including the purchase ingredient. A better
alternative would, therefore, be to include hire-purchase within
the power of the States,

IB. 26, In Johar's case,’ the Supreme Court made the fol-
lowing observations as to the altemative Methods, under the
existing constitutional set up of deciding the valuc of a vehicle
given for hire-purchase :—

“There may be two ways of doing it, The Sales tax
authorities may split up the hire into two parts,
namely, the amount paid as consideration for the
use of the vehicle so long as it was the property of
the owner, and the payment for the option on a
future date to purchase the vehicle at a nominal
price. If the first Part is determined, the rest would
be towards the payment of Price. The first part
may be determined after finding ००५ the proper
amount to be paid as hire in the market for 2 vehicle
of the type concerned or in such other way as may
be available to the sales tax authorities,

“The second method may be to take the original Price
fixed in the hire-purchase agreement and to calcu-
late the depreciation and all other factors that may
be relevant in arriving at the price when the second
sale takes place to the hirer, including the condi-
tions of the vehicle at the time of the second sale.”

“It is, therefore, for the sales tax authorities to find out the
Price of the vehicle on, which tax has to be paid in either of the

ways indicated by us above or such other way as may be just
and reasonable.”

Constitutional dichotomy

IB. 27. At this stage, we should Point out that Were are
certain constitutional complications attendant on a Proposal for
the levy of a tax on hire-purchase. A hire-parchase transaction
is a composite transaction, made up of two elements, namely,
(i) bailment or hiting ; and (ii) sale which is not effected im-
mediately. The amount paid by way of hire-purchase price
under a birc-purchase agreement is, as pointed out by the Sup-

3, KE 2004८ & Cov. Dy, CFO AIR. 1965 5. C, 1082, 1091,
1093 (Paras. 20-22),

Observa-
tion in

i
Johar's
case.

Constitu-
tional,
dichotomy
and comp-
lications
resulting
therefrom.


34

reme Court,! partly towards the hire and partly towards the pay-
ment of price.

No legisla- 1B. 28. Now, in so far as the hire-purchase price repre-
विधा sents rhe sale price also, Parliament has no legislative competence
Tax sale to impose any tax thereon, becausc of State List, entry 54.
part. Parliament has Iegislative competence to levy a tax only in rele-

tion to the ‘hire’ part of the hire-purchase price, and not with

reference 10 the ‘sale’ part of the price.

Theoretically, the two could be treated separately, but, from
a practical point of view, it would be difficult to determine what
is the ‘hire’ part of the hire-purchase price (under a hire-pur-
chase transaction) and what is the ‘salc’ part. The Supreme
Court has suggested that there may be two ways of determining
the “hire? part and the ‘sale’ part involved in a hire-purchase
price, But, both the methods suggested by the Court involve, in
substance, a splitting up. If the Union decides to levy a tax on
the ‘hire’ part only, it cannot do so without splitting up. Simi-
larly, if the States wish to tax the ‘sale’ part, they cannot do so
without splitting up. Jt would, therefore, appear that the more
convenient method would be to tax the composite price,—after
such constitutional amendment as is necessary. This will avoid
an atiack on the validity of the law on the ground that it amounts
to an encroachment by Parliament into the sphere of ‘sale’, or
an encroachment by the States into the sphere of ‘hire’.

Present 1B. 29. Since the present constitutional position represents
een’ a dichotomy? in the sense that tax on the hire part is within the
Temoved Competence of the Union only, and tax on the sale part is within
by amend- the competence of the States only, it becomes necessary to amend
हु the Constitution, so that the amendment will authorise levy of
the entire tax by one legislative authority. One alternative

would be an amendment which authorises Parliament to levy

a tax on hire-purchase, in which case, Parliament’s existing resi-

duary power to tax the ‘hire’ part (of the hire-purchase price)

and the new power to be transferred to Parliament with regard

to the ‘sale’ part of the hire-purchase pricc, will be merged, arnt

this will enable Parliament to provide for a tax on bire-purchase
transactions without the necessity of a demarcation between the

3, K.L. Sahar & Co. ¥, Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, AAR. 1956
8.C, 1082, 1091.
3, Para 1B, 28, supra


35

hire’ part and ‘sale’ part. ‘The other alternative would be to
transfer ihe entire power to the States. This will achieve a
merger of the existing power of the States to tax the ‘sale’ part
and the new power (to be transferred) to tax the ‘hire’ part,
and will enable ie Static Legislatures to provide tor a tax an
hire-purchase price without demarcation as aforesaid.

1B. 30. The legal complications involved in a tax on hire-
purchase, if the present dichotomy is maintained, may be again
mentioned. The ‘price’ (in hire-purchases) is a composite one.
Though, in one uspect, the instalments paid (or stipulated io be
paid), represent the “hire” for the use of the vehicle, still they
represent, in another aspect, the instalments of “price” payable
as consideration far the transfer of title. If the transaction were
one of pure “hiring” (i.e, without the sale element), the hirer
would have paid much less.

If the Union is to tax them, it cannot tax the sale part. If
the States are 10 tax them, they cannot tax the ‘Aire’ part. That
is the present position.

(a) If the tax is levied by Parliament on the actual
instalments of hire-purchase and the sale materia-
Jises, then there may lsc a partial encroachment on
the State List, entry 54. Where the hire-purchase
transaction itself results in sale, by the exercise of
the option, a “sale” takes place of the goods which,
till then, had been hired. As the Supreme Court
has held? :

“When all the terms of the agreement are satisfied and
the option is exercised, a sale takes place of the
goods which till then had been hired. When this
sale takes place, it will be liable to sales tax, for
the taxable event under the Act is taking place of the
sale... ”

At the time when the hire-purchase transaction materialises
in a sale,—usually, on payment of the last instalment with or
without some nominal optional money,—sale in law and in fact
has resulted, and the last instalment, since it passed the property
in the goods, should be construed as effecting a sale. That, in
fact, is the intention of the partics.

Ulects of
present
dichotomy.


Position if
above
dichotomy
is not
kept

Conclusion
and recom-
mendation.

36

It is really the price clement that goes to add to what might
strictly be called the hire, to yield the amount stipulated.

(b) If the method of taxing the actual instalments (whether
the tax is levied on the total, or is levied every year) is not to
be adopted. the only other a’: (where the sale materia-
lises) is to resort to notional splitting up. The notional splitting
up will separate the hire part from the sale part . This is, how-
ever, a cumbersome process.

Two questions of detail thus atise when 8 hire-purchasc
agreement leads ultimately to a sale, (1) whether sales-tax could
be levied at the inception of the contract of hire-purchase, or
whether the taxing authority should wait till the option is exer-
cised and the title passes. (2) What is the amount of consi-
deration for which the sale, which takes place when the option
is exercised, should be deemed to be effected.

1B. 31. If we abolish the dichotomy referred to above in
regard to hire-purchase, the position would become less comp-
Ticated. as the above difficulties would be avoided. The whole
power to tax (intra-State) hire-purchase in the wide sense could
be transferred :—

(i) either to the Union with a provision for assignment
of the proceeds to the State ;*

or
(ii) to the States.
Which of the two courses should be adopted is a matter of
policy. Our preference is for transfer of the power to the States,

because in our view basically the entire transaction takes place
in the State and the States should be given the power.

1B. 32. In the light of the above discussion, our conclusions
as to taxation of hire-purchase are as follows :—

Hire-purchase not resulting in sale.

(1) The Union has the power to tax hire-purchase not
resulting in sale, inter-State or within the State, under
the Union List, entry 97.

1, Article 269 af the Constitution werld require to be amended, in this
ase.


37

(1) The power to tax inter-State hire-purchase (not re-
sulting in sale) under the Union List, entry 97, seems
to have been excrcised by the Union, vide the defini-
tion of ‘sale’ in the Control Sales Tax Act.

Gii) The power to tax hire-purchase within the State also
vests in the Union, under Union List, eniry 97 (as
interpreted in the judgements of the Supreme Court.
Whether this power should be transferred to the
State is a question of policy. But in the Commissicn’s
view, a broad view? should be taken of the legislative
entries, and fine nuances need not matter, aid the
Commission prefers allotting the power to the States
(by amending the Constitution}. The question is
ultimately one of policy, as already stated.

If this alternative is adapted, there are scveral drafting de-
vices open, ९.2.

(a) amending State List, entry 54, or
(b) adding a fresh entry in the State List, or

(०) inserting, in article 366, a wide definition of ‘sale’.
The Commission prefers the last one, as avoiding
multiple amendments.

Under the drafting device at (a) above, it will be necessary
to amend State List, entry 54 (to add hire-purchase), but at
the same time also to amend Union List, entry 92A, so that
inter-State hire-purchase (not resulting in sale) may continue
to be excluded from the purview of the States, notwithstanding
the proposed addition of hire-purchase to the State List. Under
this device, it will be necessary to add the following in 7th Sche-
dule, both at the end of Union List, entry 92A and at the end
of State List, entry 54 (after converting the existing full-stop into
a semi-colon) :

“uansfer of goods on the hire-purchase or othcr system
of payment by instalments, hire-purchase resulting
in sale.”

If necessary, a non-obstante clause may be added to the cffect
that property nced not pass.

|, eft discussion as to works contract.


38

The nen-obstante clause would be 95 follows

“transfer of goods on the hire-purchase or other in-
stalment system of payment, notwithstanding the
tact that the transferor retains the title in the goods
as security for payment of the amount stipulated”?

The second device (b) above would be to add fresh entries—
say, State List. entry 544 and Union List, entry 928

The third device would be to add a wide definition of
“sale” in articl: 366.

The Commission prefers the Iast device’ (c) above as it
avoids multiple amendments.

(iv)

)

Whether the course at (iii) should be adopted or not,
is a matter of policy, involving financial and political
considerations.

Tn the alternative, the power to tax intra-State hire-
purchase could (if a policy decision to that effect is
taken by the Union), be exercised by the Union,
and the necessary law passed. The proceeds of the
tax imposed thereunder could, then, be distributed
to the States. Article 269 of the Constitution ‘will
have to be amended for the Jatter purpose, so as to
have an expanded definition of “sale”,

It will be desirable, in this casc, to have separate taxing legis-
Jation, as the Central Sales Tax Act is confined to tax on fater-
State wansactions.

If this alternative is adopted, it is suggested ‘that it will be
desirable to transfer the entire power to the Union, i... the power
to tax hire-purchase resulting or not resulting in sale (inter-State).
This will be practically convenient, and check evasion.

1, As to the non-obstante clause. of section 2 (h), Explanation |,
Madras General Sales Tax Act (Madras Act 9 of 1939) quoted in

KL.

Johar & Co.v. Dy. ८.7:6., ALR. 1963 8.0. 1082, 1086 fon

appeal from A.LR. 1958 Madras 561).
2, Amendment of article 366 of *ie Constitution.


39

(४1) Whether the course referred to at (४) above should
or should not. bc adopted. is again a matter of
policy, involving financial and political considerations.

Hive-purchase resulting in sale

(शी) Hire-purchase resulling in sale is governed by the
position applicable to sale in general, except that
only the sale element can he taxed under the name
of sales tax’.

Bara suggestion in regard to hire
4५४) above.

1



Sale of
Controlled
Commodi-
ties

position

CHAPTER 1-C
SALE OF CONTROLLED COMMODITIES

1-0. 1, So far, we have dealt with transactions where the
fact that property does not pass immediately in the goods, or does
not pass in specie, raises legal difficulties in the way of the tran-
sactions being regarded as “sale or purchase of goods” within the
meaning of the constitutional power of the States to levy a tax.t
We have now to deal with a class of transactions where such
legal difficulty arises by reason of the absence of the consensual
element required in a sale. We refer to those transactions where,
by law, the free choice of the parties—usually, the seller—is res-
tricted in the matter of price, quantity of goods to be sold. party
to whom they are to be sold or any other matter pertaining to
the sale. Briefly, such sales may be referred to as sales of con-
trolled commodities. Here, there is no question about the passing
of the property in the goods. The property does pass to the buyer.
But the absence of the consensual clement—whose place is taken
by a restriction imposed by or under a statute—creates controver-
sies as to whether and in what cases the legal restrictions imposed
by or under the statute destroy the character of “sale”.

LC. 2. A study of the case law on the subject shows that
the position in this respect is fluid’. Broadly speaking, the test
adopted is, whether the area of bargaining is or is not large en-
ough 10 permit the clement of consent to operate. If the arca
of bargaining is large enough, the transaction is a sale, Tt was
held in one judgment of the Supreme Court* that sales tax can
be imposed on the sale of such commodities, notwithstanding
that some of the terms and conditions of the sale (e.g, the price)
are regulated by or under statute. An carlier judgment of the
Supreme Court! had, however, held that if the area of bargaining

4, Constitution, Seveath Schedule, State List, entry 54,

8, Sce pata 1-C. 6, tnfra.

2, Indian Steet Wire Products v. State of Madras, AR. 1968, S.C.
478, 480, 483; (1968) 1 S.C.R.

4. New Indla Sugar Mills Ltd. v. C.S.T., Bihar, ALR. 1963 S.C, 1207
(1963) Supplement 2 S.C.R. 459.

40


41

is very small, the transaction is not a “sale” because the element
of consensuality is missing.

1-C. 3. The test mentioned above is, however, a difficult one
ta apply, and, to avoid controversies, it would be better if the
Position could be simplificd. का a welfare State where the State
regulates economic activities in the public interest, controls are
likely to continue for sometime, and the problem in question is
likely to recur.

As the Supreme Court has observed :1

“the State may compel persons to make contracts. as
where, by a series of Road Traffic Acts from 1930
to 1960, a motorist must insure against third-party
risks ; it may, as by the Rent Restriction Acis, pre-
vent one party to a contract from enforcing his rights
under it; or it may empower a Tribunal either to
teduce or to increase the rent payable under lease.
Tn many instances a statute prescribes the contents
of the contract. The Moncy-lenders Act, 1927, dic-
tatcs the terms of any loan caught by its provisions.
‘The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1924, contains
six pages of rulcs to be incorporated in every contract
for “the carriage of goods by sca from any port in
Great Britain or Northern Treland to any other port”;
the Hire-purchase Act, 1938, inserts into hire-pur-
chase contracts a number of terms which the patties
are forbidden to exclude ; successively Landlowd and
Tenant Acts from 1927 to 1954 contain provisions
expressed to apply ‘notwithstanding any agreement
to the contrary.”

1c. 4. A survey of the judicial decisions shows that the tests
which have been adopted’do not reveal a simple or single cri-
terion which could be neatly or precisely siated. Some of the
decisions might give the impression that if the party to whom
the selter is to sell the goods is not to be selected by the Govern-
ment of by the authority acting in pursuance of the law, then the
transaction could be regarded as a sale. But some of the decisions
do not emphasise any such test. Again, the fact that there was

1... Jucdiot Steel and Wire Products Lid. +. State of Madras, ATR. 1968
S.C. 478, 21 S.T.C. 138.

Difficulty
of applying
the test

Filect of
judiciak


a2

no offer and no acceptance, is sometimes highlighted ;* but, then,
there are cases? where many esscntial matters were not subject
io olfer or acceptance and not only the party te whom the goods
are to be delivered, but also the price and the manner of trans-
portalion and payment. were delermined by the Controller ; and
yet the transaction was regarded as a sale. No doubt, cases at
the extremes may be easy to decide. For example, where only
the price is regulated by law and most of the other matters are
Jelt to contract, the transaction could be regarded as a sale, on
the reasoning that the effect of the price control order is only
to supes-impose, upon the agreement between the parties, the
ised under the control order* This is one extreme. At
the exher extreme is the case! where every aspect of the transac-
tion was wholly and completely controlled. and thercfore it has
been hekt that there is no sale. But, in a fairly large number of
cases, it is not easy to decide on which side of the line the case
shoulu be regarded as falling.

The undermentioned cases*-'* shaw the extent of the con-

troversy.

See the Now Mndion Sugar Mills case,
the dudtun Steet & Frou Products ea
ce Slaiz of Rajasthan v. Karan Chand Tape.

31.8. 1963 5.0, 1207.
3.1, २. 1968 5-९. 478.
ALR. 1969 8.0.

hum agencies Private Lid. v. (जनालाएरज Tax er, TH

kly Notes, 141.

OM vy. Conunissieme of Sales Tux.
ALR, 1963

6... Indian Stoel & Wire Products ¥. State of Madras, ALR. 1968 S.C.
478,

3, dndiwva Sugac Ltd, v. State of Aadiva Pradesh, & LR. 1968 S.C. 599.

Suite uf Rakavthan v. Mis. Koran Chwd Thapar & Bros, ADR.

S.C. 343.
© Mex. Chittxe Mal Narain Das ९. Conunissionee of Satey Tax. ALR.
1970 S.C, 2060.

e Sabie dang Su Mysore. ALR, 1972

Mitts act another ४५ Siaty

S.C. 87.

Ul, Piva dvencies Prt. Lid. y. Commercial Tax Officer, Seuldah, 77
OWN [41 (Caleuttay- .

1, Canmissimer of Soles Tae, MP. ¥. Mohanunad Rasul of Panna

0) 26 STC, 202 (Madhya Pradesh).
ner of Sales Tux v. Ram Bilus Rant Gopal, ALR, 1970
All. $18 (FB).

16, KINA, Kntih & Otters ४६ State of AP. & Others, (करा) 27 SC.
ncikra Praciosl:}.

कर Officer. Hissar and ansthee v. Jaswant Singh,
. 582 (Punjab & [aryanay.

nupali Veeran v. Special C.T.O. (1971
oy Pra tesh}—Gupplies to Governmes



~ i eo
“

43

of sugarcane, शा essential commodity, raised the question whether
it fell within the definition of “sale” in the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
Answering the question in the affirmative, the Supreme Court
emphasised several aspects of the transaction in issue.

First, the Supreme Court pointed out that though there was
no choice (in general) as to sale by the grower of sugarcane
to the factory, there was some element of choice, for example, if
the factory was closed or the grower did not grow sugarcane.
Secondly, though it was true that 95 per cent of the sugarcane
had to be sold, the parties had the choice to increase the quantity
above 95 per cent, and the delivery -of the sugarcane was to be
in such lots or on such dates and at such time as was agreed
between the parties. Thirdly, the goods were unascertained and
were to be inspected. All these aspects indicated freedom not
only in the formation of the contract, but also in its performance.
Even though the partics were determined by the order and the
minimum price was fixed and the minimum quantity was also
fixed by the order, that did not complete the picture, because the
parties made the offer and acceptance, chose the terms of delivery,
and could obtain supply of a larger quantity or stipulate for 2
price higher than the minimum.

1-C. 6. It appears to us that the very fact that an elaborate
analysis has to be undertaken whenever a question arises whether
or not the choice left is adequate, shows that there is need for
clarifying the scope of the constitutional power in this regard.
We are of the view that the fact that the consensual element is
lacking in some respects, does not necessarily make it unjustifi-
able to tax them by extending the definition of sale. There is
no doubt that for a long time, controls over the transfer of goods
of one class or ancther will be an unavoidable feature of our
economy. A realistic view should, threfore, be taken. Subject
to the control imposed by Jaw, these transactions result in trans-
fer of goods for price, and should be taxable.

1-0. 7. Here again, we prefer an amendment of article 366.
The definition of “sale” to be inserted? in that article could have
an Explanation as follows :

salarjang Sugar Mills Lid. v. State of Mysore, (1972), 29 81.0.

246, 261, 262 S.C).

don neadations i9 ¢9n72
purchase.

20 M of Lawy74—4.

2122 with works contracts and hire-

Case relet-
ing to
sugarcane—
a recent
illustration.

Recom-
mendation
16 cover
sales of
controlled
commodities,

000 alter-
native-—-Ex-
planation
to be added
to Stute
List, entry
54.


44

“Explanation —A transaction docs not cease to be a sale
merely because—

(3) the goods are required to be delivered in compli-
ance with any obligation laid down by or under
any law regulating trade and commerce in, of pro-
duction, supply or distribution of, the goods or any
law dealing with price control, or

(8) the terms and conditions on which the goods are
to be delivered are laid down by or uader any
such law.”

Another 1-C. 8. Another possibie aiternative is an amendment to State
alterna list, entey 54.

live

umendment,

ot Stale

List. entry

54,

Recom- 1-C.9. We recommend that one or the other of the two

meralation. shernativest mentioned above should be adopted. The first alter-
native? would be better, as it would apply fo article 269 and
Union List, entry 92A also,

1) Para 1-C, 7 and 1-0. 8, supra.
3, Insertion in article 366 of a definition of sale with the recommended
Explanation.



CHAPTER 1-D
SALE BY ASSOCIATIONS TO MEMBERS

D—P.1. Some problems seem to have ariscn in regard to the Sate by
sales of refreshments and other articles by associations to their associations
members. A few illustrative cases on the subject may be examined हु
for understanding the problem.

{—D.2. Co-operative socicties furnish one cxample of such Co-operative

associations, In ene of the earlier cases decided by the Supreme Sites.
Court, it was held that where there was nothing on record to
show that the co-operative canteen was acting merely as an agent
of its members (in providing facilities for making food available
to the members). it could not he urged that the transaction was
not a sale. It could not be said that the society was acting
only us an agent or a trustee. A registered society is a body cor-
porate with power to hold property etc. and the property which
it holds cannot be assumed to be the property of the members.
The society is a juridical person, and the supply of refreshments
by it for a price paid or promised results in a transfer of property
in the refreshments. 1 could not, therefore, be urged as a
proposition of law that when a co-operative society supplies, to
its members, refreshments for a price under the scheme of distri-
bution or supply of refreshments, the transaction can in no event
be regarded as a sale.

1-—D.3. Though the above case? related to a co-operative Unincorpo-
society, the court (Shah J.) did make certain observations as raved tons
to the position in regard to unincorporated societies, as follows :—

“In the case of an unincorporated society, club or a firm
or an association, ordinarily the supply and distribu-
tion by such a society, club, firm or an association,
of goods belonging to its members, may not result
in sale of the goods which are jointly held for the
benefit of the members of the society, club, firm or

1, Dy. CF.0. v, Balik Indic Lid, AN
843, paragraphs 7 anc 13, (1968) 2 5.0.7. 348.
* Para 1-9. 2. न

45


Supply by
club to
members
not ‘sale’.

No ‘sale
is such
cincum-
stances in
bogiand.

46

the association, when, by virtue of the relinquishment
of the common rights of the members, the property
stands transferred to a member in payment of a
price, and the transaction may not prima facie be
regarded as a ‘sale’ within the meaning of the Act.”

But the Court made it very cleur (towards the end of the
judgment)! that it was not called upon in this case to decide
whether an waincorporated club which supplies goods for a price
to its members, may be regarded as selling goods to its members.

1—D.4. Then. there are clubs. In a case? decided by the
Supreme Court on appeal from Madras, the Cosmopelitan club,
Madras, the Youngmen’s Indian Association, Madras and the
Lawley Institute, Ootacamund, filed writ petitions under article

5226 of the Constitution, challenging the levy of sales tax under

Madras General Sales Tux Act, 1959, on snacks, beverages and
other articles supplied to their members or guests. The High
Court held that the club was not a ‘dealer’ within the meaning
of section 2(g), read with Explanation I, of the Madras Act. and
that there was no ‘sale’ within the meaning of section 2(h), read
with Explanation 1, of the Act. On appeal to the Supreme Court
it was held that a member’s <lub cannot be made subject to the
provisions of the Sales Tax Act concerning sales, because the
members are joint owners of all the club property. The supply
of articles to a member at a fixed price by the Club canazot be
regarded as a “sale”.

1—D.5. It is necessary to mention here that, in England, it
was held in Graff v. Evaits,* that a transaction whereby a mem-
ber of a club acquired liquor which was the property of the
club was not sale but merely transfer of special property, This
case was decided eleven years before the English Act relating to
the sale of goods was passed in 1893.

The basis of the decision was that the transaction was a
release of the rights of the other members to the “purchaser”.
It might have been thought,‘ therefore, that when section 161)

7.0. ९. Enfield Indie Ltd., ALR. 1968 5.0. 838, 843, Para 13.
's Indian Association, (1970) 1 5.0,0 , 46?
ALR. 1964 Red. 63).

882) 8 Q.B.D. 373.

Goods (1966), page 9.

(on appeal 11
3, Graff v. Evans
4. Atiyah, Sale of



47

of the Sale of Goods Act specifically enacted (in 1893) thar—
pees There may be a contract of sale between
one part owner and another,
the basis of Graff v Evans had ceased to be valid.

ii may be noted that the Indian Sale of Goods Act has a
similar provision.’ But in Davies v. Burnerr,2 a Divisional Court
followed the earlier case, and the Sale of Goods Act was not
even referred to. A well-known writer has stated,? that “this
view of the law has now been accepted for so long that it is
unlikely to be upset by a higher court.

The English cases mostly relate to licensing.* But the point to
be ‘noted is, that the provision in the Sale ef Goods Act as to
“part owner” has not come in their way.

‘The position in this respect, as was observed in an Australian
case,* is simply that “a part of the common property is appro-
priated to the separate use of the members, and he makes a
corresponding contribution from his separate property to the com-
mon fund.” The question must, of course, always be us to the
meaning of the word “sale” or “sell” in the particular statute
which comes under consideration, If no reason is scen for giving
the word an extended meaning, one would think it perfectly
corrcet to say that an ordinary unincorporated members’ club
does not “sell”, in the true sense, liquor which a member obtains
from te commnon store on payment of money to the common
fund.

1—D.6. The broad general principle which constitutes a com-
mon feature of these transactions, is the absence of a transfer
of property, It would appear that these transactions are not
‘sale’, because there is no transfer of property.

1—D.6A. This, thon, is the present position. The question
now to be cousidered is, whether it is desirable that the taxability
of such transactions should be provided for by expanding the

Section 4(1), Indian Sale of Goods Act.

+ Davies ४- Burnett, (1902) 1 K.B. 666.

Atiyah, Sale of Guods (1966), page 9.

For a review of cases, see Trebanag Club v. Macdonald, (194) 1 Al)
E.R. 454.

है. Watson v. 5. & AG. Johnson Era, (1936) 55 CLR 63, 70 (per

Dixen 1)

General
abserva-
tions.


Amendment
cof Consli-
ion not
needed.

Jnincorpe-
tuted
woneciations
st in
various
arrunge-
ments.

No evasion.

48

concept of “sale for the purpose of the iegislative power of
the States,—a result which can be achieved only by amending
the Constitution.

4-D.7. We do not think that it would be appropriate to
amend the Constitation for this purpose. The number of such
clubs anc! associations would not be very large. Moreover, taxa-
tion of such transactions might discourage the co-operative move-
ment.

1--7.8. Unincorporated associations exist in a “myriad of
structural arrangemenis."! As a general proposition, each is liable
for the activities of its members when the activity has been autho-
rised, supported, or ratified by the association.

1—D.9. It should be also noted that there can be no serious
question of evasion in such cases. A member really takes his
own goods.

1—D.10. We. therefore, do not recommend any change.

3, merican Law Institute—Study of the Division of Jurisdiction
between State and Federal Couris, page T4 (Proposed Final Drafi
No. 1, 1965), cited in Nete on “Unincorporated Assoviations”
(1965) 75 Yale Lod. 138.

w


CHAPTER 1-E

SOME GENERAL OBSERVATIONS AS TO TAXATION ON

SALE

1—F.1. So far, we have dealt with specific transactions. A General

few general observations may now be made. abserva.

to “sale”.
A sale of goods requires an agreement to transfer title in
“ goods for money, followed by the actual passing of such title as
a result ci the agreement. This broad concept, thus requires
‘ Gi) an agreement to transfer title, Gi) in goods, (iii) for money

and (iv) passing of title as a result of the agreement. Most of the
problems that have arisen as to the taxability of various transac-
tions are due to the fact that one (or more) of the ingredients
mentioned above are missing from the transaction. This will be
cleur if the ingredicnt and its antithesis are represented as in the
following chart. which also mentions the situation where the
antithesis exists.

Fagredent Antithesis

(i) Aereement 1० transfer Title passing without agreement, or no

ute transfer of title.
tii) In voods Title passing under agreement but not
for gouds.

Mustrative situation—
Works contracts (No agreement to trans-
fer the very eoeds which come into
existence).
(ill) Far numer Title passing for value other than money.
Fiustrative situation—
Baater.

fivy Passing of litle asa result Title does nut pass because there is only:
of the agreement an agreement (or some prior step), and
no complete sale,
Hlustrative sitaations—
br (4) Hire-purchase.
(01 Consignment transfer 1

1, See chapter 2, in Page St.

49


The basic
draeback
of the
Present
schearc.

50

1—E.2. ‘Ihe basic defect in the present scheme is that a very
limited type cf economic activity is taxable by the States,—and
other economic activities are not taxable, except by way of
excise duties or indirectly by way of stamp duties. This leaves
room for loopholes and gaps. It would appear that some day, it
will be desirable to consider the possibility of devising a tax
which will embrace all transactions which are regarded as adding
value or which are entered into with that object.

»


CHAPTER 2

EVASION OF CENTRAL SALES TAX BY MEANS OF
TRANSFER OF GOODS FROM ONE STATE TO
ANOTHER, ON WHAT PURPORTS TO BE
CONSIGNMENT TRANSFER OR A TRANSFER
TO ANOTHER BRANCH OF THE SAME
INSTITUTION

introductory

J. The question that is considered in this chapter is one Ingrcdicnts
connected with the basic concept of sale. In order that the turn- °f sale.
over from a transaction may be taxable under the Act, the tran-
saction must have four constituent elements, viz. (i) parties com-
petent to contract ; (ii) mutual assent ; (ili) transfer of property
in goods from the seller to the buyer, and (19) price in money
paid or promised.

2.2. It has been stated? chat difficulties exist in relations to Consign
the taxation of ‘consignment transfers’,—i.e. wansfer of goods by गा ता
ene branch of a commercial agency or institution to another
branch outside the State. Central Sales Tax, it is stated, cannot
be levied on such transfers, because there is no inter-State ‘sale’,
even though there is inter-State movement.

Evasion by reason of non-taxation.

2.3. The problem does not appear to be totally new. ‘The Fifth
Fifth Finance Commission had made the following observations? Ginance |
in this regard, sion’s

recom- |

“8.32, The Uttar Pradesh Taxation Enquiry Committee ™e™ations-
has also remarked that in many cases transactions
shown ay consignments and works contracts, which
are not liable to States’ sales taxation, were not
genuine and that they were manipulated to hide the
real nature of sales transactions. It is desirable that

the Government of India as well as State Goy-

Noses in the Ministry of Finance.
4. Fifth Finance Commission, Report, page 89, para 8.32.

51


Evasion.

Section 6A. 7

52

ernments may consider what measures should be
devised to meet this situation.”

2.4. It appears that States are faced with erosion of the
revenue, occurring through transfers on a consignment basis.

2.5. It may be noted that the Central Sales Tax (Amend-
ment) Act, 1972 partly mitigates the situation by casting the
onus on the transfer or to show that the transfer is otherwise
than by way of sale.

Section 6A (newly inserted in the Central Sales Tax Act}?
is as follows :

“6A(1) Where any dealer clims that he is not Hable

_ to pay tax under this Act, in respect of any goods, om
Pay pe yg

the ground that the movement of such goods from one State
to another was occasioned by reason of transer of such goods
by him to any other place of his business or to his agent or
principal, as the case may be, and not by reason of sale, the
burden of proving that the movement of those goods was so
occasioned shall be on that deafer and for this purpose he may
furnish to the assessing authority, within the preseribed time or
within such further time as that authority may, for sufficient cause,
permit a declaration, duly filled and signed by the principal
officer of the other place of business, or his agent or principal,
as the case may be, containing the prescribed particulars in the
preseribed form obtained from the prescribed authority, along
with the evidence of despatch of such goods,

(2) If the assessing authority is satisfied after making such
inquiry as he may deem necessary that the particulars contained
in the declaration furnished by a dealer under sub-section (1)
are true, he may, at the time of, or at any time before. the
assessment of the tax payable by the dealer under this Act,
make an order to that effect, and thereupon, the movement of
goods to which the declaration relates shall be deemed for the
purposes of this Act to have been occasioned otherwise than as
a result of sale.

Explanation—tIn this section, “assessing authority”, in
relation to a dealer, means the authority for the time
being competent to assess 9 tax payable by the dealer
under this Act.”

(Amendment Act 61 of 1972


53

2.6. Even this provision, it is stated, bas been assailed in the Criticism
evidence before the Select Committee as unconstitutional. We 64
have been asked 10 consider whether consignments should be

taxed under the Act.

Two types of transactions

7. ft scoms to us chat in examining chis question, two types Rona fide
10 be kept apart from each other, namely— consign-
ments and

(i) bona fide consignments, and (ii) sham consignments, shum con-
signments.

Where goods are consigned from cne branch of an establish-
ment (0 another, bona fide, there is do ‘sale’, because there
| de a sale by the seller to himself. To constitute a ‘sale’.
there miust be Gvo different persons.*

Where. on the other hand, the consignment from branch to.
brunch i 4 sham transaction, and the transaction is, in reality,
ane intended to transfer property to a different ‘person’, there is
no lega? difficulty in taxing it as a salc.* Ne doubt, it may not
he easy to discover the true nature of the transaction ; and the
Process of gathering the relevant facts may involve some labour

cane

Case law

2.8, A few cuses dealing with the transfer of goods to a Telco case
branch or the like transactions will elucidate what is stated above. 1 400 by |
In the Tata Engnivering Co. case,’ the assessee, a manufacturer Court.
of trucks, was assessed in respect of transactions in which the
vehicics were moved from the site of works in Jamshedpur to
various stockyards in different States. The terms of contract bet-
ween the assessee and the dealers showed that when vehicles
were moved from the works to the stockyards, it did not neces-
sarily happen that the number of vehicles allocated to the dealer
was delivered to him.

The Supreme Court observed :

The points which would require determination
would be whether the transactions which have been
subjected to tax were of sale within the definition of

7... Notes in the Ministry of Finance.

* of section 2/Lifg), Coniral Sates Tax Act, 1956.

2. Mutindra Kunvar v. State of Madras, (1968) (2 $.1.८, 72 (Mad).

4. Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. ¥, Assistant Canunissioner

of Commercial Taxes, ALR 1970 S.C. 1281, 1285, 1286 (Grover 3.1.


1 Mahendva Kumar Isiworlal & Co. ¥. State of Madras, (1968)

“the

34

that expression contained in secon 2{g) and whe-
ther the movement of geods from Jamshedpur tu
the steckyards of the appcliant in the different Statce
was occasioned by any convenant or incident of the
contract of sale..,....° After examining the procedure
followed by the appellanis in their negotiations with
dealers and despatch of vehicles 10 stockyards, the
Supreme Court held -—

allocation of Ictters and the statements furnished by
the dealers did not by themselves bring about tran-
saclions of sale within the meaning of section 209)
of the Act. The Assistant Commissioner himscif
found that sometimes the vehicles were sent from
the works at Jamshedpur cven before an allocation
letter had been issued. Jt would appear from the
materials placed before us that generally the comple-
tion of the sales to the dealers did not take place at
Jamshedpur and the final steps in the matter of such
completion were taken at the stockyards. Even if the
appellant took into account the requirement of the
dealers which it naturally was expected to do when the
vehicles wore moved from the works to the stock-
yards, it was not necessary that the number of vehi-
cles allocated to the dealer should necessarily be
delivered to him. The appropriation of the vehicles
was done at the stockyards through specification of
the engine and the chasis number, and it was open
to the appellant till then to allot: any vehicle to any
purchaser and to transfer the vehicles from one stock-
yard co ancther..... .. It is not possible to com-
ptehend how in the above situation it could be held
that the movement of the vehicles from the works
to the stockyards was accasioned by any convenant
or incideat of the contract of 886. .......... ... ०००००
Consequently the appeals are allowed and the order
of the High Court and the Assistant Commissioner is
set aside........ पु

2.9. In a Madras case, Mahendra Kumar Ishwarlal & Co.,
Vs. State of Madras’ the petitioners’ firm were jaggery and

21 S.T.C, 72 (Madras).


55

foadgrains merchants. in Tirupathur, Madras State. Another
firm Chunilal Bhagwandas & Co., Bombay. comprised the
same partners as the petitioners. The petitioner firm (in
Mailras State) iransferred, to the Bombay firm, jaggery of
a certain value. The Sales Tax Department of the (erstwhile)
Mudras State took the view that the travsfer of jaggery
Tepresented a “sale” by the Madras firm to the Bombay firm,
and should. therefore. be assessed for Central Sales Tax.
On the other hand, the petitioner contended that since the
partners in both the firms were identical, therefore, in spite of the
fact that their share capital ratio was different, there could be
no sale at all, because one person cannot seli to himself. The
Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, to which the petitioners appealed
against the decision of the assessing authority, held that even
though the two firms had the same partners, the fact that the
profit-sharing ratio of the partners in the two firms was different,
made a difference, and that this difference would enable the two
firms being viewed as two different persons, with the result that
one firm could effectively sell goods to another, thereby attracting
the levy of sales tax on the transactions.

2.10. The petitioners filed a revision before the Madras High
Court.

Tt was hold that there was no sale. The High Court relied
on the Supreme Court decision in Harayanappa v. Bhaskara
Krishnappa*, which said *......since a firm has no legal existance,
the partnership property will vest in all the partners and in that
sense, every partner has an interest in the property of the partner-
ship. During the subsistence of the partnership, however, 10 part-
nee can deal with any portion of the property as his own, Nor can
he assign his interest in a specific item of the partnership pro-
perty to anyone. His right is to obrain such profits, if any, as
fall to his share in the assets of the firm.........

Relying on these observations, the Madras High Court held,

“_.., What emerges, therefore, from the above reasoning 15
that in regard to the present transaction, it is the case
of the same group of firm partners transfering a parti-
cular item of property, to which they were entitled. to
themselves. Jn other words, the broad principle thal a
person cannot scll.to himself will be attracted in regard
to the present transaction also ”

A.LR. 1066 S.C. 1300.

1 Havayanappav. Bhi


Question of
amendment
cumidered.

“Taxation on
censignment

56

2.11. The High Court also referred, with approval, cu three
more cases', and said, “...The decisions we have citzd above
ip support of our conclusion rely upon the definition of ‘sale’, aad
That te coastitute u sale there must be two different per: in the
ordinary sense of the term ‘person’. When two partnerships have
sods irom onc to the other and the partners of the
two firms are identical, it will really be a case af one person traas-
ferring goods to himself. There is. therefore, no ‘sale’ so far as
the definition of ‘sale’ is concerned, whether it be under the Mad-
ras General Sales fax Act or the Central Sales Tax Act. We
therefore, allow the revision case and set aside the assesomnl on
the disputed turnover... .7

transferred

Amendment if desirable — Constitutional pasition

2.12. This, then, is the position. Is it necessary 0 avoid
totally the process of gathering the relevant facts referred to
above, by introducing a provision taxing cven consignments from
branch to branch? Such a legislative provision is theoretically
within the competence of Parliament, under its residuary power
of taxation. But the Constitutioval scheme*—so far as taxation
on a transaction gya sale is concerned—is somewhat narrow,

2.13. Taxation of mere consignments is not also within the
cheme of the present Central Sales Tax Act. That Act is ccla-

- table 10 taxes on the sale or purchase of goods (other than mews-

papers), where such sale or purchase takes place in the course
of inter-State trade or commerce?,

The Act is iniended 10 be administered as a compiementary
picce of legislation to the State Sales Tax act‘. The constitutional
provision relating®, inter alia, to taxes on the sale or purchase of

1, (a) The State of Madvas represented by the Deputy Commercial
fax Officer. Maudras Division. Madrus ¥. Sri Mut. pgan Electricals.
{(T.L.No. 40 of 1999; unreported case);

(एक) Raju Chettior & Others v. State of Madras, (19534 SS.T-C.
132 (Mad).

[के State of Puntub v. Jutlandur Vegetables Syndicate, (1966) 17
STC. 326

2, See for detailed discussion, paca 2.26 ta (Punj) fafre

3, See also pare 2.30, cic. seq infra.

4, Cf section 72), 112)92) and 9¢3), Central Sales Tax Act, 1956-

5, Constitution, Articles 269(1) (g) and 269(2).



37

goods (other than newspapers} in the course of inier-Siate wade
or commerce. is also limited to ‘sale’ in the strict sense.

2.14. The proceeds of such taxes. in so far as they are attri- Constituti-
putable to the States, da net form part of the Consolidated Fumd HR ony in
of India, and ure assigned co the State in which the iax was widening the
collected!, When all these aspeets are borne in mind, it will be eons of sale
Tealised that without a constitutional amendment widening the transactions
scope of the expression ‘sale or purchase’ wherever it occurs in the
Consiitution in the coniext of inter-State sale or purchase, con-
fusion will resulc if consignment transactions are brought within
the definition of ‘sale’ in the Central Sales Tax Act. Hence, if
such Lrangactions are to be taxed. it will be necessary to amend
the Constitution in several places—-e.g. article 209 wherennder
the proceeds are distributed to the States.

2.15. The legal concept of “sale” requires two persons. If Tax why

there is no transfer of “property” in Lhe goods in the legal sense, justifiable,
there is no transfer of wealth, and since there is no transfer of
wealth, the transaction also has so far remained non-taxable.
Sinec, however, it appears chat tax is evaded by representing, no
consignment transfer, what are really sales to the buik consumer,
the compulsions of the situation and the need to check evasion
demand that even consignments should be taxed. If goods are
sent from State X to State Y as “consignment transfers", and
the consignment is treated as not amounting to intey-State ‘sales’,
Central Sales Tax cannot be levied, at present. But sales tax
in State Y can be levied when the goods are sold by the branch
in State ४ to the bulk consumer. There is, therefore. no defeating
of State sales tax in the abstract, But there might be evasion of
Central Sales Tax, by fictitiously representing, as consignments,
transactions which are really sales.

2.15A, A recent Supreme Court case has considered? two Supreme

important questions which are relevant to “consignment transfers”. case relating
to distribu-

(1) Whether. in the circumstances of the case the despatch non perce
of refrigerators from the appellant’s factory in Faridabad (Har-
yana) to their godowns in Delhi would be a ‘sale’ or ‘Purchase’

Section 9(3}, Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

*, Para 2,3, suprs

3, Kelvinator of lidia v. State of Haryana. (1973) 2 Supreme Court Case
351, 561, 562, paca 12.


58

in the course of inter-Stute trade or commerce under section 3
of the Central Sales ax Act, 1956.

ther such despatch was, under section 3(a), of that

The facts of die case were as follows:—

The appeilants, manufacturers of retrigerators etc, bad their
factory in Faridabad (Haryana) and registered office and godewns.
in Delhi. They had entercd imo distribution agreements with
three different distributors; under which the refrigerators were
sold under three different brand names. The terms and conditions
in the three agreements were similar, The refrigerators were
sent from Faridabad to Delhi, and kept in the appellant’s godowns
and finally despatched to the distributors. The sales Tax Tribu-
nal, Haryana referred the question whether the despatch was an
inter-State sale for the opinion of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court, the High Court decided the questions in favour of the
deapartment and held that the despaich constituted ‘sale’ under
section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act. and ws therefore taxable,
under that Act. The appellants came in appeal before the Supreme
Court by special leave. The principal question was whether the
distribution agreements could be construed to be contracts of sale.
On examination of the agreements the following facts had been
accepted by the departmental authorities and by the High Court :
(i) the dealer (appellant) manufactured and sold refrigerators,
(ii) the refrigerators were sold with three different trade marks,
(iii) the sale of each brand was made through a separate distri-
butor apointed for the purpose, (iv) the manner of movement
was laid down in the ageeements, (v) the dealer was bound to
sell a particular brand to a particular distributor, (vi) the refri-
gerators were exported outside India, (vii) the price of the refri-
gerators was fixed as mutually agreed upon from time to time,
(viii) the property in the goods passed at Delhi after delivery,
(ix) the prices were not settled for individual machines, but on
2 periodical basis, (x) the purchase orders were placed by the
three distributors after the goods reached the Head Office at
Delhi, (xi) after manufacture of the goods in the factory, an
excise clearance pass was obtained after payment of excise duty
for the transport of goods from the factory to the company's
godown in Delbi, and, the excise pass was always for the move-
ment of goods in favour of self, (xii) the appellants paid the
octrai during the transport of the goods from Faridabad to
Delhi, (xiii) on arrival of the goods in Delhi, the Appellant's

*


ae ce ee

59

stul received them and put them in their godown, (xiv) the
appellant’s staff in Delhi gave delivery of the goods to the cus-
tomer at Delhi, under a challan prepared at Delhi, (xv) the bills
were raised from Delhi and the price was received by the appe-
Hunt Co. in Debi and (xvi) that all the appellants did was te
manufacture the refrigerators in Faridabad and brand them diffe-
rently for the purpeses of sale and distributors. While, on the
basis of the above facts, the High Court found that the distribu-
tion agreements constituted agreements of sale, the Supreme
Court found it otherwise. Khanna J., speaking for the unanimous
Bench of himself and Alugiriswami J., observed : “In the face
of the facts cf the present case, we find it difficult to hold that
the sale of refeigerators by the appellant to the three distributors
took place at Faridabad. We are also unable to agrec with the
High Court that the distribution agreements constituted agrec-
ments of sale”,

2.15B. The following reasons were given: “It is noteworthy
19 this context to observe that ihe number of refrigerators which
were to be purchased by each of the distributors was not speci-
fied in the distribution agreements, nor did the agreements contain
Ute price which was to be charged for each refrigerator. Accord-
ing to the agreement, the appellant undertook to sell and the
distributor undertook to purchase the products of the appellant
“as mutually agreed upon from time to time.” It is, therefore,
plain thar sacs by the appellant company to the distributors “de-
pend upon the future agrcement between the parties from time
to time. Disiribution agreement dated September 15, 1965 and
December 11, 1965, no doubt mentioned the minimum number
of Leonard and Gem refrigerators which had been purchased by
ihe distributors, the exact number of refrigerators to be sold by
the appellant to these distributors was still left to volition of the
appellant. The appellant company, it was also mentioned, would
incur no liability if it was unable to supply the guaranteed mini-
mum number of refrigerators, The mode of dealings between
the parties was that subsequent to the distribution agreements,
orders were placed by the distributors with the appellant after
the refrigerators had reached the appellant's sale office and godown
in Dethi. The price of the refrigerators was also to be mutually
agreed upon irom time to time. It is plain that it is the orders
which were placed in Deihi by the distributors that resuited in
mutual agreement of saie%,

od.



60

“It was, in our opinon, the mutual agreement between the
partics at the time of the placing of the order by the distributor
with the appellant which constituted the contract of sale and not
the distribution agreement. The distribution agreement with each
distribstor provided the framework within which the different
contracts of sale were entered into by the distributors with the
appellant. This circumstances should not make us lose sight
of the fact that in distribution agreements and the subsequent
contracts of sale were distinct transaction. ..”.

2.15C. The Supreme Court also found the argument that the
first distribution agreement obliged the appellants to 5०1 all their
refrigerators to the first distributor unconvincing, as the agree-
ment was qualified by the terms “as mutually agreed upon from
time to time” and the appellant exported its products to foreign
countries. The Supreme Court rejected the contention on behalf
of respondents (State of Haryana) that the sale (to the distri-
butors) took place in Faridabad and that appropriation towards
the agreement took place there, The contention was. advanced
on the assumption that trade mark name plates for the different
‘brands were affixed in Faridabad. The Supreme Court found no
material to Support the assumption and even if the name plates
were affixed there, the name plates could be removed and re-
placed in Delhi, as the three brands of refrigerators were identical
except in respect of name plate. Another important factor was
that orders in respect of the various refrigerators were placed by
the distributors in Delhi after the refrigerators had been trans-
ported to the Delhi sale office and godown of the appellant. The
court observed : “.. 2... If the sale of the refrigerators in favour
of the distributors had already taken place at Faridabad and the
refrigerators had been appropriated there towards the sale con-
tract, there would have arisen no occasion for the placing of the
subsequent order in Delhi by a distributor with regard to the
said refrigerators. The fact that subscquent orders had to be
placed by the distributors in Delhi with regard to the different
refrigerators after their arrival in Delhi shows that there was no
earlier appropriation of those refrigerators towards any contract
of sale with the distributors. The stand taken on behalf of
the department that the appropriation of the refrigerators took
place at Faridabad towards the contracts of sale with the distri-
butors is inconsistent with the entire course of dealings between
the parties. It may also be observed that in deciding the ques-
tion whether the transactions between the parties constituted sales
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, the court should

er

~


61

look not mercly at the distribution agreements, regard should be
had of the entire course of dealings between the parties...... ”

2.15D. On the important question whether the movement of
refrigerators from Faridabad to Delhi was occasioned by a sale,
the Supreme Court held: “.....-. Assuming that the distribu-
tion agreements constituted contracts of sale, it would still have
to be shown that the sale by the appellant to the distributors
occasioned the movement of refrigerators from Faridabad to
Delhi. In this respect, we find that according to the facts found
by the Tribunal, the appellant had a godewn and sale office in
Delhi. There is nothing to show that the appellant has also a
godown in Faridabad. The movement of refrigerators from
Faridabad to the appellant’s godown in Delhi in the circumstances
can be acribed to the fact that the appellant has a godown fecitity
in Delhi’. There were two places at which, in the nature of
things, the appellant could have sold the refrigerators to the
distributors. It could be either at Faridabad where the
appellant has its factory wherein the refrigerators are
manufactured, or in Delhi where the appellant has its office and
godown and where also the three distributors have their offices.
The selection of the sale depended upon mutual agreement bet-
ween the parties. It is also obvious that if there is a choice before
the parties of so arranging their matters that in one case they
would have to incur liability to pay tax while in the other case
the Kability to pay tax would not be attracted, they would prefer
the latter course. There is nothing illegal or impermissible to 2
party so arranging its affairs that the liability to pay tax would not
be attracted or that the brunt of taxation would be reduced to
the minimum. The appellant company in the present case would
incur no liability to pay tax under the Act if it were to transport
the refrigerators from its factory in Faridabad to iis own office
and godown in Delhi and thereafter to sell them to the distributors.
The liability to pay tax under the Act would, however, arise if
the sale of the refrigerators to distributors were to take place at
Faridabad and the movement of refrigerators from Faridabad to
Delhi were to take place under the contract of sale. The ques-
tion with which we are concerned is whether the appellant entered
into such an arrangement with the distributors that the liability
to pay tax would be attracted and not the other arrangement under
which no such liability could be fastened on the appellant. So
far as this question is concerned, we find that the parties expressly

1, Emphasis supplied.


62

“cated in each of dhe three distribution agreements that it would
be in Dethi that the sale of the refrigerators would take place to
the distributors and the property therein would pass to them. It
was again in Dehi that the refrigerators were delivered to the
distributors, The order for the refrigerators were placed by the
distributors in Delhi and it was also here that the price of refrige-
rators was paid. Looking to all facts of the case, we have no
doubt thai the arrangement beiween the parties was that refri-
gerators would be sold by the appellant to the distributors after?
they had been transported to the sale office and godown of the
appellant at Alipore Road, Delhi so that no liability to pay tax
under the Act would arise. It cannot in the circumstances be
said that the wansport of the refrigerators from Faridabad to
Delhi was in pursuance of contracts of sale between the appellant
and the distributors....... ”

2.15E. The Supreme Court rejected the contention on behalf
of the respondents that since under the contract the freight
charges from Faridabad to Delhi were paid by the appellants,
this would show that the movement of the goods was occasioned
by the contract of sale. The court found that the price payable
by the distributers was the aggregate of the ex-factory price and
the transportation charges, Since ex-factory price changed from
time to time and since the agreements provided that the sale as
well as delivery to the distributors would take place in Delhi, there
was nothing surprising in the clause of the distribution agreement
saying that transportation charges would be added to the ex-
factory prices in calculating the amount payable by the distribu-
tors to the appellant. The Supreme Court also found it as in-
correct an observation made by the High Court that in two of
the distribution agreements the liability for shortage of goods
during transportation from Faridabad to Delhi was on the distri-
butors and not on the appellant Co. Even in the case of the
third agreement, where the Supreme Court found that there was
such a stipulation, the court considered it to be of no decisive
importance and only as “a matter of mutual agreement between
the parties,” and the distributor treating any loss or liability result-
ing therefrom more than offset by the distributorship of the parti-
cular brand of the refrigerator. The Supreme Court also rejected
a contention based om section 23 of the Sale of Goods Act that
where there wasa contract for the sale of unascertained or future
goods by description and goods of that description and in a deli-

1, Emphesis added.


63

verable state are unconditionally appropriaied to the contract,
either by the sclier with the assent of the buyer or by the buyer
with the assent of the seller, the property in the goods passed to
the buyer. The Supreme Court refused to construe the distribu-
tion agreements as contracts of sale. There was also no material
to show that there was any assent expressed or implied by the
distributors to the appropriation of the refrigerators by the appel-
Jant at Faridabad. ‘fhe Supreme Court relied upon its earlier
decision in Tara Engineering case1, where the Court refused to
consider the transport of manufactured trucks and buses from
the appellant's factories in Jamshedpur to Stockyards as infer-State
Sales, as the movement could not be proved to be occasioned by
sales,

2.15F. The Supreme Court held : “We accordingly accept the
appeal and set aside ihe judgment of the High Court. The answer
given by the High Court to the question referred to it ig dis-
charged. In ovr opinion, the three agreements between the
appellant and the distributors were merely agreements for the
distribution of goods and were not agreements of sale between
the parties. I cannot, in our opinion, be said that there was
any movement of refcigerators from Faridabad to Delhi under
8 contract of sale. The question in the circumstances is answered
against the department. The transactions between the appellant
and the distributors did net, in our opinion, constitute sale in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce. As such, there was
20 liability to pay tax under the Act.”

Amendment, if desirable—Need to check evasion

2.16. This, then, is the present position. Need to bring, The problem
within the range of taxability, transactions not falling within the scale ie tix
existing tax structure, in this field (or, for that matter, in any ¢¥asion,
other ficld) can arise by reason of ihe fact that the narrow scope
of the tax structure is being abused. In the preseat case, from
the suggestion made by the State Governments we infer that
evasion on a large-scale is being restored to. It would also
appear that the insertion in 1972 of section 6A? is not regarded
as adequate to check such evasion,

Teta Engineering etc. Co. Lud. vy, Asstt. OCT.
SCR. 162: $.C.C. 622.
% Para 2 5, supra.

+ < another (1970)31


64

Jt would seem, therefore, that it is thought that evasion can-
at be checked otherwise than by taxing all consiguments. Even
though there is a logical difficulty in equating a consigament with
a sale, it seems that that has been regarded as necessary.

2.17. On that basis, the amendment called for will have to
alternatives. achieve the object of bringing, within the range of taxable acti-
vities, all consignments of goods from one State to another,
subject, of course, 10 cettain possible limitations which we shall
presently deal with’. For achieving this object, two broad alrer-
natives are open.

Alternative. 2.18. According to the first alternative, such transactions
Separate ‘Act COUld be taxed by a separate fax aot to be combined with the

present Central Sales Tax. According to the second alternative,
Such transactions could be included within the present structure
of the Central Sales Tax. Though the latter course is likely to
necessitate a radical expansion of the scope of “sale” under the
Alternotive Central Sales Tax Act,—as also, perhaps, in some of the consti-
broadening tutional provisions?, nevertheless, from the practical point of view,
the scope of that course would appear to be preferable to the first alternative.
Ele inthe “The first alternativo—that is to say, a separate Act to tax inter-

State consigaments not amounting to sale,—may mean the dupli-
cation of numerous provisions already found im the Central Sales
Tax Act,

‘The question. 2,19, If, then, the second alteraative’ is to be adopted, the
of fay. fext broad question that arises is, whether the tax on the inter-
State consignments should be Jeviable in the same manner as the
present Central sakes tax is levied, or whether any other device.
should be adopted in that behalf. One possible device could
be this—the State to which goods are consigned from another
State (otherwise than by way of sale) may be empowered ta
levy a higher rate of tax on such goods when sold internally with-
‘in the consignee State, with a provision for granting rebate in
fespect of such inter-State sales tax as has been actually ievied
on those goods. Though this device may avoid an amendment
of the scope of ‘sale’ in the Central Sales Tax Act (which will
be necessary under the other alternative), it will also involve
some other amendments, Moreover, the consignor State would
not get any additional reveme if this device is adopted, al least

1, See para 2.21,
* These need not be enumerated for the present purpose.
3, Para 2.18, supra.

s


65

in eases where the consignee State does not avail itself of the
power to levy higher tax. On the other hand, if the present
scheme given in the Central Sales Tax Act is extended to consign-
ments not amounting to sale, there would be symmetry, and also
a certain amount of smoothness in working, because the ex-
perience gained in the working of the present Act would continue
to be valuable and useful for the collection and realisation of
the extended tax also.

2.20. If it is decided to pursue the approach suggested above,
namely, extending the present Act to consignments not amount-
ing to salcs, there could be a number of legislative devices which
one can adopt for the purpose. It is unnecessary to go into all of
them. Our preference is for expanding the definition of “sale”
in the Central Sales Tax Act.t

2.21. We shall now consider the question whether all consign-
ments should be covered by the extended tax, or whether any
limitations in that respect are desirable. There can be no dispute
that the tax should cxiend only to consigaments made in the
course of business?, ie. to consignments made by a dealer in
the business of buying or selling goods. But a person who
carries on the business of buying selling goods*, may be a
Manufucturer, an importer, a distributor, a wholesaler or a retailer
or may possibly fall under some other category. From the
point of view of principles of economics, the State where the
goods arc manufactured or imported from outside India for the
first time, and from which the goods are then consigned (with-
out sale) to other States in the course of business, can legitimately
claim that it should not lose, on such ‘non-sale’ consignments

Legislative
devices.

What should
be the
limitations.

the tax which would have been eamed if there had been an ‘

inter-State sale proper. The resources of the State would, to a
Jarge extent, have been employed in facilitating the manufacture
cr import of the goods. When one comes to the stage
of the wholesaler who is not himself a manufacturer
or importer, this ground of justification does not, perhaps, apply
with the same force, Therefore, as a matter of abstract logic
some distinction could be made between manufacturers and
importers (on the one hand) and wholesalers etc, on the other
hand. However, it is possible that such distinctions might lead
to an increase in adininistrative work, and we are not inclined to
recommend any such distinctions.

1. See para 2.23 infra (recommendation,
3. Compare section 2(b), defnition of “dealer”.
+, Section 2(b), definition of “dealer”.


Definition of

66

2.22, The principal purpose, then (of the definition of ‘sale’

“sale” should as proposed to be amended) will be to levy a tax on a dealer in

cover
transfers
other than
by sales.

Amendment
a matter
of policy.

Recommen-
dation.

respect of goods where the movement of such goods from one
State to another is occasioned by reason of consignments of such
goods by him to any other place of his business or to his agent
or principal, oterwise than by reason of sale.

2,22A. We may state here that whether the law should or
should not be amended so as to include consignments in a matter
of policy. In some of the replies to the Questionnaire issued by
us on the subject, the economic difficulties likely to be created
if consignments are taxed have been referred to. We express no
opinion on the matter.

Recommendation to amend the Act

2.23. We. therefore, recommend’ that if it is decided as a
matter of poliey to tax consignments, then the definition of
“gale. in the Central Sales Tax Act should, after carrying out
the requisite constitutional amendments, be amended somewhat

on these lines* :—

“(g) ‘sale’ means any transfer of properly in goods by. one
person to another for cash or deferred payment or for
any other valuable consideration’, and includes—

(i) a transfer of goods on hire-purchase® or other system
of payment by instalments, and

(ii) a consienment of goods cecasioning their movement
from one place to another, where such consignment
is by a dealer to any other place of his business or
ta his agent or principal.

Amendments needed in the Constitution to be considered separately.
see pata 2,25 et seq. intra.

Scetion 28), Central Sales Tax Act.

. This is not intented to be a precise draft. पु
Consequential amendments, if necessary, in the other provisions of
the Central Sales Tax Act, should be separately considered.

As to amendment of the words referring to “valuable consideration”,
there is a separate recommendation. See Chapter 8.

Portion relating to hite-purchase is subject to the discussion in the
relevant chapter.

ee

“


67

but does not include a mortgage or hypothecation or a
charge or pledge of goods ; and its grammatical varia-

tions and cognate expressions shall be construed
accordingly.”

2.24. We are conscious that the item (relating to consign- The com-

ments) proposed to be added as above!, will intraduce a cer. Plex nature

कि कि हि : of the pro-
tain amount of complexity in the Act; but, if the object of blem.
checking evasion is to be achieved, this complexity cannot be
avoided. “The tax laws are aimed at dealing with complex
Problems of infinite variety, necessitating adjustment of several
disparate elements.”

2.25. It should, perhaps, be unnecessary to point out that The
the added item (as proposed above) will cover all inter-Staic amend: in
consignments in the course of business; and will eliminate any cover all
inquiry 2s to whether the particular consigament constituted a consign-
bona fide sale or a fictitious sale. Also, it will cover successive
inter-State consignments of the same goods in the course of
business.

Constitutional position—concepi of sale

2.26. We should point out that to achieve the above ob- Constitu-
ject, an amendment of the Constitution, in order to authorise tional
the distribution of the proceeds of the tax on consigamenis, is amen
unavoidable. No doubt, Parliament already possesses the needed.
Power to levy a tax on inter-State consignments under its resi-
duary power, But the disiribution of the Proceeds of the tax
10 be so levied cannot be provided for within the language of
article 269, and must need an expansion of the scope of article
269. It would appear that the expression “sale or purchase”,
occuring in article 269 (and in Union List, entry 925) will
have to be given the same interpretation as has been given to
it under State List, entry 54.

When an expression is used in a legal document without
change at several places, normally it should bear the same
interpretation, in the interest of symmetry and to avoid confu-
sion. ‘This is the first point to be considered.

4. Para 2.23 Supra.



68

“Sale of 2.27. A decision! of the Supreme Court also throws light
pieaeiern on the meaning of “sale”:.—
expre-
ssion. “The expression ‘sale of goods” is a composite expres-
sion, consisting of various ingredients or elements.
Thus, there are the elements of bargain. or contract
of sale, the payment or promise of payment of
price, the delivery of goods and the actual passing
of title, and each one of then: is essential to a
transaction of sale though the sale is not comple-
ted or concluded unless the purchaser becomes the
owner of the property.”
Metapho- 2.28. It has been observed in an Australian? case :—
tical use of
sale. “The werd ‘sale’ is used in various metaphorical senses.
When a man enters into # contract of employment,
he is sometimes said to ‘sell his labour’, but really
there is no transaction of sale; the contract is a
contract of employment, not a contract of sale.
Similarly, when a banker ‘deals in credit’ he makes
Joan contracts and does not sell anything.”
per far 2.29, 1६ may well be that the Jegal conception of a sale is
cept €x- not strictly inapplicable to the case of hire-purchase. There
tended, may be a semblance of a reason in the case of tax on a hire-
purchase by treating it as sale, by acting on what we regard as
the substance of the transaction, On the other hand, there is
some occasion for surprise at finding in any particular legisla-
tion the word “sale” or the word “sell” used as referring to @
transaction of consignment.
ire. nen 2.30. A modern judicial expression of the prin facie mean-

३० laid ing of “sale” is to be found ia Sismpson v. Conolty’. Ht was
down in held in that case that an agreement to extinguish an existing
Simp pnotly, debt if land is transferred, is not a “sale” of land. The Court

observed :

“But the general principle of English law is that a sale
means the exchanging ef property for money. That

~ Popatlal Shah v. State of Madras, A.1.R. 1953 S.C. 274.
3, Baris of New Soutk Wales v. Commonwealth, (1948) 76 CLR. 1,
234 (per Latham, C.1.).
३, Simpson v. Conolly, (1953) 2 All E.R. 474, 477 (Finnemore J.).
(The Edited 8th editions of Benjamin. on Sales).


69

applies—and 1 think both counsel agree with this—
to a sale of land and sale of chattels equally.”
Such is the primary meaning of the word “sale”,

2.31. There are, no doubt, to be found authorities and Wider de-
statutes which have extended that meaning. Upjohn 1.0, for finitions.
example, cited the following from T. Cypria Williams’ Books,
the Contract of sale of land.

“ ‘Sale’ in the strict and Primary sense of the word, means
an agreement for the conveyance of Property for
a price in money; but the word ‘sale’ may be used
in Jaw in the wider sense and so applied to the
conveyance of land for a price consisting wholly or
partly of money’s worth other than the conveyance
of some other land.”

2.32. Even here. the essential concept of transfer of the Essential
. हि हु जा
property in goods is not abandoned. concept
property.
2.33. The distinction between “sale” and “agency” has been Distine-
discussed at length in Cordon Woodraffe's case®. All this dis- tion bet
cussion is intended to drive at the submission that it is difficult and
to place an expanded interpretation on “sale or purchase” in 28¢0CY-
article 269, so as to cover a sale not Properly so called.

2.34. An amendment to expand the meaning of ‘sale’ (to The need
cover consignment) is considered necessary because since sec- to clarify
tion 9(3) of the Central Sales Tax Act has, for its power and tutional
origin, article 269(2) of the Constitution, it is desirable that basis.
the constitutional provision itself should be unambiguous, so
as to authorise the distribution of proceeds of a tax on consign-
ments under section 9(3) read with the definition of “sale”.

The exclusive object of entry 92A (in the Union List) was to
confer, on the Union, the power to levy a tax on inter-State
transactions of sale or purchase of goods, These transactions
were, before the insertion of that article, regarded (according
to an interpretation subsequently found to be erroneous) as
falling within the power of the States. By a new entry,—entry
92A—that power was in 1956 vested in the Union, but the pro-

TT. Bohashaw Brothers v. Mayer, (1958) 3 ANBAR. 833, 835 (Upjohn J.).
2 Cordon Woodraffe v. S.K.M.A. Majid & Co., ALR. 1567 S.C. 181.



in com-
mon par-
Tance ‘sabe*
tloes not
include
consign-
ments.

Past inter-
pretation.
nota sure
शा,

The com-
mon notion
is differ-
emt,

70

ceeds were, by an amendment of article 269 which was madc
simultaneously, directed to be distributed to the States.

2.35. And since, in State List, entry 54, “sale” has been
narrowly construed, it is very likely that in article 269 and
Union List, entry 923, also, it will be narrowly construed, parti-
culasly having regard to the close relationship of article 269(3)
to entry 92A.

2.36. Consignment of goods without passing of property is
not, even in popular language, equated with “sale”. Thus,
both the legal and popular meanings of ‘sale’ exclude consign-
ments without transfer of property.

2.37. No doubt. it is true that the Ceniral Sales Tax has—
on one plausible interpretation’—itself levied a tax on hire-
purchase nat resulting in sale, and, on that basis. it could be
argued that the strict common law concept of “sale” has not
been adhered to by the legislature. But this does not neces-
sarily lead to the conclusion that, for the purpose of article
269 of the Constitution, the interpretation of the expression
“sale” should be wide. Legislative practice, reflected in a defi-
nition (which itself is open to two interpretations*), is not con-
clusive on a question of competence of the very legislature which
has adopted that practice. (The word ‘competence’ is used
here not to indicate the power of the Union to tax, but to con-
note its power to assign the revenues from the tax to the

States).

As Lord Radcliffe emphasised, “resort to a later Act can
rarely, if ever, be justified, unless the message that it conveys
is a plain one itself, at least free from ambiguity”.

2.38. Though it is commonplace. it has to be emphasised
that the passing of property for price is of the essence of sale,
and where the property does not pass (as in consignment trans-
fers), an essential feature of sale as known to the law and also
as understood by the layman, is missing.

2, See discussion relating to hire-purchase,
3, In Re Mac Manaway, (1951) A.C. 161, 177 (P.C.).


»

7

As has been observed!, “Alike in the ordinary use of lan-
guage and in its legal concept, a safe connotes the mutual as-
sent of two parties” and, of course, the passing of property.

Amendnient of the Constitution

2.39, Therefore, if consignments are as a matter of policy Recam-
intended to be included in the Central Sales Tax Act, it will be mendation
advisable to amend article 269(1)(g) and 269(3) of the Con- the Con-
stitution*. by adding an Explanation to that article, somewhat stitution.
on the following lines*:—

“Explanation—For the purpose of this article the ex-
pression “sale ar purchase” includest—

a consignment of 2oods occasioning their movement
trom one place to another, by a dealer to any other
place of his business or to his agent or princi-

1, Kirkness Unspector uf Taxes) v. Rudson John & Co. Ltd.) (1955)
2 AILE.R, 345, 348 (H.L.) (Vise. unt Simonds,).
2, There ize provisions of the Constitution using the expression “sale”
but they dano! seem to require amendticnt in the present context,
3. This is not intended to be a precise draft.
4, Ast hirs-purchase, sce asticle 366 as proposed Lo be amended.



Scope of the
Chapter.

Need for.
demarcation

CHAPTER 3

SALES IN THE COURSE OF IMPORT—KHOSLA’S CASE

Tatroductory

3.1. In this Chapter, we shall deal with a question concern-
ing the taxation of sales im the course of import. The question
is one of considerable constitutional importance. It arises from
the judgment in Khosla’s case, which interpreted section 5 of
the Central Sales Tax Act and its relationship to article 286(1)
(9) and article 286(2) of the Constitution. The question is 2
vexed one and its proper consideration and appreciation in-
volves a study of the historical and constitutional background’,
and that background must be dealt with in order to unrave the
various issues turning essentially on the taxability of purchases
connected with export and sales connected with import.

3.18. We shall first deal with the constitutional aspect.
Where there are two Governments operating in respect of a
subject matter—in this case, taxation, demarcation of their res-
pective jurisdictions becomes unavoidable. Taxation of trans-
actions relating to commodities is a major source of revenue
in almost all the countries of the world, and it is also well-
known that (he power to tax such transactions may have to be
exercised at various stages. Where this power is divided bet-
ween two Governments, care has to be taken to see that the
power of one Government is not so exercised as to impede the
the policy legitimately adopted by the other Government.
Secondly, since matters concerning international trade have nece-
ssarily to be vested in the national Government, care has also to
be taken to see that legislation passed by the States does not im-
pinge upon international trade, These broad considerations have
led to the inclusion in the Constitution of the relevant provisions,
of which article 286(1) is material®,

1, See para 3.13 et See infra, Page 80.
2. Paras 3.6, 4, infra. Page 76.

72

™


camer

73

3.2. It may be stated that in the period prior to the Consti- position
tution, the authority of a province to levy a tax on transactions before the

‘Constitu-

of sale was not subject to limitations of the nature Iaid down in tion,

article 286 of the Constitution, The provinces had power to levy
a tax on the sale of goods and on advertisements under the Go-
vernment of India Act, 1935, Seventh Schedule, Provincial List,
entry 48.

There was no express provision in the Government of India
Act prohibiting the provinces from levying a tax on sales which
took place in the course of import or export or in the course of
inter state trade or commerce, or on transactions which took
place outside their respective territories, Of course, as regards
the legislative power of the provinces, the general limitation that
they could legislate only “for the province or any part thereof”,
was always applicable.

A Provincial Legislature could not pass laws having
extra-territorial operation. But this did not limit legislative com-
Ppetence (as to a tax on the sale of goods) to sales concluded within
the boundaries of the province.! A sufficient territorial nexus
between the taxing state and the sale? was enough to maintain
the validity of the law.

r
Be

3.2A. In this connection, a judgement of the Federal Court Judgment

is of interest. In 1942, the Federal Court had to consider the

of
Federat

question? whether a tax levied by a prevince on the first sale Court.

by the manufacturer or the producer could be said to be an excise
and, thercfore,outside the competence of the state. The Federal
Court upheld the validity of the tax, on the ground that the tax
was on the occasion of sale and not on the occasion of manufac-
ture. In the course of the arguments, the well-known American
case of Brown v. The state of Maryland‘ was cited, where an act
of the state of Maryland, prohibiting the importers of foreign
goods from selling their goods without taking a licence, for which
50 dollars had to be paid, was held to be repugnant to the pro-
vision in the Constitution of the U.S.A. which provides that:“‘no
state shall, without the consent of Congress, allow any imposts
or duties on on imports or exports, except what maybe absolutely
necessary for executing its inspection laws.”

1.” Papailal Saak WV. Stote of Madras, (1953) 4 S.T.C. 188; ATR. 1953

S.C. 274; (1953) 5.C.R. 677.

2. Sundarcramler & Co. ¥, State of Andhra Pradesh ATR. 1958
S.C, 468, 479, 493, (1968) S.C.J. 459.

3. Madras Province V. Boddhu Paidenna & Sons, AAR. 1942 F.C. 33,
37 Gwyer C.3.

4, Brown ¥. State of Maryland (1827) 12 Wheat 419.

- waa
Le ee
we


74

The Federal Court pointed out that provisions which were
being considered in the American casc were very different from
the provisions of the Government of India Act. One of the
Points of difference emphasised by The Federal Court was that
the American Constitution also provides that Congress alone has
power “to regulate commerce with foreign nations, among the
several slates, and with the Indian tribes”; and it was held that
the Maryland tax was not less repugnant 10 this provision also:
Marshall C.J. asked:

“To what purposes should the power to allow importa-

tion be given, unaccompanied with the power to
authorise the sale of the thing imported?......Cong-
ress has a right, net only to authorise importation,
but to authorise the importer to sell......... what
does the importer purchase, if he does not purchase
the privilege to’ sell?”

The Federal Court added:

“On this view of the Commerce clause, it would indeed

be difficult to recognise the right of the State to
impose a tax upon the first sale of the commodity,
al any rate so long as it remained in the importer’s
hands. Jn the Indian Constitution Act mo such
question arises:+ and the right of the Provincial
Legislatures to levy a tax on sales can be considered
without any reference to so formidable a power
vested in the Central Government. Lastly, the pro-

ibition in the American Constitution is against the
laying of “any imports or duties on imports or
exports”; the prohibition is not merely against the
jaying of duties of customs. but is expressed in
what we conceive to be far wider terms; and it does
not appear to us that it would necessarily follow
from the principle of the Maryland decision that
in India the payment of customs duty on goods
imported from abroad or the payment of an excise
duty on goods manufactured or produced in India
can be regarded as conferring some kind of licence
or title on the importer or manufacturer to sell his
goods to any purchaser without incurring a further

1,

Cm ‘hasis Supplied.

लि


75

liability to tax. That was the view which commean-
ded itself to the Court in (1827) 12 Wheat, 4197
and it was view adopted and argued before us. The
analogy with the American case is an aftractive
one; but, for the reasons which we have given we
are wholly unable to accept it.”

3,3. The matter is Mlustrated by section 2(g) of the C.P. and
Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947 (as then in force), which provided?
as follows :

“ ‘sale’ with all its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions means any transfer of property in
goods for cash or deferred payment or other valu-
able consideration, including a transfer of property
in goods made in course of the execution of a con-
tract, but does not include 2 mortgage, hypothe-
cation, charge or pledge.

* . . a

Explanation CUF).—Notwithstanding anything to the con-
trary in the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 1930, the sale of any
goods which are actually in Central Provinces and Berar at
the time when the contract of sale as defined in that Act in
tespect thereof is made, shall, wherever the said contract of
sale is made, be deemed for the purpose of this Act to have
taken place in the Central Province and Berar.”

3.4. This Act was enacted in exercise of the powers con-
ferred upon the Provincial Legislature by the Government of
India Act, 1935, 7th Schedule Provincial list—Entry 48. In
exercise of that power, the Legislature was competent to enact
@ law for levying sales tax acting on the principle of territorial
nexus, i.c., the province could fix upon one or more ingredi-
ents of sale, and make it the foundation for imposing liability
for sales tax. The Provincial Legislature, relying upon either
the manufacture of the goods within the province, or the exist-
ence of the goods at the date of the contract of sale within the
Province, or the making of the contract of sale within the pro-
vince, as the basis, could provide for levying sales tax. “Sale”
within the territory was not a condition of the exercise of the
power to levy sales tax.*

1. Brown V. State of Maryland, (1827) 12 Wheat 419.
* See Anwer Khan V. State of M.P., ALR. 1970 8.C, 1765.
La 33 Anwer Khan ¥. State of M. P., A. 1. R. 1970 5. C. 1756 26 8. 7. C

20 M of Law/74—6.

Section
2(g) CP.
and Berar
Sales Tax
1947 and
its con-
struction by
the Sup-

reme Court.


Other de-
cisions of
the
Supreme
Court.

e

Position
under the
‘Constitu-
tion,

76

3.5. It has been held by the Supreme Court in a large num
ber of cases? that under the Government of India Act, 1935
the Provincial Legislature was competent to enact a law for
levying sales tax acting on the principles of territorial nexus,
ic., the province could fix upon one or more ingredients of
sale; and make it the foundation for imposing liability for sales
tax,

The position is however, substantially different under the
Constitution. Even if a sale is inside the State—and therefore
not subject to the ban under article 286(1)(a)—it cannot be
taxed by the States if it falls within either of the other two
bans prescribed in article 286.

3.6. The Constitution has dealt with the matter by an
express and elaborate provision. Broadly speaking, it not only
Prohibits taxation by the States of a sale* outside the State, but
also prohibits taxation of a sale in the course of import or
export—or in inter-State trade or commerce. This provision is
to be found in article 286८1).

3.7. Under article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution, no law
of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax on
the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes
Place “in the course of the import of the goods into, or export
of the goods out of, the territory of India” The principal ob-
ject of the prohibition is_to protect international trade.

3.8. Such a prohibition* is based on one of those consti-
tutional doctrines which form the heart of the federal concept.
Tt is the basic need for the demarcation of the taxing power on

1, (a) Popatla! Shah V. State of Madrus, A. 1. R. 1953 S. C. 274; (1953)
S.C. R. 677.
(0) Tuta Iran & Steei Co. Ld. ५. State of Bikar, (1968) 9 S, T. 0. 267;
A/T. 8. 1958 5, C. 452; (1958) 5. 0. R. 1365.
(c) Bharat Sugar Mills Led. V. State of Bihar, (1960) 11 S. T. 0. 793;
A. ३. 8. 1961 S.C. 1183.
(d) Tikaram के Sons Lid. ¥. Commissioner of Sales Tax (1968) 22
S. T. ©. 308; A. 1. ६, 1968, 5. 2. 1286,
(८) Anwar Khan Mahboob Y. Commissioner of Saies Tax (1970) 26
8. 1. C. 381, 3 AL 1२. 1970 5, C, 1756.
5, Por brevity, “Sake” is usedia the above discussion to include pur-
chase.
3. Pare 3.7, Supra.



गा

transactions relating to commodities, that constitutes the spirit
of the constitutional prohibition. Verbal controversies and ques-
tions of interpretation naturally arise on the formula that may
be adopted to give effect to this spirit, But the essential and
basic consideration is the one to which we have referred.

In the celebrated American case of Brown ५. Maryland™
Marshall C. J. observed: —

“The constitutional prohibition on the States to Jay a
duty on imports. a prohibition which vast majority
of them must feel an interest in preserving, may
certainly come in conflict with the acknowledged
power 10 tax persons and property within their
territory. The power, and the restriction on it,
though quite distinguishable when they do not ap-
proach each other, may yet, like the intervening
colours between white and black, approach so nearly
as to perplex the understanding, as colors
perplex the vision in making the — disti
tion between them. Yet the distinction exists,
and must be marked as the cases arise. Till they
do arise, it might be premature to state any rule
as being universal in its application. It is suffi-
cient for the present to say, generally, that when
the importer has so acted upon the thing imported
that it has become incorporated and mixed up with
the mass of property in the country, it has, per-
haps, lost its distinctive character as an “import”
and has become subject to the taxing power of the
State; but while remaining the property of the im-
porter, in his warehouse, in the original form or
package in which it was imported, a tax upon it is
too plainly a duty on imports to escape the prohi-
bition in the Constitution.”

3.8A. Problems of interpretation of such prohibitions are Problems

unavoidable, Clark J. in State of Wisconsin v. fC. Penny शत,
(७४१, observed as follows:

“that there is a ‘need for clearing up the tangled under-
growth of past cases’ with reference to the taxing

1, Brown V. Maryland, (1827) 6 L. 5७,
3, Stata of Wissrtsia ¥. ज. any C2, (1910) 311 ७, $. 435, 445.



Question

of sale in
the conrse
‘of import.

ris

power of the Siates is a concomitant to the negative
approach resulting from a case-by-case resolution
of ‘the extremely limited restrictions thal the Con-
slitution placed upon the States...

“Commerce between the States having grown up like
Topsy, the Congress meanwhile not having undertaken
to regulate taxation of il, and the States having
understandably persisted in their efforts to get some
return for the substantial benefits they have afforded
it, there is little wonder that there has been no end
of cases testing out state tax Ievies. The resulting
judicial application of constitutional principles to
specific State statutes leaves much room for con-
troversy and confusion, and little in the way of
precise guides to the States in the exercise of their
indispensable power of taxation. This Court alone
hhas handed down some three hundred _full-dress
opinions spread through slightly more than that num-
ber of reports. As was said in Mifler Bros. Co. ५.
State of Maryland the decisions have been not
always clear, consistent or reconcilable. A few have
been specifically over-ruled, while others no longer
fully represent the present state of the law. From the
quagmire there emerge, however, some firm peaks of
decision which remain unquestioned .

This shows the complexity of the qucstion.

3.9. We now come to the specific question to be considered
in this Chapter—the question of taxation of sale in the course
of import, with reference to the judgment of the Supreme Court
in Khostla’s case?.

3.10. Consideration of this question, as a matter of policy,
was deliberately avoided in the earlier Report*. Since the pre-
sent law is that a sale of the nature illustrated in Khosla’s case is
a sale in the course of import, the question to be considered is
whether it should be made liable to taxation by the States—thus
over-fiding what was laid down in Khosla’s case.

{, Miller ¥. State of Meryland.

5, KU. Khosla & Ca. ४- Deputy Commnissiorsr of Taxes, A.1-R, 1966
S.C. 1216; (1966) 3 S.C.R. 352.

2, 20th Report, Page 65, para 131, Section 5 of the Centyal Sates Tax Act
Taxation by States of Sales in the course of import.


wy

3.11, As already stated, the earlier Report of the Law Com- Suggestions
mission was confined 10 a narrow legal question. Suggestions that a Sone
were received by the carficr Commission®, however, indicate that
several alternatives are open in this context.

(i) The proposition laid down in Khosla’s case may
be left as it is*;

Gi} ‘The preposition Zuid down in Khosia's case may be
codified 1

so may not only be maintained, but
nded in its scope*;

(iii) ‘Phat proposni
mey aber he

(iv) Thal preposition may be abrogated, so as to allow
the States to levy sales tax on such transactions*;

3.114. The choice is, thus fairly wide ; and a decision in the Entries 10
matter necessarily requires an examination of matter of consti- the Consti
tutional policy. ‘The reason why sales in the course of import ing to inter-
(or export) are taken out of the domain of taxation by States is national
well known, Matters alfecting international trade were intended
to be kept exclusi within the competence of the Union, and —
the Constitution-makers were anxious to see that the legislative
power of the State was not exercised in a manner which would
impair the efficient performance of the responsibility of the Cen-
tre in the field of international rclations, This is evident not only
from the entries in Union List relating to international affairs
in general, but also from the entries relating to international trade
in particular. For example, trade and commerce with foreign
countries, and imports and exports across customs frontiers,
are dealt with by a specific entry in the Union List—Union List,
Entry 4], Dutizs of customs, including export duties, fall within
the exclusive competence of the Union—Union List, Entry $3.
The general principles laid down in the Constitution, article
246(1), about the paramountcy of entries in the Union List need

1. Para 3.10, Supra.

5, 30th Report, pages 66 to 72, paragraphs 132 to 139,
3, Cf. 30th Report, page 66 para 133.

4, Cf Wth Report, page 67, para 134.

4. Cf. 30th Report, page 70, para 136.

6, Cf. 3th Report, pages 67, 68 and 69, para 135.


Background
of the
problem,

80

not be elaborated here. For abundant caution, some of the en-
tries in the State List expressly lay down that the power there-
under is to be subject to the legislative powcr of the Union under
a specific entry. For example, see State List, entries 11, 13, 22,
24, 32, 33, 54, 63 cic. In fact, the entry relating to the taxing
power of the State in relation to sale or purchase of goods (State
List, entry 54) provides that the power is subject to Union List,
Entry 92A. (Entry 92A—Taxes on the sale or purchase of
goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes
place in the course of inter-State trade or Commerce.

At is this anxiety of the Constitution-makers to preserve inter-
national trade from the taxing power of the States which is re-
flected in Article 286(1) (b), which prohibits the imposition, by
a law of a State, of a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where
such sale or purchase takes place, in the course of the import of
the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of
India.

3.12. We may now consider whether the preservation of
international trade from taxation by the States justifies the im-
position of a prohibition against the Icvy of tax by the States on
transactions of the nature which figured in Khusta's case. The
question to be considered is. when there is a transaction in which
there are two sgles, namely, (1) a sale by a forcign manufacturer,
dealer or other foreign trader to an Indian importer, and (ii) a
sale by the Indian importer to the first purchaser in India
should the sccond sale be regarded as deserving of exemption
from state taxatien, even in the special circumstances that were
present in Khosla’s case ?

Chronological events retevant to the problem

3.13. To put the question in its proper perspective, it would
be convenient to refer to the legislative and judicial background
of the problem. We shall deal with important developments in
their chronological order. These are :

(1) Article 286, as it existed+ before 1956;

(2) The twe Travancore cases;?

1. Para 3.13A and 3.14, infra.
9, Para 3.15, infra.


gi

{3) The Law Commission’s 2nd Report, which used the
word ‘occasion’, with intent to give the effect to the
Propositions laid down in the Travancore cases;1

(4) The Central Sates Tax Act. 1956, passed with the
same intent;?

(5) Case-law before Khosla’s case;?
(6) Khosla’s case
(7) 30th Report:? of the Law Commission:

(8) Our conclusion;*

i its a i- Article 286
3.13A. Article 286(1) before its smendment by the Consti. fsticle i,

tution (Sixth Amendment} Act. was as follows:—

(1) No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the impo-
sition of 4 tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale
or purchase takes place—

(a) outside the State; or

(b) jn the course of the import of the goods into, ot export
of the goods out of the teritory of India.

(Explanation not quoted).

3.14. When article 286 of the Constitution (before 1956) Article 286-

used the expression “course of import” and the expression "17
P ‘Pi

“course of export™, it did use language which could have a wide
meaning as well as a narrow meaning. ‘The language could, if a
oatrow meaning is to be given, be confined to that sale which
itself constitutes the import. Or, in a wider sense, it could be
applied to all transactions which tock place in the course of bring-
ing the goods from outside into India. A similar wide view was
possible as regards export. In fact, one of the members of the
Constituent Assembly®, Shri Amiyo Kumar Ghosh, wished to

infr
+ Para 3.22, infra.
Para 3.23 at see करिए,
Para 3.41 at see infra.
Para 3.48 at see infra.
. Pata 3.66 at see infra
1, Para 3.13 A Supra.

Sse Vol. 9, Constitunt Assembly Debates 333, 334, 346,

aah eH!

a!


Pata 3.14
(Cond)

First
Travancore
case.

82

tuake it clear that export meant the last transactions, and
hat only at the point of these transactions, last or first,
as the case may be, the sales will be exempted from sales tax.
and ai no other point. Another member—Shri Jagat Narain
Das—also expressed a desire for clarification. In reply, Dr.
Ambedkar stated that while he knew that some friends did not
like the phraseology, he would add that the Drafting Committee
had spent a good deal of time in order to choose the exact phra~
sealogy. However, Dr. Ambedkar added that the Drafting
Commilice would further examine this phraseology, se as to re-
move the criticism. The Drafting Commitee, however, does not
appear to have made any charge after this debate’.

TRAVANCORE CASES.

3.15. The ambiguity” in the language of article 286 became
apparent when the first Travancore case was Jecided. As 15
well-known. four alternative constructions were advanced before
the Supreme Court in that case as to the meaning of “course of”,
and the court was circumspect caough to observe that it was
confining its decision to the particular situation im the case,
namely, what may be described roughly as (1) import —pur-
chase, and (ii) ecxport—sale. These, the court held, were
definitely exemp:, whatever else may or may not fall within the
exemption,

3.16. The first Travancore case dealt with sale by export.
‘The second Travancore case also dealt with export sales. But
the whole field was covered in the discussion.

Ta the first Tranvancore case,3 the Supreme Court bed as
follows :—

“Whatever else may or may not fall within article 286(1}

(०), sales and purchases which themselves occasion the

export or the import of the goods, as the case may be.

out of or inte the territory of India come within the
exemption, and that is enough te dispose of these
appeals.”
1, The Rcpore of the Drafting Commitice dated 3rd November, 1949
does not deat with this point.
* Para 3.t4, Supra

*, State of Trarnncore-Cochin ¥. Bombay Co. Ltd. (1952} $.C.R. 1112,
AIB 1952 SC 366(1953) IML 3 STC 434.


83

“We are clearly of the opinion that the saies here in ques-
tion, which occasioned the export in each case, fali
within the scope of the exemption under Article 286
(1) (0), Such sales must of necessity he put through
by transporting the goods by rail or ship or both out
of the territory of India, that is to say, by employing
the machinery of export. A sale by export thus in-
volves a series of. integrated activities commencing
from the agreement of sale with a foreign buyer
and ending with the delivery of the goods to a common
carrier for transport out of the country by land or sea.
Such a sale cannat be disassociated from the export
without which it cannot be effectuated, and the sale
and resaltant export form parts of a single transaction.
Of these two integrated activities, which together con-
stituie an export sale, whichever first occurs can well
be regarded as taking place in the course of the other.
Assuming without deciding that the property in the
goods in the present cases passed to the foreign buyers
and the sales were thus completed within the state
before the goods commenced their journey as found
by sales tax authorities, the sales must, nevertheless,
be regarded as having taken place” fii ihie course of the
export and are, therefore, cxempt under Article 286
(1)(b). That clause, indeed, assumes that the sale
had taken place within the limits of the Stale and
exempts it if it took place’in the course of the expert
of the goods concerned.”

3.17. In the second Travancore case’, these observations Second
were sought to be taken advantage of, and it was argued that Travancore
the last_purchase of goods made by the exporter for the pur-
pose of exporting them to implement orders alrcady received
from a foreign buyer (or expected to be received subsequently
in the course of business) and the first sale by the importer to
lers pursuant to which the goods were imported (or
xpected to be received after the import), would also
fall within the scope of the exemption in Article 286(1}(b) of
the Constitution. The majority of the judges of the Supreme
Court. however, rejected this argument.

1, State of Travancore-Cachin v. $.V.C. Factory. A.LR. 1953 S.C.
333, 335, 331, (1954) SCR 4 STC 205.
7


a4

Summing up the conclusions, and explaining the observations
in the first case, the majority observed that:
“(1) Sales by export and purchase by import fall within
the exemption under article 286(1) (b).

/@ Purchase in the State by the exporter for the purpose
of export as well as sales in the State by the importer
after the goods have crossed the customs barriers’ are
net within the expression, and

(3) Sules in the State by the exporter or importer by trans-
fer of shipping documents while the goods are beyond
the customs barricrs are within the exemption assum-
ing that the Stute’s power of taxation extends to such
transactions.

(4) The word “course” and the expresion “in the. course
of" not only imply a period of time during which
movement is in progress, but postulate also the con-
nected relation.

(5) Therefore, the sale in the course of export out of the
country should be understood as meaning a sale taking
place not only during the activities directed to the
exportation of the goods out of the country, but also
as part of it connected with such activities. The time
factor alone was not determinative.”

While this was the majority view, the minority—§.R. Das J.
as he then was—would regard the last purchase by the exporter
and the first sale by the importer to be within the exemption.

non aot i 3.18. The Supreme Court used the word ‘occasion’ in the

to Travancore cases. But this was not intended to give a precise
give 2 re- definition. We may, in this connection, refer to what Lord Reid
tion, has said recently? about the function of a court:

_ “Tt is not the function of a court to frame definitions; some
latitude should be left for future developments.”
Effect of

judgement "3.19. In this manner, the majority judgment in the second
im second Travancore case defined the scope of article 286, and

Tew अमर down the. potential width of constpugtion which had been left
Taxation

Enquiry |

Commission.

1. inthe SCR, the expression is “barriers”. a
2. Saunders v. Augtia Building Society (1970) 3 All B.R. 961, 963
(L.)


8S

open by the first casc. The question of exemption in respect of
import and export did not itself present much difficulty, either to
the Government of 10 the business community during those years,
but, as is well known, considerable complications were caused
and uncertainties created by judicial pronouncements in respect
of exemption under another head, namely, sales or purchase out-
side a State and sales or purchases in inter-State trade or com
merce. Because of these coraplications and uncertainties. the Tax-
ation Enquiry Commission* considered the question of inter-State
trade in detail, The Commission found the dichotomy in article
286, as it then stood, unsatisfactory, and suggested that a new
dichotomy should be adop:cd, namely, sales in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce and sales not in the course of inter-
State and commerce. Yaxation of inter-State sales should be
deal with exclusively br the Centre, so as to secure uniformity
and co-ordination. That Commission further recommended that
the Central legislation, which would give effect to this recom-
mendation, should aiso deal with the definition of the jocal of
sales for the purpose of defining in detail the relevant jurisdic-
tions of the Union and the States, and the States inier-se. En-
tirely irrespective of the power of the Central Governmem [0
levy a tax, the Commission said, that H was absolutely necessary
that there should be a body-of law which defines the circumstan-

\

ces in which a sale becomes taxable by a particular State and by”

no other, In support of the advantages of Parliamentary iegis-
Jation as contrasted with the rigidity resulting from coustitu-
tioval provisions, the Taxation Enquiry Commission made cer-
tain observations’. These observations were as follows :—--

“We realise, of course, that the legislation itself may have to
be modified from time to timc in the light of new circumstances
not fully provided for. or of judicial interpretation of the original
provisions. Parliamentary legislation, as distinguished from con-
stitufional provisions. will have the obvious advantage that these
modifications can be made as required without undue delay or
dificulty. Tt will not, of course, suffice to define the jurisdiction
jnter-se of individual States. The other important aspects of Cent-
ral legislation would be the definition in adequate detail of what
constitutes a sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade

3, Taxation Enquiry Co-nmi:
29 62, paragraphs है 10 22,

3... Taxation Eng tiry Commission, Report (1953-54), Vol, 3. pages 54
59, paragraph 20.

ion, Report (1953-S4, Vol. 3, pages 48



Consti-
tutional
Amend-
ment.

86

or commerce. [a this matter too, the embodient of the princi-
ples in an enactment of Parliament, and not in the Constitution
itself, would have the advantage thar the details of the law can,
without undue rigidity, be modified to suit new facts or unfore-
seen citcumstances. As we have stated, the Constitution itself
would of course lay down the broad division of tax power bet-
ween the Union and the States. The important fact would re-
main that afl sales would fall under one or the other of these
categories. Ihe Union, which under the scheme would, of
course, derive no revenue from the taxation of inter-State sales
or purchases, would be solcty interested, m the legislation which
it promotes, in securing, from a practical angle, the maximum
possible co-ordination between different States in regard to the
operation of the inter-State sales tax and the maximum possible
vquily in che appointment of the relevant proceeds to the States
in which the goods have been physically delivered and thosc from
eal despatch has taken place. In the actual pro-
visions of law, it will no doubt avoid the many pitfalls which have
been a feature of the present constitutional provisions as they
have been interpreted und implemented, and even if it does not
fully suveeed in doing so as uhe outset, the relevant legislation,
as we have emphasised, can be modified at subsequent stages in
conformicy with the administrative and other requirements as
they arise from time 10 time.”

3.20 Having, thus, recommended that sales in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce should be regulated by Central
legislation, and that principles for determining when sales took
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce should be
laid down by Parliamentary legislation, the Taxation Enquiry
Commission recommended an amendment of the Constitution
for conferring the nécéséary” legislative powers on Parliament.

Along with this recommendation, relating to intcr-State trade
or commerce, the Taxation Enquiry Commission recommended an
amendment of article 286 so that Parliament may, by law, also
formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of
goods takes place in the course of import or export!.

3.21. In pursuance of this recommendation of the Taxation
Enquiry Commission, the Constitution (Tenth Amendment)

1, Taxation Enquiry Commission, Reports. (1953-54), Vol. 3, page
56, paragraph 15, sub-paragraph —C.


a7

Bilt! was intraduced in Parliament, and under that Bill Parlia-
ment was empowered to formulate by law the principles for
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in one
of the ways mentioned below :—

(i) outside a State;
(ii) in the course of the import goods into or export goods
out of the territory of India;
(iii) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.

This Bill became the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act,
which revised article 286,

It may be stated that this power is couched in phraseology
which does not compel Parliament to adopt the judicial cons-
truction placed on the constitutional power. The power is wide
enough to empower Parliament to amplify or modify that con-
struction, or to adopt a new onc*.

3.22. The Law Commission was consulted as to the principles and Re-

to be formulated under amended article 286, and the commission, the Law
with the intention of codifying what had been laid down in the Gomanis:
first Travancore case and by the majority in the second Travan- Nee a “
core case, suggested certain “propositions”. On the basis of these 1936.
propesition® section 5, Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 was

enacted, dealing with a sale in the course of import or export.

Sections 3 and 4 of the Act also follow the Commission's Case law
tecommendations, but we are primarily concerned with section 5.
It may be noted that this was the view of the majority of the
Law Commission.

3.23. Legislative determination (in section 5 of the Central
Sales Tax Act)* as to when a sale is regarded as in “the course
of import”, did not prevent the accumulation of case law. The
words “occasions the import” used in the section came up for
judicial construction in several decisions, including Khosla’s case.
Most of the relevant decisions have been reviewed in the Report
of the Law Commission® dealing with section 5. That Report
was the aftermath of the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Khosla’s case.

Sixth Amendment.
3, See para. 3.69, infra.
% 210 Report of Law Commission,
See para. 3.26, infra.
4. Para. 3.22, supra.
3. 30th Report of the Law Commission.


law
‘Commis-
son's
fever
{and Re-
port),

88

3.24. An important question concerning section 5 was decided
in the judgment of the Supreme Court, in Khosla’s case’.
At this stage, it will be sufficient to mention thet in Khosla’s
case, it was held that the sale of the materials in question by
Khosta to the Director General of Supplies and Disposals was
so integrally connected with the import of those materials (at
the earlier stage) from the Belgian manufacturers by Khoslas,
that the sale to the Director General of Supplies & Disposals
was to be regarded as having occasioned import, within the
meaning of section 5.

‘The sale by Khoslas—which may be described as an inter-
nal sale—was not independent of the import, but had occasion-
ed import, and was therefore held to be exempt under section 5
of the Central Sales Tax Act. Because of this Judgement, there
is, at present, no right in the States to impose a tax on a sale
between an Indian buyer and an Indian seller, if the transaction
falls within the principle of Kkasla’s case. The question to be
considered in this Chapter is, whether this position unduly res-
tricts the taking power of the States.

3.25, The Central Sales Tax Act was itself enacted after
consulting the Law Commission. After Khosla’s case, the Law
Commission was, in 1967, again requested to consider the ques-
tion whether section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act should be
amended. The Commission recommended no change in the
section. The question has now to be considered again, in view
of the present reference.

3.26. In the 2nd Report of the Law Commission, dealing with
Parliamentary legislation relating to sales tax, the word
‘occasion’ was used by the majority of the Commission while
suggesting the propositions to which legal effect should be given.
The Commission,? (in its majority Report), after discussing the
two Travencore-Cochin cases, came to the conclusion that the
test of “ovcasioning” the movement [7820 in these cases) parti-
cularly in the light of the majority judgment in the second
Travancore case should be adopted. But, the Commission made
it very clear that it was not giving a draft.

1, हू. 6. Khoska & Co. V Deputy Commissioner (1966) 3 S.C.R. 352;
ALR. 1966 8, 2. 1216.

2, Ind Report of the Law Camnissioa on Parliamentary legislation,
clating to sales tax, page 3, para 10.


859

3.27. Section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, which was goyioe
enacted ia implementation of the majority view in the 2nd Re- 5 of
port of the Law Commission, was alse intended to implement 2 SP
the law enunciated by the majority of the Court in the Traven- Tax, Act
core-Cochin cases. As observed by Shab J', in a later case*, नव
the Act gave legislative recognition to the view of the Supreme the jaw
Court in the twa Travancare-Cackin cases. This aspect of the (tusolated

in the
matter was also adverted to in the 30th Report of the Law Travancore-
Commission. ‘ “och 7%

3.28. The word ‘occasion’ docs appear to have a wide Wide |
meaning as well as a narrow one, as already pointed out’. Shun
sion’.

Ik would appear that in Khosla’s case the word ‘occasion’

(used in section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act} received a
wide interpretation whereunder the first sale after import be
comes éxémpt, if certain conditions are satisfied. We have to

examine if this wide view requires modification.

No doubt, the two Fravanceve cases did not relate to the
border-line situation presented in Khusia’s case.* The view
taken by 85. R. Das J., in his minority judgment in the second
Travancere case, represented ong extreme, thal is to say. acoor-
ding to that view, the first sale after import and the last sak ')
before export were to be exempt in every case, The argument
that the first sale after import and the last purchase for export
were exempt in every case was rejected by the majority im the
second Travancore-Cochin case.

3.20. Tt is also true that in between the two extremes, Many Intention
situations could arise, and in Khosla's case a broad view of the of majo-
exemption was taken in respect of a sale which was treated as In- the
volving import Trovancore

care.
However, it must be remembered that in Azesia's case, the

Court was primarily concerned. with the interpretation of section
5 and, as such, not neccssarily bonad by the earlier decisions in
the ave Travancore cases which dealt with the interpretation of
article 286(1)(b). Ie is, therefore, permissible to infer that, in
interpreting the word ‘occasion’ used in section 5, the Court may

ifthe Law Commission, page 60, pera. 121,

", Bow Corm Nilgiri Plantation €o.v. Seles Tax Officer, AAR. 1968
S.C. 1752, (755.

"Para. 3.14, supra.

4. 865 divassaioa in 10:0 Report, aye 92, para, 6505).


Distine-
tion
‘between
domestic
sales
and
export
sales.

30

have been justified in accepting the broader meaning of the word.
We will refer to this aspect of the matter Jater.) when we examine
the judgment in Khosta’s case in greater detail.

3,30. A distinction between domestic sales and export sales
was made in the second Travancore case, where the Supreme
Court, in the majority judgment, said: *

“As pointed out by a recent writer, from the legal point
‘of view it is essential to distinguish the contract of
sale which has as its object the exportation of goods
from this country from other contracts of sale relat-
ing to the same goods, but not being the direct and
jmmediate cause for the shipment of the goods......
When a merchant shipper in the United Kingdom
buys for the purpose of export goods from a manu-
facturer in the same country the contract of sale
is a home transaction; but when he resells these
goods to a buyer abroad that contract of sale has
to be classified as an export transaction: Schmittofi-
Export Trade, 2nd Ed. page 3.”

“This passage shows that, in view of the distinct charac-
ter and quality of the two transactions, it is not
correct to speak of purchase for export as 8 pur-
chase in the course of import. The same reason-
ing applies to the first sale after import which is a
distinct local transaction effected after the impor-
tation of the goods into the country has been com-
pleted, and having no integral relation with it.”

3.31. Perhaps, the words “distinct local transaction” used in
the second Travancore-Cochin case? have been constructed as
suggesting an antithetical situation, where the local transaction
and the international transaction are not distinct from each other,
but integral parts of the same transaction. But, as already stated,*
according to the majority judgment, the intention was to exempt
only the import-purchase and export-sale.

1, Para 3.47, infra.

2, State of Travancore Cochin y S.V.C. Factory. A.d. R.1953
S. C. 333, 336.

4. Fara 3.30, supra.

4, Para 3.29, supra.


9)

3.32. At this stage, we may refer to several cases decided by gome pre-
the Supreme Court before Khosla’s case. One of them which Khosla
deals with inter-State sales, in Tata Iron & Steel Co. v. 5. RB. case,

Sarkar,’ on which the decision of the Supreme Court in K.G.
Khosla's case is primarily founded.

Tn that case, the company had its registered office in Bombay,
its Head Sales office in Calcutta in the State of West Bengal and
its factories in Jamshedpur in the State of Bihar. The company
was registered as a “dealer” under the Bihar Sales Tax Act, and
was also registered as a “dealer” in the State of West Bengal
under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. For period of assess-
ment July 1, 1957 to March 31, 1958 the company submitted its
return of taxable sales to the Commerciat Tax Officer, Lyons
Range, Calcutta, disclosing a gross taxable turnover of Rs. 9,
571.71 op. in respect of sales liable to Central Sales Tax in the
State of West Bengal. By his memorandum dated August 12,
1959, the Commercial Tax Officer directed the company to sub-
mit a statement of sales from Jamshedpur for the period under
assessment, “documents relating to which were transferred in
West Bengal or of any other sales that may have taken place in
West Bengal under section 3(b) of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956.” The company, by its letter dated September 30, 1969,
informed the Tax Officer that the requisition for production nf
statement of sales made from Jamshedpur in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce was without jurisdiction. The company
contended that “all the sales from Jamshedpur were of the type
mentioned in section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act and at the
same time, some of them also fell within the category mentioned
in section 3(b) of the Act,” that even if the sales were of the
type mentioned in section 3(b) of the Act, the apporpriate State
of the place where the sales take place or are effected alone had
jurisdiction to assess such sales to Central Sales Tax, and that
in respect of inter-State sales from Jamshedpur, the suits of the
sale was always the State of Bihar as the goods were in Bihar
either at the time of the contract of sale or at the time of appro-
Priation to the contract.” By his order dated October 21, 1959,
the Commercial Tax Officer made a “best judment assessment”
on a gross turnover of Rs. 90,00,09,561.71 np. of inter-State
sales and cailed upon the company to pay Rs. 41,14,718.12 np.
as tax under the Central Sales Tax Act.

1, Fata Iron & Steel Co. v. SR. Sarkar, (1961) 15.08. 379:
ALR. 1961 8.0. 65, 71, 72; 11 S.T.C. 655.
20 M of Law/74—7,


92

3,33. The company had, on December 15, 1958, filed with
the Sales Tax Officer, Jamshedpur a return of inter-State Sales
made from Jamshedpur for the period July 1, 1957 to March
31, 1958 and a return for the same period for the sales made from
Dhanbad with the Sales Tax Officer, Dhanbad. Tn these returns,
the company included ail sales in which movement of the goods.
had taken place from the State of Bihar to destinations outside
that state. The total turnover in respect of inter-State sales as
shown in the return exceeded Rs, 26 crores and the company
paid as required by the Bihar Sales Tax Act Rs. 71 lakhs odd as
advance tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

By this petition, the company impugned the validity of the
order of the Commercial Tax Officer and claimed a writ of certio-
rati quashing and setting aside the assessment order dated
October 21, 1959, and a writ of mandamus directing the Com-
mercial Tax Officer to refrain from taking steps in enforcement
or implementation of the order.

3.34. Mr. Justice Shah delivered the majority judgment. He
fiest discussed the effect of the various amendments made by the
Constitution (Sixth Amendmeat) Act of 1956 (investing Parlia-
ment with exclusive authority to enact laws imposing tax on
sales or purchases taking place in the course of inter-State trade).

The actual discussion related to inter-State sales and inter
alia to the question how far section 3(a) or section 3(b) of the
Central Sales Tax Act applied to the sales in question.

According to the majority, the decision in the two cases had
no beating on the interpretation of section 3, clauses(a) and (०).
In those cases, the expression “in the course of import and
export” and “in the course of inter-State trade or commerce”
used in article 286 fell to be determined. The Constitution did not
define those expressions, and Parliament had, in the Central Sales

Tax Act, sought to define (by section 3) when a sale or purchase |

is said to take place in the course of inter-State trade or com-
merce and to define (by section 5) when a sale or purchase is
said to take place in the course of import or export, and further
to define (by section 4) when a sale or purchase of goods is
said to take place outside a State, In delivering the majority
judgment, Mr. Justice Shah observed? :—
“In interpreting these definition clauses, it would be
inappropriate to requisition in aid the observations

1, Tata fron etc. v. §. R- Sarkar, (1961) 1S.C.R. 379, 391; A.LR. 1961
S.C. 65, 71, 72; 11 S.T.C. 655;


93

miade in ascertaining the true nature aud incidents
without the assistance of any definition clause of
“sale outside the State” and “sale the course of
import or export” and “sale in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce” used in article 286.

“In our view, therefore, within clause (9) of section 3
are included sales in which property in the goods
passes during the movement of the goods from one
State to another by teansfer of documents of title
thereto; clause (2) of section 3 covers sales, other
than those included in clause (b), in which the
movement of goods from one State to another is
the result of a covenant or incident of the contract of
sale, and properiy in the goods passes in either
State.”.”

3.35. In his minority judgment, Mr. Justice Sarkar (as he
then was) expressed the view, that a sale cannot fall under both
clause (3) and clause (b) of section 3. For, then, it would be
liable to be taxed twice. Clauses (a) and (b) were mutually
exchusive. Interpreting these two clauses, he said that clause (a}
contemplates a sale where the contract of sale occasions the
movement of the goods sold, and clause (b), @ sale where trans-
fer of property in the goods sold is effected by a trans-
fer of documents of title to them. Of course, in the first case, the
movement of the goods must be from one State to another,
and in the second, the documents of title must be transferred
during such movement.

3.36, Thig decision raises the question. whether, if the words Distinction

‘in the course of”, which occur in article 286(1), had been left “forex-
undefined, the Kind of conclusion arrived at in Khosla’s case port and
could haye been avoided. The matter, though now academic, conrse of
is of interest. A distinction between a sale “for export” and a डएणा
sale “in the course of export?” was well-established by 1956,

the former being regarded as outside the exemption {in article

286), and the Jatter being regarded as within the exemption.

3.37. In the Ben Gorm? case, on the facts of the case, Ben
the sale was regarded as not exempt. The purchasers were local Gorm

1, Seo 30th report, page 42, paragraph 93 (3a), and the Bea Gorm
case, Para 3.37, infra.

3 Bon Gorin Nilgiri Plastation Ca, ५, Sales Tax Officer, ALR. 1964
S.C. 1752, (1964) ? SCR 706.


The ratio
in Bes:
Gorm
case.

4

agents of foreign buyers, and the purchase was not “in the course
of export”, But the judgment of the majority in that case
would scem to suggest that if the integrated activity was such
that the export was a necessary condition of the contract, and
if there was no likelihood of diversion, then, the sale woud be
in the course of export. The minority view in that case went
further. It was prepared to extend that principle to a contract
in which export could be taken to the intended, and would not
necessarily confine it to cases where there was an express
provision for the export of the goods purchased in India.

3.38. Mr. Justice Shah, who delivered the majority judg-
ment, laid down the principles applicable in such cases as
follows!:—

(1) Before the Constitution Amendment of 1956 there
was no legislative guidance, but such cases were
governed by the interpretation put on the consti-
tutional provisicns in the two Travancore cases?-*.

(2) After the amendment of 1956, guidance was pro-
vided in section 5 of the Ceotral Sales Tax Act,
which was “legislative recognition” of what was
said by the Supreme Court in the two Travancore
cases.

(3) There is a distinction between. a sale “for export”
and a sale “in the course of cxport”—

(a) In general, where the sale is effected by the seller
and he is not connected with the export which
actually takes place, it is a sale “for oxport”.
As un example, where a foreign purchaser or his
agent purchases goods within India and they or
one of them export or exports the goods out of
India, the sale would te sale “for export”,
but such a transaction is not “in the course of
export even though the Indian seller had the
knowledge of intended export.

1. Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantation Co. ¥. Sules Tax Officer, (1964) 7808
706, 711, 712. AIR 1964 SC 1752.

2, (1952) S.C.R. 1112 (First Travancore case).

3, (1954) S.C.R. 53 (Second Travancore case).


95

(0) Where the export is the result of a sale and the
export is inextricably linked up with the sale, so
that the bond cannot be dissociated without a
breach of contract, the sale is in the course of
export.

3.39. In the majority judgment, it was held that the know- Kaew
1९082 that the goods purchased are intended to be exported, export
did not make the sule and export parts of the ‘same transaction’, dors not
There was no statutory obligation upon the purchaser to export Ke it
the chests of tca purchased by him with the export rights. The ral part.
export quota ierely enabled the purchaser to obtain an export
licence, which the purchaser may or may not obtain. There
was nothing in law or in the contract between the Parties, or
even in the nature of the transaction, which prohibited diversion
of the goods for internal consumption. The sellers had no
concern with the actual export of the goods. Once the goods
were sold, they (the sellers) had no control over the goods,

There was therefore, no direct connection between thre sale and
export of the goods, which would make them parts of an
integrated transaction of “sale in the course of export.”

3.40. Thus, several tests for determining when a sale is in The tests
the course of export, were discussed in the Ben Gorm case.” were .
but none was regarded as applicable on the facts. The tests found in

हि applicable
discussed were:-— it Ben
Gorm

(1) obligation; case,

(ii) non-divertibility;
(ii) direct connection;
iv) part of the same transaction,

We do not pause to discuss various other judicial decisions
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts before and after
Khosta’s case, as these have been exhaustively reviewed in the
earlier Report.4 }

4, Beu Gorm: Nilgiri Plantation Co. Y. 5.7.0. (1964) 7 S.C.R. 706, 713
ATR 1964 SC 1752.

3, Para 3.38 to 3.39, Supra,

3. 30th Report of the Law Co. ission.



96

Khosta's 3.41. We shall now concentraic on Khosla's case The
case-facls facts of that case were these:—

K. 6. Khosla & Co., the asessee, entered into a contract
with the Director General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi
for the supply of “axlc-box bodies”. The contract provided for
the manufacture of boxes in Belgium and the inspection of the
manufactured articles at the work of the manufacturers by a
Tepresentative of D.G.1S.D., London who was to issuc an ins-
pection certificate. A second inspection by the Deputy Direc-
tor of Inspection, Ministry of W.H. & S., Madras was provided
in the contract. He was to issue inspection notes on receipt
of a copy of the inspection certificate from London after veri-
fication and visual inspection by him. The contract also pro-
vided that goods were to be manufactured according to specifi-
cations by M/s. La Brugeoises Et. Nivelles, Belgium. Khosla
& Co. were entitled to be paid 90 per cent of the price after
inspection and delivery of the stores to the “consignee”, and
the balance of 10 per cent was payable on final acceptance by
the “consignee”. It appears that “consignee” denoted the buyer
ot his nominee. In the case of deliveries on 0.4. basis, the
assessee was entitled to 90 per cent payment after inspection
on proof of despatch and balance 10 per cent after receipt of
the goods by the “consignee” in good condition. The date of
delivery, according to the contract, was “in 8 months ex-your
principal's works from the date of receipt of order and the
approved working drawings, i.c., delivery in India by 31st July,
1957, or earlier.” The assessee was responsible for the execu-
tion of the contract in accordance with terms and conditions
as specified in the tender and the Schedule attached thereto.
The “purchaser”, notwithstanding the approval by the inspec-
tor, could reject the stores on arrival if they were found to be
noi in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract.
Further, K. 6, Khosla & Co., was responsible for the safe
arrival of the goods at the destination. The D.G.1.$,.D., London
was to issue pre-inspection delay reports regularly to the
DGS. & D., New Delhi. He was 2180 to send copies of the
inspection certificates to the Director of Inspection, Ministry of
W.H. & S., Bombay. Under the Bills of lading, the goods

1 #.८., khosla & Co. Put. Ltd. ५. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial
Taxes, Madras, ALR, 1966 S.C. 1216, 17 5.1.0 473, (1966) 3 S.C.R. 352.



97

were consigned to be cleared by K. G. Khosla & Co. to Mad-
ras Harbour. They were cleared by K. G. Khosla’s clearing
agents, and despatched for delivery to the buyers thereafter.

3.42. The Sales Tax Officer, Madras found that the trans-
action was an intra-State sale and not in the 0०088 of import
because, the sale was completed only when goods were deliver-
ed in Madras State and, therefore, it did not occasion the im-
port. He also relied on the terms of the contract which gave
to the purchaser the right to reject the goods if they were not
jn accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract.
Qn appeal, the Appellate Tribunal held that the property in the
goods had not passed to the buyer while the goods were with
the Belgiam manufacturers and that the sale had not occasion-
ed the import.

3.43. The matter was taken to the Madras High Court in
revision. The High Court rejected the contention that the goods
must be deemed to have passed to the buyers when the goods
were approved in the factory of the manufacturers. It also
rejected the contention that the sale by the assesses to the Gov-
ernment occasioned import. In the High Court’s view it was
necessary that the sale should have proceded the import, and
as the salo had not taken place in Belgium, there was no ques-
tion of the sale occasioning import of the goods.

3.44, Against this judgment, K. G. Khosla & Co. appealed
to the Supreme Court, The Supreme Court held that the trans-
action was not subject to payment of sales tax, as it fell within
the prohibition of article 286(1)(b) read with section 5 of
the Central Sales Tax Act. In interpreting the words “occasions
the movement of goods” in section 5(2), the Supreme Court
expressed the view that the words used in section 3(a) and
5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act should have the same mean-
ing in the two sections, and therefore relied on the interpreta-
tion’ of section 3(a) by Mr. Justice Shah’ in the Tata Iron &
Steel Co. case.

After referring to various judgments, the Supreme Court
held, that the High Court was in error in holding that “before
a sale could be said to have occasioned the import, it is neces-
sary that the sale should “have preceded the import”?

1, Tata tron and Steel Co. Lid. v. S.R. Sarkar, para. 3.34 to 3.37 supra.
3, Para 3.43, supra.


98

3.45. The Supreme Court also held that the movement of
the axle-box bodies from Belgium into India (Madras) was
the result of the covenant in the contract of sale and was an
incident of such contract. The Supreme Court lastly observed :

“Tt seems to us that it is quite clear from the contract that
it was incidental to the contract that the axle-box
hodies would be manufactured in Belgium, — ins-
pected there and imported into India for the con-
signee. Movement of goods from Belgium to India
was in pursuance of the conditions of the contract
between the assessee and the Director-General of
Supplies. There was no possibility of these 80005
being diverted by the assessee for any other purpose.
Consequently we hold that the sales took place in
the course of import of goods within section 5(2)
of the Act, and are, therefore, exempt from taxa-
tion.”

Khosla’s caso 3.46. The propositions laid down in K. 6. Khosta’s case may
semmarised. be thus summarised :—

(1) Article 286(1) (0) of the Constitution read with sec-
tion 5, Central Sales Tax Act, exempts transactions
from sales tax where the sale occasions the movement
of goods frpm or to a foreign country into or from the
territories of India, the movement itself being the result
of a covenant or an incident of the contract of sale.

(2) It is an erroneous view of the law to think that before
a sale could occasion the import, the sale should have
preceded it.

(3) The contract itself showed that it was ao incident of
the contract that axle-box bodies would be (a) maou-
factured in Belgium, (b) inspected there, and (c) im-
ported for the consignee (the buyer).

(4) Movement of goods from Belgium to India was in
pursuance of the conditions of the contract.

(5) There was no possibility of the goods being diverted by
K. G. Khosla for any other purpose or to any other
contract. -


99

(6) As in inter-State sales where property in the goods
could pass in either State, the property could pass in
either country.

3.47. Khosta’s case was decided exclusively? on section 5 of Case decided
the Central Sales Tax Act, and irrespective of article 286(1). Sxlusively,
Whether, after the passing of the legislation by Parliament for-
aulating the principles referred to in article 286—i.e. the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956, Sections 3, 4 and 5—it is still necessary, in
testing the validity of taxution by a State of the particular sale or
purchase, to have recourse to article 286 of the Constitution, or
whether the Court is to apply only the provisions of the Central
Sales Tax Act relevant to the exemption claimed, is a question
which is of considerable importance.

At was presumably assumed in Khosia’s case that since Parlia-
ment had formulated principles in section 5, the test was to be
sought only in that section. Apparently because of this implicit
assumption, when Khosia’s case was argued, the earlier decisions,
particularly the decisions in the two Travancore cases, were not
teferred to, and the judgment of the court seems to have been
based entirely on the language of section 5, without the aid of the
discussion and pronouncements in the two Travancore cases,

Interpreting then, section 5, and taking into account only the
language of section 5, the Supreme Court, in Khosta’s case, sclec-
ted, out of the two views possible as to 2 sale which is to be
exempt as occasioning import, the wider view, which had the
effect of holding that the chain of sales exempt is not necessarily
confined to the import or to the sale ending with the entry of the
goods into India at the customs barrier, but could, at least in the
situation which presented itself in Khosta’s case, extend beyond
that point.

3.47A. In regard to the decision in Khosla's case, it is relevant
to repeat that during the course of the arguments, the two Tra-*
vancare decisions, which would have supported the case of the
State, do not appear to have becn cited on behalf of the State, ©
nor were they cited by the assessee. And, for the assessee, te~
liance was placed mainly on the Tata Iron & Steel case. Since
the parties in the case concentrated their attention on section 5,
Khosla’s case appears to have been decided independently of
article 286, and on the basis only of section 5 of the Act. Because

1, Pata 3.29, supra


30th Report

100

of the several distinct featurcs of the transections with which the
Court was dealing in Khosia’s case, the purchase by Khosia from
the Belgium firm and the sale by him to the Railways constituted,
were regarded as inseparable. The argument that there were
two differcnt and distinct transactions—the first of which was
exempt from tax, but the second was not (on the principle laid
down by the Supreme Court in the two Travancore cases), does
not appear to have been advanced.

3.48. The judgment in Khosia’s case led to a reference to the
Law Commission by the Government of India in 1967. Attention
to this judgment had been drawn by the State Government of West
Bengal, since the judgment circumscribed the power of the State
Government to impose sales tax on certain types of transactions.
The exact question referred to the Law Commission in 1967 was?
the following :—

“Since the provisions of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax
Act incorporate verbatum the principles recommended
by the Law Commission on the basis of the carlier
Supreme Court judgments in Travancore-Cochin cases,
the Commission is requested to examine the matter
further and consider whether they would recommend
any amendments of the Act, so as to exclude transac-
tions of the type hereinbefore discussed from the pur-
view of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act.”*

3.49. The Law Commission* in the reference took into
account the history of the Act of 1956, judicial decisioas prior as
well as subsequent to that Act relating to the boundaries of the
ban under article 286(1) (9) of the Constitution (imposition of
sales tax on import sales), and the judgment under consideration
(Khosla’s case). The majority of the Commission took the view
that the propositions which emerged from the judgment in

1, 30th Report of the Law Commi: ection 5 of the Cental
Sales Tax Act etc.) (February, 1967), page 3, para 5.

4, Second Report of the Law Commission—Parliamentry legislation
relating to Sales Tax (1956).

3, 30th Report of the Law Commission (Section 5 of the Central Saks
Tax Act—Taaation by the States on sales in the course of import).
(February 1957), page 65, paragraph 130.


101

Khosla’s case were consistent with the two Travancore cases 00
which the earlier Report of the Law Commission was based, and
did not go beyond the intendment of these decisions. The mino-
rity (Shri K. G. Datar and Shri R. P. Mookerjee) took a contrary
VIEW.

The Commission. of course, took care te mention that it was
permissible to bring about a suitable modification of the position
in such manner as may be legally appropriate, but the Commission
did not profess to deal with matters of policy.2 For the sake of
convenience, however, the Commission summarised several sug-
gestions? received by it, and brought them to the notice of the
Government.

After this Report,* there have been no notable legislative de-
velopments, rclevant to the question under consideration.

3.50. We shall now refer to a few decisions subsequent t0 Decisions
Khosia’s case. In the State of Bihar v. Tata Engineering Co.,* after (०५
the Supreme Court stated that the decided cases established that (1७-1गएएत
sales will be considered as sales in the course of export or import sales.
or sales in the course of inter-State trade and commerce under
the following circumstances:

(1) When goods which are in the export or import
stream are sold;

(2) When the contracts of sale or the law under which
goods are sold require those goods to be exported
or imported to a foreign country or from a foreign
country as the case may be, or the goods are requi-
ted to be trausported to a State other than the State
in which the delivery of goods takes place, and

(3) Where, as a oecessary incident of the contract of
sale, goods sold are required to be exported or
imported or transported out of the State in which
the delivery of goods take place.

1, 39th Report of the Law Commission (Section 5 of the Central Sae
Tax Act) Taxation by the states on Sales in the coutse of (import)
(February, 1967), page 65, paragraph 135.

. Sec para 1,11, supra.

. 30th Report, page 65, page 131.

4. State of Bihar y. Tata Engineering & Locomotive (P.) Ltd. (1971) 27
S.T.C, 127, 149 (S.C); ALR. 1971 S.C. 477.


Application
of Khosta’s
case to
export
sales,

Application
of the
principle to
inter-sales—
a Kerala
case.

102

3.51. In another recent case relating to export sales,—Tasa
Engineering Co. v. Asst. Commissioner, the Supreme Court,
after referring to the carlier decisions, observed —

“It has been laid down that the sale in the course of export
predicated a connection between the sale and export, the wo
activities being so integrated that the connection between the two
cannot be volumarily interrupted without a breach of the con-
tract or the compulsion arising from the nature of the transuc-
tion. To occasion export, there must exist such a bond
between the contract of sale and the actual exportation that cach
lnk is inextricably connected with the onc immediately preced-
ing it. The principle* thus admits of no doubt, according to the
decisions of this court, that the sales to be exigible to tax under
the Act (Central Sales Tax Act, 1956) must be shown to have
occasioned the movement of the goods or articles from one State
to another. The movement must be the result of a covenant or
incident of the cuntract of sale.”

Tt will be noticed that according to the judgments referred
to above, the essential test is of an integral connection between
the sale sought to be taxed and the import.

3.52. This test of integrated conncction has been applied to
inter-State sales also. “To occasion export, there must exist such
a bond betwcen the contract of sale and the actual exportation,
that each link is inextricably connected with the one immediately
preceding it.” So observing, the Kerala High Court*® treated a
sale in the following circumstances, as an inter-State sale. The
facts were as follows:—

The assessee, a dealer in coir-yarn in the (erstwhile) Tra-
vancore-Cochin State, effected sales of coit-yarn to certain firms
in port Cochin (then in the Madras State). The assessee uscd
to go to the firm at port Cochin and enter into written agreements
with them as to specified varieties of coir yam, with reference
10 samples shown to and retained by the purchasing firms. The
price per candy of coir would be fixed. ‘The assesee then used

1, Tate Engineering & Locomotive Ca. Lid. ¥. Assistant Commissioner
of Commercial Taxes, (1970) 1 S.C.J, 622; 26 S.T.C, 354 AER. 1970
S.C. 1281 (1970) 35.C.R. 862.

*. This Sentence relates to Inter-State Sales.

"NK, Subramaniam ५, The State of Kerala, (1971) 28 S.7.C. 733, 735
(Kerala).



163

to purchase coir from various manufacturers, transport the goods
at his expense to the purchasing firm at port Cochin, aud, when
ihe goods arrived at port Cochin, the assessee, or his agent used
to deliver the goods to the purchasers and receive an advance
payment. After a week or two, the coir would be tried, inspec-
ted and re-handled, and the rate would be fixed. After final
weighment and bailing, the invoice would be drawn and the
balance duc would be received. On these facts, it was held that
the inter-State movement of the goods from the (erstwhile)
Travancore Cochin State to the (erstwhile) Madras State was
the direct result cf a covenant or incident of the contract of sale.
Thus, the principles which had been applied in relation to export
sales? and import sales* was applied to inter-State sales also.

3.52A. Recently, an important judgment relating to import
sales—Hinani’s case—has been pronounced by the Supreme
Court. We shall refer to this later.>

3.53. It was conceded in a recent Patna case* that the ingre-
dients for holding that a sale or purchase of goods is in the
course of import or in the course of export or in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce, are similar.

3.54. There are, no doubt, cases on the border-line. A
Madras case is in point.’ In that case, the National Agricultural
Marketing Federation, which had the exclusive right to export
dried chillies to Ceylon, entered into contracts with various co-
operative establishments in Colombo for supplying chillies.
Thereafter, the Federation allotted quotas to various dealers in
the State of Tamil Nadu for the supply of chillies, for which
Purpose it entered into separate contracts with those dealers.
The contract entered into by the Federation with one of the
dealers—the assessce—provided (besides other matters) that the
assessee should despatch the goods to the importer in Colombo,
for and on behalf of the Federation, on or before the stipulated
date, from the port of Tuticorin. It was held that. the sale
between the Federation and the assessee was not an export sale.

4. Ben Gorm case, A.LR. 1964 S.C. 1752.

*, Compate Khosla's case, A.LR. 1966 S.c. 1246 (1966) 3 5.C.R. 352,

*. Para 3.55, infra.

4. Commissioner of Commercial Taxes y. Bhag Singh Miikha Singh
(1971) 28.8.T.C. 649, 651.

5. Eraitamuthy Nadar v. Joint Commercial Tax Officer, (i971) 28
S.T.C. 649, 651 (Madras).

Binani's
case,

Patna cases
relating to
inter-State
sales.

A border-
line case.


Binant
Brothers’
ease.

104

The stipulation in the contract (between the assessee and the
Federation) requiring the assessee to put the goods on beard
the ship, was only to fulfil the terms of the export sale between
the Federation and the foreign importer, and did not mean that
transaction was inextricably connected with the export
sale. The export sale was the result of the contract between
the importer in Ceylon and the Federation in India. Instead
of the Federation taking delivery from the assessee, the assessee,
on behalf of the Federation, put the goods on beard the ship,
but the sale between the Federation and the assessee did not
occasion export.

3.55. Import sales came up before the Supreme Court in a
recent case,—Binani Brothers v. Union of India. The question
related to sales tax in respect of stores supplied to the Director
General of Supplics and Disposals which had been specifically
imported against licences issued by the Chief Controller of Im-
ports and Exports, on the basis of the import recommendation
certificate issued by the Director General of Supplies and Dispo-
sals {or other authority like the State Trading Corporation).
The teansaction was held not to be exempt as a sale in the
course of import.

3.55A The facts in detail were as follows:—

‘The petitioner was an importer and a dealer in non-ferrous
metals (zinc, lead, copper, tin etc.}, and was on the approved
list of registered suppliers to the D.G.S&D. The petitioner had
been importing and supplying non-ferrous metals to respondents
Nos. 1, 2 and 3 during the past several years. The Government
of India,in placing an order with the petitioner, used to grant
import licences in terms of the contracts. On the basis of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Khoslas case® the respondent
No, 2, issued an order to ail the authorities concerned, including
respondent No. 4 (namely, the Pay and Accounts Officer,
Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply) directing that sales
tax should not be allowed in respect of supplies/stores which
had been specifically imported against licences issued by the

व, Mis. Binant Bros, (P.) Ltd. y. Union of India and others (W.P. No.
39 of 1969), (11.12.1973) (Ray C.J.)
Khanna, Mathew, Alagitiswami and Bhagwati, JJ) Judgement by
Mathew J. (1974) 8.C.T. page 29, item 17; (1974) 18.C.C. 459, 474
(S.C.C. 1st April, 1974).

2, K.G. Khosla ५. Dy. C.C.4. (supra).


105

Chief Controller of Imports and Exports on the basis of import
recommendation certificate issued by the D.GS&D. (or other
authority like the S.T.C.) for supplies against contracts. The
respondent No. 4, in pursuance of the said order, deducted a
sum of Rs, 66,780 from the amount payable to the petitioner in
respect of pending bills, and also threatened to recover Rs. 235,
130, being the amount paid by respondent No. 2 as sales tax,
in respect of contracts which had already been executed. The
petitioner contended that the transctions in question, namely,
the sales which the petitioner made to he D.GS. & D., were not
sales which occasioned the movement of the goods in the course
of imports, aad were separate and distinct from the contracts
of purchases made by the petitioner with the foreign sellers.
The later alone occasioned the movement cf the goods in the
course of import and the decision in Khosla’s case was net
applicable.

3. 56. It was held that the transactions in question which the
petitioner entered into with the D.GS&D. were not “sales in
the course of import,’ but were separate and distinct from the
contract of purchases made by the petitioner with the foreign
sellers. The latter alone occasioned the movement of the goods
in the course of import. Khosta’s case was distinguished, ....
apparently on the ground that in that case there was an obligation
to import, while there was, in the present case, no obligation re-
garding import. The court made these points in arriving at its
conclusion: —

(a) In the case under consideration, the court was con-
cerned with sales made by the petitioner as principal
to the D.G.S&D, No. doubt, for effecting these sales,
the petitioner had to purchase goods from foreign
sellers and it was these purchases from the foreign
sellers which occasioned the movement of goods in
the course of import.

(b) The petitioner’s sales to the D.G.S&D, were however,
distinct and separate from his purchases from foreign
sellers. To put it differently, the sales by the petitio-
ner to the D.G.S&D. did not eccasion the import. It
was purchases made by the petitioner from the foreign
sellers which occasioned the import of the goods.

(०) The foreign sellers did not enter into any contract, by
themselves or through the agency of the petitoner,
with the D.G.S&D., and the movement of goods from
the foreign countries was, therefore, not occasioned


106

oa account of the sales by the petitioner to
the D,G.S&D.

(d) There was no obligation under the contracts on the
part of the D.G.S&D. to procure import licences of
petitioner. On the other hand, the recommendation
for import licence made by D.G.S&D. did not carry
with it any imperative obligation upon the Chief,
Controller of Imports and Exports to issue the import
licence. It may appear from this judgment that
Khosla's case will, in future, be strictly limited to
cases where there is an obligation to import.

3.57. The following observations distinguishing Khosla’s case

are of

importance.

“In KAosla’s case, it might be recalled that Khosla and Co.

entered into the contract of sale with the D.G.S&D. for
the supply of axle bodies manufactured by its principal
in Belgium and the goods were io be inspected by the
buyer in Belzium but under the contract of sale the
goods were liable to be rejected after a further inspec-
tion by the buyer in India. It was in pursuance of this
contract that the goods were imported into the country
and supplied to the buyer at Perambur and Mysore.
From the statement of facts of the case as given in the
judgment of the High Court it is not clear that there
was a sale by the manufacturers in Belgium to Khosla
& Co. their agent in India. It would seem that the only
sale was the sale by Khosla & Co, as agent of the manu-
facturer in Belgium.1 In the concluding portion of
the judgement of this Court, it was observed as
follows: —

deer eeee It seems to us that it is quite clear from the con-
tract that it was incidental to the contract that
the axle-box bodies would be manufacturered
in Belguim, inspected there and imported into India for
the consignee. Movement of goods from Belgium to
India was in pursuance of the conditions of the con-
tracts between the assessee and the Director-General
of Supplies. There was no possibility of these goods
being diverted by the assessee for any other purpose.
Consequently we hold that the sales took place in the
course of import of goods within section 5(2) of the
Act, and are, therefore, exempt from taxation. As

4, Emphasis supplied.


107

aiready stated, there was to be an inspection of the
goods in Belgium by the representative of the D.G.S&D.
but there was no completed sale in Belgium es, under
the contract, the D.G.S&D. reserved a further right of
inspection of the goods on their trival in India.”

Two views possible—as to the word “occasion”.

3.58. As is apparent from the above discussion, two views
are sessile as to_whether the word.“occasions” can be Construed
widely as was done in Khosta’s case. Words like ‘occasion’,
‘case’ and the like, are vague and formless, when used in the
abstract.

As Lord Reid said recently:?

“In very many cases it cannot be said positively that one
construction is right and other wrong. Construction 50
often depends on weighing one consideration against
another. Much may depend on one’s approach. If
more attention is paid to meticulous examination of the
language used in the statute, the result may be different
from that reached by paying more attention to the ap-
parent object of the statute so es to adopt that meaning
of the words under consideration which best accord
with it.”

3.59. The word “occasion” could be, very roughly, inter-
preted as having a meaning approaching the meaning usually
attributed to the word “cause”. On such interpretation. one could
state that it is because of the contract of sale between the parties
that the materials had their movement from the forcign country
to India, and the contract of sale between the parties has (in that
sense) “occasioned the movement of the goods” into the territory
of India, by way of import.

Any argument that by virtue of the decision in Khostla’s case,
the first sale after import is regarded as ‘occasioning the import’
within section 5, would require a discussion of what is meant by
the word “occasion” or “cause”.

3.60. The meaning of the expression “cause” may, therefore,
be usefully examined at this stage. “Cause” originally meant
both “cause” and “reason”. “Cause” is the condensed expression
of the factors of any phenomenon, the effect being the fact
itself.”

1, R.v. National Ins. Comm. Ex parte Hudson (1972) 2 W.LR. 210,
215 (प्र...) (per Lord Reid).
2, 2 G.H. Lewes, Problems of Life and Mind, sec. 19 cited by Prescott
Hall, “Doctrine of Proximate Cause” 15 Ea Harv. L. Rev. 541, 566.
20 M of Law/74—8

Two inter-
pretations
Possible
on the
word
‘occasion’,

‘occasion’
and

‘cause’.


108

“Of these two senses of the word ‘cause’, viz. that which
brings a thing to be, and that on which a thing under
given circumstances follows, the former is that of which
our experience is the earlier and more intimate, being
suggested to us by our consciousness of willing and
doing.”*

3.61. On the general question of causation, there is an illu-
mination passage in the speech of Lord Shaw of Dunfermline,
in a case? often cited :—

“To treat proxima cause as the cause which is nearest in
time is out of the question. Causes are spoken of as
if they were as distinct from one another as heads ina
row or links in the chain, but—if this metaphysical to-
pic has to be referred to—it is not wholly so. Causation
is not a chain, but a net, At each point influences,
forces, events, precedent all simultaneously meet ; and
the radiation from each point extends infinitely. At
the point where these various influences meet, it is for
the judgment, as upon a matier of fact, to declare which
of the causes thus joined at the point of effect was the
proximate and which was the remote cause.”

(This passage may have been partly inspired by the argument of
Wright K. C.).

Selection of 3.62, In another case*, Viscount Simon L. C. said :

cause impli-

cit. “The interpretation to be applied does not involve any meta-
Physical or scientific view of causation. Most results
are brought about by a combination of causes, and a
search for ‘the cause’ involves a selection of the govern-
ing explanation in each case.”

In the same case, Lord Wright said :

“This choice of the real or efficient cause from out of the
whole complex of the facts must be made by applying
common sense standards.”

1, JH. Newman, Grammer of Assent, 55.

2, Ley and Shipping Co. Ltd.v. Norwich Union Fire Insurance Society
Lid. (1918) A.C. 353, 369 (Compare Arguments of Wright K.C. at
page 352, 353.

3. Yorkshire Dale S.S. Co.Ltd. v. Minister of War Transport, The
Cabwold (1942) A.C. 691, 698, 206.


109
3.63. In yet another case’, Denning [.. J. said :

“It is always a matter of seeing whether the particular event
was sufficiently powerful a factor in bringing about the
result as to be properly regarded by the law as a cause

of it.

3.64. Of the various kinds of “causes” discussed above, We फसल cause
think that the one nearest fo the legislative intention in section 5 nearest to
of the Central Sales Tax Act is the direct or immediate cause?. विन
Even that is somewhat wider than what was intended. The word section 5
“occasion” was really uscd in the sense of a sale which itself
constitutes the impors.

Parliament's intent

3.68. No doubt, even under Kiosla’s case every sale after Sale after
import is not exempt. But even the situation where the import fs import tobe
an integral part of the sale (as in Khosla’s case) was, in our pxcluded by
view, intended to be excluded from the scope of section 5 accord7//P*liament.

ing to what we presume to be the intention of Parliament.

Conclusion

3.66. 1६ is in tho light of this background that we have to Modifica.

examine whether the position resulting from Kkosta’s case should needed—dis-

be modified. We shall confine ourselves to the legal aspects of Thea to lecal
the matter. aspects.

3.67. In our opinion, when Parliament, in enacting section 5,
used the word ‘occasion’, it presumably intended to adopt the
narrow interpretation placed upon the word by Patanjali Sastri
CI who spoke for the majority of the Cowt in the second
Travancore case. We are, therefore, inclind to recommend that
the broad interpretation placed on that word in Khosia’s case
needs to be Jegislatively restricted.

3.68. In view of what is stated above, we recommend an ‘Two propo-
amendment of the Central Sales Tax Act which will give effect to S404 ay

the following propositionss— have to
ins ९ P ba given.

(1) A purchase of goods made by an exporter from a local effect to.
seller for the purpose of exporting them in order to

1, Cork ६ Kirby Maclean Ltd. (1952) 2 AU. E-R. 402, 407.
2, Cf. para 3.30 supra.
3, This is not a draft.


Power to
formulate a
wide one,

110

implement a contract of sale with a foreign buyer, shall
not be deemed to be a purchase which has occasioned
the export, even if it be a term of the contract of pur-
chase that the goods shall be exported, and even if,
Pursuant to such centract, the goods are exported and
even if the goods would not have been exported but for
the aforesaid term of contract.

(2) A sale of goods made by an importer ta a local buyer
in order to implement a contract of sale with the local
buyer, shall not be deemed to be a sale which has
occasioned the import, even if it be a term of the con-
tract of sale that the goods shall be imported, and even
if, pursuant to such contract, the goods are imported
and even if the goods would not have been imported
but for the aforesaid term of contract.

3.69, Such an amendment wiil fall under articie 286(2). We
May stale here’ that the power to formulate principles under
article 286(2) of the Constitution is, no doubt, a wide onc; and,
Parliament in exercise of this Power, is not confined to merely
codifying or adopting pro-cxisting judicial interpretation as we
have already pointed out?. Operating within the Iimits neces-

‘\ sarily implied by the expressions “Smport” and “export”, Patlia-

ment can formulate principles which would codify the existing
judicial interpretation, modify it, or extend it, or even adopt an
entirely new approach. In other words. it is not merely the
mechanical and verbal formulation of something which is already
existing that is contemplated, but a certain amount of discretion
is implicit, particularly because the power is a power to “formu-
late” principles—a creative function.

3.70, This is not to say that it is an unlimited power. Some
time ago, a distinguished writer’, while discussing the subject of
judicial discretion in the interpretation of statutes, stated :—

“A judge has discretion to include, a flying boat within a
tule as to ships or vessels. He has no discretion to in-
clude a motor-car within such a rule.”

This is true of the power to formulate principles also.

“4. See also para 3.21, supra.
2, Glanville Williams, “Language and Lew", 61, 1, R. 71, 302



ill

The principles to be formulated will not, therefore, overstep
the field of “import” or “export”. But, as already stated!, within
the limits indicated by import and export, there is considerable
Jatitude, even as regards principles which may be derived from
judicial decisions. The task of Parliament is creative because
“cases do not unfold their Principles for the asking”; and it may
be necessary for Parliamentary legislation to define them from
time io time, as occasion arises?,

Judges, in the judicial process, can go with their logic, their
analogies, their philosophies, till they reach a certain point. As
Cardozo has pointed out* :

“At first, we (judges) have no trouble with the paths, they
follow the same Hines. Then they begin to diverge, and
We must make a choice between them.” 5

Where Judges have made their choice, Parliament is free to
affirm or reverse or modify what they have chosen. Where judges
have not, as yet, made their choice, Parliament is free to make
its own choice. And, where the choice made by Parliament by
formulating certain principles is frustrated, Parliament can Te-
formulate the principles.

3.71. We may state that during the course of our discussion,
We considered the question whether it would be expedient to re-
Place the word ‘occasion’ by another less ambiguous and mere
Precise word in order to ayoid any future difficulty, But we
ultimately came to the conclusion that it would not be advisable
to amend section 5 by substituting another word for ‘occasion’,
because we apprehend that the use of any hew word may, in turn,
Create problems of its own. In our view, the purpose which we
have in mind would be served effectively if we add two Proposi-
tions* to section 5, which would make it clear that the broader
interpretation placed on the word ‘occasion’ in Khosla’s case was
Rot within the contemplation of Parliament when it enacted sec-
tion 5.

3.72. One of us, Mr. S.P. Sen Varma has, in a separate note,
‘Suggested the insertion of elaborate provisions to emphasise that
the word ‘occasion’ used in section 5 must receive the narrower

1, Para 3.69, supra.

3, off para 3.19, supra.

*, Cardozo, Nature of the Judicial Process, pages 19, 20, 22.
4. See para 3.68, supra.

Substitution
of another
word for
the word
“occasion”

not
possible.


112

interpretation. His suggestions are made in a positive form and
they seek to make it clear that the first purchase after upport and
the last sale before export are not exempted from slate taxation
uoder section 5.

In fact, when we were discussing section 5, Mr. Sen Varma
had urged that the Commission should adopt the course which he
has ultimately adopted ia his separate note. We fully discussed
his proposals, but came to the conclusion that the purpose which
we all had in mind would be more effectively served by adding
two propositions framed in a negative form so as fo remove the
anomaly resulting from the wider construction placed on the word
‘occasion’ in Khosta’s case.

We also felt that any attempt to achieve this result by making

elaborate provisions in a positive form may conceivably raise

“unanticipated problems 10 future, and that is a possibility which
we are anxious to avoid.

Besides, we were inclined to take the view that the elaborate
provisions which our colleague has set out ia his separate note
may, with respect, appropriately form pact of discussion of the
point in a judgment but may be out of place in a statutory pro-
vision of the nature under.con tion. That is why we regret
we were not able to accept our ague’s suggestions, though we
gave them the respectful consideration which they deserved.

Before we conclude, we must, however, emphasise the fact
thet the Commission is unanimously of the view that the word
‘occasion’ used in section 5 must receive a narrow construction
‘and that the first purchase after import and the last sale before
export should not be entitled to exemption from taxation by the
States concerned.

Summary of the principal points discussed in this Chapter

3.73. We now propose to sammarise the points which we
have discussed in this Chapter at some length. We are consci-
ous that this process will inevitably involve repetition, but, hav-
ing regard to the fact that the problem with which this Chapter
deals is vexed and complex, we think it necessary even at the
risk of repetition to summarise our conclusions in order to make
our view clear beyond any doubt.

(1) Before the Constitution was adopted and while the
Government of India Act, 1935 was in operation, there was no
the power of the Provinces to impose a tax on

specific bar on
in respect of commodities so long as the trans-

all transaction


113

actions took place within their territorial limits. That being
so, the provinces had the power to impose a tex on the sale or
purchase of goods in the course of import or export.

(2) When the Constitution was adopted, article 286(1) put
some restrictions as to the imposition of tax on the sale or pur-
chase of goods as specified therein. Article 286(1)(b} exem-
pts from tax the sale or purchase of goods into or export of
goads out of the territory of India. The clause ‘in the course
of is capable of a wider or a narrower interpretation.

(3) This clause came to be considered by the Supreme Court
in the first Travancore case, That case was concerned with an
export sale and, as such» even within the narrow meaning of
the expression ‘in the course of export’, it was clearly exempt
from being taxed. That, in fact, was the unanimous decision of
the Court.

Having held that the export sale was exempt from tax under
article 286(1){b), the Court proceeded to explain the meaning
of the expression ‘in the course of export’. While doing so, it
used the word ‘occasion’ and observed, iter alia, that a sale,
which itself occasions cxport, would be within the protection of
article 28611)(b). This observation, we think, was intended
to cover only export sales of the kind with which the Court
was dealing in that case and exclude all other sales. But, it
must be conceded, that the word ‘occasion’ used in the judg-
ment was capable of a wider as well as a narrower interpre-
tution,

(4) In the second Travancore case, the question which the
Court had, incidentally, to consider was whether the word
‘occasion’ used in the earlier judgment was intended to be inter-
preted in its wider or narrower sense. Patanjali Sastri C. J.,
who spoke for the majority of the Court. clearly and explicitly
stated ihat the word ‘occasion’ used in the earlier judgment,
which was unanimous, was intended to be interpreted in the
narrower sense and sa the judgment expressly stated that the
first sale after import and the last purchase before export did
not fat! within the protection of article 286(1) (0).

S. R. Das, I, however, who was a party to the earlier
judgment, had presumably understood the word ‘occasion’ in
its wider sense and so, in his minority judgment, he expressed


114

his view to that effect and added that the first purchase after
import and the last sale before export fell under article
286(1) (0).

(5) It was in view of this disvergence of judicial cpinion
about the interpretation of the words ‘in the course of import
or export’ that article 286(2) was inserted in the Constitu-
tion. By this article, Parliament was empowered to make a
law formulating principles for determining when a sale or
purchase of goods takes place in any of the ways mentioned
in clause (1) and this includes clause 286(1) (0) in which the
televant words “in the course af” occur.

(6) Having thus empowered Parliament to formulate pria-
ciples for the interpretation of article 286(1), the Union Gov-
ernment referred the matter to the Law Commission for its
opinion. In its majority report, the Law Commission used the
word ‘occasion’ in suggesting the principles which should be
followed in enacting the law under article 286(2), and though
there is reason to believe that the majority view was in favour
of the narrower construction placed on the relevant words in
article 286(1)(b) by the unanimous judgment in the first
Travancore case, as explained by the majority judgment in the
second Travancore case, the Report, in terms, did not make
this position clear and was content to use the word ‘occasion’
without any Explanation that it was used in the narrower sense.

(7) The relevant portion of the text of section 5 similarly
used the word ‘occasion’ without any Explanation showing that
the intention of Parliament in using the word was to adopt the
narrower view propounded by Patanjali Sastri J. in the second
Travancore case. The result was that the ambiguity flowing
from the use of the word ‘occasion’, which has a wider as well
as a narrower meaning, remained and, as already explained by
‘us, a wider view was accepted by the Court in Khosla’s case.

(8) We are clearly of the view that the relevant words
which were used in article 286(1) (0) by the Constitution were
not intended to affect the pre-existing right of the States to
tax the first purchase after import and the last sale before export
and that the framers of the Constitution, therefore, must be pre-
sumed to have used those words in their narrower sense. That,
in fact, was the judicial interpretation of the word in the two
Travancore cases.


115

As we have just pointed out, when the Law Commission in
its majority report, used the word ‘occasion’, presumably, it
used that word in the narrower sense; it did not expressly say
so, In the absence of any express statement to that effect in
the report, in the text of section 5, which bodily lifted the word
‘occasion’ from the Report and inserted in Section 5, the Legis-
lature did not add any Explanation to indicate that the word
‘occasion’ was used in the natrower sense and that substantially
is responsible for the decision in the Khosla’s case which plac-
ed a broader interpretation on the word ‘occasion’ and there-
by, for the first time, unduly restricted the pre-existing right of
the States to tax the first purchase after import and the last
sale before export.

(9) After the Supreme Court rendered its decision in Kho-
sia's case, the Union. Government refereed to the Law Com
mission for its opinion the question whether the decision in
Khosla’s case was consistent with its earlier decisions in the
Travancore cases. This reference was presumably made be-
cause the States complained that the decisions in Khosta’s case
unduly restricted their power to tax the first purchase after
import and the last sale before export.

The majority? of the Law Commission, in its 30th Report,
expressed the view that Kfosfa’s case was consistent with the
two Travancore cases. Confining ourselves to the specific
question which was referred to that Commission, we wish to
state that this view of the majority was not correct, if due re-
gard is had co the exposition of the law in the majority judg-
ment in the second Travancore case.

On the specific question referred to the Commission, there-
fore, the minority view in the 30th Report was correct. We do
hot, however, wish to express any opinion with reference to the
other observations made in the minority report.

(10) Jn this connection, it may not be irrelevant to point
out that the reference to the Commission made after the
Supreme Court rendered its decision in Khosia's case was
somewhat inappropriately worded. After the passing of the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act, 1956, it was section § of the Act which was
in operation and in that case, the decisions in the
Travancore cases which dealt not with section 5, but with
article 286(1){b), though relevant, were technically not bia-
ding. In our view, the query addressed to the Commission should

1 30th Report.


116

bave been whether the Supreme Court had correctly interpreted
section 5 in Khosia’s case when it held that the sale by Khosla
10 the Railways fell within the protection of section 5. We have
thought it necessary to make this incidential observation in
order 10 clarify the truc legal position at the time when the refe-
rence was made.

(11] After a careful study of the relevant constitutional judicial
and Jegislative history, we have come to the unanimous conclusion
that the undue restriction which after the judgement in Kkosla’s
ease began to operate on the power of the States to tax the two
categories of transaction in question should be removed. For
thai purpose, we are recommending the acceptance of two propo-
sitions whilst our colleague, Mr. Sen Verma, is recommending
more detailed propositions. The object of both the recom-
mendations is, however, one and the same.

(12) Since this interpretation unduly restricts the power of
the Siates and was not intended by Parliament, the suggestion
now is that the law should be brought in line with what was
decided in the two fravancore cases, so far as sales or purchases
in the course of import and purchases in the course of export
are concerned. Hence, an amendment on the lincs recommen-
ded* is required.

1, Para 3.68, Supra.



CHAPTER 4

CONFLICTING DECISIONS OF THE COURTS AS TO THE
CENTRAL SALES TAX IN REGARD TO THE SCOPE
OF THE PENAL PROVISIONS OF THAT ACT

INTRODUCTORY

4,1. In this Chapter we propose to deal with a provision The close.
of the Central Sales Tax Act of considerable importance. Briefly Tea gtate
stated, section 9(2) of the Act imposes a duty, on the sales tax laws
officers of the States, to assess and re-assess, and to collect and under |
enforce payment of, the Central tax. It provides that they shall 9¢2)-
also have the same powers for this purpose as they have under
the State Act. These two propositions are wound up by 3 gene-
ral enactment to the effect that, for the above purposes, the
specified provisions of the General Sales Tax laws of the State
shall wpply in relation to the Central tax. The broad effect of
this provision is that, in relation to matters concerning the admi-
nisiration to the tax, the Central Sales Tax Act is not self-con-
tained. In order to ascertain the precise legal provision applicable
on a point of administration, one has to consult the State law.
Moreover. many of the provisions of State Sales tax law are to
he ascertained from the rules made under the State law. This
position, of course, is not an accident, but is deliberate

4.2, There is, thus, no doubt that section 9(2) necessitates The result-
a complicated study, involving: — pew

(i) the Central Act.
(ii) the State Act,
(ii) the cules under the Central Act. and

(iv) the rules under the State Act.?

a
1, para 4.1, Supra.
३. of. the discusdorin 0. $. 7. ४. Kantilat Mohanta! (1967) 195. 1. ९.
377 का, P.).

M7


Legista-
tion by
reference.

The ques-
tion of
applicabi-
lity of
State
amend-
ments.

118
Section 9(2)—legislation by reference

43. Section 9(2) is, thus, an example of the familiar de-
vice of legislation by a reference. Because of the adoption of
this device, however, a few problems as to the precise effect of
the sub-section have arisen. We shall discuss these problems
one by one.

4.4, Under the section, the provisions of the “General Sales
Tax” law of the State concerned on various matters mention-
ed in the section, apply in relation to the collection and assess-
ment of tax. A controversy has arisen as to whether only the
provisions of the State Act, as they existed when the Central
Act was passed, are attracted by virtue of this sub-section, or
whether amendments made in the State Act subsequent to the
passing of the Central Act also become applicable.

4.5. Most High Cousts?, *, 5 have taken the latter view.
The Madhya Pradesh High Court has also held that the pro-
cedure for recovery of Central Sales Tax by the States is
governed by the Jaw in force at the time of the recovery of the
tax, and not by the law in existence when the Central Act
came into force.* The judgment points out that the definition
of “sales tax law” uses the words “for the time being”. This
is also the Mysore view.’ In the Mysore casc*, it was held
that in the last part of sub-section (2) of section 9 of the Cen-
tral Act, the applicability of the provisions of the General Sales
Tax Jaw of the State has not been confined only to those
cascs where the authorities have exercised any power urtder thar
law (ie. the State law). Subject to any rules made under the

1. Auto Pins (fndia) ४. The State A. 1. 1९. 1970 Puoj. 333, 337, paragraphs
810 11.
2. K. V. Adinarayana Setty ¥. Com. Tax Officer (1963) 14, 5. 1. C. 587
(Mys.)
3. ९. 8.7. ५. Kantital Mohanial. (1967) 19 5. 1. ए. 377 M. Pe
4, Mis. Jiwanmun Sons (P) Ltd. V. Deputy Commissioner of Sates Tax
(197) M. P. L. J, 684; 28.8. TC. 247, 251 (Bishmber Dayal, C. J.
and Shiv Prasad J.) (Madhya Pradesh)
5, (a) KV. Adinurayana Setty V. C. 7. 0, (1963) 14, 5.1.
597 (Mysore); .
(७ _Mysore Electrical Industries V. C. T. O. Av 1. 8. 1970 Mysore
259, 263 para 15.
6. K.V. Adinarayana Setty V. C. 7 0. (1963) 14 S. T. C. 587, 597
(Mysore).

517


119

Central Act, the provisions of the general sales tax law of
the State could be applicable for all or any of the purposes
mentioned in section 9{2).

4.6. The Madras view, however, is different.1 The Madras Madras
view makes a distinction -between amendments of a substantial वि
character and others: and, according to the discussion in a
Madras case’, subsequent amendments of the State Act would
apply only if they do not make any substantial change.

4.7. So far as this particular problem, namely, the appli- The view
cability to the Central Act of subsequent amendments in the पदक
State Act is concerned, it would appear that the majority view? of High
is likely to prevail. In fact. practical considerations demand (1
that such amendments should apply, because otherwise the prevail.
whole scheme of the Central Sales Tax Act would be frus-
trated. It would be obvious that the Act is intended to be
administered in combination with the State Act.

Section 9(2) is, in fact, explicit on the point, when read
with the definition of “general Sales Tax law.”! The same
authorities as administer the State Act, arc expected to admi-
nister the Central Act also. Any other interpretation would
necessitate the preservation of each State Act, as it existed in
1956.—which would become impossible in course of time.

4.8. The majority view is likely to prevail, as we have al Desirability
ready stated’. In our view, it is necessary to make the position ment 2s

. हि regurds
clear. Therefore an amendment is desirable*. construc-

tion of
section
: 942,
1, (a) Haji J. A, Kareem bait V. 6. 7: 0. AIR. 1967 Mad. 171,
175, para 9 (Vecraswami and Natesan JJ).
(8) Sate of Madras V. M. Angappa Chettiar, (1968) S.T.C. 22

Madras.
(०) 0. H. Shak & Co. ५. The State of Madras, (1967) 2 M.LA
26).
(4) K. A. Ramu Cheitiar ९. Stare of Madras, (1967) 2 M.L.3. 315-
Huji J. A. Kareem Sait ¥. C-3.0, AR. 1967 Mad. 171.
Para 4.5, supra.
Section 2(1), Central Sales Tax Act.
. Para 4.7, supra.
Seo para 4.16, infra.

cr ar


Constitn-
tional
position
consides-
ed,

The prin-
ciple in
Shama
Rao's case,

120
Section 9(2)—the constitutional position

4.9, So much as regards the question of construction of the
lang: of section 9(2). What is a matter of more conse-
quence is the question of constitutionality of the provisions
of the section. In this context, we have to refer to a Madras
case!, where the High Court observed: —

“In fact, for the Central Legislature to adopt a State
Jaw not only as it exists at the time but also as it
may exist in future, including amendments made
from time to time, will amount io abdication of its
legislative functions. This is because, if the Cen-
tral Legislature purports to adopt a State law 10
be made in future by way.of an amendment, the
Central Legislature would have had no occasion to
apply its own mind in making the law.”

These observations raise an important constitutional question.

4.10. In this connection, a judgment cf the Supreme Court
is of importance. The facts of the case were as follows:—

On 16th August, 1962, the administration of Pondicherry
became vested in the Government of India by virtue of a de
jure transfer. The Pondicherry Administration Act, 1962 (42
of 1962), constituted that territory as a separate centrally
administered unit; and under the Union Territories Act, 1963
(20 of 1963). a Legislative Assembly was set up for that area.
The Assembly, under that Act, acquired the power of enact-
ing laws in respect of items in Lists II and III of the Seventh
Scheduic to the Constitution. The Assembly thereafter passed
the Pondicherry General Sales Tax Act, 1965(10 of 1965),
which was published on 3rd June, 1965, after receiving the
President’s assent on 25th May, 1965. The Act provided that
section 1(2) of that Act would come into force on such date

1. DH. Shak 4 Co. ¥. The State of Madras, (1967), S.T.C. 146,
149 (Mad) (1967) 2 M.L.J. 261.

*, Emphasis supplied.

3, B, Shama Rao ¥, Uition Territory of Pondicharry, (1967) 2 M.LJ
S.C.) 98, 100, 105; ALR, 1967 5. 0. 1480; 20 $.1.0. 21
(1967) 2 S.C.R. 288,



121
॥ as the Government may by notification appoint. Section 2(1)
of the Act provided that: —

“The Madras General Sales Tax Act 1959 (1 of 1959)
(hereinafter referred to as the Act). as in force
in the State of Madras immediately before the
commencement of this Act shall extend to and come
into force im the Union ‘Ferritory of Pondicherry
subject to the following modifications and adap-
tatlons........, ”

* 4.i1. Thus. there was to be a time interval between the
date of passing and date of commencement of the Pondicherry
Sales Tax Act. If, in between the two dates, the Madras Legis-

‘ Jature amended its own Sales Tax Act, that amendment would
become applicable to Pondicherry. The validity of this Position
Was at issue. The Supreme Court held the Pondicherry Act to be
void. The reasons for this conclusion of the Supreme Court
Were thus stated:—

“In the present case, it is clear that the Pondicherry
Legislature not only adopted the Madras Act as it
stood at the date when it passed the Pris.cipal Act.
but also enacted that if the Madras Legislature.
were to amend its Act prior to the date when the
Pondicherry Government would issue its notification
tt would be the amended Act which would apply.
The Legistaiure at wat stage could not anticipate
that the Madrus Act would not be amended, nor
could it predicate what amendment or amendments
would be carried out or whether they would be of
@ sweeping characier or whether they would be
suitable in Pondicherry. In point of fact the Ma-
dras Act was amended, and by reason of section
2(1) read with section 1(2) of the principal Act,
it was the amended Act which was brought into

| operation in Pondicherry. The result was that the

Pondicherry Legislature accepted the amended Act.
though it was not and could not be aware what
the provisions of the amended Act would be. There

’ was, in these circumstances a total surrender in the

matter of sales tax legislation by the Pondicherry
Assembly in favour of the Madras Legislature,
and for that reason we must agree with Mr. Desai,

1, Emphasis supplied,



An ana-
lysis of
the doc-
trine,

122

that the Act is void. or as is often said, “still-
bom”.

4.2. The judgment in the case? cited above was consider-
ed by Subba Rao, C. J., in a subsequent case? relating to
section 5, Punjab General Sales Tax Act. There the Chicf
Jusiice, who was a party to the majority judgment in Shama
Reo's case, explained and distinguished the same, and observed
as follows:—

“Section 1[2) of the said Act provided that the Act
would come into force on such date as the Gov-
ernment by notification may appoint. The effect
of the section was that the Madras Act as it stood
on the date of the notification issued would be in
force in the Union Territory of Pondicherry. In-
deed, 1 turned out that the Madras Act was amend-
ed before the said notification. This Court held
that there was a total surrender in the matter of
sales tex fegisiation by the Pondicherry Assembly
in favour of the Madras Legistature, and for that
reason the said sections were void or still-born.”

4.13. If the argument that there is a total surrender of the
legislative function,® is regarded as applicable to the provision
in section 9(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act!, then, it could
be contended with some force that Parliament is not compe-
tent to apply future amendments made by the States in their
own Sales Tax laws, since Parliament could not have applied
its mind to them. If such a view were to be taken by the
Supreme Court, the majority interpretation’ of the present Ppro-
vision in section 9(2) will not stand.

1, Shama Rus V. Pondicherry Administration (1967) 20 S.T.C. 420
S.Cy ALR, 1967 5.0. 1480, para 4.11 supra.

. Messes. Devi Dass Gopat Krishnan V. State of Punjab & Others
(1967), 20 S.T.C; 430; A.LR. 1967 S.C. 1895. See para 4.19 B
infra.

3, Para 4.12, supra,
4. Para 4.4, supru.

3. Para 4.5, supra


123

4.134. Three cases? reported in 1973 raise the importaot
question of the constitutional validity of sections 6, 8 and 9 of
the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. In all the cases, the impugned
sections were challenged as violative of the principles of delegated
legislation and, in particular, as violating the law laid down in
Shama Rao vy. Union Territory of Pondicherry While all the
judgments upheld the sections, the reasonings that were given
were divergent, with the result that an authoritative interpretation
should await a verdict from the Supreme Court. A brief review
of the cases is given below.

4.13AA. In the Gwalior Rayon case? the main ground of
challenge was that since the Constitution vested the exclusive
power of imposing sales tax on inter-State transactions
in Parliament, it was not competent for Parliament to
delegate the power of fixing rates of tax on such transac-
tions to State Legislatures. (Section 8, inter alia, provided that
a State Legislature could vary the rate of tax laid down in
the section im certain circumstances), Section 8(2) (0), which
provided that if a State fixes a higher rate than ten per cent
on intra-State sales that rate would apply to inter-State sales also
in preference to the ten per cent laid down by Parliament was
challenged as amounting to abdication of legislative power by
Parliament in favour of State Legislatures. It was contended
thal section 8(2) (0) was ultra vires as it amounted to an efface-
ment of itself by Parliament and, therefore, wholly invalid.

Dayal C. J.4 negatived these arguments and accepted the con-
tenlions raised on behalf of the State that the instant case was
not a piece of delegated legislation at all and that the principles
relating thereto were inapplicable to such a case. On the other
hand, he held, it was a case of legislation by reference by which
an Act of another legislature was adopted without physically in-
corporating all the details.

4,13B. Relying on text book writers on Constitutional Law
on the distinction between Delegated Legislation and Legislation

"7 infra. .

2, Shama Rao ५. Union Territory ef Pondicherry, A.1. 1. 1967 $. C.

80: (1967) 2M. C.D. 98, Para 4.11, Supra.

Rayor Silke Manufacturing Wve.) Co. Lid. v. Assistant Commis-

of Sales Tax, (1973) 31 8. T. ८. 9 (MPD (1973)
M.P. 1... 3., 85.

4, Two separate bat concurring judgements were given by Bishambhar
Dayal, C.J.and Raina, J.

Law;74—9

Three re
cent cases
as to
validity of
sections 6,
8 und 9.

Gwaltor
Rayan case.


124

by reference, Dayal, C. ¥. concluded that since the provision
actually referred to the law prevailing in 8 particular State and
not to a particular part of the State, the reference should be
treated as the adoption of the law as it stood from time to time.
On this basis, he distinguished the decision in Shama Rao's case*
Raina, J., also accepted the position that the present case was
not a piece of delegated legislation and, therefore, there was no
need to sce if it suffered from excessive delegation. However,
he felt that the principles which limit excessive delegation would
be a good guide to examine the question of abdication of legis-
lative power or self-effacement in the case of legislation by refer-
ence also, The question that had to be decided was whether the
power to determine the rate of tax (which, according to section
8(2) (0), could be increased by State Legislature to more than
10 per cent as laid down in the Act) was an essential legislative
function which could not be assigned to another legislative body,
the executive or another authority. Relying on Bose, J.’s_ views
in Raj Narain Singh v. 2, A, Committee? that an executive
authority could be authorised to modify existing and future laws
excepting in essential features, Raina, J. inferred that since it was
open to a Legislature to leave it to the executive to determine
details relating to the working of taxation laws, such as the selec-
tion of persons on whom the tax is to be laid, the rate at which
it is to be charged in respect of different classes of goods and
the like, it could be said that the fixing of the rate of tax was
not an essential feature of legislation relating to tax and hence
could be assigned to another authority. He distingnished the
decision in Devi Dass Gopal Krishnan & Others y. State of Pun
fab® on the ground that the basis principle was that fixing of rate
of tax could be delegated to an authority provided the statute
contained a policy or principle which would furnish guidance
to the delegate in the exercise of such powers. He held that
fixing the limit of the rate of tax was only one of the modes
of exercising such guidance and was not the only method of
doing so, A delegation could be conirclled by indicating the
policy, or by providing guidance otherwise.

1, He also distinguished the Shama Reo’s case on the basis of the
delegate being the executive.

3, Rej Narain Singh y. P. A. Committee (1955) 1 S.C. 7९, 290.

3, Devi Das २. State of Punjab (1967) 20 5. T. 0. 430 (8. 0.) In this case,
section S of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 was struck
down by the Supreme Court as self-effacement by the Legislature
inasmuch as it conferred an uncontrolled power on the State
Government to levy tax at rates fixed by itself.

re


125

4.13C. Thus, Raina, J., though agreeing with the view that in
a legislation by reference, it is permissible to adopt the provisions
of another statute as they exist as well as any amendments in
future, held that the question of abdication of the legislative
function or self-effacement must, in such a case, be examined on
the same principles as governed the limits of valid delegation.
He distinguished the decision in Shama Rao’s case’ op one
more ground other than those mentioned by Dayal, C. 3., and
said that in Shama Rao’s case, an entire enactment which was
Not in force at the time of enactment was adopted. In the present
case, there was adoption of a provision of the Act of the State
Legislature by general reference, which was limited to the rate
of tax.

4.13D, The next case to be considered is a Gujarat one,

Rallis India.?— The main argument was that Parliament had ab- ६७५

dicated its legislative function in favour of State Legislatures in
enacting sections 6, 8 and 9 of the Central Sales Tax Act.
Bhagwati, C. J., narrowed down the scope of the inguiry to the
Proposition that it was sufficient to attract the constitutional inhi-
bition against abdication if there was surrender by the legislature
of an essential legislative function even in respect of a particular
subject matter of legislation in favour of another person or autho-
tity which was not empowered by the Constitution to exercise that
function. He then went on to discuss what was an essential
legislative function, Relying on Mukherjea, J.’s observations in
In re the Delhi Laws Act, 1912,* that the essential legislative
function consisted in the determination of the legislative policy
and of formally enacting that policy into a binding rule of con-
duct, Bhagwati, C. J., explained that it was not always possible
for the Legislature to ascertain the facts and circumstances “in
all cases, which would have to be determined outside the halls
of the legislature.” The Legislature will have, in such circunr
stances, necessarily to delegate subsidiary or ancillary powers of
legislation to delegates of its choice for carrying out the policy.
However, such delegation should be within limits, and should
not be “unconfined and vagrant”. He then posed the question :
cea eens has the Parliament said that within its allotted field,
which is here tax on inter-State sales, what will operate is not

1, Shama Rao x. Union Territory of Pondicherry. (1967) 20 8. T. ८.
215 (8. ८)

3. Rallis india Lid, ४. R 3. Joshi, 31 3. वा. 2, 261, 277 (Gujarat).

. fa re Delhi Laws Act, 1912 (1951) 5. 0. 8. 747.

Rallis India
case.
(Gujarat)


126

its own legislative policy determined and “chosen by it, but
legislative policy enunciated by the State Legislature, which has
Plenary power of legislation within its cwn field and which is not
subject to any guidance or control from Parliament? If it has,
it will be a clear case of abdication or self-effacement.” After a
detailed examination of sections 6, 8 and 9, he concluded that
the provisions did not amount to abdication.

Gi) The Court distinguished the power of State Legislatures
under section 8 to declare the rate of tax as nil funder section
8(2-A)] as not amounting to ‘exemption’ from tax. It did not
affect chargeability. though the rate of tax might be nil.

(ii) About section 8(5), which empowered the State Govern-
ment in the public interest to direct that the inter-State rate of
tax would be at a rate lower than those prescribed in sub-sections
(1) and (2), the court held that such 8 power was in the nature
of a conditional legislation, which had been recognised since the
decision in Queen v. Burah2 Even assuming that the provision
was a piece of delegated legislation, the court held that it was
valid, because Parliament had clearly laid down the policy or
principle which was to guide the State Government in exercise
of the power, namely, that it should be in the public interest.

(iti) Regarding the rate of tax under section 8(2-A) [sub-
section (2-A) of the section formed the target of the main
attack}, the court held that a deliberate choice of legislative policy
on the part of Parliament was discernible, inasmuch as the pur-
pose behind the provisions in section 8(2-A) was to ensure
that consumers in the States to which the goods were imported
were not placed at a disadvantage as compared with the con-
sumers in the State from which the goods were imported. ‘This
could have been carried out by Parliament—(1) by prescribing
separate schedules of rates for each State in the Act itsclf and
by amending it from time to time as and when changes were
brought in State rates, or (2) by prescribing separate schedules
of rates ia the Act and allowing the State to amend them from
time 10 time, or (3) by adopting the rate structure as provided
in sub-sections (1), (2) and (2-A) of section 8. The first two
methods, which were undoubtedly within Parliament's competence,
could not be adopted on practical considerations. The third,
which provided a self-operating machinery whereby the rate

1. Queen ९. Bural, (1878) 3 A.C. 889.

*


127

structure of the Central Act could be adjusted to the rate struc-
tures of State sales tax laws according to the formula laid down
in section 8, provided, according to the court, a highly efficient
method of carrying out the legislative policy.

4,13E. This was the position regarding section है, as discussed
in Rallis India case. Section 9, which provided that the existing
machinery io each State for assessment, re-assessment, collection
and enforcement of payment of tax on intra-State sales would
assess, re-assess, collect and enforce payment of inter-State tax
under the Act, was also (in that case) challenged as exceeding
the limits of delegated legislation, inasmuch as it related to sub-
stantive matters rather than adoption of procedural provisions.
On this, Bhagwati, C.J., found nothing excessive as far as the
adoption of the general sales tax law of the appropriate State
in the matter of advance payment of tax was concerned. On
the question of adoption of provisions relating to penalty, imposi-
tion of tax liability on a transferee of or successor to a business
and tecovery of tax from third parties, the court did not give any
opinion, However, it was observed that even if they were vio-
lative of any principle, the provision was clearly severable, and
would not affect the validity of section 9. On the question of
the applicability of Shama Rao’s case, the Court held that Par-
liament had applied its mind and made a deliberate choice of
legislative policy, and there was no parallel between the existing
situation and that decision.

4.13F. In the Thatlam case? also, the grounds of attack (before Thallam
the Andhra Pradesh High Court) were alleged abdication by का)
Parliament of its legislative function in the enactment of sections
8 and 9 of the Act. Gopal Rao Ekbote. J., reduced the question
to whether even essential functions of legislation, that is to say,
laying down the policy and a rule of binding conduct, had been
delegated by Parliament to an agency not contemplated ‘by the
Constitution. On section 8, the court held that Parliament could
not be said to have abdicated its functions merely because it had
authorised the State Legislature to fix the same rates in respect
of transactions within the State and apply them to transactions
which were subject to central tax. ‘The Court held that it was

1, Shama Ravy. Union Territory of Pondicherry, (1967) 20 $.T.C.
215 (8.0)

> Thallam Bulasbrahmanyom vy. State of A.P., (1973) 31 S.7-C,
489 (A.P.); (1972) 1 An W.R. 263.


Conclusion.

Panjab
case,

128

not a case of applying future laws to central transactions without
Parliament applying its mind, but a piece of delegated legislation.
On this view, the Court felt it unnecessary to consider the effect
of the judgment in Shama Rao’s case! which, according to the
Court, struck a different note as regards application of future laws
from the previous decisions starting with R. V. Burah® and in re.
Dethi Laws Act.2 Ekbote, J., concluded with the following ob-
servations :—

“We have no hesitation in holding that in delegating the
power to fix the rates to the State Legislatures and
applying those rates to the transactions subject to
tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, whether pre-
yailing or future, it is a case of permissible picce of
delegated legislation and, therefore, quite valid. Sec-
tions 8 and 9, therefore, do not amount to abdication
of legislative function by Parliament........ ”

This observation would seem to indicate that the Court would
have upheld any challenge as to the constitutionslity of section
9(3) on the basis of prospective amendment of State Tax laws
and their validity under section 9(3). The Mysore,* M._P.S and
Punjab and Haryana High Courts® have already held that section
9(3) was valid and prospective modifications and amendments
to State tax laws and their applicability to transactions under
the Central Sales Tax Act was not abdication of Parliamentary
duty, The Madras High Court had, however, taken a different

view".

4,13A. An argument that section 9(2) amounts to excessive
delegation was advanced before the High Court* of Punjab,

1, Shama Rao’s case, suptas

3, Queen ४, Burah, (1878) 3 A.C. 889.

. Inve. the Delhi Laws Act, 1912 (1951) S.C.R. 747.

4 Mysore Electrical Industries V. Com. Tax Officer, A-LLR. 1970 Mys.

. Commissioner of S.T. V. Kantilat Mokan Lal, A.1.R. 1968
M. P. 20.

. Auto Pins (India) ¥. State of Haryana, A. 1. R. 1970 Punj. & Har-
yene 333.
(a) Haji Kareem Salt ४. Dy. Com!. Tax Officer, A. I. R. 1967
Mad. 171.

2

(b) D. H. Shah & Co. ¥. State of Madras, (1967) 2 ML? 261.
8, Tek Chand Daulat Ram V. Excise & Tax Officer, (1972) 29
8, 7. 0. 585, 603 FB.) Punieb.


129

which, however, rejected it. The High Court relied on clause
(2) of article 258 of the Constitution, which runs as follows! :—

“(2) A law made by Parliament, which applies in any
State, may, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter
with respect to which the Legislature of the State has
70 power to make laws, confer powers and impose
duties, or authorise the conferring of powers and the
imposition of duties upon the State or officers and
authorities thereof.”

It is in exercise of that power that section 9(2) of the
Central Act had been enacted. Availing of the services of the
hierarchy of the functionaries acting under the State Act and con-
ferment of powers on them, providing for the procedure to be
followed by them and imposition of duties upon them in terms
of the procedural, remedial and other provisions devised there-
under to enable them to administer various provisions of the
Central Act, falls squarely within the scope of clause (2) of article
258, and cannot legitimately be contended to be unauthorised
or excessive delegation on the part of the Parliament in favour
of the State or the authorities administering the State Act.

4.14. Tt may, in this connection, be noted that section 9(2) Wee oe
makes three types of provisions.? In the first place. it imposes peovislons
certain duties on the officers acting under the general Sales 9/3). on
Tax law of the particular State, by requiring them to assess,
re-assess, collect and enforce payment etc. of the tax or penalty
under the Central Act, as if the tax or penalty under the Central
under the Central Act, as if the tax or penalty were Jeviable under
the State Act. Secondly, for this purpose it confers certain
Powers on the officers of the States in relation to the tax or
penalty. Here again, there is a reference to the general Sales
Tax of the State. Thirdly, it contains a general provision stating
that the specified provisions of the general Sales Tax law of the
State shall apply “accordingly”. Each of these Provision of sec-
tion 9(2) refers to the “general sales tax law” of the State,?

If subsequent amendments of the various State laws are not
attracted for the purposes of section 9(2) of the Central Act,

1, Constitution, Article 258 (2).
3. Para 4.5 and 4.5B, supra.
> For definition of “general sates tax law", soe section 200,



130

then the position becomes unworkable, because it is always diffi-
cult to apply, for the purposes of the Central Act, a State Law
(which has been amended), without the amendment. Psycholo-
gically, there would be a difficulty in doing so, on the part of
the officer concerned. Moreover, it is common experience that
after some time it is not easy to get copies of the State law
as it stood in 1956,—which is the year of enactment of the Cen-

tral Act.
Remedy suggested

Alterna: 4.15. To remedy such a situation (if it does arise), there are,
tives for _— theoretically speaking, several courses open. (a) In the first
पक Provision in section 9(2), the Union could frame its own self
tion, place, instead of the incorporating contained code of the rules
relating to assessment of tax under the Central Act. Whether or
not the Union also appoints its own assessing authorities for the
purpose, is immaterial for this purpose. It could delegate the
necessary powers to the State authorities. The only difference
would be that State authorities will then be deriving that power
not from the State law read with section 9(2), but from the Cen-

tral Government directly.

(0) The second alternative would be to amend the Consti-
tution, and to provide there what is now contained in section-9(2)
of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. For obvious reasons, tHis
is not a very convenient method.

(c) The third alternative would be to insert, in section 9{2),
8 particular date, say, “as in force on the first day of April,
1974.” Initially, this date could be inserted by adding the quoted
words after the words “general sales tax law,” wherever they
occur in section 9(2) or elsewhere in the Central Sales Tax
Act, Subsequently, every year, by a short amendment of the
Central Sales Tax Act, the year ‘1974’ (or the subsequent year}
could be replaced by the year then current, This would mean
that the Sales Tax law in force in the State on the first April
of the then current year would be attracted to the Central tax.
No doubt, if, after the 1st April of one year and before the Ist
April of the next year, a particular State Legislature makes any
amendments, those amendments would not be attracted. Theore-
tically this cannot be avoided. But there is a practical way of
avoiding it. The Centre can request the States, by a general
Ietter, not to make amendments in the Sales Tax laws of the


131

Siates which would be operative from a date other than the Ist
April. Except to meet urgent situations, this is the practice even
new, in most States.

4.16. As we have an apprehension that there is a reasonable RECO on
possibility of section 9(2) being required to be construed as at- for amend-
tracting only the unamended State lew, we consider it advisable, ment of
and recommend that the last alternativet indicated above should 302) to
be carried out, as an urgent measure. Such an amendment would insert
be harmless in any case, and would avoid any controversy or =~
likelihood of attack on the constitutionality of this part of the
section. As a long term measure, it will of course be desirable
to make the Act self contained.

Section 9(2) and offences covered

4.17, There is another problem arising out of section 9(2). How far
It seems that a view prevails? that only offences specifically listed offences
in the Central Sales Tax Act ate recognised for the purpose of in the
initiating action under section 9. So, for offences provided in Central
State laws,—for example, for delay in the filing of return, delay covered.

in payment of tax etc—punishment is not permissible.

4,18. The position could be clarified by adding, in section Recom: कि
9(2), the word “offences” before the words “compounding of in add
offences”, We recommend an amendment of section 9(2) ac- offences
cordingly. 5(2).

Penalties

4.19, There is another question arising out of section 9(2), Penalty
concerning penalties. In a Calcutta case,* it was held that the ynder
penalty leviable under the State law could not be imposed for how far
failure in filing, or delay in filing, returns under the Central Act. attracted—
According to this case, section 9(2) of the Central Sales Tax 8०४४ (५६८. ta
does not incorporate that substantive law of penalty for non-sub-
mission of returns under the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act
1941.

. Para 4.15 (९), supra.

. See para 4.15 (3), supra. and para 4.28, infra,

. Notes in the Ministry of Finance,

|. Mohan Lai Chokhani ९ S.T-Q. 28 8-T-C. 367, 373 (Cal.).

|. Referred to in the judgment as section 9 (3), because it was so
numbered at the time of the assessment in question.

ake p


The
principal
considera-
tions,

Insufficient
Importance
attached to

whe word
‘penalties”,

132

4.20. The principal reasons for this construction were as
follows :—

In the first instance, section 9(2) of the Central Sales Tax
Act, makes the whole provision “subject to the other Provisions
of this Act and the rules made thereunder”,

Secondly, the authorities for the time being empowered to
assess, re-assess, collect and enforce payment of any tax under
the genera! sales tax law of the appropriate State are only so
empowered “on behelf of the Government of India.”

Thirdly, this power includes the power to “assess, re-assess,
collect and enforce payment of tax, including any penalty payable
by a dealer under this Act”. Hence, the central idea is “penalty”
payable under this (Central) Act, and not penalty payable under
a State law.

Fourthly, the power is “qualified by the words as if the
tax or penalty payable by such a dealer under this Act is a
tax or penalty payable under the general sales tax law of the
State”. This is a deeming provision and can deem no more than
what it says, namely that the “penalty payable under this (Cen-
tral) Act”, and not any other penalty, will be deemed “as if”
payable under the general sales tax law of the State.

Fifthly, the other words in section 9(2) are—“for this pur-
pose they may exercise all or any of the powers they have
under the general sales tax law of the State”, followed by the
provisions which have also been quoted above. There, the limit.
ing words are “for this purpose”, aud not “any other purpose”,

4.21, It should, with respect, be stated that the Calcutta
judgment* does not attach sufficient importance to the word
“penalties”, which occurs towards the end of section 9(2) before
the words “compounding of offeaces”. That word, in the context,
could refer only to penalties leviable under the State Acts. How-
ever, this judgment shows the need for a clarification of the
position.?

1, Para 4.19 and 4.20, supra,
3, Set para 4,26 for further discussion.


मऊ

133
Section 9(2) and the equality clause

4.22. Another point of great importance was raised in the Question.
same!-? Calcutta casc. Counsel for the petitioner argued that ®t:

if section 9(2) was to have the effect of attacking the substantive
provisions of State Jaws as to penaltics, 2 situation would be
created whereunder the law would differ from State to State, be-
cause the substantive provisions of each State sales tax law vary.
This, he argued, would introduce inequality, and violate article
14,

The High Court, in its judgment, referred to this argument,
but did not decide it because the matter was settled by the con-
struction placed on section 9(3)—namely that it did not attract
the penalty provisions of the law of the State. Nevertheless, the
judgment did discuss the matter at some length. In the course
of the discussion, the Court referred to the Supreme Court judg-
ment? upholding the validity of the procedure under the Income-
tax Act, 1922 for the recovery of tax, and treating it as not hit
by article 14. Having mentioned this judgment, the High Court
also quoted the observations in the judgment made by one of
the Judges—

“We must be in a position to postulate some reasonable basis
for the differentiation and we cannot get away from this necessity
by vague references to the wisdom of the Legislature or by in-
dulging in pure speculation as to what might have been at the
back of its mind. Speaking broadly, for the enforcement of the
levy of a Central tax like the income-tax, there should be urifor~
mity of procedure and identity of consequences from non-pay-
ment. The machinery for recovery might be different between
the several States, but the defaulting assessee must be put on the
same footing as regards the penalties.”

The High Court after quoting the above passage observed :

“These observations are very relevant for the point under de-
cision in this appeal before us. Mr. Mukherjee, the learned
Advocate for the appellant, has argued that, if the Central Sales
Tax Act by reason of section 9(2) of its provision is construed

3. Mohan Lal Caokhani v. C.7.0. (1971) 28 $.T.C. 363 (Cal.).
3, Para 4.19, supra,
3, Pershottam ¥. Addi. Collector, ALR. 1956 S.C, 20; 28 LTR. 891.


Observa-
tiona of
the Sup-
Teme Court
in N. X.
Nataraja
Madatiar's
case.

134

to authorise the State Government to impose a penalty for delay
or non-submission or returas of turnover, then it will 1087 to a
chaotic situation, because different penalties are provided under
different State sales tax statutes in different States. A few ilfus-
trations were given by Mr. Mukherjee cn this point. According
to him, Andhra Pradesh provides only for best judgment assess-
ment and so also the Central Sales Tax (Madras) Rule 5(4).
But here, under section 111), a full scale assessment is contem-
plated in West Bengal. The State of Bihar introduccs a penalty
for such failure a sum not exceeding five rupees per day, whereas
Orissa introduces a penalty for the same ground but for which
penalty cannot exceed 1|10th per cent of the tax duc or rupces
five for every day thereaiter.”*

4,23. It may be noted in State of Madras v. N. K. Nataruja
Mudaliar,? the question mocted was as to whether, in the face
of article 301 and 393 of the Constitution providing for freedom
of trade, commerce and intercourse and for prohibition against
preference of one State over another or discrimination between
one State and another, the adoption by the Central Act of varying
rates of sales tax in force in various States under the State laws
was constitutionally valid. The Supreme Court observed as
follows :—

“An Act, which is merely enacted for the purpose of imposing
tax which is to be collected and to be retained by the State does
fot amount to a law giving, or authorising the giving of, any
Preference to one State over another, merely because varying
rates of tax prevail in different States. The flow of trade does
not necessarily depend upon the rates of sales tax ;
it depends upon a vatiety of factors, such as the source of supply,
place of consumption, existence of trade channels, the rates of
freight trading facilities, availability of efficient transport and
other facilities for carrying on trade. It is where differentiation
is based on considerations not dependent upon natural or busi-
ness factors which operate with more or less force in different
localities that Parliament is prohibited from making a discrimi-
nation. Prevailence rates of tax on sales of the same commodity
cannot he regarded in isolation as discriminative of the subject io
discriminate between one State and another.”

1, The judgement gives other examples of disparity.
3, State of Madras v. N. K. Nataraja Mudatiar, ALR. 1970 §.C. 1742.


135

4.24 and 4.25. This case thus related to rates. But the reason-
ing in this case could perhaps be adopted to support the validity
of section 9(2), against an attack on the ground of inequality.
The position however. cannot be treated as being beyond doubt.

4.26. In view of the discussion above,t and particularly in Express

view of the Calcutta case,? the insertion of an express provision aed
as to penalties* appears to be desirable. penalty
desirable.

One alternative would be to insert the following sub-section
in section 9 :—

“(2A4). In particular, without prejudice to the generality of
the provisions of sub-section (2), penalties leviable
under the general Sales Tax law of the State shall also
be leviable for the purposes of this Act, as if the tax
under this Act had been levied under the general Sales
tax law of the State”,

4.27. But this would not meet the objection of inequality* Recon:
which has been sometimes raised. A better course would, there- है
fore, be to prescribe the penalties in the Central Act. We would
recommind this course on principle. We cannot lay down details
of the provisions to be made, as that involves various adminis-

trative aspects.
Conclusion

4,28. In fact, as regards the whole Central Sales Tax Act, Whole Act
we may est that the Act should be self-contained. The speci- should be
self-con-
fic amendments suggested above should,’ of course, be un- tained.
dertaken, as an urgent measure, But, as a long term measure, it
is desirable to make the Act self-contained, in respect of matters®

for which section 9(2) at present provides.

4.19 tod, 25 sapra,
y fokan Lai (एक v. C.T.0., 1970) 28 S.T.C. 363, 367, 373,

¥ (Calcutta). (0.8. Mukherjee, C.J. and B.C. Mitra J.)

3. See Para 4.21 ampere.

4, Sse Mulan Lal Chathani V, Conunercial Tax Officer

(1971 28 8. पा, 0. 367, 373 (Cal), Supra.

3. ५ 4:16, 4.18, 4.27 supra:

6, Cf pata 4.16, supra. toad with 4.15 (0).



The ques-
tion of
mens rea
‘with regard
to offences.

Recommen-
dations in
Law Com-
mission’s
47th Re-
port,

CHAPTER 5
PUNISHMENT FOR EVASION OF SALES TAX

Introductory

5.1. One of the questions which we have been asked to
consider is, whether the provisions with regard to penalties for
the evasion of sales tax should not be amended, so as to do
away with the concept of mens rea or to bring them in line with
the recommendation made by this Law Commission in its 47th
Report with regard to offences under other fiscal laws.

Mens Rea

5.2. It may be noted that this Law Commission, in its
Report on the offences connected with social and economic
legislation, made several recommendations for amendment of
the enactments dealing with social and economic offences, includ-
ing laws relating to direct taxation. It should be noted, how-
ever, that not all the amendments recommended in the Report
were applicable to laws relating to direct taxes. Some of the
recommendations for amendment were expressly stated as not
applicable to the Income-tax Act and other taxation laws,
having regard to the complicated nature of offences under those
laws. Thus, it was noted in that Report? that provisions as
to the following were absent from the Income-tax Act :—

(i) Elimination or modification of mens rea ;
Gi) Confiscation ;

Gii) Stoppage of business (on conviction) ;
(iv) Higher powers of Magistrate :

- (२) Special rules of evidence,

1. 47th Report of the Law Commission (Social and Economic
Offences).
2, 47th Report (Social and Economic Offences), page 130, para 15.54.

136


137

5.3. But amendments for inserting such provisions in the Amend-
enactment relating to direct taxes were ruled ont, having regard meet, oF
to the complicated nature of the offences under the Act. matiers not

recommen-
ded in
taxation
law.

5.4, The same reasoning applies to offences under sales tax Change in

Jaws. That the offences under the Sales Tax Act will be of a iales Tax

complicated nature, cannot be denied. No change is, there- wenn
fore, recommended on the question of mens rea. gards mens

rea
5.5. and 5.6. It may also noted, with reference to mens Court deci-
rea under the Act, that it has been held that to bring home the phasise need
offence under section 10(b), a guilty animus or mens rea is for mens
essential.? This view is concluded by a series of decisions.? rea

5.7. We shall now examine—(i) such provisions of the laws ? ‘rovisions
relating to direct taxes as are suitable for sales tax laws ; and tax न
(ii) such of the amendments recommended in the Commis- considered.
sion’s Report on Social and Economic offences‘ as were intended
for direct tax laws provided they are suitable for adoption in
sales 12x laws,

Higher punishment

5.8. We shall first consider the question of higher punish- The ques-
ment for certain offences. In the Commission's Report on fen of
Social and Economic Offences’, the offence of making false puntsiment
Statements in declarations under the Income-tax Act was specifi- for certain
cally dealt with, and a recommendation was made to regulate (सा,
the punishment according to the amount of tax which would
have been evaded if the statement by the assessee (now dis-
covered to be false), had been accepted as true. If the amount
of such tax excceds one lakh of rupees, or if the case is one
of a second or subsequent conviction, the recommendation was
to prescribe the maximum punishment of 7 years’ imprison-

1. Para 5.2 6), Supra.
2, Misra Limestone Co. V. S. T. Officer, ALR. 1971 Orissa 122, 124.

3, Manjunath Type Botreading Works Y. State of Mysore (1969)
23 'S.T.C. 438 (Mysore),

(8) Commissioner of Sales Tax, Indore V. Bombay General Stores,
A.LR. 1969 Madhya Pradesh 213,

(० Pannalal Urassh Kumar af Ghoghar Rewa ¥. Commissioner of
Sates Tax, M.P. (1971) 27 S.T.C, 199 (Madhya Pradesh).

4, 47th Report of the Law Commission.

5, 41 Report of the Lay Commission, Page 174.



138

ment (and fine), with a minimum of six months’ imprison-
qment—there was also a recommendation as to relaxation of the
minimum. In other cases. the maximum imprisonment recom-
mended was three years (with fine as an alternative), but there
was to be no minimum. The same approach could be adopted
for offences under the Central Sales Tax Act. But, in this
case, the figure of one lakh of rupees, should be reduced to ten
thousand rupees because, even for evasion of tax to the tune of
Rs. 10,000, the turnover would have to be fairly high. Further,
we are of the opinion that there need be no relaxation of the
minimum in this case.

मुहर कपल" 5.9. Accordingly, we recommend that section 19 of the

amend sec- Central Sales Tax Act should be revised as follows :—

Het itsert “10. [६ any person—

17 000 seer [(a) to (as in existing section he shall be
punishable—(i) if the amount of tax which would
have been evaded if the offence had not been
discovered or the amount illegally collected, as the
case may be, exceeds ten thousand rupees, or if the
case is one of a second or subsequent conviction
for an offence under this Act, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven yeafs, but
which shall not be less than six months, and with,
fine;

(ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to thtee years, or with fine, or
with both 5

and when the offence is a continuing one, the fino under sub-
clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of this clause, may be a daily
fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which
the offence continues.”

Adequacy 5,10, It is heartening to note that some High Courts arc alive
of punish: to the necd for adequate punishment for offences relating to
Gujarat taxes. Thus, for example, in a recent Gujarat case, the High

case, Court observed :

“One can understand an offence against the person of
an individual committed on account of the emo-

4, State of Gujarat V. Korimbhat, (1972) 29 8. 1. C. 95, 97 (Gujarat)
(MP. Thekkar 73


AO ca

~ aw.

139

tions of an individual getting the better of his
reason...... When, however, offences against public
revenues are committed by businessmen with
deliberation, no lenient view of the matter can be
taken by the courts. Let it not be forgotten that
the public revenues collected by way of taxes from
the citizens are काश alic employed by the State
for ensuring that the citizens are not deprived of
their right to possess property. If offences against
public revenue are committed by businessmen,
it would amount to robbing the State which pre-
vents them from being robbed by others.

Where a charge is that of filing false returms and of
failing to account for sales running into as large
a sum of Rs. 1,38,914.31, to impose a penalty of a
fine of Rs. 10 (it is no overstatement to make) is
to make mockery of the provisions contained in
section 63 of the Act. To impose a fine of Rs. 10
can very well be equated with the issuance of a
Hicence to defraud public revenues on” payment of
Rs. 10.

A time has come when the courts cannot afford to take
an unduly lenient view of contravention of the

provisions enacted by the Legislature to prevent
fraud against public revenues.”

Abetment

5.11. The question of abetment of offences may now be
considered.

5.12, In the Commission’s Report! on Social and Econo-
mic offences, a re-draft of the section of the Income-tax Act
relating to abetment,? was suggested. We recommend that on
the same lines, a new section should be inserted in the Central
Sales Tax Act® as follows :—

“10-B. Abetment of false accounts, etc.

If a person abets or induces in any manner another person
to make and deliver au account, statement or declaration relating

1, 47th Report of the Law Commission.
4, Income Tax Act, 1961
3. Section 10 8

20 M of Law/74—I10,

Abetment.

Recommen-
dation of
insert sec-
tion 10B
relating to
abetment.


149

to any transaction chargeable to tax under this Act, which is
false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe
to be true, he shail be pusishable—

(i) if the amount of tax which would have been evaded
if the declaration, account or statement had been
accepted as true, exceeds ten thousand’ of rupees
or if the case is one of a second or subsequent con-
viction for an offence under this Act, with impri-
sonment for a term which may extend to seven
years, and with fine ;

(1) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with finc, or
with both.”.

Corporations

Punishment 5.13. The question of punishment of Corporations was

of Cor- considered in the Commission’s Report? on Social and Econo-

Porations. mic offences, and the insertion of the following section in enact-
ments dealing with social and economic offences was recommen-
ded.

“10-B. (1) When a corporation is convicted of an offence
under this Act, it shall be competent to the Court before which
the conviction takes place, to pass on the corporation a sentence
of public condemnation, in addition to any other punishment to
which the corporation may be sentenced.

(2) When such a sentence is passed, the court shall cause
the name and place of business of the corporation, the offence,
the fact that the corporation has been so sentenced and any
cther punishment imposed, and such ether particulars as the
court may considet to be appropriate in the circumstances of the
case, to be published at the expense of the corporation in such
newspapers or in such other manner as the court may direct.

(3) The expenses of such publication shall be recoverable
from the corporation in the same manner as fine.”.

~ "DAs to the amount cf—Page 59, Supra.
2, 47th Report, Page 172, and P. 61-62, Para 8.1.

‘7


Hi

5.14. We recommend that a similar provision should be Recommen-
dation to

inserted in the Central Sales Tax Act,! as section 10-C. ineert sec=
tron 10-C
regarding
Corpora-
Publication of names of convicted individuals tions.

5.15, We also recommend? that a provision for publication of section
names of convicted individuals should be added in the Central गिरे पा
Sales Tax Act. Legislative precedents are available on the names of
subject and we need not, therefore, suggest a draft. convicted

1, Tt could be put as section 10-C
3. It could he put as section 10D



Collection
of excess

amount by
dealers —

No legisla-
tive com-

petence in
States.

Provisions
for penalty
held void
in absence
of proce:
dural safe-
guard,

Case relat-
ing to U.P.
Act.

CHAPTER 6

DISPOSAL OF EXCESS AMOUNTS COLLECTED RY A
DEALER FROM A CUSTOMER AS SALES TAX

6.1 It appears that some difficulty has been fclt as regards the
disposal of amounts illegally collected as sales-tax by a dealer
from a customer, Such a situation usually arises when Sales
Tax is realised from a person in respect of goods not liable to
tax. State Acts sometimes contain provisions to the effect that
such ameunts will be forfeited to the State Government. But
such a provision has been held! to be beyond the legislative
competence of the States, as it is not incidental to the power
to levy a “tax” on the sale of goods, because, an hypotkesi, the
amount in question is not leviable as “a tax”.

Thus, section 5(c) of Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax
Act (6 of 1957) as amended was held to be ultra vires the
State Legislature,? on this ground. The section provided for
lability of the dealer 10 pay illegally collected tax to the Gov-
ernment.

6,2. Even where the provision was framed in terms of
“penalty”, and not merely in terms of “forfeiture”, it was held
to be void, in the absence of procedural safeguards which com-
plicd with article 19(1)(#) of the Constitution. On this
ground, a provision in the Bombay Sales Tax Act was held to
be void.$

6.3, In a recent case* decided by the Supreme Court a deal-
ee wrongly collected a certain sum as sales tax from the cus-
omer. The question was whether the State Legislature is

Abdul Quadar and Co. ४. Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad (1964) 6 8.0.8.
867; ALR. 1964 S.C. 922, 923 to 925 (Section 11, Hyderabad
General Sales Fax Act).

2, V, Audiseshlah & Co. ¥. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1968) 22. §.7.C.
222 (Andhra Pradesh). (Section 5, Andhra Act).

3, Kantilal Babulal v. H. C. Patel, A.t.R. 1968 S.C. 445, 448, Para
9; 170७४ 1.8.C.R. 735, (Section 12-38, Bombay Sales Tax Act,
1946).

4, State of U.P. v. Annapurna Biscuit Mfg. Co. (1973) 1.8.C.R. 668
(dated 3rd May, 1973). A.LR. 1973 S.C. 1333 (uly). (Section
294, U.P. Act).

142


143

competent to pass a law for the deposit of that amount in the
Government Treasury.

The U.P. Legislature had, through an amending Act, sub-
stituted the following provision (in place of the old section)
in the U. P. Sales Tax Act—

“294. (1) Where any amount is realised from any person
by any dealer purporting to do so by way of realisation
of tax on the sale of any goods to such person, such
dealer shall deposit the entire amount so tealised into
the Government treasury, within such period as may
be prescribed, notwithstanding that the dealer is not
liable to pay such amount as tax or that only a part of
it is due from him as tax under this Act. *

(2) Any amount deposited by eny dealer under sub-section
(1) shall, to the extent it is not due as tax, be held
by the State Government in trust for the person from
whom it was realised by the dealer, or for his legal
Tepresentatives, and the deposit shall discharge such
dealer of the liability in respect thereof to the extent of
deposit.

(3) Where any amount is deposited by any dealer under
sub-section (1) such amount or any part thereof shall,
on a claim being made in that behalf in such form us
may be prescribed, be paid to the person from whom
such dealer had actually realised such amount or part,
or to his iegal representative, and to no other person:
“Provided that no such claim shall be entertained after
the expiry of three years from the date of the order
of assessment or one year from the date of the final
order on appeal, revision or reference, if any, in Tespect
thercof, whichever is later.”

6.4. The constitutional validity of this Provision was chal-

Jenged in the Allahabad High Court, which declared it as un-

Constitutional. There was an xppeal to the Supreme Court (on ©

a certificate granted by the High Court), The Supreme Court
dismissed the appeal, relying on its two earlier decisions. The
first was Commissioner of Sales Tax ४. Ganga Sugar Corpora-
tion Lid.,’ in which the Supreme Court had declared a similar
Provision {section 8-A(4)] ultra vires the Constitution. Section
8-A(4) read as follows:—

|, Conwnissioner of Sales Tax y. Ganga Sugar Corparation Ltd. 1970)
25, 51.6. [55 (S.C). (Section BA, ए, 9, Act). ‘

Earlier |
cases relied
Te


Arn Andhra
Pradesh
case.

A cass
from Bihar.

Three
aspects
considered,

144

“8-A(4). Without prejudice to the provisions of clause
(8) of sub-section (2) of section 14, the amount
realised by any person as tax on sale of any goods
shall, notwithstanding- anything contained in any
other provision of this Act, be deposited by him in
the Government Treasury within such period as
may be prescribed, if the amount so tealised ex-
ceeds the amount payable as tax in respect of that
sale or if no tax is payable in respect thereof.”

The second case was Abdul Quadar & Co. v. Sales Tax
Officer, Hyderabad." In that case also the Supreme Court had de-
clared section 11(2) of the Hyderabad General Sales Tax Act,
which required the dealers to deposit tax wrongly collected by
them in the Government Treasury, to be wire vires the Consti-
tution.

6.5. In another judgment ‘of the Supreme Court,” section
20A of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, (which was substantially simi-
lar to section 29A of the U.P. Act?) was held to
be void, The question which the Supreme Court posed to it-
self was—“Is there any entry in List वो. or List I of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution under which the State
Legislature could make such a law?”

Tt was contended before the Supreme Court that Entry 54
in List EI or in the alternative, entry 7 in List गा gives suiti-
cient power to the State to legislate on the subject under dis-
pute, However, the Court rejected this contention, and dismiss-
ed the appeal, and declared the provision of the Bihar Act as
ultra vires the Constitution.

Tt is needless to state that the Supreme Court decisions
have been applied by several High Courts.‘

6.6. What, then, would be done to clarify the position ? We
consider three aspects in this contert—

(a) the position under the ordinary law as to the effect
of mistake of law;

1, Abdui Quadar & Co. ९. Sales-Tax Officer, Hyderabad, (1964)
15 §.T.C. 493, Ant. R. 1964 S. C. 922.

2. Asoka Murketing Lid. y. State of Bihar, (1970) 1 S.C.N.R. 283,
(1970) 1 S.C.C. 354. (Section 20 A, Bihar Act).

3. Para 6.3 supra.

4, Lakskininarayana Commercial Corp. ¥. C. 7-0 (1972) 29 5.7.0.
527 {Andhra Pradesh).


145

(b) the proper course to be adopted;
€c) the constitutional position.

(a) Ordinary law as to effect of mistake of law

6.6A. The Supreme Court has held’ that if it is established
that a payment, even though it bea tax, has been by a
party labouring under a qistake of law, the party is entitled
to recover the same, that the party receiving the same is bound
te repay or return it, and that no distinction can be made in
respect of a tax liability and any other liability on a plain
teading of section 72 of the Indian Contract Act.

6.7. The settled position in law, as regards the liability of Liability of
the State, as laid down by the Supreme Court,2-"-* is as State.
fotlows:—.

(a) Where tax is levied by mistake of law, then ordi-
narily it is the duty of the State, subject to any
provision of the law relating to sales tax, to refund
the tax;

(0) If refund is not made, remedy through court is
open, subject to the same restrictions and also io
the period of limitation, namely, three years, from
the date when the mistake had become known to
the person who had made the payment by mis-
take.

(c) The High Courts have the power, for the enforce-
ment of statutory rights and fundamental rights, to
give consequential relief by ordering repayment. of
money realised by the Government without the
authority of law The power is, of course, dis-
cretionary.

1. Sale? Tax Officer v. Kanhtiya Lat, AWT.R. 1959 S.C. 135;
(1959) S.C.R. 1356.

2 ‘Stare of Kerala v. Aluminium Industries (1965), 16 5. T. C. 689
(8:0.), referred to in the Yearly Digest (1965) K.L.R. $28.

3, State of Madhya Pradesh ४. Shailal Bhai, AYR. 1964 S.C.
1000, 1019. para 14 to 17.

4, Gill & Co.v. Commercial tax Officer, Civil Appeal No. 1580-
1595 of 1967 dated 9-2-1968 (1968) S.C, Notes 80; (1968)
22 ST.C, 524 (8. ८.)


Liatitity of
ihe dealer.

Three
Ferles in-
volved,

State to
secure re-
storation 16
citizen.

146

6.8, These propositions deal with the liability of the State
to refund moncy illegally realised. The liability of ihe dealer
to refund, to the citizen, the amount iHegally realised cannot also
be disputed. It is well settled that a person who is illegally made
10 pay a tax is entitled to refund.t

6.9. It should be remembered that there are three parties
involved in the question which is under consideration. First,
there is the citizen who has becn illegally deprived of a certain
amount of money under the guise of tax; secondly, there is the
dealer who, knowingly or otherwise, has recovered the amount
from the citizen without the authority of law: and thirdly,
there is the Government which, as a sovereign, is naturally
anxious that the amount should be refunded to its rightful
owner, that is, the citizen,

6,10. Not much argument is needed in support of the pro-
position that the State, as the sovereign charged with the ad-
vancement of justice, ought to see that what belongs to the
citizen is restored to him. The machinery by which this objec-
tive is to be achieved, and the provision to be made to achieve
it and other matters, are matters of detail rather than of prin-
ciple. A legislative provision dealing with this problem must
take us to the point of the ultimate destination of the amount.
The provision in most State laws relating to Sales Tax leave
the matter al the stage of vesting the money in the State, or
satisfy themselves with prescribing penalties for the illegal
realisation of tax. It is obvious that if a satisfactory legislative
formula can be devised which carries out the objective men-
tioned above in the fullest manner, it would not only advance
substantive justice, but also make for a clarification of the law
in a field where some such clarification or declaration of the
law appears to be.eminently needed. The general proposition
in the Contract Act? for restitution gives effect to a well-cata-
plished principle of the common law; and what is needed is a
provision which works out this principle in the particular field
of taxation in था effective manner.

1, of. section 72, Contract Act.
2. Section 72, Indian Contract Act, 1972,


147

(b) Constitutional Position
6.11. The present constitutional position is clear. The const
legislative power to deal with the disposition of amounts collec- tion,
ted illegally as sales tax is not relatable to the taxing power of
the States,! and it would seem that this power can be derived
only from the residuary legislative power, which vests in the
Union,

(c) Proper Course

6.12. That being the position, the proper course would be Parliament's
to enact Central legislation on the subject of amounts illegally Power under
collected by any person from members of the public by way ary power
‘of tax though not chargeable as tax. Since legislative power °""%
in this regard does not fall within any particular taxation entry,”
it would fall only under the residuary power, which rests with
the Parliament. Therefore, the proposed provision could be
made applicable to all amounts levied under the guise of tax,
but not so legally leviable.

6.13, As to the cnact content of the provision, some think- Precedent
ing is required. ‘The usual provision in the State Sales Tax j/onted 2
Act does not go to the fullest length. Then, there is the precedent Tax At
adopted in the Income tax Act, but it is net completely ap- 2०७ consis
propriate, The theoretical basis for the proposed provision dered,
would, of course, be unjust enrichment,’ but the practical pro-
blem is, how money belonging to a member of the public should
be made to reach him back. We think that it would be ए४०-
ful to provide that if a dealer or other person holding such
money cannot prove that he has paid it to the rightful owner,
he should be required to pay it into the State Treasury, and
failure to do so should render him Sabie to prosecution and
punishment.

6.14. It is hardly necessary to provide administrative penal- No need to
ties for failure by the dealer or the person to deposit this amount. PIovide ad-
However, the Sales Tax Inspector or other officcr examining the penalties.

Sec decisions cited in para 6.1 (0 6.5, supra.
Se para 6.11, supra.

Constitation Seventh Schedule, Union List, entty 97.
Section 276B, Income Tax Act, 1961.
of. Section 72, Contract Act, and para 6.5, supra.

Peon


Kecommen~

dation to

enact sepa-
Tale Jaw re-

garding
amount i}

legally col-

lected as
taxes.

148

accounts can, if he finds that a violation of the proposed statu-
tory requirement has been committed, initiate suitable criminal
proceedings.

6.15. We, therefore, recommend that a legislative provision

somewhat an the following lines, should be made by a separate
law.

“(1) Where any person other than a public officer’ has,
purporting to act in pursuance of any Jaw impos-
ing a tax, realised from any other person as tax
any amount not legally due from such person as
such tax, he shall’, unless he proves that he has
refunded the amount to that person or has other-
wise accounted for the amount in accordance with
such law,—

(a) deposit the amount so collected without delay in
the nearest Government Treasury, and

(0) shall by general or special notice intimate the par-
ticulars of the case to that person and to the
authority to whom he would be liable to account
if the amount had been legally due as tax.

“(2) All amounts received under sub-section (1) shall
be credited to the public account of India, or to the
public account of the State‘, as the case may be;
but the Union of India or the State, as the case
imay be, shal! be liable to refund the amount to the
person from whom it was realised.

(3) The Central Government or the State Government,
as the case may be, shall cause public notice to be
given* every six months of the receipt of such
amounts, giving the prescribed particulars.

(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in’ any
law or contract, whén any dmount is deposited -by
a person in compliance with the provisidns of this

. To be implemented by 2 separate law.

. The expression ‘public officer” to be defined.

. punishment for contravention can be imposed.
|. See ariicle 266 of the Constitution .

+ Expression “presctibed™ to be defined.


149

section, such deposit shail constitute a good and a
complete discharge of the Hability of that person
in respect of such amount to the person from whom
it was collected. .

(5) The person from whom the amount deposited in pur-
suance of this section was ccliected, shall be entitled
to apply to the authority to whom it was paid for
refund af the amount to him, and the said authori-
ty shall allow the refund if it is satisfied that the
claim is in order :

Provided that no such refund shall be allowed unless
the application is made before the expiry of the
period within which the applicant could have claim-
ed the amount from the person who collected it by
a civil suit, if his liability had not been discharged
in accordance with the provision of sub-section (4).

Provided further that ne claim for such refund shall be
rejected without giving the applicant a reasonable
_opportunity of being heard.

{6) Nothing in sub-section (5) shall affect the right
of the person entitled to refund of any amount
thereunder to file a civil suit for the recovery of
such amount against the Government; and the
period of limitation for such suit shall be computed
from the date of receipt or publication of the
notice under sub-section (3).”

6.16. Two other questions: relating to tax illegally collected Crimi
were raised duting our discussions, and may be examined al दिन for
this stage ; first, whether a dealer who deliberately collects as overcharg-
tax sum not legally due. is guilty of an offence, and second, if गिंड
he is not so guilty, whether a provision in that behalf should be
recommended. We deal with them below :

6.17. As to criminal liability fot over-charging tax, © the peace of
offence most probably committed by a dealer in the circums- cheating
tances mentioned above is that of cheating. In so far as is mate- Paria
rial for the present purpose, the relevant section in the Indian charging.

Penal Code", (dealing with cheating) punishes a person who,

1, Section 415, tead with section 420, LPC.


150

by “deceiving” another person, induces that person to do a cer-
tain thing,—in the present case, the payment of money not
legally due. The crucial word is the word “deceiving”. The
starting poiat in the search for guilt in a case alleged to be one
of cheating, is a consideration of the question whether there was
a “deception”. The Indian Penal Code does not define the ex-
pression “deceiving”. Roughly speaking, there is deception when
there is unteue representation (made knowingly), which in-
duces belief in the mind of the person to whom the representa-
tion is made, and which is intended to induce such belief,

Sarah 6.18. The first question, then, to be considered, is whether

unis to there is a representation by a dealer when he over-charges tax.
‘esea- Jt is well-established that a representation may be by words or
by conduct, Verbal assertions or direct representations are not
required to constitute deception. “Actions speak londer than
words”. In an English case often cited’, it was pointed out that
if a wrong-doer who pretends to be a college student, by putting
on clothes peculiar to the students of a particular college, goes
to a shop and thus obtains goods at credit, he would be guilty of
the (statutory) offence of obtaining goods by “false pretences’”,
even though he did not say that he was a member of the college.
In the present case, of course, there is really something more
than an implied assertion or assertion by conduct ; there is an
express demand. Hence there is no doubt that there is a re-
presentation. °

Represey 6.19. Another question to be considered, in regard tothe -

a matter of meaning of deception or representation is, whether a represen-

Taw. tation as to 4 ntatter of law constitutes deception. In England,
{in respect of the offence relating to false pretences), because
of the requirement that there must be a “false pretence”, the
general view taken was that there must be an untrue Tepresenta-
tion as to fact*. In the discussion of the law on the subject,
therefore, a distinction was usually made between a Tepresenta-
tion of fact (on the one hand) and a Tepresentation as to opinion,
or prediction, or promise (on the other hand). It was generally
stated that the “pretence” must relate to the present or the past,

1, Rex y. Barnard, (1837) 7 cat and P, 784.

3, See now, Theft Act, 1968, section 15.

3. Seotion 32, Larceny Act, 1946 (repealed) [see now, section 15 (4),
Theft Act, 1968].


१51

and not the future. On the specific question whether a rcpre-
sentation as to a matter of law would be covered by the siaty-
tory offence of false pretence, there was some uncertainty. Many
writers took the view that it was covered, but there was no direct
reported English case. The position has now been clarified by
the Theft Act. Section 15, of that Act punishes a person who
by “deception” induces the person deceived to do a certain
thing. One of the sub-sections of the Act which is important
for the present purpose!, is as follows :—

“(4). For the purpose of this section, “deception”
means any deception (whether deliberate or reck-
less) by words or conduct as to fact or as to law,
including a deception as to the present intentions of
the person using the deception or any other person.” |
6.20. Since, in India, the only crucial word is “‘deceiving?”, Significance,
Courts are, it appears, free to adopt a wider interpretation than “deceiving”.
was adopted by English Courts under the old statute’. After
all, such fraud as is deliberate, though not relating to 8 matter
of “fact”, ought not ‘to go unpunished. The way of the trans-
gressor Ought to be made as hard as possible. It is, therefore, a
proper view to take that if a dealer deliberately over-charges tax,
he is deceiving the customer, because he is, by his own act,
inducing the customer to believe that the tax is legally charge-
able. , ड़
6.21. No doubt, the absence of an effective penal provision Adequacy
would be deplorable, “both because the courts are reluctantly of iy
compelled to allow dishonesty to go unpunished and because af tum.
the serious waste of judicial time involved in the discussion of
futile legal subtleties*.” But, as stated above, the law is ade~
quate in India to deal with deception as to tax.

6.21A. As a matter of fact, many State Acts relating to Provision
Sales tax also contain provisions relating 10 punishment for over- fo Siate
charging tax; aad this provision in the State Acts would be
attracted, in respect of over-charging under the Central Sales
Tax Act, by virtue of the general provision in section 9(2) of

1, Section 15 (4), Theft Act, 1968 (Eng.).

2, Section 415, Indian Penal Code.

3. Para 6.19 Supra.

4, Note in (1955) 72 Law quarterly Review 183, quoted by Lord
Goddard C.J, in Russell ५, Smith, (1957) 2 Ali. E.R. 796, 797,


152

the Central Act,—particularly because it is now proposed to add
the word “offences!” in section 9(2).

Doubt us tea 6.22. No doubt, an objection could be raised that the sec-

Sue tions in the State Laws are themselves invalid, becausc, if tax is

Jaws usto pot legally chargeable, a provision imposing a penalty for illegal

overchare- charging falls outside the purview of the States’ legislative
power. There is some justification for entertaining such a doubt,
in view of the Supreme Court decisions®, already cited. Most
of them deal with the. civil aspect, but one relates to the penal
aspect. That was a case from Bombay and a provision in the
Bombay Sales Tax Act imposing a “forfeiture” of the amount
illcgally collected as tax was held to be void, as violating article
1901) (f) of the Constitution. The Court said that it “assumed”
that the Legislature had legislative competence to enact — the
provision. But, earlier, it stated that a Gujarat decision holding
that such a provision is incidental to the power to tax sale
“cannot be sustained.” We may, however, point out that the
provision in the Penal (0०06९ would apply’, in any case. Hence
the second question posed above® does vot arise, and it is not
necessary to introduce any amendment in the penal law on this
point.

1, See discussion relating to section 9, Central Sales Tax Act.
2. See Para 6.1 to 6.13 Supra.

. Kantilal Babwial v. H.C. Patil ALR. 1968 8.0. 445.

. Section 415, Penal Code.

. Para 6.20, Supra.

. Para 6.16, Supra.

3,
4.
5
6


CHAPTER 7

ESTABLISHMENT OF CHECK-POSTS FOR PREVENTING
EVASION AND ENSURING BETTER COLLECTION OF
' TAXES ON THE SALE OF GOODS

7.1, One of the questions which we have been asked to consi~ Introduc-
1 der is the establishment of check-posts for preventing evasion and
ensuring better collection of taxes on the sale of goods. We
assume that ‘check-pasts’, in this context, would be in the nature
of barricrs put up to ensure that in inter-state movement, goods
do not escape the tax lawfully leviable. Tt appears that some
* obscurity exists as to legislative competence to provide for such

check-posts. Because of this obscurity, our discussion will con-

centrate on legislative competence. {

Hi

‘ 7.2. The power of the Union to levy inter-state sales tax is Legislative
primarily derived from Union List, entry 92A under which (so

far as is materialt} a law can be made imposing a tax on inter-

state sale or purpose of goods. Now, it is well-settled! that the
legislative entries in the Constitution must be given the widest

possible interpretation and the Legislature is competent to enact

| provisions to check the evasion of ६857, The amplitude of the

पु legislative power in relation to measures for enforcement® is

‘ well-established.

7.3. On this principal, the imposition of interest on arrears Amplitude
of sales tax has been upheld. Though the State List, ontry 54, tries.
of the Constitution does not refer to interest, the power to charge
interest on arrears is regarded as incidental te the power to
impose sales 187५.

3, Board of Revenue ५, R.S. Thaver, AIR. 1968 S.C. 59, 64, (1968)1 S.C.R.
148, 20 S.T.C. 453, 66 I.T.R. 664.

. a, See 49th Report of the Law Commission, pages 7 to 9 para 13 to
i 19. (cases reviewed).
| 3, (a) Ravinchandra v. CLT (1954) 26 LTR. 758, (4955) 1 S.C.R, 829
(0) Balaji ५. 1.7.0. (1962) 2 S.C.R. 983, 43 T-T.R. 393,
. 4, B. Ram Chand ४. S.T.O. (1968) All LJ. 970, 972; 23 S.T.C, 42300.8.)

(Oak CJ. and T.P. Mukberji 73.

153


Suggestion
referred to.

Jedicial
decisions-——
Andhra
case,

Parliament
competent
to set up
check-post
under the
Central
Act.

154

7.4. We understand, however, that States have, in view of
certain judgments?-, urged* that there should be a provision in
the Central Sales Tax Act for setting up check-posts. We, there-
fore, proceed to a discussion of the case law.

7.5. As a starting point for discussion, we may take 2
recent case of the Andhra Pradesh High Court. Ht held sut-
section (3) and (4) of section 29 of the Andhra Pradesh Gene-
ral Sales Tax Act, 1957 to be beyond the legislative competence
of the State. Under those sub-sections, the officer-in-charge of
the check-post could seize goods not covered by way bills con-
taining the prescribed particulars. and could confiscate them if
the penalty levied was not paid. Ir was held by the High Court,
following a Supreme Court judgment®. that the power to con-
fiscate and scize goods was not ancillary or incidental to the
power to tax the sale or purchase of goods. We shall, in duc
course, discuss the judgment of the Supreme Court.

7.6. It seems to us, however, that the position should be
considered separately with reference to the Central Sales Tax
Act and with reference to the State Sales Tax Acts. So far as
the position under the Centrat Sales Tax Act is concerned, it is
obvious that the creation of check-posts and the conferment of
other powers including, if necessary, powers for the seizure of
goods, falls within the competence of Parliament. Whether or
not such a power is incidental to the power to levy taxes, is, in
the case of Parliament, immaterial in the present context because,
if Union list entry 92A does not give the power, Parliament has
it under its residuary legislative power. What precise amend-
ments should be made to provide for such check-posts and to
confer such powers is not a matter with which we are concerned.
at the moment, and we should make it clear that any provisions
that may be proposed in this regerd should take care to comply
with the fundamental rights, particularly, articles 19 and 31 of
the Constitution. But legislative competence of Parliament cannot
be doubted.

|. Tydgment reported in 27 S.T.C. page 1 and 27 S.T.C, page 4 (S.C).

. See pata 7.7 and 7.10, infra.
. Notes in the Ministry of Finance.
Anandpur District Co-operative Marketing Society L1d.

v. Special Assistance Commercial Tax Officer, (1972) 29 S.T.C. 649,
654, 654 (Andhra Pradesh).
. Cheek-post Office v. K.P. Abdullah, (1971) 27 S.7.C. 1
. See Para 7.7, infra.

sere

aw

ei eee


155

7.7. So far as the creation of check-posts for the purposes
of State Sales Tax Acts is concerned, there are two important
decisions of the Supreme Court to be noted. In K. P. Abdulla’s
easel, a section of the Madras Sales Tax Act? was at issue. Sub-
section (1) of that section authorised Government to set up
check-posts or barriers. to prevent or check the evasion of tax.
Sub-section (2) of that section empowered the check-post
officer fe stop the vehicle or boat at the check-post or barrier,
to keep it stationury as Jong as it may be reasonably necessary,
to examine the contents of the vehicle or beat, to inspect — the
records etc. and to take the name and address of the driver, the
owner of the vehicle or boat and the consignor and the consignee
0 the goods. Sub-section (3) of that section conferred power on
the check-post officer io seize and confiscate any goods under
transport in such vehicle or boat which were not covered by the
specified — documents, subject to certain procedural safeguards
and subject to an option to the person in charge of the vehicle
to pay, in licu of confiscation, a specified sum, including tax.
The Supreme: Court found the power to confiscate the goods to
be invalid, on the ground that such a power could not be said.
to be ‘fuirly and reasonably comprehended in the power to legis-
late in respect of taxes on sale or purchase of goods’, The
following observations of the Supreme Court are relevant :—

“sub-section (3) assumes that all goods carried in a
vehicle near a check-post are goods which have been
sold within the State of Madras and in respect of
which liability to pay sales tax has arisen, and autho-
Tises the Check-post Officer, unless the specified
documents are produced at the check-post or the
barrier, to seize and confiscate the goods and to
give an option to the person affected to pay penalty
in lieu of confiscation. A provision so enacted on the
assumption that goods carried in a vehicle from one
State to another must be presumed to be transported
after sale within the State is unwarranted. In any
event, the power conferred by sub-section (3) to
seize and confiscate and 10 levy penalty in respect
of all goods which are carried in a vehicle whether

1. Check-Post Officer, Coimbatore ¥. K.P. Abdullah, (1971) 278 T.C.
1; ALR. 1972 S.C 792, (1972) 2 SCR 817.

5. Section 42, Madras General Sales Tax Act , 1959.

20 M of Law/74—1E

Check-posts.
under State
Sales Tax
laws.


State Legis-
latures
competent
to estab-
lish check-
posts.

Constitu-
ronal
amendment
not appro-
Briate.

Check-posts
in inter.
Stats trans-
actions-
Rule struck
down as
dealing with
jnter-State
transac-
tions,

136

the goods are sold or not is not incidental or ancillary
te the power to lavy sates tax?”,

7.8. It should be mentioned here that sub-sections(1)and(2)
of section 42 of the Madras Act (which related to setting up of
check-posts and stopping of vehicles) were not found by the
Supreme Court ta be wanting in constitutional validity. What
was held to be void was sub-section (3). in one respect?. The
State Legislature can still create check-posts. The validity of
that power in the abstract is not denicd at all, But, if any power
to seize and confiscate? the goods is to be validly given, the legis-
lative provision conferrmg the power must bear in mind the
observations made by the Supreme Court, perticularly as regards
the invalidity of the rigid presumption of sale found in the
Madras Act‘.

7.9. We do not think that this position can be appropriately
altered by a constitutional amendment. Nor do we think that the
view taken by the Supreme Court departs from the view that it
has taken regarding corresponding provisions in the legislation
dealing with direct taxes. In fact, most of the judicial decisions
relating to the corresponding provisions in the Income-tax Act
are referred to in the judgment of the Supreme Court itscif. We
are mentioning this because a belief prevails in some quarters
that the position is different under the Income-tax Act.

7.10. The second case®,—Hansraj Bagrecha’s case—-
decided by the Supreme Court also relates to check~posts. But it
musi be noted that in thet case a rule made by the Government
of Bihar was struck down because it authorised restrictions on
inter-State transactions, — a matter admittedly beyond the
competence of the State Legislature. The rule in question® was as
foltows:—

“(1) No person shall tender at any railway station,

steamer station, air-port, post office or any other
place, whether of similar nature or otherwise, notified

1, Emphasis supplied,

3, See pare 7.7, supra.

4, Sec para 7.7, mupra.

4, See para 7.7, supra.

3, Hanaraj Begrecta y. State of Bihar (1971) 27 $. T. C. 4 (8. 2.3
6, Rule 31-B, Bihar Sales Tax Rules, 1959,


157

under section 42, any consignment of such goods,
exceeding such quantity, as may be specified in the
notification, for transaction io any place outside
the state of Bikar, unless such person has obtained a
despatch permit in Form XXVII-D from the appra-
priate authority referred to in the Explanation to
tule 31 and no person shall accept such tender unless
the said permit is surrendered to him.”

It is plain that a State Legislature has no competence to make
such roles regarding inter-state sales. But the position of the
Union Parliament is obviously different, and the judgment in the
above cases does not throw any doubt on the legislative power of
the Union.

7.11, Prima facie, therefore, there should not be any legal ne cans-
Gifficulty in regard to the insertion of a provision for the establish- titutional
ment of check-posts or the adoption of other measures, which “culty.
may be reasonably necessary for preventing the evasion of the
tax levied under the Central Sales Tax Act. Any objection under
article 301 of the Constitution could be met by relying article
302.

What precise provisions should be made, is a matter of admi-
nistrative charactera and we suggest that the Department con-
cerned may, if it regards the establishment of check-posts (or
the adoption of other measures) necessary for the proper en-
forcement of the Central Sales Tax Act, chalk out en outline of
such measures, and process the matter in consultation with the
Ministry of law. As already pointed 007, the provisions of
articles 19 and 31 of the Constitution will have to be borne in
mind when drafting such provisions.

3, See Para 7.6 supra.


CHAPTER 8

OTHER QUESTIONS—DEFINITIONS

8.1. So far, we have dealt with questions specifically raised
in the letter of reference. Certain other related questions concern-
ing the Central Sales Tax Act, though not mentioned in the
letter of reference, will now be considered.

8.2. The first question relates to the meaning of the expres-
sion “customs frontiers”. Under section 5 (1) and 5(2) of
the Act, the transfer of shipping documents after the outgoing
goods have crossed the “customs frontiers of India”, is regarded
as a sale in the course of export. and conversely, where the sale
takes place before the incoming goods have entered the customs
frontiers of India, it is regarded as a sale in the course of import.
The result is that if the sale takes piace after the incoming goods
have entered the customs frontiers, it is not a sale in the course
of import.

Now it may be noted that the Supreme Court has, in one
case! interpreted the expression ‘customs frontiers’ as meaning
or denoting the customs frontiers as defined* for the purpose of
the Customs law. In that case, the State raised the contention
that the sales in question (i.e., sales effected while the goods were
in the Madras harbour), were not sales in the course of import,
as the documents of title were handed over by the assessee to the
buyers after the ship had crossed the ‘territorial waters’, Accord-
ing to the State, the expression ‘customs frontiers’, occurring in
section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, was co-termi-
nous with the extent of the ‘territorial waters’ of India, as fixed
by the Proclamation, dated March 22, 1956 issued by the Presi-
dent of India. According to the State, the import was complete
when the ship carrying the goods from a foreign port entered
the territorial waters, and any sale by the importer, by transfer
of documents of title to the goods subsequent to such entry,
would not amount to sale in the course of import. On the other
1, State of Madras v. Daver & Co., AAR. 1970 8.0, 165, 167, para 7.

38, Defined in section 3A, Sea Customs Act, 1878 (repealed).

158


159

hand, according to the assesseec, ‘customs frontiers’ in
section 5(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act, must be read,
to analogous to ‘customs barriers, and, wher it is so read, the
position would be that a sale effected by transfer of documents of
title before the goods have crossed the ‘customs barrier’ would
not be liable to tax under the Madras Act, even though the
goods have entered the territorial waters, and thus crossed the
“customs frontiers”.

The Supreme Court upheld the contention of the State of
Madras and agreed with the former interpretation.

8.3. This decision of the Supreme Court was rendered with Position und-
Teference to an asscssment year when the Sea Customs Act of ger the ge
1878 was in force, as the assessment in question related to the 1962.
assessee’s turnover for 1957-58. But the problem can survive
under the Customs Act, 1962 also, because, under the /attcr Act,
the definition of ‘India’ includes Indian territorial waters, The
question could arise whether ‘customs frontiers’, in the Centrat
Sales Tax Act, means the frontiers of “India” as defined in the
Customs Act,—which includes territorial waters.

8.4, The result of the interpretation placed by the Supreme Difiicutties
Court? is, that if, after the goods being imported have crossed 0 PY |
the “customs frontiers” (as interpreted by the Supreme Court) position.
but have not yet reached the “customs barriers” as usually
understood, a sale takes place by transfer of shipping documents,
the sale is not regarded as taking place in the course of import.

Local sales tax is, therefore, Jeviable on such sales. Now, it
has been stated? by orde circles that this interpretation will
eause practical difficultics.

Apparenily, the practicul difficulty likely to be caused is in
relation to determination of the actual location of the goods
at the time of sale, with reference to customs frontiers, which,
after all, are not visible like barriers on the shore. The ex-
Pression “customs fronticrs” was given a vide meaning in the
old Sea Customs Act, or to state the position in terms of the
Present Customs Act, 1962,—“territorial waters” have been

1. As to ‘custo.ns barriers’ see para 8.6 infra.
3. Para 8.3 and 8.4 supra.
3, Notes in the Finance Ministry.


160

included withia ‘India’—because such a wide connotation is con-
sidered necessary for the purposes of the enforcement of the
customs law, particularly for surveillance and similar purpose.
But, in practice, the actual checking of the goods mostly takes.
Place not at the edge of the national territorial waters, but at
a “customs station”, when the goods cross the customs barriers.
The expression “customs station” has a statutory connotation?
and can be conveniently utilised.

Recommen-
dation to 8.5. It would, therefore, be convenient from the practical

gets crass s- Pont of view—and theeretically unobjectionable—it the ex-
toms, fron- pression “crossing the customs frontiers” is defined, for the pur-
5: Pose of the Central Sales Tax Act, in the following terms®-* ;--

“(aa) ‘crossing the customs frontiers’ means crossing the
limits of a customs station? established by or under the
authority of the Central Government for the Purpose of
the Customs Act, 1962, and its grammatical variations
and cognate expressions shall be construed accord-
ingly.”

We recommend an amendment of section 2 of the Central
Sales Tax Act, accordingly.

Expressions 8.6. It may, incidentally, be noted that the Customs Act,

used in the 4 कि
Customs? 1962, does not use the expression—

Act, 1962, (8) ‘customs frontiers’, or
(b) ‘customs barriers’.

The expression “customs waters” is used in section 115 of
that Act. The expression “land frontiers” is used in sections
105 and 109 of the Customs Act, 1962.

The expression “customs barriers” has been used in the
case-law, including the second Travancore case (as reported in
the Supreme Court Reports), and the expression “customs
frontiers” also occurs in some of the reported cases under the
Central Sales Tax Act.

1. No definition ef “Customs barriers” could be discovered in the Customs

Act. See para. 8.6 lafra.
3. Section 2(13), Custums Act, 1962, read with section 2(10) section

2(12), section 2(29), and section 7.
3, To be inserted as section 2aa) in the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.

4, This is not intended to be a precise draft.



161

8.7. The word, ‘export’, which is one ef the crucial words io
section 5, has created some problems. Jt has been held*, that
in the context and setting in which the expression ‘export out of
the territory of India’ cccurs in Part XVIM of the Constitution,
it is not sufficient that the goods were merely moved out of the
territory of India, but that it is further necessary that the goods
should be intended to be transported to 8 destination beyond
india, so that they were in the course of ‘import’ into some
ciher locality outside India. In other words, the concept of ex-
port, according to this view, postulates also the concept of ‘im-
port’. There should be two territories; and there is no ‘export’
of goods if the goods are intended to be taken out of the country
without any intention of their being landed in specie in some
foreign port. Now, it has been  stated* that this interpretation
Tesults in the levy of local sales tax on sales of coal, aviation
feel and other supplies to ships or airlines involved in interna-
tional carriage,

8.8. Some of the rclevant cases on the subject are summarised
below :

In State of Kerala v. Cochin Coal Co,> the question decided
was, whether the sale of bunker coal was in the course
of export. Bunker coal was stocked at Candle island
in the State of Madras. Jt was sold to steamers call-
ing at the port of Cochin in the State of Travancore-
Cochin, and delivered there. The assessee contended,
that no sales tax could be levied on these sales, since
they were cither sales “in the course of export” or “in
the course of Inter-State trade”, and therefore, exempt
under which sales falling within the Explanation to
Constitution, or under the Government notification
under which sales failling within the Explanation to
article 286(1)(a) made during a particular period
were exempted from liability to pay a tax. It was held,
that the delivery was for coasumption within the State,
and the sale fell within the Explanation of Article
286(1) (a), and though the sales were in the course
of inter-State trade falling within article 286(2) the tax
was validated by the Sales-tax Validation Act, 1956. It

1. See Supreme Court cases cited in pata. है, है infra.

3, Notes in the Ministry of Finance.

8, The State of Keruta aud Others y. The Cochin Coal Company Ltd.
(1961) 2 8. C, R. 219; A. ER. 1961 5. C. 40g, 410.

Section 5—
Meaning of
‘export’.

Case Law.


162

was also held, that the sales were not made “in the
course of export”, aad did not fall under article 286
(1) (b), and that for article 286(1) (6) to apply, it was
not sufficient that the goods merely moved out of the
territory of India, but it was also necessary that the
goods should be intended to be transported to a desti-
nation beyond India.

A similar point was raised in Burnuth Shell Oi Storage and
Distributing Ca. of India Lid. v. the Commercial Tax Officer’,
where the sale was of aviation spirit to international aeroplanes,
and an exemption from taxation was claimed on the ground that
the sale was in the “course of export”. The sales were howcver
held to be excluded from the phrase “in the course of export”,
because there was no destination into which the aviation spirit
could be said to be imported, the sale being for use in the course
of the journcy. Explaining the meaning of the word “export”,
Mr. Justice Hidayatullah said that the test in he case of exports
was that the goods must have a foreign destination where they
could be said to be imported.

“Jf the goods arc exported and there is a sale or purchase
in the course of that export, and the sale or purchase
cceasions the cxport to a forcign destination, cxemp-
tion is earned... The crucial fact is the sending of
the goods io a foreign destination—where they
would be reccived as imports?. The two notions of ex-
port and import, thus, go in pairs.”

“Applying these several tests to the cases on hand, it is
quite plain that aviation spirit loaded on boatd an
aiccraft for consumption, though taken out of the coun-
try, is not exported, since it has no destination where
it can be said to be imported, and so long as it does
not satisfy this test, it cannot be said that the sale was
in the course of export. Further, 88 has already been
pointed out, the sale can hardly be said to occasion
the export. The seller sells aviation spirit for the use
of the aircraft, and the sale is not integrally connected
with the taking out of aviation spirit. The sale is not-
even for the purpose of export, as explaincd above.

. Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of india Lid, v. The
Commercial Tax Officer, (1961) 1 3. 0. R. 902, 921, 923; A. 1. R. 1961
8. C315, 323, 324; 11 5. T. 0. 764.

, Emphasis supplied.



163

Jt docs not come within the course of export, which
requires an even deeper relation. The sales, thus, do
not come within article 28601) (b).”

‘These decisions were noted, in a diffcrent context, in the
Report of the Law Commission on Khosla's case. At that time,
however, the question to be considered by the Commission was
a marrow one, namely, whether the proposition Jaid down in
Khosia's case required to be modified.

8.9, The questicn has now bera raised?, whether, in view of The quer |
the effect of these decisions on liability to local sales tax, the yan ot | madi
position should not be modified, Under section S(1) of the position.
Central Sales Tax Act, a sale or purchase shall be deemed 10
dake place in the course of export, if the sale or purchase occa-
sions “export”.

The Central Sales Tax Act has no definition of the expression
“export”, and, as construed by the Supreme Court, that expres-
sion means the taking of goous out of India ro a Place Gutside
india®, Vf there is no precise or single destination for goods,
then, according to the interpretation placed by the Supreme
Court there is no “export”. This has led to the sale of fnel to
international carrier being (axud by the States.

8.10, One cannot be dogmatic as to whether this imterpre- Reason
tation requires modification. If, however, it is felt that the present justiiying
position causes hardship to aircraft and ships purchasing fuel, tion of the
by rendering them fiable to local taxation, we do not sce any present
objection to the law being amended so as to regard such tran tation of
sactions as in the course of export. ‘export’.

The teasons thar would justify a special provision for fuel
supplied to international carriers are many. Unless there is uni-
formity in the levy of sales tax om such fuel, airlines or other
international carriers would have a tendency to uplift fuel at @
place either in a non-taxing country outside India or from States
within India where the taxation is low. This aspect is directly
connected with imernational tradc, and with the prevention of
discrimination between States.

4, 30th 8०0७1, pages 48 and 49 paragraphs 104 and 106.
# See para 8.7, supra.
3, Para 8.6, supra.



Other
Teasons.

Explana-
tion tion 4,
ing
fuel.

164

Mereover, there is no direct benefit accruing to the Airlines
from the States. Unlike road transport owners (or other internal
carriers}, whe depend on the highways maintained by the State
Governments for the efficient running of their transport, airlines
or other international carriers derive no such assistance.

8.11. There are also other reasons, rclevant to federalism.
For example, the growth of aviation and international carriage
is imporiant for national defence, and for the development of
the country’s economy and the spread of its culture. Hence a
position which militates against such growth can. with propriety,
be modified.

8.12. Only a small percentage of fuel uplifted by aircraft from
a State (while operating scheduled international or domestic ser-
vices) is actually used by that aircraft in that State generally.

Again, the problem of modernisation and introduction of
larger and faster aircraft involves huge financial outlay and the
industry has, therefore, to conserve ils resources to the maximum,
in order to meet these growing needs.

The profit margin of the Air Transport Industry is also quite
small. Any increase in operating cost caused by a heavy State
levy of sales tax on fuel would have a crippling effect on the
Airline Industry. It may also affect the Tourist Industry, if on
account of excessive taxation, airlines reduce the services into
and operated out of India. This would entail loss of valuable
foreign exchange.

8.13. It may, therefore, be convenient to add* an Explanation
dealing with sale of fuel to an international carrier to be inserted
as follows in section 5, since one of the reasons in support of
the present position, as given in the judgment of Hidayatullah? J.,
is that the sale is not integrally connected with the taking out of
the goods.

“Explanation.—A sale of fuel to an international carrier
for the purpose of consumption in international
carriage shall be deemed to occasion export of the
fuel.”

J A Constitutional amendment does not appear to be necessary. The
proposed jegislative provision will fall within Article 286.
2, Burimah Shell cuse, AUR. 1961 $.C. 315, 323, Para 8.8 supra.


165

We do not think that any general defmition of ‘export? is
necessary.

8.14. We shall deal with another question which also pertains Section
to definitions contained in the Central Sales Tax Act. Most Sales ee
Tax Acts of States (as well as the Central Sales Tax Act}! define considers
‘gale’ as meaning a transfer of property in goods etc. for “each top’ int
or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration”, or in of sale.

similar terms.

Elucidating the expression “money consideration” occurring
in the definition of “purchase” in the Punjab General Sales Tax
Act, 1948, the Supreme Court? has pointed out, that the ex-
pression “valuable consideration” takes its colour from the pre-
ceding expression “cash or deferred payment”. If so, it can
only mean some other monetary payment in the nature of “cash
or deferred payment.”

8.15. In a Madras case,* however, the words “other valuable A Madras
consideration.” which occurred in section 2(n), Madras General case.
Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Madras Act 1 of 1959), were regarded
as covering a case where the assessee supplied gold jewels and (in
consideration therefor) received equal weight of gold and labour
charges for making the jewels. Here the goods were transferred
in lie of gold, but still the transaction was held to be a sale.

An Allahabad case‘ not cited before the Madras High
Court, takes a different view on this point.

8.16. This being the position, it would, be advisable to Recom-
clarity the law, by amending section 2(g), Central Sales Tax mendation
Act, so as to adopt the interpretation’ placed by the Supreme section
Court,® namely, that the expression “valuable consideration” 2(8-
means some other payment in the nature of cash or deferred
payment, We recommend an amendment accordingly.

1, See-seclion 12(e), Central Sales Tax Act.

+, Devi Dass v. State of Punjab (1969) 1 S.C.J. 19, 28, 29.

3. WR. Vadivel Achari ¥.jMadras Sales Tax Appellate Tridynat, (1969)
2M.LJ. 4 (DB, crilicised in (1969) 2 M.L.J. Journal) 9.

4. STC. ९. Ram Kumar, (1969) 19 S.T.C. 400 (Allahabad), (Manchanda

ere Beg J2)-
5, Devt Dass v. State of Punjab, Para 8.14, supra.
. Para 8.14, supra.



Intraduc-
tore

Section
8(2)(d)

CHAPTER 9
SECTION § AND THE RATE OF TAX

9.1. We now come to a question pertaining to the rate of
tax. The rate of tax under section 8 is to be calculated accord-
ing to a complicated scheme ; and the rate differs accordiog (1)
as the sale is to the Government of 8 registered dealer, (2) or
as the sale is to any other person. The rate also differs, in
the first case (sale to Government or registered dealers} if the
goods are meant (a) for re-sale, as distinguished from the case
where (8) they are meant for use in manufacture. In the second
case, (sale to a person other than Government or a registered
dealer}, the rate differs (3) in regard to sale of “declared goods,”
as distinguished (ii) from sale of other goods ; and, in both cases,
there is a special concession it the case of goods which cnjoy
exemption under the State Jaw, or goods, which, under the State
law, are taxable at a rate lower than 3 per cent.

9.2. The tax structure is thus somewhat complicated. The
scope for simplification is limited, so Jong as the present structure
is maintained.

93. There is a constitutional question concerning section
8(2) (७), which requires to be considered.

Under section 8(2) (b), the tax payable by any dealer on his
turnover, in so far as the turnover or any part thereof relates to
the sale of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce
net falling within sub-section (1}, shall, in the case of goods
other than declared goods, be calculated at the rate of icn per
cent, or at the rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such
goods inside the appropriate State, whichever is higher.

The expression ‘appropriate State’, as defined in the Act*
means, roughly, the State in which the place or business of the
dealer is situated.

166


167

9.4. Now, a question has arisen about the constitutionality
of this provision. The argument is to the effect that the pro-
vision for ten per cent rate violates the freedom of trade, in cases
where the State rate is lower tham ten per cent. Several other
arguments have been put forth, but only the above one has suc~
ceeded.—and that 100 only in the Madras High Court.1 We have,
while discussing? section 9 referred to certain decisions which
discuss s. 8(2){b) also. By imposing a higher rate for inter-
State sale, it is stated, Parliament discriminates against importing
States. The exporting State charge only the lower rate for
internal sales while charging ten per cent for inter-State sales,
which is unfair to the importing State.

9.5. A Supreme Court case?, State प्र, Nataraja Mudaliar, on
the subject may be discussed first. The background of that case
was as follows :—

In an earlier case. Larsen & Toubro Ltd. v. Joint Commercial
Tax Officer’, the Madras High Court (Veeraswami J.) had struck
down sub-sections (2) and (2A) and (5) of section 8 of the
Central Sales Tax Act, on the ground that they violated articles
301 and 303(1) of the Constitution, inasmuch as the differential
fates or exemptions in various States had an unequal burden on
same or similar goods, and this affected their free movement or
flow of inter-State trade and commerce, In State v. Nataraja
Mudaliar®, the Supreme Court reversed the Madras High Court
decision, and upheld the validity of the various sub-sections. Shah
J, delivering the judgment of the Supreme Court (for himself,
Mitter and Vaidyalingam JJ.) held:

>> >> नह rates of tax prevailing in different States on
transactions of sale in the diverse commodities are
undoubtedly not uniform. According to the High
Court, such a scheme was “obviously quite discrimi-
natory and considerably affected the freedom of
trade, commerce and “intercourse”, the differential

|. Case-law on the subject is discussed कलम (Para 9.10) and also in Para
413A to 4.137, supra,

. Para 413A to 4.13F supra,

3, Siate of Madras v. N. &. Nataraja Mudeliar, (1968), 22 8.T.C. 376
(Supreme Court) (Shah 4.3. .

4, Larsen and Toubro Lid. v. J.C.7.0. (1967) 20 8. 7. C, 150 (Mad)
(Weeraswami J.)

S.N. 3 supra.


168

rates or exemptions in various States imposing an
unequal burden on the same or similar goods which
affected their free movement or flow in inter-state
trade and commerce, and that a higher rate of tax
in a state worked as a barrier to the free movement
of similar goods to another state where there was
no tax or a lower rate of tax, and for trade in
particular goods declared or undeclared to be free
throughout the territory of India, the rate of iax or
exemption as the case may be must be uniform.
We are unable to accept the view propounded by the
High Court. The flow of trade does not necessarily
depend upon the rates of sales tax: i depends upon
a variety of factors'...... Instances can easily be
imagined of cases in which, notwithstanding the lower
rate of tax in 8 particular part of the country, goods
may be purchased from another part, where a higher
rate of tax prevails...... The rates of tax in force
at the date when the Central Sales Tax Act was en-
acted have again not become crystalised. The rate
which the State Legislature determines, subject to the
maximum prescribed for goods referred to in section
8(1) and (2) are the operative rates for these tran-
sactions ; in respect of transactions falling within sec-
tion 8(2)(b) the rate is between the range of two
and seven per cent. The rate which a State legisla-
ture imposes in respect of inter-state transactions in
a particular commodity must depend on a variety
of factors. A State may be led to impose a high
rate of tax on a commodity either when it is not
consumed at all within the state, or if it feels that
the burden which is falling or consumers within state
will be more than offset by the gain in revenue ulti-
mately derived from outside consumers. The im-
position of rates of sales tax is normally influenced
by factors political and economic. If the rate is so
high as to drive away prospective traders from pur-
chasing a commodity and to resort to other sources
of supply, in its own interest the State will adjust the
rate to attract purchasers, Again, in 2 democratic
constitution, political forces would operate against the
levy of an unduly higher rate of tax. The rate of

1, Emphasis supplied.


a Sees 1 जा

169

tax on sales of a commodity may not ordinarily be
based on arbitrary considerations, but in the light
of the facility of trade in a particular commodity, the
market conditions—internal and external—and the
likelihood of consumers not being scared away by
the price which includes a high rate of tax. Attention
must also be directed to sub-section (5) of section 8
which authorises the State Government, notwithstand-
ing anything contained in section 8, in the public
interest to waive tax or impose tax on sales at a lower
rate on inter-state trade or commerce. It is clear
that the Legislature has contemplated that elasticity
of rates consistent with economic forces is clearly
intended to be maintained... . . . The Central Sales
Tax, though levied for and collected in the name of
Central Government, is 8 part of the sales tax levy
imposed for the benefit of the States. By leaving
it to the States io levy sales tax in respect of a
commodity on intra-state transactions, no discrimina-
tion is practised, and by authorising the State from
which the movement of goods commences to levy,
on transactions of sale, Central Sales tax, at rates
prevailing in the State, subject to the limitation al-
ready set out, in our judgment, no discrimination
can be deemed to be practised......... Prevalence of
different rates of sales tax in the State which have
been adopted by the Central Sales Tax Act for the
purpose of levy of tax under that Act is, as already
mentioned, not determinative of the giving of prefer-
ence or making a discrimination. The view expressed
by the High Court that section 8(2), 8(2A) and
8¢5) infringe Article 301 and Article 303(1) cannot
be sustained.”

9.6. Before this judgment of the Supreme Court was delivered,
the question of validity of section 8(2) (0) had come up before
the Madras High Court in another case. There,’ the High Court
held section 8(2)(b) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, to be
void and ultra vires article 301 of the Constitution. Section
8(2)(b) provides that certain inter-State sales are subject to a
fixed rate of tax or the intra-State tax, whichever is higher.

1. Sitalakshmi Mills Ltd, ९. Deputy C.T.O, (1968) 22 S.T.C. 436 (Madras)
DB)


Conelu-

sion,

170

‘The Madras High Court held that the provision for differential
tates of taxation, provided in section 8, was uncoustitutional and
violative of the freedom of trade. commerce and intercourse
guaranteed by article 301. This was also the High Court's deci-
sion in Larsen & Toubro Ltd. v. Joint Conunercial Tax Officer’,
which was over-ruled later by the Supreme Court in State of
Madras 5. N. K. Nataraj Mudatiar** But the Supreme Court
jedgment in Stee ef Madras v. N. K. Nataraj Mudaliar was pro-
nounced after the Madras judgment in the present case.

9.7. In a Delhi case, the Delhi High Court upheld the
validity of section 8(2) (७), following the reasoning in the Sup-
reme Court decision in State of Madras v. A. K. Natraja Mudaliar,
and declined to follow the decision in the Sitalakshmi Mitis Lid.,
case, decided by the Madras High Court.®

9.8. There is, thus a conflict of decisions amongst the High
Courts. But, in view of the Supreme Court judgement® it is
almost certain that the Supreme Court will over-rule the Madras
High Court judgment in the Sitalakshmi case, if the matter comes
up on appeal before the Supreme Court.

Hence, no recommendation for clarification need be made.

. Larsen & Foubro Ltd. v. Joint Commercial Tax Officer (1967) 20 §.T.C.
150 (Mad.)

. State of Madras v.N.K. Nataraj Mudaliay (1968) 228.T.C, 376

(Supreme Court} (Shab J.) .

Para 9.5, Supra.

. General Agencies (Indiu) Ltd. v. The Sales Tax Officer (1962) 29 8,T.C.
270, 273, 274, 277 (Delhi).

. Sitalakshmi Mills Lid.v. Deputy C.T.O. (1968} 22 S.T.C. 436 (Mad-

ras) (D-B.). Pata 9.6 Supra.

State of Madras ¥. Navara} Mudatiar See pata 9.5 supra.


CHAPTER 10

RETROSPECTIVE RESTRICTIONS UNDER
ARTICLE 286(3)

10.1. Under article 286(3) of the Constitution, Parliament Question
is competent to declare certain goods to be of special importance eee
in inter-State trade or commerce. The result of such 2 declara- tion vader
tion is that any law of a State imposing tax on the sale or auiele
purchase of the goods so declared is subject to such restrictions he retros-
and conditions (in relation to specified matters) as Parliament Pete.
may by law specify.

lt appears! that doubts have arisen as to whether. under this
article, restrictions having retrospective effect could be imposed
in regard to the powers of the State Legislature.

10.2. In this connection, an amendment regarding coal may Amend-
be referred to. In one case,? the Supreme Court had held that renarding
the expression “coal” in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, coat
1956 included charcoal. But States had been treating charcoal
as a non-declared commodity, und the need for amending the law
aml for giving retrospective effect to the amendment (to safeguard
State revenues) arose. But, it is stated, the matter was not free
from doubi. The am2ndment* was drafted as below, at the Sclect
Committee stage of the 1971 Bil.

“(a) for clause (i), the following clause shall be, and
shall bs decmed always to have been substituted,
namely :—

“(i) coal, including coke in all its forms. fut ex-
cluding charcoal :

Provided that during the period commencing on the 3rd day

of February, 1967 and ending with the date of commencement

res ॥

Comunissioner of Sales Ta.

gh, (Feb. 23, 1967). 19

3. Central 34005 Tax Ameadment 81, 1971, which ted tu ihe Amend
ment Act of (972.

jadhya Pradesh ¥. Jaswant Singh Charan
C. 469.

Vv
20 M of 1 4७/74--12


Select
Commil-
tee’s ob-
servations.

Amend.
ment 1॥05-
trative of
doubt on
the subject,

Ne scope
for
devising
suitable

mechanism.

172

of section 11 of the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972,
this clause shall have effect subject to the modification that the
words “but excluding charcoal” shall be omitted.”

10.3. The Select Committee? on the Bill of 1971 made the
following observations which explain the above* amendment.

“(i} Sub-clause (a}—This sub-clause secks to exclude
with retrospective effect, charcoal from the definition
of “coal” contained in clause (i) of section 14 of
the Principal Act. The Committee feel that the
retrospective effect to the amendment through this
Sub-clause excluding charcoal from the scope of the
term “coal”, should not effect the position during the
jutervening period from the 23rd February, 1967
(he date of the Supreme Court judgment in Jaswant
Singh Charan Singh’s case) and the coming into foree
of the amendment. It should be ensured that the
Supreme Court judgment would prevail during the
aforesaid period and “charcoal” will be treated as
declared goods, and no dealer would be required to
pay tax on “charcoal” at a rate exceeding the one
applicable to “coal” in the appropriate State. The
sub-clause has been amended accordingly.”

10.4, The above amendment has becn referred to as an
example of the doubt prevailing on the subject of retrospective
effect being given to a law falling within article 28603). 1
is stated? that there may be similar occasions in future when
retrospective cfiect may have to be given, and a suitable mecha-
nism has, therefore, to be devised.

10.5. We have given our careful consideration to the mater,
but we do not think that any suitable mechanism could be devised

1, Report of the Select Committe> on the Central Sales Tax (Amendinent)

Bill, 1971, (एफ August, 1972) page
5, Para 10.2, Supra.

3, Notos in the Ministry of Fiaance.

कक


173

in this regard as to article 286.4 Whenever a difficulty arises
as to the interpretation of words denoting goods declared as ¢s-
sential by section 14, (of the Central Sales Tax Act), the neces-
sary amendment will have to be made in the form in which it
was made? with reference to ‘coal’. There does not appear to
be much scope for any other device.

10.6. Hence, no amendment is recommended on the above .,
ir No change

point. recom-
mended.

1. Para 10.1, supra. oO a हु
2, The Central Sates Tax (Amendment) Act, 1972 (161 of 1972).

3, Para 10.3, supra.


Paints
dealt,
with.

Peculiasi-
ties of

moditics,

CHAPTER IT

CONCLUSIONS

11.1. We have, in the preceding chapters, made an attempt
to deal with such problems as appeared to require attention. The
mass of case law and the numerous controversies ercate an im-
pression that the Act bristles with problems. At the same time,
we would like to say that there is no room for grave despon-
dency.

11.2. We would, in this connection, Jike to note what has
been stated by an American writer? on the problem of evasion
of taxes on transactions relating to commodities.

“Where the payers of a particular tax are few in number,
the administration can exercise a careful and detailed
supervision, which is impossible where the number
of tax-payers is Jarge. A general sales or turnover
tax suffers from the circumstance that it must be
collected in small amounts from a large number of
tax-payers. The tax administration cannot enquire
carefully into the accounts of every little country
sider mill and every corner candy store. Instead. it
must trust to the honesty of the tax-payers and ta
such devices as the sample cheek, even though this
involves the loss of a substantial proportion of the
tax revenue through evasion. The alternative—to
allow an exemption which will eliminate the flood
of retuens from small dealers and small manufac-
turers—weakens the economic character of the tax.”

4. Schultz and Harris, American Public Finance, (1949), pages 533-534.

174


CHAPTER 12

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Tn this Chapter, we summutise our principal conclusions and
recommendations.

Point |—Definition ef “cusioms jrontic:

The expression “crossing the customs fronticrs” should be Chanter 8.
defined (for the purpose of the Centra! Sales Tax Act}, as mean-
ing crossing the fimits of a customs station established by or
under the authority of the Central Government for the purposes
of the Customs Act, 1962, and its grammatical variations and
cognate expressions shauld be construed accordingly.

Paint 2—Sale of fuel to international carrier

An Explanation dealing specifically with the sale of fuel to an Chapter 8.
imernational cartier should be inserted in section 5 of the Central
Sales Tax Act, as follows :—

“Explanation:

Sale of juel to an international cartier for the purpose of
consumption in international carriage shall be deemed to occas-
ion export of the fuel.”

Point 3—Section 2(g)—Definition of sate and element of
valuable consideration.

Section 2g), Central Sales Tax Act, should be amended so Chapter 8.
as to adopt the interpretation placed by the Supreme Court,?
namely, that the oxprossion “valuable consideration” (in the
definition of salc) means some pavment in the naire of cash or
deferred paynient,

Devi Bas ५. State of Punjab, (1967) 20 $.T.C. 430, 444, 445 (5.C.

[75


Chapter 1A.

176
Point 4—Works Coniracts.

The question whether the power fo tax indivisible contracts
of works should be conferred on the States has been raised. The
present posiden on the subject, and the possible alternatives, mav

he briefly stated thus:—
Gi) The Union has the power to tax works contracts
under Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Union List.
entry 97.
Gi) The power to tax inter-Srare works contracts has not,

so far, been exercised by the Union, and the defini-
tion of ‘sale’ in the Central Sales Tax Act does not

include Works contracts.

(iii) The power to tax works contracts within the State
also vests in the Union, under Union List, entry 97
(as interpreted in the judgments of the Supreme
Court).

The question whether Uke power should ar should not be
transferred to the States, is one of policy. But, fer the reasons
given in the Report, the Commission prefers its transfer to the

States,

If this alternative is adopted. there are several drafting
devices open, &.-—

(a) amending State list, entry 54, or
(फए) adding a fresh entry jn the State list, or

(c) inserting in article 366 a wide definition of “sale”.
The Commission prefers the last one. It would
avoid multiple amendments.

(४) Whether the course at (9) skould be adopted or not,
js a matter of policy, involving financial and political considera-

tions.

(४) In the alternative, power to fax intra-State Works
contracts could (if a policy decision to that effect is taken by the
Centre), be exercised by the Unica. and the necessary law
passed. The proceeds of the tax imposed thereunder could,
then, be distributed to the States. Article 269 of the Censtitu-
tion may have to be amended in that case.


177

{vi} Whether the course referred to at (¥) above, should
be adopted ar not, is, again, a matier of policy, involving financial
and political considerations.

Point 3—Hire-purchase.
‘The question of taxation of hire-purchase agreements not Clupter 18.

resultmg in sale has been raised before the Commission. The
2m position and possible alternatives may be briefly stated

Fhre-purchese not resulting in sate.

10) The Union has the power to tax hire-purchase not resul-
ting in sale, inter-Srate or within the State, under the Union List.
entry 97,

cits The power to tax svier-Siate hire-purchase (not resulting
in sale) under the Union List, entry 97, seems to have been
excreised by the Union, ride the definition of ‘sale’ in the Central
Sales Fax Act.

(19) The power to tax hire purchase not resulting in sale,
witha: tie Siate also vests in the Union, under Union List, entry
97 (as interpreted in the judgments of the Supreme Court),

The question whether the power should or should not be
transferred 10 the States, is one of policy. But, for the reasons
given in the Report the Commission prefers its transfer to the
States.

॥ this alternative is adopted, there are several drafting devices
open, ९.8५

(a) amending State List, entey 54, or
(b) adding a fresh entry in the State List, or

fe) inserting in article 366, a wide definition of sale.

The Commission prefers the last one (amendment of article
366). as it avoids multiple amendments. If, however, State List,
entry $4 (to add hire-purchasc) is amended, it is necessary also
to amend Union List, entry 923. so that inter-State hire-purchase
(not resulting in sale) may continue to be excluded from the
purview of the States, notwithstanding the addition of hire-
purchase to the State List.


Chapter 2.

178

In case this alternative is adopted, the following could be
added in the Constitution, 7th Schedwe, both at the end of
Union List, entry 92A and at the end of State List, entry 54
(after converting the existing full-stop into a semi-colon);

“transfer of goods on the hire-purchase or other system of
payment by jnstalments,? hire-porchase resulting in
sale.”

(iv) Whether the course at Gii) should be adopted or not,
is a matter of policy, involving financial and political considera-
tions.

{v) In the alternative, the power 10 tax intra-State hire-
purchase could (if a policy decision to that effect is taken by
the Union) be exercised by the Unicn, and the necessary law
passed. The proceeds of the tax imposed thereunder could, then,
be distributed to the States. Article 269 of the Constitution will
have to be amended for the latter purpose.

This witl, however, require separate legislation, as the Central

Sales Tax Act is confined to tax on inter-Staie transactions.

If this alternative is adopted, it is suggested that it will be
desirable to transfer the entire power 10 the Union, i.e., the power
to tax hire-purchase resulting or not resulting in sale (intra-State) ,
by amending Union List, entry 92A, This will be practically
convenient and check evasion.

(vi) Whether the course referred to at (¥) above, should be
adopted or not, is again a’ matter of policy, involving financial
and political considerations.

Hire purchase resulting in sale

(vii) Hire-purchase resulting in sale is governed by the posi-
tion applicable to sale in general, except that only the sale element
can be taxed under the name of sales tax. For suggestions in
regard to hire-purchase resulting in sale. see (v) above.

Point 6—Consignments.

What are described sometimes 2s “consignment transfers”
are not taxable as sales under the present law. The Union can

$8 won-obstante clause may be added ‘to the effect
that property need not pass.



179

tax them under ihe residuary power, but even if such a tax is
levied, the proceeds of the tax cannot be distributed to the States
without amending article 269(1) (8) and 269(3) of the Const
tution.

Therefore, if, as a matter of policy. consignments are to be
included in the Central Sales Tax Act, it will be necessary? first
to amend article 269(1){g) and 26973) of the Constitution, by
adding an Explanation to that article, somewhat on the foliowing
lines?:

“Explanation—For the purpose of this article, the ex-
pression “sale or purchase” inctudes a consignment
of goods occasioning their movement from one Place
to another, by a dealer to any other place of his
business or to his agent or principal.’

Point 7—Sale of controlled commodities

The position with reference to the taxability of sales of con-
trolled commodities has become uncertain, in cases where the
transactions are subject to statutory control. Although, in
theory, the rules on the subject appear to be clear, in practice,
their application scems to involve nice distinctions, based on how
far the consensual element has been abrogated. Accordingly,
it is recommended that the position in this regard may be made
clear, by a constitutional amendment amplifying the power of
the States. Article 366 of the Constitution should be amended
for the purpose, by inserting a wide definition of ‘sale’.

Point 8—Supply of goods by clubs ete.

A suggestion has been made that the Power of the States to
levy & tax on the supply of 8०००5 by clubs, societies and other
associations to their members may be made clear, in view of the
restrictive interpretation* placed by courts. No change on the

1, There are other pravisions की the Constitution using the expres-
sion “sale”, but they do not sgein to. require amendment in the
present context,

3. This is डर: iatended to bz a precise draft.
3. After the proposed amendment of the Constitution, the desired
amendments in Central Sales Tax Act coukl be made,
+, See, for example,
(a} Dv. C.T.O. ४. Binfield hidia Lid. ALR, 1968 5.0, 838,
10) FOTO. ६. Young Maw's tidian Asseciation, (1970) .C.C. 462,

Chapter 10.

Chapter 1D,


Chapter 3.

180

above point is, however, considered necessary, as such cases
would not be many. There is not much possibility of evasion,
and the sale is really by members to members.

Point 9—finpert and Export—Khosta’s case.

The judgment in Khosia’s case,’ which restricts the power of
the States as regards sakes in the course of import, is considered
at length. The recommendation is fer an amendment which will
give effect to the following propositions.?

(1) A purchase of goods made by an cxporier from a local
seller, for the purpose of exporting them in order to implement a
contract of sale with a foreign buyer, shall not be deemed to be
a purchase which has occasioned the export, even if it be a term
of the contract of purchase that the goods shall be exported and
even if, pursuant to such contrac. the goods are exported and
even if but for such term, the goods would not have been ex-

ported.

{2) A safe of goods made by an importer to a local buyer,
in order to implement a contract of sale with the local buyer,
shall nat be deemed to be a sale which has occasioned the impert,
even if it be a term of the contract of sale that the goods shall be
imported, and even if, pursuant to such contract, the goods were
imported and even if, but for such term, the goods would not
have been imported.

Chapter 4 Point 10:—~Reference ro State Sales Tax Law-—Section 9,

Central Sales Tax Act.

Section 9(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act applies the provi-
sions of the general Sales Tax Law of the State for the specific
purpose of the Central Sales Tax Act. The question has arisen
whether the ‘reference is to the State law as it existed in 1956
(when the Central Act was enacted) or whether amendments
made in the State law after 1956 can be taken into account.

There is also a doubt arising from the fact that an objection
of undue delegation may be raised with reference to section 9(2)
of the Central Act. To remedy such a situation, there are.
theoreically speaking, several courses open.

R. 1966 S.C, 1216; (1966) 5.0,8., 352.

1... KG. Khoste’s case,
2... This ig noc # draft.


isk

(i) First elernative—In the first place, instead of the
incorporating provision in section 9(2), the Union could frame
its own self-contained code of pro’ ns relating to assessment
of tax levied under the Central Act. Whether or not the Union
alse appoints its own assessing authorities for the purpose, is
immateriat

Instead of so appointing the assessing authorities it could
delegate the necessary powers to the State authorities. The only
difference would be that State authoritics will, then, be deriving
that power not from the State law read with section 9(2), but
from the Central Government.

(ii) Second alternative—The sccond alternative would be
to amend thc Constitution, and to provide there what is now
cantained in section 9(2) of the Central Sales Tax Act. For
obvious reasons, this is not a very convenient method.

Gii) Third alternative—The third alternative would be to
insert, in section 9(2) a particular date, say, “as in force on the
first day of April, 1974”. Initially, this date could be inserted by
adding the quoted words after the words “general sales tax law”,
wherever they occur in section 9(2) or elsewhere. Subsequently,
every year, by a short amendment of the Central Sales Tax Act,
the year then current (i.e. the year current at the time of each
subsequent amendment} could be substituted.

This would mean that the Sales tax law in force in the State
on the first April of the then current year would be attracted to
the Central Sales Tax Act. No doubt, if, after the Ist April of
one year and before the Ist April of the next year, a particular
State legislature makes any amendments in its owa Sales Tax
Law, those amendments would not be attracted. This situation
cannet, in theory, be avoided. The Union can, however, request
the States, by a general letter, not to make amendment in the
Sales Tax laws, during the middle of the year, as far as possible.

As a short term measure, the third alternative should be
adopted. Tn addition, as a long term measure, the first alter-
native should be adopted.

Point 11—Penalties—section 9(2) Central Sates Tax Act. Chapter 4.

There is some uncertainty as to how far section 9(2) of the
Central Sales Tax Act covers penalties leviable under the State

॥॥ point 12, infra.


Chapter 4.

Chupter 3,

182

Sales Tax law. The doubt arises because of absence af specific
mention of penalties.

One alternative (fo remove the doubt on the subject) would
be to insert the following sub-section in section 9 :—

“2¢A) In particular, and without prejudice to the gene-
rality of the provisions of sub-section (2), penalties
leviable under the general Sales Tax law of the State
shall also be leviable for the purposes of this Act, as
jf the tax under this Act had been levied under the
general Sales Tax law of the State.”

But this would not meet the objection of inequality which
has been raised in some cases’. To remove that objection, 8
better course would be to provide penalties im the Central Act.
[Details of the provision cannot be indicated, as that involves
several administrative aspects].

Point 12~-Central Saies Tax Act to be self-contained.

As regards the entire Central Sales Tax Act, the recommenda-
tion is that the Act should be self-contained. The specific amend-
ments suggested above* should, of course, be undertaken, as an
urgent measure. But, as a long term measure, it is desirable
to make the Act self-contained, in respect of matters for which
section 9(2), at present provides’.

Point 13—Punishment under section 10,
Central Sales Tax Act.

Punishment for the offence of making false statements in
declarations under the Act, should be dealt with on the basis
of the amount involved, that is to say, by regulating the punish-
ment according to the amount of tax which would have been
evaded if the statement by the assessee (discovered to be false),
had been acccpted as true. If, say, the amount of such tax
exceeds ten thousand rupees, or if the casc is one of a second or
subsequent conviction, the maximum punishment could be seven
year’s imprisonment. with a suitable minimum in other cases, the
maximum imprisonment could be threc years (with fine as an
alternatixe), but there necd be no minimum.

1. See Muha Lal Chokhani ¥. Commercial Tax Officer, (1991 28 S.T.C.

367, 373 (Cal)
2. Points 10 and
3, See also point 10 supra.

supra.


183

Tn chat case. section 10 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
could be revised as follows :—

“10. IE any person—
[(a) to (1) as in existing section}, he shall be punish-

(i) if the amount of tax which would have been evaded
if the offence had not been discovered or the amount
ilicgally collected. as the case may be, exceeds ten
thousand rupees. or if the case is one of a second or
subsequent conviction for an offence under this Act,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years but which shall not be less than six
qoonths, and with fine :

Gi) in any other case, with imprisonment for a icrm which
may extend to three years, or with fine. or with
doth ;

and when the offence is a continuing one, the find under sub-
cluuse (i) or sub-clause (ii) of this clause, may be a daily fine
which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during which
the offence continues.

Point 14—Mininuon punistinent—Relaxation of.

While inserting minimum punishment? it is not desirable to
insert any provision for relaxation.

Point 15--—Abetnient—Proposed section 108
Central Sates Tax Act.

A riew section should be inserted in the Central Sales Tax
Act as follows :—

“10-B. If a person abets or induces in any manner another
person to make and deliver an account, statement,
or declaration relating to any transaction chargeable
to tax under this Act, which is false and which
he either knows to be false or does not believe to be
truc, he shall be punishable—

(i) if the amount of tax which would have been evaded
if the declaration, account or statement had been

1, See, sapra. Point 13:

Chapter 5.

Chapter 5.

Abetment c
‘alse ac-
counts ctc.


Chapter 3

Chapter 5.

184

accepted as true. exceeds of ten thousand mipees
or if the case is one of a second or subsequent
conviction for an offence under this Act, with im-
prisonment for.a term which may extend to seven
years’, and with fine :

{ti} in any other case, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.

Point 16—Corperations : Proposed section 10-C.
Central Sates Tax Act.

The following section should be inserted in the Central Sales
Tax Act.

“10-C, (1) When a corporation is convicted of an
offence under this Act, it shall be competent to the
Court before which the conviction takes place, to pass
on the corporation a sentence of public condemnation,
in addition to any other punishment to which the
corporation may be sentenced.

(2) When such a sentence is passed, the court shall cause
the name and place of business of the corporation,
the offence, the fact that the corporation has been
so sentenced and any other punishment imposed, and
such other particulars as the court any consider to
be appropriate in the circumstances of the case,
to be published at the expense of the corporation
in such newspapers or in such other manner as
the court may direct.

(3) The expenses of such publication shall be recoverable
from the corporation in the same manner as fine.”?

Point 17—Publication of name of convicted individual.

A provision for publication of name of convicted individual
should be added* in the Central Sales Tax Act.

1, Minimura punishment not tegarde! as necessary in this case.
2, cf. section 547, Cr.P.C. 1898.
3. Tl could be put as section 10-D.



183

Point 18—Separuie law regarding amount iilegally collected as
taxes.

‘To facilitate and enforce recovery by the citizen of any amount
Wlcgally realised as tax by a private person (whether as sales
tax er any other tax), a separate law coniaining a provision
[somewhat on the following lines}, should be made? by Parlit-

ment :

“Where aay person other than # public officer? has,
purporting to act in pursuance of any law imposing
a tax, realised from any other person as tax any
amount not legally due from such person as such
tax, he shall*, unless he proves thar he has refunded
the amount to that person or has otherwise accounted
for the amount in accordance with such law, deposit
the amount so collected without delay in the neacest
Government Treasury, and shall intimate the parti-
culars of the case to that person by special or gencral
notice and to the authority to whom he would be
liable to account if the amount had been legally due
as tax.”

‘This is the proposed principal provisian’. The Treasury would,
of course. refund the amount deposited. to the person entitled.
Limitation for suit for refund should run from date of publication
‘of notice. Other incidental and‘ procedural provisions could be
devised, as may be considered suitable

Point 19—Check posts.

t has been stated that there is some constitutional difficulty
in regard to provisions for the establishment of check posts for
checking the evasion of tax on the sale of goods. A preliminary
cxamination of the case law, however, shows that there should
be no serious difficulty, if the provision is properly framed.

We would like to place on record ovr warm appreciation of
the valuable assistance we have received from Mr. Bakshi,
Momber-Sccretary of the Commission in the preparation of this

inplen by a seperate law.

‘The expression “Public Officer” to be defined.

. Punishment for contravention can be imposed.

h2 ceicvant eiaptec for detailed recommeadation,

Chapter 6

Chapter 7.


P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman
P. K. ‘Vripathi Member
$. 5. Dhavan Member
5. P. Sen Varma Member!
P.M. Bakshi Member-Secretary

Dated : New Delhi, the 20th May, 1974.

7. Shri S. P. Sen Warma has signed the report subject to a separate note,


LAW COMMISSION
Note by Member, Shri 5. P. Sen-Varma

1 regret that I have to differ from the view of my esteemed

Reasons for
a separute

colleagues regarding the scope and nature of the amendment of xote.

section 5 of the Central Sales-Tax Act, 1956. 1 think that
unless that section is made comprehensive as well as precise, as
far as practicable, by suitable amendments, doubts and ambigui-
ties regarding the scope and meaning of the section will persist
and they will not be likely to be removed by the two proposals
{negative in character) suggested in the majority report. I am
fortified in the view I have taken regarding the amendment of
section 5 by what 8. R. Das, J. (as he then was) said in his
dissenting judgment in the second Travancore case. He first
posed the question as to what was the scope of the ban imposed
on the States by article 286(1)b)? He felt, the answer would
depend on the meaning that may be ascribed to the phrase “in
the course of? occurring in clause (1)(b) of article 286. He re-
ferred to the unanimous decision of the Court in the first Travan-
core case according to which “whatever else may or may not fall
within article 286(1)(b), sales and purchases which themselves
occasion the exports or imports of the goods, as the case may
be, out of ot into the territory of India come within the exemp-
tion... ... ”, According to him, this was sufficient to dispose of
that case and it was not then necessary to decide what else might
fall within that phrase. Then Daa, J. said —

“This Court is now called upon to decide that point.”

(Vide para 48 of the judgment as reported in the A.LR.)

In my opinion, the two proposals of the majority relating to
the amendment of section 5 will leave the point still undecided
thereby keeping the door open for doubts, disputes and ambi-
Quities-

187
20 M of Law/74—13


188

I circulated this note without this paragraph and the few
subsequent paragraphs to the other Members cf the Commission
including the Chairman. The specific suggestions made in this
note were not before the Commission on any previous occasion
during our discussion although the matter was discussed in a
general way when J put forwacd my views that a comprehensive
amendment would be very likely io reduce chances of doubts and
ambiguities. But neither my view expressed at that time was
acceptable to my colleagues nor the specific suggestions now
made in this note have been agreed to by them before the
finalisation of theic views.

Before I close this topic I like to make a brief mention of
the objections made by the Chairman and other Members to my
specific suggestions during the discussions of their note and my
note.

In the revised draft note of the majority prepared after such
discussions substantially the same objections in a slightly different
Janguage have been given. These objections are, (1) “it would
not be quite appropriate to inscrt such elaborate provisions in the
Act” in view of the narrow problem before the Commission
arising from Khosla’s case, (2) any attempt “to cover other aspects
of import-salos and export-purchases is likely to create compli-
cations. The verbal formula that mav be thought of in this res-
pect would create intiicacies of iis own.”, (3) “while a detailed
discussion and claborate treatment of various aspects might be
appropriate in a judgment, it would be cut of place in 2 statutory
Provision of the nature under consideration.”

As regards objection (1), 1 may say that in view of the sharp
divergence of opinions since almost the very beginning, on this
complex subject not only in the highest judiciary of the land and
other Courts and authorities but also in the Law Commission
of India, we should try to ensure that section 5 which in a sense
explains and defines the scope of article 286(1)(b) should be as
clear as possible. In view of the history before us we should
not besitate to make elaborate provisions in the section in spite
of the narrow problem arising from Khosla’s case. And on a
perusal of the judgment in Khosla’s case it appears clear that
problem thrown up by it cannot be regarded as narrow because it


189

has several facets. In my view the suggestions of the majority
may make it necessary to make yet another reference to the Law
Commission on the samc subject as contained in section 5.

As regards objection (2), it is difficult to see why other neces-
Sary and relevant aspects of import-sales and export-purchases
should net be clearly specified in section 5. Because in present
section 5 this has not been done, brevity of the section has been
attained with serious consequences trailing behind in the shape
of ambiguities, doubis and disputes about the scope and extent
of the section.

So far as sales or purchases preceding export and sales or
purchases succeeding import are concerned, they may-——but only
may—be covered by the suggestions of the majority, but those
suggestions do not expressly take such sales cr purchases out of
the purview and cope of section 5 and article 286(1) (89) with
the result that again it may be agitated before the Supreme Court
that such sales or purchases come within the scope of that section
and that article. And who knows that the Supreme Court may
nat in the absence of clear language in section 5 in this regard
decide, in spite of the suggestions of the majority being incor-
porated in that section, to adopt the view which Das, J. (as he
then was) so elaborately and forcefully put forward in his dis-
‘senting judgmeat in the second Travancore case? A dissenting
judgment is as if it were, to use the word of a great Judge in
America, “brooding” in the heavens ready for descent and accept-
ance on carth at any time. In this way, the suggestions of the
majority may, if accepted, create more intricacies and compli-
cations because those suggestions of the majority do not speci-
fically exclude the first sale or purchase before the export and.
the last sale or purchase after the impert. Therefore the sharp
controversics as to whether they are sales or purchases in the
course of export or import will remain. I am fortified in this
view because Das, J. did not accept the view that the first sale
or purchase before cxport and the last sale or purchase after
import were sales or purchases for the purpose respectively of
export or import. His stand was that such sale or purchase was
so integrally connected with export or import that they formed
integral parts of such export or impert. In my suggestions, में
haye tried to make the position as clear as possible.

As regards objection (3), here again I respectfully differ. I
readily admit that human language is imperfect and slippery and


190

any unnecessary lenth and prolixity of language must be avoided
in a statute. But if after elaborate discussion and examination
of an enactment from various aspects With the assistance of the
members of the Bar, the Court has pointed out flaws, defects,
lacunae and ambiguities in the enactment, the framers of the
statute should make every attempt to remove those flaws, de-
fects, lacunae and ambiguities and for that purpose should not
fightshy of making the language of the enactment claborate in
so far as that is necessary, but no more. As Viscount Bryce
said in his Inaugural Lecture on February 25, 1871 on entering
the duties of Regius Professorship of Civil Law at Oxford —

“The power of stating a proposition of law in comprehensive
and exact terms wide enovgh to cover all cases con-
templated and yet precise enough to exclude cases
more or Tess similar, to which the role is not intended
to apply, is valuable to the text-writer and quite indis-
pensable to the framers of statutes.”

(underlined by me.)

Tf we look at the Indian Statute Book and the Statute Book
of any other English-speaking country, we shall find that they
abound in sections with elaborate provisions. Even the Con-
stitution of India has many articles which are very lengthy and
these lengthy articles occur in large number in Part XIJI—Fin-
ance, Property, Contracts and Suits (art. 286 occurs in this
Part), because provisions relating to these matters are in their
very nature very complex and intricate and to bring out their
scope, meaning and implications, elaborate provisions were felt
necessary.

व्‌ must admit, however, in all humility that human-being
being imperfect, a perfect statute has not yet been written nor
will it ever be.

1 now propose to deal with and discuss article 286(1)(b) of Introductory

the Constitution and section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 in an attempt to find out the exect scope and mesning of
these two provisions as they have been topics of controversy for
a long time. For this purpose I like to discuss in brief the
constitutional position in regard to sales taxes in general because
that may help us in forming a clear view of the particular matter
which is the immediate object of this study.


191

Reference The letter dated the 12th April, 1973 received from the
cone Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs constitutes the
in Apri, _ third reference from the Government of India to the Law Com-
1973 mission relating inter alia to the scope, extent, meaning and
implications of article 286 of the Constitution ; and as a maiter
of fact the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 was passed on the re-
commendations contained in the Commission’s report on the first
reference. The first reference was made shortly after the intro-
duction of the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Bill, 1956 in
Parliament in which there was a proposal to empower Parlia-
ment to formulate by law principles inter alia for determining
when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the course of
the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the
tertitory of India, This Constitution (Amendment) Bill on its
enactment became the Sixth Constitution {Amendment) Act,
Constitution 1956. By this amendment, a number of changes was made in
{Seth Amr the Constitution with respect to sales tax. These changes in
1956. brief were as follows :—

(1) A new entry 92A was introduced in the Union List in
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution whereby Parliament
acquired exclusive power to make law with respect to “taxes on
sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such
sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce |" formerly, Parliament’s power to make law was con-
fined to entry 92 of the Union List to “taxes on the sale or pur-
chasc of newspapers and on advertisements published therein”.
This entry 92 remains unchanged even now, Thus by new entry
92A, Parliament's power was enlarged to cover the power to make
Jaws with respect to taxes on the sale or purchase of goods
other than newspapers im the course of iuter-State trade and com-
merce. This amendment was in a sense in consonance with the
exclusive power to Parliamept to make laws with respect to
“inter-State ade and commerce” specified in entry 42 of the
Union List- We are not however much concerned here in this
note cither with the new entry 92A or with the provisions con-
tained in articles 301 to 307 which broadly speaking may be
fegarded as the commerce clauses of our Constitution.

(2) The second change was that a new entry 54 was subs-
tituted for the original entry 54 in the State List. Original entry
54 was as follows :—

“34. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than
newspapers.”


192
The new entry 54 reads as follows —

“54, Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than
newspapers subject to the provisions of entry 924 of
list 17.

The combined effect of these two changes namely, the in-
sertion of entry 92A in List I and the amendment of entry 54
in List II as well as of the substitution of new clause (2) for
the original clause in article 286 was that a State Legislature
was completely denuded of whatever power it had, to make laws
with respect to taxes on the sale or purchase of goods in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce by virtue of the origi-
nal clause (2) of article 286 and entry 54 cf List II as it stood
before the amendment of 1956.

(3) The third change brought about the Sixth Constitutional
Amendinent of 1956 was the insertion of a new sub-clause (g) in
clause (1) of article 269 whereby taxes on the sale or purchase
of goods other than newspapers in die course of inter-State
trade or commerce “shall be levied and collected by the Govern-
ment of India but shall be assigned to the States in the manner
provided in clause (2)" of article 269.

(4) The fourth change made by the Sixth Amendment in
1956 was the insertion of a new clause (3) in article 269 us
follows :—

“(3) Parliament may, by law, formulate principles for
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes
place in the course of inter-Siate trade or commerce.”

(5) In the fifth place, the Explanation to clause (1) of article
286 was omitted as it became unnecessary in view of the pro-
visions of new clause (2) of article 286. The Explanation which
was omitted laid down for the purposes of article 286 (1) (a), a
rule that “a sale or purchase shai] be deemed to have taken place
in the State in which the goods have actually been delivered as
a direct result of such sale or purchase for the purpose of con-
sumption in that State, notwithstanding the fact that under the
general law relating to the sale of goods, the property in the
goods has by reason of such sale or prrchase passed in another
State.’ The Explanation had also given rise to a great deal of
legal controversy and practical difficulty.


193

{6) Sixthly, for clauses (2) and (3), two new clauses (2) and
{3} were substituted in article 286 85 follows:—

“(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for deter-

mining when a sale or purchase takes place in any
of the ways mentioned in ctause (1).

(3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or

The

authorises the imposition of, a tax on the sale or
purchase of goods deciared by Partiament by law to
be of special importance in inter-State trade or
commerce, be subject to such restrictions and vondi-
tians in regard to the system of levy, rates and other
incidents of the tax as Partiameal may by law

specil

above analysis shows the far-reaching changes

Perliament made by the Sixth Constitutional Amendment in the

10 formulate
Tinciptes.

structure of the safes tax system of the country and in the
powers and jurisdiction of Parliament and State Legislatures

with respect thereto. It was for the first time in our constitu-
tional history that Parliament was empowered to formulate by
Jaw principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods
takes place in any of the following ways, that is to say ;:—

(a)

(०)

where such sale or purchase takes place outside 8
state fart. 286(1)(a)]:

wherc such sale or purchase takes place in the course
of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods
out of, the territory of India fart. 286(1)} (b)];

(०) where such sale or purchase takes place in the course

of inter-State trade or commerce [art. 269(3)1.

{N.B.—It seems! that the use of the word “when” in article
269(3) and article 286(2) and the use of the word “where”
in entry 92A of the Union List or in article 286(1), were not
intended to signify any distinction and difference because such
distinction and difference are not casy to discern im respect of
the same subject matter. It seems that these two different
conjunctions “when” and “where” were used to signify the same

situation:]

The object of these provisions was to make it clear that’a
State Legislature cannot make any law which may have the effect


194

of extraterritorial operation, that is, operation beyond and out-
side the territory of the State. That a State Legislature has
no such cxtra-territorial power of legislation is clear from the
provisions of article 245 and article 246(3) of the Constitution.
This however is not the case with Parliament in view of the
specific provisions of article 245(2). In this connection the words
“for the whole or any part of a Statc” in article 245(1} and the
words “for such State or any part thereof” in article 246(3) may
be noted.

‘The Law Commission in 1956 was invited by the Government
of India to make recommendations relating to the formulation
of principles in respect of the three matters specified above.

It may not be cut of place to mention here that there is no
specific entry in any of the three Lists in the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution under which Parliament has the power to
make 149 with respect to taxes on sales or purchases of goods
taking place outside a State or in the course of import or export
although Parliament may exercise such power under article 248
read with residuary entry 97 of the Union List. No such law has
however, been enacted by Parliament. The position therefore is
that at present there is no parliamentary Jaw with respect to taxes
‘on these two categories of sales and purchases and the Legislature
of a State has no power at all in relation to these cases because
powers of the States have been expressly taken away by article
286(1). Therefore, when in accordance with the principles
formulated by Parliament in section 4 and section 5 of the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act, 1956, any sale or purchase of goods is a sale
or purchase taking place outside a State or a sale or purchase
taking place in the course of import or export, such a sale or pur-
chase is not taxable at all under any law at present. The Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956 provides only for the imposition of taxes on
inter-State sales or purchases under Chapter II of the Central
Sales Tax Act, 1956. It may be mentioned here that “goods”
as defined in the Act do not include newspapers.

The question for our present purpose therefore naturally
arises,—which exactly are the sales or purchases of goods taking
place in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of
the goods out of, the territory of India ? And herein lies the rub-
My endeavour in this note will be to find out and recommend a
correct and proper solution of this question so as to set at rest
as far as practicable all doubts and controversies which have

No specific
entry in the
Constitution
relating to
taxes on
sales or
puschases:
in the course:
of expert or
import.

Exact ques.
1६
decided,


Importance
of foreign
trade in
the inter-
ests of
federal fina-
nee and of
sales-tax

interests
of State
economy.

195

been agitating and troubling the minds of all concerned practically
since the adoption of the Constitution. And if for this purpose
I am to suggest rules, principles, guidelines and criteria which
may not be strictly Iogical and may 10 some extent even smack”
of artificiality, I should not hesitate in doing so, for, as has been
said, 16 of the law is not logic but experience.

Export and import trade, that is foreign trade has all along
been under the exclusive power and jurisdiction of the Centre
(entry 41 of the Union List). This was so even under the
Government of India Act, 1935 (entry 19 of the Federal List
in the Seventh Schedule): but in that Act there was no pro-
vision corresponding to article 286 of the Constitution. I need
not stop here to consider section 297 of the Government of
India Act, 1935 as that section cannot be of much help in
grasping the scope of article 286 exccpt that that section prohi-
bited under sub-section (1){a) a Provincial Legislature or a
Provincial Government from enacting any law or taking any
executive action prohibiting or restricting the entry into or
export from the Province of goods of any class or description.
Jt should be noted that in view of the language used, this pro-
hibition or restriction was operative not only in relation to other
Provinces but also as regards foreign countries. Foreign trade
being thus within the exclusive competence of Parliament, Par-
liament has the power to impose by law. and has in exercise
of that power actually imposed by law, customs duties on im-
ports and exports under the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (now
under the Customs Act, 1962) read with the Indian Tariff Act,
1934 (entry 83 of the Union List corresponding to entry 44 of
the Foderal List in the Seventh Schedule to the Government of
India Act, 1935). Importance of import and export and cus-
toms duties on import and export in the interests of federal
finance and cconomy cannot be over-emphasised. Therefore,
the framers of the Constitution were anxious that our foreign
trade should not be subjected’ to the power of the States to
impose by law taxes on sales or purchases of goods if such
sales or purchases could be regarded as sales or purchases of
goods taking place in the course of import or export.

‘At the same time, in the interests of State Finance and
economy, the makers of the Constitution did sot like to curtail
unnecessarily the power of the States to impose taxes on the
sales or purchases of goods because perhaps the most impor-
tant source of revenue for the States was the taxation of sales or


196

purchase of goods under entry 54 of the State List. They,
therefore, proceeded on the view that only these sales or pur-
chases should be taken out of the States’ power to impose taxes
which were in a strict sense sales or purchase taking place in
the course of import and export and no more. And this objec-
tive was sought ta be achieved by article 286(1)(b). In the
absence of the bar of article 286{1)(b), sales and purchases
laking place in the course of import or export might be subjec-
ted to laxes under the sales-tax laws of the States. The result
in that case would be noi only reduction of the volume of
foreign trade but also donble taxation. This was noted by the
Supreme Court in the first Travancore case in 1952 and also
in the second Travancore case in 1953. Thus, Patanjali Sastri
C.J., in the first Travancore case observed in paragraph 12 of
the judgment as reported in AIR as follows:-—

“Tt might well be argued, in the absence of a provision
like clause (b) prohibiting in terms the levy of
tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such
sales or purchases are effected through the machi-
nery of export and import, that both the powers
of taxation ihough exclusively vested in the Union
and the States respectively, could be exercised in
tespect of the same sale by export or purchase hy
import, the sales-tax and the export duty being
regarded as essentially of a different character. A
similar argument induced the Federal Court to
hold in Province of Madras vs. Boddu Paidunna
and Sons, 1942 FCR 90, that both Central excise
duty and provincial sales tax could be validly im-
posed on the first sale of groundaut oil and cake
by the manufacturer or producer as ‘the two taxes
are economically two separate and distinct imposts’.
Lest similar reasoning should lead to the imposi-
tion of such cumulative burden on the export-
import trade of this country which is of grcat im-
portance to the nation’s eccnomy, the Constituent
Assembly may well have thought it necessary te
exempt in terms sales by export and purchases by
import from sales-tax by inserting article 286(1) (७)
in the Constitution.”

Then in the second Travancore case in 1953, while explaining
and further clarifying, the decision in the first Travancore case,


197

the same Chief Justice (Patanjali Sastri, C.J.) observed in para-
graph (14) of the judgment as reported in AIR—

“It is true, as pointed ont in the previous decision, that
the export-import trade is important to our national
economy, but it is no less true that the State-power
of taxation is essential for carrying on its admini-
stration, and it must be as much the constitutional
purpose to protect the one as not unduly to cur-
tail the other. The question really is, how far did
the Constitution makers want to go in protecting
the foreign trade by restricting the power of taxing
sales or purchases of goods which they conferred
on the States under entry 54 of List If. The pro-
blem before them was one of balancing and recon-
ciling the rival claims of forcign trade in the inter-
ests of our national economy and of the States’
power of taxation in the interests of the expanding
social welfare needs of the people committed to its
charge and we have their sciution as expressed in
the terms of clause (1)(b). It is for the Court to
interpret the true meaning and scope of those terms
without assuming that the onc constitutional — pur-
pose was regarded as more important than the
other. This Court has already held in the pre-
vious decision that clause (1)(b) protects the ex-
port-import trade of this country from double
taxation by prohibiting the imposition of sales tax
by the State on export sales or import purchases,
and we find no warrant in the language employed
to extend the protection to cover the last purchase
before export or first sale after import.”

In the above analysis of the constitutional position 1 have
tried to show that the implication of article 286 even before 1956
was that there might be some sales or purchases in the twilight
zone of forcign trade which could legitimately be regarded as
part and parcel of foreign trade itself and therefore be regarded
as sales or purchases in the course of import or export so as ta
take them out of the States’ power and competence. It is
therefore, the essential job of all concerned te find out and pin-
point as correctly as possible, sales and purchases in that twilight
zone so that such sales aad purchases may be excluded from the
power and compeience of the States.


198

Before 1956, there was no specific provision in the Consti-
tution on this aspect of the matter. Naturally therefore it was
left to be decided and determined by the Courts and in final
analysis by the Supreme Court itself. And as we have already
indicated, Supreme Court, did decide and determine this thorny
question although, as we shall presently see, the decisions of
the Supreme Court could not set at rest all the doubts and mis-
givings as to the scope and meaning of the expression ‘sale or
purchase of goods taking place in the course of import of the
‘goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India’.

The case of State of Travancore-Cochin and Others vs. the The frst
Bombay Company Limited, AIR 1952 5. C. 366 (referred to ‘Travancore
as the first Travancore case) was one of export sales and the res- ense (1952).
pondents were assessed to sales tax on the turn over of the
sales of their commodities (coir products, lemon grass oil and
tea) in which they dealt. The dealings followed more or less
the same pattern in all the cases and consisted of export salcs
of the respective commodities to foreign buyers on either cif.
or f.0.b. terms as the case might be. The respondents claimed
exemption from assessment in respect of the sales effected by
them on the ground inter alia that such sales took place in the
course of the export of the goods out of the territory of India
within the meaning of article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution.
However, the sales-tax authorities rejected this contention of
the respondents as in their view the sales were completed before
the goods were shipped and could not therefore be considered
to have taken place in the course of the export. This view of
the State Sales Tax Authoritics might have been regarded as
the only correct view had article 286(1) (b) not been there in
the Constitution. Indeed such a view might be fully supported
had the cases arisen under the Government of India Act, 1935
where, as already pointed out, there was no provision corres-
ponding to article 286. But as we have tried to show that in
making the provisions of article 286, the makers of the Consti-
tution proceeded on the assumption and implication that in the
interests of foreign trade of India, there might be some sales
or purchases of goods which should be regarded as sales or
purchases taking place in the course of the import of the goods
into or export of the goods out of the territory of India, although
in the narrowest sense such sales or purchases were not in
the actual coursé of import or export. According to the nar-
rowest view, only those sales or purchases which are effected by
the tranfer of documents of title to the goods on the high seas


199

(beyond the customs frontiers of India) would come within the
scope of article 286(1)(b) and no more,

Be that as it may, the High Court of Travancore-Cochin
did not accept this narrow view and accepted the contention of
the respondents, and quashed assessment made by the State
Sales Tax Authorities and held that the cases came within the
exemption of article 286 and were not liable to sales-tax under
the State sales-tax law. As a matter of fact, the Travancore-
Cochin High Court in its judgment clearly expressed the view
that :—

“The words ‘in the course of make the scope of this
clause very wide. It is not restricted to the point of
time at which the goods are imported into or export-
ed from India. The series of transactions which
necessarily precede export or import of goods will
come within the purview of this clause. Therefore,
while in the course of that series of transactions the
sale has taken place, such sale is exempted from
the levy of sales tax. The sale may have taken place
within the boundaries of the State. ven then,
sales-tax cannot be levied if the sale had taken
place while the goods were in the course of import
into India or in the course of export out of India”.

This wide view put forward by the High Court on the mean-
ing and scope of artic: 286(1) (0) drew forth from learned
counsel appearing before the Supreme Court on behalf of the
Union, the several State Governmeuts, and the respondents as
many as three other different views on the scope, meaning and
interpretation of article 286(1)(b) thereby clearly showing that
that article contained in its apparently simple language seeds
of conflict, discord and dissent as each of the four views (15
cluding the view of the Travancore-Cochin High Court) might
be regarded as legitimate and proper according to the upholders
of the respective views. These four views were, in the words
of the Supreme Court as follows :—

(1) According to the first view put before the Supreme
Court on behalf of the State of Madras (now Tamil Nadu}—
The exemption granted by article 286(1)(b) is limited to sales
by export and purchases by import, that is to say, those sales
and purchases which occasion the expert or import, as the case
may be, and extends to no other transactions however directly


20)

oc immediately connected, in intention or purpose, with such
sales or purchases, and wheresoever the property in the goods
May pass to the buyer. The Advocate-General, Madras thought
that a State could not impose sales-tax though title passed within
the State limits while the goods are still under transport on the
high seas and no question of exemption could therefore arise.

(2) According to the second view—In addition to the sales
and purchases of kind described above (in the first view),
the exemption covers the last purchase by the exporter and the
first sale by the importer, if any so directly and proximately cox-
nected with the export sale or import purchase so as to form
part of the same transaction. This view was sponsored by the
Attorney-general of India.

(3) According to the third view—The exemption covers
“only” those sales and purchases under which the property in
the goods concerned is transferred from the seller to the buyer
during the course of transit, that is, after the goods begin to
move and before they reach their foreign destination. This was
the view supported by the State of Bombay (as it then was) and
certain other States.

(4) The fourth view which was the view of the Travancore-
Cochin High Court in the case, has been expressed by the High
Court in the passage already extracted from its judgment.

OE these four views, according to the Supreme Court, the
first view was the narrowest and the fourth view, the widest.

After referring to these four views and briefly discussing
them, the Supreme Court stated in para 10 of the judgment as
fceported in the A..R—

“We are clearly of opinion that the sales here in ques-
tion, which occasioned the export in each case, fall
within the scope of the exemption under article
286(1){b). Such sales must of necessity be. put
through by transporting the goods by rail or ship
out of the territory of India that is to say, by emp-
Joying the machinery of export. A sale by export
thus involves a series of integrated activities com-
mencing from the agreement of sale with a foreien
buyer and ending with the delivery of the goods to
@ common carrier for transport out of the country by


aa

201

fand or yea. Such a sale cannot be dissociated from
the export without which it cannot be effectuated,
and the sale and the resultant export form: paris of
a single transaction. Of these two integrated acti-
vitics which together constitute an export, which-
ever first occurs can well be regarded as taking
place in the course of the other. Assuming without
deciding that the property in the goods in the present
cases passed ia the foreign buvers and the sales were
thus completed within the State before the goods
commenced their journey as found by the Sales Tax
Authorities, the sales must, nevertheless, be regarded
as having teken place in the course of the export
and are therefore exempt under article 286(1) (b).
That clause, indeed, assumes that the sale has taken
‘place within the Limits of the State and exempts it
if it takes place in the course of the export of the
gaods concerned.”

{N.B.—The lines have been underlined by me.}

And in para 14 of the judgment, the Court held—

“We accordingly bold that whatever else may or may
not fall within article 286(1)(b), sales and pur-
chases which themselves occasion the export or the
import of the goods, as the case may be, out of
of into the territory of India come within the exemp-
tion and that is enough to dispose of these appeals.”

11 may be pointed out that though in the body of the judg-
ment the expressions “export sale”, “import purchase”, “sale by
export” and “purchase by import” have been used, in its final
conclusion in para. 14 of the judgment, quoted above, expres+
sion “sales and purchases which themselves occasion the export
or import” has been used. In the second Travancore case how-
ever, as we shall have occasion to note, this order was reversed,
and the expressions “sales by export” and “purchases by import”
have been used in the final conclusions of the Court and not the
expression “sales and purchases which themselves occasion the
expert or import.”

The Supreme Court expressed uo opinion on the point raised
in the course of the argument as to whether ‘sale’ imports a
wider concept than the passing of title im the goods from the
seller to the buyer which under the law relating to the sale of


202

goods is determined by highly technical rules based upon the
presumed intention of the parties and liable to be displaced by
their expressed intention.

The Court did not accept the suggestion made from the Bar
that on the construction of article 286(1) (०) indicated by .the
Court, a “sale in the course of export” would become practically
synonymous with “export” and reduce clause (0) to a mere
redundancy, The Supreme Court pointed out that im the absence
of article 286(1)(b) which expressly prohibits imposition of
taxes on the sale or purchase of goods in the course of import
of export, the States might impose tax on such sales and pur-
chases in exercise of their exclusive power under entry 54 of
the State List and the Union also might impose customs duties.
in exercise of its exclusive power under entry 83 of the Union
List and thus the same sale by export and the same purchase
‘by import would be subject to both sales-tax and customs duties,
because these two imposts are essentially of a different charac-
ter. As already mentioned, the Supreme Court in support of
this view cited the Federal Court case of Province of Madras
vs. Boddu Paidanna (1942) FCR 90 where the Federal Court
held that both central excise duty and provincial sales tax could
be validly imposed on the first sale of groundnut oil and cake
by the manufacturer or producer as “the two taxes are economi-
cally two separate and distinct imposts.”

In the result the Supreme Court by agreeing with the coa-
clusion of the Travancore-Cochin High Court though on diffe-
rent grounds dismissed the appeals filed by the State of Travan-
core-Cochin.

The following specific points which emerge from this decis-
ion deserve mention seriatin: :—

(1) That the language of article 286(1){b) which may
prima jacie appear to be simple is not so in reality and is cap-
able of different interpretations, is clear from as many as four
different views mentioned in the judgment.

(2) A sale in order that it may come within the scope .of
the exemption under article 286(1)(b) must be a sale which it-
self occasions the export (or as the case may be, which itself
occasions the import.)

(3) A sale which itself occasions an export is a sale by
export which involves a series of integrated activities commen-
cing from the agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending.

— “०-०... --

ae


203

with the delivery of the goods to common carrier for transport
out of the country by Jand or sea.

(4) Such a sale i.e. a sale which itself occasions the export
therefore cannot be dissociated from the export without which
it cannot be effectuated and the sale and the resultant export
from parts of a single transaction.

(5) Even where the property in the goods passes to a
foreign buyer and the sale is thus completed within the State
bejore the goods conumence their journey, the sale must, never-
theless, be regarded as having taken place in the course of ex-
port and is thereforc exempt under article 286(1) (b).

(6) As a matter of fact, article 286(1)(b) assumes that
the sale which itself occasions an export has taken Place
within the limits of ihe State and excmpts it if it takes place in
the course of the export of the goods concerned.

(7) In order that a sale or purchase can take place in the
course of export or import it-is not essential that the property
in the goods must be transferred to the buyer during ther
actual movement, as for instance, where (in the case of export)
and shipping document are endorsed, and delivered within three
State by the seller to a local agent of the foreign buyer after
the goods have been actually shipped or where (in the case of
import) such documents are cleared on payment or acceptance
by the Indian buyer before the arrival of the goods within the
State. This view, which lays undue stress on the etymology af
the word “course” and formulates a mechanical test for the
application of clause (b) of article 286(1) places too narrow
a construction upon that clause in so far as it seeks to limit its
operation only to sales and purchases effected during the transit
of the goods and would, if accepted, rob the exemption of much
of its usefulness. (Para 13 of the judgment)

(My comments—As a matter of fact, second part of sub-
section (1) and second part of sub-section (2) of section 5 give
effect to this view, but are not limited to it only. The first part
of each of these two sub-sections goes further and gives effect to
the view of the Supreme Court expressed in its final conclusion
in para 14 of the judgment.)

I have dealt with and analysed this case in some detail in or-
der to sce whether the pith and substance of the meaning of

20 M of Law!74—!+


204

sale or purchase of goods taking place in course of import of
the goods into or export of the goods out of, the territory of
India, that is to say, whether the true and correct meaning and
scope of article 286(1){b) have bcen brought out in the judg-
ment, The judgment, it is submitted with respect, is marked by
lucidity and terseness of expression and shows clarity of views
on a difficult subject but in spite of these qualities, the judgment
has not been able to set at rest all doubts and disputes as to
the meaning of article 286(1) (0); on the contrary, it has given
rise to sharp divergence of opinions, as will appear from the
second Travancore case to which we now proceed.

The controversy was raised again in the second Travancore
case (State of Travancore-Cochin vs. Sanmugha Vilas Cashew-
aut Factory, Quilon, A.LR. 1953 S.C, 333). The same five
judges who heard and decided the first Travancore case heard
and decided this case also. As a matter of fact, appeals in this
case formed part of the first Travancore case also, but after
they had been heard in part along with the other appeais from
the same order, it was found that the material facts relating to
the course of business of the respondents in the sccond ‘Travan-
core case had not been clearly ascertained and accordingly
those appeals were remitted to the High Court for further cn-
quiry and findings in regard to those matters. The other appeal
however in which the materials on record were found sufticient
were finally decided in the first Travancore case.

In the second Travancore case the respondents were dealers
in cashewnuts in the State of Travancore-Cochin and their
business consisted in importing raw cashewnuts from (i) ab-
road, and (ii) in purchasing them from the neighbouring
districts in the State of Madras as also (iii) in purchases made
in the local market and after converting them by means of cer-
tain processes into edible kernels, exporting the kernels to other
countries, mainly America. The oil pressed from the shells
removed from the cashewnuts were also exported. The Consti-
tution having come into force on the 26th January, 1950, the
respondents in each appeal claimed exemption under article
286(1) (b) in respect of the purchases made from that date till
the 29th May, 1950, the end of the account year. The sale-tax
authorities having rejected the claim, the respondents applied
to the High Court under article 226 and the High Court upheld
the claim and quashed the asscssments so far as they related to
the said period. The State of Travancore-Cochin then filed

the appeals to the Supreme Court.

The second
‘Travancore
case (1953)


205

Before considering how far the cashewnut purchases made
by the respondents were entitled to the protection of article
286(1)(b), the Court again felt the necessity “to ascertain the
scope of such protection.” In this connection the Court reiterated
and recapitulated the four different views mentioned in the
first Travancore case as to the meaning and scope of article
286(1)(b) and after having done so, repeated what it had
held in the previous case in para 14 of the previous judgment—

“Whatever clse may or may not fall within article 286(1) (b),
sales and purchases which themselves occasion the
export or import of the goods, as the case may be,
out 08 er into, the territory of India come within the
exemption.”

Then the Court proceeded to discuss and decide the only
question debated before it as to “whether in addition to the
export-sale and import-purchase, which were held in the pre-
vious decision to be covered by the exemption under clause
(1)(b), the following two categories of sale or purchase would
also fall within the scope of that exemption :—

“(1) The last purchase of goods made by the exporter
for the purpose of exporting them to implement orders
already received from a foreign buyer or expected to
be reecived subsequently in the course of business,
and the first sale by the importer to fulfil orders pur-
suant to which the goods were imported or orders ex-
pected to be received after the import.

(2) Sales or purchases of goods effected within the State
by transfer of shipping documents while the poods are
in the course of transit.”

As regards the first category mentioned above, the Court was
of the opinion “that the transactions are not within the pro-
tection of clause (1)(b)”. In support of this view the Court
Gave a number of reasons. The Court first pointed out in para.
10 of the Judgment as reported in AIR—

“The word ‘course’ etymologically denotes movement from
one point to another, and the expression ‘in the
course of’ not only implies a period of time during
which the movement is in progress but postulates
also a connected relation.”

20 M. of 1.39/74--15


206

And in support of this reasoning the Court sought to give an
analogy from the English Bankruptcy Act, 1869. It was held
in the case of In re Pryce; Ex parte Rensburg (1877) 4 Ch. 9.
685 that the words “debts due to the bankrupt in the course of
his trade” in section 15(5) of English Bankraptey Act, 1869,
“do not extend to all debts due to the bankrupt during the period
of his trading but include only debts connected with the trade.
“A sale in the course of export out of the country”, the Court
observed in para. 10 of the judgment, “should similarly be
understood in the context of clause (1) (0) as meaning a sale
taking place not only during the activities directed to the end of
exportation of the goods out of the country but also as part of
or connected with such activities. The time factor alone is not
determinative. The previous decision proceeded on this view
and emphasised the integral relation between the two where
the contract of sale itself occasioned the export as the ground for
holding that such a sale was one taking place in the course of
the export.”

(Underlined by me.)

The Court did not agree with the contention that on. this
principle of connected or integrated activities a purchase for
the purpose of export must be regarded as covered by the ex-
emption under clause (2)(b). The Court said—"‘A purchase
for the purpose of export lke production or mannfacture for
export, is only an act preparatory to export and cannot, in our
opinion, be regarded as an act done ‘in the course of the export
of the goods out of the territory of India’ any more than the
other two activities (i.e. production or manufacture for export)
can be so regarded.” (Para. 11 of the judgment.)

The views of Schmitthoff in his book—Hxport Trade—
were cited by the Court in this connection with approval—

“From the legal point of view it is essential to distinguish
the contract of sale which has as its object the exporta-
tion of the goods from this country from other contracts
of sale relating to the same goods, but not being the
direct and immediate cause for the shipment of the
8००95, . ..,..... eee ‘When a merchant shipper in the
United Kingdom buys for the purpose of export goods
from a manufacturer in the same country, the contract
of sale is 2 home transaction; but when he re-sells
these goods to a buyer abroad that contract of sale


207

has to be classified as an export transaction.” (2nd
Edn. p. 3).

The Court observed that “The same reasoning applies to the
first sale after Import which is a distinct local transaction effected
after the importation of the goods into the country has been
completed, and having no integral relation with it.” (Para. 11).

(underlined by me.)

The Court also referred to the practical difficulty in extend-
ing the exemption of article 286(1)(b) to the last purchase jor
the purpose of export and the first sale after the import.
“Supposing”, the Court observed in para. 13 of the judgment,
“A js the seller from whom B the export merchant purchases
the goods for export. If the sale is to be exempt, how is A to
be satisfied that the goods would actually be exported subse-
quently? And even if they were, it must be difficult for A to
prove to the Sales-tax Officer that they were so exported by B,
if proof was required. On the other hand, B might be kecping
the goods, waiting for orders to come or might change his mind
and not export the goods at all but sell them locally. In that
case, what would be the position of A vis-a-vis the Sales-tax
Officer demanding the tax? Could A_ escape liability if he
failed to collect the tax from B at the time of the sale? Or,
is A to collect the tax ignoring B’s declaration of his intention
to export and leaving him to apply for refund by producing
evidence of actual export, whenever that takes place? Even if
a sales-tax enactment provides for adjustment on those lines,
would not such kegislation, in so far as it compels B to suffer
the tax until he actually exports the goods, contravene clause
(1)(b) which ex Aypothesi exempts the transaction from sales-
tax? And what would be the position if the goods were burnt
or otherwise lost in the meanwhile, and the export never took
place ?”

Noticing all these practical difficulties and uncertainties, the
United States Supreme Court laid down the following rule in
the case of Expresa Siderurgica, 5, A. vs. Merced (1949) 337
US. 154

“Tt is the entrance of the articles into the export stream that
marks the start of the process of exportation. Then
there is certainty that the goods are headed for their
foreign destination and will not be diverted to domes-
tic use. Nothing less will suffice.


208

The Court then observed that similar difficulties and un-
certainties would arise if the cxemption were sought to be
extended 10 the first sale after import. In the first place, the
first sale after import will be a local sale because it takes place
after the goods have been actually imported into India ie.
after the termination of the process of importation. In the
next place, how is the exemption to be applied to goods imported
from abroad after they are mingled with other goods and lose
their distinctive character? In this connection the Court re-
jected the American doctrine of “original or unopened package.”

It is in the light of these discussions and conclusions that the
Court considered whether the imports of cashewnuts by the res-
pondents fell within the exemption of article 286(1) (७), and
if so, to what extent. These imports were divided into two
categories—(i} purchases made through intermedisries (called
“the Bombay party”) doing business as commission agents at
Bombay. As the Bombay party acted as agents of the respon-
dents charging commission, privity was established between the
respondents and the African sellers. ‘That being so, the pur-
chases of cashewnuts by the respondents from the African sellers
occasioned the import and therefore they came within the exemp-
tion of article 286(1)(b) and were not subjected to sales-tax
Jaw of the State.

In the other category, the Bombay party indented the goods
on their own account and sold the goods as principals to the
tespondents and other customers but the goods were shipped
direct to Cochin or Quilon on c.if, terms, The shipping docu-
ments were made out in the name of the Bombay party as con-
signees and were delivered to them against payment through
bankers at Bombay. The Bombay party cleared the goods
through their own representatives at the port of destination and
issued separate delivery orders te the respondents and other
customers for the respective quantities ordered.

The Bombay party were thus the purchasers from the African
sellers and the Bombay party sold the goods as principals to the
respondents at the port of destination by issuing separate de-
livery orders against payment. No privity being established
between the respondents and the African sellers, the respondents’
purchases were purchases from the Bombay party of the goods
within the State. In other words, they being thus local pur-
chases could not come under the exemption under article
286(1) (b).


200

As regards the sales or purchases effected in the State by
transfer of shipping (cif.) documents while the goods are stil!
in transit, the Court’s decision was that it was well known that
such sales or purchases formed a characteristic feature of for-
eign trade, they therefore fell within the exemption of article
286(1)(b), “if the State is constitutionally competent to tax
such sales” as to which the Court cxpressed no opinion.

After such examination and discussion of the position, the
Court summed up ils conclusions as follows in para. 16 of the
judgment :—

“(1) Sales by export and purchases by import falf within
the exemption under article 286(1){b). This was
held in the previous decision.

(2) Purchases in the State by the exporter for the purpose
of cxport as well as sales in the State by the importer
after the goods have crossed the customs frontier are
not within the exemption.

(3) Sales in the State by the exporter or importer by trans-
fer of shipping documents while the goods are beyond
the customs frontiers are within the exemption, assum-
ing that the State power of taxation extends to such
transactions.”

$. R. Das, J. who was a party to the unanimous decision of
the Court in the first Travancore case did not agree this time with
the majority view and wrote a long dissenting judgment. He
dissented from the majority view on the construction and mean-
ing of article 286(1)(a) dealing with restrictions placed apon a
State as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of goods
where such sale or purchase takes place outside the State. He
also dissented this time as to the scope of the expression “in the
course of” occurring in article 286(1)(b). He posed the ques-
tion, as to what was the scope of the ban imposed on the States
by article 286(1)(b)? He felt that the answer would depend on
the meaning that may be ascribed to the phrase “in the course
of” occurring in clause (1)(b). He referred to the unanimous
decisign of the Court in the first Travancore case according to
which “whatever else may or may not fall within article
286(1)(b), sales and purchases which themselves occasion the
exports or imports of the goods, as the case may be, out of, or
into, the territory of India come within the exemption, ........ ”

20 M of Law!74—16

er


210

According to him, this was sufficient to dispose of that case and
it was not then necessary to decide what else might fall within
that phrase. He said, “This Court is now called upon to decide
that point”. (vide para, 48 of his judgment) Das, उ., then des-
cribed the practice of foreign trade in India and how it was care
tied on. And he expressed his views in Para, 51 of his judgment
as follows :—

“Ya my judgment the Parchase made by-the exporter to im-
Plement his agreement for sale with the foreign buyer
is to be regarded as having taken place ‘in the course
of export, I take this view, not because 1 read the
words ‘in the course of as synonymous with the words
‘for the purpose of” but because [ regard the purchase
by the exporter as an activity so closely integrated with
the act of export as to constitute @ part of the export
process itsclf and, therefore, as having taken place
‘in the course of the export, The learned Attorney-
General accepts this position but the Advocates-Gen-
eral of the States demur. They maintain that in this
view of the matter one cannat Stop at the last purchase
by the exporter but has to include the purchase. by the
Person whe sells to the exporter and all Previous sales
or purchases until one reaches the producer, I find
80 substance or cogency in this line of teasoning. In
the last purchase by the exporter we have at least one
party who is directly concerned with or interested in
the actual export. The exporter is the connecting link,
the commercial Vincalum, as it were, between the fast
purchase and the export. But in the earlier sales or
Purchases neither the sellers nor the purchasers are
Personally concerned with cr interested in the actual
export of the goods at all. Therefore the earlier sales
or purchases may be too remote and may not be re-
garded as integral parts of the Process of export in the
Same sense as the last purchases by the exporter can
be so regarded, The line of demarcation is easity per-
ceptible.”

He summarised his views as regards the 6 Scope and mean-
ing of a sale or purchase in the course of import or export in
Paragraph 59 of the judgmental reported in the AIR as
follows: —

४... A. sale or purchase ‘im the course of import or ex-
Port within the meaning of clause {1}(b) includes

eek


Complexity
of the
subject.

211

(i) a sale or purchase which itself occasions the import
or export as already held by this Court, (ii) a sale or
purchase which takes place while the goods are on the
high seas on their import or export journey and (iii)
the last purchase by the exporter with a view to export
and the first sale by the imperter to a dealer after the
arrival of the imported goods. If a sale or purchase
takes place within a State, either under the general
law or by reason of the Explanation, then, if it takes
place in the course of import or export as explained
above, no State, not even ihe State within which such
sale or purchase takes place can tax it by reason of
clause (1) (b), This, in short, is the true meaning
and import of article 286 as 1 read and understand it.”

T have dealt at length with the two Travancore cases to show
their supreme importance in relation to the restrictions on the
power of the States to impose by law taxes on the sale or purchase
of goods when such sale or purchase takes place in the course of
import or export, The matter is highly complex and difficult.
In my opinion, it becomes easy to grasp their true meaning, scope
and content in the background of actual facts. Except in such
background, our ideas may continue to remain hazy and out
vision blurred. Law is a social science dealing with the actual
problems faced by man as a member of society in connection
with his affairs and dealing with other men. Hence it makes
for clarity if legal problems are considered in the context of the
realities of life. To use the language of the great German Jegal
philosopher and sociological jurist, Rudolf Von Jhering, we are
concern not so much with jurisprudence of conceptions as with
jurisprudence of actualities, That article 286(1)(b) is capable
o£ more interpretations is readily seen from the long dissenting
judgment of S. R. Das, J. and I shall presently show that this
divergence of views on the scope, meaning and interpretation of
article 286(1){b) of the Constitution and section 5 of the Cen-
tral Sales Tax Act is still persisting. Therefore I should try my
level best to define the scope of these provisions so that in future,
doubts, conflicts and divergences may be reduced to the minimum
if not altogether eliminated. It may be pointed out here with
great respect to the views of Das, J. that his view that “a sale
or purchase occasioning export or import” includes the last sale
before export of the goods and the first purchase after import of
the goods may not be universally acceptable as it was not accept-
able to the majority of the Judges in she second Travancore case.


212

The last sale or the first purchase, however it may appear to be
in the interests of foreign trade of our country cannot but im-
pinge beyond reasonable limit upon the powcr of the States to
tevy sales-tax. One may take the view that to include in the
name of integrated activities, such a sale or such a purchase as
taking place in the course of export or import does not appear to
be based upon very sound reason. For in the case of the last sale
or purchase before the export-salc, where is the certainty that
after such last sale or purchase and before such export-sale, the
exporter will not change his mind or that the goods will not be
lost, destroyed, pilfered, damaged or rendered less valuable? And
in the case of the first sale or purchase after the import is comp-
letely at an end, on what rational basis can it be said that such
first sale or purchase is integrally connected with the import even
if such first sale or purchase is in pursuance of a contract pre-
viously entered into between the importer and the first purchaser?

There is no doubt however that the two Travancore cases
decided by the Supreme Court before the Sixth Amendment of
the Constitution are landmarks in our constitutional history in
relation to the construction and interpretation of article 286 of
the Constitution.

The next phase in connection with the matter started in 1956 First
when the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Bill was introduced reference २
in Parliament and passed by Parliament as the Constitution (Sixth Commission
Amendment) Act, In the same year, the Government in the (1966).
Ministry of Law referred to the Law Commission, the question
of the principles that should be formulated by parliamentary le-
gislation for determining when a sale of goods takes place (a)
outside a particular state, (b) in the course of import or export,
or (९) in the course of inter-state trade or commerce
in pursuance of the provisions of clause (2) of article
286 and clause (3) of article 269 as inserted by
the Constitution Sixth Amendment. The Law Com-
mission in its Second Report (Parliamentary Legislation
relating to Sales-tax) dealt with these three matters. The report
of the majority covered only about 10 pages and a separate note
consisting of four pages was written by Dr. N. C. Sen Gupta,

a Member of the Commission. In paragraph 10 of the majority
report, the Commission recommended the acceptance of the prin-
ciples laid down by the Supreme Court in the two Travancore
cases and the language used by the Commission in the aforesaid
paragraph 10 was more or less the same as the language used


Khosla’s
case (1966),

213

in the decisions of the Supreme Court in the two Travancore
cases, specially in the first case. The Commission did not
aecept the views expressed by Das, J. in the second Travancore
Case nor did it accept the suggestion of the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry that the jast purchase preceding the export should
be accepted as a transaction in the course of export on the ground
that the exemption of such transactions from sales-tax will stimu-
late exports. As that Ministry did not however suggest that a
similar exemption should be granted to the first sale following
the import, it appeared to the Commission to be somewhat illo-
gical that the last purchase preceding the export should be exempt
whereas the first sale following the import should not be exempted.

With great respect to the views of the Commission in the
Second Report, it is felt that the Commission borrowed
the language used in the unanimous decision of the
Supreme Court in the first Travancore case without
critically and carefully examining whether that language would be
precise enough to remove all doubts and ambiguities and con-
flicts, as is evident from the minortiy judgment of Das, J. in
the second Travancore case. Moreover, from the observations
of the Court in para. 14 of the judgment in the first Travancore
case, it was clear that the Court did not consider the matter in
a comprehensive maaner. This aspect was specifically mentioned
by Das, J. in his minority judgment.

Be that as it may, the Government and Parliament accepted
the majority views of the Law Commission in the Second Report
in relation to sales or purchases in the course of import or export
and section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 adopted verbatim
the language of the recommendations of the Commission in para-
graph 10 of the Report.

The third phase is provided by K. G. Khosla’s case (K. G,
Khosla & Co, vs. Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes,
AIR 1966 S.C. 1216) decided by the Supreme Court on the 16th
January, 1966. It is not necessary to discuss in detail the other
cases on the subject decided by the Supreme Court before
Khosla’s case as they more or less followed the views of the Sup-
reme Court in the unanimous judgment in the first Travancore
ease and majority judgment in the second case. Morcover, dis-
cussion of too many case-laws has the disadvantage of dis-
tracting one’s attention from the real problem. Be that
as it may, it is difficult 10 accept in toto the view ex-


214

pressed in some of these cases (not cited or discussed here) that
no single icst can be laid down and each case must depend on
its own facts. It is submitted with respect that such a view seems
to be a view of despair and underrates the importance of the
principles required to be formulated by law made by Parliament
under article 286(2) which have been actually formulated by
Parliament in section 5 of the Central Seles Tax Act, 1956. It
may even be said that if this view is accepted then there was
hardly any neccssity for formulating the principles in pursuance of
article 286(2) as it now stands. Whether the principles forrm-
Jated by Parliament require improvement is a different matter.
While saying this we are not ignoring oc underestimating the im-
portance of the facts of each case. But that should not mean as to
why serious endeavour should not be made to make the princi-
ples as broad and comprehensive so as to fit in with the facts of
each and every case as far as practicable. We must try to find out
the recommendations of the Law Commission in 1956 which re-
commendations in turn were based on decisions in the two Tra-
yancore cases, The observations of Das, J. in paragraph (48) of
his dissenting judgment as reported in the ALR. will bear repe-
tition in this connection—

“The question arises : what is the scope of the ban thus im-
posed on the States ? The answer will depend on the
meaning that may be ascribed to the phrase ‘in the
course’ occurring. in clause (1)(b) ........In AIR
1952 5. C. 366 (the first Travancore case) this Court
has held that—

“Whatever else may or may not fall within article 286-
(1) (b) sales and purchases which themselves occa-
sion the export or import of the goods, as the case
may be, out of or into the territory of India come

within the exemption........

Tn other words, this Court has held that sales or pur-
chases which themsclves occasion the imports or ex-
ports are sales or purchases which take place 10 the
course of” import or export, This was sufficient to dis-
pose of that case and it was not there necessary to de-
cide what else might fail within that phrase. This Court
is now called upon to decide that point.”


215

Coming now to Khosla’s case, the following facts mentioned in
the judgment of Sikri, J. led the Court to the decision it reached
in the case —

(1) The appellant K. 6. Khesla & Co.—mentioned in the
judgrocnt as the assessee—entered into a contract with the Direc-
tor-General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi for the supply
of axle-box bodies.

(2) According to the contract the goods were to be manu-
factured in Belgium and the Director-General of the Indian Supply
Department (D.G.LS.D.), London or his representative was to in-
spect the goods at the works of the manufacturers.

(3) He was to issue an inspection certificate.

(4) Another inspection by the Deputy Director of Inspection,
Ministry of W.H. & S., Madras was provided for in the contract.
Jt was his duty to issue inspection notes on Form No. WSB 65
on receipt of a copy of the inspection certificate from the D.G.L~
$. D., London and after verification and visual inspection.

(5) The goods were to be manufactured according to speci-
fications by M/s La Brugeoies, ET, Nivelles, Belgium.

(6) There was a provision as to when the assessee would be
entitled to be paid.

(7) The assessee was entirely responsible for the execution
of the contract in all respects in accordance with the terms as
Specified in the contract.

(8) Any approval which the Inspector might have given in
respect of the stores, materials or other particulars and the work
and workmanship in the contract (whether with or without test
carried out by the contractor’s Inspector “‘shal! not bind the pur-
chaser (that is, the D.G.S. &. D.) and notwithstanding any appro-
val or acceptance given by the Inspector, it shall be lawful for
the consignee of the stores on behalf of the purchaser to reject
the stores on arrival at the destination, if it is found that the
stores supplied by the contractor are not in conformity with the
terms and conditions of the contract in all respects.”

(9) Further, the assessee was responsible for the safe arrival
of the goods at the destination.

a


216

(16) By an endorsement the D.G.LS.D., London was re-
quested to issue pre-inspection delay reports regularly to all con-
cerned including the Railway Liaison Officer c/o D.G.S.&D.,
Shahjahan Road, New Delhi. He was also requested to endorse
copies of the Inspection Certificates to the Director of Inspec-
tion, Ministry of Works, Housing and Supply, Bombay.

(11) It was further found by the Sales Tax Appellate Tri-
bunal that “the Belgium manufacturers, after manufacture
consigned the goods ie the appellants by ship under bills of
lading in which the consignee was the appellants themselves.

(12) The goods were consigned to Madras Harbour,
cleared by the appellants’ own clearing agents and despatched
for delivery to the buyers thereafter.”

(13) In pursuance of this contract the assessee supplied the
axle-box bodies of the value of Rs. 1,74,029.50 to the Southern
Railway at Perambur Works and of the value of Rs. 1,32,987.75
to Southern Railway, Mysore.

The Joint Commercial Tax Officer held that the former saies
were liable to tax under the Madras General Sales Tax and the
latter under the Central Sales Tax Act. He rejected the conten-
tion that the sales werc in course of import. He held that
“there was no privity, of contract between the foreign seler and
the Government for the goods. The goods were shipped only as
the goods of the seller and intended for them. They were cleared
as their own and delivered after clcarance. The transaction is
therefore one of intra-state sales and not one in the course of
import. The sale is completed only when the goods are delivered
in this State and so it is not occasioning the import.” The Joint
Commercial Tax Officer also referred to the terms and condi-
tions of the contract relating to the rejection of the goods by the
purchaser to which reference has already been made.

The Appellate Assistant Commissioner agreeing with the
Joint Commercial Tax Officer, rejected the appeals by the
assessec. The Appellate Tribunal also held that the sale by the
appellants had not occasioned the import except that sales to
the extent of Rs. 22,983.75 and Rs. 10,987.50 bad taken place
in the course of the import as the goods had been appropriated
to the contract while the goods were on the high seas. The
assessec filed two revisions before the High Court and the
Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Madras also filed

ee ee


217

two revisions challenging the deductions of the two sums. of
Rs, 22983.75 and 10987.50. The High Court allowed the
petitions filed by the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial
Taxes and dismissed the petitions filed by the assessee. The
High Court rejected the contention of the assessee that the sale
by the assessee to the Government Department (ic. the
D.GS.&D.) had occasioned the import on the ground that
“before a sale can be said to have occasioned the import, it is
necessary that the sale should have preceded the import” and
as the sale had not taken place in Belgium there was no question
of the sale occasioning the import of the goods.

On the facts and materials, the Supreme Court differed from
the decision of the High Court and allowed the appeals filed by
the assessee and held that the sales by the assessee to the
Government (Director-General of Supplies and Disposals} took
Place in the course of the import of goods within section 5(2)
of the Central Sales Tax Act.

In coming to this decision the Court first rejected (and it
is submitted rightly) the view of the Madras High Court that
before a sale could be said to have occasioned import “it is
necessary that the sale should have proceeded the import.”

In repelling the above view of the High Court, the Supreme
Court proceeded on the following lines of reasoning: —

(a) “It seems to us that the expression ‘occasions the move-
ment of goods’ occurring in section 3(a) and section
5(2) must have the same meaning.”

(My comments—-The expression “occasions the movement
of goods” occurs in section 3(a) only. Jn section 5{2), the
expression used is “occasions such import”. Moreover, the
words “only if* occur before the words “the sale or purchase in
section 5(2) but not in section 3. These differences in language
are significant. The meaning of the term “movement” in sec-
tion 3a) is more specific than the meaning of the term “import”
in section 5(2). As has been shown already, on a very strict
and narrow view of article 286(1)(b), a sale or purchase in the
course of import or export would be confined only to a sale or
purchase effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods
while the goods are oa the high seas in the course of ‘transit
vide in this connection the observations of Patanjali Sastri,
C. J. in para. 13. of the judgment (as reported in the AIR) in

2) Mof Law;' -17


218

the first Travancore case. There are other points of difference
between a sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce and a sale or purchase in the course of cxport or
import. In this view of the matter. to attribute the same mean-
ing to the expression occurring in section 3(a} and the expres-
sion occurring in section 5 dees not, it is pointed out with res-
pect, seem quite correct.)

(9) After taking the view as above, the Court cited with
approval the following interpretation given by Shah, J.
on section 3 in the majority judgment of the Court
in Tata Iron and Steel Co. vs. $5. R. Sarkar (ATR
1961 SC 65) :--

“In our view, therefore, within clause (b) of section 3
are included sales in which property in the goods
passes during the movement of the goods from one
State to another by transfer of documents of title
theretu: clause (a) of section 3 covers sales, other
than those included in clause (b), in which the
movement of goods from one State to another is
the result of a covenant or incident of the contract
of sale, and property in the goods passes in either
State” .

(०) These observation of Shah, J. were cited with approval
by the Court in the Cement Marketing Co. vs. State of
Mysore (ATR 1963 SC 980) although the Court in
that cas¢ was dealing not with the Central Sales 185
Act but with a similar case arising under article 286
of the Constitution before its amendment.

(d) But the same Bench of the Court in dealing with a case
arising under the Act (State Trading Corporation oi
India Ltd. vs. State of Mysore AIR 1963 SC 548)
again approved of the observations in Tata Iron &
Steel Co, case

In this way, after citing 2 number of cases under section 3,
the Court held “that the High Court was wrong in holding that
before a sale could be said to have occasioned import it is
necessary that the sale should have preceded the import.”

When the Court was invited by the Counsel for the respon-
dent to hold that the observations of Shah, J. in Tata Iron &

oy


219

Steel Co. case were obiter, and to consider the question afresh,
because Shah, J. in that case was considering clause (b) of sec-
tion 3, the Court observed—“We are unable to re-open the ques-
tion at this stage. Shab, J. was interpreting section 3 of the
Act, and although the Court was principally concerned with the
interpretation of section 3(b), it was necessary to consider the
interpretation of section 3(8) in order to arrive at the correct
interpretation of section 3(b).”

In this way, repelling the view of the Madras High Court,
the Court in a short paragraph proceeded to the question,—

“whether the movement of axle-bodies from Belgium into
Madras was the result of a covenant in the contract
‘of sale or an incident of such contract. It seems to
us that it is quite clear from the contract of sale that it
was incidental to the contract that the axle-box bodies
should be manufactured in Belgium, inspected there
and imported into India for the consignee. Movement
of the goods from Belgium into India was in pursuance
of the conditions of the contract between the assessee
and the Director-General of Supplies. There was no
possibility of these goods being diverted by the asses-
see for any other purpose. Consequently we hold
that the sales took place in the course of import of
goods within section 5(2) of the Act, and are, there-
fore, exempt from taxation.”

Thus in coming to this decision, the Court relied on only
two grounds, namely,—-

(1) the movement of the goods from Belgium to India was in
pursuance of the conditions of the contract between the assessee
and the Director-General of Supplies;

(2) there was no possibility of the goods being diverted by
the assessee for any other purpose.

Connitts o1 ६१७ sla’s cases,

My comments on the case are as follows :—

(1) It is difficult to find out from the judgment whether the
Court treated the assessee (K. 0, Khosla & Co.) as merely as
agent of the D.G.S.&D. or as independent importer importing the
goods from Belgium as his own goods.


220

(2) The terms and conditions of the contract were no doubt
4 bit peculiar in that under them a good deal of control over the
assessee was retained by the D.G.S.&D., such as control in relz-
tion to inspection of the goods both in Belgium at the stage of
manufacture and also in India at Madras and Bombay and the
issue of inspection certificates and inspection notes. All this
may be regarded as more in consonance with the position of the
assessee as an agent than with his position as an independent
importer importing goods by purchase from the Belgium manu-
facturers.

(३) But this is more than counter-balanced by other terms
and conditions of the contracts and other facts and circumstances
of the case. These terms and conditions and facts and circum-
Stances are: (i) the assessee, Khosla & Co. was entirely respon-
sible for the execution of the contract in all respects in accor-
dance with the terms and conditions specified; (i) any
approval which the Inspector might have given in respect of the
stores, materials etc. (whether with or without test carried out
by the assessee’s Inspector) shal not bind the purchaser; (iii)
notwithstanding any approval or acceptance given by the Inspec-
tor it shall be lawful for the consignee of the stores (the Southern
Railway on behalf of the purchaser) to reject the stores on
arrival at the destination if it be found that the stores supplied
by the contractor (the asscssee) are not in conformity with the
terms and conditions of the contract in all respects: {iv) the
asscssee Was responsible for the safe arrival of the goods at the
destination; (२) the Belgian manufacturers after manufacture,
consigned the goods to the appellants (the assessee) by ship under
bills of lading to which the consignee was the appellants (asses-
see) themselves; and (vi) the goods were consigned to Madras
harbour, cleared by the appellants’ own clearing agents and
despatched for delivery to the buyers thereafter.

All these terms and conditions and facts and circumstances
Point 10 the assessee being the importer, himself importing his
own goods. The Court however did not consider at all _ this
2876९ of the case as to whether the assessee was merely an
agent of the D.G.S. & D. or was an independent importer who
had cntered into a contract with D.G.S, & D. to self the goods
to him after “the safe arrival of the goods at the destination.”

{4} The Court also did not consider at all the finding of the
Joint Commas Tax Of hat “here wes no privity of con-
ecign scller and the Government for the



221

gocds. ‘he goods were shipped only as the goods of the seller
(ue. the asscssce) and iatended for them. They were cleared as
their own and delivered after clearance. The transactico is
therctore one of the intra-State sales and not one in the course
of import,” While the Court specifically stated in para. 11 of
the judgment that “Movement of goods from Belgium of India
was in pursuance of the conditions of the contract between the
assessee and the Director-General of Supplies”, there is nothing
expressly stated in the judgment whether this contract could be
regarded as one between the Director-General and the Belgium
sellers.

Tt is not clear why the Court did not accept of reyect this
finding of the Joint Commercial Tax Ofneer.

(5) The findings that the movement of the goods were in
pursuance of the contract between the asscssce and the Director-
General of Supplies and Disposals and that there was no possi-
bility of the goods being diverted for any other use did not
touch the question whether the purchase by the D.G.S. & D. after
the arrival of the goods in Madras and termination of the pro-
¢ess ot import was an import-purchase by the Director-General
of Supplies and Disposals or was the first purchase by him
after the import.

(6) Then, the Court did not at all consider the two Travan-
core cases of 1952 and 1953. It docs not appear that the Court's
attention was drawn to these cases by the counsel who appeared
for the parties. All the cases cited before and relied on by the
Court were cascs under section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act,
1956 with the exception of one (Cement Marketing Co. vs.
State of Mysore, AIR 1963 SC 980) which arose under articte
286 as it stood before its amendment in 1956. The Court also
did not consider any case under section 5 of the Central Sales
Tax Act. For example, in Ben Gorm’s case (AIR 1964 SC
1752), section S was specifically considered as also the two
Travancore cases. In Ben Gorm’s case {decided on 10th April,
1964), Shah J. speaking for the majority stated in relation to
section 5 in pata. 5 of the judgment as reported in AIR—

“This was legislative recognition of what was sakl by this
Court” in the two Travancore cases, “about the true
connotation of the expression ‘in the course of the ex-
port of the goods out of the territory of Inida’ ip
atticle 286(1){b). A transaction of sale which


222

occasions export or which is effected by a transfer of
documents of title after the goods have crossed cus-
toms frontiers, is therefore, exempt from sales-tax
levied under any State legislation.”

Had the Court considered Ben Gorm’s case, the Court would
have been naturally led to consider the two Travancore cases
because they were so thoroughly discussed in Ben Gorm’s case.
But even this was not done.

‘The result therefore is that we do not know as to exactly on
what basis the Court proceeded, that is, whether proceeded on
the view that Khosla & Co. was an agent of the D.GS. & D. or
on the view that Khosla & Co. was an independent importer
importing the goods purchased by it on its account. The previous
contract with the D.G.S. & D. to sell the goods to him after
the goods have been imported into the territory of India is not
at all inconsistent with this position. It may be pointed out
that these two views would clearly come respectively within the
two categories into which Group IIL (tmports from Africa) was
sub-divided by Patanjali Sastri, C. J. in the second Travancore
case (paras. 20 and 21 of the judgment of the learned Chief
Justice as reported in the AIR). Therefore, perbaps we would
have got a clear guidance from the Supreme Court in Khosla’s
case, had the Court's attention been drawn to the two Travan-

core cases and Ben Gorm’s case.

Then each of the two final views of the Court in Khosla’s
case, namely, that the import was in pursuance of the conditions
of the contract between the assessee and the Director-General of
Supplies and Disposals and that there was 20 possibility of the
goods being diverted by the assessee to any other purpose,
would be equally compatible with the position of Khosla & Co.
as an agent of the D.G.S. & D. as well as an importer of the
goods on its own account.

The result, therefore, of this decision has been that an amount
of confusion and uncertainty has been introduced in the Jaw [sec-
tion 5 as well as article 286(1)(b)]. The State Governments
have not been happy with it. Some of them have openly remon-
strated against the decision on the ground that its effect has been
to curtail the States’ power of imposing taxes on many sale and
purchase transactions which but for the decision would be clearly
subject to such taxes. The Central Government has been also


223

in a fix as to exact scope of the law as enunciated in article
286(1)(b)} and section 5.

Second re- Therefore, within about only six months after the decision the

ferencet Ministry of Finance raised the query whether the decision in

Comaussion Khosla’s case went beyond what the Law Commission in its

(1966) Second Report intended and thereupon the Minisiry of Law
referred the matter to the Law Commission on the 18th July,
1966 for its consideration.

Aller carcful consideration of the whole matter at length
the Commission was divided in its opinions. The majority view
was that “the propositions emerging from Khosla’s case are con
sistent with the two ‘Travancore cases on which the Second Report
of the Law Commission was based and do not go beyond the
intendment of those decisions. The Particular situation involved
in Khosla’s case was, no doubt, not in issue at that time, but
there is nothing in those decisions, which is inconsistent with the
test of contractual obligation applied in Khosia’s 285०", But it
is submitted with respect that the general conclusion of the Com-
mission that “the propositions emerging from Khosla’s case are
consistent with the two Travancore cases...... ” is dificult to
accept. If Khosla’s case is consistent with the Travancore cases,
then why have the States been clamouring and remonsirating
against Khosla’s decision? Can the States now impose tax on
the first sales after import in the face of the Khosla decision ?
Why then did not the majority recommend that the States might
exercise their powers of taxation, the Khosla decision notwith-
Standing? Why then the Ministry of Finance raised the query
at all? All these questions remained unanswered in the report
of the majority.

In my view, correct Approach was adopted in the minority
reports signed by Shri K. G. Datar and Shri R. P. Mookerjee,
‘Their conclusion was that Khosla’s case was inconsistent with

the decisions in the Travancore cases. Mr. Datar in his report
said—

“For the reasons stated in the foregoing paragraphs, T am
of the opinion that the present decision in Khosla’s
case is not consistent with the previous decisions of
the Supreme Court which I have discussed above,
In particular, the decision goes beyond the decisions
of the Supreme Court in the two ‘Travancore cases
and is likely to create uncertainty in the Jaw.”


224

Uncertainty in the law the decision has, no doubt, created. But
the small amendments suggested in section 5 by Shri Datar and
Shri Mookerjec would not, 1 am afraid, remove the uncertainty.
Stui Datar says in para. 115 of his note—

“At present the section reads ‘...... if the sale or pur-
chase...... occasions such. import...... > and ‘if
the sale or purchase occasions such import
If only the Travancore cases were to be followed
and accepted, it would be only the sale occasioning
the export and only the purchase occasioning the
import.”

But I do not think these small changes using only sale in relation
to export and only purchase in relation to import would clear
away the uncertainty and doubt. My reason is simple because
every sale transaction involves a sale as well as a purchase—sale
by the person from whom the property in the goods passes and
3 purchase by the person to whom such property passes, Sale
and purchase may be regarded as the obverse and reverse of
the same transaction. Even article 286 does not appear to have
limited sale to export or purchase to import, had it been so.
then in clause (1}(b) of that article the words “export of the
goods out of’ would have been placed before the words “the
import of the goods inte”. Das, J. also in para. 51 and para. 59
of his judgment in the second Travancore case uscd the ex-
pressions interchangeably.

Io view of the detailed discussion of Khosla’s case and the my dis-
comments I have offered on that case, I regret to say that I agreement
find it difficult 10 persuade myself to accept the view of my with ‘the
colleagues in relation to that case in their report in the present by the
case. 1 haye alrcady shown that the words “occasions such maori
export” in sub-section (1), and the words “occasions such im- case.
port” in sub-section (2), of scction 5 are not free from ambiguity.

We should, therefore, try as clearly as possible to define the
exact scope and content of these words.

We should not hesitate even to recast section in new language
by dropping the word “occasions” if that helps in defining and
delimiting with sufficient clarity the limits of “the course” of
import or export. The difficulty with the word “occasion” both
as a verb and as a noun is that its connotation is very wide.
This is why the Supreme Covrt in the first Travancore case used


225

the words “sales and purchases which ‘kemselves occasion the
export or import of the 80008, as the case may be, out of or
into the territory of India"—the emphasis being laid upon the
pronoun “themselves” to indicate that such sales or purchases
alone (no other salcs or purchases) are the direct, proximate and
immediate cause of the import or export. Other sales or purchases
may be only indirectly or remotely connected with the import or
export, but they are not the direct, proximate or immediate cause.
And Law Commission in making their recommendations in the
Second Report borrowed the words used by the Supreme Court
with this difference that instead of the words “sales or purchases
which themselves occasion etc.” the Law Commission used the
words “only if the sale or purchase... ... occasions etc.” In
section 5 also the words “only if’ have been used. But even
then it seems that the Supreme Court was not sure whether the
language used in the first Travancore case (as cited above) would
fully carry out its intention and objective, Therefore even in the
first case, the Supreme Court, while expressing its clear opinion.
in paca 10 of the judgment as reported in the AIR, used the
expression “A sale by export” to mean a sale which itself occa-
sions the export. In the second of the three views pressed from
the Bar before the Court, the expressions “export sale” or “im-
port purchase” were used. These two expressions were also
used in the very same second view as reiterated by the Court
in the second Travancore case. But while stating its final con-
clusion in para, 14 of the judgment in the first Travancore case,
the Court mentioned only the expression “sales and purchases
which ‘henselves occasion the export or the import”,

While however this expression was also quoted in the judg-
ment in the second Travancore case, in expressing its final con-
clusion in para 16 of the judgment as reported in the AIR, the
Court used the expression “sales by export” and the expression
“purchase by import” in conclusion (1). The Court said—

“Qur conclusions may be summed up as follows:—

(1) Sales by export and purchases by import fall within
the exemption under article 286(1)(b). This was
held in the previous decision.

@.



226

We had already referred to the importance of foreign trade Difference
aad customs duties in our national finance and economy, we befeeen the
have also pointed out that the States’ power to impose taxes on export and
the sale or purchase of goods should not be unduly curtailed as the effects
that may adversely affect the States’ finance and economy. In
considering the meaning of “occasion” we should keep in wew
Doth these aspects. And we should not ignore the impact of
export and import trade in its proper perspective on the indus-
trial growth and development of our country.

We should in this connection note not only the relative
importance of export and import but also the difference between
the two so far as our national cconomy and economic growth
are concerned. Thus, increase m exports not only improves
India’s foreign exchange position and increases her forcign ex-
change reserves by reducing and ultimately eliminating adverse
balance of trade and payments but ulso directly encourages and
accelerates the industrial and agricultural growth and develop-
ment of the country. Increase in imports has just the reverse
effects. It tends to weaken our foreign exchange position and
to deplete our foreign exchange reserves and thereby cripples
our capacity for selfreliance in the economic sphere, attainment
of which should, as far as practicable, be the aim of any self-
respecting nation. If imported foreign goods, articles and
materials flood our internal markets, then the goods, articles and
materials produced in the country may find it difficult to compete
with imported goods and in this process imports directly tend
to hamper and hinder the growth and development of our in-
dustries, trade, business and agriculture.

Even in the case of exports. care is called for so that the Care ne-
export of raw materials, specially those which are likely to be हा
depleted without any chance or possibility of replenishment, is exports.
not encouraged unless that becomes absolutely necessary in the
overall interests of our national economy and national economic
growth. It is well-known that formerly raw materials exported
from India other than those needed for immediate consumption
in the foreign countries where they were exported, were quite
often converted into manufactured products and finished goods
and those manufactured and finished goods were imported into
India for use and consumption in this country. The bitter ex-
perience in this regard in pre-Independence days is well known
and has not yet been forgotten. Any student of India’s eco-
nomic history is aware of the baaeful consequences of this two-
way process in the export trade.


Care to
be taken
in the use
of langu-
age in
legisla-
tive darft-
ine.

227

This is why our export and import trade has been under a
strict system of control and liccnsing under the Import and Hx-
port (Control) Act, 1947, passed in March, 1947 on the eve
of attainment of Independence when a national Government
headed by Jawaharlal Nehru was in power. The Act was of
temporary duration in the beginning but has continued im force
ever since. It is now more or less 3 permanent statute. In
this connection, reference may also be made to the Foreign
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, its objective being to provide
in the cconomic and financial interests of India for the regula-
tion of certain payment, dealings in foreign exchange and secu-
rities and the import and export of currency and billion, [
may also refer to the Export (Quality Control and Inspection}
Act, 1963 whose ebject is to provide for the sound develop-
ment of the export trade of India through quality control and
inspection—ihe aim is thus to boost the export part of for-
eign trade. Alf this shows that the Central Government and
Parliament regard export trade more imporiant than import trade
in the nation’s economy,

‘Therefore, we must be very circumspect in extending ube
Iength of the course of import. And while our national aim
should be 10 boost and develop export trade, we should not
unduly lengthen the course of export cither for the simplc reason.
that the power of the States in the field of sales-tax should
not be unnecessarily curtailed. If the goods manufactured in
our country are of high quality and never go below the stand-
ard quality, then that itself will, increase the demand for such
goods in foreign markets specially if such quality goods are
produced having regard to the tastes and fancies of foreign
buyers irrespective of the imposition of taxes on the sales or
putchases of the goods before their export. In this view no
unnecessary encroachment in the State field is required.

In recasting section 5, we should not only specify the sales
and purchases which do not come within the course of import
or export but also try to indicate the positive aspect of the matter
by spelling out clearly the transactions which should come
within the limits and boundaries of such course. We should
not forget that in judicial decisions language plays an insigni-
ficant role but in icgislative enactments language is the life-blood.
Therefore, in accepting a principle, criterion or guide-line laid
in a judicial decision, the legislator must be very wary in adopt-
ing the Janguage used by the Court.


228

In this way, we may hope to define clearly limits of scope Dealing
of article 286(1) (0)... There is no doubt that we are dealing with ot
with a twilight zone, but to mark out and delimit its outer boun- zone whore
dazies is our task, however difficult it may be. This much is boundaries
certain that twilight zone does not fail within the area of defined
complete darkness. Twilight is intimately and directly connected with care.
with light, it is ia a sense part of the light. There is a natural
and direct link between cwilight and light. At every moment
twilight befor> the morning is gradually and imperceptibly ap-
proaching, and evolving itseli into, light of the day and at every
moment twilight before night is gradually and imperceptibly
reccding from the light of the day and involving itself into
darkness of the night. Therefore, in connection with the
affairs of men, one is justified in treating twilight as part of
light instead of ircating it as part of darkness, and then try to
draw the boundary-line beyond which one should not go. To
demarcate and delineate that correct boundary-line is vherefore
the problem and to find a solution of the problem by a pragmatic
approach bused upon all relevant facts and circumstances of the
situation is the reward which Law, the matrix of all social scien-
ces, hald out to those who submit to its rigorous discipline.

In the fight of the above discussions I Suggest that section Surges.
5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 may be recast on the lines Hons for
indicated below :— of section

Section 5

‘The following principles arc formulated for determining when
a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the course of the

export of the goods out of. or import of the goods into, the terri-
tory of India, namely :—

(1) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take
place in the cours¢ of the export of the goods ont of the territory
of India, if and only if such sale or purchase, either—

{a) itself occasions such export, that is to say, itself is
such as that it can be carried out only by initiating
the process of export with the delivery of the goods
to a common carrier for transportation to their foreign
destination thereby ensuring that the goods are on
their movement to such destination and there is no
possibility of the goods being diverted to any tran-
saction, use or purpose within India ; or


229

(9) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the
goods after the goods have crossed the customs
frontiers of India.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—(i} goods
delivered to a common carrier for transportation as aforesaid in
pursuance of a contract of sale of the goods shall be deemed to
be delivered in pursuance of the sale or purchase itself to which
the contract relates although such sale or purchase is completed
after such delivery ;

(i) a sale or purchase of goods which itself otherwise ovca-
sions the export of the goods within the meaning of sub-clause
{a) shall not cease to be so merely because such sale or purchase
is completed—-

(a) within the State concerned before the delivery of the
goods to a common carrier for transportation 88
aforesaid, or

{b) after the arrival of the goods at their foreign desti-
nation.

(2) The last sale or purchase of goods preceding the sale or
purchase which occasions the export of the goods under clause
{1)(a) or any other sale or purchase preceding such last sale of
purchase shall not be deemed to be a sale or purchase taking
place in the course of the export of the goods out of the territory
of India even if such last or other sale or purchase—

(i) is for the purpose of exporting the goods to implement
any order already received or expected to be received
from, ot to implement any contract already entered
or expected to be entered into, with any person for
or in relation to the export of the goods, or

(it) is an act preparatory to such export.

(3) In deciding whether a sale or purchase of goods occa-
sions the export of such goods out of the territory of India, it
shall be considered among other factors whether there is a pri-
vity of contract between the exporter and the foreign buyer ‘for
the sale or purchase of the goods.

(4) A sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take
place in the course of the import of the goods into the territory
of India, if and only if such sale or purchase ecither—

(a) itself occasions such import. that is to say, itself
js such as that it can be carried out only by initiating


230

the process of import with the delivery of the goods
to a common carrier for transportation to their Indian
destination thereby ensuring that the goods are on
their moyement to such destination and there is no
possibility of the goods being diverted to any tran-
saction, use or purpose outside India ; or

(b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the
goods before the goods have crossed the customs
frontiers of India.

Explonation——For the purpose of this clause,—

(goods delivered to 2 common carrier for transportation
as aforesaid in pursuance of a contract of sale of the goods shall
be deemed to be delivered in pursuance of the sale or purchase
itself to which the contract relates although such sale or purchase
is completed after such delivery ;

(8) a sale or purchase of goods which itself otherwise occa-
sions the import of the goods within the meaning of sub-clause (a)
shall not cease to be so merely because such sale or purchase is
completed—

(a) within the foreign conntry concerned before the deki-
very of the goods to a common carrier for trans-
portation aforesaid, or

(b) after the arrival of the goods at their destination in
India.

(5) The last sale or purchase of goods succeeding the sale
or purchase which occasions the import of the goods under clause
(4) (a) or any other sale or purchase succeeding such last sale
or purchase shall not be deemed to be a sale or purchase taking
place in the course of the import of the goods into the territory
of India even if such last or other sale or purchase is for the
purpose of importing the goods to implement any order already
received or expected to be received from, or to implement any
contract already entered or expected to be entered into, with any
person for or in relation to the import of the goods.

(6) [n deciding whether a sale or purchase of goods occasions
the import of such goods into the territory of India, it shall be
considered among other factors whether there is a privity of


ऊहीण खिल जला 5

एन

231

contract betwen the importer and the foreign seller for the sale
or purchase of the goods.

NB.

(1) The above suggestions do not constitute a legislative
draft strictly speaking, but section 5 may be redrafted on the
basis of these suggestions. I have tried to make the language
wide and comprehensive enough to cover all cases contemplated
and yet exact and precise enough to exclude cases to which the
section is not intended to apply.

(2) I have not omitted in the above suggestions the ex-
pression “occasions such export” and the expression “occasions
such import” on the ground that these expressions received judi-
cial recognition more than twenty years back and legislative
recognition eighteen years back. But I have tried to explain
these expressions to define comprehensively as well as precisely,
as far as practicable, their scope and content,—the necessity for
such explanation being to remove the ambiguities of the word
“occasions”.

S. 9, Sen-Verma

New Delhi, the 20th May, 1974.

MGIPRRND—20 Law/74—Scc. IV NS_21-9-74