LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTY-SECOND REPORT

ON

THE WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION
ACT, 1923

October, 1974
28M of Law/74—1


Chapter

1
1A.

1B.

10.

CONTENTS

Tatrodaction

Hlistory and Main Features

Section 1 and Extra.
Definitions.

Right to Compensation =.

‘Computation of Compensation. . foe
Distribution of Compensation, 2 2 |.
Notices and Reports

Protection of Compensation and other Provisions
Enforcement 2. . ee
Commissioners, their Jurisdiction and Procedure,

erritorial Anplication of the Act.

Regarding

Reference, Registration of Agte>moats, Apgea! ant Recover

Rales. . .

Schedules.

a

47
69

sd

छा

100

109

110


D.O. No. F. 2(7)/73-L.C.
P. B. Gajendragadkar
‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Dethi-1
October 15, 1974

My Dear Minister,

Thave great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 62nd
Report of the Commission on the Workmen’s Comrensa-
tion Act, 1923. The circumstances in which the subject
was undertaken for study are dealt with in the opening
paragraph of the Report.

Having regard to the nature of the subject and its
importance, the Commission first made a preliminary study
of the subject, and framed a Questionnaire in order to
elicit views. This Questionnaire was sent to the Ministries
concerned, the State Governments, the High Courts, Bar
Associations, and other interested persons and bodics,
including associations of employers and workmen. The
replies received in response to this Questionnaire were
then duly considered by the Commission, and a draft
Report on the subject was prepared by the Member-
Secretary, Shri Bakshi, and discussed by the Commission
at length. After discussion, the Report was finalised.

However, the final draft, as approved, was being
typed and the typing work could not be completed
before the ist of October, 1974, when the Commission
was re-constituted with the addition of Mr. B.C. Mitra.
That is why, Mr. Mitra has not signed the Report.


Incidentally, I may mention that this Report is the
first Report of the present Commission since its reconsti-
tution.

With warm personal regards,

Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(P. B. Gajendragadkar)

Hon’ble

Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

New Delhi.

Encl. : As above.


omy

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1. Revision of the Workmen’s Compensation Act has been
taken up by the Law Commission on a tefuience from the Goy-
crment. Before we took up this subject, we had, of our own,
taken up the question of extension of the Act to cmployment in
agriculture, and prepared a draft Report on that subject, which
we had circulated for comments. In the meantime, at the re-
quest of the Government, the entire Act has been taken up for
revision.

1.2. It is not disputed that the Act is one of the most im-
Portant legislative measures of socio-economic justice.

It is an oft-repeated Slogan: “The cost of the Product should
bear the blood of the workman.i”

This objective may not have been realised fully. But it gives
us, in striking language, a clue to the governing principle of the

Act, and its socio-economic importance.

1.3. Under the Constitution, it is the duty of the State to
Promote the welfare of the peop le by securing and Protecting,
as effectively as it may, ब social order in which Justice, social,
economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the
national life? Tt cannot be denied that legislation in favour of
the economically weaker elements creates formal inequality in
order to establish economic equality.

In another directive Principle’, the Constitution Provides that
the State shal! endeavour “to secure by suitable legislation... . .
to all workers, agricultural industrial or otherwise... .. condi-
ons of work ensuring a decent standard of life... 8

_ 1.4. ता is hardly necessary to emphasisc the need far revi-
sion of the Act. There have been far-reaching developments in
x ions in Tedia न

956), page 333, n. 96,
*. Article 38 of the Constitution,

3, See para 1.9, infra,

4 Article 43 of the Constitnrion,

Genesis.

Importance
of the Act,

Directive
principles
in tie Cans-
titulion.

Nead for
revisian of
the Act


2

the Act was passed, and it is obviously desirable that this bene-
ficial piece of social legislation should be reviewed in the con-
text of those developments. The Directive Principles in the
Constitution’, to which we have briefly referred?, also lay cm-
phasis, in particular, on the need to protect the health and
strength of workers, the need to make effective provision for
public assistance in cases of unemployment, sickness and disabie-
ment, and on endeavours to secure to all workers decent condi-
tions of work and on ensuring a decent standard of life. It is
not often realised that the provision for dependants in the Work-
men’s Compensation Act is specially intended to avoid want
and penury, and is of direct relevance with reference to these
directive principles.

The concept of equality, which is one of the basic principles
of the Constitution, has also provided inspiration for a revision
of provisions resting on discrimination.

1.5. Apart from this, it may be noted that even before the
Constitution, significant developments took place. India took
a big step in 1948 towards social security for industrial em-
ployees, when the Employees’ State Insurance Act was passed.
Some of the provisions of that Act are of an enlightened nature,
and naturally suggest the desirability of exploring the possibility
of their being adopted in the Workmen’s Compensation Act.

Report of 4.6, It should be noted that the National Commission on
the patio: Labour, in its Report forwarded to the Government a few years
nalCom- ago, made several f important recommendations for amending the

mission on Act.?
Labour.

Number of AT. In this connection, mention should also be made of

iew!tural agricultural employees. According to the Report o: the Consus

ae i of India, 19714, the total number of workers in India is

employes. 180,949,809. Out of this, the number in rural areas is

v 148,998,809. The following are the numbers of workers em-
ployed in various activities गा the rural and urban areas:—

Activities Rutal Urban

(a) Cultivators ee - 76,544,43% 1,632,275
(0) Agricultural Labourers . . . ~ 45,569,979 1,919,404
(ले Live-stock, forestry, fishing, hunting and

plantations, Orchards and Allied Activities. 3,758,642 558.159

1, Articles 38, 39०), वा and 43 of the Constitution.

3, Para 1.3, supra.
2, Report of the National Commission on Labour, (1969), pages 165, er”
seq.

4. Economic characteristics of Population (Selected Tables, serizs 1 — India),
Census Paper 3 of 1972, pages 2—4.



“

3
‘Activities हु —_ Rural Urban
(@ Mining and Quarrying 5 601,903 320,855
Manufacturing processing, servicing and
© repairs ns a . 8 . . . 8,164,840 8,902,675
(f) Construction. . . . . . 1,096,040 1,119,258
(g) Trade and Commerce. . . . . 3,623,301 6,414,942
(hy) ‘Transport, storage and Commanications . 1,210,069 3,191,132
(i) Other Services. . . . . . 7,805,344 7.960131

We quote these figures to show the importance of considering
the question of application of the Act to persons employed in agri-
culture.

1,8. It is, therefore, in the fitness of things that, in the year Need for
which marks the semi-centenary of the Act, an opportunity has (संता,
arisen to undertake a comprehensive review of the Act.

No wholesale review of the Act has taken place since the
Report of the Royal Commission on Indian Labour. Importané
recommendations made by the National Commission on Labour?
have not found their way to the statute book. Practical experi-
ence of the working of the Act, as revealed by judicial decisions
and otherwise, has brought out certain difficulties. That apar’
far-reaching developments in the industrial field have taker
place, as already pointed out. Notions of social justice have also
undergone radical change.

1.9. With reference to Jegislation in favour of the weaker Equalisation
sections, it has been stated? that:-— in substance.
“Justice at least is done in this way in the shape of
cqualisation, the breach in the idea of abstract and
uniform equality serving to level the sharp points of
sncial differences.”

“By social Igpislation in favour of workers, tenants aad
lodgers, as also of agriculture, the legislator is doing
a work of equalisation, which is to improve the lot
and prospects of the less fortunate classes. But
that is exactly what constitutcs ihe essence of the
so-called social freedom. Constitutional rights can
no longer remain mere landmarks between the State
and the individual.”

1, Report of the National Commission on Labour. See para 1,6, suora.

2, Fritz Cygi, “The Rule of Law in the Contemporary Welfare State’, (1962)
Vol. 4, Journal of the International Commission of Jurists, No. 1, page
3, at pages 8 and 9.


Social insu-
rane.

Effect of
Employees’
State Insu-
ranoe Act.

Desirabili-
ty of amen-

Simpbifi-
cation of
Jangauge.

4

1.10. tn fact, the idea of social security has been carried
much further by the scheme of compulsory insurance introduced
by the Employecs State Insurance Act?, but we are not concerned
with that Act at the moment. What we should emphasise is
the essential connection of the Workmen’s Compensation Act
with social security and social insurance.

1.11, After the passing of the Employces’ State Insurance
Act’, the area of application of the Workmen's Compensation
‘Act has diminished, to a certain extent, But the Eraployecs’
State Insurance Act applies only to (1) factories, and (ii) aoli-
fied establishments, and in the rest of the cases the Workmen's
Compensation Act still holds the ६1७४.

1,12. We would at this stage also Tike to quote what was
stated in a recent study® dealing with personal injurles:—

“fhe rate at which social institutions and ideas are being
turned upside down is not merely dramatic—it is
necelerating every year in a fashion which Jemands
a great deal of mental energy to keep pace. It can-
not be good enough, therefore, to adjust merely to
the contemporary needs. Some deliberate attention
should be given to the foresecable demands of the
years immediately ahead. And if there may seem
10 be a weight cf tradition against change. ut least
it is worth remembering that the apparent heresies
of one generation become the orthodexies of the
next. The ultimate validity of any social measure
will depend not upon its antccedents, but upon its
current and future utility.”

1.13. There is. therefore, considerable justification for under-
taking a study in depth of the Act and for considering what
amendments of the law are necded.

1.14. There is another aspect which is of special importance
in connection pith logislation intended for the common man,
like the Workmen’s Compensation Act. In such legislation the
expression of the law should be as simple as possible,—of course
consistently with that precision which is expected of every legal
writing, whether legislative or otherwise. Some of the pzevisions
of the Act ate unsatisfactory, because the degree of detail, cla-
poration and complexity renders them waintelligible to these far

1, Section 53, Emslovecs" State Insurance Act, 1948, passed as a result of
‘the Report of Professor B. 7, Adarkar, on Health Insurance for Industciat
Workers (1946),

4, Employees® State Inau:ance Act, 1948.

+. Woodhouse Cammicsion—Repert on compensation for personal injury
(New Zealand 1969), pr 34, cited in nove on Compensation for persocal

jajury (1969) 20 LC.L.Q 194, 196.


5

whom they are intended, and some others have become obsoles-
cent. In general, while the Act concentrates mainly on matters
of detail, in some respects it fails to deal adequately with the
essential ideas.

1.15. Before closing this Chapter, we may state that the sub- Matter in
ject-matter of the Act falls within the Concurrent List and Par- the Concur-
liament is, thercfore, competent to deal with it+ vent List

4, Concurrent List, entry 24.


Latroduce
tion

History of
compensa-
tion,

History of

CHAPTER 1A

HISTORY AND MAIN FEATURES

1A.1. A few observations about the history cf the Act and
its main fcatures may now be appropriate. We shall, for this
purpose, take a gencral view of the compensation law. “We shall
then examine the sources of this branch of the law, and its
significant features. Sometimes, reference will be made to legis-
lation in other common law jurisdictions.

1A.2. Speaking historically, the concept of compensation has
gone through several stages:

(1) At some remote period, well before the Twelve
Tables, the infliction of an injury led to attempts to
exact vengeance cither by the person injured or by
his kin;

(2) In course of time, custom began to impose limits
upon the extent beyond which vengeance might not
be so exacted.

(3) At a still later stage, the State itself, in the form of

- some central authority, began to regulate the exac-
tion of revenge in the form of imposition of punish-
ment.

(4) So, far the concept of vengeance was prominent.
Ultimately, the stage is reached in which elements of
revenge have disappeared, and the principle is estab-
lished throughout the law that for every injury com-
pensation should be paid.

But this liability for compensation is, in general, still based
on fault,

(5) ‘The next stage could be the one where compensation
is payable without fault. The law is moving in this
direction, but the movement covers only certain fields
of activities for the present. The Act is concerned
with one of them.

14.3. The workmen’s compensation system was the result

workmen's of growing dissatisfaction with the common law procedures and

compensa-
tion.

employees’ liability laws formerly applying to cases of work
injuries.t Under the common-law procedure, the employce
who was injured on his job got little or nothing in re-
compense. To recover damages against his employer, he had
to file a suit and prove that the injury was due to th? employer's

.S. Deptt. of Labour, State Workmen's Compensation Laws, Bulletin

No. 161 (1968 revision) page 2,



7

negligence. This was a costly, difficult and long drawn-out pro-
cess. And, in addition, the employer, even though he had been
negligent, could avail himself of three common law defences,
namely, assumption of risk (in other words, volenti non fit in-
juria), fellow servant rule, and contributory negligence.

14.4. When, during the last century, the industrial employer
came to displace the merchant and the craftsman as the pivot 0
the economic system, uo! the least important among the adjust-
ments that were called for was the creation of legal machinery
whereby the inevitable toll of human life and limb, caused by
Jarge scale mechanical production and distribution, could be
equitably allocated between employer and employce.* The pro-
0055 by which the adjustment has been, and is being, made is,
in the main, a matter of legislation. The courts, guided by ¢s-
tablished doctrines of the common law, found little that was satis-
factory. More significant, in developing that which they found,
they were guided by economic ideals that were fast becoming
little more than convenient fictions for rationalization.*

“All these conditions (of master and servant)” said Bentham,?
“are a matter of contract. It belongs to the parties interested to
arrange them according to their own convenience.” And such
was the social philosophy upon which courts erected the common-
law rules governing an emptoyer’s liability for industrial accidents.
Where the employer was persontlly at fault, recovery was casier.

14.5. At common law, the doctrine of vicarious liability was
subject to a peculiar exception whereby an employer was not
vicariously liable to one servant for the negligence of another.
In England, this exception was known as the doctrine of com-
mon employment. Jn some other jurisdictions. it was known as
the fellow ‘servant rule. It is generally traced to Priestley v.
Fowler,’ and was first clearly enunciated in the latter case of

Hatchinson®

The doctrine was based on a fictitious umplied term in the
contract of service to the effect that the servant agreed to run
the risks naturally incident to his employment, and that one of
these risks was that of harm due to the negligence of a fellow-
servant,

1, Lester Schoene, “Workmen's Compensation — Inter-State
(1933-34) 47 Harvard Law Review 339.

4, Lester Schoene, “Workmen's Compensation — Inter-State Railways”
(1933-34) 47 Harvard Law Review 389,

. Bentham, Theory of Legistation (Hildreth Tr., 2nd ed. 1871) 199, quoted
in Lester Schoens, “Workmen's Compensation — Inter-State Railways"
) 47 Harvard Law Review 389.

. Priestley ¥. Fowler, (1837) 3 M & Wt.
. Haichinson v. York, New Caste etc. Riy. Ca. (1850) 5 Exch. 343.

+ Saknond, Torts (1965) page 668.

ailways’

Addjusirac-
nts of the
लिए. mac-
hinery, ne
cesgitated
by industri-
al changes.



8

But it might be difficult for the workman tc show that his
injury was due to the negligence of anyone at all or even to तीड-
cover what its cause might have been. So the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act, 1897, adopted a new approach. ‘The Act provid-
ed compensation for a workman injured in the course of his em-
ployment even though no negligence on the part of his employer
or anyone else could be shown. The basis of the workmen’s
claim was nol negligence or fault but accident.’

Where injury was occasioned through the negligence of a
fellow servant,” or resulted from one of the ordinary risks of the
employment,’ it was said that the employee, having chosen to
encounter those dangers in return for a stipulated compensation,
could not be heard to complain.

Problem of 18.6. The purpose of workmen’s compensation laws was to
industrial eliminate the hardships experienced under the common law sys-

पाक, tem, by providing prompt payment of benefits—regardless of fault

hrion ik and with a minimum of legal formality.
Eurone,

of 14.7. Disability or death caused by industrial employment is”
3- not a problem special to our country. On the contrary, these
eee “grim companions” of mass production, and the problems which
vrobiem of they raise, have been dealt with legislatively throughout Europe
indusirial and America since the latter part of the nineteenth century.
Usability. Germany, Austria and Norway had provided Workmen’s Com-
pensation legislation for their industries between 1884 and 1894,
By 1903, most European countries had such a system in effect.

Develop- 14.8, Warkmen’s compensation laws in the U.S.A. had their

menis in} beginning in 1908, when the Federal Government passed an Act

i * covering certain civil employces.* State laws in the U.S.A. start-
ed in 1911, when Washington and Kansas both passed such laws
on March 14; both laws, however, had a later effective date.
The first State to put an Act into effect was Wisconsin, whose
law was approved and became effective the same day—May 3,
1911. Seven other States passed laws in 1911, and from then
onwards, there was rapid progress for several years.

Tn 1909, New York State and several other American States
appointed commissions to study the problem. Pennsylvania fol-
lowed suit in 1911. In 1915, article वा, section XXI of the

1, Saimond, Torts (1945) page 669,

2, See Labatt, Master and Scrvant (2nd ed. 1913), Vol. 4, page 1393, cited
in Lester Schoene, “Workmen's Compensation” etc. (1933-34), 47 Harvard
Law Review 389,

3, Labatt, Master & Servant (2nd ed. 1913), Vol, 3, page 1167, cited in Lester
Schoene, *Workme.'s Compensation” etc. (1933-34) 47 Harvard Law
Review 389,

4, U.S. Deptt. of Labour, State Workmen's Compensation Laws, Bulletin
No. 161 (1968 revision), page 1.


sw

ay

9

Constitution of Pennsylvania was amended! to permit such legis-
lation. In the same year, Ponnsylvania’s first Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act was passed.?

In 1920, all but six States in the U.S.A. had such laws sand
the Federal Act for civil employees had been re-enacted in 19163
Tt was not until 1948 that the iast State passed such an Act, and,
in the meantime, another, Federal law had been passcd—the
Longahoreman’s and Harber Workers’ Compensation Act—which
was made applicable also, by a separate Act, to the District of
Columbia.

As has been stated by an American writer‘

“Since the compulsory retirement of the horse in favour
of steam power, industrial accidents hae persistently
nibbled away at the stability of our modern economy,
These misfortunes impose ‘upen us twin obligations.
The first is to the injured workman. In justice we
should alleviate the hardship of the labourer whose
body is broken or destroyed in Producing for our
common well-being. The second obligation is to the
stability of our economy. For the common good we
thust cushion the financial impact of such misfortunes
on our industries.”

1A.9. Similar considerations weighed with the Indian Legis-
lature in enacting the Workmen's Compensation Act in 1923. As
Pointed out by Dr. Panandikar,? compensation :chemes were not
unknown in India. But the worker was always at the mercy
of the employer. He could not claim compensation as a matter
of right. The compensation was paid only when the employer,
out of his kind gesture, granted it, Dr. Hasan® tells us: “As
far back as 1884, workers in Bombay made a demand ‘for com-
pensation in a petition to the Gowersmert of India, bu: nothing
came out of it.”

1६ appears that in 1920, the workers actually agitated, and
a number of strikes were organised in the country on this issue.

1, Act of June 2, 1915, P.L. 736, as amended, PA, STAT, ANN, tit, 771
1056 (Purdon 1952),

3. Soc John M. Mclaughtia, “Double Standards in Workmen's Compen-
sation (1957) 30 Temple LQ. 294.

3, U.S. Deptt, of Labour, State Workm:n’s Compensation Laws, Bulletin
No, 161, (1968 revision), page 1.

4, John Melaughtin, “Double Staudards in Workmen's Compensation in
Pennaylvanin , (1957) 30 Temple L.C, 294.

5. Panandikars Industrial Labour in India, cited by Vivek Ranjan Bhatta-
charya, Social Security Measuras in India (1970), page 76.

6. N. Hasan, Social Szoutity System of India (1972), pag:

7. Rai Choudhary, Social Security in India and Beitaia, page 34, cited by
pixel, Ranjan Bhattacharya, Social Security Measures in India (1970),
Page 76,

Moverrent
in India,


Bi ‘of 1922

Asend-
ments since
1923,

Amend-

10

13.98. In July 1921, the Government of India adiressed the
local Governments on the desirability of introducing legislation
for the payment of workmen's compensation.’ This was donc
after a detailed examination of the question by the Government
of India. The provisional views of the Government of India
were published for general _ information. The advisability of
legislation had been accepted by the great majority of local
Governments and of employers’ and workers’ associations, and
the Government of India believed that public opin generally
was in favour of Icgislation.?

In June, 1922, a committee was convened to consider the
question. This committec was composed, for the most part, of
members of the Imperial legislature. After considering the numer-
ous replies and opinions received by the Government of India,
the Committee was unanimously in favour of legislation,
and drew up detailed recommendations regarding the tines which,
in its opinion, such legislation should follow. The Bill presented
in 1922 followed these recommendations* closely. A number of
supplementary provisions were added where necessary, but practi-
cally no variations of importance were made.

14.10. The Act has, since its enactment, been extensively
amended. Some of the amendments were necessitated by Inter-
national Labour Organisation Conventions,—e.g. the amendment
of 1925. An extensive revision of the Act followed on the Re-
port of the Royal Commission on Labour ( 1931),—-the amend-
ment of 1933. Constitutional changes made by the Government
of India Act, 1935 necessitated amendment of the Act in 1937.
Several amendments were made in 1939, 1942 and 1946, their
principal object being to widen the scope of the Act in one res-
pect or another:

The amendment Act 7 of 1959 enlarged the scope of the
Schedules I and ll. For exampic, the number of occupational
discases was increased from 12 to 15, and the number of in-
jurics entitling the workman to partial disablement benefits was
increased from 14 to 54. The Act also attempted to make the
procedure speedy. For cxample, the Amendment Act reduced
the ‘waiting period’ from 7 days to 3 days. It also removed the
difference between adults and minors in respect of payment of
certain benefits.

1A.11. History of the Amendment Act of 1959 is interesting.

went Act Of After independence, it was felt that the machinery established for

the assessment and payment of compensation was slow-moving,
and that the final settlement took a lot of time. In order to

1, 1६. Hesaa, Social Security Svstem of Tadia (1972), page 66,

2, Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the Bill of 1972 dated 29th
‘August, 1922.

3, Statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the 1922 811, dated 29th
‘August, 1922.


s

nn” Manet came ee
* oo

है H

redress this situation, the Central Government in July 1949 ad-
dressed a letter to the State Governments inviting suggestions for
ensuring speedy settlement of claims. In the light of the sug-
gestions made, a memorandum showing the proposals for amend-
ing the Act was prepared. The memorandum was circulated in
July, 1953, Later on, a technical committee was appointed in
December, 1955 to suggest the amendment of the list of occu-
pational diseases. The Act of 1959 was passed after a conside-
ration of all this material.

An amendment effected in 1962 raised the wage limit of the
covered workman from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500 per month.

14.12, In England, after the General Election of June, 1945
which brought the Labour Party into power, the workmen’s Com-
pensation Act was replaced by the National Insurance (Industrial
Injuries) Act of 1946.

In India also, after the passing of the Employees’ State Insu-
tance Act,’ the area covered by the Workmen’s Compensation
Act has narrowed down to a certain extent. But, as already
pointed out,? the Employees’ State Insurance Act applies only
to (i) factories, and (ii) notified establishments, and, in the rest
of the cases the Workmen’s Compensation Act still holds the
field.

1A.13, It would be of interest to refer to an analysis of the
trend of di:velcpments by Warren A. Seavey. He says®—

“In determining whether there is tort liability when harm
has been caused, the focal point of conflict has been whether
one should be liable for harm irrespective of fault, The law
has been in a state of flux in its desire to protect the two basic
interests of individuals—the interest in security and the interest
in freedom of action. The protection of the first requires that
every person who has been harmed as a result of the activity
of another should be compensated by the other irrespective of
his fault; the protection of the second requires that a person who
harms another should be required to compensate the other only
when his activity was intentionally wrongful or indicated an
undue lack of consideration for the interests of others. At any
given time and place the law is the resultant derived from the
competition between these two basic concepts.”

12.14, We shall now have a look at the operative provisions
of the Workmen's Compensation Act. Under the Act, if per-
sonal injury is caused to a workman by an accident arising out

1. Employees State Insurance Act, 1948.

3, Chapter 1, supra.

3. Warren A. Seavey, “Principles of Torts, (149), 56 Harv. Law Rev. 56
7, repeined ia Selected Essays on Law of Tots (Harvard, 1959), page

28 M of Law/7T4—2

Effect of

Employees’
State Insue
rance Act.

Trend of
Deyelop-
roents.

Gist of the
operative
Provisions,


Chief prin-
ciples of
Workmen’s
Compensa-
tion Act.

‘

12

of, and, in the course of his employment, his employer shall
be liable to pay compensation irrespective of fault, in. accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 2 of the Act? The expression
“workman” is defined so as to include not all employees. but
only a limited class. ‘The liability of the employer to pay com-
pensation is, under this provision, excluded in the wase of cer-
tain minor injuries;? and there is no liability for an injury caused
by an accident directly attributable to the workman being under
the influence of drink or drugs or to the wilful disobedience of
orders and rules by the workman, or to the wilful removal or
disregard by the workman of safety devices? Certain diseases
contracted in an employment are also regarded as “injuries
caused by accident”,4 for the Purpose of the Act. The liability
arising under the Act cannot be excluded ‘by contract.

1A.15. The chief principles of the Act can be reduced to
the following principles. These principles lay down its scope,
modify the common law, quantify the compensation or create an
alternative machinery :

(1) Scope of the industrial injury.—The compensable
injury is described as any personal injury cecurring by
accident “arising out of, and in the course of, the
employment.”5

(2) Scope of the employment to which the Act applies, —
The Act is applicable to certain specified employ-
ments. Moreover, the benefit can be claimed only
by a person falling within the definition of “workman”.

These two principles lay down the scope of the Act.

(3) Employer's liability irrespective of fault.—The employer
is (with limited exceptions) liable to pay compensa~
tion irrespective of fault.?

(4) Contracting out of the Act not permissible.—The Act
overrides any contract to the contrary.

These two principles modify the common law.

(5) Calculation of compensation.—Compensation is, from,

the point of view of the workman, the most important

|. Section 3(1), Workmen’s Compensation Act.

. Section 3(1), proviso (a),

. Section 3(1), proviso (b).

Section 3(2), section 3(2A), section 3(3) and section 3(4),
Section 3(1),

Section 2(1)(n), tead with the Second Schedule.

. Section 3,

a a ae


13

part of the Act. The broad questions to be deter-
mined are—
(a) Nature of the injury, and its consequences'\—
(i) Death;
(ii). Permanent total or partial disablement; and
(iii), Temporary disablement.
(9) Amount of “wages”,
(०) Whether compensation should be periodical or in
jump sum.

(6) Case of death—Rights of dependants are dealt with.?
These two principles quantify the compensation in de-
tail.

.

(7) Machinery for speedy settlement®—Since the scheme
of compensation is complicated, and usually involves
the determination of difficult questions of fact and
law, a machinery for speedy settlement is provided.

This last principle creates a machinery alternative to the
conventional courts.

A few detailed comments about some of these aspects may
be useful.

14.16. The liability to pay compensation under the Act is
confined to “personal injury”,—an expression not defined in the
Act. The injury must have been caused by “accident”. This
expression is also not defined in the Act, though, as pointed out
above, there is a special provision regarding certain diseases.
The accident must arise “out of and in the course of employ-
ment”,—a phrase which, of necessity, must be interpreted in
the light of the facts in each case. If liability arises under the
Act,, compensation is payable by the “employer”—which ex-
pression is defined’ in the Act.’ Lastly, the liability is owed
only to a ‘workman’,"—which is an important expression and
which is defined in the Act,” sq as to include his dependants.

The injury must arise “out of and in the course of his em-
ployment”. These words were used in England in the old Work-
men’s Compensation Acts from 1897 to 1945. The self-same
words have been used in England in the Road Traffic Acts,
1930 to 1960. They have also been used in Employer's lia-
bility policies. This expression, is, perhaps, the most important
one in the Act.

oy

न Cf section 4,
Section 2(1)(d) and section 8(5).

Sections 19 to 30, डे
See supra.

Section 2(1)(e).

Scetion 2(1)(n), rend with the Second Schedule,
Sce infra.

NA we ee ol

Liability
confined to
personal

injury.


14

importance 48.17. The definition of “workman”.’ as given in the Act,

of the defi.
nition of
“workman”

specifically excludes a person whose employment is of a casual
» mature of that casual worker is employed otherwise than for the
Purpose of the employer’s trade or business. The definition
also excludes a person working in the capacity of a member of
the Armed Forces of the Union. Subject to these two important
exceptions, “workman”, as defined in the Act, means a person
who is—

(i) a railway servant as defined in section 3 of the Indian
Railways Act, 1890, not permanently employed in any
‘administrative, district or sub-divisional office of a rail-
way and not employed in any such capacity as is speci-
fied in Schedule I, or

(ii) employed on monthly wages not exceeding five hundred
Tupees in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule
I,

In order to determine the question whether a person is a
workman or not, one has necessarily to look to (i) Schedule IT,
(ii) capacity in which the person is employed [with a modification
in case of railway servants falling under item (i)] and (iii) the
monthly wages [except in the case of railway servants falling under
item (i) of the definition.]

Persons drawing as wagss more than Rs. 500 a montir
(unless they are railway servants) are noi “workman”. Persons
of this type were presumably regarded as qualified, by their edu-
cation and their means, to make provision for themselves.

Casual labourers who are not employed for the purposes of
the employer's trade or business are not workmen. There are
obvious practical difficulties in including them.

Members of the armed forces ate also excluded, because they
agrec to serve’on the understanding that hazards are not
“accidents”. (These persons may, however, be covered by
separate statutory or non-statutory provisions, if they sustain
injuries in the course of their duties).

In the case of railway workers, falling under item (i) of the
definition, the restriction as to the minimum amount of wages
does not apply. The apparent assumption is that (with the ex-
ception of persons “permanently employed” in the larger railway
offices)? all railway employees have to undergo a certain amount
of risk and there would be great difficulty ia making a distinction
between those working in the specified capacity? and those not
so working.

1, Section 2(1)(a).
*, This exception will be separately examined.
*, Second Schedule.



”

15

1A.18. With reference to the definition! of “workman”,
thus, the most important part of the Act is the Second Schedule,
which contains the list of persons who, subject to the provisions
of section 2(1) (1), are included in the definition of “workman”.
It is to be noted that while railway servants of certain categories?
become workmen for the purpose of the Act irrespective of
their monthly wages, other employees become workmen only
i€ two conditions are satisfied; first their monthly wages must
not exceed Rs. 500, and secondly, they must be, employed in
any such capacity as is specified in the Second Schedule.*

12.19. Thus, for understanding the scope of the Act, the
Second Schedule is very important. The Schedule itsclf is a
yery long one, containing entries (i) to (xxxii).

14.20. Some State Governments have availed _ themselves
of the power vested in them to apply the Act to other hazar-
lous occupations.!’ The Government of Maharashtra has, for
example, extended the Act for farm workers. Coconut plucking
has becn covered in Tamil Nadu. The Governments of Tamil
Nadu, U.P., Mysore and Bihar have extended the applicability
of the Act to the loading or unloading of cargo on any mechani-
cally operated vehicles or driving such vehicles for the transport
of goods. The Government of Bihar has extended the Act to
sweepers engaged in cleaning deep surface drains, sewers and
on trucks.

In the Mysore State (now Karnataka), outdoor Municipal
or District Board workers havg been covered in benefits under
the scheme. Other works which have been brought within. the
ambit of the scheme are loading, unloading and transport of
timber, works in all establishments using power and the esta-
blishments covered under the Factories Act.

1A, 21. We now come to the employments covered by the
Act, listed in the Second Schedule. It would appear that the
various categories of employment, listed in the Second Schedule
to the Act, broadly share a common feature, namely, that the
employments mentioned are comparatively more hazardous than
employments not listed in the Schedule. No doubt, where the
Second Schedule includes an employment on the ground of the
number of persons employed, it seems to take into account also
the economic status of the employer, the obvious assumption
being that if a large number of persons is employed, the employer
would be prosperous enough and would have capacity to pay.

The principle of hazardous employment is also the basis of
the power given to the State Government under section 2(3) to
add, to the Scheduled. any class of persons employed in any
occupation which the State Government is satisfied is a “hazar-
dous occupation”,

1, See para 14.17, supra.
3, Section 2(1(nyi
3, Section 20060
+. N. Hasan, Social Security System in India, (1972), page 68.

Second
Schedule,

Notification.
by State
Goyern-
ments,

Employme+
nts covered
by the Act.


16

Provision 1A.22. It may, in this connection, be of interest to refer to
Ci 1 (६ a provision of the Soviet Civil Code, which provides for strict
vil Code. liability in cases of hazardous enterprises. It reads as follows: —-

“454. Liability for harm caused by a source of increased
danger.—Organisations and citizens whose activity
involves increased danger for those in the transport
otgantsations, industrial enterprises building projects,
Possessors of motor cars, etc., must make good the

arm caused by the source of increased danger unless

they prove that the harm arose in consequence of ir-
resistible force or as a result of the intention of the
victim.”?

Jt is, of course, hardly necessary to add that the above pro-
vision is a general one applicable in the ficld of civil wrongs.
We have quoted it as illustrative of the idea of danger which
has been expressly adopted in the provision.

Hazardous 1A.23. In the U.S.A. also, in many States, the 1895 relating
employ- 10 workmen’s compensation apply mainly to employments listed
oa” as hazardous and extra-hazardous employments. Moreover.
. most of the laws exempt employers having fewor than a speci-
fied number of employees?, Many States exclude agricultural
employment.®

In many States of the U.S.A. the laws are compulsory, but
in some they are elective. Where they are elective, the eraployer
has the option of rejecting the law. but then he loses the com-
mon law defences of—

(i) assumption of risk;

(ii) negligence of fellow employee;
(iii) contributory negligence.
Most employers accept the law*.

Compensa- 1A.24. The concept of “compensation” under the Act is
tion, linked with the nature of the injury—fatal or non-fatal, total

ot partial, permanent or temporary.
Compensation under the Act is thus limited not only as te

persons and employments included, but also as to injuries cov

ered. The compensable injury must be “arising out of and

1. Article 454, R.S.F.S.R. Civil Code cited in Alice Jay, “Principl=s of
Lianility in Soviet Laws of Torts” (1969) 18 ILC.L.Q. 424, 427 (replacing
old article 404).

3, U.S. Department of Labour, State Workmen's Compensation Laws
Bulletin No. 161 (1969) page 11.

*. See U.S. Department of Labour, Agricultural Workers and Workmen's
Compensation Bulletin No. 206 (1964). पु

4. US, Department of Labour, State Workmen's Compensation Laws Bulletin
(1969), page 3.


»

17

in the course of employment’. The expression “injury” was,
even before the Legislature made a provision on. the subject,
held in many countries! to include occupational diseases.

18.25. The disabilities caused by a personal injury have
been classified, in the Act, as follows :—

‘The large majority of cases for which cash benefits are paid
involve temporary total disablement. The employee is unable
(in such cases) to work at all while he is recovering from the
injury, but he is expected to recover fully.

A permanent partial disablement means a worker has a per-
manent injury, but is not completely disabled. He is usually
able to work. If he cannot go back to his old job, he can
often do other types of work or be trained to do so.

As against this, persons having a permanent total disable-
ment are presumed to be unable to work at all. or unable to
work regularly in any well-known branch of the labour market.
When death occurs, the purpose of compensation is to provide
for members of the family or other persons who have been de-
pendent on the deceased workman.

-g., the Massachusetts Court (US.A.), see U.S. Department of Labour
Bulletin No. 161 (1969), page 19.

Disabilitics-
Classifica-
tion of.


Tntroduc-
tory.

Matters to
‘be conside-
red in
connection
with extra-
territorial
operation.

Rule of
construc-
tion.

CHAPTER 1B

EXTRA-TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF THE ACT

1B.1. We propose to deal, in this Chapter, with the extra-
territorial application of the Act (concerning section 1). The
reasons for discussing the subject at length will be apparent from
what follows.

18.2. The question of extra-territorial application of the
Workmen's Compensation Act might assume practical import-
ance, not only in respect of sailors outside India who, apparently,
are covered by the Act,' but also in respect of Government em-
ployees employed outside India,—-and also as regards private
employees employed on trade or business outside India (who
are not, at present, covered). Consideration of the question of
insertion of a provision, in this regard, in the Workmen’s Com-
pensation Act, requires a brief discussion of the following
matters :—

(a) present position;

(b) the competence, with reference to international law,
to deal with the subject;

(c) whether the present position should be changed.

For understanding the present position. it is necessary firsé

to refer to the ordinary rule of construction.
\

The distinction between the domestic and the extra-terri-
torial effect of legislation was clearly developed when Bartolus
(1314-57) formulated the two guiding questions as follows:

Primo, utrum statutum/sorrigatur intra® terrium ad
nom subditos? Secundo, utrum  effectus  statutt
porrigatur extra territorium statuentium ?

Present position—ordinary rule of construction

18.3. The second question of Bartolus* is relevant for our
purpose, namely, whether the effect of a statute extends beyond
the territory of the State whose Legislature passed it. The
ordinary rule of construction is that a statute does not have

1, See discussion, infra Para 1B.10. :

2, “First, whether a statute extends within its territory to those not subject;
second, whether the effect of a statute extends eyond the territory of the
legislator .

3, Para 1B.2, supra.

.


19

extra-territorial operation, in the absence of express words or
necessary implication to the contrary.

This general principle is applicable to all statutes}-? and there-
fore to the Workmen’s Compensation Act? as well. Lord
Russell’s judgment in R. v. Jamesont, is instructive on the point.

In R. ५. Jameson®, Lord Russell of Killowen observed:

“But first I should like to make some observations with re-
gard to the rules of construction applicable to statutes such as
this. It may be said generally that the area within which <
statute is to operate, and the Persons against whom it is to
operate, are 10 be gathered from the language and purview of
the particular statute. But there may be suggested some gen-
eral rvles——for instance, if there be nothing’ which points to a
contrary intention, the statute will be taken to apply only to
the United Kingdom. But whether it be confined in its opera-
tion to the United Kingdom, or whether, as is the case here.
it be applied to the whole of the Queen’s dominions, it will be
taken to appiy to all the persons in the United Kingdom or in
the Queen’s dominions, as the case may be, including foreigners
who during their residence there owe temporary allegiance te
Her Majesty. And, according to its context, it may be taken to
2 ply to the Queen’s subjects everywhere, whether within the

teen's dominions or without.”

18.4. In England, it is a well founded, though rebuttable,
resumption that Parliament does not assert or assume juris-
tee which goes beyond the limits established by the common
consent of nations’®. In 1808, Lord Ellemborough put the

famous rhetorical question repeated in 1870 by Lord Black-
bura)*:—

“Can the island of Tobago pass a law to bind the rights
of the whole world? Would the world submit. to
such an assumed jurisdiction ?”

1, Halsbury (3rd ed.), Vol. 36, 9. 428,
3. ९७) Jefferys v. Boosey, (1854) 4 FLL.L.R. 815, 925 (Per Lord Wensleydale);
) filed १. Attarney General for New South Wales, (1891) A.C. 546
(c) Sirdar Cordyal Singh v. Rajah of Fariikote, (1894) A.C. 610, 683
(per Lord Selborne);
(9) Cooke v. Vogeler, (1901) A.C. 102:
(० है. v. Jameson, (1896) 2 Q.B, 425, 430, (557 Lord Russell of Killowen),
3, Para 1B.7, infra.
4. Rv. Jameson, (1896) 2 Q.B. 425, 430, (per Lord Russell of Killowen),
5. Rv, Jameson, (1896) 2 0.8. 425, 439,

*. (a) Theophile y. The Solicitor-General, (1950) A.C. 186, 195, per Lord
er;

(0) Colquhoun v. Heldon, (1890) 25 0.8. 129, 134, 135 (per Lord Esher),
7, Buchanan v, Rucker, (1808) 9 Fast 192,
3, Schibsby v. Westenh.olz, (1870) L.R. 6 QB. 155, 160.

Rebuttable
presump-
tion in
England,


20

Rule of 1B.4A. Prima facie, an Act of the United Kingdom Parlia-
pai ment, unless it provides otherwise, applies to the whole of the
Tae U.K. and to no event outside U.K.) Of course, it is clear
territorial that the United Kingdom Parliament can legislate extra-terri-
extent. torially,? and if it does so, English courts must treat the statute

as valid, and give it effect’,

7 18.5, The tule is sometimes stited in the succinct form of
the principle that “uniess ihe cor wary is made clear, an Act of
Parliament is not intended to have extra-territorial effect”

Rule a 1B.6. The necessity for reacinz legislation in the light ot
ee eo? the limitations imposed by the doctrine of international juris-
wo  diction has been appreciated in the United States of America
also for a very long time. In 1818, Chief Justice Marshull
emphasised® that general words in a statute ‘must not only be
limited to cases within the jurisdiction of the State, but also to
those objects to which the legislature intended to apply them.”
This rule, which merely illustrate: the more basic Principle that
an enactment ‘ought never to be construed to violate the law
of nations if any other Possible construction cemains’¢ has, since

then, been often Te-affirmed?, and is not open to doubt.
Sor deme 18.68, The above discussion is not intended to deny the
Position on Competence of the U.K. Parliament, as a matter of English Con-
the conti-  stitutional law, to pass Jegislation having extra-territorial effect.
nent. There are common law dicta’ in earlier cases to the effect that
legislation cannot change a rule of international law. These
appear to proceed upon the theory that International law is the
law.of nature applied to international relations, and hence is of
superior authority to positive law. “To that extent, Lord
Mansfield’s view ‘may be the last echo in England of Coke’s
doctrine in Bonham’s case” The view which has prevailed?*

1, A. 6. Alberta v. Ruggards Assets etc. (1953) 2 All E.R, 951, 956 (PC).
2. (a) Cail १. Papayanni, (1863) 1 Moo PC. 03.5.) 471; 15 E.R. 778;
(0) Niboyer ९. Nihoyet, L.R. (1873) 4 PDT.
(ले. Re Wendt (1889) 22 Q.B.D. 733;
(a) Adam vy. British & Foreign 5. S. Co. (1898) 2 Q.B. 430;

(९) CEB. Draper y. Edward Turner, (1965) 1 0.8. 424; (1964) 3 Alt
ER. 148, 152.

. Theophile v. Solicitor General, (1950) 4 All E.R. 405 (HLL).

+, Bank Voor Handel on Scheenvaavt v. Statford, (1953) 1 0.8, 248, 258
per Devlin J. (as he then was).

. United States vy, Palmer, (1818) 3 Wheat, 610, 631.
The Charming Betsy, (1804) 2 Cranch 64, 118.
५ Lauritzen y. Larsen, (1953) 345 U.S. 571.

. See discussion in Pound, “Common Law and Legislation, (1907-1908)
21 Harvard L.R. 383, 394,

Pound, “Common Law and Legislation, (1907-1908) 21 Harvard L.
Rev, 383, 394,

10, of. Evatt J. in Trustees etc. Co. ९. Federal Commissioner of Taxation,
(1933) 49 C.L.R. 235, 239.



»

«

21

is that the courts are to prevent interference of legislation with
international law by interpretation; that, to avoid a conflict bet-
ween international law and a statute, the courts will resort, if
need be, to strained and forced construction. But, if the con-
flict is unavoidable, the statute prevails.

On the Continent, where different views of the relation of
courts to legislation obiain, it is significant that instead of dis-
cussing the duty of interpreting statutes so as to accord with
international law, (as do English and American authors). text-
writers consider the duly of states te change their laws so as to
bring them into harmony with the just demands of other states*.

Nevertheless, the general rule in Anglo American Law is that
the legislature is presumed not to have acted so as to Jay down
extra-territorial application.

18.7. In England. this gencral rule has been held to be
applicable to the Workmen’s Compensation Act also. Thus, it
has been held that a British workman is not entitled to com-
pensation ia respect of an accident in foreign countries while
working there, for a British employer*. In that case, an English
workman in the employment of Engfish contractors was sent
out by them to Malta, to work for them there, and met with
a fatal accident. 1 was held that his widow was not entitled
to compensation under the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
1906. kt was also held that the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
1906 had no application outside the territorial limits of the
United Kingdom, except in the case of seamen and apprentices
as provided by section 7 (of the 1906 Act).

Cozens Hardy M.R.3 said: “What is the widow’s claim
here? She is claiming, not as party to the contract, not as
claiming any rights under a contract made by her or by any
person through whom she claims, but she is simply claiming
the performance by the defendants of a statutory duty, which
Statutory duty is said to be found in the Workmen’s Compen-
sation Act. Now, that brin; ty us face to face with this proposi-
tion, What is the ambit of the statute and what is the scope
of its operation? 11 secms to me reasonably plain that this is
a case to which the presumption which is referred to in Maxwell
on the Tuterpretation of statutes in the passage at page 213,
which has been read by Mr. Waddy, must apply: “In the
absence of an intention clearly expressed or to be inferred from
its language. or from the object or subject-matter or history of
the enactment, the presumption is that Parliament does not
design its statutes to operate beyond the territorial limits of
the United Kingdom.”

1. Pound, “Common Law and Legislation , (1907-1908) 21 Harvard L.R.
383, 384,

3, Tomelin v. Pearson, (1909) 2 (8, 61 (0.3.).
4, Tomalin रे. Pearson (1909) 2 K.B. 61, 64 (C.A).

English
cases under
DAS
Compensa-
tio Act,


‘Cases rela-
ting = ta
Ships,

English act
of 1925,

Present
position
under the
Indian Act.

22

_ Fletcher Moulton L. J. said in the same case: “And, as
this is a statutory right, we are driven to inquire what is the
ambit logically of the operation of the statute.

“Tt clearly cannot apply universally all over the world. 1
have no doubt, for the reasons the Master of the Rolls has given,
it applies to the United Kingdom alone. The accident must be
one happening in the United Kingdom to a person there who
has the statuts of a Workman to some employer who, in some
way or another, is made liable to the jurisdiction of this Act.”

18.8 Similarly, a British ship on the high seas is not
“British territory” so as to enable a workman injured thercon
to bring himself within the Act, unless he is within the special
provisions relating to seament.

1B.9. These decisions were rendered under the English Act
of 1906, but are valid for the later Act also. In England, the
Act of 1925 applied to members of the crew of any ship regis-
tered in the United Kingdom or of any other British ship or
vessel of whichthe owner or (if there is more than one owner)
the managing owner, or manager, resides or has his principal
place of business in the United Kingdom?.

This is the only limited situation in which the English Act had
extra-territorial operation.

Present position-—under the Indian Act

1B.10. As regards the position under the Indian Act, it may
be stated that there is no express provision in the Act regarding
extta-territorial application in general. But it would appear that
implicitly the Act recognizes that in one situation, the Act is
intended to have extra-tercitorial operation,—though of a very
limited character. We refer to the provision as to ships*. Sec-
tion 15 states that “this Act shall apply in the case of workmen
who are masters of ships or seamen” (subject to certain modifi-
cations). This would seem not to be confined to ships in Indian
territorial waters. Nor is it confined to ships registered in India.
The word “registered”, which occurred in section 15 and in the
definition of “seaman” in section 2(1)(k), was omitied* in 1933,
alongwith the definition of “registered” which appeared previously®
as section 2(1)(j) and which stated that “registered” means “regis-
tered in British India”. Section 15(2), under which the time
limit for making a claim for compensation is to be counted after
news of the death has been reccived by the claimant ctc., suggests

1. Schwartz v. India Rubber etc, Co. (1912), 2 Kings Beach 299 (C.A.).

4. Section 35, etc, (English) Act of 1925, corresponding to section 7 of the
Act of 1906).

3, Section 15.

4, Act 15 of 1933 (amending the Workmen’s Compensation Act), See para
1B.12, infra.

_ 5. See para 1B.12, infra.


”

23

that the Legislature had in mind not merely accidents occurring
on the shores of India or within its territorial waters, but also
accidents occurring abroud or on the high seas. The procedural
provision in section 15(3), to some extent, bears out such a wide
interpretation; and the provision in the Act relating to venue,

under which, where the workman is the master of 4 ship or a
seaman, any matter under the Act may be done by or before a
Commissioner “for the area in which the owner or agent of the
ship resides or carries on business,” is also wide cnough to sup-
port such an interpretation. The last mentioned provision (sec-
tion 21) is helpful in another respect, namely, it indicates a
legislative intention to confine the application of the Act, (in
relation to ships) to cases where the owner or agent of the ship
resides or carries on business in India.

18.11. Tt cannot however be disputed that all these provisions यह

are cquivocal, in the sense, that they can be held to be confined Amendment.
to accidents occurring within Indian territorial waters. But that
does not seem to be the intention, particularly if the amendment
of 1933 is kept in mind.

1B.12. This brings us to the amendment of 1933. It appears परत डी
that before 1933, there was a requirement that the ship must be requirement
registered in British India, but® the Report of the Royal Com- of registra-
mission on Indian Labour pointed out that many Indian seamen ‘ion.
were employed on British ships, and those ships were registered
ontside British India, so that the Act was not available to them?
No doubt, as that Commission pointed out, certain arrangements
had been made to protect their rights by ensuring that they would
be entitled to compensation under the British law, and that the
Workmen's Compensation Commission in India would act as the
arbitrator (under the British law) for determining the claim under
the British law. But, since the arrangement was fourd io be
unsatisfactory, the Royal Commission suggested removal of the
word” “registered”, in this as well as in the other sections ner-

taining to ships.

18.13. This recommendation of the Royal Commission was Amendment
duly carried out in 1933. This amendment may be taken as hav- °* 1933-
ing been intended to have extra-tertitorial application. If so, inter-
pational law becomes relevant. and is. therefore. considered

low.

Position under International law

1B.14. So far as the application of a law to territorial waters
न ° P ” ii i
is concerned, there is no serious difficulty from the point of view law-torrtoral
Waters.

1, Section 21(1), proviso, see para 1B.26, infra.
3, Report of the Royal Commission on Indian Labour.
२, See also para 1B.20, infra.

4. Para 1B.24 et sec. infra.


24

of international law. By modern doctrine, the jurisdiction of a
State to legislate in relation to events occurring within such waters
is, in general, undisputed.

It was pointed out by an American writer,’ some time ago ;

“If the locale of injury is within a sovercign’s own waters,
it is part of the Anglo-American tradition that the courts of that
sovereign—and indeed other courts—will apply his particular ver-
sion of the maritime law in translating the facts into juristic re-
sults.”

“If the ship floats in territorial waters, the law of the waters
traditionally speaks more loudly than that of the ship*.”

Certain restrictions are, no doubt, imposed by conventions as
to the exercise of the jurisdiction in relation to ships not regis-
tered. But, we need not go into these, as they do not touch legis-
lative competence.

It may also be noted that, in India, fortunately, no such con-
troversy has arisen as has arisen in the U.S.A., as to whether a
particular event has occurred on “navigable waters” of the U.S.A,
or whether it has occurred on State territorial waters,

An opinion given by the Law Officers, including the Queen's
Advocate, in 1879, quoted in the Debates in the House of Com-
mons on the Shipping Contracts etc. Bill,? may be cited.

“A British ship had put into a Spanish port and we thought
in this country (England) that the Spanish authorities were be-
having very vexatiously in that they were visiting various claims
and penalties on the ship because, quite accidentally and without
doing any harm to anyone, a quite unimportant mattcr had been
omitted from the manifest of the cargo. Yet the Law Officers
of the time reported to the Fereign Secretary in the terms :

“By the Law of Nations every independent Government is
the sole judge of the measures which may best suit, promote, or
insure its own people, their interests and safety; may open or
chose its territory, waters, and harbours; and altogether refuse to
admit, or impose what conditions it may deem fit, woen the admis-
sion of foreigners and foreign vessels. These conditions may be
absurd, vexatious, inconsistent with or contrary to the usage of
all other civilized nations ; still the Government has the right
to impose them, and a foreign Government can only pretest
against their being imposed.”

G. H. Robinson, “personal injury in the maritime industry”, (1930-31)

44 Harv. L. Rev. 223, 229.

See article, “Applicable Law in State Waters”, (1964) 27 Temp. L.Q.

479, 480.

3, H. C, Debates, Vol. 698 (15 July, 1964) Col. 1243 (Speech of Mr. Charles
Fletcher Cooke).


»

25

1B.15. Similarly, if the amendments to be made were confined
to ships registered ‘in India, no difficulty would arise in inter-
national law.

1B.16. But the application of the Act to extra-tertitorial acci-
dents on non-Indian ships or to other extra-territorial accidents,
raises certain problems.

The current view in international law seems to be —

{a) A State has jurisdiction to prescribe rules governing
the conduct of its nationals, wherever they are
found.

(0) But a State may not prescribe rules governing the con-
duct of aliens cutside its territory, merely because
such conduct affects nationals of the State outside of
its territory.?

1B.17. English legislation and judicial decisions observe these
limits. The judicial decisions cited above in connection with the
discussion of the ordinary sule of construction,® are relevant on
this point also.

18.18. The same principle has been applied in the U.S.A. The
earliest judgment relevant to the topic is that of Chief Justice
Marshall.® Some of the more important recent cases* happen to
relate to Jabour legislation,—e.g., the Employer’s Liability Act.

There are other American cases® also, to the same effect.

1B.19. Speaking judicially,* Story-had said in 1824: “The
Jaws of no nation can justly extend beyond its own territories,
except so far as regards its own citizens,” Ten years later,” while

1. The position, as stated above, is based on a study of

(a) Harvard Researches in International Law Jurisdiction (1935)
Vol. 1, page 439, et. seq.

(b) Jennings, “Extea-tervitorial Jurisdiction and Anti Trust Laws" (1957),
British Year Book of International Law, 157,

(० Article in (1962) British Year Book of Taternational Law, 457.
(3) Winters’ article on Maritime Torts in (1954) 3 LCL. 0. 15

(©) Ellis, “Extra-territorial applications of anti-trust legislation” (1970)
Netherlands Law Review ILL.A, Conference Issue.

*. See discussion a3 to rule of construction, supra, und as to rebutlable pre-
sumption, para 1B.3 and 18.4, supra.

*, Rose v. Himely, (1808) 4 Cranch 241, 297.

(a) New York Central Railroad v. Chis iolm, (1925) 268 U.S. 29 (Emp-
loyers Liability Act held not appticable to accidents in Canada);

(0) Vermilva Brown Co. v. Cornell (1948) 335 U.S. 377 93 L. Ed. 76
(fair Labour Act and Employment in Bermuda).

- McCulloch vy. Sociedad Nacional de Mondrus, (1963) 372 U.S. 10.
6, The Apollon, (1824) 9 Wheat 362, 370.
7, Story, conflict of Lawa, (1934) page 18-20,

a

ships
registered
in India,

Difficulty
as regards
extra~

territorial
accidents,

English
view,

U.S.A.

view,

Story's
view.


Position
Teg. ships,

Amendment
of 1933,

26

he was Dane Professor of Law in Harvard, he stated the following
as “general maxims of international jurisprudence.”

“(1)_ As every nation possesses an exclusive sovereignty and
jurisdiction within its own territory the laws of every State affect
and bind directly all property, whether real or personal, within
its territory; and all persons who are resident within it, whether
natural-born subjects or aliens; and also all contracts made and
acts done within it.

(2) No State can, by its laws, directly affect or bird property
out of its own territory or bind persons not resident therein, except
that every nation has a right to zind its own subjects hy its own
Jaws in every other place.”

Broadly speaking, the position is the same today.

18.20. Thus, with regard to extra-territorial accidents on ships
not registered in India, difficulty arises if the Indian Act, section
15, is given a wide scope. As stated above, the Act (as amend-
ed in 1933) is intended apparently to cover such extra territorial
accidents.

The Royal Commission on Indian Labour had recommended
that special attention should be given to the possibility of extend-
ing the Indian Act to Indian scamen while serving on all ships
within India’s territorial waters and on British ships engaged in
the coastal trade of Indie. The great majority of Indian seamen
Were engaged on ships registered outside India, and mainly on
British ships. These seamen could not claim compensation under
the Indian Act, though thcy had the protection of the British and
other Workmen's Compensation Acts. These aspects were speci-
fically mentioned by the Royal Commission.

1B.21. It appears that the 10841 difficulty in extension of the
Act beyond the Indian. territorial waters to ships not registered
in India (from the point of view of international law) was noticcd
by the officers of the Government, and this was one of tae reasons
advanced (in the beginning), when the Bill of 1932 was introduced,
for not proposing an amendment in the Act so as to cover
Indian scamen employed on ships not registered in British India
---a situation specifically emphasised in the Report of the Royal
Commission on Indian Labour,

1B.21A, However, several members of the Legislative As-
sembly? stressed the need for covering such seamen.

1, See discussion regarding present position 1B.10 and 18.13, supra.
3, Particularly, Shri N. M. Josbi.


27

‘The amendment regarding ships was made at the Select Com-
mittse staget-2 The Commitee observed:—

“Sub-clause (ay(ii) and (iii) and clause hip” fo have
omitted the definition of “registered ६ from the
Act, as we consider that there is ne longer any need
for making any distinction between ships which are
registered elsewhere and ships which are unregistered.
We have inserted in item (vi) of Schedule TI, the
ships 10 which we consider the Act should be ap-
plied.”

Material in the file relating to the period when the Select
Committee on the 1932 Bill made its report, does not indicate
how the objection® from the point of view of international law
was taken to have been satisfied. But it may be stated that most
of the non-Indian ships employing Indian seamen were of British
ownership, and obviously they could not raise a legal objection
in those days, in the then constitutional set-up. The present posi-
tion is obviously different.

Need For Amendment

18.22, The next question therefore is whether (a) besides
the case of ships (which is already covered, though in an indirect
way),* it is necessary to cover other extraterritorial accidents,
and (b) whether as regards ships, the position should be chang-
ed. Opinion on the subject of competence from the point of
view of international law* is very much in a गत state. One
has, therefore, to proceed cautiously before extending the scope
of the Act. As the Supreme Court of the United States has
put it :*

“In dealing with international commerce we cannot be
unmindful of the necessity for mutual forbearance if
retaliations are 10 be avoided; ror should we forget
that any contact which we hold sufficient to warrant
application of our law to a forcign transaction will
logically be as strong a warrant for a foreign country
to apply its law to an American transaction.”

Jf at all the extea-territorial app Mication of the Act is to be
fucther extended, it can be confined to Government servants, or
to cases where the employer as well as the employee is a citizen
of India. From the point of view of international Jaw, there may

. Legislative Depastment File No. 160/32-C.&G. (1932) (relating to Act
15 of 1933) (National Archieves)

4, छ:3अ ते the Select Camninea, (10 February, 1933) para 3.
®. Para 18,21, supra

4 Scotion 15,

5, See discussion, supra:

6, Lawitzen v. Larsen, (1953) 345 U.S. 57.

28 M of Law/74—3

‘Whether

it is desiz-
able to
cover extra-
territatial
accidents.


28

not be a very serious dispute about the exercise of legislative
ower where both the parties are the citizens of the country.
lence, if extra-territorial application is extended to those two
situations, no serious objection from the point of view of inter-
national law is likely to arise. The moment, however, one crosses
these" boundaries, and tries to regulate compensation fer accidents
occurring abroad where only one of the parties is a citizen of
India, difficulties are bound to arise—both legal and practical.

No need to 1B.23. It would, however, appear that even as Tegards acci-

widen the dents occurring to Government em loyees or occurring in cases

Scope. where the employer and the emp 10108 are Indian citizens, no
practical difficulty has been experienced or hardship felt by rea-
son of the absence of a Provision, and the matter should better
be left as it is.

Desirabilit 1B.24, In fact, even as regards, ships, it is better to confine

of restric Y the Act to ships registered in India. The concept of “Indian

ting the ships”! has not much direct importance in our statute law.

present

Provision Conditions now have changed; there are not as many Indian

as to ships. seamen on ships registered outside India as before, and having
regard to international law, there is a case for re-insertion of the
word “registered”.

Such an amendment will, no doubt, have the effect of taking
out ships whose owners carry on trade or business in India and
employ Indian seamen, if the ships are registered outside India,
Tt is fair that the workmen employed on such ships should also
receive compensation but they will have to pursue their remedies
under the law of the country whose flag the ship flies. If neces-
sary, the matter could be dealt with by agreement with the foreign
country concerned?

The general British view was summarised in these words by
the Attorney General in 1964, in the course of the Debate on
the Shipping Contracts etc. Bill?

“In our view, a country such as America acts in excess.
of its own jurisdiction when its measures purport to
regulate acts which are done outside its territorial
jurisdication by persons who are not its own nationals
and which have no, or no substantial effect within
its territorial jurisdiction.”

Aircraft. 18.24. We now come to the question of aircraft. An air-
craft has no flag, but the system of registration is applicable.
There appears to be some propriety in ado; ting the criterion of
the place of registration of aircraft. “Under the Tokyo Convention,

1, Sections 21 and 22, Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
. ef, sections 35 to 37, English Act of 1925.
3, H. C. Debates, Vol. 698 (15 July, 1964) Col, 1279 {Attorney General).


29

of 1963 for example, {a) the State in which an aircraft is re-
gistered has power to exercise jurisdiction over offences “against
penal law” and over acts which jeopardise safety or good order
and discipline; and the jurisdiction of other States (including
any which may be overflown) is limited to the circumstances
listed in Article 4 of the Convention. (b) The aircraft com-
mander is given specific powers in accordance with his scheme,
coupled with an immunity (Article 10), and other States incur
certain obligations to assist in its enforcement. (c) For extra~
dition pu 00869, the offences are deemed to have been committed
both in the territory of the State of registration of the aircraft
arid in the place where they occurred. The Indian Penal Code
288 also adopted the test of place of registration.

18.25, It is, therefore, legitimate to give importance to the
Tule of the place of registration of the aircraft, as has been
done in the case of ships, with reference to the Workmens’ Com-
pensation Act also.

1B.26. This disposes of the difficult question of application
of the Act extra-territorially to ships and aircraft. We should,
in connection with the jurisdiction of authorities under the Act,
refer to section 21, quoted below:—

“21(1) Where ay matter is under this Act to be done
by or re a Commissioner, the same
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to
any rules made hereunder, be done by or before a
Commissioner for the area in which’ the accident
took place which resulted in the injury:

“Provided that, where the workman is the master of
a ship or a seaman, any such matter may be done
by or before a Commissioner for the area in
which the owner or agent of the ship resides or
earrics on business.”

We are primarily concerned with the proviso to the section,
It is really a procedural provision which comes into operation
where the Act* applies to the particular ship, and has not the
Status of a rule relevant to the  extra-territorial application of
this Act.2 Hence, we need not disturb it.

18.27. In view of what is stated above, the only amend-
ment needed regarding extra-territorial operation of the Act is
to define the extra-territorial operation as confined to ships and
aircraft registered in India.

1, See 1 and Secton 15.
3, See also para 18.10, supra.
3, कण seclion providing for application to aircraft is proposed (section

Section 21,

Section 1-
Amend-
ment 18-
garding
ships an
acat.


30

What is stated above as ta ships, applies to aircraft also.
The: éxtra-territorial application of the Act to aireraft should,
therefore, be provided TBs, on the same lines as is proposed in
relation. to-ships,

a

Recommen- 1B.28. We, therefore, recommend that the following sub-
Gaena’” section should be inserted in section 1, in order to deal with

section 1, the extra-territorial application of the Act.

“This Act shall apply to masters, seamen, and other
members of the crew of ships, and captains and
other members of the crew of aircraft, outside India,
provided that such persons are workmen within the
meaning of this Act, and the ship or aircraft is
registered in India.” *


CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS

2.1. We shall deal in this Chapter with the definitions con-
tained in section 2 of the Act. While some of the definitions —
such as the definitions of “managing agent” and “minor”,—a
purely drafting devices, and some have only minor importance—
such as the definitions of “managing agent” and “minor”,—a
number of definitiotis are of considerable importance, as they
are concerned with some of the fundamenta ‘oncepts of the
Act. The definitions of “dependant”, pemploy ex”, “partial dis-
ablement”, “total disablement”, “wages”, an “workman” fall
in this category.

Some of the other Provisions contained in section 2, such as
sub-sections (2) and (3), are not in the form of definitions,
but they also pussess an importance of their own. It is for
these reasons that this Chapter will occupy more space than a
discussion of statutory definitions would normally occupy.

2.2. We shall concentrate on im ortant definitions. We
first take up Section 2(1}(d) which defines the expression “de-
pendant”. This is one of the most important definitions in the
Act, because on it depends the tight of a person to participate
in compensation payable on the death of the workman.

The definitions of “dependant” is as follows: —

(d) “dependant” means any of the following relatives of
a deccased workman, namely :—

1) a widow, a minor legitimate son, and unmarried
legitimate daughter, or a widowed mother; and
Gi) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the work-
man at the time 6६ his death, a son or a daughter

who has attained the age of 18 years and who is
infirm;

Gil) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of
the workman at the time of his death, हु

(3) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,

(c) a sninor illegitimate son, an unmatried illegiti-
mate daughter or a daughter legitimate or jlle-
gitimate if married and a minor or if widowed
and a minor,

31

Tntrodue-
tory

Section 2
axd)—
“Depen-
da

basic Prin-
ciple,



Complexit;
of the de
finition.

32

(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or
a widowed sister if a minor,

(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,
(0 a minor child of a pre-deceased son,

(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where
no parent of the ¢l tld is alive, or

(h) a paternal grand parent if no parent of the
workman is alive. .

The basic principle underlying the provision entitling the
dependants to daim compensation? under the Act, is that there
should not be a sudden economic dislocation in the family by
teason of death of the workman. The list of dependants is
based on certain assumptions as to dependence. having regard
to Indian social conditions.

2.3. The definition of dependant appears to be complex,
but the complexity is mainly due to the legislative scheme. The
compensation® is to be distributed among the dependants. The
intention of the legislature is that while in the case of certain
relatives this benefit should be available irrespective of whether
they ate or are not dependent on the workman, in the case of
certain other relatives’ the benefit should be available only if
they are dependent on him. In the latter case, again, a distinc-
tiont had to be made between relatives wholly dependent and
those partly dependent on the workman. Apart from this,
there are other factors leading to complexity, based on physical
condition, age, sex and legitimacy. For example, a son or
daughter if infirm, though a major, had to be provided for. This
is based on physical condition. In the case of sons, a distinc-
tion had to made between minor sons and major sons. In
the case of daughters, the distinction had to be primarily related
to their marie a or unmarried, status.—but in certain respects,
age was also regarded as material. Then, there is a distinction—
unfortunate if one may say so®&—between legitimate and illegiti-
mate children,—not in every case but in certain respects. So
long as these distinctions are retained. the room for simplification
of the definition is naturally limited. .

2.4, So much as regards the complexity of the definition of
“dependant”. As regards the substance of the definition, there
are a few improvements worth considering. The distinction bet-
ween legitimate and illegitimate children® is wrong on principle,

4, Section 8(5).

१, Section 8(5).

“The distinction se “ ler
is not in harmony wih {hs 0 नकवी गण “Hependent
These distinctions came into the Act by amendments of 1933 and 1938

5 See para 2.4, infra.

' Para 2.3, supra.


33

and out of tune with modern thinking. We think that it should be

removed. In other words, a “minor illegitimate son” and an “un-

married illegitimate daughter” should be transferred from cate.

gory (ili) to category (i) of section 2(1) (9), which contains the
lefinition.

2.5. Llegitimate children are not “non-persons”, They ate
humans, live and have their being.’ In the U.S.A. it has been
held that they are clearly “persons” within the meaning of the
Equal Protection Clause? of the Fourteenth Amendment of the
U.S.A. Constitution.?

2.6. Regarding illegitimate children, it may be noted that
courts in U.S.A. have gone the furthest. In an American case,*
the petitioner, an unwed mother, filed an action against one Perez,
the putative father of her minor child in the State of Taxas.
During the proceedings, it was established that Perez was the
“biological father” of the petitioner's child needing support. It
was held, however, by the trial court that there was no legal
obligation to support an illegitimate child. This view wes con-
firmed on appeal.

The Supreme Court of the U.S.A. teversed the decision, and
stated that “once a State posits a judicially enforceable right on
behalf of children to needed support from their natural father,
there is no constitutionally sufficient justification for den’ ring such
an essential right to a child, simply because her natural father has
not married her mother.”

The Court relied on its earlier tuling, holding that illegitimate
children are entitled to wrongful death benefits,> and also to a
similar decision® applying the benefits by way of workmen's com-
pensation to illegitimate children.

2.7. In many cases,'Congress has made a Provision for re-
covery by illest itimates, but with certain safeguards designed to
require proof? of paternity.

2.8. It may be noted that numerous Latin and South Ameri-
can countries have attempted to solve the’problem by constitutio-
nal provisions. The Boliviana Constitution, for example. provides
that “inequities among children are not tecognised. They have

1. See Note, “The Rights of Illegitimates under Federal Statutes, (1962
76 Hary. 1... Rev. 337,

> No State shall “deny to any Person within its Jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws.

3, Levy v. Loinsiann, 20 L. Ed. 2 d 436, 439, (Doughias 3.).

4. Gamez v. Perez, (1973, 408 U.S. 535; 35 L. ed. 56; 41 US.L.W. 417.
5. Levy v. Louisiana, (1968) 391 U.S. 68.

#. Weber v. Aetne Casuality and Surety Company, (1972) 406 U.S. 164.

z

'. Note “Rights of illegitimates under Federal Statutes” (1962. 76 Harv.
L, Rey. 337, 339, 344 and footnote 27,

Constitu-
tional pro-
visions in
some Latin
American
countries.


Adopted
Children.

Section 2
(yd un-
born child
of the
workman.

34

all the same rights and duties.1” The Gautemala Constitution
provides that “all children are equal before the law and have
identical rights,?”

The Panama Constitution provides that “parents have the
same duties towards children born out of wedlock as towards
children born in it. Ali children are equal before the law and
have the same hereditary rights in intestate succession?”

2.8A, Secondly it is desirable to treat adopted children in the
same way as natural born children, having regard to changed
social conditions, In fact, under the General Clauses Act,’ “son”
includes an adopted son, where the ‘personal law’ permits adop-
tion. Adoption is now being resorted to by non-Hindus ako.

2.9. The implementation of the two changes indicated above*
in the definition of “ lcpe ndant” permits a slight shortening of
category (iii) of the definition.

2.10, At present, the Workmen’s Compensation Act does not
contain a specific provision for the rights of an unbora person. If
a strict textual interpretation is adopted, his rights will not be
regarded as covered by the item in the definition of “dependant”
which relates to “children”.

2.11. It may be noted that in England it has been held that
damages may be recovered under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1846,
for the benefit of a posthumous child. Ownership may be vest-
ed ia a child in the womb and such a child constitutes a “tife”
for the purpose of the rule against Perpetuitics.7 So coo, such a
child can a “child of the family”, within s. 16(1) of the
Matrimonial Proceedings (Magistrates Courts) Act, 1960.9

There is an interesting provision in the Hindu Succession
Act as to the right of an uaborn child which reads as foilows :—

“20. Right of child in womb.—A child who was in the
womb at the time of the death of an intestate, and
who is subsequently born alive shall have the same

1, Constitation, article 183, Pan American Union, Constitution of Republic
of Bolivia (1961).

2. Constitution, article 86(2)(3), Pan American Union, Constitution of
Republic of Gautemala (1962).

3, Constitution, art, 58, Pan American Union, Constitution of the Re-
Public of Panama (1946).

3, Section 3(53), General Clauses Act, 1897.
5, Regarding illegitimate and adopted children.
6, The George and Richard, (1971), L.R. 3 Ad. & E. 466,
7. (a) Elliot vy. Lord Joicey, (1935) A.C. 209 noted in 9 Aus:ralian Law
Journal 294;
(0) Re Stern, Bartlats v. Stern, (1968) Ch. 732; (1961) 3 All E.R. 1129.
8. Caller v. Caller (1966) 2 AU E.R. 754.



35

right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she hac
been born before the death of the intestate, and the
inheritance shall be deemed to vest है such a case
with effect from the date of death of the intestate.”

2.12. It appears desirable to make a specific provision to the
effect that a child who was in the womb at the time of the death
of the workman, and who is subsequently bora alive, has the
same right to be treated (as a dependant) as if he or she had
been born before the death of the workman.’ We recommend
accordingly. This recommendation js confined {o an unborn
child of the workman and will not include any other unborn
dependants.

There should not be any consequential complications. If the”

child is actually born alive before the award of compensation, the
amount due to him can be suitably invested. If he is not born.
by that time, a suitable provision’ could (if necessary), be in-
seried® for safeguarding his rights and for ultimate adjustment
of the position if a live birth does not take Place,

2.13. Section 2(1) (0) (i) uses the expression “unmarried
daughters”. Tt has been held that this does not include a divore-
ed daughter. This interpretation has the effect of totally re-
moving the divorced daughter from the category of dependants,
there being no other item covering her. We think that if totally
dependant, a divorced daughter should (until re-married) be
treated as a dependant,

2.14. The definition of “dependant” includes certain widows.
In an Andhra Pradesh case,* it was held that a widow does not
‘cease to be a dependant on her re‘marriage, The Court observ-
ed:— .

“There is no provision in the Act to the effect that subse-
quent events would affect the claim of the dependant
10 compensation, Further, a similar conclusion fol-
lows by a consideration of section 8, sub-section (5),
which is in the following termp:—

‘8(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a decdas-
ed workman shall, subject to any deduction made
under sub-section (4), be apportioned among the
dependants of the deceased workman or any of
them in such proportion as the Commissioner
thinks fit, or may, in the disctetion: of the Com-
missioner, be allotted to any one dependant. ”

1, Compare Section 20, Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Para 2.11, supra),
3. Section 8 could be amended Suitabiy, if necessary.
3, (1969) AN 1. J. 16, cited in the Yearly Digest (1969), Col. 3225,

‘ मे. Kotayya ¥. Di Nagavardhatamma, A..R.‘1962 Andhra Pradesh 47
para 19, (Sanjeeva Rao Nayadu J), ०

Recomm-
endation,

Unmarried
daughter
and divor-
ced daugh-

ter

Re-matri-
age of wid-
ow.


Minor att-
aining maj-
ority before
order of
Comtniss-
ion,
Amendment
regarding
pre-déceg-
se

Mino rbro-
ther no
cha nge,

Uterine
Telation-
ship-Reco-

36

2.15. In a Rajasthan case,’ the contention that the widow -
became debatred from claiming compensation on account of her
re-matriage was rejected, “because in the Act there is no such
provision that after re-marriage widow of the deceased would not
be regarded as a dependant. Under section 21 of the Hindy
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, a widow remains a de-
pendant, within the meaning of that section so Jong as she is not
re-married, But the definition of the ‘dependant’ under the Act
is not so restricted and the fact that she has re-married will not
disentitle her to claim compensation under the Act.”

In respect of the widowed mother,? the contention that a
mother who has re-martied cannot be considered to be a “widow-
ed mother”, did not appeal to the Madhya Pradesh High Court.
The High Court gave the reason that the relationship of a “mother
is not destroyed by re-marriage” and, more over, the word
“widowed” has been uscd in contra-distinction to the word “un-
widowed”,

2.16. With respect, we ate unable to see the validity of the
reasoning adopted in the decisions cited above. In our view,
the widow should be debarred on re-marriage, since there would
be some body to look after her. It would be useful to add an
explanation to that effect, modifying the above judicial inter-
pretation.

2.17. We are also of the view that a person who attains majo-
tity before the order under section 8(5) is passed, should be de-
barred from compensation, if his entitlement as a dependant is
on the basis of minority only,

2.18. We are further of the view that in the definition of
‘dependant’ [item Gii) (f) and (g)}, the word “pre-deceased”
should be amplified so as to include a case where the person
soncerned dies before the passing of the order under section 8(5),
This is intended to avoid hardship for the children of persons who
die in the interval between the workman’s death and the date
of the order of the Commissioner under section 8(5).

2.19, During our discussions, we considered the question
whether a minor brother should be excluded from the definition of
“dependant”. But the present provision is based on (i) Indian
social conditions, and (ii) the fact of dependence. We *herefore
decided not to recommend a change in this regard.

,_,2:20. The question whether the words indicating relationship
include uterine relationship has arisen under the Act. In one
case* from Madhya Pradesh, a workman had died in course of
work. One B, a minor brother of the deceased, put in his claim
for compensation. The court held that from the evidence, it

1. की, 2, Moondra & Co. ५. Shanwari, ALR. 1970 Raj 111, 118, para 19 |
*, Intivabjt ५, Amirkhan, ALR. 1959 M.P. 329, Para 4, (7. K. Tare 1).
% 6. M. Gwalior Sugar Co. vy, Srilal, A.LR. 1958 MP, 133, 134,



37

appeared that B was a uterinc brother of the deceased (ie. the
mother of B and the mother of the deceased was the same). The
question was whether the term “minor brother” occurring in sec-
tion 2(1), clause (9), included also a minor uterine brother. It
was held that the term “minor brother” includes a minor uterine
brother under the Workmen’s Compensation Act which was a
Jaw which has “its roots in charity, sympathy and the advance of
socialistic ideas.”

2.22, In a Lahore case,’ it had been held? that a “minor
brother” includes a consanguinc minor brother. The Lahore
case also referred to the principle of Mohammedan Law, accord-
ing to which consanguine brothers and sisters are classified as
residuaries (heirs).

The High Court of Madhya Pradesh has held that a consan-
guine brother and a uterine brother stand on the same footing
as both are step-brothers. Reference was also made by the
Madhya Pradesh High Court to the provision in the Indian Suc-
cession Act? under which (for purposes of succession) there is
no distinction between those who are related to the deceased per-
son by full blood and those related by half blood.

Jn our opinion, the above interpretation should be codified
So as to include uterine and consanguine brothers and sisters in
the definition “of “dependant”.

2.21, We recommend the following revised draft of the defi-
nition of “dependant”, in the light of the above discussion.

Revised draft of section 2(1) (d)

(१) “dependant” means any of the following relatives of a
sed workman, namely :—

(i) a widow, a minor son, an unmarried daughter, or a
widowed mother; and.

(ii) if wholly dependant on the earnings of the workman
at the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has

attained the age of eighteen years and who is infirm,
or a divorced daughter* who has not re-married;

iii) if wholly or in part dependant on the earnings of the
workman at the time of his death—

(a) a widower,
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,

1, Dependants of Kartar Singh, A.LR. 1931 Lah. 742.
3. In re Mong Kyan, A.LR. 1931 Rang. 173, takes a contrary view.
3, Section 27, Indian Succession Act, 1925,

+ As to divorced daughters, totally dependent, 5६८ 2(t)(aXii).

Recomme-
nda ion


Section
201)(छ- -
employer
lending
the wor
man to
another
employer.

38

(c) a minor daughter, if married... .or widowed... .,

{d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a minor
widowed sister,

(e) a widowed daughter-in-law,

(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son;

(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where
no parent of the child is alive; or

(h) a paternal grand-parent, if no parent of the work-
man is alive.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause.

(a) references to a widowed female do not include a female
wha re-marries ajter the death of the workman and before the
date of the order of the Commissioner under sub-section (5) of
section 83

(b) references to an unmarried female do not include—

(i) @ female who marries before the date of the said
order;

Gi) a female who is divorced before the date of the said
order;

(c) references to a brother or sister include a consanguine
or uterine brother or sister;

(d) references to a minor do not include a person who at-
tains majority before the date of the said order;

(e) @ child of the workman who was in the womb at the
time of the death of the workman, and who is subsequently born
alive’ whether before: or after the date of the said order, shall
have the same right to be treated ay a dependant as if he or she
had heen born before the death of the workman;

(f) references to a son, daughter or child include an illegitt-
mate or adopted son, daughter or child;

(g) references to a ‘pre-deceased’ relation include a person
who dies before the date of the said order.

2.23. Where an employer lends a workman, at present, under
section 2(1) (०), the lending employer is not liable to pay com-
pensation. Under the English Act,? the lending ernployer is
liable. We are of the view that both the Tending employer and
the borrowing employer should be liable. Usually, the services
of the workman are lent at the instance of the lender and the
relationship between the lender and the workman continues. In

1, See para 2.12, supra. ~
3. Section 56) of the English Act of 1925.


39

some cases the lender would ordinarily be more rich than the
person to whom the services are lent. The lender has also, in
most cases, a business interest in lending. He exposes the
workman to hazard. Hence he should be liable. The borrow
ing employer, who uses the services of the workman should, of
course, continue to be liable since the hazard is in the new em-
ployment.

2.24, Accordingly we recommend the following re-draft of
the definition of ‘employer’;

(९) “employer” includes—
(9) any body of persons whether incorporated or not;
Gi) ‘any managing agent of an employer;
(iii) the legal representative of a deceased employer;
and
(iv) when the services of a workman arc temporarily
lent or let on hire to another person by the person
with whom the workman has entered into a con-
tract of service or apprenticeship, the person with
whom the workman had entered into the contract
of service or apprenticeship, as well as the person
to whom the services of the workman are so lent
or let on hire.

2.25. For the sake of convenience of reference, it is desir-
able to insert in séction 2, a definition of “monthly wages”,—an
expression defined in section 5. The following new clause
should, therefore, be inserted in section 2(1) after the definition
of “minor’:—

“(fif) ‘monthly wages’ has the meaning assigned to it by
section 5.

2.25. In the definition of the expression ‘partial disablement’,
which is. to be found in section 2(1) (8), there is scope for imp-
rovement in one respect. The definition does not  separtely
define the expressions ‘permanent partial disablement’ and ‘tem-
porary partial disablement’. The expression ‘permanent partial
disablement’ is used in the proviso to the definition, which,
however, does not bring out the idea that it is defining ‘perma-
nent partial disablement’ as ६ apecies by itself. It may be noted
that the expression ‘permanent partial disablement’ -occurs else-
where in the Act.1 It would, therefore, be desirable to recast
the latter part of-the definition so as.to bring out this idea. This
could be done by converting the proviso-to section 2(1) (8) into
an Explanation, as follows :— -

“Explanation —Every injury specified in Part IT of Schedule
I, shail be deemed to result in permanent partial disablement”

3, See, for example, section 4012.

Recom-
mendation.

Section
2m)
(New)—
Defiit ion
of “month~
ly wages.””

Section 2
(1) (8) par-
tial disable-
ment,


40

At the same time, the expression ‘permanent partial disable-
ment’ may be defined by adding a new definition—clause (g2)—
as follows: —

“(gg) ‘permanent partial disablement’ means partial dis-
abl fement of a permanent nature and includes such
injury as is referred to in the Explanation to clause
(82.7

Sec tion 2.26. The definition of ‘total disablement’ in section 2(1) (i)

2(1)G) total leaves room for improvement in so far as the proviso seeks ta

disablement define the scope of ‘permanent total disablement’, but does not
directly define it. The expression is used elsewhere in the Act.
In the interests of clarity, it is better to revise it on the same
lines as has been recommended above with reference to ‘partial
disablemenv’.?

‘Workman 2.27. The expression ‘workman’ is defined as follows :

“(n) ‘workman’ means any person (other than a Person
whose employment is of a casual nature and who
is employed otherwise than for the purposes of the
employer’s trade or business) who is—

(i) a railway servant as defined in section 3 of the
Indian Railways Act, 1890, not permanently emp-
loyed in any administrative, district or sub-divi-
sional office of a railway and not employed in
any such capacity as is specified in Schedule IT,
or

(ii) employed on monthly wages not exceeding five
hundred rupees, in any such capacity as is speci-
fied in Schedule IT,

whether the contract of employment was made before or after
the passing of this Act and whether such contract is expressed.
or implied, oral or in writing; but does “not include eny person
working in the capacity of a member of the Armed Forces of
the Union; and any reference to a workman who has been in-
jured shall, where the workman is dead, include a reference to
his dependants or any of them.”

Section 2.28. The definition of “workman”? js obviously a very in-
2(1)(a)De- volved one. This complexity is due to the fact that too many
finition of ideas—positive and negative—~are packed into one sentence
workman’ fegardless of the convenience of those who have to read the Act,
Tn the first place, strain is caused by the excluding words “other
than a person” etc, which interrupt the mind of the reader who
wishes to Proceed with the positive part of the definition. Sec-
ondly, repeated recurrence of negative ideas in that part of the

1. See, for example, section 4(1Nb).
3, See discussion relating to section 2(1)(2),
*, Para 2.27, supra.



4)

definition which pertains to railway servants, creates confusion.
Thirdly, the clarificatory portion represented by the words “whe-
ther the contract of employment” ete. tends to increase the pro-
lixity of the definition; and, finally the non-inclusive portion
(relating to Armed Forces) gives the impression that the defi-
nition is about to end, but immediately there is a provision for
the construction of referehce to a workman who is dead,—a pro-
vision which is confined to very particularised situations.

2.29. Some complexity may be unavoidable in a legal docu-
ment but still there is scope for improvement. An attempt to
disentangle the various elements which cluster together in the
present clause, is worthwhile.

2.30. So much as regards points of drafting. Some points
of substance may now be dealt with concerning the definition
of “workman”,

2.31. The clause has a separate category of railway servants
under which a railway servant as defined in the Railway Act, is
a workman subject to two conditions (which we shall discuss
later). Section 3(7) of the Railways Act. defines a railway
servant as follows:—

“Railway servant’ means any person employed by a
railway administration in connection with the ser-
vice of a railway”.2

There are two condition in the clausc in the Workmen's
Compensation Act. The first is that railway servants who are
“permanently employed” in certain offices are excluded. (Rough-
ly they are persons who perform inframural duties). The
second is that persons employed in a capacity mentioned in the
Second Schedule are excluded—the object, of course, being
that if they fall under the Second Schedule, they should satisfy
the wages test.

As regards the first condition, in our view, the present word-
ing referring to persons “permanently employed” in an office,
ig intended to re! er not to their permanent or temporary status,
but to the sphere of their duties. It is meant to refer to persons
who usually discharge their duties within the four walls of an
administrative office,—persons with “intra-mural” functions.
This should be clearly brought out.

Also, to avoid doubts as to whether a railway servant can
fall under the general category—as is the obvious intention —
slight verbal changes are desirable by way of clarification.

13, Section 3(7), Raitways Act.

Point of
Substance,


42

हि 2.32. Since this clause represents a special category, it should,
if it is retained,’ appear after the general one relating to emp-
loyees in general.

on the assumption that the present separate category of railway
Scrvanis is to be retained. It seems to us, however, that this
matter itself requires serious consideration, The present scheme
50075 to constitute a discrimination between railway servants
and other workmen similarly placed. A. railway servant (if he
satisfies certain conditions mentioned above) is not subject to a
maximum regarding the wages. Others are so subject. This dis-
crimination is difficult to support in the face of article 14 of
the Constitution and, on ‘the merits, appears to be unjustified,
We are therefore of the view that this discrimination should
be removed and like railway servants, other employees (if they
satisfy the other conditions of the definition) also should be
brought within the Act if they fall within the Second Schedule
drrespective of their wages.

Recommen-

datioa, ing

2.334. Finally we propose certain structural changes in the
definition,

2.34. In the light of the points discussed Above, the follow-

te

draft of the defintion is recommended:—

Re-drafi of definition of “workman” “workman” means
any person employed in any such capacity as is
specified in Schedule IT.

First Exception—A person whose cmployment is of a
casual nature is not a workman if he is employed
otherwise than for the Purposes of this employer's
trade or business,

Second Exception—A person working in the capacity
of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union is
not a workman.

Explanation [—It is immaterial whether the contract of
employment was made before or after the passing
of this Act and whether such contract is expressed
or implied, oral or in writing.

Explanation IT——Any reference to a workman who has
been injured shall, where the workman is dead, in-
clude a reference to his dependants or any of them.”

[Item to be added to the Second Schedule]

- Hor a contrary suggestion, see para 2,33, infra.

* af this re-draft is adopted, the Second Schedule should also be amended
10 add “railway servant”.


43

We also recommend that the Second Schedule should be
amended to add ‘railway servant’ as below:—

“33. employed as a railway seryant as defined in section
3 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890:—

Provided that a railway servant ordinarily discharging
duties in any administrative, district or sub-division-
al office of a railway . . . shail not be workman by
virtuc of this item.” हु

2.34. We now come -to section 2(2). There are certain section 22).

provisions of the Act where the existence of “a trade or business”
of the employer is material1 The activities carried on by a
local authority may or may not amount to trade or business.2
da the case of Government Departments also, the activity is
often not an economic activity* analogous to trade or business.
Nevertheless. Section 2(2) makes a wide provision whereunder
activity of a local authority or of a department acting on behalf
of the Government is considered a trade or business.

7. The reason for the provision is that in the case of activities of
the Government. or a local authority, it would be difficult to dis-
tinguish between activities by way of trade or business and other
‘activities.

We do not wish to disturb the substance of the provision.
But we think that in section 2(2), the Government should be
mentioned before the local authority. We arc also of the view
‘that the present wording in this respect which refers 10 a “de-
partment acting on behalf of the Government” is not appro-
priate and should be replaced simply by the words “the Gov-
ernment”,

_ 2.35. Accordingly we recommend that section 2. sub-sec-
tion (2), should be revised as follows:—

“2(2) The exercise atid performance of the powers and
duties of the Government or of a local authority
shall... . . . for the purposes of this Act, unless a
contrary intention appears, be deemed to be the
trade or business of such Government or autho-
rity...”

1, B.G. scution 20), definition of “workman”, and section 12, and the
Second Schedule, item 4.

"1. As to “business”, see ALR. 1968 S.C, 554.

3, 506 A.LR. 1970 S.C. 1407, 1416 (case regarding the Safdarjung Hospital),
New Delhi. न .

28 M of Law/74—4

Recommen-
dation.


44

Section 43) 2.36, Section 2(3) reads thus:

Power to रे

my “(3) The State Government, after giving, by notifica-

pations tion in the Official Gazette, not less than three

" months notice of its intention so to do, may, by a

like notification, add to Schedule LU any class of per-
sons employed in any occupation which it is satistied
is & hazardous occupation, and the provisions of this
Act shall thereupon apply within the State to such
classes of persons :

Provided that in making such addition the State Govern-
ment may direct that the provisions of this Act shall
apply to such classes of persons in respect of speci-
fied injuries oniy.”

Proposal 2.37. This sub-section thus confers a power on the State
giving the Government to add to the Schedule. We have considered the
Fe Sentral question whether such a power should not be given to the Cent-
Govt, also, Tal Government also so that in the case of employments which
1... have been found to be hazardous and the importance whereof
is not confined to a particular State, it would not be necessary
for each of the State Governments to take separate action. No
doubt the vesting of the power in the State Government, as at
persent, has one advantage namely that the State Government
can utilise its special knowledge of local conditions. Neverthe-
less it appeared to us that the question whether such a power
should be given to the Central Government also could be use-

fully considered.

Amendment 2.38. We have considered the matter in all its aspects and
a section we recommend that the power should vest concurrently in the
2 desit- Central Government and in the State Governments, Such an
हु amendment will secure uniformity where necessary. At the
same time it will retain the present power of the State Govern-

ment which enables prompt action to meet local needs.

Constitu- 2.39. Before coming to our conclusion in this regard, we
tional have carefully considered the constitutional aspect. In our view,
aan the vesting of the power concurrently in the Central Govern-
. ment and the State Governments? is not likely to conflict with

the scheme of the Constitution relating to the distribution of the

executive power between the Centre and the States, The power

to add an ‘employment’ in the Schedule by a notification is an
“executive” one. But it is permissible to vest an executive

power in the Central Government concurrently with the State
Governments. Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the
executive power of the Union extends? under artic’e 73(1) of

the Constitution to matters with respect to which Parliament has
power to make laws, But there is a proviso to this article

4, Para 2.38, supra.
15, Article 73(1)(a) of the Constitution,

mee


45

under which this executive Power shall not, save as expressly
provided in the Constitution er in any law made by Parliament,
extend in any State to matters with respect to which the Legis-
lature of the State has also Power to make laws, i.e., matters
mentioned in the Concurrent List. The subject of workmen's
compensation is in the Concurrent List.1 Hence an executive
power relating to the Workmen’s Compensation Act can be con-
ferred on the Central Government, if it is expressly so provided
in a law made by Parliament. It is true that the Workmen’s
Compensation Act 1923, though a Central Act, is not द faw
made by Parliament. But any amendment now to be made in
that Act by Parliament will be a law made by Parliament and
will therefore satisfy the above Constitutional requirement.

Under another provision of the Constitution’—article 162-~
the executive power of 8 State extends to matters with respect
to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws
but the proviso to that article also enacts that in any matter

have power to make laws, the executive power of the State shell
be subject to, and shall be limited by, the executive power ex-
pressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law made ty
Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof. An express
Provision conferring concurrently on the Central Government
the power under section 2(3) would therefore seem to be
consistent with the scheme of the relevant Provisions of the
Constitution as analysed above.

Thus there is no constitutional difficulty if the power to
notify the employment is given concurrently to both the Gov-
ernments.

2.40. We are also of the view that the State Goverament
should, before issuing a notification under section 2(3), send
an intimation to the Central Government so that the latter could
consider the feasibility of making the addition in the Schedule
on all India basis.

2.41. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend
that section 2(3) should be revised as follows:—

“(3) The Central Government or the State Government,
after giving by notification in the Official Gazette,
not less than thrce months’ notice of its intention so
to do, may, by a like notification, add to Schedule
वा any class of persons employed in any occupation
which it is satisfied is a ‘hazardous occupation and
the provisions of this Act shall thereupon apply

1, Seventh Schedule, Concurrent List, Item 24,
*, Article 162 of the Constitution,

State
Govern-
ments
should give
intimation
to Centre.

Recommen-
dation to
revise sec-
tion 203),


46

withiti the territories to which this Act extends—or
within the State as the case may be, to such classes
of persons :

Provided. that :in making addition ste Central Government
oF. {he State fovernment may direct that the provisions of this
Act shall ‘apply to such classes of persons in respect of specified
anjugies -onlyzs; . 5 -

-+ «Provided. further that the State Government shall, before or
at: -the time -of: issuing the notification, forward an
intimation thereof to the Central Government.”


* CHAPTER 3

RIGHT TO COMPENSATION

3.1. We propose to devote this Chapter to a discussion of
certain basic questions concerning the workman’s tight to com-
pensation dealt-avith in sections 3, 4 and 4A of the Act. The
employer's. liability to pay compensation is the subject-matter of

_ Section 3 where the scope of that liability is defined elaborately.

The amount of compensation forms the subject-matter of section
4. Section 4A provides that compensation payable under sec-
tion 4 is to be paid as soon as it falls due. The three sections
occupy two printed pages in the Act: we shall concentrate o7
such of them as are material. पर

3.13. The maia paragraph of section 3(1) creates the right
to compensation. If a personal injury is caused to a workman
by an accident ‘arising out of’ and ‘in the course of his emp-
loyment’, his employer will be liable to Pay compensation वा ac-
cordance with the provisions of the Chapter.

3.18. We notice that a workman who is injured does not get
medical expenses under the Workmen’s Compensation Act. We
suggest to Government that the Employees’ State Insurance Act,
1948 which is. more liberal in this regard, should be extended
to more employments. We cannot recommend an amendment
in the Workmen’s Compensation Act on this point because such
un amendment would practically assimilate the Workmen's Com-
pensation Act to the Employees’ State Insurance Act. But,

aving regard to the considerations of social justice, it is in our
vicw highly desirable that this aspect of the matter be attended
to and the question of extension of the Act of 1948 to various
employments to which it dues not now extend should be actively
considered.

3.1C. Section 3(1) Proviso (a) enacts .that the employer
shall not be liable to Pay compensation in respect of any injury
that does not result in the total or partial disablement of the
workman’ for a period excecding three days. The reason is
obvious,

3,2. Under  séction 3(1), proviso clause (b) Gi) compen-
sation is barred for a non-fatal injury if the accident (which
caused the injury) is “directly attributable to” the workman
having been ‘under the influence of drinks or drpgs.. This clause
of the proviso requires some examination, The proviso, we

Ay

Introduce
tory

Section —
36), main
para.

question

sonsideret,
Suggestion
to “exten
ESL Act

Section
अ1), pro-
viso (ay

Section 3
(1) proviso
(b) ()—In-
fluence of
drugs oor
drinks,


48

presume, postulates that the accident did arise “out of, and in
the course of” the employment. Otherwise the case would be
outside the section and would need no proviso to exclude it.
But it excludes compensation on the ground that the accident
is directly attributable to the situation mentioned above.

Possible jus- 3.3. What. then is the rational for barring compensation
1 tifieation jn the situation referred to above? Perhaps one possible justi-
ह अयकक fication would be that since the accident was directly attributable
rule, to the physical condition of the workman, the employer shoukt
not be made liable to compensation even though the accident
arose out of and in the course of the employment. In on view,
however, the fact that the workman by his (drunk or drugged)
condition contributed to the accident, should not justify the ex-
Clusion of compensation at the present day. Socia! justice
requires that he should be compensated.

3.4, Another possible justification for the present rule could
be that the workman has no business to get drunk while dis-
charging his duties. This also should hardly suffice to deprive
him of compensation once he is injured. For fatal injuries, the
legislature has already taken a liberal attitude (so that the work-
man’s fault may not be visited on his dependants). ‘The same
approach should be extended to non-fatal injuries.

Recommen- 3.5. and 3.6. In view of what is stated above, we recom-

dation 311), mend that section 3(1), proviso (9) (i), should be deleted.
proviso

{b) 0)

Provisions 3.7. At this stage we would like to refer to several provi-
inthe Em- sions* of the Employees’ Statc Insurance Act 1948 and con-
ployees sider how far their principle is worth introducing in the

rave Act Workmen’s Compensation Act. Primarily the object of these
1948. provisions is to widen the scope of the expression “course

employment” or to eliminate certain defences or to facilitate
the proof of certain facts. Some of these deal with matters not
dealt with in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, while others-—
e.g. section 51-B—reverse the position under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act.

Section 3.8. We shall first take up section 51A of the Employees’
31A, Em- State Insurance Act 1948 which provides as follows :--
ployees’

State Tosa “51A. For the purposes of this Act, an accident arising

in the course of an insured person’s employment
shalt be presumed in the absence of evidence’ to the
contrary, also to have arisen out of thar employ-
ment.”

1, Section 51 A to 51 13, Employer State Insurance Act. 1945.


49

It will be noticed that while section 3(1) of the Workmen's
Compensation Act requires Proof of two facts,? the above sec-
tion of the Employees’ State Insurance Act renders proof of one
fact unnecessary. We are of the view that since the Provision
im the latter Act is a beneficial one and obviously serves social
justice, it should be adopted.

3.9. Of course it is to be noted that before a Presumption under
the section can be raised, it must be proved that the accident
arose “in the course of the employment”. The words “arose in
the course of”, in section 3(1) of the Workmen’s Compensation
Act, 1923, have been generally? construed as referring to the
time, place and circumstances of the employment. It is only
when these three links are established that the casual connec-
tions required by the words “in the course of’ can be presum-
ed.

3.10 to 3.15. It may also be noted that section SIA of the
Employees’ State Insurance Act is ultimately derived from an
English provision. Under the Workmen's Compensation Act,
the burden of proving that the accident arose: “out of” and “in the
course of” the employment is on the employee. Under discussion
ie. Section 51A, employees’ State Insurance Ac. 1948 although
the burden of proof that the accident arise “in the course of”
the employment still lies on the claimant, the burden of proving
that it arose “out of” the employment has been shifted.

3.16. According to the Supreme Court judgment in Mackin-
non Mackenzie case,* the words “in the course of employ!
ment” in the Workmen's Compensation Act, mean “in the
course of the work which the workman is employed to do
and which is incidental to it”. The words “arising out of the
employment” are understood to mean that “during the course
of the employment”, injury has resulted from some risk inci-
dental to the ‘duties of the ‘service which, unless engaged in the
duty owing to the matter, it is reasonable to believe the work-
man would not otherwise have suffered. In other words, there
must be 2, casual relationship between the accident and the
employment, that is, if the accident had occurred on account
of a risk which is an incident of the employment, the claim for
compensation must succeed unless the workman has exposed him-
self to an added peril by his own imprudent act, This is an
interpretation of the existing section. After the proposed
amenciment, the burden of proof will be shifted, as explained
above,’

1, Para 3.14, supra,
4, See para 3.34, infra,
* Section 7(4), National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946 (now
replaced by the 1965 Act)
+ Machinnon Mackenzie vs Ibrahim tssac. ALR. 1970 $C 1906, 1908. para
$6, {follows 1917 A.C. 352). (Case “under Workmen's Componsenns
ct).

5. Para 3.15, supra.

Connection
between
“course of
and “‘out
01 Presu-
mption in
section Sla,
Employees
State Insu-
tance Act,
1948,
Origin of
section SIA

Meaning of
the expres
sions “in
the course
of and
“out of .


हि
Te

50

A verbal 3.17. Before adopting section 51A of the. Employees’ Stalc

ae ne Insurance Act however, a verbal point should be considered.

tion STA The words “in the absence of evidence to the contrary”., which
occur in that section should, while adopting that section, be re-
placed by the words “until the contrary is proved”. The latter
formula is more in consonance with Indian legislative practice.
In fact the words “shall presume” indicate a rebuttable presu-
mption and 10 express provision allowing proof to the contrary
is needed. However it is desirble tc have these wards in
order to. avoid ambiguity.

Recommen- 3.18. In view of what is stated above, we are of the opinion
dation. that section SLA of the Employces’ State Insurance Aci nay be
adopted with the verbal change.’ suggested above.?

Elfect. of 3.19, We proceed to deal with another restriction on the

. ~ Tight to compensation which is to be found im the exiting sec
wilful dis- tion. Under section 3(1), proviso (0) (ii), the right t com-
obedience. pensation is barred in respect of any injury not resulting in
death caused by an accident which is directly attribuiadle to---

“the wilful disobedience of the workman to an order
expressly given or to a rule expressly framed fer
the purpose of securing the safety of workman”,

. 3.20. The position in this respect under the Employees’
Section 51B State Insucance Act is different.24 ‘The relevant section of
E.S4, Act. that Act is as follows:-—

“SIB. Accidents happening while acting in breach of regu-
lutions, हट:

An accident shall be deemed to arise out of and in the course
of an insured persons’s employment acting in contravention of
the provisions of any law applicable to him or of apy orders
given by or on behalf of his employer or that he is actiag with-
Out instructions from his employer, if

(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have
arisen had the act not been done in contravention
as aforesaid or without instructions from his emp-
loyer, as the case may be; and

(9) the act is done for the purpose of and in connec-
tion with the employer's trade or business,”

. Para 3.17, supra. .

. For the consequential re-draft of section 3, see para 3.38, infra.

. Section 518 E.S. Act, 1948.

. Kor history, See para 3.23 infra.


3!

3.21. The principle of this provision is, in our view, worth
ineorporating into the Workmen's Compensation Act having re~
gard to modern nations of social justice, according 10 which em-
phasis should not be. placed on whether the. workman was gillty
Of this‘ or that wrong when the accident occurred: What is
material is only the fact that the accident arose out of and in the
course of the employment.*

3.22. There is an allicd question to be considered, Section
3(1), proviso (b) (iii), bars compensation in tespect of a non-
fatal injury caused by an accident which is directly attributable
to—

“the wilful removal or disregard by the workman of any
safety, guard ot other device which he knew to have
been provided for the purpose of sccuring the
safety of workmen”.

ft is, in our view, desirable to remove this proviso. The
reasons for such an amendment are substantially the same as
those indicated above with reference to proviso (9) (ii)*, to
section, 3(1).

3.23. to 3.25. We shall now consider in deail certain points
arising out of section 51B of the Employees’ State Insurance
Act® It would appear that the origin of section 51B ics in
a section of the National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act
1946, which itself was derived from section 1(2) of the Work-
men’s Compensation Act 1925 derived from section 7 of the Act
of 1923. In some respects, the 1946 Act’is wider than the
1925 Act but the differences arc not material for the present
purpose. The condition that the act must have been done for
the purpose and in connection with the employer’s trade or
business which is found in section 51B of the Employees State
Insurance Act, 1948, appears also in the English Act 1946 and
in the English Act of 1925, In fact in other respects also
section 51B substantially follows the provisions in the English
Act of 1946.47

3.26. What has been stated in section 518 of the Emp-
loyees’s State Insurance Act can be stated in a more direct
manner, by enacting that the fact that the rule or order in ques-
tion was transgressed is immaterial. That is a matter of form.

1, See para 3.
2, See discussion as tv section 310, Proviso (b)Gi) Para 3.19 to 3.26, supra,
3, Para 3.20, supra.

4, Section 8, National Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act. 1946.

3, See abo Noble v. Southern Rail Company, (1942) 2 A.F.R. 383, 386, 387
-L.).

Principle of
section 518

Worth ado-
pling.

Section
3D, pros
viso (byiii).

Section 318
1. Act

considered

in detail

Adoption
of section

dered Re-
quirement
of (rade or
business:
not fayeu-
red.
Contained
in Section
SIB.


52

3.27. One question of substance however still remains. Is
it necessary to incorporate the requirement? contained in section
518 that the act must have been done for the purpose of and
in connection with the employer's trade or business? This re-
quirement postulates two ingredients, first that the employer
must have been carrying on a trade or business, and secondly
that the act must have been done for the purposes of and in
connection -with the employer’s trade or busiriess. A trading
employer can take the defence that the workman’s Act trans-
gressing his orders was not connected with the trade or busi-
ness. A non-trading employer, though liable generally for an
accident, can still take the defence that the workman has trans-
gressed his orders.

3.28. In so far as this requirement postulates that the main
object of the act which caused the accident was to further the
employer’s business,? the real uirement is objectionable because
the proper enquiry should only be whether the act is within the
scope of the employment. The second question namely whe-
ther a non-trading employer should be brought withia the pro-
viso, is of policy. In some cases the statute docs make a dis-
tinction between trading employers and _ others. The
question whether, in this particular context, the distinction should
be maintained is one of policy. On the one hand, it can be
argued that if a non-trading employer, say, a doctor who emp-
loys a radiologist, is to be made liable, even where the partica-
Jar act of the workman has been forbidden by him, some hardship
would be caused. On the other hand, it can be argued that a
workman who transgresses a rule or instruction should, never-
theless be compensated under the Act so long as he dose not
go beyond the sphere of employment. Having carefully consi-
dered the matter, we are of the view that the requirement of
trade or business should not be adopted.

Contributory negligence should be no defence in cases other-
wise falling under the Act. Social justice requires that. the bene-
ficial provision in section 51-B of the Employees State Insu-
rance Act should not be whittled down, and the absence of a
connection with trade or business should be irrelevant. In fact
section 3 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, though it is
confined to breach of instructions regarding safety devices, is
more liberal than section 51-B of the Employees’ State Insuranee
Act in this respect. As a result we recommend that section
51-B should be adopted after omitting this requirement. Also
we recommend that Parliament may consider the desirability of
deleting clause (b) of section 51-B of the Employees’ State Insu-
tance Act.

1, Para 3.20, supra.
2. 2Borley v. Ochanden, (1925) 2 K.B. 325.


33

3.29. We shall now proceed to section 510 of the Emp-
(सम State Insurance Act 1948 which deals with accidents
which’ ‘happen’! while the workman (insured person) is travel-
ling in the employer's transport. Broadly stated, the effect of
the section is that if an accident occurs hile nn Workman, with
the express or implied permission of the em; loyer, trav. as
& passenger? by any vehicle to or from his place of work, he is
covered even though he is under no obligation to his employer
to travel by that vehicle, provided certain conditions are Satis-
fied. This’ provision is subject to certain conditions. The first
condition is that the accident is such as would have been deem-
ed to have arisen out of and in the course of his employment,
if the workman had been under an obligation to his employer
to travel by that vehicle provided certain conditions are Satis~
time of the accident the vehicle was being operated by or on
behalf of the employer (or some other Person under arrange-
ments with the employer) and the vehicle was not being operat-
ed in the ordinary course of a public transport service.

3.30. This section corresponds to section 9 of the National
Jnsurance (Industrial injuries) Act 1946 (Eng.). There was
AO corresponding provision in the Workmen's Compensation Act
of England. As a general rule, a man’s employment does not
begin until he has reached the place where he has to work and
it docs not continue after he has left it" Where there is no
“place of duty”, one has to tead this general mule in relation
to the ambit, scope or scene of duty. Certain exceptions were

recognised to this general rule. Mainly those exceptions re-
late to—

(i) time spent in transport provided by the employer /
if the workman was under obligation to use it:

(ii) means of access to, or

egress from the place of
work:

(iii) attendance before starting time;

(iv) return to the employer's Premises. even after the
termination of the employment, for some purpose
justified by the terms of the employment;

a3

compulsory use of premises Provided by the emp-
loyer—for example, where, between the hours of
active work, the employer is tequired to usc certain

Premises as a resting place.

1, The proper ward is

‘occur"”.
3. Drivers are excluded.

- Natherton v. Coles, (1948) 1 All E.Ri 227, 229,

Accidents
onewing
in the cou-
rsz of tran-
sport to or
from place
of work
(Section
51C, Emp-
Joyees State
Insurance
Act 1948)


=

Test of obli-
gation 10

usc ‘teats
Bort previ
ously adop-
ted in Eng-
lish casts,

Test of
permission.
tater subs~
tituted by
कफ in
1946,

S4

3.31. We are now concerned with the first of the exceptions
mentioned’ above’ namely time spent’ in transport provided: by
yer. According to the “casc law under the (English):
Workmen's Compensation Act of 1925; ‘thé time speut-im trans-
port provided by or on behalf of the employer, was: regarded
as an exception and must be included in the period of employ-.
ment, if there was an express or implied obligation ‘on the work~
man to use the transport so Provided? . Under the English Act®
of 1946 relating to national insurance, however, tio obligation
to use the transport is required in ordér that the accident be
deemed to have arisen out of and in conrse of the employment.

3.31A. Thus the statutory provision in the English Act® of
1946 which has been adopted in the Employee: State Insu-
rance Act 1948, section 5167, enlarges the scope of the excep-
tion recognised by judicial interpretation of the Workmen's Com-
pensation Act by removing the requirement of obligation to use
the transport. Instead it is now provided that tho workman
must be travelling as a passenger by the particular vehicle to
or frem his place of work with the express or implied peretis-
sion oj the employer, Need for an obligation is expressly ruled
out. But certain other conditions have to be satisfed.t We are
jn favour of adopting the principle of the provision in section
51-C. Hence again the drafting could be simplified,* and the first
requirement" that the accident must be such that it would have
been deemed to have arisen if the employer had been under an
obligation to provide the transport, can be omitted, as merely
repeating what is already required by the ingredient indicated by
the words “out of and in the course of the employment?”

3.32. The second requirement? namely that at Ure lime of
the accident, the vehicle was being operated by or on behalf of
the employer etc., and was not being operated in the ordinary
course of public transport service, raises a question of policy.
Oa the one hand, it can be argued that such accident as arise
while the workman uses a public transport system 57 transport
not provided by the employer, are not hazards created by the
enyoyer but are hazards which the workman has to face,
ihough in a sense for the purpose of the employment. It can
be argued that this hazard is common to the particular work-
man and to persons who are not workman within the Act. On
the other hand, it can be argued that it is not proper that an
injury suffered in furtherance of the employment shovld escape
the pratection given by the Act.

. Saint Helena Colliery Co. v. Hewitson, 1924) 59 FLL,
. Section 9 Nationa! Tnsuranse (udustrial Injuries) Act, 1946,
. Section 9, Natiena! Insurance (Industrial Injuries) Act, 1946.
. These have been set out above. Para 3.29, supra.

Compare discussion us to section 515 of tke Act of 1948.
. pata 3.29, siapra.
. Para 2.29, supra.

ane ee wl


5

on

3.32A. In this connection it would be of interest to com- te contine

pare the position prevailing in some of the legal systems on the ent as
Conti There is a great deal of diversity among the six to injuries
legal systems on the Continent—Belgium, France, Germany, on way to
1६४४, 2 exemberg and Netherlands,—on the subject of workmen's work.
comper. n rules in respect of accidents occuring outside
the employer's premises while the workman is on his way to
or from work. In Italy and the Netherlands for example, there
are 70 statutory provisions at all ०1 the subject. But while
the courts in Netherlands have by judicial interpretation extended
the concept of “employment-telated accident” to inchide acci-

~ dents occuring on the way between an émployee’s residence and
his place of employment, the Italian courts have found it im-
possible १6 adopt such a liberal view?.

In therlands however the legislation of 1967 abolished
the fraeitional distinction between industrial and ordinary acci-
dens. All accidents, from whatever cause, whether of not
‘empleyment-related, are now subject to the same rules in Nether-
lands. Consequently the provlem of way-to-work accidents has
become academic in the Netherlands*. Germany has covered
trips made for the purpose of keeping work-relates medical ap-
pointments. France and Belguim are more liberal since they
cover trips between the place of work and the place where the
employce takes his meals*.

In this connection, attention may be drawn to the fact thal
the Irtereational Labour Organisation in 1964 adopted a conven-
tion calling for compensation of way-to-work accidents. A re-
commendation adopicd at the same time (1964 defines. more
explicitly the kind of trips which are to be covered under work-
men’s compensation systems. They include trips between the
place of work and (1) the employce’s permanent or temporary
residence; (2) the place where the employee takes his meals:
‘and (3) the place where the employee ordinarily receive his
salary. The exact recommendation is as follows':—

“5. Each Member should, under prescribed conditions
treat the following as industrial accidents +

(a) accidents, regardless of their cause, sustained dur-

ing working hours at or near the place of work

- or at any place where the worker would not have
been oxcept for his employment;

+. ook Review in (Winter 1972) American Journal Comparative Law,
Sef, 198 (Review of Christian Fabry, “Les Accidents De Traijel”).

2, Book Reviow in QWinter 1972.) American Journal Comparative Law 164,
165. :

३, Book Review, in OWinter 1972) American Journal, Comparative Law,
164, 1659. . rt ”

4 LPO, Conventions (1919-1966), page 1094, Convention of 1964 on Emp-
Joyment Injuries, Recommendation No. 121, 7



Emergency
{Section 51
D, Employ-
e's State
Insurance

Act, 1948).

36

(b) accidents sustained within reasonable Periods before
and after working hours in connection with trans-
porting, cleaning, preparing, securing, conserving,
Storing and packing work tools or clothes;

(c) accidents sustained while on the direct way between
the place of work and —

(i) the employecs’ Principal’ or secondary residence:
or

(i) the place where the employee usually takes his
meals; or

(iii) the place where he usually receives the remunc-
ration.”

3.33. Having carefully considered all aspects of the
matter, we are of the view that section 51 Cc
of the Employee’s State Insurance Act should be ad
with modification that it should not be necessary that the trans-
Port is provided by the employer, if the workman is travelling
directly to or from the place of employment.

3.34. We now come to another Point relevant to the expres-
sion “course of employment”, It relates to action by way of
Fescue or otherwise in an emergency. At common Law the
voluntary assumption of risk is regarded as justified (and hence
not a bar to a claim in tort) in certain situations. Chief amongst
these are the situations where a person is under a general cr
moral duty to save others from peril? (eg. a policeman stopping
Tunning horses in a busy street), or is under a legal duty to pro-
tect property, e.g., his master’s? (night watchman going back into
burning premises) or otherwise acts instinctively? (wife trying
to save her husband from falling glass). Mostly these are situa-
tions of emergency. They have come to be known as “rescue”
cases.

3.35. These cases have a rationale. In the memorable.
phrase of Cardozo‘, “Danger invites rescue. The ery of dis-
tress is the summons to relief. The law does not ignore these
reactions of the mind in tracing conduct to its consequences......
The risk of rescue, if only it be not wanton, is born of the occa-
sion. ‘The emergency begets the man. The wrong-door may not
have foreseen the coming of a deliverer. He is accountable as
if he had.”

1, Haynes |. Harwood, (1935) 1 K.B. 146 (C.A).
3, D Urao v. Samson, (1939) 4 Ali E.R. 26.
3. Brandon v. Gxborne Carrett & Co,, (1924) 1 K.B. 548,

*. Wagner v. International Railroads, (1921) 232 1४.४. 176 (New York Court
of Appeals).


ro

57

3.35A. Section 51D of the E.S.J. Act 1948 which is based
on the same principle, is as follows: —

“51D. An accident happening to an iasured person in or
about any premises at which he is for the time being
employed for the purpose of his employer's trade
or business shall be deemed to arise out of and in
the course of his employment if it happens while
he is taking steps on an actual or supposed emer-
gency at those premises, to rescue, succour or prce
tect persons who are or are thought to be or pos-
sibly to be injured or imperilled or to avert or mi-
nimise serious damage to property.”

3.36, No such section was contained in the (English) Work-
men's Compensation Act but, in cases arising under these Acts,
a workman was not treated as acting beyond the sphere of his
employment and on his employer's work, if he voluntarily
did in an emergency, an act in the interests of his
employer outside the scope of his ordinary employment. Courts
in England held, under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, that
where the workman departs from the scope of his duties in an
emergency, the accident may be held to arise out of the em-
ployment.

Thus where an unskilled labourer assisted a machinist in a
difficulty and suffered injury, he was held to be covered’. “An
emergency is something which occurs unexpectedly. It does not
necessarily mean an occurrence giving rise to greater danger?.”

3.36A. It appears to us that an express provision as to
emergencies, as in section 51D, E.S.1. Act®, could be usefully
added to the Workmen’s Compensation Act also. We do not
however consider necessary the requirement as to trade.

Subject to this modification we recommend an adoption of
this section though in a simplified form.

3.38. In the light of the above discussion we recommend the
insertion* of the following new provisions® :—

“3.(1A) For the purposes of this Act, an accident aris-
ing in the course of a workman's employment shail
be presumed, until the contrary is proved, also to
have arisen out of that employment.

1, London and Edinborough Shipping Co. v. Brown (1905) 7 Fq 488 (Scottisia
Court of Session).

3, Deromody v. Higgs & Hill Lid. (1937) 4 All E.R. 379.

> Para 3.35A, supra.

3, These could be inserted in section 3 as sub-sections.

5. Section 3(1)(b), proviso’ Gi) and (ili) to be deleted.

Section
51D, 5.51,
Act.

Decision
under the
English
Workmen’s
Compen-
sation Act
as to emer-
gency.

Provision

as to emer~
gency desir-
able.

(Compare
section 314.
E.S.J. Act,
1948).


58
(Compare 3.(18) An accident shall be deemed to arise out of and
section 518. in the course of a workman’s employment notwith-
ES.L Act, standing that he is at the time of the accident acting
1948), in contravention of the provisions of any law appli-

cable to bim or of any orders giver by or on behalf
of his employer, or that he is acting without instruc-
tions from his employer, or in disregard of any safety
guard or other device provided for the purpose of
securing the safety of workmen, it the accident would
“have been deemed so to have arisen had the act
not been done in contravention of the provision as
aforesaid or without instruclions from the employer
or in disregard of a safety guard or other device as
aforcsaid, as the case may be.

(Compare 3.(1C) An accident occurring while a workman is, with
section SIC the express or implicd permission of his employcr,
ESI. Act, travelling as a passenger by any vehicle directly to
1948). or from his place of work shall. notwithstanding that

he is under no obligation to his employer to travel
by that vehicle be deemed to arise out of ard in
the course of his employment whether at the time
of the accident the vehicle was being operated by
or on behalf of his employer or by any other person.

“Fxplanation.—In this sub-section. “vehicle” includes a
vessel and an aircraft.

Compare 3.{1D) Where an accident occurs to a workman in er
section 519 about any premises at which he is for the time being
ES. Act, employed, it shalf be deemed to arise out of and in
-1948, the course of his employment if it occurs while he

is taking steps on an actual or supposed emergency
at those premiscs.—

“(a) to rescue, succour or protect persons who are
injured or imperilled or who, it is thought, might
possibly be injured or imperiled, or

(b), to avert or minimise serious damage to property.”

This finishes the new provisions to be introduced and we
shall resume our consideration of points concerning section 3.

Sections 3.38A. Sections 3(2) to 3(4) will be discussed later’.
3(2) to
3(4), 3.39. Under section 3(5) a workman has no right to com-

Section 315) pensation in, respect of any injury if he has instituted “in a civil
court” a suit for damages in respect of the injury against the
employer or any other person. Conversely no suit for damages
shall be maintainable by a workman “in any court of law” in
respect of any injury, if he has instituted a claim to compensation

4, Para 3.47 ct seq, infra.


39

for that injury before a Commissioner or if an agreement has
been “come to” between the workman and the employer regarding,
compensation for such injury.

3.40. Two posts arise out of this sub-section—one of iriter-
pretation and the other of verbal symmetry. The first point is
what is the exact scope of the expression “civil court” in the first
part of the sub-section or of the expression “court of law” in the
second part? In a Madhya Pradesh case!, it was held that the
expression “civil court” includes a Motor Accident Claims Tyi-
bunal constituted under the Motor Vehicles Act so that obtain-
ing compensation from the Tribunal bars a claim for compensa-
tion under the Workmen’s Compensation Act.

3.41. So far as this particular tribunal is concerned, there is
now a specific provision in the Motor Vehicles Act? which pro-
vides that where the death of or bodily injury to any person
gives rise to a claim for compensation under the Motor Vehicles
Act and also under the Workmen’s Compensation Act 1923,
the person entitled to compensation shall receive compensation
under either of the Acts but not under both.

To avoid the possibility of a conflict of views on the subject
in respect of similar Tribunals it is in our view desirable—

(i) to define the expression® “civil court” as including
other Tribunals entitled to order payment of com-
pensation on death of or bodily injury to any per-
son; and

(i) to use the expression “civil court” in Place of the
expression “court of law”, in the latter half of the
sub-section.

Consequentially it will be desirable to add an explanation.
providing that “suit” includes claims for compensation for the
death of or bodily injury to a person under the Motor Vehicles
Act or any other law. “We would like to make it clear that the
agreement referred to in section 3(5) should be Tegistered.

3.42. We recommend the following re-draft of section 3(5)
in the light of the above discussion.—

Revised section 3(5)4 “Nothing herein contained shall be
deemed to confer any right to compensation on a
workman in respect of any injury if he has instituted

‘Radhabai v. Bala Ram, (1971) Jabalpur Law Journal 17, (K, 17, (Krishnan and
Oza JJ.), cited in the Yearly Digest (97), Col. 2609.

. Section 110AA, Motor Vehicles Act 1939.

. ‘Phis is not a dratt.

+. To be renumbered if the suggestion to re-number section 3(2) ttc, as
section 3A is accepted.

28 M of Law/7™4—5

Two points
while arise.

Recommen-
dation to
revits sec

ion 3(5).


Claims un-
der other
Acts,

Recommen-
dation to
insert new
sub-section,

Sectio:. 3A
Le, 3(2) to
section 3
(4) renum-
bered.

60

in a Civil Court against the employer or any other
person, a suit for damages in respect of the injury
and no suit for damages shall be maintainable by a
workman in any civil court in respect of any injury—

(a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in
respect of the injury before a Commissioner; or

(8) if an agreement has been reached between the
workman and his employer providing for the
payment of compensation in respect of the injury
in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and has been registered under this Act.

Explanation.—In this section—

(a) ‘civil court’ includes a tribunal having ju-isdiction to
entertain a claim for compensation in respect of any
injury; and

(b) ‘suit’ includes such claim before such tribunal.”

3.42A. We are of the view that where a claim for compensation
for an accident which could have been made under the Work-
mens’ Compensation Act, is made before a civil court or other
tribunal, the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act as to
tight to compensation (both of the workmen and the dependants)
should apply, and the question of quantum of Compensation
should also be determined in accordance with the frovisions of
the Workmen’s Compensation Act. The principal idea is that
the beneficial provisions of the Act excluding certain dcfences
should be attracted, as also provisions as to persons who are
dependants. Irrespective of the form, the principles governing
these matters ought to be the same in respect of such claims. The
new proposal will apply to claims before civil courts as well as
tribunals.

3.42B. Accordingly, we recommend that the following new
sub-section should be inserted in section 3:—

“Where in respect of a death or personal injury, a claim
for compensation which could have been made under
this Act, is made before a civil court or before a
tribunal, the provisions of this Act as to the right
to compensation (both of the workmen and of the
dependants), shail apply to such claim and the
amount of compensation shall also be determined
as far as may be in accordance with the provisions

of this Act.”

3.43. Sections 3(2), 3(2A), 3(3) and 3(4) relate to cer-
tain occupational diseases. If certain specified conditions are
satisfied, the contracting of the occupational diseases by the work-
man is regarded as an injury by accident and there is a rebuttable
presumption that the accident arose out of, and in the course of,


61

the employment. This is the broad effect of these sub-sections.
In other words, to the concept of “personal injury caused by
accident” which is the basis of a claim under sub-section (1),
these sub-sections add the concept of disease subject to certain
conditions.

The cynditions are numerous. In the first place the work-
™man must be employed in an employment specified in the Third
Schedule. In the second place the occupational disease con-
tracted by the workman must be one which is specified in the
Third Schedule as “peculiar” to the particular employment. In
the third place, in case of employment in Part B or Part C of the
Third Schedule, the employee must have been in the service of
the employer continuously for a specified period but this re-
quirement (of continuous pericd) is to be read as subject to cer-
tain provisions which relax it or certain other provisions which
explain and interpret it. These matters of detail need not be
gone into at present.

3.44. To the list of disease given in the Third Schedule, the
State Government {in the case of Part A and Part B of the Third
Schedule) or the Central Government (in the case of Part C),
can make additions after following the procedure Jaid down in
section 3(3). Where the requirement of continuous! period. is
relaxed, there arises a need to distribute the liability between two
or more employers—a matter provided in sub-section (2A).

3.45. Except as provided in sub-sections (2), (2A) and (3),
compensation is not payable for a disease unless the discase is
directly attributable to a specified injury by accident arising out
of and in the course of employment.

This brief analysis of the sub-sections in question is offered
to facilitate further consideration of the matter.

3.46, Now the first difficulty that one experiences when read-
ing the sub-sections concerning diseases is in the nature of a
strain caused by too many provisions crowded together as sub-
sections. The topic of disease deserves at least one separatc
section for itself, so as to relieve the strain. Secondly, the first
proviso to section 3(2), (which is apparently in the form of a
proviso) really adds to the main provision regarding employments
im Part C, so far as the requirement of continuous minimum
period is concerned. Jt enacts a substantive provision having an
importance of its own. Broadly stated, its effect is that irres-
pective of the length of the continuous period of service, if (a)
a workman, while in the service of onc or more employers in the
employment in Part C, contracts the peculiar occupational disease,
and (b) the disease has arisen out of and in the course of the
employment, then the contraction of such disease ‘shall be deem-
ed to be an injury by accident’ within the meaning of the section.
1, Para 3.43, supra.

‘Too many
Provisions
crowded
together,



Need for
classifica-
tion of the
provisions.

Recommen-
dations.

‘Occupation-
al disease
When to be
deemed to
injury by
accident
[section 3
(2), main

[Section 3
(2), main
para in
part.]

62

This “deeming” is not subject to proof to the contrary. It is
desirable that the first proviso to sub-section (2) should appear
as a substantive provision (for employments in Part C), followed
by the other substantive provision in the main sub-section (for
employments in Part C). The second proviso to sub-section (2)
is grammatically inaccurate though its sense is fairly clear. It
applies to employments in Part B or in Part C and provides for
cases where the contraction of the disease takes place after ces-
sation of the employment. Such a special provision is necessary
apparently because the main sub-section—section 3(2)—speaks
of “whilst in service”.

3.47. It would appear that understanding of these sub-sections
would be facilitated if the four sub-sections—3(2), 3(2A), 3(3)
and 3(4)—were put in a separate section and some attempt was
made to classify the provisions into—

(1) common provisions;

Gi) provisions applicable to employments in Part A of
the Third Schedule;

Gii) provisions applicable to employments in Part B
of the Third Schedule; and

(iv) provisions applicable to employments in Part C of
the Third Schedule.

This improvement is suggested in view of the fact that the pre-
sent arrangement hardly conduces to a clear understanding of
what is intended. Moreover in so far as the employments in
Part C are concerned, there are as already stated above? not
one but two substantive provisions, ‘Certain other drafting im-
provements in the second proviso are also desirable.

3.48. On the above basis the following redraft of section 3(2),
(2A), (3) and (4),—1to be put as section 3A—is recoramended.°

3A(1): If a workman employed in any employment
है ecified in Part A of Schedule गा contracts any
iscase specified therein as an occupational disease
peculiar to that employment the contractng of the
disease shall be deemed to be an injury by accident
within the meaning of section 3, and unless the con-
trary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to have
arisen out of, and in the course of, the employment.

(2) If a workman, whilst in the service of an employer
in whose service he has been employed for a continu-
ous period of not less than six months (which period

346, supra. ta. 506 para 3.46 supra.
ing section 3(5) could be renumbered as section 3B.



63

shall not include a period of service under any other
employer in the same kind of employment) in any
employment specified in Part B of Schedule MI, con-
tracts any disease specified therein as an occupatio-
nal disease peculiar to that employment, the contraci-
ing of the disease shall be deemed to be an injury
by accident within the meaning of section 3, and
unless the contrary is proved, the accident shall be
deemed to have arisen ont of and in the course of
the employment;

Provided that if it is proved— iSection
+ 3(2), Second
(a) that a workman, having served under any eruploye? iso in

in any employment specified in Part B of Schedule 2

HIE for a continuous period of six months has, °°
after the cessation of such service contracted any
disease specified in the said Part B as an occupa~

tional disease peculiar to the employment; and

(8) that such disease arose out of the employment,
the contracting of the disease shall be deemed
to be an injury by accident within the meaning
of section 3.

(3) If a workman, whilst in the service of one or more [Section
employers in any employment specified in Part C of 3@), main
Schedule वा for such continuous period as the Cen- para in part]
tral Government may specify in respect of each a
such employment, contracts any disease specified
therein as an occupational disease peculiar to that
employment, the contracting of the disease shail be
deemed 10 be an injury by accident within the mean-
ing of this section, and, unfess the contrary is prov-
ed, the accident shall be deemed to have arisen out
of, and in the course of, the employment.

(4) Tf it is proved— [Section

(a) that a workman, whilst in the service of one or 3 (2), first
more employers in any employment specified in POvS°
Part C of Schedule DJ, has contracted a disease
specified therein as an occupational disense pe-
culiar to that employment during a continuous
period which is less than the period specified
under this sub-section for that employment; and

(0) that the disease has arisen out of, and in the
course of, the employment,

the contracting of such disease shall be deemed to
be an, injury by accident within the meaning of sec-
tion 3,

1. The present second proviso to section 3(2) is ambiguous in this regard,
‘dul presumably the above is the correct reading, Sea section 3(2), main
para.


64

[Section (5) If it is proved—
3 (2), second

proviso in (a) that a workman, having served under one or

art] more employers in any employment specified in

P Part C of Schedule III for a continuous period
specified under sub-section (3) for that employ-
ment, has after the cessation of such service, con-
tracted any disease specified in the said Part C as
an occupational discase peculiar ta the employ-
ment; and

(b) that such discase arose cul of the employment,

the contracting of the disease shati be deemed
to be an injury by accident within tne meaning

of section 3.
[Section (6) If a workman employed in any employment spcct-
3 (29)] fied in Part C of Schedule HI contracts any occupa-

tional disease peculiar to that employment, the con-
tracting whereof is deemed to be an injury by acci-
dent within the meaning of section 3 and such शा
ployment was undec more than one employer, all
such employers shall be liable for the payment of
the compensation in such proportion as the Com-
missioncr may in the citcumstanccs deem just.

[Section (7) The State Government in the case of employments
baa) specified in Par A and Part B of Schedule III, and
७ Central Government in the case of employments

specified in Part C of that Schedule, after giving

by notification in the Official Gazette not less than

three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may,

by a like notification, add auy descrip:ion of em-

ployment to the employments specified in Schedule

वा, and shall specify in the case of employments so

added the diseases which shall be deemed for the

purposes of this section to be occupational disease

peculiar to those employments respectively, and

thereupon the provisions of this section shall apply

as if such diseases had been declared by this Act to

‘be occupational diseascs peculiar to these employ-

ments.
en “(8) Save as provided by sub-sections (1) to (7), no
c compensation shall be payable to a workman in res-

pect of any discase unless the disease is directly
attributable to a specific injury by accident arising
out of and in the course of his employment.”

Section 4(1) 3.49, We now proceed to a consideration of the general
General scheme of compensation, The amount of compensation under
scheme a8 sub-section (1) of section 4—which is one of the longest sub-

to compen- *
salon sections in the Act—depends on a number of factors.


65

There is of course a common clement of gradation name-
Jy the amount of monthly wages; the amount recoverable in
respect of an injury (whatever its nature) is linked up with the
amount of monthly wages of the particular worker. This part
of the scheme is to be ascertained from the Fourth Schedule to
the Act. In addition, the amount of compensation varics ac-
cording as the injury has resulted in (i) death (it) permanent
total disablement (iti) permanent partial disablement or (iv)
temporary disablement. In the case of permanent partial dis-
ebiement, again there is a distinction between an injury speci-
fied in Part II of the First Schedule and an injury not so Speci-
fied. If the injury is so specified, the percentage of compensa-
tion is laid down by the Schedule itself while if the injury is not
specified, the percentage is not so laid down but is proportionate
to the loss of earning capacity permanently caused by the injury.

” This might be explanied more elaborately.

In the case of death, a specified amount mentioned in the
Fourth Schedule is to be paid and in the case of permanent
total disablement also, a specified amount mentioned in the
Fourth Schedule is to be paid. No other complications enter
here.

But in the case of a permanent partial disablement, the
amount specified for permanent total disablement is first ‘to be
taken into account and then 8 percentage is to be applied there-
to, The percentage given in the Schedule as appropriate to the
particular kind of injury is to be applied for this purpose. In
other words, the amount specified in respect of permanent total
disablement is to be reduced to that percentage. In the case of
certain injuries however no such statutory percentage is laid

down and the appropriate percentage has ‘to be arrived at on
the facts of cach case.

In the case of temporary disablement whether total of
partial the amount specified in the Fourth Schedule is to be
paid as a half monthly payment.

3.50, The provisions as to compensation might appear to
be somewhat complicated but the complexity seems to be un-
avoidable. From the layman’s point of view, structural im-
Provemeats could be suggested only int clause (d) of section
4(1) relating to temporary disablement.

_ 3.51. Section 4(1), clause (d), imposes a strain on the
mind when reading. “In the interests of Proper understanding
of the section it is desirable to split up this clause into two
parts—(i) the main proposition and (ii) the detailed Provisions.
‘The main proposition could be retained as at present. The de-
tailed provisions could be transferred along with existing section

1. See discussion relating to section 40009), para 3.51, उक्त

Section
4 6) (०9).


66

4(2) to a new section.! The revised provisions will then be

as follows: —
Revised section 4(1) (a)
[Section “(d) Where temporary disablement whether total or
4 (1) @io partial results from the injury and the injured
i part] workman has been in receipt of monthly wages fall-
. ing within limits shown in the first column of Sche-
f dule 1V—a_half-monthly payment of the sum

shown against such limits in the fourth column to
be paid in accordance with the provisions of section
4A

Section 4A (to be added”)

(1) The half-monthly payment referred to in clause (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be payable on the sixteenth
day—

(i) from the date of the disablement where such dis-
ablement lasts for a period of twently-eight days or
more or

(ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from
the date of the disablement where such disablement
lasts for a period of less than twenty-eight days;

and thereafter half-monthly during the disablement or
during a period of five years whichever period is
shorter. (Provisoes as at present).

Section 4A, 3.52. It is onc of the chief principles of the Act that com-
Compensa- pensation as provided in the Act shall be paid as soon as it
tion to be Hs due. Theoretically, compensation falls due as soon as lia-
paid bility is incurred under section 3(1); but acceptance of the fia-
promptly, bility or quantification of the liability may sometimes take time.

* To provide for such a situation, the Act has a provision requir-
ing the employer, where he does not accept the liability to the
extent claimed, to make a provisional payment based on the
extent of liability which he accepts. This is the gist of sub-
sections (1) and (2) of section 4A,

If the employer is in default in paying the compensation due
under the Act for one month from the date of it fell due, the Com-
missioner may, under sub-section (3) of section 4A, direct that
in addition to the amount of the arrears, simple interest at the
rate of 6 per cent per annum on the amount due “together

1, The new section will be numbered as section 4A. Present section 4A.
will then become section 4B.

3, Present section 4A to be re-numbered as section 4B.



67

with, if in the opinion of the Commissioner there is no justifica-
tion for the delay, a further sum not exceeding 50 per cent af
such amount”, shall be recovered from the employer by way of
penalty.

3.53. This section (section 4A) was inserted in 1959. No
reported cases on this section have come to our notice, But
sub-section (3)1 of the section appears to be capable of im-
provement in some respects. As it is also possible that some
of the expressions used in sub-section (3) might create contro-
versies, drafting changes are also desirable. .

3.54. The first question to be considered is whether the
Power to direct the payment of interest under section 4A(3) is
to be exercised only when the Commissioner decides the claim
and awards compensation.

This apparently is the present position and could be made
clear. ‘The second question is whether the interest to be award.
ed under the sub-section is regarded as a kind of penalty or
whether only the “further sum not exceeding 50 per cent” is 10
be regarded as a penalty. The words “by way of penalty” oc-
curring at the end. of section 4A(3) would suggest the former
interpretation, while the separate mention in section 30(1) (aa)
of “interest or penalty” would suggest the latter interpr etation,
which is also more appropriate and should be adopted.

Thirdly in so far as the amount payable under the section
is described as a penalty, it would be desirable to provide for
notice to the employer before a Penal order is passed. Fourth-
ly we are of the view that the rate of interest mentioned at pre-
sent—6 per cent—should be increased to 9 per cent and the
Commissioner should be bound to award interest at that Tate in
every case where the employer is in default.

3.55, To carry out the above improvements we recommend
the following re-draft of section 4A(3).

[Revised section 4.4 (3) ]

“44(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the
compensation duc under this Act within one month from the
date it fell due, the Commissioner—

(a) at the time of ordering payment of such compensa-
tion shall direct that the employer shall, in addition
to the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest
at the rate of nine per cent per annum on the amount
due, and

1, Para 3.52, supra.

Paucity of
Case-law
and imp-
Tovements
needed in
drafting.

Questions
to be
considered.

Recommen-
dation,


68
(0) if, in the opinion of the Commissioner, there is no
justification for the delay, may direct that the em-
ployer shall in addition to the amount of the ar-
Tears pay a further sum not exceeding fifty per
cent of such amount by way of penalty:

Provided that an arder for the payment of penalty shall not
be passed under clause (b) without giving reasonable opportu-
nity to the employer to show cause why it should not be passed.


CHAPTER 3A

COMPUTATION OF COMPENSATIGN

३4.1. Certain matters concerning the method of calculating
compensation—sections 5 to 7—wilf be dealt with in this Chap-
ter. While the right to compensation and the amount of com-
pensation have been dealt with in earlier sections (sections 3
and 4), certain matters of detail which are relevant to the
method of calculation remain to be dealt with and they form
the subject matter of this Chapter. Since the amount of com-
pensation depends on the amount of wages either directly’ or
indirectly’,—the definition of “wages” in section 5 is important
enough. In case of temporary disablement, compensation is in
the form of halfmonthly payments,’ and sections 6 and 7 are
relevant thereto. Compensation on death is to be distributed—
section 8, Assignment is barred by section 9.

Method of calculating wages

38.2. For calculating monthly wages section 5 provides
several methods.

The normal situation of a workman employed under the
same employer continuously for 12 months is dealt with in
clause {a} under which the monthly wages are 1/12 of the
total wages earned for the whole 12 months.

We are of the view that this clause requires modification in
one respect. At present, the total wages for the whole 12
months are to be taken into account and divided by 12 but, in
fairness, the wages for the last month should be decisive. Under
the present law a workman who got a rise in wages 8 month or
so before the accident does not get the benefit of that rise, if
he is injured. This should be changed by amending clause (a).

३4.28. We therefore recommend that in section 5(a) for
the words “one-twelfth of total wages etc. the words “the wages
for the last full month immediately preceding the accident”,
should be substituted,

3A.3. This finishes section 5(a). In order to arrive at a
proper, fair and consistent computation of monthly wages, two
alternative methods of computation are provided for in clause
(0) which applies where the continuous employment under the

2 Section 4(H(@), 4006) and 417७. ~
3, Section 4(1)(c).
3, Section 4119).

69

Introduz-
tory.

Section
5(a) and
Sib}.

Method of
calculating
wage.

Recommen-
dation to
amend
section 5(a)

Comment
ons.5,
clause (७),
first,
method.


oT

Commen
on clause

b), second

method.

Recominen-
dation to
amend

s ection
5b.

Section 5(c)

70

employer was for less than a month. The first method in
clause (b) applies where the continuous period of service was
less than one month. Under this clause,—

“the monthly wages of the workman shall be the average
monthly amount which, during the twelve months
immediately preceding the accident, was being earn-
ed by a workman employed on the same work by
the same employer.”

With reference to this clause it was observed in a Sind
caset,——

“These words are not as explicit as they might be. The
words ‘continuous’ and ‘service’ which find place in
clauses (a) and (c) have been omitted.” (i.e. they
have been omitted in the computation part).

The clause could be made more explicit on this point.

3A.4. Where the employer had no regular employees, this
first method of computation would not apply and for computing
the workman’s monthly wages, one must have regard to the
words “or if there is no such workman so गण ed”, and pass
on to the second method provided in clause (b) under which
the monthly wages of the workman shall be the average monthly
amount which, during the twelve months immediately preceding
the accident, was being earned by (a) workman “employed on
similar work in the same locality.”

With reference to these words it has been observed judicial-
ly} that—

“these words manifestly inchide wages from any source
and any employer.” पु

Tt may be advisable to provide this explicitly.

3A.5. We recommend that the change indicated above? with
reference to section 5(b), should be carried out by a suitable
verbal amendment.*

34.6. In section 5 clause (०), which is a residuary provi-
sion, it is clear* that the words “last continuous period of service
immediately preceding the accident” mean continuons employ-
ment “under the same master’. No atnendment is needed here.

1, Pestonji v. Asibai, ALR. 1949 Sind 50, 53 para 25.

३, Para 3A.3 and 3A.4, supra.

2, Amendment not drafted with reference to section 5(b).
4, Pestonji v. Asibai, ALR. 1949 Sind 50, 52, para 20.



UW

3A.7. One question concerning contract labour has also to
be considered under section 5. It is well-known that when con-
tract labour is employed red, the contractor usually pays less than
the employer. Th e the Commissioner appointed under
the Act should, in case of contract labour, have power to in-
crease the amount of wages for the purpose of computation
under the Act if the wages which would have been payable if
the employer had directly employed the workman exceed those
aid by the contracior. The matter can be included in section
> which deals with the computation of wages. The Commis-
sioner could be given a power, similar to that which he now has,
under section 5(b) to take into account the wages of other
workmen in similar employ although of course the present
power is meant for a different purpose.

3A.8. We therefore recommend that, to section 5 a suitable
provision authorising the Commissioner to consider, in case of
contract labour, a direct employee's wages should be added, in
the shape of an Explanation,’ on the following lines;

“Explanation2.—In the case of a workman employed on
contract labour, the Commissioner shall have pcower
to direct that the amount of wages of the workman
shall be computed at a higher rate, if the wages
which would have been payable if the employer
had directly employed him ‘exceed those paid by
the contractor, and, for this purpose, the Commis-
sioner may take into account the wages of other
workmen in similar employ”.

34.9. The Act makes no express provision for altering com-
pensation except in section 6. By the terms of section 6, it is
limited to half-monthly payments which are prescribed by the
Act for only temporary disablement (partial or total). Besides
section 6 there is no other provision in the Act which empowers
the parties to seek a reopening of the question of compensa-
tion whether fixed by an agreement or determined by an award.
Should other cases be covered? In a Calcutta case,? the ques-
tion was discussed and the following comment made:

“The reason why the Act has made an exception in the
case of the temporary disablement appears to me to
be plain. The disablement being temporary, is
normally bound or due to disappear, or it may be
that it will grow worse and be aggravated into a
permanent disability, but whether or not the subse-
quest devclopment be for the bettcr or for the
worse, the disablement is for the time being of a

1, Present Explanation to be renumbered as Explanation 1.
3, Angus Co. Ltd. v. Chouthi, ALR. 1955 Cal, 616, 619 (Chakravarti, 0.9.

Contract
labour,

Recom-
mendation
to add an
Explana-
tion regar-
ding con-
tract la-
bour.

Cases not
covered by
section 6.


72

temporary character, and since it is temporary, pro-
vision for future adjustment is obviously called for.

“Since the compensation is to be paid for the disable~
ment, there will be no reason to pay il. when the
disablement has ceased for, again, since compensa-
tion is payable for disablement as it is at the time
the compensation is fixed, there is no reason why the
full amount should continue to be paid, although
the disablement diminishes and the earning capacity
is corresporelingly restored. Looking at the matter
from the other point of view, since the compensa-
tion is originally assessed on the basis cf a tempo-
rary disablement. there is no reason why the figure
50 assessed should be maintained, even if the dis-
ablement worsens and deteriorates into a permanent
disability.”

32.10, In the same case,’ it was pointed ont that “it is not
impossible that when a personal injury suffered by a “workman
is assessed for the purpose of compensation, some mistake should
be made, nor is it impossible that even 8 permanent disablement.
wher it is partial, may deteriorate. In the case of permanent
disablement of a iofal character, the question perhaps does not
arise. But it is conceivable that in the case of a permanent dis-
ability of @ partial character, there may be aggravation. Why
the Legislature has made no provision for such cases. it js not
for us 10 say.”

At the same time, the judgment explains the present narrow
position thus :—

“It may have been thought that it would be quite imposst-
ble to work the Act if successive applications made
at different points of time during the remainder of
the workman’s life were to be permitted and it was
to be decided each time whether an aggravation had
occurred and if it had occurred, whether it was an
aggravation of the injury itself as such or whether
the deterioration had been occasioned by the opera-
tion of external causes. ‘We are, however, not con-
cerned with question on legislative policy and our
sole function is to interpret the Act, as we find it.”

It appears to us that the passage quoted above explains
satisfactorily the absence of a specific provision and so we do
not recommend any change in this regard.

Section 3A.11. Section 6(1) provides for the review of half monthly
60). payments payeble under the Act. The review is by the Com-
missioner on the application either of the employer or of the

“angus Co, Lid., ४, Choutld, ALR. 1953 Cal. 616. a



ope

a

B

workman accompanied by tho certificate of a qualified medical
prictifictiér that there has been a change in the condition of the
workman or subject to rules made under this Act on applica-
tion made without such certificate.

Review is thus permissible under two situations; first where
a qualifiédd medical practitioner certifies as to a change in the
condition of the workman and secondly, subject to rules under
the Act without such certificate of course on an application.

34.12. The Act is silent as to the exact circumstances to
which the second situation is applicable,—except that rules' will
provide for it. It is desirable that the Act should give some

guidance as to the cases for which the second situation is meant;
the sitaation intended’ should be broadly indicated in order to
make. the sub-section more intelligible and self-contained. From
the rules it appears that the circumstances provided for (in the
rules) relate to increase or decrease in wages and the like. Some
of the important grounds mentioned in the rules could be men-
tioned in section,6 of the Act with a residuary power to add
other circumstances by rules.

3A.13. In the light of the above discussion we recommend
the following re-draft® of section 6(1) :

“6(1) Any half-monthly payment payable under this
Act, either under an agreement between the parties
or under the order of a Commissioner, may be re-
viewed by the Commissioncr—

(a) on the application eithcr of the employer or of
६ workman accompanied by the certificate of
a qualified medical practitioner that there has been

a change in the condition of the workman; or

(b) subject to rules made under this Act, on applica-
tion made without such certificate—

(i) by the employer on the ground thai since the
right to compensation was determined, the
workman’s wages have increased®;

(ii) by the workman, on the ground that since the
right to compensation was determined, his
wages have diminished;

+ Section 32(2)(a).

. The grounds of review are taken from some of the grounds mentioned
in the rules.

+, See section 4(1)(d), proviso (b).

Recom-
mendstion,


74

(iii) by the workman, on the ground that the empla-
yer', having commenced to pay compensation,
has ceased to pay the same notwithstanding the
fact that there has been no change in the
workman's condition such as to warrant such
ceasation;

(iv) such other ground as may be prescribed.”

Section 7- 34.14, Section 7 reads as follows:—

Commuta-

tion of “7. Any right to receive half-monthly payments may, by
half-mone agreement between the parties or, if the parties can-
thly pay- not agree and the payments have been continued for
ments, not less than six months, on the application of either

Party to the: Commissioner, be redeemed by the pay-
ment of a lump sum of. such amount a5 May be
agreed to by the parties or determined by the Com
missioner, as the case may be.”

Recommens 3.15. The procedure for commutation of compensation is

dation. laid down? in the Rules. We think that it should find a place in
the Act. Hence we recommend that the following sub-section
should be added? in section 7:—

“(2) Where an application is made to the Commissioner
under sub-section (1) for the Tedemption of a right
to receive half-monthly payments by the payment of
@ lump sum, the Commissioner—

(a) shall form an approximate estimate of the probable
duration of the disablement, and

(b) shall order payment of a sum equivalent to the
total of the half-monthly payments which would
be payable for the period during which he esti-
mates that the disablement will continue, less one-
half per cent of that total for each month com-
prised in that period:

Provided that fractions of a rupee included in the
sum so computed shall be disregarded.

(3) When, in any case to which sub-section (2) applies,
the Commissioner is unable to form an approximate
estimate of the probable duration of the disablement,
he may, from time to time, Postpone a decision on
the application for a period not exceeding twa months
at any one time.”

3. This is intended to provide an additional sanction for delay in payment.
3, Rule 5 of the rules under the Act,
3. Present section 7 (0 be re-numbered as sub-section (1),



a ---_००..२........०००.......... ५

CHAPTER 4
DISTRIBUTION OF COMPENSATION

4.1. Once compensation is computed in accordance with the Section 8.

provisions of the Act, the next important question that arises is
the distribution of the amount so computed. In. the case of
death, the persons entitled are the dependants as defined in the
Act!, but every dependant is not necessarily entitled to claim a
right of participation in the compensation. It is for the Commis-
sioner to decide whether a particular dependant? should be allow-
ed to do so and if he is allowed, then what share should be ap-
portioned to him. The provisions of section 8 which deals with
the subject are of importanee.

4.2. Any person—whether lawyer or layman—who reads the Recommen-
section is struck by its length and complexity. The section, as ‘ton to
originally enacted, was a very short one; but successive amend- "Place
ments have engrafted one provision after another on the section Section 8
that, as it stands at present, it has neither the clarity nor the by threo
brevity of the original and as one Proceeds to read it, one loses sections.
thread of the principal idea with which the section begins.

8

Broadly speaking, the principle topics dealt with in the sec-
tion are : deposit, distribution and investment, This can be illus-
trated by the following analysis :—

Section No. Topic

Compulsory deposit.
Voluntary deposit.
Receipt for compensation depo-
sited,

S83

Deduction of certain
from the money deposited
and notice preliminary to
determination of distribution,
and 8(7) in part Pepe a the
in ayment sum appor-
tioned. pe

छू
=

Distribution -

38

4
J

in part Investment
Variation of the sum inyested.
Recovery where variation is
‘on the ground of fraud im-
personation or other impro-
‘per means.

S

Investment

ont ee ee oe
डे

1, Section 2.
3, Section 8(5).

75
28 M of Law/74—6


Section
861) to
84).

76

It would be convenient if section 8 is replaced by three sec-
tions—8, 8A and 8B—cach section to deal with one of the topics
mentioned above.

We shall now discuss the changes needed in the several sub-
sections of section 8. - हु

4.3. Under section: 8(1), inter alia, subject to a provisg al-
lowing small advances, no payment of compensation jn respect of
a workman. whose injury has resulted in death shall be made
otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner. Under the
same sub-section, no lump sum payment to a woman or person
under legal disability shall be made otherwise than by deposit.
Under section 8(1), again, any other sum amounting to not less
than 10 tupees payable as compensation may be deposited with
the Commissioner. Section 8(2). permits deposit of compensa-
tion in cases other than those of death. Section 8(3) provides
that the receipt of the Commissioner sfiall be a sufficient discharge
and section 8(4) permits certain deductions to be made.

Section 81) .. 4.4. Section 8(1), requires consideration in some detail. There
8(6)& 8८7) ate two situations for which the mode of payment of compen-

provision
regarding
workmen.

sation is specifically laid down in section 8(1). First where the
injury has resilted in death; and, secondly where a lump sum is
to be paid as. compensation to a woman or a person under. oe
disability. In these two”cases the compensation must be de 66
with the Commissioner; it cannot be paid directly by the employer
1o the person entitled.

As regards the first situation, there can be no controversy, |
object of deposit being to secure’ that the dependants are ascer
tained and the compensation apportioned amongst them under
section 8(5) by the Commissioner.

a

As regards the second situation, again, there is no controversy
as regards persons under fegal disability. But as regards women,
some re-consideration of the present Jaw is necessary. The effect
of the present provision for compulsory deposit is that it is not
immediately paid to the person entitled. Even after deposit
under section 8(6),—injury resulting in death-—“the Commis-
sioner may.......... heen aee pay the amount to the person
entitled thereto”. Under section 8(7), where the lump sum de-
posited is payable to a woman (or a person under legal disabi-
lity), the amount “may be invested”, appliedor otherwise dealt
with for the benefit of the woman or of such person during his
disability in such manner as the Commissioner ‘may direct”. ‘This
scheme involves avoidable delay and inconvenicnce where the
person entitled is an adult woman.

The net effect of these provisions is that ‘compensation pay-
able to an adult woman is not necessarily paid to her in cash
immediately. It has to be deposited with the Commissioner and

4, Re-drafts showing proposed splitting up not prepared.


77

after that, its immediate payment to her is subject to the discre-
tio’ of ‘the Commissioner who miay (if it is not paid immediate-.
19) invest पक it, or othetwise deal with it for the benefit of
the woman.‘

4.5: We-are’ of the view that this scheme (which appears to
havé been introduced by an amendment of 1929) requires modi-
fication having. regard to progress achieved by women. The
English Act? was in this respect confined to persons under legal
disability. No doubt in 1929 when the scheme was introduced,
conditions in India were different from those in England and the
provisions were perhaps needed for the protection of women. But
at the present day, some modifications in this scheme may be
necessary because some ‘women may resent even the protection
thrown around them.

It would therefore be proper if, having regard to the advance-
ment in the socio-economic condition of women, the application
of the above provision in section 8(1) is modified by giving a
discretion to the Commissioner to permit direct payment to the
woman by the employer without deposit under sub-section (1).
‘This will require an amendment of sub-section (1) of section 8.

45A. Accordingly we recommend that the following proviso
sheuld be inserted below section 8(1) :—

“Provided further that in the case of a lump sum to be

paid as ‘compensation to a woman, an employer may,

if the Commissioner is satisfied that it is a fit case

for direct payment and so certifies, make a direct
payment to ‘her.”

.. .4-5B. Phis finishes that part of section 8 which deals with the
है 1355 of. compensation. We proceed to the second part? of
section dealing with distribution of compensation. ©

“ 4.6. Section 8(5) déaling with distribution of .compensation
i§ as follows: — ms

“(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased
workman shall, subject to any deduction made under
sub-section (4), be. apportioned among the depen-
dants: of the deceasé¢d workman or any of them in
«such proportion as the Commissioner thinks fit or
may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be al-
lowed to any one dependant.”

This is one of the iost important provisions in the Act and we
propose to discuss a few points concerning this sub-section which
are of practical significance.

1, Section 26, Workmen's Compensation Act, 1925 (Eng.).

२, Cf. analysis in para 4.2, supra.

ay

Section 8(2)
Recommen-
dation to
amend.

Recom-
moendation
regarding
section 8(1)

Section 85)


hy

B

Section&(5}- 4,7, It is plain that distribution of the compensation

Desirabi- the ants is a matter entirely for the defrminon of te

1 face Commissioner and sub-section (5)? furnishes no guid to
him.

Recom-
meadation.
In our view it is desirable to insert some guidelines in this
regard. Without attempting हि to be exhaustive we may state that
the Commissioner should take into account—
(i) nearness of relationship—e.g., the dependant being the
widow, child or parent of the deceased;

(ii) the means of the dependant and the extent of his
dependence on the workman;

Gii) the desirability of not distributing compensation
amongst a very large number of persons,—which may
lead to its being frittered away.

We therefore recommend that the following proviso should
be inserted below section 8(5): है
“Provided that in exercising his discretion under this sub-
section, the Commissioner shall have due regard. to—
(i) the nearness of relationship of the dependant to
the deceased;

(ii) the means of the dependant and the extent to his
dependence on the deceased;

(iii) the desirability of ensuring that the amount of com-
Pensation is not distributed anv te ne being
umber of persons so as to lead to its being

frittered away; and

(iv) other relevant considerations.”

Section 85. 4,8, Then there is another question which arises out of sec-
death, tion 8(5). Compensation is to be apportioned by an order of
the Commissioner to one or more depen What is to hi
when 8 dependant dies after the death of the workman and
apportionment ? What is the nature of his right? This question
has created some difficulty.

For example, in 8 Calcutta case’, an argument was put forth
by the employer that no right could accrue in favour of a de-
pendant at till the enquiry is finished by the Commissioner
and the distribution order is made. If therefore the dependant
dies before the distribution order is made, the compensation should
be refunded—that was the contention. This contention was held
to be not tenable. The court held that it was true that section
3 which imposes the liability upon the employer to pay compen-
sation does not specity the person or persons to whom itis pay-
able but section 8 makes it clear that- nobody has any right to

1, Para 4.6, supra.
२, Pasupathi Dutta v. Kelvin Jute Mills, A.I.R. 1937 Cal. 495, 497.


79

it except the d dants arid this is the case whether the com-
pensation is paid di direct or through the Commissioner. In cer-
tain cases the co: tion has to be deposi ited with the Com-
missioner and this is for ensuring proper distribution, The High
Court observed :

“In my view, ‘dependant’ in section 8 includes the heirs
or legal representatives of the dependant as defined
by section 2, where the dependant has died since the

death of the workman.”

4.9, The High Court pointed out that the compensation is to
be ited with the Commissioner for safe custody and equit-
able her tet ay particularly when there are more di कप
than one, but though the Commissioner has got the entire dis-
cretion in the matter and can allot the entire amount to one de-
pendant, he cannot deprive the sole dependant of any portion of
the compensation nor can he give any portion of the same to one
who is not a dependant.

4.10, In England, a similar view was taken by the House of
Lords? (though Lord Dunedin dissented), It appears, however,
that the House of Lords did find some difficulty in arrivi ang at ihe
Sg re rape

". or} 8B
which replaced the Act of 1906, it is provided in section 2(3):

“Where a dependant dies before a claim under this Act
is made, or if a claim has been. made, before an
agreement or award has been arrived at or made, the
legal personal representative of the de] it shall
have no right to payment of compensation, and the
amount of compensation shall be and
portioned as if that dependant had died before the
workman.”

__ 4.11. The High Court of Calcutta, in the case cited abovet,
“after referring to the statutory provision in England‘, observed:—-

“Fhere is no corresponding provision in the Indian Act.
If the opposite view is taken, the position would be
that the right to ion would depend upon.
the accident of the time when the Commissioner
made his inquiry or when the dependant dies, If
through अकाल दफा et making bis ingiry
through some cause, such as a or some

1, United Collieries Ltd. ९, Simpson, (1909) A.C. 383.
3, See section 2(3), Eng. Act of 1925,
1. Panpathi Dutta ४. Kelvin Jute Mills, A.LR. 1937 Cal. 495, Para 4.8,
supra.
*Para 4.1 0, supra.


80

other unavoidable delay, dependants might die .un-
- compensated after suffering _ privations through , the
: Joss of the workman upon whom. they were depen-
dant. Such could, not be the position under the
‘Act. a ° ;

Madras “412. As was held ina Madras case, under section 8 sub-
view. section. (4), the se it of the employer to हुए 8 refund arises only
when a workman: dies without any dependant and the. Commission-

er at the time of the distribution knows that he has left no de-

endant within the meaning of the Act. But, if the workman

leaves a dependant and the claim of that dependant is recognised

by the Commissioner as the person entitled to receive’ the com-
“pensation, any claim on the part of the employer for a refund can

no longer arise’ under that clause. न

“+ "This is tio doubt the present position. The right to. com
‘pensation vests in the dependant om the death of the माया),
subject to the order of the Commissioner under section 8(5),. ,

Recom: “4.13. We are, however, of the view that the right should not
mendation 36: vest and: 1 वा the! case of death of a dependant before the
regarding ord sey settion8(5) is passed, the amount should be subjeat
३८5). to distribution amongst others: (388 the English section)}-a:. if
‘the death occurs the ordes but ‘before the actual payment,
the same ‘principl fe aa apply and the arhount should be sub-
degt to corbin among the surviving dependants held en-
itted. We thi that‘the scheme of the Act is that the factum
of dependents is the primey consideration. We re¢ommend that

‘suitable providions?, be inserted in this behalf.

Section (6)... 4.141, 66001 8(6) reads as follows:

—Recom- > ५. ‘ :
mendation, “9° * (6) Where any compensation deposited with the
Commissioner is payable to any person, the Com-
missioner shall, if the person to whom the compen-
' sation is:payable is not a woman ora person under
@ legal disability, and may, in other cases, pay the
हि _ money to the person entitled thereto.”
_. The word. is eas ation” in this sub-section is wide enough
to cover fistt (25270 Payments. We are of the view that in the
case. of: Halt-monthiy Payments, payment ‘to the adult female
Jshould, be conipulsory, and should: not depend om‘ the discretion
of the. Commissionér. 5 Soe कि

+; Apart fromthis point of, substance, a verbal change is need-
ed. The latter half of the sub-section, which deals with “other
cases”, is not very clear because in effect (through not in form),
it contemplates two negatives. The first half provides for’ cascs

1. Abdurvahonan v. Beerat Koya, A.LR: 1938 Mad. 402.” mo!
1-०, Para 4.10, supra.
2 Draft not annexed.



8

the: payee isnot a woman or person ubder १९४६४ dikability.
hee alter hat, when it speaks of “other cases”, has therefore
really in mind cases where the payee 7s a woman or person under
legal disability, There is scope for verbal improvement in this
respect.

We therefore recommend that the sub-section sheuld be
4scd .as follow:

8B, (6) Where any compensation deposited with the
Commissioner is payable to any person,—

(a) the Commissioner shall, if the person to whom the
- compensation is payable is not a woman or a per-
son under a legal disability or if the compensa-
tion consists of a half-monthly payment payable
to an adult woman not under legal disability, pay
dre money to the person entitled thereto;
18) the: Commissioner. may, if the’ person to whom it
. 2h yable is ६ ion oF व person under legal
aise ity, Gnd the compensation does not consist
of a. half-imonthly ‘payment payable as aforesaid,
pay the money tothe person entitled thereto.”

sth 4S:, Section: 8(7) reads ap follows: — .-

“(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commis-
sioner is payable to a woman or a person under a
legal disability; hch“sum-niay bé invested, applied
or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the woman
.or of such pérson: duriig his disability, in such man-
ner ‘as ‘the’ Commissioner direct; and where a
half-monthly: payment is payal able to any person under
a ‘legal’ disabii pay the Commissioner-may, of his own
niet stton or/att-applitation madé:to Him'in this behalf,
order that the payiticft be made during the disability
to any dependant of the workman or to any other
=petson whom ‘the Commissioner thinks best fitted to
‘provide for the ‘welfare ofthe workman.” 3... "5

waa “the. Jauter-natr ‘of the sub-section’, the word “de; dant”
sOuld-‘céeato ‘ait ihipression thatthe subsection is applicable to
vies of death? bar ‘inte not the true’ postion, rn

Half-monthly payments are, under section 4(1) (0), -payable
on the disablement of a workman and it would appear that the
ep Sston “Gefiendartt”: in the” tattet halt ‘eub-section मे really
theats a pétson who would be a dependant’ if the workman: di

“.-Halfmenthly payments.

*,.See definition of “dependant” in section 260) “which speaks of relatives
of a deceased workman.

Section 8(7)
~-Recom-
mendation.


६2

Incidentally section 8(7)- is ble only where payment
bas not been made under Dee (6). That should be made
The sub-section should therefore be revised as follows :

“(7) Where—

(a) any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is
payable to a woman or person under a legal dis-
ability, such sum Commissioner not
ordered payment under clause (8) aj sub-section
6, be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with for
the benefit of the woman or such person daring
his disability in such manner as the Commissioner

may direct ;
(०) wauct a eg yment Payable to pessoa
jer 8. pg तीज one if
has not 0 payment under clause (b) of sub-~
section (6), may of his own or on an

cation made to him in this behalf, order that the
payment be made di the disability to any per-
son who would be Ma if the workman
died, or to any other person whom the

sioner ‘best to provide for the welfase
of the workman,

sections, 4:16. Section 9. provides as follows:
“Save as provided by this Act, 20 lump &

monthly payment pe!
any may be capal of being assigned or
or be le. attachment or pass to any
other than the workman by operation of law, noc

1, 4. M. Abdurrahman v. Nadakichri M. B. Kaya, AIR 1938, 1 Mad, 402.
40, Workmen's Compensation Act, 1925 {Eng.).


a3

“A weekly payment payable under this Act or aay

under this Act or a sum paid by

way of redemption thereof, shall not be capable being

charged or attached and shall pass to

any other person by operation of law nor shall any
claim be set off against the same.”

not found in the English Act.
age

lee
t
il

other He
in Section 9 is needed with reference to the question raised in

है

1, Soe recommendation as to section 8(5), para 4.13,
3, Para 4.16, supra.



CHAPTER 5
“NOTICES AND REPORTS

; Jef, In ‘order that the provisions conferring fight to com-

lniroduc peasation may not remain a dead-letter, the’ Act!

% Gf sections ‘{sections 10, 10A, 108 and 11),
kinds of notices, reports and stateménts and provi ng “for im-
migdiate. medical examination of the workman. The primary
abject ‘of ‘these’ provisions has somehow got blurred- because
of:the hapazard manner in which the provisions have come to
be inserted, and—if we may say so with respect—because of the
casual ‘manner in which the various statutory requirements
have been inserted. The result has been that ‘Considbrations of
proper enforcement of the Act have not received the attention
which they deserve; and somehow, the relevant provisions—
Particularly section 10—give one the impression of an over-
legalistic statute, likely more to put obstacles in the way of
claims for compensation than to provide facilities for their pro-
per assertion, We make these introductory observations in
order to explain why, in the case of the sections with which
this Chapter is concerned, it has become netessary to resort
to @ re-casting of the provision, as also to a number of changes
of substance.?

Section 10 5.2. In section 10(1), there is, on the part of the workman,
(notice an obligation to give notice of accident to the employer. If
to be ००- the notice is not given, the claim of the workman for compensa-
. Hon cannot be entertained unless the case falls within one of
the exceptions specified in the section or unless the Commission-
er waives this requirement. In our opinion this provision
should be deleted. It is possible that the employer may deny
receipt of notice or may not maintain the required notice—
book under sub-section (3), and nice questions of fact requir-
ing evidence may then arise. We are therefore of the view that
there should be no such obligation on the workman. The
giving of notice—which we would prefer to describe
as an “intimation”—should be a facility allowed to the work-
man and not an obligation imposed on him. He can avail him-
self of the facility in order to preserve evidence of his bona fides.
But failure to do so should not entail a bar to the claim being
entertained?.

3, See discussion as to sections 10, 10A and 108, infra.
2. For redraft of section 10, see para 5.8, supra.

84 he


85

“S35. Section 102) ‘reads—

“10(2) Every such notice ‘shall give the name and add-
Tess of the person injured and shall state in ordi-
nary language the cause of the-injury andthe, date
on which thé: accident happened, and ‘shall be served
on the employer on.upon any “person responsible
to the employer for ‘the management. of any branch
of the trade business in which the: injured work-
man was employed.”

This sub-section will need consequential changes in, view of

‘eur secommendation to. substitute voluntary intimation in place -

of compulsory! notice.
“5.4, Section. 10(3) reads—

“The State Government may require that any prescribed
class of employers shai! maintain at their premises
at which workmen are employed @ notice-book, in
the ptescrited foriti, which shall be readily access-
ible at all reasonable times to any injured work-
man employed on the premises and: to any person
acting beng fide on his -behalt.” oe

i. We ate of the view thatthe maintenance of ‘such a book
‘Should be obligatory for all employers. ¥f the workman choose-
es to give an intimation,2—(we are recommending the substitu-
tion of an intimation in place of notice)——-he should have
available a bound book -in which the intimatign will-be enter-
ede: oe

5.5. Section 108 confers a power on the Commisioner "to
fequire statements from employers regarding fatal accidents, At
present the Commissioner has a power but there is no duty. We
think that it should. be mandatory on the Commissioner to do so
whenever a fatal: accident occurs and the Comuissioncr has in-
formation t thereof. We recommend that the section should be
Ss icnded®, aan : 7

ection 10 [) maint paragraph teads—

“1OB(1) Where, by any law की the time being in force,
notice is required to be given to any aathority, by
or on behalf of an employer, of any accident occur-
ing on his premises which results in death or serious

bodily injury, the. person required to give the notice
shall, within ‘seven days of the death’ or: serious

Se tecomorende 100), Para. 5, sipra,
eset -recpmimendation 85:7० séction 10(1); para 5.2, supra.
» For redraft of stetion 108, see pata. 5.8.0. ५ :

5.6,

Er

'

Sectior
10 (2)

‘Sectiin’’
WA”

Seotie
108 6).


Object of
the

ment
momended

in section
10, 10A and
108.

Roe-drafts
‘of section
10, 105 &
‘108.

1S. 10B(1)
main para-
staph.)

18. 1080)
tion.)

amend-
its 1000-

86
bodily injury, send a report to the Commissioner
giving the circumstances ‘attending the death (or
serious bodily injury);

‘We are of the view that section 108 which is 8 useful pro-
vision should apply in every case, and not merely where some
other law provides for notice of a fatal accident. We recom-
mend that section 10B should be suitably amended for the
purpose, We propose to omit §, 10B(1), proviso and 5. 10(2).

5.7. The changes which we have recommended in sections
10, 10A, and 108 are intended to ensure—

(i) prompt intimation of accidents at the instance of
the employer;

(ii) effective provisions for checking by the Commis-
sioner; anc

(iii) sufficient facility to the workman to put on record
‘what he knows about the accident,—-without being
under a legal obligation to do so,

The. revised scheme has three major features—the employ-
er should be primarily responsible to give notice of serious ac-
cidents (section 10B), subject to checking by the Commissioa-
er (section 10A) and, in. addition, the above facility of intima-
tion by the workman should ‘be available (section 10). Theso

three + major feature of the revised scheme are complementary to

one fr,

5.8. In the light of the above discussion we recommend the
following re-drafts of sections 10, 10A and 108 which are to
be re-numbered as indicated below:

RE-DRAFT OF SECTION 108
RE-NUMBERED AS SECTION 10.

10(1) Where an accident occurs on the premises of an emp-
and results in the death of व workman or serious
injury to him, the employer ‘shall, within seven days of the
death or serious bodily injury, send a report to the Commis-
sioner giving the circumstances attending the death or serious
bodily injury. न

[S. 10B(1) ptoviso, omitted]

Explanation—“Serious = bodily injury” means an injury which
involves or in all probability will involve the permanent loss of
the use of, or permanent injiiry to, any limb, permanent
Joss of or injury to the sight or or the fracture of any
fimb, or the enforced absence of the injured person from work
for a period exceeding twenty days.


87

{S. 10B(2) omitted] . tweety
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to factories to which
the Employees" State Insurance Act, 1948, applies.

RE-DRAFT OF SECTION 10, PORTION RELATING TO

INTIMATION, RE-NUMBERED AS SECTION 104,

104. (1) Where an accident causing the death of or person- Section 10
al injury to a workman occurs, the workman to whom injury is e Dial]
caused by the accident, or, in case of death, any dependant? .
may, if he so desires, give to the employer an intimation of the
accident, stating, in simple language,—

(a) the name and address of the person injured or
de .

(b) the cause of the injury or death, and
(c) the date on which the accident occurred.

(2) The intimation of accident given under sub-section [:xisting

(1) may be served on— Spotion io
(a) the employer, or fnedified |

(b) any one of several employers, or

(c) in case’ of any employer carrying on 4 trade or
business, any’ person responsible to the employer
for the management of any branch of the trade or
business in which the injured or dead workman was
employed.

(3) An intimation under sub-section (1) may be served Dézisting
by delivering it at, or sending it by registered post (4)
addressed to, the residence or any office or place of
business of the person on whom it is to be served.
or by entry in a book maintained under sub-section
(4), or if the workman or dependant so desires, by
both such delivery and such entry.

(4) Every employer shall maintain at the premises at ction 1000)
which workmen are employed, 2 bound intimation
book, in the prescribed form, in triplicate, which
shall be readily accessible at all reasonable times to
any injured workman employed on the premises
and to any person acting bona fide on his behalf
or to the dependant of a deceased workman.

‘Provided that where the workman is employed, or was,
before his death, employed, in any such employment as is men-
tioned in item 23 of the Second Schedule®, the provisions of

1; The reason for separately mentioning dependant is obvious.
3 Ttem relating to agriculture.


88

‘this sub-section sHall not apply except in so far as- the State
i Government, by notification in the official Gazette, otherwise
directs. ° 7 हु . 5

(5) Every employer shall, as soon as may be after receipt

“of the intimation under sub-section (1), send a copy
of the intimation to the Commisioner and give. an-
other copy to the workman from the intimation
book.

RE-DRAFT OF SECTION 104.
RE-NUMBERED AS SECTION 108,

Existing 10B.(1) Where a Commissioner receives information from

section 10 any source that a workman has died as a result of an accident

Al arising out of and in the course of his employment, he shail
send by registered post a notice to the workman’s employer re-
quiring him to submit, within thirty days of the service of the
notice, a statement in the prescribed form, giving the circum-
Stances attending the death of the workman, and indicating
whether, in the. opinion of the employer, he is or is not liable
to deposit compensation on account of the death.

oo (2) If the employer is of opinion that he is liable to depo-
sit compensation, he shall make the deposit within thirty days
of the service of the notice.

(3) ‘Ie the’ employer is of opinion that he is not liable to
deposit compensation, he shall in his statement indicate the
grounds on which he disclaims liability.

(4) Where the employer has no disclaimed liability, the
mmissioner, after such inquiry as he may think fit, may in-
किया, 2 dependants of the deceased workrban that it is
open to the depéndants to prefér a ‘claim for compensation, and
may give them such ‘other further information as he may think
.

REDRAFT OF PART OF SECTION 10° RELATING TO
LIMITATION FOR CLAIM RENUMBERED “AS SECTION
21A.

‘Ex ing ~214.-(1) No claim for compensation shall- be entertained
section 10 by: a Commissioner unless the claim is preferred: before him
60), main- within two years of the occurrance of the accident or, in the
para modi- case of death, withia two years of the date of death:

[Existing Explanation 1.—Where the accident is the contracting of
section 10 a disease in respect of which the provisions of sub-section (2)

&, aewt of section 37 are applicable, the accident shall.be deemed to have

1, This is a reference to existing 3, 302)... The reference te the |
reNumbered provision to be substituted.


89

occurred:..on the first of the days during which the workman
Wasi: bontinuously absent from; work ‘in consequence of the. dis:
ablement ‘caused by the disease: |."

51. Explanation 2,—Ia case. of fpital jal disablement which, ig due
to the contracting of any sych disease and which does not force
the workman to absent bimselt ga ee the Period of two
years shall be counted fro dl workman 3. intima-
tion of the disablement to his employer; or! if the workman does
not give such intimation, from the day on which his employ-
ment.under the employer commenced.

Explanation 3.—lIf a workman, having been employed. in an
employment for a continuous period, specified under sub-section
(2) of section 3 in respect of that employment,? ceases to be
so employed and develops symptoms of an occupational disease
peculiar to that employment within two years of the cessation
of employment, the accident shall be deemed to have occurred
on the day on which the symptoms were first detected.

(2) The Commisioner may entertain and decide any claim
to compensation in ‘any case notwithstanding that the claim has
not been preferred in due ‘time as provided in sub-section (1), if
he is satisfied that the failure was due to sufficient cause, ,

* 8.9) Section 11 deals with medical examination of the work-
men, | : है है

Sub-section (1) provides that where 4 workman has given,
notice of an accident, he shall, if the employer, before the ex-
Pity gf 3 days from the time at which service of the -notice
has. been effected, offers to have him examined free of charge
by a qualificd medical practitioncr, submit himself for such exa-
Mination. In the case of a workman receiving a half-monthly
Payment, he has to submit himself for such examination from
time to time; and there is a proviso prohibiting an employer
from requiring the workman to submit himself for medical exa~
mination otherwise than in accordance with the rules. We are
at the moment concerned with the notice of accident referred
to in this provision. The scheme of the section is that before:
three days expire from the time of service of the notice, the emp-
loyer can require the workman to undergo the medical exami-
nation, Since we are recommending separately? that notice of
accident—now to be called intimation of accident—by the work-
man will be optional and not obligatory, this provision requires
modification for obvious reasons. Cases of death or serious
bodily injury will usually come to the notice of the employer;

1. Intimation by workman is now proposed to be discretionary — see redraft
of section 10-64, in this case, such a provision is unavoidable,

३, This is reference to existing section 3(2).

4. See discussion as to section 10.

(Existing
section 10
(1), second
Proviso}

{Existing
section 10
(), third
Proviso}

[Section 10
(1), fifth
Proviso
modified]

[Section 1]-
Medical
Examing
tion.)


90

in the employer is required himself to repo 2 Case
es not involving death or serious bodily ate also Likely
to come to his notice. We therefore ‘think आई the period

of three days should now be computed from the date of the oc-
currence of the accident, even where an intimation of the acci-
deat has not been given by the workman,

5.10. The- opening portion of section 11(1) is somewhat
[Recom- | involved and we propose to. recast it slightly.

as to 860-
4 tion 110).] Accordingt ly we recommend that section 11(1) should be
revised as —

“11.(1) Where an accident occurs and the employer,
before the expiry of three days from the time at
which the accident occurs, offers to have the work-
man examined free of charge qualified medi-
cal practitioner, the workman submit himself
for such examination, and any workman who is in
teceipt of a half-monthly payment under this Act
shall, if so required, submit himself for such exami-
nation from time to time:

Provided that workman shall not be required to submit him-
self for examination by a medical practitioner other-
- wise than in accordance with rules made under
this Act, or at more frequent intervals than may be
prescribed.”

{Section 5.11, In section 11(6), the words “whose instructions he
LO~ had _ followed” should be repla by the words and “followed
mendation His instructions”, to make wording more simple.

for amend-
ment.]

4, Section 108.


CHAPTER 6

PROTECTION OF COMPENSATION AND OTHER PRO-
VISIONS REGARDING RIGHT TO COMPENSATION

6.1. The right to compensation conferred by the Act could fintroduc-
be thwarted by agreements shutting out the right or by the tion-}

teal employer engaging workmen in the name of some other
person, (say, contractors) or by the insolvency of the employ-
er, or by an illegal transfer of assets and the like. Sections 12
to 14 and 17 afford the necessary protection against such de-
vices. Section 18A provides for penalties for contravention of
certain provisions of the Act. .

‘These sections have a very important feature in common.
Their primary object is to protect the right to compensation and
to make certain other provisions which cither serve as a sate-
guard against an attempt to circumvent or violate the provisions
of the Act, or nuilify the effect of legal events (such as, insol-
vency) which might otherwise impair the right to compensation.
Thesc sections and sections 15-16 which happen to be placed
amidst them will now be discussed.

6.1A. Section 12 imposes fiability on a Person who gets cer- [Section 12}

tain works done through contractors in certain circumstances.
The section is essentially linked up with the distinction between
a servant and an independent contractor. The common law
Tule based on this distinction has been over ridden by this sec-
tion which has been enacted pursuant to a specific public policy.
Ordinarily the degree to which the principle may intervene to
control the details of the performance of the agent, is the broad
test applied to distinguish between a servant on the one hand
and as independent contractor on the other hand. But here,
ignoring the common law concept, a specific provision has been
ic.

Of course such liability, apart from the Act, as may be
attached at common law to the principal of an independent
contractor, remains unaffected, if the remedy is pursued as at
common Jaw and not under the Act.

6.2. Some of the well recognised “Common Jaw mules” as ta
independent contractors include the following'. A principal is
liable in contract or tort for the acts of his agent regardless of
whether the agent is a servant, independent contractor or neither,

ceurity, (1960) 33

1. Broden, “Employment relationship under Sock
Temp. L.Q. 307.329.

91
28 M of Law/74—7

[Common
law rules as
10 eontrac

tors. |


Special
provision
m section
12.

92

WH the principal directs a specific tortious uct or result, if the
agent makes certain representations which be is authorised or
apparently authorised to make, and if the situation is such that
the duty 10 protect the third person may not be delegated by the
principal. The principal is not liable in other circumstances.

6.3, Ordinarily the question who is the “empicyer” of a
person claiming to be a workman is one of fact, But the legis-
lature can make special provisions for special situation. We
are here concerned with one such special provision. Where the
employer has engaged a contractor, there is a tegal fiction™
whereunder the employer of the contractor is liable to workmen
engaged by the contractor. In the English Act, the words “un-
dertaken by the principal” appear, in place of the words ‘which
is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the principal” which
occur in our sub-section (1),—words qualify the kind of work
which is to be executed by the contractor.?

To state the position broadly, even though the work may be
within the scope of the general purposes of the principal, he is
not liable in England if the work is not a part of the trade or
business which the principal undertakes. For example, where
the manufacturers of mouldings employed a contracto- co stock
timber imported by them for the purposes of their business,
they were not held liable*.

6.4, The Legisiature has substituted the very material words
“which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the princi-
pal", for the words “undertaken by the principal”, which occur
in the English Act. The English Act applied only to work
undertaken by the principal, but the Indian Act applies to work
40706 by 2 contractor which is ordinarily part of the trade or
business of the principal. “The variation was abviously delibe-
rate, and the two phrascs do not mean the same thing’.” It
may be that work which is ordinarily part of the trade or
business of the principal, nevertheless, was not the work uader-
taken in the particular case er usually undertaken fy she prin-
cipal.

6.5. It may be noticed that sub-sectlon (4) of section 12
(of the Indian Act) is a replica of sub-section (4) of section
6 of the English Act and refers to work undertaken or usually
undertaken by the principal. But the word “undertaken” does
not occur in the Indian Act in the first sub-section.

6.6. The principle of social justice underlying section 12(1)
iy that where a person by contract, entrusts* certain work to
> Section 12.

_ Section 6, English Act of 1925.

. Hockey v. West London Timber Co, (1914) 3 Kings Bench 1013.
_ ATR, 1942 Bom. 20.

. Phis is not a paraphrase of the section,


93

another person, and that other person engages a workman, the
person entrusting the work is liable as employer under the Act
(if certain conditions are satisfied).

The important words are:—

“any compensation which he would have been liable to
pay if that workman had been immediately employed
by him”. The fact that the first mentioned person
is not the immediate employer thus becomes immate-
rial. The intervention of the person to whom the
work is erifrusted does not destroy the logal fink bet-
ween the person entrusting the work and the work-
man. To put the matter is a different way, the nar-
tow legal view of contract of employment is extend-
ed (for the purposes of the Act) if certain condi-
tions are satisfied, to the case of employment of work-
man by another person, if he is one to whom the
work has been entrusted by contract. Those condi-
tions are—

(a) the contract (entrusting the work) is in the course
of or for the purpose of, the trade or business of
the person entrusting the work;

(b) the contract must be for the execution, by or under
the contractor, of the whole or any part of any
work which is ordinarily part of the trade or
business of the principal (i.c., the person entrust-
ing); [These two conditions are to be found in
section 12(1)];

this section does not apply in any case where the
accident occurred elsewhere than on, in or about
the premises on which the principal “has under-
taken, or usually undertaken, as the case may be”,
to execute the work or which are otherwise under
his control or management.”

(c

[This requirement is contained in section 12(4)].

6.7. Thus, the extension of the liability beyond the im-
mediate cmployment seems to be based on a number of con-
ditions, namely——-(a) the business character of the contract,
(>) the work being part of the ordinary business, and (c) po-
tential control or management of the employer as indicated by
the geographical contiguity of the premises where the accident
has occurred.

6.8. The geographical contiguity of the premises where the
accident occured has perhaps been inserted in order to indi-
cate the possibility of control. This is reasonable on the
whole. We recommend no change in this respect.


4

Section 13 6.9. This disposes of section 12 and we may now take up
section 13. In certain circumstances a person who has paid
compensation has the right to indemnity because the . person
legally liable is not the employer. Scction 13 provides for this
situation and deals with the remedies of the employer against
the third person.

The section’ is an follows:—

“13. Where a workman has recovered compensation in
respect of any injury caused under circumstances
creating a legal liability of some person other than
the person by whom the compensation was paid
to pay damage in respect thereof, the person by
whom the compensation was paid and any person
who has been called on to pay an indemnity under
section 12 shall be entitled to be indemnified by
the person so liable to pay damages as aforesaid.”

The words “person by whom the compensation was paid”
principally refer to the employer. The other person to whom the
section applies is the person indemnifying under section 12.
(Section 12 provides for indemnity as between the employer and
a contractor, and as between a contractor and sub-contractor
and so on).

Some controversy seems? to have arisen in the past as 0
how far section 13 is applicable between the principal contrac-
tor and the sub-contractor. Section 12(2) was amended on
this point in 1933. This matter is now dealt with by scction
12(2), as amended?.

6.10. The drafting of section 13 contd be made more simple
Recom- _‘ than at present and we recommend that section 13 should be
mendation rc-drafted as follows:—
to amend
section 13. “13. (1) Where—

(a) the injury for which compensation is payable under
this Act, was caused under circumstances creating
a legal liability of any person to pay damages in
respect thereof; and
(b) the workman has, in respect of such injury, recover-
ed compensation under this Act from any other
person,

the person by whom the compensation was paid, and any person.
who has been called on to pay an indemnity under section 12,
shall be entitled to be indemnified as aforesaid.”

1, Section 13 corresponds roughly to section 30 of the English Act of 1925.

3, See Chynibhoy ¥. Gunpat, ALR. 1933 Bom. 338.

5, See statement of Objects and Reasons annexed to the Bill of 1932, Notes
on Clause 9 (13 Feb., 1932).


95

6.11. Section 14 makes certain provisions relating to in-
solvency of the employer. A small verbal change is needed ia
sub-section (4) where the reference to section 230 of the In-
dian Companies Act 1913 should be replaced by a reference to
section 530 of the Companies Act 19561.

6.12. Section 14A provides that compensation shall be a
first charge on assets transferred by the employer before paying
the compensation in so far as the assets consist of immovable
property. The language of the section could be made more
simple as the present drafting is a bit involved.

The following re-draft of section 14-A is therefore recom-
mended:

7140. Where—

(a) liability 10 pay any compensation under this Act has
arisen, and

(b) the employer transfers his assets before the amount
of the compensation hay been paid.

such amount shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, be a first “charge on that
part of the assets so transferred which consists of immovable
property.”

6.13. Section 15 relates to ships. Certain questions relat-
ing to extra-territorial application have been separately discuss-
ed?

Sub-section (1) of section 15 lays down one of the modifi-
cations applicable in case of workmen who are masters of ships
or scamen. It provides that the notice of the accident and
claim for compensation may be served on the master of the
ship; “but where the accident happened and the disablement
commenced on board the ship, it shail not be necessary for any
seaman to give any notice of the accident.” Since the notice
of accident (at present required under section 10) is now pro-
posed to be made optional in every case*, the quoted portion of
section 15(1) should be omitted.

6.14, Section 15(3) relates to depositions taken outside In-
dia where an injured master or seaman is discharged in any part
of India or “His Majesty’s Dominions or in any other foreign
country”. The specific mention of His Majesty’s Dominions is
no longer required and the quoted words should be replaced by
the words “in any foreign country”, |

1. Draft not annexed.

2. Seo discussion rotating to seotion 1 and extracterritorial application —
Chapter 18.

3, See discussian ws to section 10, Para 5.2, supra.

Section व
Recom-
rnendation,

Lion 14

per

Section
415(1)

Section
1303).


Section
15(5) and
15(6).

Section
154 (New)

Section
16.

Section
17,

96

6.15. Sub-section (5) of section 15 bars the payment of
compensation in respect of any injury for which provision made
for payment of a gratuity, allowance or pension under certain
war-pensions scheme made under a British statute.’ or under
a scheme made in 1942 by the Central Government, entitled
~The War Pensions and Detention Allowances (Indian Seamen)
Scheme, 1942. Sub-section (6) deals with cases where a person
applies for compensation under one of the scheme referred to
above and the application is rejected or payments made in
pursuance of the application are discontinued on the ground
that the injury is not one covered by the scheme.

In such a case the limitation for giving notice of accident
for making a claim is modified—we arc not concerned with the
details of the modification.

Ji appears that the schemes referred to in sub-section (5) of
section 15, are now obsolete®; and, if that is so, sub-seclion (5)
and sub-section (6) should both be deleted.*

6.16. There is no special provision in the Act in relation to
aircraft!,—such as is contained in section 15 as to ships. Such
a provision is obviously needed since in certain cases, persons
employed on aircraft fall within the Second Schedule. We re-
commend that section 15 should be applied to aircraft with
such modifications as are required®.

6.17. Section 16 deals with cturny as to compensation and
necds no change.

6.18. Under section 17, any contract or agreement whereby
a Workman relinquishes his right of compensation would be
null and void in so far as it purports to remove or reduce the
liability of any person to pay compensation. In a Gujarat casc",
the heirs of a deceased workman accepted an ex-gratia payment
of a sum of money from the employer, giving up whatever legal
rights they had to claim the amount by réason of death by the
accident. The question arose whether a contract entered into
after the libility arose is hit by section 17. It was held that the
agreement was hit by section 17 and was void. There is no-
thing in the section which limits its operation to a contract or
agreement entered into before the liability has arisen. The sec-

. Pensions (Navy, Army, Air-force and Mercantile Marine) Act, 1939 (2
and 3 Geo. VI. Ch, 83),

. This is subject to verification from the Ministry concerned.

Th case, similar schemes are in operation in later statutes, they should

be provided for by a fresh provision.

As to extra-territorial application, sce discussion relating te section {.

. Draft not annexed.

. Chaunhathen v. Burjorji Sethna (1972) 4.0 4, 440 (Guj.) cited in the Yearly
Digest (1971), Col. 2610 (Akbar $. Sarela J.).


o7

tion applies irrespective of whether the contract (of the nature
contemplated by the section) is made bofore or after the acci-
dent,

6.19. It may be convenient to codify this judicial interpreta-
tion’ so as to make this beneficial provision comprehensive. We
therefere recommend that in section 17 after the words “whe-
ther made before or after the commencement of this Act”, the
words “and whether niade before or afier a right to compensa-
tion kas accrued under this Act” should be inserted.

6.20, Since the Workmen’s Compensation Act is a measure
meant for the benefit of the workers, it is desirable that the
workers should know of their rights under the Act. This pur-
pose can be achieved by giving wide publicity to the provisions
of this Act and one method of giving such publicity is to
require the employers to display the relevant abstracts of this
Act in their premises—ie., in the place of work, In many
other Labour Laws and Social Welfare Laws, there are provi-
sions ‘or giving publicity to those particular laws by requiring
the management to exhibit the abstracts of these Acts at promi-
nent places in their premisi One such provision, section 62
of the Mines Act, 1952, is reproduced below:

“There shall be kept posted up at or near every minc.
in English and in such other language or languages
as may be prescribed, the prescribed abstracts of
the Act and of the regulations and rules.”

In the Workmen's Compensation Act, section 32(2) (०),
also lays down that the State Government “may make rules pro-
viding for prescribing abstracts of this Act and requiring the
employers to display notices containing such abstracts. Since
this Aci is a Central Act, it would be much better to have uni-
formity in the matter throughout the country. Instead of
leaving it to the rules, it is desirable that a section should be
introduced in the Workmen’s Compensation Act in this respect.

6.21, We therefore recommend the insertion of a new sec-
tion on the subject. [t will also be necessary to introduce a
penalty clause for contravention of the new section. Necessary
amendment can be introduced in the penal section? which pro-
vides for a fine of Rs, 500 for contravention of certain sections
of the Act. Consequently the provision in the rule-making sec-
tion can he removed.

1. Para 6.18, supra.
2, See

(a) Section 108, Factories Act, 1948:

(0) Section 62. Mines Act, 1952:

(०) Section 19, Maternity Benefit Act. 1961
. Sectinn (8A.
4, Section 32020}

Recom-
mendation
38 10 50९-
tion 17.

Section
174 (New
Display of
abstracts,

Recom-
mendation.


98

The new section requiring the display of abstracts of impor-
tant provisions of the Act will be! on the following lines*:

“17A. There shall be kept posted up at or near every
place of work where workman are employed — sub-
stracts of “sections 3 and 4—

(8) in the language of the State; and

(b) where the majority of the workman employed in
that place do not understand the language of the
State, also in the language of the majority of
workmen.”

Section 6.22. Section 18A provides penalties for contravention of
184. certain provisions of the Act. We recommend the following
changes in the section: —

{a) the maximum amount of fine should be increased
from five hundred rupecs to onc thousand rupecs,
having regard to the fall in the value of the rupee.

(b) Imprisonment upto six months should be added.

(९) Section references should be altered having regard
to the scheme proposed* fot the re-arrangement of
sections 10, 10A and 10B.

(d) As a new section‘ relating to display of extracts is
proposed to be added, violation of the provisions of
that section should also be made punishable under
section 18A.

Section 18A should. in the light of the above discussion, be
revised as follows:—

“18A. (1) Whoever

{a) fails to send a report which he is required to make
under section 10, or

(b) fails to maintain an intimation book which he is
required to maintain under sub-section (4) of sec-
tion 108, or

(c) fails to send to the Commissioner a statement which
he is required to send under sub-section (1) रण
section 108, or

Penal ties.

1, Section 18A also to be amended.
4, Section 32(2) to be consequentially amended.
3, See recommendation as to section 10, 10& and 108.

4, See recommenda ‘on ‘o insert section 178,


99
(d) fails to make a rcturn which he is required to make
under section 16, or
(९) fails to display extracts of the provisions of this Act
as required by section 17A,

shall be punishable with imprisonment upto six months or with
fine upto one thousand rupees or both.”


Introduce
tory.

Section 19

Section
20

CHAPTER 7

COMMISSIONERS,THEIR JURISDICTION AND
PROCEDURE

7.1. Sections 19 to 26 deal with the appointment of Com-
missioners, their jurisdiction and procedure. Of course, the Act
docs not contain all the law of procedure that is applicable to
the Commissioners, because many of the matters are
left to rutes.! A certain amount of uniformity in procedure
would, no doubt, be desirable; but, at the same time. having
regard to the fact that Commissioncrs are appointed by the
State Governments, and also in view of the need to mainiain
a ccrtain measure of elasticity in proceedings before the Com-
aissioner, the present Act has Tele the matter mostly to the
rules confining itself to a few important matters, such as, the
venue, the form of application, the power to call witnesses, the
appearance of parties, the method of recording evidence, aad
costs, The provisions being sketchy, there is not much room
for improvement, cxcept that such of the provisions as arc
based on the corresponding sections of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, now fequire re-examination, in view of the changes
Froposed in that Code.* We should also note that the 7
vision relating to application® to the Commissioner suffers from
a basic flawt. The elementary (but fundamental) proposition
that a claim may be made is missing.

Sf there is no bar of limitation®, then, a claim may be enter-
tained by the Commissioner—this proposition is given only an
indirect recognition elsewhere in the Act®. The matter should,
we think be dealt with more directly. We shall deal with the
point in detail? under section 22.

7.2. Section 19 needs no change.

14.24. Section 20{1) treads—

“20(1) The State Government, may by notification in

the Official Gazette. appoint any person to be a
Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation for
such area as may be specified in the notification.”

. Section 32(2W(c), (, 6), (0), () ete.

. See discussion relating to section 25.

. Section 22.

. See para 7.13, infra.

. Section 10.

. Section 10,

. Para 7.13, infra.

Owe eee

100


101

ers. But it is not feasible to impose a rigid requirement that
ollicers appointed as Commissioners should have judicial ex-
perience. Hence, we are unable to accept a suggestion made
in that regard!.

Usually, senior judicial officers are appointed as Commission-

7.3. There is a brief provision relating to experts in section
20(3). Under this sub-section, any Commissioner may, for the
Purposes of deciding any matter referred to him for decision.
under this Act, choose one or more Persons possessing special
knowledge of any subject relating to the matter under inquiry,
“to assist him in holding the inquiry”. The Provision is not
confined to medical experts, and any matter on which “special
Knowledge” can be acquired, could come within this provision.
The number of reported cases on this sub-section is very small®,
but its utility is obvious

However, there is a certain amount of obscurity as to the
exact position of the person chosen “to assist the Conunissioner
in holding the inquiry” under the section. Is he in the position
of an assessor, or is he in the position of an expert witness ?
If he is an assessor, then, he is practically a member of the
Court’. If he is an expert witness, he would be subject to cross-
examination by the parties,

7.4. In general, when the opinion of a person having spe-
cial knowledge of a subject is intended to be utilised by or
before a Court, there are several Courses open, as will be evident
from the brief analysis given below :—

(i) Assessor—The person Possessing special knowledge
could be an ‘assessor’, He then becomes a member
of the court. He sits throughout the proceedings.
He does not give any “evidence”. and cannot, there-
fore, be subject to cross-examination by the parties‘,

Gi) Court expert—The Person possessing special know-
ledge could be described as a “court expert”®. He
Temains independent of the parties, but is not a
. member of the court. What he renders to the court
can be properly called a “report” or “advice”,
This, category is not known to our legat system.
We are referring to it since the Present provision,
it may be argued, is in this category.

- 8. No. 70 (Suggestion by one High Court).
Athar Ali ४. Kava Bengal Line, Calcutta, A.LR. 1937 Cal. 697, 101, 702,
‘The ward “court” is used here in a wide sense.

CE. English Act, 1925, First Schedule Rules 5 and If.

५ For history of expert evidence, sev Learned Hand's article in 15. Harvard
Law Rev. 40,

Section
2003)
obscurity of
Position of
expert.


Recom-

mendatio 1.

102

(iii) Court witness—The person having spec:al know-
ledge could be treated as a court witness. Jn this
case, he has to be summoned! and examined on
oath, and would be subject to cross-examination
by cither party?

(iv) Witness of a party—The person possessing special
knowledge could be summoned as a witness ai the
instance of either party (or produced by a party
without 4 summons), Like any other witness, he
would be examined on oath, and cross-examined.
The court has no initiative in the matter.

7.5. It appears to us that so far as the Workmen’s Compen-
sation Act is concerned, there is no need to carve out a separate
category—(ii) above',—for the reasons already mentioned. Nor
is it necessary to give the specialist the position of an assessor—
(i) above. Category (iv) above—witness of a party—aesds
No express provision.

7.6. and 7.7. It is therefore cnough to empower the Court
to call him as a Court witness—category (iii) above*-a.

7.8. Power to summon 4 court witness is already contained
in the Code of Civil Procedure, and that will be available to the
Commissioner'.

7.9. If the specialist appointed under section 2003) gives
an opinion, the parties should have the right to test the validity
of his opinion. At present, the person appointed is more of the
nature of an assessor, and is not subject to examination by the
parties. The present provision is also defective in another res-
pect; the specialist may be consulted in chambers by the Com-
missioner, and the parties then know nothing of the advice
given by him. This defect should be removed.

7.10, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend
that in place of section 20(3), the following sub-section should

be substituted :-—

“(3) If, for the determination of any matter, the app-
raisal of which requires special knowledge. it is

1, Section 23, Workmen s Compensation Act.

3, See case-law on —~
{a} Order 16, rule 14, Cade of Civil Procedure, 1908;
(>) Section $40, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898; and corresponding

Section in the 1974 Code.

(c) Section 165, Indian Evidence Aci, 1872.

3, Para 7.4 (ii) supra.

29, Para 7.4 (iii) supra

3, Section 23, Workmens Compensation Act, and Order 16, rule 14, Code
of Civil Provedure, 1908.


103

necessary to obtain the opinion of an expert the
Commissioner may summon such expert to appear
as a witness and express his opinion on that matter.

(3A) Where a person summoned under sub-section (3)
appears, he shall be examined by the Commissioner,
and may then be cross-cxamined by the parties.”

7.11. Section 21 deals with the venue of proceedings and
the transfer of cases.*

Under section 21(1), any matter to be done by or before
the Commissioner shall, subject to the provisions of the Act and
the Rules, be done by or before a Commissioner for the arca
in which the accident took place which resulted in the injury.
Under the proviso to the sub-section, which is meant for cases
where the workman is the master of a ship or a scaman, any
such mattcr may be done by or before a Commissioner for the
arca in which the owner or agent of the ship resides or carrics
on business. The reference in section 21(1) to “agent of the
ship” is really a reference to the “agent of the owner of the ship”.
We recommend that this should be brought out by a suitable
verbal amendment.?

7.12. Section 22, sub-section (1) begins negatively, by pro-
viding that no application for the scttkement of any matter by
a Commissioner (other than an application by a dependant or
dependants for compensation), shall be made unless and until
some question has arisen between the parties in connection there-
with, which they have been unable to settle by agreement. This
provision, at first sight, gives the impression that before the
Commissioner can assume jurisdiction, some attempt at settle-
ment must have taken place between the partics and proved
abortive. This, of course. is not the intention; and it has been
judicially? made clear that there is no obligation on the parties
to attempt to settle, before they can proceed to make an appli-
cation to the Commissioner.

7.13. An equally serious flaw in the present Act is, that the
elementary proposition that a workman can make an applica-
tion for compensation,—which, of course, is* implicit in the
Act—does not find a place in the section. In view of the gene-
ral understanding that the right to make an application under a
special statute should be conferred in express words, it is desir-
able to have an express provision, particularly because the right
to compensation under the Act is different from the common
law right to damages. The prevalent view seems to be that 8
claim by the workman before the Commissioner does not fall

1. As to the proviso, see para 18.23 supra.

3, Draft not annexed.

3, C. E. Corporarion v. Dureraj, A.1.R. 1960 Orissa 39.
4, Sce also para 7.1, sapra.

Section
21 (t).

Section
22{1).

Express pro-
vision as to
right to
make an
applica-
tion desir-
able.


104

withm section 22, but within section 10, But every section 10
‘begins negatively, vide the words “no claim shail be entertained”
in section 10, It bars a claim filed after the expiry of the period
of limitation. We are of the view that a positive provision
empowering the persan concerned to make 2 claim is needed

Recommend- 7.14. In view of what is stated above, we recommend tht
‘Amend see io place of sub-section (1) of section 22, the following provi-

tion 22, Sions should be substituted

‘(1) Where an accident occurs in respect of wiich lia-
bility to pay compensation under this Act arises,
a claim for such compensation may, subject to the
Provisions oj this Act, be made before the Commis-
sioner.

(1A) Subject to the pravisions of sub-section (1), no
application for the settlement of any matter by a
Commissioner, other than an application by a de-
pendant or dependant for compensation, shall be
made—

(a) aaless and until some question has arisen between
the parties, or

(0) af the parties have been able to settle the question
by agreement.”

Section 7.15. Under scetion 2202) (03, the following particulars,
22 (2b) are to be given in an application 10 the Commissioners -—

“(b) In the case of a claim for compensation against
an employer, the date of service of the notice of
the accident on the employer, and. if such notice
hes not been served or has not been served in due
time; the reason for such omission.”

Recommenl- 7,16, As the giving of notice of accident by the workman

ations. is not to be optionalt aud is to be described as an intimation,
we recommend that as a consequential amendment, section
22(2) (0) should be revised as follows :

“(b) in the case of a claim for compensation against
an employer, the date of service of itimation of
the accident on the employer, if such intimation has
been served -

Section 224 7.17. There is a verbal point concerning section 2285 under

which, affer the deposit of a sum by en employer as compensa-
tion for injury resulting in death, the Commissioner has power

1. See discussion as to section 10.

eee


105

to require the employer to make a further deposit. In sub-
section (2) of the section, such a determination of the Commis-
sioner is described as an “award”. But, cverywhere else in the
Act, the word used is “order”. The use of a different word is
not appropriate, and, in fact, has created some controversy in
another field, namely, whether! the decision of the High Court
under section 30 on appeal from an order of the Commissioner
is a “judgment” within clause 15: of the Letters Patent.

7.18. It seems, therefore, to be advisable to replace the Beco rons
word “award” by the word “order”? in section 22A. We 16- "
commend that section 22A should be so amended,

3.19, Section 23 deals with the powers and procedure of Section 23
Commissioners. Tt needs no change.

7,20. Section 24 relates to the appearance of partics, Jt Szction 24
needs no change.

7.21. For the effective representation of claimants under gestion 245
the Act, a provision regarding legal aid is desirable. In the and 248
absence of legal aid, the provisions conferring rights remain a
dead latter. for want of proper assertion of these rights. In
this connection, attention may be invited to our Report on the
Code of Civil Procedure*, where we have made a recommenda-
tion that where a person permitted to sue as an indigent is not
reptesented by a pleader, the court shall assign a pleader to
him at the expense of the State.

7,214. In relation to the eligibility for proposcd legal aid, Eli 7
we have, after some consideration, come to the conclusion that fo" legal aid,
it is not necessary to lay down any means test. The right to
legal aid should be available to every workman, irrespective of
his financial condition. We do not think that such a provision
would cast any undue burden on the State, because, in practice,
those who can afford to engage a private lawyer, will always
do so.

(Ne
Legal aid,

While legal aid for workmen who are injured and who are
alive presents no difficulties, a peculiar difficulty might arise in
relation to their dependants. This difficulty arises because of
the fact that there might be a conflict of interest amongst the
dependants, where rival claims are put up under section 8(5)
in respect of apportionment of compensation amongst the var-
ious dependants. It is obvious that the official liwyer—whom
We propose to designate as the Claims Prosecutor—would be
Placed in an embarrassing position if he were to be burdened
with the duty of pleading before the Commissioner the case of
each dependant in respect of his claim to apportionment. In

v. Mackinon Machenzie & Co., AT,R. 1970, Bom. 278, 283 para

*, See, for example, section 30, which speaks of “order’’.

3, 54th Report (Code of Civil Procedure), Chapter 33, recommendation to
insert Order 33, rule 9A (new).


106

so far as the case of dependants is common to all of them, he
would have no difficulty, but where there is a conflict of in-
terest of the nature mentioned above, his position would be
embarrassing. We, therefore, propose to make it clear that in
such cases, he will not represent the dependants in respect of
matters on which there is a conflict of interest. Tn ease of con-
flict, the official lawyer shall not represent them in respect to
the conflict. Subject to this rider, it may be provided that every
workman! (alive) and all dependatns together shall. be entitled
to be represented by an official lawyer.

7.22. We are not suggesting any elaborate provisions as to
socedure for grant of legal aid. ‘As regards appeals and re-
erences before the High Court, the procedure in this regard
will be governed by rules to be made by the High Court. As
to procecdings before the Commissioner, the necessary rules
can be made by the Government under the gencral rule-making
power. If necessary, the relevant section? can be suitably

amplified.
Procedure for
grant ‘oflegal 7.23 & 7.24, We may note that the Committee on Legal
aid, Aid has also made a recommendation’ as to legal aid in pro-

ceedings under the Workmen's Compensation Act. We ap-
prehend, however, that implementation of the Report will take
time. because that Report contemplates a comprehensive scheme.
In the meantime, it is necessaty to make some provision in the
Workmen's Compensation Act as to Tegal aid.

We hope that our recommondations wili be implemented at
an carly date.

7.25. We are of the view that so far as proceedings before
the Commissioner are concerned, there should be at least one
legal practitioner in each Commissiones’s office, who should
conduct cases on behalf of workmen and dependants. He
should be appointed by the State Government.

As regards proceedings before the High Court, the High
Court should assign an Advocate ad hoc at the expense of the
State, if the workman is qualified for legal and under our scheme.

Recommend: 7.26. Accordingly, we recommend insertion of the follow-
. ing new sections :—

“24.4. (1). The State, Government shall, in respect of
every area for which a Commissioner is appointed,
appoint a qualified legal practitioner as Claim Prose-
cutor.

1, Trrespective of income.
5. Section 322.5.
2, Report of the Expert Committee on Legal Aid (1973), Ch. 8.


107

(2) The claims Prosecutor shall represent,without fec,
all workmen and dependants in proceedings before
the Commissioner, except those who do not wish to

avail of his services.

Provided that where there is a conflict of interests among
the dependants, the Claims Prosecutor shall not
represent them in relation to such conflict.”

“24B, (1) Where, in proceedings under this Act before
the High Court, a workman or dependant is not
xepresented by an advocate, the High Court shalt
assign an advocate to him. at the expense of the
State.

(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval
of the State Government, make rules providing

for

(a) the mode of selecting advocates to be assigned in
the High Court under sub-section (1);

(b) the facilities to be allowed to such advocatcs in
the High Court;

(०) the fees payable to such advocates by the Goy-
ernment, and, generally, for carrying out the pur-
poses of sub-section (1).”

7.27. Section 25 is as follows :—

“95. The Commissioner shall make a brief memoran-
dum of the substance of the evidence of cvery wit-
ness as the examination of the witness proceeds, and
such memorandum shall be written and signed by
the Commissioner with is own hand and shall form
part of the record—

Provided that, if the Commissioner is prevented from
making such memorandum, he shall record the rea-
son of his inability to do so and shall cause such
memorandum to be made in writing from his dicta-
tion and shall, sign the same, and such memorandum
shall form part of the record.

Provided further that the evidence of any medical wit-
ness shall be taken down as nearly as may be word
for word.”

It would be noticed that under this section the Commissioner
can dictate the memorandum of evidence only if he records the
reason of his inability to make the memorandum himself: This
28 M of Law/74—-8

Section 25

Section 25.५
Recording 0
evidence



108

testrictive provision follows the corresponding provision in the
Code of Civil Procedure.t We ate of the view that the dicta-
on by the Commissioner should be provided for, irrespective of
any question whether he is able ot unable to make the memo-
randum himself. We have made a similar recommendation in
our Report on the Code of Civil Procedure.*

Recommers- 7.23. Accordingly, we recommend that section should be

ation. amended so as to read as follows २-५
“25. (J) The Commissioner shall, as the examination
of each witness proceeds, make or dictate or canse
io tbe mechanically recorded—
(a) the evidence of ary medical witness, 4s neatly as
may be, word for word;
(0०) a brief memorandum of the substance of the
evidence of every ofher witness.
(2) Such evidence’ or memorandum, as the case may be
shall be signed or otherwise authenticated by the
Commissioner, and shall form part of the record.”
Section २6. 7.29, Section 26 relates to costs. It needs no change.

1, Order 18, Rules 5 and 13, C.P.C. (Appealable and nos-appealable cases:
respectively).
3, S4th Report, Chapter 18.



CHAPTER 8

REFERENCE, REGISTRATION OF AGREEMENTS,
APPEAL AND RECOVERY

8.1. In certain cases, the Commissioner may like to submit
10 the High Court a question of law for its decision. Even
where the Commissioner has already made his order, an appeal
lies to the High Court from his order, in certain cases. On
the other hand, the parties may themselves settle the matter by
agreement; but, in that case, the agreement must be registered
with the Commissioner, who has to be satisfied as to its gen-
uineness. Finally, where an amount becomes payable under
the Act by any person, either by reason of an order of the Com-
missioner or under an agreement, or otherwise, a provision as
to the recovery of the amount has to be made, These matters
are dealt with in sections 27 to 31, which will be dealt with in
this chapter.

8.2. Section 27 deals with the power to submit cascs.
Registration of agreements is dealt with in sections 28 and 29,
They need no change.

8.3. Section 30 deals with appeals from the orders of the
Commissioner. Sub-section (3) of the section reads thus 3

“The provisions of section 5 of the Indian Limitation
Act, 1908 shall be applicable to appeals under this
section.” This sub-scction is now redundant, in
view of section 5, Limitation Act, 1963, and should
be deleted. We recommend its deletion,

8.4. Section 30A provides for withholding payment of sums
deposited before the Commissioner, pending appeal. No
change appears to be needed in this section.

8.5. Section 31 deals with recovery, and needs no change.

Introduc-
tory

Sections 27
to 29.

Section 30-
Recommen
dations to
delefe sub-
section (3).

Section 304,

Sevlion 31.


Tatroduc-
tory.

Section 32
@)—
Various
clauses
requiring
amend-
ment.

CHAPTER 9
RULES

9.1. This chapter is concerned with the power to make rules
(sections 32 to 36). The principal section to be considered
is section 32, which deals with power of the State Government
to make rules. Certain changes are required in sub-section (27
of section 32, which enumerates the matters in respect of which
rules may be made. These are mentioned below.

9.2. Clause (j)—Under section 32(2), clause (j) fees may
be prescribed for proceedings under the Act. We (पाए that
there should be a maximum of, say. two rupecs* as regards
applications.

Accordingly, we recommend that in clause (1), after the
words “fees”, the words and brackets “(not exceeding two
rupees in case of applications)” should be inserted.

Clause (1). —Tbe notice book under (existing) section 10
is now proposed to be made compulsory.? and is to be called an
intimation book.

Accordingly, clausc (1) of section 32(2) should be revised
as follows :—

“(1) for prescribing... ... the form of intimation book
to be maintained by employccs.”

Clause (m): In clause (mm) of section 32(2), the refer-
ence to “section 10A” should be replaced by a re“crence to
“section 1057, in view of proposed re-arrangement® of sections
10, 10A and 10B.

Clause (n) : Since the report under (existing) section LOB
is now to be made compulsory in every case, clause (n) should
be omitted from section 32(2).

Clause (0): Clause (0) empowers the State Government
to make rules requiring employers to display abstracts of the

_ These fees are in addition to the court fees {if any) levied under the Court
Fees Act.

. See discussion re. section 10.
See discussion as to sections 10, 108 and 101.
. 500० discussion as to section 109,

110


EES SE

111

Act. We bave recommended! the insertion of a specific section
on the subject. Clause (0), therefore, becomes redundant. and
should be deleted from section 32(2).

Clause (cc): A new clause should be added as to rules
regarding legal aid*, It will be as follows :—

“(cc) prescribing the mode oj selecting advocates to be
assigned in proceedings before the Cammissioner
under section 24A, the facilities to be allowed to
such advocates by the Government, and, generally
Jor carrying out the purposes of sections 24A, in
so for as it relates to proceedings before the Com-
missioner.”

9.3. The next Section requiring change is scction 35(1}. Section 45
In section 35(1), main paragraph, the reference to any part of (1) main
iis Majesty’s Dominions, (which occurs twice) should be omit- paragraph
ted. ‘The words “any other country” should suffice. Other dation to

consequential changes should be made, amend,

9.4. While rules can be made under section 35(1) to give Section 35
effect to arrangements for the transfer of money deposited with (1) Second
५ Commissioner where the person entitled to the moncy resides wos.
in a foreign country, the proviso to the sub-section Jays down"!
that a sum deposited in respect of a fatal accident shall not be
transferred without the consent of the employer concerned, until
the Commissioner has passed orders determining its distribution
under section 8(4) and 8(5). During our discussions we con-
sidered the question whether there should also be a provision
prohibiting such transfer, where the employee prefers an appeal.

We think that this would be a reasonable Provision, and accord-
ingly recommend that the following further proviso should be
inserted? helow the existing proviso to section 35(1) :—

“Provided further that where the employer concerned
prefers an appeal under clause (a) ‘of sub-section
(1) of section 30, the sum deposited under this
Act in respect of any accident shall not be so trans-
ferred without the consent of the employer concern-
ed until the appeal is disposed of.”

9.5. Section 36 needs no change. Secti cn 36,

1, Sez discussion relating fo section 174,
2, Sce discussion re. 5, 244 and 249, (New).
3, Cf. section 30A.


CHAPTER 10

SCHEDULES
Introduc- 10.1. The Act has four Schedules annexed to it, namely.—-

tony SCHEDULE 1. List of injuries deemed to result. in
permanent total disablement.

SCHEDULE 2. List of persons who, subject to the pro-
visions of section 2(1)(n), are includ-
ed in the definition of workman.

SCHEDULE 3. List of occupational diseases.
SCHEDULE 4. Compensation payable in certain cases.

The first and fourth Schedules arc important for the pur-
pose of computing the amount of compensation. The Second
Schedule is relevant to the scope of the Act. The Third Sche-
dulc is important, since it lists the diseases which attract the
application of the Act.

First Sche- 10.10. We think that it is not necessary to recommend any
dule—no changes in the first Schedule, and therefore we have no sugges-

changes tions to make with reference to that Schedule.

Second 10.2, With reference to the Sccond Schedule, we first come
Schedule ॥ 0 an important type of employment, namely, agricultural em-
in agent Ployment. The present scheme of the Act concentrates on in.
ture. dustrial cmployment, and, though some activities connected with
agriculture are mentioned in some of the items in the Second
Schedule, there is no comprehensive item relating to agriculture.
Having regard to certain important consideration,’ this matter

requires detailed discussion.

Directive 10.3. We have already mentioned? that the Constitution
Principles Jays down the Directive Principle® that the State shall try to
congo Promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting,
justice and as effectively as it may. a social order in which justice, social.
conditions economic and political, shali inform all the institutions of the

of work. — national life.

10.4. In article 43, the Constitution provides that the State

shall endeavour “to secure by suitable legistation vee tO
all workers agricultural, industrial or otherwise condi-
article

tions of work ensuring a decent standard of life.

1. See infra.
2. Chapter 1 supra.
3, Article 38 of the Constitution

112


112

not only specifically mentions agricultural workers, but also
places them in the forefront, thus indicating the desirability of
giving a priority to them.

10.5, Economically, agricultural labourers are the poorest.’
Socially, they are the lowest in strata.2 They are not organised.
They are heavily in debt. Moreover, any imbalance in their
economic condition is likely to have serious repercussions on
the general economy of the country. Hence, it is speciaily
necessary that the extension of the Act to them should be con-
sidered as an urgent measure of social justice. Their lot was
neglected for a long time, in framing welfarc Icgislation. This
acglect, during the pre-independence period, may have been due
to the fact that much of the legislation relating to welfare of
labour was modelled on the lines of the corresponding laws in

Western countrres, where agriculture did not possess primary
" importance.

We arc making these general observations in order to cx-

plain the need for expanding the scope of the Act by extending
it to agricultural workers.

10.5A. We may mention that persons employed in agricul-
ture have, in the course of their duties, to subject themselves to
various hazards. The following list of the hazardous factors
or activitics is illustrative only.—

(1) use of pesticides,

(ii) snakes, jackals or other dangerous creatures.
Gili) hazards trom bunds or excavation, or

(iv) carrying heavy loads.

Of course, the liability to pay compensation under our pro-
posal will not be confined to accidents arising from these haz-
ards. We have mentioned them merely to emphasise the justi-
fiability of extending the Act to agricultural employment, subject
to the criteria to be inserted in that behalf*.

10.6. At the same time, we realise that it would be imprac-
ticable to extend the Act to agricultural employment i general, tions to be
because such an extension would bring in, within the scope of borne in
the Act an unmanageably large number of persons. We have _. d
to have due regard to the employer’s capacity to pay, as also to ™"
the need for the existence of an organised activity, and also to
the nearness of hazards, in deciding the activities to which the
. Act should be extended,

Considera-

1K. K, Ghosh, Agricultural Labour in India, (1969) page 97,
2K. K. Ghosh, Agricultural Labour in India, (1969), page 79,
3, Para 10.11, supra.


Possible
1९515.

Present
position —
Second
Schedule

114

10.7. We have no specific material before us in this con-
nection. But tentatively. as a common sensc test, we are men
tioning certain possible criteria. Government may adopt one of
them, or devise any other test for cnsuring that only persons
having the capacity to pay will be covered. The criterion in
this regard should be objective, not involving determination of
nice questions of fact or Jaw.

The possible tests are:

(a) Minimum man days, 1.6. the number of labourers
multiplied by the number of days for which they
were employed during a specified period should
satisfy a certain minimum, or

(b) Minimum number of labourers should have been
employed for a minimum number, of cays during
a specified period; or

(९) Agricultural income should satisfy a specified mini-
mum; or

(d) Acreage under cultivation and quality of and should
be of a specified minimum grade;

(e) Any other test which may be considered appropriate
by Parliament.

We make no positive recommendation as to the test to be
adopted, but, as already stated, we leave it to Parliament to
adopt any of the test suggested above by us, or to adopt anv
other test which is just and fair, at the same time avoiding

complicated questions.

We did not hold an inquiry on this point, because an in-
quiry by us would have involved considerable expense which
we wished to avoid at the present time. Since conditions vary
from State to State, the inquiry would also be complicated and
time-consuming. Government, with its resources, can deal with
details in lesser time, and with lesser expense.

With these preliminary observations, we proceed to state
the present position regarding employment in agriculture, and to
consider the changes needed.

10.8. For ascertaining the present position, the Second
Schedule has to be consulted. The Schedule itself is a very
long one, containing entries (i) to (xxxii). It would appear
that the only items which can possibly be pressed into service
jn connection with agricultural employment, are items iii) and
(xxix) of the Schedule, quoted below? :—

“(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering,
repairing ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapt-
ing for use, transport or sale any article or part of

1. Second Schedule, items (it) and (xxix),


EE

115

an article in any premises wherein or within the
precincts whereof twenty or more persons are so
employed;

(xxix) employed in farming by tractors or other con-
trivances driven by steam or other mechanical power +
or by electricity.”

Item (iii), quoted above, cannot be applied to agricultural
employment without straining the language. Item (xxix), quo-
ted above, is confined to the actual process of ‘farming’, and
also requires the use of specitied contrivances.

There is an item connected with tube-wells, which reads as.
follows: —

“(xxx) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity,
in the construction, working repair or maintenance.
of a tube-well.”

There are also specific items relating to coffce ००, and palm-
trees. But all these are confined to specific processes. There
is no item covering agricultural employment in general.

10.10. We have already noted* that some of the notifications Notifica-
issued on the subject are relevant to agricultural operations. But {on by
there has been no systematic attempt at a comprehensive amend- 320.
ment in this respect. ments,

10.11. In so far as mechanical and allied contrivances are Hazard
used in employment in agriculture also, the employment be- constituted
<omes as much hazardous as industrial employment; and the ¢x- by mecha-
tension of the Act to injuries resulting from accidents caused pina) cone
by such contrivances in agricultural employment would, there- ji yance:
fore, be justified in principle part from the additional consider- रे
ation that the Second Schedule to the Act already contains men-
tion of one type of employment in agriculture,* relating to
persons employment in farming by tractors ctc. as we have tute.
already poin ed out*. The question, however, stil! remains
whether the Act should be extended to employment in agricul-
ture.

used in
agricul.

10.12, Before we took up the question of revision of the entire Views recei-
Act, we had taken up suc motu the limited question of cxtensior: yed from
of the Act to cmployment in agriculture, and our tentative pro- States by
posals on the subject were circulated for comments to the
Ministry concerned and to State Governments and others. From.

1, Second Schedule, item 30.
3, Para 14.2... supra.

3, Second Schedule item 29.
4, See para 10.8, supra.


Importance
of Agricul
tura!émptoy-
meat

116

the comments which we received from the Ministry of Labour,t
it appears that the Ministry had also circulated a similar proposal

to States. That Ministry has been good enough to furnish us
with a gist of the comments received from State Governments,
as well as a list of the hazardous employments in agriculture as
forwarded by various States. We have studied those lists, and,
while we find that many of the iiems suggested in the lists are
substantially covered by existing items in the Second Schedule,

a few are not so covered.

10.13. It was observed from the replies received from the
State Governments® that some State Governments were not
favourably inclined to the proposal for extension of the pro-
visions of the Act to the workmen cmployed in agriculture.
The arguments given by them against the proposal were broadly
on the following lines :—

() Many agriculiurists have small holdings, and they
will not be in a position to bear the expenditure on
payment of compensation under the Act.

(1) Scattered nature of employment, illiteracy among
the cmploycrs, and employees, and poor means of
communication to reach the place of employment
will present a difficulty of considerable magnitude
in the administration and execution of the provisions
of the Act;

(iii) In agriculture. as opposed to industrial type of work,
the manual work is not directly exposed to hazards
and hence does not involve risk to life, except when
farming throvgh mechanised system is done by mak-
ing use of tractors ete. digging of channels, making
हर bunds etc. which are alrcady covered under the

ct,

10.14. We have taken ull these points into consideration. We
hope that the limited recommendations which we are going to
make will avoid the difficulties said to be likely to arise. As
we have alrcady point out’, our intention is to cover only those
employers who can afford to bear the expense.

10.15, Finally. we would like to re-emphasise. the importance
of agricultural employment. Writing in 1969, the National Com-
mission on Labour! noted as follows :---

“Agricultural labour excluding small cultivators, accord-
ing to the Census, accounts for 30.6 millions. Agri-
culture in its broad connotation accounts for nearly

: Sa eel oe of Labour, Deptt. of Labour and Rehabilita-
Para 10.11, supra.
*, Para 10.11, supra.
- National Commission on Labour Report, (1969), page 394, para 28.6.



I

i7

50 per cent of our national income and engages

about 70 per cent of the working population.”
The same Commission noted? that agricultural labour is most-
jy provided by economically and socially backward classes. ‘These
figures and facts bring out the magnitude of this occupation of
employment in agriculture. It is also well-known that mechani-
sation is on the increase in agriculture as in other walks of life.

10.16, We would also like to quote what was stated in a
recent study? dealing with personal injurics—

“The rate at which social institutions and ideas are being 4
turned upside down is not mercly dramatic—it is
accelerating every year in a fashion which demands
a great deal of mental energy to keep pacc. It can-
not be good cnough, therefore, to adjust merely to
the contemporary needs. Some deliberate attention
should be given to the foreseeable demands of the
years immediately ahead. And if there may seem to
be a weight of tradition against change, at least it
is worth remembering that the apparent heresies of
one generation become the orthodoxies of the next.
The ultimate validity of any social measure will
depend not upon its antecedents, but upon its current
and future utility.”

10.17. There is, therefore, considerable justification for widen- Desirability
ing the scope of the Act on the subject mentioned above. cf apen:
10.18. Before making our recommendation on the subject, Extension
we may first dispose of the course to be adopted for so widen- of tle a
ing the Act, 1.6. for extending the benefits of the Act to agricul- achetved
tural cmployment as indicated above. There are two courses हु
open. One method would require only a notification by the State
Government. The State Government has power® to add to the
List in the Second Schedule, any class of Persons employcd in
any occupation which, the State Government is satis! ied, is a
“hazardous occupation’. This power can be utilised for the
abave purpose. The other alternative is an amendment of the
Act by Parliament, We are definitcly in favour of the latter
course, as it would introduce uniformity.

This takes us to the question of legislative competence. that is
to say, competence of Parliament to extend the Act to agricultural
employment.

1. National Commission on Labour, Report (1969), page 393, para 28.4,

3, Woodhouse _Commission—Report_on compensation for personal in
jury (New Zealand) (1969), para 33, cited in note on Compensation for
personal injury (1969) 20 L.C.L.Q. 191, 196.

'. Section 263).



118

Lepisiative 10.19, Under the Constitution, the power to make a law for
power. the “welfare of labour” is a concurrent one, and amongst the
sevedinent sub-heads of the power as mentioned" in the relevant legislative
under consj- entry, ““workmen’s compensation”, is specifically mentioned. That
deration. —_ sub-head is, obviously, wide enough to cover legislation relating
to workmen connected with agricultural employment. There
should, therefore, be no constitutional difficulty if an amendment
by Parliamentary tegislation is recommended and undertaken to
extend the Act to such workman. In fact, entry 29 in the Second
Schedule to the Act was amended in 1959, and the amendment
illustrates actual exercise of the power,

10.20, Having taken the various aspects into consiJeration,
we arc making certain recommendations on the subject. If our
recommendations are accepted. we trust that all the usual hazards
of agriculture will be covered by a combined operation of the
existing and new entries relevant to agricultural operations,

Recommene 10.21. We now proceed to deal with the lines on which the
fawn rele amendment should be made. The principal consideration will. of
employments Course, be the actual or potential hazards in the employment.
in agricui- Such hazards may be evidenced by the size of the undertaking,
ture, or by the nature and area of work, and the like. Tn the fir:
place, therefore, we recommend extension of the Act to any ay
cultural employment which satisfies the criterion to be inserted in
this regard after determination by Parliament. We have already?

indicated the possible criteria.

10.22 and 10.23. In addition to what we have recoramended
above,? we recommend that where any agricultural Operation in-
volves the use or handling of any contrivance driven by steam or
other mechanical power or by electricity, the Act 57009 apply.
The hazard supplies the justification in such cases'. In such
cases, the application of the Act should be irrespective of the
capacity to pay, this being mercly an extension of what is con-
tained in the Sccond Schedule, item 29.

Item = 1 — 10.24, We have finished consideration of agricultural employ-
“exclusion of ment. We now take up the amendments needed in the Second
clerks, Schedule in other respects. We have a few comments on item 1.

which reads thus —

“employed, otherwise than in a clcrical capacity or on a
railway in connection with the operation or mainten-
ance of a lift or a vehicle propelled by steam or other
mechanical power or by electricity or in connection
with the Joading or unloading of any such vehicle.”

1, Constitution, 7th Schedule, Concurrent List, item 24,
3, Para 10.7, supra.
3, Para 10.21, supra.

See para 10.11, supra


Ve pe

119

The expression “in connection with”, which appears in item
1, is an expression of wide content. With this, one may con-
trast the expression “in the construction of”, which could have a
narrow meaning.* Those words are used in item 10.

10.25. The exclusion of persons employed in a clerical capa-
city is of interest. In this connection, it may be noted that there
are, in the Second Schedule, several items which exclude persons
working in a clerical capacity.# The formula varies. First, in
some of the entries, the substantive entry speaks of a person
employed “in connection with” the specified operation’, and
persons working in a clerical capacity are excluded. Secondly,
in some of the items, the formula employed in the main entry
is “a person employed in” (or “on”) certain preniises, and a
geographical contiguity is, therefore, required’. Lastly, in some
of the items, no geographical contiguity is required®, but, never-
theless persons working in a clerical capacity are excluded.

10.26. Ttems in the first category’, referred to above’, exclude
persons acting in a clerical capacity, for the reason that other-
wise the wide wording “in connection with”, would cover persons
not on the premises, and not directly involved in the hazardous
Operation.

10.27. As regards items in the second category?, which re-
quire a geographical contiguity, there is, in our view, a case for
removing the exception for persons! acting in a clerical capa-
city"? in item 3, but not in item 18 where the area covered is very
large, being an “estate”.

The position under item 2 is not identical with the first catc-
gory, since the requirement of contiguity itself restricts. the
entry.

10.28, As regards items in the third catcgory, the cxclusion
of persons? working in a clerical capacity is, strictly speaking,
unnecessary, because it is difficult to sec how a clerk can be

1. Dukitizi ¥. Corporation of Calcutta, A.LR. 1951 Cal, 653, 655, para 9.

*. See Prativa ४. Corporation of Calcutta, (1951) 55 Cal. W. N. 496 (Case
of a building inspector, held to be excluded) (Decision on item page 10),

3, Items 1, 2 5, 10, 14, 18, 19 and 30.

4, Trems 1, 5 and 14,

5. Items 2 and 18.

6, Items 10, 19 and 30.

7, Trems 1, Sand 14,

8, Para 10.25, supra.

9, Items 2 and 18.

19, To indicate precisely the amendment required, a re-draft is given at
the end cf this Chapter.

41, See recommendation in para 10.34, infra,
12, Para 10.25.

Clerical
employment
various items
discussed.


a

rem 2,

Ambiguiry
in iwm 2.

120

employed. “in the construction” of an aerial ropeway*,—as is
assumed in item 10, However, perhaps, for abundant caution,
the exception seems to have been insericd; and its removal at
this stage might be unwise, as it might be construcd as extending
the benefit of the main provision to persons acung In a clerical
capacity, even though they are remote from the place where the
hazardous work is carried on.

10.29. We now come to item 2%. It has been held in a
Bombay casc* that it is not necessary under item 2 that the de-

sed should be working in the manufacturing process itself. It
is enough if he is working in the premises where persons are cm-
ployed in a manufacturing process, and if the deceased is em-
ployed in those premises otherwise than in a clerival capacity.
Thus, & night watchman employed to keep watch on the premises
of a pumping station’, was held to fall within item 2, since he
was eniployed in premises which satisfied the conditions of tem

10.30. It may be useful to codify the above interpretation.

10.31. There is also an ambiguity ia this item, It is quoted
below :—
“(ii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in
any premises wherein or within the precircts whereof
a manufacturing process as defined in clause (६) al
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948, is being carried
on, of in any kind of work whatsoever incidental to
or connected with any such manufacturing process of
with the article made, whether or not employment in
any such work is within such premises or precincts
and steam, water or other mechanical power or clec-
trical power is used.”

10,32. Do the words “and steam, water or other mechanical
power or clectrical power is used govern both the parts of the
item, (premises and work), or do they govern only the second ?
Apparently, both parts are intended to be covered, the hozard
being constituted by the use of power in either case. This could
be made cicar.

_ 10.33. Tt is also desirable to add nuclear or chemical energy,
in this item’.

10.34, In the first part of itcm 2, the exception regarding
clerical employment should be removed, as there is no reason
why clerks should be excluded® in this case, as the hazard cons-
tituted by the premises is shared by all persons. In the second

1, Item 10.

3, Hem 2 is quoted ta para 10.31, infra.

3, Laxmibal ¥. Bombay Port Trust, AAR. 1954 Bom. 180, paragraph 3.
3, Pumping is a manufacturing process,

5, Compare item 19 as proposed to be revised. Para 10.54, infra.

6, See discussion as to item J. Para 10.27 supra,

Veena


121

hatf of the item also, it should be removed, since the require-
ment is that the work miast involve power. We propose accord-
ingly a re-draft in respect of this item.

10.35. Item 3 refers to persons employed for the purpose of
making, altering, etc. any article in any premises where 20 or
more persons arc so employed. The Explanation to the article,
(which was added in 1962), explains that persons employed out-
side the premises but in work incidental to or connected with
the work relating to making, altering, etc. of the article, shall be
deemed to be employed within such premises. The emphasis in
this item is on the particular premises.?

To some extent, this item overlaps item 2, which applics to
premises where a manufacturing process is carried out and power
is used®. Of course, the idea in the Explanation which governs
item 3 is to club together persons employed internally and per-
sons employed externally so as to make up the requisite number
of 20. This item need not be disturbed.

10.36. Item 4 relates to cmployment in the manufacture or
handling of explosives in connection with the employer’s trade
or business. Of course, the definition of ‘trade or business’ appli-
cable to the Government and local authorities? makcs this item
applicable, so far as the Government or lvcal authorities are
concerned, to all their activities.

There are, on the statulc book, specific laws relating to cxplo~
sives and explosive substances, nevertheless, the Legislature has
not thought it necessary to refer to those laws for the purpose
of defining the meaning of explosives, and the ordinary meaning
has been regarded as enough. In the circumstances, a change
in this regard is not suggested,

10.37. But we arc of the view that persons employed on pre-
mises where explosives are manufactured in connection with the
employer's trade or business should be covered, even if they are
not themselves directly employed in such. We recommend a
redraft of item 4 accordingly.

10.38. Item 5 refers to persons employed in three kinds of
employments —

(a) in any mine as defined in the Mines Act, in any mining
operation, or

1, Firm 6. D, Gian Chand ए. Abdul Hamid, ALR. 1938 Lahore 855.
3, Para 10.3, supra.
*. Section 2(2).

Item 3,

Tlem 4,

Tem 5.


वाला 6.

Item 7.

122

(b) in any mine 25 so defined, in any kind of work other
than clerical work, incidental to or connected with
any mining operation or (connected) with the mineral
obtained, or

(८) in any mine as so defined, in any kind of work what-

soever below the ground.

10.39, That the employment under item 5 must be in a 1yine,_

is a requirement common to the three kinds of the work enu-
merated above,—though this aspect could have been brought out
more clearly. A suitabl> change is desirable to bring it out.

10.39A. It is, in our view, also desirable to make it clear that
in item 5, the expression “mince” is intended to cover also mines
connected with minor minerals. {cm 5 applies to mines as de-
fined in? the Mines Act, 1952. That Act defines a mine as mcan-
ing “any excavation where any operation for the purpose of
searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carricd
on,” and as including certain other things not material for our
purpose. The definition does not exclude minor minerals. The
expression “minor minerals” is defined in a later Act as fol-
tows?:—

(९) “minor minerals” means building stones, gravel, ordi-
nary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for
prescribed purposes, and any other mincral which
the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, declare to be a minor mineral.”

A clarification to the effect that item 5 covers minor mine-
rals would be useful.

10.40. ltem 6 relates to a person employed as the master
or as a sea-man of certain ships. Broadly speaking, the ship
must be propelled by power or must have the specifizd tonnage
(minimum 25 tonnes net), or it must be a sea-going ship pro-
vided with sufficient area for navigation under sails alone. This
item does not appear to require any change.

10.41. Item 7 relates to persons employed for the purpose of
specified operations connected with ships. In paragragh (४) the
reference to the Indian Ports Act, 1908, might require to be
added to, by mentioning the latest Central Act relating to certain
major ports. The enumeration of vatious types of work is
rather elaborate, but has the utility of precision. and of avoidi
doubts .
1. Section 3(1)¢j), Mines Act, 1952.
"Seaton 2(e), Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development Act,



a entre

123

10.42, Item 8 refers to persons employed in the construction, Item 8.

maintenance, rcpair or demolition of specified buildings, specified
dams or embankments, roads, bridges, tunnels or canals, wharfs,,
etc. Several points arise with reference to this itcm.

(i) Sometime ago, a question seems to have arisen whether
the word “repair” in this article includes painting, and the ques-
tion seems to have been answered in the affirmative.-? It may
be desirable to mention painting in item 8. It is specifically men-
tioned in item 7.

(ii) In this item, the reference to “twelve feet” in paragraphs
(a) and (b) should be replaced by a reference to the correspond-
ing meters.

(iii) Paragraph (a) is confined to specified buildings—
broadly speaking, multi-storeyed buildings or buildirgs with a
certain height. Apart from multi-storeyed buildings, the height
is the criterion. The two requirements are not cumulative; one
of them is enough*. The above position may be brought: out
more ciearl, by splitting up.

As regards the words “employed in...... *, a Calcutta* case
is of interest. The case was concerned with a person employed
under the Corporation of Calcutta as a Building Inspector who
had met his death at the hands of a riotous mob. It was con-
tended on his behalf that he was a workman, because he was
“eployed in the construction, repair or demolition of buildings
and other like constructions and, therefore, came under Cl. (VIE)
of Sch. HI to the Act. Harries C.J., who delivered the judgment
of the Court, pointed out that a Building Inspector employed by
the Corporation had nothing to do with the construction of
buildings, and that, in any event, the work which the deceased
was employed to do was substantially work of a nature which
would not bring him within the category of persons employed
in the construction, repair or demolition of buildings. It was in
that context that the learned Chief Justice observed that in coming
to a conclusion as to whether a man was or was not a workman,
his ordinary work was to be regarded and that if the work in
which a person was substantially employed was work which
would not bring him within the category of workmen, the fact
that on very rare occasions he might do something that would
being him within that category would not suffice for the purposes
of the Act.

1, Nadirsh vy. Krishna Bai, AAR. 1936 Bom. 199.

3, Bachia v. Shanti, AAR. 1946, All. 200, 473, 474, following Berriman
v. L. & N. E. Rly. Co. (1945) 1LK.B. 462.

5, Subhadrabai v. Malwa, A.LR. 1961 Madhya Pradesh 349.

4, Prativa v. Corporation of Calcutta, (1931) 55 Caleutta Weekly Notes
498, discussed in A.LR. 1957, Cal. 653.

28 M of Law/'74—9



Item 9.

Item 10.

Teem it,

Ttem 12.

Item 13.

124

10.43. Item 9 applies to persons employed in setting up,
maintaining, repairing or taking down “any telegraph or telephone
line or post or any overhead’ electric line or cable or post or
standard or fittings and fixtures for the same.” We do not re-
commend any changes in this item.

The word ~jelegtaph” is defined in the Telegraphs Act as
includiifa: wireless ‘telegraph. So we do not think it necessary
to add a definition of “telegraph” in this item.

10:44: Item-‘10 covers persons employed, otherw:se than in a
clérical capacity, inthe construction, working, tepai~ or demoli-
tion of any aerial ropeway, canal, pipeline, or sewer. The cx-
ception, for persons in clerical capacity has already been dis-
cusséd.*

10.45, Itém™11 refers to persons employed’ in the service of
any fire brigade, and needs no change.

10.46. Item 12 applies to persons employed upen a railway
as defined in clause (4) of section 3, and sub-section (1) of
section 148, of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, cither directly or
through:.a sub-contractor, by a person fulfilling a contract with
the railway adininistration. The principal object seems to be
to cover persons employed by (independent) contractors on
railway, works. a “persons néed not claim under the general
provision as to sib-contractors.

No: chatgé’ of substaned'-is required-in this item. But the
words''“by''a person fulfilling: a contract” etc. go with the word
“emptoyed”. A-slight re-casting is desirable to bring this out.

10-47, Item 13 refers to persons “employed as Inspector,
matl‘guard, sorter-or van peon in the Railway Mail Service (or
asa telegraphist or-as a-postal or railway signaller), or employed
in‘ any’ occupation ordinarily. involving’ outdoor work in the
Indian Posts and-Telegraphs Department.”

_Persons engaged on similar activities connected with Wire-
less’ communications will be covered*, in view of the definition
of “telegraph” in the Telegraphs Act.

10.48, in this item, we would recommend only a slight re-
casting so as to keep railway signallers etc. scparatz.

1, See Indian Telegraph Act, definition of “telegraph”.
2, See discussion relating to item 1, para 10.28, supra,
3, Section 12.

3, Gf Indian Telegraphs Act, definition of “telegraph”.


1.5

10.49. ltem 14 refers to persons employed, otherwise than

in a clerical capacity, in connection with operations for winning
natural petroleum or natural gas. Jt needs no change.

10.50. Item 15 reads :
“Employed jn any occupation involving blasting opera-
tions.”
Jt needs no change.
10.51, Ttem 16 reads :

~Employed in the making of any excavation in which on
any one day of the preceding twelve months more
than twenty-five persons have been employed or
explosives have been used, or whose depth from is
highest to its lowest point exceeds twelve fect.”

‘The reference in item 16 to twelve feet could be replaced by
reference to corresponding metres, The item should cover
twenty five or more persons.

10.52, Item 17 refers to persons employed in operation of
any terry boat capable of carrying more than ten persons.
It needs no change.

10.53, Item 18 covers persons employed, otherwise than in
a clerical capacity, on any estate which is maintained for tae
purpose of growing cardamom, cinchona, coffee. rubber or tea,
and on which on any one day in the preceding twelve months
twenty-five or more persons have been so employed.

Tt needs no change.

10.54. Under Item 19, persons employed,- otherwise than in
a clerical capacity, in “the generating, transforming छा supplying
of cleetrical energy or in the generating or supplying of gas” are
covered.

We recommend that Nuclear and Chemical energy should be
added in this item.?

10.55. Persons employed in a lighthouse as defined in clause
(d) of section 2 of the Indian Lighthouse Act, 1927. fall within
jtem 20, which needs no change.

_ 10.56. Ttem 21 relates to persons employed in producing
cinematograph pictures intended for public exhibition or in exhi-
bition or in exhibiting such pictures.

The words “public exhibition” would, presumably, cover
exhibition on the television net-work.

The item needs nochange.

10.57 to 10.61, No substantial changes are required in items
22 to 25.

1, Compare item

2 as proposed to be revised. Para 10.33, supra.

Item 14.

Tem 15.

trem 16,

Item 17.

vem 18.

Item 19.

Tem 20.

Item 21,

tems
220 25.


126

Ttem 26. 10.62. Item 26 relates to persons cmployed in the handling
or transport of goods in, cr within the precincts of —

fa) any warehouse or other place in which goods arc
stored, and in which on any one day of the preced-
ing twelve months ten or more persons have been
so employed, or

(४9) any market in which on any one day of the pre-
ceding twelve months fifty or more persons have been
so employed.

It needs no change.

Trem 27. 10.63, Item 27 relates to persons employed in any occupa-
tion involving the handling and manipulation of radium or X-rays
apparatus, or contact with radio-active subsiances.

Tt needs no change.

Item 28. 10.64. Item 28 relates to persons employed in or in connec-
tion with the construction, crrection, dismantling, operation or
maintenance of an aircraft as defined in section 2 of the Indian
Aircraft Act, 1934. If the scope of air-borne vebicles itself
become widened, the necessary amendment, one can presume,
will be made in the Aircraft Act.

‘rhe item needs no change.

Item 29. 10.65. Persons cmployed in farming by tractors or other
contrivances driven by steam or other mechanical power or by
electricity fall within ‘item 29. We have separately तत्वों with
the question of widening this item.’

Ttem १0. 10.66. Ttem 30 reads : :

“Employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the
construction, working, repair or maintenance of a
tubewell.”

Tt needs no change.

Trem 31. 10.67. Item 31 refers to persons employed in the main-
tenance, tepair or renewal of electric fittings in any building.

Tt needs no change.

Item 32, 10.68. Persons employed in a circus fall within item 32. No
change is suggested, in this item.

Persons em- 10.68A. We have finished the existing items. We shall now
ployed nt deal with a few new items. We propose to add a new item to
requiring  COVer persons employed in any employment which requircs them
them to to handle snakes? for the purpose of extraction of venom or for

handle the purpose of looking after snakes. The need for it is obvious.

1, See discussion as to extension of the Act to agricultural employment;
para 10.21 to 10.23, supra.

riculture, see para 10.21 to 10.23. supra,

4


127

10.69. We regard it as a serious drawback in the existing
Act, that it fails to cover those employees who, though not
directly employed in the specified hazardous employments, are,
nevertheless, exposed to those very hazards by reason of the fact
that the duties of their employment require them, whether ecca-
sionally er frequently, to face these hagards. For example, an
oilice worker who ocasionally bas to visit a thermal power house
tor checking, say, stores, in order to verify the accounts of
cortain purchases made for the power house, is exposed to the
same hazards as a worker emp! foyed on the premises. But, as
the law stands now, if he is injured by an clecrical apparatus in
the power house, he is not covered by the Workmen's Compen-
sation Act. Similarly, a person performing administrative dut'
who has to go 10 a Government-owned factory for some such
purpose as is mentioned above, is not covered by the Act. The
oxisting scheme is based on the distinction which exists between
the hazard constituted directly by one’s usual employment, and
the hazard, occasionally agising trom isolated contacts with the
hazardous object.

10.70. In our view, this distinction should, having regard to
the modern tendency to increase rather than decrease the right
io compensation, be removed. Where the accident is dne ta
the hazard constituted by a scheduled employment, compensation
should be admissible whether the workman is one employed in
the very employment (which is hazardous), or whether he comes
into contact with that hazard only at isolated times in the
course of his duties. We, therefore, recommend the inserticn
of a general item at the end of the second Schedule, to cover
such a situation,

10,71. We now come to a question of arrangement. There
are 32 1s mentioned in the Second Schedule. Reading of
this list is a laborious process, and whenever one wishes to
find out whether a particular employment is of is not inchided
in the Schedule, one has to made through the entire Schedule
without the aid of any headings.

While it is not intended that the Schedule should be made
more general—that would only be at the sacrifice of precision—
it is desirable that some device should be adopted to make re-
ference to the Schedule more convenient then it is at present, With
this end in view, we recommend that the items in the Schedule
should be grouped under a few broad groups. IE necessary, the
group headings could be accompanied by a mote to be inserted in
the Schedule itself, to the effect that the headings are inserted
for the sake of convenience only.

10.72. There is scope for simplification in this respect, be-
cause, at present, there is repetition of the same field of employ-
ment in several items, though with a different requirement in

1, For consideration by the draftsman.

Persons ox-
poset to
hazards
{Additional
item to be
inchrded in
the second
Schedule).

Second
Schedule
segarding
of items.


Basis of re-
grouping,

Re-draft of
Second
Schedule.

Recommen-
dation.

[Existing
item 1]

128

cach case. For example, (artificial) power or energy in gene-
ral figures in item |, and electrical energy in particular appears
in items 19, 20, 21 and 31. Explosives appear in item 4, but
also re-appear in items 15 and 16. Wild animals occur directly
in items 22 and 24, and indirectly in item 32, which relates to
employment in a circus.

10.73. This repetition of a common element affords one con-
venient basis for re-grouping the existing items; this could be done
without necessarily disturbing the language of each item. Another
basis for re-grouping of the items is furnished by the idea that
modes of transport, such as, ships (items 6 and 7),  cailways
Citems 12 and 13), ferries (item 17) and aircraft (item 28),
could be grouped together. Petroleum. explosives and mines
(items 4 and 5, 14, 15 aud 16) could be brought together.
Plantations and mechanised operations in agriculture {items 18,
29, and 30) can constitute one group. Climbing trees (item
23) and diving {item 25) could be clubbed together. These
are personal hazards.

10.74, A redraft of the Second Schedule, with the items
re-arranged and placed under groups, bearing in mind the possi-
ble basis for classification indicated above, is given below.) It
also carries out the amendments which we have recommended
in each item.

10.75. Tn the light of the above discussion, we recommend
following redraft of the Second Schedule.

“SCHEDULE I
[See Section 2(1) (1) |

LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVI-
SIONS OF SECTION 211) (0), ARE INCLUDED IN THE
DEFINITION OF WORKMEN.

The following persons are workmen within the meaning of
section 2(1) (1) and subject to the provisions of that section, that
is 10 say, any person who is employed as stated in any one of the
following items :—

Group A.—Power and electricity?

1. employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or on a
railway, in connection with the operation or maintenance of a
lift or a vehicle propelled by steam or other mechanical power
or by electricity or in conncction with the louding or unloading
of any such vehicle ;

4, Para 10.75, कब,
2, The group headings have been inserled for the sake of convenience only


rs.

129
2. employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the
generating, transforming or supplying of elcctrical, nuclear or
chemical encrgy or in the generating or supply of gas ;

3. employed in a lighthouse as defined in clause (d) of sec-
tion 2 of the Indian Lighthouses Act, 1927 3

4. employed i producing cinematograph pictures iniended
for public exhibition or in exhibiting such pictures ;

5. employed in the maintenance, repair or renewal of clec-
trie fitings in any building ;

Group 8-- Manufacturing

6. employed, ..

(a) in any premises wherein or within the precincts
whereof a manufacturing process as defined in clause
(k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1943, is being
carried on, or

{b) in any kind of work whatsoever iacidental to or con-
nected with any such manufacturing process or with
the article made, whether or not employment in any
such work is within such premises or precincts ;

Provided steam, water or other mechanical power or electri-
cal, power er nuclear or chemical energy is used in the manu-
facturing process referred to in sub-clause (a) or in the work
referred to in sub-clause (b).

Explanation:—

At is immaterial for the Purpose of sub-clause (a) that the
person employed in the premises is not himself employed in the
manufacturing process,

7. employed for the Purpose of making altering, repair-
ing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting for use. trans-
port or sale any article or Patt of an article in any premises
where or within the Precincts whereof twenty or mere persons
are so employed;

Explanation —For the purposes of this clause, persons em-
ployed outside such Premises or precincts but in any work inci-
dental to, or connected with, the work relating to inaking, alter-
ing, repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting for
use, transport or sale any article or part of an article shall be
deemed to be employed within such premises or precincts :

[Existing
item 19]

[Existing
item 20]

[Existing
item 21]
[Existing
iwem 31)

[Existing
item 2]

[Existing
rem 3]


[Existing
item 4)

[Existing
ड़ item 5]

[Existing
item 14}

[Existing
item 15]

[Baisting
item 6}

(Existing
item 7]

130

Group C—Mining, Petrol etc. and explosives

8. employed in the manufacture or handling of explosives in
connection with the employer’s trade or business; or on premises
where such manufacture of explosives is carried on or

9, employed. in any mine, as defined in clause (j) of section
2 of the Mines Act, 1952,—

(a) in any mining operation; or

(b) in any kind of work, other than clerical work, inci-
dental to or connected with any mining operation or
connected with the mineral cbtained, or

(c) in any kind of work whatsoever below ground; or

Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby de-
clared that for the purposes of this clause, and for the purpose of
the definition of “mine” in the Mines Act, 1952 as adopted by
this clause, the expression “minerals” includes minor minerals.

10. employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in con-
nection with operations for winning natural petroleum or natural
gas;

11. employed in any occupation involving blasting operations:
Group D—~Transport and Communications

12, employed as the master ar as a scaman of —

(a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part by
steam or other mechanical power or by clociricily or
which is towed or intended to be towed by a ship
so propelled; or

(b) any ship not included in <ub-clause (a), of tweniv-
five net tonnage or over: o¢

(c) any sea-going ship not included in sub-clause (a)
or sub-clause (8) provided with sufficient arca for
navigation under sails wlone;

13. employed for the purpose of—--

(a) loading, unloading, fuelling, ecusiructing, demotisting,
cleaning or painting any ship of which he is not
the master or a member of the crew, or handling or
transport within the limits of any port subject to” the
Indian Ports Act, 1908. of goods which have been
discharged from or are to 65 loaded into any vessel;
or

(b) warping a ship through the lock; or

3, Hf necessary reference to other faws relating [0 ports should be added


131

(c) mooring and unmooring ships at horbour wallberths
or ia pier; or

(d) removing on replacing dry dock caisoons when vessels
are entcring or leaving dry docks; or

(९०) the docking or undocking of any vessel during an
emergency; or

(0) preparing splicing coir springs and check wires, paint-
ing depth marks on locksides, removing or replacing
fonders whenever necessary, landing of gangways,
maintaining life-buoys up to standard or any other
maintenance work of a like nature; or

{g) any work on jolly-boats for brining a ship’s line 10
the wharf; °

14. employed upon a railway as defined in clause (4) of
section 3, and sub-section (1) of secticn 148, of the Indian Rail-
ways, Act, 1890, by व person fulfiling a contract with the raibwa y
administration; whether such employment is directly or through
@ sub-contractor,

14A. employed as a railway servant as dcfined in section 3
of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 :

Provided that a railway servant ordinarily discharging duties
in any administrative, district or sub-divisional office of a yailway
dette tees cena ed shall not be a workman by victue of this item.”

15. employed,—

(a) as a telegraphist or as a postal or railway signaller;
or

(0) as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van peon in
the Railway Mail Service, or

(९) in any occupation ordinarily involving outdoor work
in the Indian Posts and Telegraph Department;

16, employed in the operation of any ferry boat czpable cf
carrying more than ten person;

17. employed in the handling or transport of goods in, er
within the precincts of;—

(a) any warehouse or other place in which goods arca
stored, and in which on any one day of the preceding twelve
months ten or more persons have been so employed, or

कि) any market in which on any one day of the preceed-
ing twelve months fifty or mare persons have been
so employed;

[Existing
item 12]

(Transferred

from the
definition
of

sworkman]

lexisting
item 13]

[Existing
item 17}

TExisting
item 26}


132

[Existing 18. employed in or in connection with the construction, erec-
item 28] tion, dismantling, operation or maintenance of an aircraft as de-
fined in section 2 of the Indian Aircraft Act, 1934;

Group E—Construction

[Existing 19. employed in the construction, maintenance, repair or
item 8] demolition of— -

(a) any building which is designed to be छा is oe has

been—
(i) more than one storey in height above the ground:
or
(ii) three and a half metres or more from the ground
level to the apex of the roof; or
(b) any dam or embankment which is three sud half
metres or more in height from its lowest to its highest
point: or
(0) any road, bridge, tunnel or canal; or
(d) any wharf, quay, sea-wall or other marine work
including any moorings of ships;
{Existing 20. cmployed in sctting up, maintaining, reparing or taking
fem 9] down any telegraph or telephone line or post or any overhead
electric line or cable or post or standard or fittings and fixtures
ior the same:
[Existing 21. employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacily, in the

item 10} construction, working, repair or demolition of anv aerial ropeway,
canal, pipeline, or sewer;

[Existing 22, employed in the making of any excavation in which on
item 16] any one day of the preceding twelve months twenty-five or more
persons have been employed or explosives have been used. or
in the making of any excavation whosc depth from its highest
to its lowest point exceeds three and haif metres.
Group F-~Agriculture

23. employed—

[New] (a) in any agricultural employment which satisPes the
following conditions, nai

Existing] (0) in any agricultural operation involving the use or

item 29 handling of any contrivance driven by steam or other

mechanical power or by electricity .

Explanation—In this item, “agriculture” includes horticul-
ture, forestry or bee keeping and “agriculturat’ shall
be construed accordingly.

1, The?conditions are left to be filled up after the criterion to bz adoote
this behalf is decided. Sec discussion in para 10.7,


NN aT
133

24, employed, otherwise than in a.clerical capaci i

oyed, othe पु pacity, on any [Existing
estate which is maintained for the purpose of growing cardamom, item 18]
cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea, and on which on any one day in
the preceding twelve months twenty-five or more persons have
been so employed;

25. employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the isti :
1 a 3 , Pxisti
construction, working, repair or maintenance of a Pipe well; item 301 €
Group G—Wild Animals and Snakes ee
26, employed in the training, keeping or working of elephants istis :
or wild animals 8 8 P leon ote i,
a,
27. employed in operation for the catching or hunting of [फंड
elephants or other wild animals; fon 24}
{Existing

28. employed in a circus;
item 32)
29. employed in any employment which requires the person [New]
employed to handle snakes for the purpose of extraction of venom
or for the purpose of looking after snakes;
Group H—Climbing and diving

30. employed in the tapping of palm-trees or the felling of [rxisting
logging of trees, or the transport of timber by inland waters, Of — jem 23)
the control or extinguishing of forest fires;

31. employed as a diver; [Existing
Group I—Fire item 25]
32. employed in the service of any fire brigade. {Existing

Group J-—X Ray and radio-active substances item 11]

33. employed in any occupation involving the handling and [Existing
manipulation of radium or X-rays apparatus, or contact with radio- item 7]
active substances.

Group K—Supplementary

34, employed in any employment which is of such @ nature [New]
that in the course of his duties, the person employed has to sub-
ject himself to a hazard arising from any employment mentioned
in any other item in this Schedule. Tf his employment is inci-
dential to or connected with any employment so mentioned, and
if the personal injury is caused by an accident which occurs on
the premises where the empieyment so mentioned is carried on.”

Explanation.—In this Schedule “the preceding twelve months”
relates in any particular case to the twelve months ending with
the day on which the acclodent in such case occurred.


f

3rd Schedule

Third
Schedute

The word
“sequelae”

134

10.76. Having finished consideration of the Second Schedule,
we now take up the Third Schedule. The Third Schedule con-
tains the list of occupational diseases, and has to be tead with
sections 3(2), 3(2A) and 3(3). The subject is of a technical
character, and since we have not received any concrete sugges-
tions in respect of them, we are not recommending any changes
of substance in the Schedule. A few minor points concerning
the Schedule are discussed below.

10.77. There are several items in the Third Schedule (list of
occupational discases), which use the word “sequelae”, while
describing certain diseases. For example, in Part A of the
Third Schedule, one of the discases listed is “compressed air ifl-
ness or its sequelae”. ‘This word, which is peculiar to the langa-
age used by Pathologists. is derived from the Latin word “sequel”,
which means “follow”, The word connotes 4 morbid condition
or symptom following upon some disease.

dt would appear that this word caused some controversy in
Engiand'. One of the scheduled diseases in England (in the
workmen’s Compensation Act of 1906) was “lead poisoning and
its sequelac”, The County Court Indge had found that the
granulat kideny (from which the diseased workman died) was
one of the consequences of lead poisoning (a scheduled discase}.
but there was no finding that in this particular case i: was con-
sequent upon lead poisoning. An appeal was preferred and
allowed. The Court of Appeal pointed out that these words
had no operation unless it was first established to the satisfaction
of the County Court Judge that lead poisoning was etther the
proximate or the uliimate cause of death, in the particular case.
Cozens—Hardy M. R. observed as follows: —

“It is not sufficient that death was caused by somethiag
which may in some cases* be a sequela of lead poisan-
ing but may also be a sequela of gout or alcoholismh.
In short, it must be proved that death was a conse-
quence of lead poisoning in the case of ‘his porti-
cular individual, not necessarily a direct or imme-
diate consequences but at least a remote — conse-
quence.”

Farewell L. J. explained the meaning of the expressicn “seque-
Jae”, in the following terms:—

“It is clear, if sequelae be translated into plain Engtish
and called ‘or its consequences”—ie., the conse-
quences, not a possible consequence*, the allegation
then is that the man died not from lead poision-

1. Havlett ५, Viger & Co, (1908) 2 Kings Bench 337 (Court of Appeal.
3, Emphasissupplied.
3, Emphasis supolied.


I ,

135

ing, but from a consequence of lead Poisoning
and it is as necessary for him to prove this case
as it would be for him to prove that he had
died from lead poisoning if that had been the case.
‘The schedule cannot be read as if the words were
“lead poisoning or granular kideny”; it can only be
“lead poisoning”. Tt is impossible to have the con-
Sequence without the cause, which is the gist of the
liability.”

10.78. 10 would, therefore, appear that the object of insert-
ing the words “or its sequelae” in the Schedule to th: Act wag
10 preven: az employer from evading his liability to pay compen-
sation on the ground that his employee had died, not actually
from the scheduled disease, but from’ a complaint which super-
vened or was consequent upon it. At the same time, the death
or injury must be fraceable to a consequence of the scheduled
disease.

10.79. In view of what is stated above, it would be advis-
able to substitute, in the Third Schedule, tor the words “its se-
quelac”, (wherever they occur), the words “any disease caused
thereby in the particular case”, and we recommend accordingly.

10.80. The Third Schedule also leaves scope for improve-
ment in respect of arrangement of the items. At Present, the
items in the Schedule bear no nimber, and are arranged in a
haphazard fashion. The following changes are proposed {9
facilitate reference:

(1) Division of the Schedule iato Paris

(६2) Hazards otherwise than by poisoning will be placed
first in each Part. Hazards by poisoning will be
placed next.

(3) Numbering of the items (with scparat: numbering
within each pari).

(4) In evumerating hazards by poisoning, alphabetical
order is to be followed, as far as possibt

The revised arrangement will be as follows: —

Third Schedule
(see section 3)
List of Occupational Diseases

Gccupational disease

Employment

PART A

+ Any employment :--
(a) involving the handing of wool, hair,
bristles or anisnal carcases, or parts of

such carcasses, including ‘hides, hoofs

and horns; or

1. Anthrax, . .

Recommen-
dation re-
garding the
expression
Sequelae’
Arargement
of items in
the Third
Schedule,



136

Oveupational disease

Employment

हर

Compressed ai? illness or

any disease caused thereby

int the particular Case

3. Poisoning by lead tetra-
ethyl.

Poisoning by nitrous fumes

5. Poisoning by organic phus-
phorus, insecticides.

1. Ovcupational Catarac: due
to infra-red radiations.

wb

Chrome ulceration or any
disease
tire particular case.

Pathological manifestations

प्र

active subsiances;

4b) Xrays.

4, Primary cpitheliomatous
cancer of the skin.

5, Telegraphist’s Cramp

. Poisoning by arisenic or ils
corapounds, 00 anv disease
caused thereby in the parti-
लावा: vetse.

. Poisoning by benzene, or
its homologues, their amtdo
und nitroderivatives of any
disease canse:t thereby in
the particular case.

caused thereby in

with anthrax; or
{@) involving the lgading, ur lox:
transport of any merchand:se.

iB OF

Any process carried on in compressed air.

Any process involving the ux of lead
fetraethyl.

Any process involving exposure {9 nitrous
fumes.

Any process invelying the use or handling
‘of exposure to the fumes, dus! or vapour
containing any of the organi phos-
phorus insecticides,

PART EB

Any manufacturing process ineulving एड
posure to glere froma एल material or
to any other sources of infra! radia-
ions.

Any process invoiving the use of cheamiz
acid er dichromate of :-2monium
potassium or sodium, or thei- prepara-,
tions or the manufacture of biachro-
mate.

Any process invatving exposure 23 the
action of cadium radiaactive ssosaness

or X-rays.

Any process invai tis Aandling पर
use of lar, pilch, bitanen, w'ineraf of
paraffin, or the compounds, jvaduels
or residues of these substances.

the

Any employment involving of

telegraphic instruments

use

Any process involviny the production,
liberation or ulilisation of arene or
its compounds.

Any process involving the manufacture,
liberation, or use of benzene, homolo-
gues and their amido and nitroderiva-
tives.

1. We have separately recommended substitution of a different wording
in place of ‘sequelae’. Para 10.73, supra,



Occupational Disease

437

Employment

8. Poisoning by carbon disul- Any employment in :--

9

10,

11

13.

3.

4,

phide ता any disease caused
thereby in the particular case.

Poisoning by halogenated
hydrocarbons of the aliphe-
tic series and their halogen
derivatives.

Poisoning by lead, its alloys
or compounds or any dis

ease caused thereby in the
particular case excluding
poisoning by lead tetra-cthy!.

Poisoning by manganese or
a compound of manganese,
or any disease caused ther
by in the particniar case.

Poisoning by mercury, its
amalgams and compounds,
or any discase caused there=
by in the particular case.

Poisoning by phosphorus or
its compounds, or any fi
ease caused thereby in the
partienlar case.

Asbestosis पु है .

Bacassosis .

Coal Mini's Peumoconio-
sis.

Silicosis |,

{a) the manufacture of carbon disulphide;
or

(b) the manafacture of artitivial silk by
viscose process; oF

(७) rubber industry; or

(d) any other industry involving the
production or use of products con-
taining carbon disulphide or_ exposure
to emanations from carbondisulphide -

Any process involving the manufacture
liberation and use of hydrocarbons of
the aliphatic series and their halogen
derivatives,

Any process involying the handting or
use of jead ore of Tead or any ofits
preparations or compounds execpt lead
tetra-ethy!.

Any process involving the use of, or
exposure to the fumes, dust or yapour
of, manganese or a compound of manga
nese, or a Substance containing manga-

nese,

Any process involving the use of mercury
or ils preparations or compounds.

Any process involving the liberation of
phosphorus ar usc or handling of
phosphorus or its preparations or
compounds.

PART €

Any employment in :—

(1) the production of :
(i) fibre vement materials; or
(ii) asbestos mill board; or

(2) the processing of ores containing
asbestos,

Any employment in the production of
bagasse mill board or other articles
from bagasse.

Any employmizat in coat mining.

Any employment involving exposure to
the inhalation of dust conta ni ng ca,

EN



138
3

Amendineny 10.81. In the Fourth Schedule. for cases where the monthly
Recommen. Wages exceed Rs. 400, the present figures are Rs. 10,900, 14,000
ded. and Rs. 87.50 respectively, in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th columns of
the Schedule. We think that a specific item for the Rs. 400-500
& group is required.

We therefore recommend that in the Fourth Schedule, for
cases where ihe monthly wages are from Rs. 400 to 500, the
present figures,—Rs, 10,000, 14,000 and Rs. 87.50—should be
retained, and, us regards cases where the monthly wages excecd
Rs. 500, the figures in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th columns of the
Fourth Schedule should be Rs. 11,000, 15,000 and Rs. 100
Tespectively.

Comparative Table with reference to Second Schedule

Bristing item
1 1
2 re
~ oo aa
4 ~ _ 8
5 ~ 9 ~~
~ 6 2
7 ~ “3s
8 rr फ
9 7 >
10 — a a
1 2.”
2 ey a
13 ओ छः
हि मम



ee

a EE Sees OO,

'
fom

139
है Existing item Proposed item 7
16 ~ 2 ~
17 —_ 16 ~
er uO
— a पर ~~
हे 20 या 3 7
2 4 7 _
22 या 26 आओ
a 23 30 प्र
24 — 27 जाओ
oe
26 ~~ y ~ _
27 7 33 _
28 18 a
29 2)
7 30 25 _
7 31 5
RR 3

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of
the valuable assistance we have received from Shri Bakshi, Mem-
ber-Secretary of the Commission in the preparation of this Re-
port. a



Fee

P.B Gajendragadkar 5.

P.K. Tripathi
S. 5. Dhavan .
S.P.Sen-Varma
P.M. Bakshi :

Dated: New Dethi,

the 1500 October, 1974,

te.

Chairman
Member
Member
Member

Member-Secretary

1. Member Shri B, C. Mitra has not signed the Report. Plea:

warding letter.

MGIPRRND—28 M of Law/74—Sec. 1५ (N.S.}—10-3-75—2000

pate

see the 105

ae

ss

“oe

“9