LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTY THIRD REPORT

ON

THE INTEREST ACT, 1839

February, 1975

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs


P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR 9. O. No. F. 2(5)/74-L.C.
SHASTRI BHAVAN,
New Devut-110001.
February 21, 1975.

My Dear MINISTER,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Sixty-third
Report of the Law Commission on the Interest Act, 1839 (Act 32
of 1839 passed on the 30th December,1839}.

The Act is very short onc; basides a preamble, it contains
only one section and a proviso, However, it is a statute of impor-
tance since it prescribes the general law of interest which be-
comes applicable in the absence of contractual or statutory provi-
sions specifically dealing with the subject.

Twould like to add that almost every phrase used in the
Act has given rise to problems of interpretation and judicial
decisions disclose divergence of views in respect of the same.

Besides, the Actis very old and the Commission thought it
required reconsideration from the point of view both of subs-
tance and of form, that is why, the Commission 1001 up the task
of revising the Act suo motu.

The Report of the Commission will show that the various
recommendations made by us seek io bring about a total revision
of the Act, and to make its provisions comprehensive, these
recommendations will, itis hoped make the provisions of the
Act more precise, specific, unambiguous and juristically satis-
factory.

The Commission takes the view that it is necessary that the
Act of general importance should be a self-contained statute,
containing in one place, in an casily intelligible form the rele-
vant provisions which, at present, the ordinary citizen has to
gather from numberous judicial pronouncements. This, in subs-
tance, is the approach which the Commission has adopted in
making its Report.

As usual, after a preliminary study of the subject, a Draft
was prepared by Mr. PF. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary. This
Draft was carefully examined, revised and finalised in accordance
with the conclusions reached by the Commission. That is how
the report has taken its present form.

I may incidentally. mention that this is the Second Report
of the present Commission since it was, reconstituted on the Ist
of October, 1974.

With warm regards,
Your sincerely
Sd.

i
(P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR}

Hon'ble Shri H. R. GOKWALE,
Minister of Law, Justice and Co. Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi.

Encl : As above.

1-1 ६ ए (ND)/75


CONTENTS

Pen
(warren = Introductory a - +- + - 1
CHAPTER 2 History. . . पु पु : पु पु . . . पु . . 2
Crarter24 = Interestin Hindy Law and Muslim Law पु : . . : - पु डा
CHAPTER2B = Preamble . . . + : . - . + . ‘ . . प्‌ . 42
Cuapter 3 Constitutional position and territorial extent . . . हे . 5 . soe 12
CHAPTER + Section [--Power of the Court and suits merely for Intereer + ड़ . . . : . 14
CuapTer 1 Amount on which interest can be awarded * , . ’ . . . noe . at
(CHAPTER 6 Rate of Tnterest and Date of Commencement of Interest पु . पु . + . . 24
Cmarptep 7 Section 1—~Proviso—Tnterest now payable by Law. . + - . . पु . 26
CHAPTER 8 Summary of Recommendations . . पु roy so . - . . 29
Cuarter 9 Recommended Amendments. + nd . . . . . ' . 30
APPENDIX i Interest Actland Fraud - . . . . पु न 1 . . nN . . 33
AppeNDIx 2. Provisions regarding Interest in some labour Laws पु हू ४» «४ + * 8 BB



Cuapter |

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. Revision of the Interest Act, 1839 (hereinafter referred to as the Act), Genesis of the Re
which forms the subject-matter of this Report, has been taken up by the Law port.
Commission suo motu as a part of its function of revising Central Acts of gene-
ral application and importance. Though the Act is a short one, it is a legisla-
tive measure not only of importance but also of some difficulty, as will be shown
by the discussion that follows in the succeeding chapters of this Report.

1,2, The Act does not contain all the Laws on interest. In 1855, for ex- Other laws.
ample, the laws against usury were repealed by a Central Act In 1918, by
another Central Act,’ certain usurious transactions were regulated. There are
provisions in other laws relevant to the charge of interest in respect of transac-
tions dealt with by those laws. Interest from the date of the suit is governed
by section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, on which we have made a
separate Report’ dealing with that section.

Then, there are Acts in force in various States. providing for the relief of
agricultural indebtedness or regulating the business of money lending. It is
unnecessary for the purposes of this Report to discuss the provisions relating
to interest in the various laws referred to in this paragraph. It is sufficient to
state that by and large, most questions relating to interest before the date of
the suit involve, directly or indirectly, a reference to, and sometimes a minute
examination af, the Act. It is, therefore, impossible to make a comprehensive
statement with regard to the law relating to interest as applicable to various situa-
tions without a look at the Act.

12A, The rule of Eunglish law is that interest is not due on money i
secured even “by a written instrument, unless it appears on the face of the instru- Rule of English law,
ment that interest was intended to be paid, or unless it be implied from the usage
of trade, in the case of mercantile instruments.”

At common law; interest was not payable on ordinary debts, except by
agreement or by mercantile usage, nor could damages be given for non-payment
of such debt. . '

1.3, 1६ is of some interest to note that the Indian Act, enacted in 1839, fol- Indiati_ and English
lowed: closely on the heels of the Civil Procedure Act, 1833, which was enacted |cgislation in the
in England and which, to a large extent, relaxed the prohibition against the grant 19th century.
of-interest which had been the general view at common Jaw in England. When,
in 1854, the usury laws were themselves formally repealed in England, the Indian
Legislature also followed suit, by repealing the usury 1898 in 1855. Of course,
the prohibition against usury was not, in practice, enforced in courts in England
even before the formal repeal by the Act of 1854.

14. It will be apparent from the detailed discussion’ of section 1 that follows ‘Narrow limits.
later in this Repori, that the Act keeps the right to interest within narrow limits. है
One reason for this approach is historical? It can also be thought that the tight

3 The Usury Laws Repeal Act, 1855.
2 The Usurious Law Act, 1918.
3 55th Report of the Law Commission (section 34,C.P.C.).

4 Page v. Newman (1829)9 B & 0, 378, 381: 1९. 18. 204, 206 andthe Knell ities revi
LC. & DR. (०. ४. SER. Co. (1893) A.C. 429, 437, he English authorities reviewed by Lord Herschell

* £0. & D. R.Co.v. SER, Co. (182911 Ch, 120, 140 (Lindley L.J.) approved, ५

Co, (1893) 4.C.429 (प.1..), approved, on appeal, 2-6, & DR. Co, 5; E.R.
* Usury Laws Repeal Act, 1455.

१ Sve Stephen, History of English Criminal Laws Vol. 3, page 198.

® See Chapter 3, Infra.

3 See discussion relating to usury; Chapter 2, Zura.


2 The Interest Act, 1839

to claim interest was kept within narrow limits in order to induce the creditor
10 take a prompt action to file a suit. Jt is well-known that once a suit is insti-
tuted," the discretion of the court to award interest is wider than that conferred
by the Interest Act.

CHAPTER 2

HISTORY OF INTEREST AND USURY

‘The concept of in- 2.1, Before we discuss the law on the subject, it is desirable to make certain
terest. general ooservations about the concept of interest and its relationship to usury.

Interest is a return on a loan or other monetary obligation. To the lender,
it is the difference between the money now and money in the future, seen as a
profit.

Interest is” in general terms, the return or consideration or compensation
For the use or retention by one person of a sum of money, belonging to, in a
collequial sense, or owed to, another. There may be other essential charac.
teristics of interest, but they are not material here for our present purpose.

People have different preference as between money now and money in the
future. Hence a “natural” rate of interest on loan ‘arises. Ordinarily, the
lender will take advantage of the present necessity of the borrower, in contrast
with the future need of the lender, to take a higher rate than is reasonable ;
and this he will do regardless of the prevailing economic conditions*

Market rate and 2.2, The market rate of interest may not be necessarily the same as that
agreed rate. which is agreed upon between an individual lender and borrower. As has been
stated by a writer’ on the subject :

“The market rate of interest, as economists now commonly agree, is deter-
mined by conditions of time preference’ investment opportunity, and liqui-
dity preference." This rate expressess the common estimate of buyers and
sellers of the price of loanable funds, or the present exchange ratios of funds
available at different points of time . ”

After stating that the market rate is determined by competitive conditions,
he says,

“The competitive conditions assumed above apply perticularly to the money
and capital markets. The assumption is likely to be less realistic in loans
for consumption. Here the danger of usury in the modern sense is greatest.
Yet, in this instance, interest payments will include, in addition to pure
interest, charges to cover operating costs and risks of non-repayment. In
the field of small money lending, some protection to borrowers against
usurious rates is allorded by both federal and State legislation im the United
States and similar laws in other countries.”

Justifications for cha- 2.3. In economic theory, the justifications of interest are many. One

ging interest—money writec’ has thus analysed the position :

38 productive of in-

come. “The ficst formal, theoretical justification of interest was a demonstration
that the use of money could be productive of income. Although fragmen-
tary indications were prevalent in earlier writings, the productivity approach

1 Section 34, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
3 Reference regarding Validity of Ferm Security Act, (1947) S.C.R. 394, 411 (Canada).

* See Dr. Francis Hyde, Chaddock Professor of Eccnon.ics. Science, University of Liverrcol—article on “Usury” in

Chambers Encyclopaedia, (19593, Vol. 14, p. 213.

‘ Thomes F, Divine, Professor of Economics, St. Louis University, in Encyclopaedia Americana, Vol. 27, 088० 823, article
on “Usury”.

* Seo para 2,4, infra.

© Para 2.5, infra.

* William Kinnard Jr. (University of Ccnnecticyt), Article en “Taterest”, in Eneyclopacdia Ancricana, Vol. 15, page



The Interest Act, 1839 3

to interest theory really developed with Adam Smith (1723-1790). Despite
many variations, the basic thesis is that money will be borrowed and interest
paid, so long as the return that can be earned on the borrowed funds exceeds
the interest rate, Interest was, therefore, paid because income could be
derived from the use of money,”

24, Another economic justification for interest—the theory of “time prefer-
ence’—has been explained by the same writer’ in these words:

“The supply side of interest rate theory was first treated systematically by
Eugen Bohm—Bewerk in the [880's. His was a time preference, or abstin-
ence theory. According to it, the worth of a sum of money presently held
is greater than the worth of the sume sum payable at some time in the future.
The preference of the lender for moncy to use now over money promised
in the future causes him to require some premium.”

25, Modern economic analysis has added variations to these basic approa- Variations on above
ches.’ John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946), for example, has argued that interest approaches.
stemps directly from the supply of and demand for money itself, rather than the
use of money. His theme is that “liquidity” is the umique characteristic of money,
and he called the demand for money to hold “tiquidity preference”,

economist.”

“To develop a more refined theory the motion of liquidity preference. mea-
sured by the reward required to induce owners of wealth to hold assets
other than money, must be broken up into a number of aspects. Amongst
the disadvantages of various kinds of assets compared to money we may
distinguish:

The concept of “liquidity of money” has been developed by an English

1. Liquidity in the narrow sense. Liquidity partly consists in the capacity
of an asset to be realised in money. A limited and imperfect market,
the cost and trouble of making a sale, and the time required to effect

- it, reduce the liquidity of an asset quite apart from variability in its
price. Liquidity in the narrow sense depends upon the power to realise
its value in cash, whatever the value may be at the moment. To avoid
confusion with Keynes’ language we will call this quality “convenience”
instead of “liquidity”.

2. Uncertainty of future capital value or capital—uncertainty fo short,
due not to any fear of failure by the borrower, but to the possibility of
changes in capital values owing to changes in the ruling rate of interest.
(This is the main ingredient in Keynes’ conception of liquidity prefer-
ence. He regards the rate of interest primarily as a premium against
the possible toss of capital if an asset has to be realised before its redemp-
tion date).

3. Lender's risk, this is, the fear of partial or total failure of the borrower.
Further, when comparing long term bonds with other paper assets, we
have to add one more factor ;

4. Uncertainty as to the income that a sum of money now committed to
the asset will yield in the future, or income uncertainty, (for short).”

Tt was not, however, without Jong controversy that the economic justification
for charging interest came to be accepted.

2.6, In this context, the long controversy surrounding usury and the usury
Jaws is of historic and economic interest. The primary object of usury laws is to
prevent the exploitation by the lendert of the need of the individual borrower,
as seen in contrast with prevailing conditions.

1 हो [0 Kinnard Jr. (University of Connecticut), Article on ‘Interest’, Jn Encyclopaedia Americana, Vol. 15, page
1

रैली तकिया Kinnard Jr. (University of Connecticut ६ Article on ‘Interest’, in Encyclopaedia Americana, Vol. 15, Page
191.

* Jonn Rebinson, The Rate of Interest an 1otheressays(Maz.nillan, London, 1952), page 6.
* See para 2,2, supra.


The Interest Act, 1839

“Usury” is the charging of interest in excess of that allowed by law for a
loan of money or for the extension of the maturity of a debt. In early English
law, usury meant compensation for the use of money regardless of amount. But
the above is the present understanding. In the Encyclopaedia Britannica,’ it is
stated : —

“The laws against usury are of ancient origin. Early laws of China and India
prohibited usury. The Mosaic law limited the exaction of interest; the
Roman law prescribed or regulated such charges. In England, during the
middle ages the practice of charging interest was maligned by the church
and outlawed by the State. But the credit requirements of modern commerce
caused removal of these restrictions in England and elsewhere.

“Whilz the exaction of oppressive imterest is not illegal under the common
law of England or the United States, a public policy which protects debtors
from over-reaching lenders has been implemented by the statute law of both
countries. Im England, the Money-lenders Acts of 1900 and 1927 consti-
tuted a code providing for registration of money-lendets, gorverning the
form of their coniracts, limiting rates of interest and providing for the re-
opening by the court of money-lending transactions.

Hammurabi Code 2.7, The Hammurabi Code of ancient Babylon’ contained a Jaw limiting
and Roman law, interest on loans of corn or silver.

Usury was an offence in Roman law, and, according to the 12 Tables,’
“The Interest on money is 84 per cent per annum. A Usurer who lends at a
higher rate of interest, is punishable.” The maximum rate of interest under
the late Republic and early Roman Empire was set at twelve per cent’ A
lender who exacted a higher interest rate could be sued for four times the
amount exceeding the legal rate. Justinian later reduced the rate ta 6% gene-
rally, but permitted merchants to collect 8 per cent, and persons of higher social
position only 4 per cent. He also abolished the fourfold penalty.

The Code of Jewish Jaw" contained extensive provisions outlawing any
interest, which apparently carried over into early Christian Europe.

Origin of the prohi- 2.8. The modern European experience with usury has its roots in the time

bition against usury. of Charlemagne, when the prohibition against taking interest was directed pri-
marily at clerics, apparently because collecting interest showed greed, or at least
a Jack of charity” The prescription against charging interest was gradually ex-
tended to laymen, and the whole concept of usury as a lack of charity was
transformed into the idea that interest was a moral injustice similar to theft.
There is considerable disagreement as to why this development occured, but,
since the type of borrowing then most prevalent involved loans from a large
landowner to a small farmer of a sum for day-to-day expenses, and since a lender
could seize a borrower's property when the borrower defaulted on a Joan, one
principal reason for the wider ban may have been to decelerate further conso-
lidation of land-holdings.*

The Scholastic philosophers, working on the foundations of (i) patristic
teachings, (ii) the classification of voluntary contracts in Roman law, and (iii)
the Aristotelian concept of the sterility of money, undertook to construct an

3 Bneyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 22, page 908.

" Driver & Mills, the Babylonian Laws; Legal Commentary (1956 page 173, cited in Note on ‘Usury’, in 18 stand-
ford Law Review at page 1381

3 For the text of the Babylonian law, see Driver & Mills, The Babylonian Laws: cext and Translation (1955) page 39.
+ sth Table, item 18; Stephen, History of Criminal Law, Vol. 1, vege 10

* Berger, Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Roman Law (1953), pages 469, 954, cited in note an ‘Usury’ in 18 Standfora
Law Rev. 9. 11:

® Canaftied & Goldin, Code of Jewish Law (1263), Vol.2 Ch. 65, page 41, cited in the Note on “Usury” 18 Stanford Law
Rev. page 2301.

7 Noonan, the Scholastic Analysis of Usury, (1957), pages 1a—17, cited in Note on Usury, 18 Stanford Law Rev.
at page 1382.

3 Noonan, the Scholastic Analysis of Usury, (1957१ pages 14--17, cited in Note on Usury, 18 Stanford Law Rev. at
page 1282.


The Interest Act, 1839

analysis of interest that would apply to all debtor-creditor relationships. Goods
were Classified as fungible (perishable or generic), and non-fungible (durable or
specific), To demand payment for. the use of non-fungible goods (for example,
a horse or a house) in addition to its return, was considered justifiable. But,
to charge for the use of a fungible goods (fer example, bread, grain, or wine).
in addition to the return of an cquivalent, was declared to Ee a violation of
justice, a charge for something tiat does not exist, since the use of the goods
consists of its consumption or destruction. Money was classified as a fungible
goods because, once it is exchanged for other goods, its usz is accomplished
and it ceases to exist for the borrower.

“Therefore”, concluded Thomas Aquines, “it is in itself illicit to accept a
price for the use of money loaned, which is called usury.”

2.9 Yet, though interest was condemned on the basis of the intrinsic na-
ture of the loan, it was allowed if certain extrinsic circumstances existed which
gave the lender a title to compensation for loss or danger of loss. With the
growth of industry and commerce and the expansion of Joans for investment,
the Scholastic philosophers became more and more lenient in justifying interest
on the basis of these titles, such as loss incurred from delay in repayment of
the loan (damhuni energens), or sacrifice of profit that might have been earned
had the principal been invested rather than loaned (Iucrian cessane), or risk of
1055 of the money loaned (pericufw sortis) as in the case of such venture-some
lending as a “loan on bottemry”.

2.40. A second possible explanation for the broadened application of the
prohibition against usury is that the mediaeval philosophers only saw examples
of loan proceeds being spent on items necessary for immediate consumption,
and, therefore, put forth the theory that moncy had no productive capability
justifying the collection of interest, They distinguished interest from rent, since
Jand had a capability to produce crops, and this entitled the lessor to exact
rents, while money had no such capability.

St, Thomas Aquinas’ integrated this theory into the natural law which was
gaining popular acceptance at the time. It was largely due to his writings that
the theory persisted for several centuzies, until the commercial age and the Re-
formation combined to bring about its rejection.

211, In the mediaeval period, usury ia all its forms was condemned by
theorists as being contrary to scriptures and to the teachings of philosophy.
But, in practice, the theorists agreed that it may be legitimate to receive pay-
ment for a Joan of money where the lender underlook a part of the risk involved
but not where the debt was unqualified by any share of the risk. When the
structure of society grew more complex, it became evident that neither the Gov-
emmment nor commerce could be carried on without credit, and that there were
some loans to which the overall prohibition of the usury faws on moral grounds
could not apply.

2.12. In practical applicalion, therefore, the doctrine of usury had to be
narrowed down to the prevention of exploitation by the money-lender. This is
illustrated by an early English Act, which fixed the maximum rate of interest
at 10 per cent per annum in certain cases, such as failure to pay by the specified
time, as distinct from payment for the mere use of money. Subsequent legis .
lation in England reduced the tate, and the matter evoked a lot of controversy
amongst economists. Ultimately, John Locke’ showed that any attempt to fix
the maximum rate of interest was illusory. He pointed out that the demand for
money regulates its price. He showed that a legal rate below the market rate
would severely hamper trade, because people would then prefer to hoard that
capital, rather than risk lending it.

Extrinsic
ances as
interest.

circumst-
justifying

Mediaeval theory,

Practical necessity of
allowing interest to

be charged,

"Thomas F. Divine, Professor of Economics, St. Louis University, in Eneyclopaedia Americana, Vol.27, page 824, article

on “Usury”.

*St. Thomas Acquines, quoted by Thomas F. Divine in Encyclonsecia Americana, Vol. 27, nage 824.
TNeenan, the Scholastic Anatysis of Usury (1957), page 53) cited in Note on Usury, 18 Stanford Law Rey. at pp.

‘Dr. Froacia Hyde, in “Usury” in Chambers Encyclopaedia, (1959), Val. 14, pages 213, 214.
‘Juha Locke, «Considerations of the lowering of interest”, (Works, 1801 Edition),
2-1 L DIND}75


6 The Interest Act, 1839

The controversy! between Bentham and Adam Smith on the subject of usury
laws is also well-known. Adam Smith apparently accepted the usury laws,
while Bentham demonstrated, from Adam Smith’s own promises of natural
freedom, that there could be no logical reason for the support of laws ५ wich
so obviously restricted a man’s freedom of action in the employment of his own
capital. an

According 10 the Code Napoleon, interest is either legal or contractual.
The legal interest is fixed by law; the contractual interest may exceed the
legal interest, whenever the law has not prohibited such excess.

Freedom to charge 213. The above discussion would show that freedom to charge interest
interest—a feature of subject to the limit, if amy, imposed by Jaw, is the broad approach in most mo-
modern syatent. dern legal systems.
Brief history of po- 2.14. At this stage, a brief history of the position in England as shown by
sition in England. the case-law, would be useful. zn Eddowes v. Hopkins’, Lord Mansfield, after
stating that interest may be payable in consequence of the usage of particular
branches of trade or a special agreement, added that interest may be payable
“in cases of long delay under vexations and oppressive circumstances if a jury
in their discretion shalt think fit to allow.” This statement of the law. it may.
be noted, is fairly wide, and though it emphasises the element of oppression,
it does not contemplate any other limitations on the “discretion” of the jury.
Lord Ellenborough's 2.15. However, in a subsequent case—De Havilland ¥. Bowerbank>—Lord
view,

Ellenborough laid down a somewhat different rule , he said that interest ought
to be allowed only where there is a contract for payment on a day certain, as
on bills of exchange‘, where there is an express promise’, where it may he in-
ferred from the course of dealing’ and where the money has been actually used
and interest made of it. This enunciation is much more limited than the doctrine
laid down by Lord Mansfield.”

2.46, In 1893, Lord Herschel, in the House of Lords said* that, “What-
ever might be said in regard to the older authorities upon the matter of interest,
1am of opinion that the law laid down by Lord Tenterden in Page v. Newman’,
to the effect that ‘interest is not due on money secured by a written instrument,
unless it appears on the face of the instrument that interest was intended to be
paid, or unless it be implied from the usage of trade, as in the case of mercantile

instruments, is not open to question’.

2.47. In England, the Civil Procedure Act, 1833—popularly known as Lord
Tenterden’s Act—was intended to make the law more liberal. In form, it gives
the impression of 2 statute intended io narrow down the right; but, in reality,
its object was to widen the power of the court. Of course. the Act did not go
far enough. That is why, in 1934, a wider legislative provision was enacted}*

Before Lord Tenterden’s Act, interest was payable at common Jaw and in
equity in certain cases only. The object of that Act was to make the law in
segard to the granting of interest more liberal, and not Jess liberal. To ensure
this object, a proviso was added, leaving untouched those cases in which there

*Bentham: In Defence of Usury.

Wddowes v. Hopkins, 1 Douglas, 376.

"De Havilland v. Bowerbank, cited in London Chowthom etc. Rly. Co. ¥. 8. मे Rly.(1893) A.C. at page 438,

‘Arnott v. Reafer, 3 Hong, 353.

"“Eddowes v. Hopkins, 1 Douglas, 376.

“Graven v. Tickell, 1 Ves. Jun, 60,

‘Para 2.14, infra.

SEC. and Dover Rly. Co. ५. 5.8, Rly. Co. (1893) A.C. 439 (Lord Herschel),

*Page v. Newman, 9 B & C at 9 p. 378,381 (King’s Bench presided over by Lord Tenterden, with Baylay Littledale and
Parke J3.). .

‘para 2.20, infra.

%: आई adgment of Lord Watson in London Chatham & Dover Railway Co. v. South Eastern Raitway Co. 1893) AC.
p. 429,


The Interest Act, 1839

was already a right to interest when the Act was passed. It has been stated that
the object of Lord Tenterden’s Act was to put all debts of a fixed amount, and
due on, a fixed day, on the footing of a bill of exchange.’

248, Section 28 of the Act of 1833 (Lord Tenterden’s Act) provided as
follows: —

“28. Upon all debts or sums certain, payable at a certain time or otherwise,
the jury on the trial of any issue...... may, if they shall think fit, allow
interest to the creditor al a rate not exceeding the current rate of interest
from the time when such debts or sums certain were payable, if such debts
or sums be payable by virtue of some written instrument at a certain time,
or if payable otherwise, then from the time when demand of payment shall
have been made in writing, so as such demand shall give notice to the
debtor that interest will be claimed from the date of such demand until
the term of payment; provided that interest shall be payable in all cases
in which it is now payable by law.”

Section 29 of that Act provided as follows: —

“29, The jury on the trial of any issue, or on any inquisition of damages,
may, if they shall think fit, give damage in the nature of interest, over and
above the value of the goods at the time of the conversion of seizure, in
all actions of wover or trespass de benis asportatis, and over and above
the money recoverable in all actions of pelicies of assurance made after the
passing of this Act.”

2.19, This finishes consideration of the English law as it stood before the
Act was passed. In India, the position on the subject is not clearly discernible,
for two reasons. The first reason is that the provisions on the subject of interest
and usury are scattered, and the second reason is that the text of the principal
legal provision’ relating to interest, though grammatically complete, is not self-
contained as regards the substange. This comment particularly applies to the
proviso to section I of the Act.’

2.20. It should be noted that, in England, in 1934, the law was made
more liberal by the passing of section 3(1) of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act, 1934, which extended the power af the Court to grant interest
to any proceedings for the recovery of any debt or damages, and also dispensed
with the requirement of a written agreement or written notice. We shall discuss
this section in detail later.‘

2.21, To summarise what is stated above, the law in England, speaking
chronologically, has undergone the following broad stages: —

(i) Liberal view at common law?
ii). Strict view at common law.

Gii) Statutory modification of the common law by the Act of 1833 (Lord
Tenterden’s Act), to a limited extent.

(iv) Reluctance of the courts to construe the Act of 1833 liberally, accom-
panied, at the same time, with a criticism of its narrow scope.

(v) Further liberal provision by statute, by the Act of 1934,
(vi) Judicial construction of the Act of 1934.

Obscurity of position
in India.

English Act of 1934.

Developmenta in En-
gland. Binamarises

{William Wills Q.C..in argument in London Chatham ete, Railway Co. v. S.B. Railway Co.,(1893) A.C. 90. 429,432,

'The Interest Act, 1839, section 1.

२७९६ Chapter 7, infra.

#See paragraph 5.2, infra.

‘Compare Lord Mansficld’s judgement.
‘Compare Lord Ellenborough’s judgment.


8

Meaning of “inter-
est”,

Developments in In-
dia compared.

introductory.

Three _ outstanding
features.

Gradual evelution.

Sophistication.

Damdupat.

Content of the rules.

Rate of interest.

The Interest Act, 1839

224A. Finally, it may be noted that the word “interest”, is derived from
the mediaeval Latin “interse” and “id quod interest’, and signifies the notion of
loss or damage sulfeced by the claimant as opposed to the usurious conception
of reward for money lent—cf. the French phrase “dommages et interests’.

2,22. Having concluded this briaf survey of developments in the West, we
may state that developments in India stopped at stage No. (iv) above’, and have
not kept pace with the statutory developments-—stages (v) and (vi) above—
represented by the English Act of 1934 and judicial construction thereof,

CHAPTER 2A

INTEREST IN HINDU LAW AND MUSLIM LAW

2A.1, The law relating to interest in ancient India seems to have attained
an admirably high degree of sophistication and development. The law on the
subject not only reveals that there must have been subtle discussions, but also
contains rules which would do credit to any legal system.

24.2. Three features stand out on a close examination of the content of
the rules—-

(४) the gradual evolution of the law from a strict atlitude towards interest
to a liberal one in the course of time ;

(0) the standard of sophistication of the rules ;
(०) the reasonablencss of the content of the rules.

24.3, That the law gradually progressed from a strict attitude towards the
charging of interest to a more liberal ons, can be illustrated by stating that
some of the earlier writers’—such as, Vasistha—not only provided strict rules
as to the maximum rate of inierest, but alsy mentioned that some writers had
stated that the above rate of interest should not be paid for more than a year.
Jn Jaler works, however, such a strict emphasis on restrictions as to interest is
missing.

28.4 The standard of sophistication of the rules on the subject is also
illustrated by various provisions on matters of detail, for example, provisions
prohibiting interest when the loan was secured by a pledge, rules dealing with
various kinds of special interest, such as compound interest and daily interest,
and similar other refinements.

24.5. The Hindu law rule of “Damdupat” is well-known, and it may be
stated that this rule is of very ancient origin, having been mentioned by most
writers of Smritis * It may, for example, be of interest to note that Vasistha®
lays down the rule that in principle the lender of a sum of money cannot de-
mand a total of interest higher than the amount of principal lent; “For gold,
double ; for cereals, triple (the amount of the loan)”.

28.6. The content of the rules is of interest. A few salient features may
be referred to. Take, for example, the question of rate of interest.

2A,7, Leaving out of consideration the case of pledge, we find that ordi-
narily the rate of interest was fixed by law; The rate varied according to the

amount of risk incurred by the creditor”; thus, an unsecured debt carried 2

Westminister Bank Lid., ¥. Riche (1946) | AWE,R. pp. 466,472.

Para 2 24, supra.

Svasistitar’ even condemned extortion of interest. P, N. Sen, Hindu Ineisprudence (1918), page 306.
*Gautama, XIT, 31; Manu, VIE, $1 ; Yaajnavalkya, If 39; Vishnu, WI, IT, 17.
8Sce Ganga Nath Jha, Hindu Law in its Sources, Vol. 1, Ch. 8, forthe Texts.

*Yasistha, IT, 441.

7०, N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence, (1948), page 307.


The Interest Act, 1839 759

higher rate of interest than a secured debt: morgover, the rate of interest also
varied according to the casie of the debtor; one belonging to a higher caste
being liable to pay at a lower rate than one belonging to a lower caste. Inciden-
tally, we may add that this was due to the values based on the hierarchy which
was then a part of the social structure.

Then, again, when the lending of the debt involved an exceptional risk,—
ag for instance, where the deblor intended to undertake a journey through a
forest, or a sea-voyage after taking the joan, the creditor was considered entitled
to claim interest at a bigher rate ihan was ordinarily allowed, in consideration
of his incurring the risk .of losing even the principat itself.

The maximum rates are variously expressed by the various writers, and it
is not necessary to go into details.

24.8. Interest. where expressly stipulated, was of course, permissible, sub- Interest im aosence
ject to a legal maximum. What is remarkable is that the Hindu Law allowed ot express stipular
the creditor to charge interest under certam circumstances even in the absence ‘ons.
of a definite contract in that respect.

Interest does run where there is an agreement. But, even in the absence
of an agreement, when a debt is demanded and is not paid, interest accrues trom
the date of demand. In friendly loans, in the absence of an agreement, no interest
was chargeable. With this rule. we may compare Antonio’s retort to Shylock’:

“For when did friendship tuke, A breed for barren metal of his friend.”

But such a friendly loan was presumed to be for 6 months only*.

2A9, Vishnu’ laid down that when a person took a joan without interest, Vishnu and Harada.

promising to repay it within a definite period, but did not fulfil that promise
within the limited time out of avarice, then the debt would carry interest from
after the expiry of that period. Even where there was no definite period of
tepayment fixed by the contract, after the expiry of a specified interval (six
months according to Narada‘, and a ycar according to Vishnu’), the creditor
could charge interest at the Iegal rate. According to Katyayana, however,
interest should not run until there had been a previous demand.

Tt would thus seem that where there is no contract for the payment of
interest but there is a fixed petiod within which the loan is promised to be re-
paid, the loan will carry interest alter the expiry of that period without pay-
ment ; this much is perfectly clear. Some doubts exist in regard io the question
if the creditor becomes entitled to claim interést when there is neither any con-
tract to pay interest, nor any fixed period for repayment.

2A10. Certain texts lay down that interest should run after the expiry of Starting point.
certain stated intervals in such cases. On the other hand, the text of Katyayana®
suggests that interest should run on the failure of the debtor to pay on demand,
whenever that demand may be made.

28.11, The text of Katyayana (which is the last portion of a larger ~Katyayana.

text’), deals with three classes of debtors—
(1) a debtor who goes abroad without repaying his debt ;

(2) a debtor who goes abroad after demand of repayment made by his cre-
ditor ; and

. (3) a debtor who resides in his own country and yet does not pay after
demand.

nn ~ eg
aMerchant of Venice, Act, 19 Scone 3, line 128,
*Narada 1, (08—109.
svishnu. For Sanskrit text, see P. N. Sen, Hindu Jueisprudence (1918), page 406, है
‘Narada I. 108.
svishnu.
“Katyayana referred 10 separately,
3508 (७) ५. N- Mandlik, Hindu Law or Fyaviar Mayukh, page 103, lines 11 to 20.
(b) Stokes, Hindu Law Books, pages, 111-112.


10

Vijnaneshwara.

Admissibility of in-
terest,

Legal interregnum on
death of King.

Muslim law as to
usury.

The Interest Act, 1839

Katyayana here provides for cases where a debtor has taken a loan called
Yachitika (payable on demand), and goes abroad before a demand is made, (there
being no contract for payment of interest). In such cases, interest will run after
the expiry of a year, and where a demand has been made before the debtor's
departure, the debtor is allowed a free grace of three months whereafter interest
begins to run.

In the case of the first class, interest runs after a year; in the case of the
second, interest runs after three months ; in the case af the third’, interest, lite-

rally, according to the text, begins to run “from that time”.

2A,12, On the authority of these texts of Narada and Katyayana, Vijoane-
shwara, the author of the Mitakshara, had deduced the rule that in cases of
absence of a stipulation for interest, interest will be payable from the date of
demand. The gloss of Vijnaneshwara, which is material for the point now
under discussion, is as follows:

“Again, as to him, who, even residing in his own country, does not pay the
debt, though it has been demanded, the King shall cause interest to be paid
by him from the date of demand‘.”

2A,13. In short’, (1) a person who goes abroad to a different country with-
out returning what he has borrowed shall be liable to pay interest after the ex-
piry of one year; (2) it he does so after the lender has demanded the return of
the loan, it will carry interest after the expiry of three months; and (3) when
the borrower does not leave the country, but still fails to return the Joan upon
demand, he shall be made to pay interest although there is no contract for it,
from after the date of such demand.

2A.14, Vasistha’s rule of “legal interregnum” is also interesting’, enunciat-
ing as it does, a remarkable doctrine’ When the king died, the running of
interest ceased unlil the coronation of the new king’. All official and k
transactions were dated in regnal years of the ruling king, counted from ts
coronation. With this we are familiar from Ashoka’s inscriptions as well as
documents in Sanskrit. ‘The period between the two points of time—the death
of the ruling king and his successor’s coronation—was a legal interregnum. It
was non-existent in the eye of the law, and no interest, therefore, argued Vasistha,
was to be counted for the period. This doctrine is not, however, found in the
two Codes of Manu and Yajnavalkya, or in the Codes subsequent to them.
Jayaswal says’—“Jt seems that the doctrine never found approval with practical
legislators.”

2A.15, The position under Muslim Law is of interest. In the Dictionary
of Islam, T.P. Hughes'’ deals with usury as follows :—

“Usury Arabic RIBA. A word which, like the Hebrew neshek, includes all
gains upon loans, whether from the loans of money, or goods or property
of any kind. In the Mosaic 189, conditions of gain for the loan of money
or goods, were rigorously prohibited: ‘If thou lend money to any of my
people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither
shalt thou Jay upon him usury".’ ‘If any brother be waxen poor ............

7569 Soundanappa y. Sivabasappa (1907) 1.L.R. 31 Bom. pp. 354, 360 to 363.
*The Sanskrit word is

‘Mitekshara, under Y. II. 39.

‘Saundanappa v. Shivbasappa, (1907) 1.L.R. 31 Bom. pp. 354, 360 to 363.
*P. N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1918) pages 308-309.

*vasistha IT, 49.

*Jayaswal, Manu and Yajnavalkya (1930), pages 116-117.

sBubler, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 14, p. 15 n.

*Jayaswal, Manu and Yajnayalkya (1930) pages 116-117.

YP. Hughes—A Dictionary of Islam (1973) (Oriental Pub.) pages 656-657.

BExedus, xxii, 25.


The Interest Act, 1839

take no usury of him or increase: but fear the God ; that the brother may
live with thee. Thou shalt not give him the money upon usury, nor lend

him thy victuals for increase”.

28.16, The following further points are made in the same work’ :

(1) The teaching of the Quran on the subject is given in Surah ii 276;
“They who swallow down usury, shall arise in the Last Day only as
he ariseth, whom Satan has infected by his touch.” This for that they
say “Selling is only the like of ‘usury’, and yet God has allowed sel-
ling and forbidden usury ; and whosoever receiveth this admonition
from his Lord, and abstaineth from it, shall have pardon for the past
and his lot shall be with God. But they who return to usury, shall be
given over to the fire,—therein to abide for ever.”

(2) In the Traditions, Muhammed is telated to have said:—

“Cursed be the taker of usury, the giver of usury, the wrifer of usury,
and the witness of usury, for they are all equal.”

“Verily the wealth that is gained im usury, although it be preat, is of
small advantage.”

(Sahihu Muslim, Babu’r —Riba’).

(3) RiBA, in the language of the law, signifies ‘an excess’ according to a
legal standard of measurement or weight in one of two homogeneous
articles (or weight or measurement of capacity) opposed to each other
in a contract of exchange, and in which such excess is stipulated as an
obligatory condition on behalf of the parties, without any return, that
is, without anything being opposed to it.

(4) Usury, as an illegal transaction, is occasioned (according to most Moha-
mmedan doctors) by rate, united with species, Here, however, it must
be observed, that rate amongst the Musalmans, applies only to articles
of weight or measurement of capacity, and zo? to articles of longitudinal
Measurement such as cloth etc., or of articles like eggs, dates, walnuts
ete, when exchanged from hand to hand.

(5) Usury cannot take place between a masier and his slave. Nor can it
take place between a Muslim and a hostile infidel in a hostile couatry,
in accordance with the saying of the Prophet: “There is no usury bet
ween a Muslim and a hostile infidel in a foreign country”, and on the
further ground, that the property of a hostile infidel being free to the
Muslim, it follows that it is lawful to take it by whatever mode may
be possible, provided there be no deceit used.

34.17. The testimony of a person who receives usury is inadmissible in a
court of law. It is recorded in the Mahsut, however, that the evidence of an
usurer is inadmissible only in case of his being so in a notorious degree ; because
mankind often make invalid contracts, and 11252 are in some degree usurious’.

24.18. According to the authors of Muslim law, the position on this sub-
ject appears to be that the strict injunction against the levy or charging of interest
had in course of time become obsolete.

24.19, Tyabji* quotes a “tradition” in this behalf. “Abu Hurairat said :
The Apostle of God, said, “really a time is coming to man when all will eat
interest. if he will not eat the interest, its impression will reach him, such as
the giving interest. the witness of it, or the writer of interest”.

Prohibition obsolete.

Tyabji's view.

Leviticus xxv, 35—37.
*T. 9. Hughes—A Dictionary of Islam (Oviental Publishers, 1973), nage 656-657.

'Hidayah, Grady's tition, P. 362; cited by T. P. Hughes. A Dictionary of Islam (1973) under “Bvidence”’.

*Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968) page 29, para 4, and footnotes 17, 18.
*Miscat-ul Masbili : Traditions as to INTEREST, Book 12, Ch. 4, Part 2.


12°

Recommendation to
delete the preamble.

Introductory,

Entries incidentally
televaot.

The Interest Act, 1839

But Tyabji adds' that the prohibition has become obsolete. In one of the
earliest cases decided by Peacock C. 4.4, calculation of interest on dower was
justified as representing the profits that might have accrued.

24.20, Interest on dower can, apparently, be explained on the ground of
equitable considerations’. But there have been other cases’ where interest was
allowed on the ground of usage,—e.z. between Bhora traders,

CHarTEr 2B

PREAMBLE

2B.1. We now address oursélves to the amendments required in the Act.
An important question concerning the preamble to the Act may be disposed of
first, The preamble reads—

“Whereas it is expedient to extend to the territories under the Government
of the East India Company, as well within the jurisdiction of Her Majesty's
Court as elsewhere, the provisions of the Statute 3rd and 4th, William JV,
Chapter 42, section 28, concerning the allowance of interest in certain cases.”

It is obvious that the preamble is out-dated and has now become totally
obsolete and irrelevant. We are of the view that it should be deleted. We re-
commend accordingly.

Cnraprer 3

CONSTITUTIONAL POSITION AND TERRITORIAL EXTENT

3.1, We propose to discuss. in this Chapter, the constitutional position as
to the Interest Act, with reference to legislative competence as regards its sub-
ject-matter, and the connected question of the territorial extent of the Act. At
the outset, we should state that dram the point of view of legislative competence,
it is difficult to place the subject-matter of the Interest Act, 1839, within one
particular legislative entry. In so far as interest is to be awarded on a@ contrac-
tual obligation, it could be said that the Act comes within the Concurrent List,
entry 7, “Contracts .........°. In so far as the award of interest concerns the
procedure of the Court, the Concurrent List, entry 13, relating to “Civil Proce-
dure” may be noted. As the Act stands at present, interest on damages is not
allowed ; but, if any amendment in that regard is proposed’ thea the Concurrent
List, entry 7, “actionable wrongs” would also be relevant.

Then, there are entries in the Constitution having incidental relevance—e.g.
Concurrent List, entry 9—‘bankruptcy and insolvency”, and others. By and
large, however, it can be stated that the subject-matter of the Interest Act and
of amendments germane thereto, would come within the Concurrent List in part,
and within the residuary entry as regards the rest. It should be pointed out that
the Act is not confined” to money-lending and, therefore, State List, entry 30,
relating to money-lending and money-lenders, and the relief of agricultural in-
debtedness, would not be directly relevant.

3.2, Entries in the State List dealing incidentally with interest are: —
Entry 18——Agricultural loans ;

Entry 30-———-Money-lending and money-lenders. relief of agricultural in-
debtedness’,

‘Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968) page 29, para +.
*Woomatul Fatima v. Meerun Munuissa,(1968) 9 U.R. pp 318, 324, 325.
~ ag T¥abji, Muslim Law( 1968), Page 135, para 113 and Nawasi Begum v. Dilfarez Begum, ALR, 1927, Alle 39.
‘Advocate General v. Yusufally, (1921) 24 Bom. L.R. 1960, 1105, ALR. 1921 Boms., 328.
350० discussion a5 to amount on which interest can be awarded, Chapter 5, infra.
‘See para 3.2, supra,
7868 para 3.1, supra.


The Interest Act, 1839
Entry 43—-—Public debts.
Entries in the Union List? dealing incidentally with interest are -—
Entry 35—-—Public debt of the Union.
Entry 39---~Post Office Savings Bank.

Entry 46---—Bills of Exchange, cheques aud promissory notes,

3.3. It appears that the Act has not heen extended to the areas which com-
prised the former Part B Siates. The Part B States Laws Act is silent about the
Interest Act. Perhaps, at the time when the Part B Stutes Laws Act was enacted,
it was thought that the subject-matier of the Interest Act falls within the legisla-
tive eniry relating to moncy-lending (which is in the State List). This assump-
tion--if any such assumption was made—reguires re-consideration. The subject-
matter of the Act really falls within the residuary entry, as already pointed out’,
The expressions “debt” and “creditor”, used in section 1, are not confined to
money-lending. It must be staled that the text of the operative provision—sec-
tion 1--is not confined to transactions belween money-lenders and borrowers,
whatever other Jimitations may flow from the language of section 1. Broadly
speaking, inlerest can be awarded, under section I, on a debt or sum certain,
if the other conditions of the section ure satisfied, and it is not necessary that
there should be an element of money-lending in the origin of the debt or sum
certain, In fact, legislation dealing with the relief of agricultural indebtedness
or regulating the business of money-lending can impose substantive or proce-
dural restrictions relevant to the charge of interest, by virtue of the specific power
given fo the States in that behalf by the Stale List. A law made in exercise of
that power—i.e., the power relating 10 momey-lending—would normally be reserv-
ed for the assent o” the President, so thal it may not be challenged as repugnant
to Central legislation on a subject in the Concurrent List’ This does not mean
that the subject-matter of the Intzrest Act itself falls within the State List.

Incidentally. we note that in the Tndia Code’, the Interest Act is printed
in Volume 6, Part 6, page 3, under ihe heading of “money-lending”. Presumably,
it was assumed that the Act principally deals with transactions of borrowing
and lending. But, as we have already pointed out’, such an assumption would
not be strictly accurate or well founded.

3.4. In our view, the words used in section | of the Act clearly indicate
that the Act does not purport to deal solely, or even primarily or mainly, with
money-lending as such; ifs sweep is very much wider and if, in some cases, it
conceivably sees to apply to money-lending transactions, properly so-called,
that is only a case of incidental application. Incidentally, most of the money-
Jending transactions which fall within State legislation relating to money-lending
provide for the payment of interest, and it is because of those provisions that
the transactions covered by such Acts are outside the purview of section 1. In
pith and substance. therefore, the Act applics to matters which fall under rcesi-
duary entry in the Unien List, as already stated’.

Our subsequent discussion will show that when judicial decisions had occa-
sion to consider the scope and effect of section 1, most of the transactions in
issue in those decisions were other than those of “money-lending” technically
so-called. पु

3.5. Hence, there should be no constitutional difficulty in the way of re-
commending the extension of the Act to the whole of India’. The advantage of
uniformity that will be gained by such an amendment is obvious. We, there-
fore, recommend that an extent clause should be inserted m the Act for the pur-
pose, as follows :— ‘

“Tt extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.”

13

Part B States.

Interest Act not con-
fined 10 money-lend-
ing.

Recommendation as
to extent clanse in
section 1.

>See also para 3.1, supra.

*Paras. 3.1 and 3.2, supra

“India Code, Vol. 6, part 6, page 3.
4Para 3.1 and 3,2, supra.

sPara. 3.1, supra.

*Para. 3.3, supra

3-1 LD (४0175


14

Misunderstanding as
to Part B States cau-
sed by note in India
Code.

Act not extended by
Central Iegislation
after independence.

Section _1—operative
provision—Analysis.

The Interest Act, 1839

3.6. We may mention that some misunderstanding on the question whether
the Interest Act, 1839, extends to the areas of former Part B States, is caused by
the footnote to the text of the Act as printed in the India Code. That footnote
slates that the Act has been declared to be in force “in ail States” by section 3
of the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874, except as regards certain areas in Scheduled
Districts. In fact, however, the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874 does not make
any such declaration. On the other hand, section 3 of that Act (as printed in
the India Code'), while declaring that the enactmenis mentioned in the Schedule
to that Act--which includes the Interest Act also—extend to the specified areas,
expressly excludes the areas comprised previously in Part B States.

We may cite the section:

Extract of section 3, Law Local, Extent Act, 1874
(India Code, Vol. 2-C, Part 4, page 27)

“3, The Acts mentioned in the first schedule hereto annexed are now in
force” [in the whole of India except’ (the territorics which, immediately
before the Ist November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States) and]
the scheduled Districts.

[The Interest Act, 1839, is mentioned in the First Schedule to the Act]

3.7, The matter could be viewed from a different angle. The Interest Act,
1839, before independence, was not in operation outside British India of its own
force. If it was to be extended to any area outside British India, that could
have been done only by suitable Central legislation, or suitable Provincial or
State legislation enacted after independence. We are not here concerned with
Provincial or State legislation, because that would be only of local application.
But so far as Central legislation is concerned, neither the Part B States Laws
Act nor any other Central Act has expressly extended the Interest Act, 1839,
to any area in a Part B State. Therefore, the position seems to be that the local
extent of the Interest Act remains unaffected by constitutional changes that have
taken place as a résult of independence, so far as areas previously included in
Part B States are concerned. As the Act does not have an extent clause, the
position in this regard has to be ascertained irom a study af the various Central
Acts pertaining to the extension of existing laws to the areas of Part B States,
and as already stated that study yields a negative result.

CHAPTER 4

SECTION 1—POWER OF THE COURT AND SUITS MERELY FOR
INTEREST

4.1. We shall now proceed to deal with the operative provision. The Act
contains only one section, quoted below:

“I, Power of Court to allow interest.—it is, therefore, hereby enacted that,
upon all debts or sums certain payable at a certain time or otherwise, the
Court before which such debts or sums may be recovered may, if it shall
think fit, allow interest to the creditor at a rate not exceeding the current rate
of interest from the time when such debts or sums certain were payable, if
such debts or sums be payable by virtue of some writien instrument at a
certain time , or if payable otherwise, then from the time when demand of
payment shall have been made in writing, so as such demand shall give
notice to the debtor that interest will be claimed from the date of such de-
mand until the time of payment: provided that interest shall be payable in
all cases in which it is now payable by law.”

Mndia Code, Vol. 2-C, Part 4. page 27.
‘Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “throughout all the Provinces of India, except”.
‘Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.


The Interest Act, 1839

The section has become somewhat cumbersome. It deals with several
points~-

(a) Power of the court 10 award interest.

(0) Amounts with reference to which the power can be exercised.

(c) Rate of interest ta be awarded by the Court.

(d) Date of commencement of running of interest.

(९) Savings as 10 existing laws (in the provise).

We shali discuss these points serially and indicate the amendments that we
recommend on ¢ach point.

4.2, In Thawardas y. Linion of India, Sinha J., analysing the conditions for
award of interest, stuted—“the following among other conditions must be fulfil-
Jed before interest can he awarded under the Act.

11) there must be a debt or a sum certain;
(2) it musi be payable at a certain time or otherwise :

(3) these debls or sums must be payable by virtue of some written contract
at a certain time :

(4) there must have been a demand in writing stating that interest will be
demanded from the date of the demand.”

it may be pointed out, however, that conditions (3) and (4) formulated by
Sinha 1. ate alternative to each other, and cannot apply together. There should
either be a wrillen instrument fixing a certain time or a written demand. We
shall have occasion lo consider these aspects in detail later*

4.3. So far as the power of the court to award interest is concerned, it is to
be noted that the power is expressed’ in section 1 as exercisable by “the court
before which such debts or sums may be recovered”. Several questions have
arisen by reasoa of these words. In the first place. are they confined to an ordi-
nary civil suit’? It may be noted that in the corresponding current English Act,‘
there is a provision worded as follows (only the material portion is quoted): —

“(1) In aay proceedings tried in any court of record for the recovery of any
debt or damages, the court may, if it thinks fit, order that there shall be in-
cluded in the sum for which judgment is given interest at such rate as it
thinks fit on the whole or any part of the debt or damages for the whole or
any part of the period between the date when ihe cause of action arose and
the date of the judgment”.

44, It bas been held® that under the corresponding English provision,"-" un-
secured creditors cannot claim interest in winding up proceedings, even though
the company which is being wound up is actually found to have a surplus.

This interpretation would, it seems, apply to section 1 of our Act also. Of
course, on the specific question of interest in winding up. the provision in the
Companics Rules’ may sulBce, Rule 156, Companies (Courts) Rules, 1959, is as
follows : -

“136. ftterest-—-On any debt or sum certain, payable at a certain time or
otherwise, whereon interest is not reserved or agreed for, and which is over-
due at the date of the winding up order, or the resolution as the case may be,

3

Conditions to be ful-
filled.

Power of the court
to award interest.

Position as to wind-
ing up proceedings.

1 hawardas ५. Union of tadie. AVR 1935 5.0. 468, para 30; (1955) 2 S.C.R. 48.
’Chapter 5, infra.

3para 4.1, supra.

Section 3€1). Taw Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934.

SRE Fine Indusivial Conuoiities £td.,(1955) 3 AM B. R. 707, 709 (Vaisey 1.).
$S2ct'on 3111, Lica Reform {Miscellaneous Provisions} Act, 1934,

*Para 4,3, supra.

#Rule 156, Co.npunies (Courts) Rules, 1959.


16 The tnterest Act, 1839

the creditor may prove for interest at a rate “not exceeding four per cent per
annum upto that date from the time when the debt or sum was payable, if
the debt or sum is puyable by virtue of a written instrument at a certain
time, and’ if payable otherwise, then from the time when a demand in writing
has been made, giving notice that interest will be claimed from the date ef
demand until the lime of payment.”

Proceedings other 44A. But, in general, proceedings, other than suits would be outside the
tran suits 10 be co- section, We are of the view that the section should be widened to cover proceed-
ree ings other than suits. The discretion to award interest is as much needed in rela-

tion to other proceedings, as in relation to an ordinary civil suit. We are recom:
mending an amendment of the section for the purpose.

Employees’ State In- 45. As to the expression “court”, in section 1, a wide construction has been
surance Court. placed. Jt has been held’ that the Employees’ State Insurance Court is a “court”

within the meaning of section 1, and as such can award interest on the arreats of
contribution due by an cmployer under the Interest Act, if a demand has been
made in writing claiming interest.

Ambiguity as regards 4.6. Connected with the question of the power of the court is the question

the necessity of a whether il is necessary that there must be a written instrument. The material

wrilten instrument. words of the section arc’—“if such debts or sums be payable by virtue of some
written instrument at a certain time ; or if payable otherwise, then from the time
when demand of payment shall have been made in writing.” (The cest of the
section is not muterial tor the present purpose), The question thal arises for con-
sideration is whether the word “otherwise” is to be read as in contrast with the
words “written instrument”, or whether it constitutes a contrast only to the words
“at a certain time”. Either of the two constructions, may be plausible. It is not
necessary, for the present purpose, to examine the relative merits of the two
constructions. But, as a matter of good legislation, there is no reason why the
fact that there is no written instriment should be material in regard to giving
discretion to the court to allow interest under the section. No doubt, the exist-
ence of a written instrament creating the debt has evidentiary value, and this is
of practical importance, as disputes of fact are thereby minimised. But that
should not come in the way of allowing imterest where there is no written deed,
if the justice of the case requires the award of interest. The origin of the debt
in a writlen instrument, coupled with payability at a certain time, can legitimately
be regarded as justifying a difference in treatment in relation to the starting point
of running of interest ; but it need not be regarded as destroying the very basis
of the admissibility of intercst.

We are, therefore, recommending an amendment af the section for the pur-
Pose, so as to make it clear that section covers the case discussed above.

Suit merely for in- 4.1, Secondly, there appears to have been some controversy on the question

rest. whether a suit for the mere recoyery of interest can be filed. The Calcutta High
Court answered this question in the negative,’ on the ground that the Act merely
gives u discretion to the court, and there is no “right? in the creditor. The
Lahore High Court, however, took a different view,’ on the point. According to
the Lahore view, there is nothing in law which debars a creditor from suing for
the recovery of interest alone, if he has complied with the formalities required by
the Interest Act, and if his case is otherwise governed by the said Act.

The Nagpur decisions'.* on the subject are conflicting, The matter, there-
fore, requires examination. We shall examine the case Jaw in detai), in dne course?
We may first examine the language of the section,

*Ried Co-operative Timber Works Lid, v. E.S.2. Corporation, 1:(1970)2 M.L-J.40: ALR. 1970 Mad. 439,
*Para. 4.1, supra.
*Marshall v. Bengal Spinning ete. Co. 897) 1 Cal. WN. 219.

‘Dhandari Bros. v. Municipal Committee, A.1.R. 1931 Lah. 457 462, disscuting from Adarshall v. Bengal Spinning
ete, Co., (1897) 1 Cal. WN. 219.

“Municipal Committee Vv. 5.8. थे. P. Factory, ALR. 1938 Nag. 119, 122 (Niyogil.) (not considered in the 1944 case
law).

“Western india Life Ins. Ca.,v. Sittabai, ALR. 1944 Nag. 122,123, (Bobde J.).
Para. 4,9. infra.



The Interest Act, 1839

4.8. The opening words of section | indicate that it covers cases relating to
“all debts or sums <erlain payable at a certain time or otherwise”, and jt confers
jurisdiction on the Court to allow interest Lo the credifor at a rate not exceeding
the current rale of interest from the time when such debts or sums certain were
payable. Such debts or sums may be payable by virtue of some written instrument
ata certain time, or may be payable otherwise, There is no express limitation that
the principal must be outstanding. In the latter case, the Court is empowered to
award interest from the Gime when a demand for payment shall have been made
in wrilling so that such demand shall give notice 10 the debtor that interest shall
be claimed from the dute of such demand until the time of payment. The proviso
to the section prescribes that interest shal! be payable in all cuses in which it is
now payable by law.

Leaving out of consideration cases falling under the proviso, we may note
that the jurisdiction of the Court 10 uward interest at any rate as specified, in the
section arises when the Court is one “belore which a suit for recovery of a debe
OF sum certaim may be recovered”, These words are ambiguous, as would appear
from reported cases.*

4.9, We shall naw examine judicial decisions as [0 the interpretation of section
1, on the question whether ४ suit merely for interest is competent. We may begin
with the Lahore case* The ntiffs in that cuse had supplied coal to the Munici-
pal Committee. Amriisur, in i large quantity. Their bills were kept unpaid for a
Jong time, and, therefore, the plainiifls gave several uctices to the Municipal Com-
mittee that interest would be charged on une unpaid bills. Subsequently, the bills
were paid by the Commiltee. :vithout interest, und 50 the plaintiffs instituted a suit
for interest alone. The objection was raiscd thar a suit merejy for interest could
not be instituted. Overtrulin, this objection, cre High Court held that the Interest
Act did not prohibit a suit for merest alone if the principal had heen paid by the
debtor before the institution of the suit, It said that as the plaintiffs had themselves
paid interest to their bankers at 9% per annum an the sums borrowed by them
for carrying on their coul busiiess, it was reasonable to allow that amount, The
claim for interest in this case was for Rs, 25,000 and odd. The following extract
from the judgment of Jai Lal, J. is instructiv

“I was unable to construe the Act so as to prohibit a suit for interest alone
if the ptincipul has been paid by the deblor before its institution.”

Counse! in that case relizd upon the words in the Act—“the Court before which
such debts or sums certtin may be recovered” in this connection, and argued that
these words implied that a suit for such debis or sums certain should also have
been instituted along with interest as if “may be recovered” means “is sought to
be recovered”.

Dealing with this argument, Jai Lal J. said:

“They... जाला specify the Court which bas jurisdiction to entertain
a suit for interest, 1041 is 10 say, it provides that the Court in which a suit
for the recovery of interest ean he instituted is the Court which has jurisdiction
to entertain a suit for recovery of such debt or sums certain. If the contention
cof the learned counsel be cotrect, them it may lead sometimes to absurdities.
Supposing a principal sum of Rs, 100 is due to a creditor and a notice is given
by him to the debtor that interest would be claimed by him from the date of
the notice, and thereafter the debtor pays, say, Rs. 90/- by nine monthly in-
stalments of Rs, 10 each on acount of cipal which instalments are accepted
by the creditor as such but without waiving his right to interest or expressly
reserving such a right, and subsequently he institutes a suit for the recovery of
Rs, 10 “und interest which has accrued due on the several balances of the
principal, it is possible to argue with any reason that only interest on the re-
maining principal amount of Rs. 10 can be claimed and not on the whole of
the principal, or the respective balances thereof? There is, in my opinion,
no justification for such a contention. हा

"para, 4.9, infra.

7

Section 1—opening
words.

Judicial decisions aa
to suit for interest,

°Bhandari Brothers v. Municipal Committee, Aswitsar, A.1.R. 1934 Lahore 457,462 (Jai Laland Abdul Qadir

3.)


is पु The Interest Act, 1839

Aspect of pquity. 4.10, This case approaches the matter from the point of view of general rules
of law. A Nagpur case may’ be taken as illustrating the aspzet of equity.
The suit was solely for interest by a widaw in respect of an insurance policy,
11८ interest was ciaimed at the rale of 6% per annum, for 7 months from Novem-
ber, 1940 ie 25th June. 1941. The Insurance Company had, afler a long delay,
paid the principal amount due on the death of the plaintiil’s husband, and the
amoutil was sent by cheque on 18 June, (941 which the plaintiff accepted. The
Court of Small Causes had awarded interest against the Insurance Company, on
the ground that there was unjustifiable remiseness,

Ht is nei clear from ihe report when the pluintiif made the demand for interest.
The cuse. hewever, wes decided wilh reference to the Interest Acl, and one of
the objections of the Josural Company was that a suit for mere interest could
not lie, The High Court rejected this contention, No authority had been cited
in support of the contention. It appears that the Calcuttu cuse was not cited?
‘The High Court was in agreement with the Lahore view" on the subject. The
High Court also held that atticle 63 of the Limitation Act' suggested that a suit
for mere inlérest is perlectly possible. [t also saw no objection ia principle to the
Maialiinability af a sui mere interest.

The counsei fur the defendants sought to tely on section 62 of the Contract
Act.’ But che High Court pointed out, first, ihat, there was no necessary data,
(for applying section 63), and secnodly, thar since the interest claimed in this case
was not by virtue cf any promise the perlurmance whereof could be “dispensed
with or remitted”, section 63 could have no relevance.

4.01. In one of the Nagpur cases* which took a restrictive view, the Municipal
Committee of Akola demanved the payment af cerisin cx, but the liability 10 pay
the tax was dispuled by the defendants. We are not concerned with the history
of the litigation dispuling the liability, bot i may be nected that in May, 1929, the
Municipal Commitice demanded payment of the tax by a colice in which it also
included a demand for iste at the rate 01 124 nt per unnum on the arrears
of the tax. In November anc December, 1929, it rece the arrears of tax with-
oui jalerust, alter the litigation had become unsuccessful. Then it served on the
defendants a fresh notice of demand for interest. Sinez the defendant failed to
pay the interest, Lac Mun‘cipal Committe applied to the Magistrate for recoyer-
ing the amount under the Municipal Act.

‘The Magisirale issued the necessary warrant. but. on appeal, the Deputy Com-
missioner held that the notice of demand for interest only was illegal, and the
eventual warrant was also illegal. The Municipul Committee then filed the pre-
sent suit in which, so far as is relevant, one of the questions was whether the plain-
uff could recover interest on a tax which was not paid on the duc date but was
paid later. The claim for interest was negatived by the High Court on the fol-
lowing ground

“Even on the assumption that the Civil Court has jurisdiction notwithstand-
ing section 77, Municipalities Act, 1 am unable to sce how the Committec’s
claim for recovering mere interest after the principal amount had been re-
covered is tenuble, In the circumstances of this case, the Civil Court may
have the power to award interest either under the Interest Act, 1839 (32 of
1839) or section 73, Contract Act. The lalter provision cannot apply because
the right is not founded जा any contract and there has been no breach of
jt. Under the Interest Act, the Court has a discretion to award interest when
a claim is made for recovering any debt or any sum certain payable at a
stipulated time but the Municipal Commitee has already recovers its debt,
assuming that the taxes could be regarded as a debl, after they fel! due, The
Interest Act gives power to the Civil Court bul does not create wily right in
favour of a creditor and it could not therefore be the subject matt.r of a suit.”

20 Bat, A-LR. 1944 Nagpur 122 (8006० J.)

1 Westerns India Life Insurance Cumpay v.
‘Marhsall's case, Para 4.7, अधि"
*Bhandari-Brothers v. Muni. Cont. Aovitsar, AJR. 1931 Lahore 42.
+Article 63, Limitation Act, (963, is referred to ater.

भर \egection 63, Contract Act, 1963, Tsdiscusses! in detail later. रत ;
‘Akola Municipal Committce vis. S.C, and Pressing Factor), ASR. 1938 Nagpur 179, “Noyogi J.)


The Interest Act, 1839

Thus, in the Nagpur High Coutt. there is a conflict of decisions.’ ane judgment
taking a wide view apd another judament taking a restrictive view.

442, In the Calewia case? a Jearned Judge in Chambers said:

“Now it is to be observed, in the first place, that the Aet (32 of 1879), upart
which reliance is placed on the part of the plaintiffs. is only an enabling Act by
which the Court is vested with a discretion lo grant interest under certain cite
cumstances, upon debis or sums certain. payable at a certain time. There is
nothing in the Act wl creates a right 10 interest in favour ef creditors
which of ilsclf could be made Lhe subject malter of a suit and this observa-
tion is, | think sufficient to dispose of the claim as regards the interest in
respect of the instalmeut which was paid before suit.”

This observation was commenied upon by Jai Lal J. in the Lahore case? to
which we have already referred:

“With grcat ri ci dam ble to agree with the reasoni
remark. It is no “doubt true thut the question of awarding interest and of the
fixing of the rate is Icft to ihe discretion of the Court, but that is no reason for
holding that the creditar fhe ७8 of action to sue for interest. There are
several instances in wtieh ti of retie€ and its extent have been left by the
legislature [0 the ciseretion of th: Court, but it would not be correc: ta hold
in such cases that the pintff is not merely on that account entitled to sue
for that relief, The reporied case. it may be mentioned. was for of
interest due on certain debentares ang thts wes an addifiona! ground given by
the learned Judye for dismissing ube suil,”

nz wuMlerfying this

4.13. One of the provisions io be considered in this contest is section 63 of
the Indian Contract Act, which was referred to in the Nagpur cas: it may be
debatable whether the relationship of promisor-promsisee (to which alone szclion 63
is applicable) can be said to exist in. every case umder the Interest Aci. Howes
we may consider the maiter, since it was referred to in the Nagpur case.
63 deals with remission by ihe premisee, The section provides as follows

“63. Every promisee may di with or remit, wholly in part, the per-
formance of the promises made ta him, o: may accept instead of it any satis-
faction which he thinks fit’*

4.44, It should 0३ neted that this section does not provide that acceptance of
a part of the debt ia itie/f amounts to satisfaction of the whole debt. It leaves it
to the promtisce to remit in part the performance of the promise. There must be
an acceptance fm satisfaction of the whole dehi. This is made clear by iliustra-
tions (b} and (ए) to the section, quoted belaw:
Clustrations ta section 63, Cantract Act)

“(b) A owed B Rs. S000. A pays to B, and B accepts, in satisfaction of the
® whele debt, Rs. 2000 paid at the time and place at which the Rs. 5000
were payable. The whole debt is discharged.

(९0) A owes B Rs. £400. C pays to B Rs, 1.000 and B accepts it in sarisfac-
tion of his ch on A. This payment is a discharge of tae whvle claim.”

4-15. Section 41 of ihe Indian Contract Act deals with acceptance of perfor-
mance fram a third person, ber that section is net of any special impnrtance
for the present purpose, ai least in India. What is to be emphasised is that section
63 of the Contract Ac! 465 only iF the promises remits performance of the pro
mise in part. or acccrHs, ad of the promise, any satisfaction which he thinks
fit. Hence, the choice is that of the promises.

Section 63, Contract
Act.

tpara 4.16 and 4.14, supra.
> sMgrshall v. Tae alt Sp

in ATR. 19M Lah 4
"See, Lahore case, supra, Para 4.9.
‘Western India Life Ins. Ca. ,¥.Seeta Bai. sapre.

‘Illustrations not quoted.

ving and Weaving Company, (1897) 1 C.W.M. 279 Cas quoted in the Lahore. case)



Limitation Act.

Recommendation.

Interest why granted,

"\Digambar v. Harendra. (1910) 14 Cal. W.N. 617 (Mookerjee and ET छवि GWA LT (Mookeriecand Teamon)OSOOSOSC~CS~S Do)

The Interest Act, 1839

4.16. in Digambar's case, Mookerjee and Teunon, JJ. held that though a
tender of a smaller amount than the amount of the entire claim may be invalid as
a tender, there was nothing to prevent the creditor from accepting the amount
tendercd in part payment, and his doing so will not preclude him from after-
wards claiming the residue of his accoutl,—ualways provided that the debtor did
not make it a condition of his tender that it be accepted in discharge of the whole.
This view was re-iterated by Mookerjee and Rankin JJ. in the case of Beharilal
y. Nasimuiness Bibi?

The real emphasis in section 63, Indian Contract Act, is, therefore, not on
the mere acceptance of a smafler sum of money when a larger sum is due, but
on the agceptance of the smaller sum jn discharge of the entire debt. When a
creditor dozs once so accept the money. he is eslopped from claiming more, This
section, however, is relevant only when the relation is of promisor and promisee.

4.17. Tt may be noted that article 63 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908,
read thus.”
Col. (15 ee .
Col. (2) For movey pryable for inlerest apon money duc from the defen-
dant to the plaintiff.
Col. (3) three years.
Col. (4) when the in:erest becomes due.”

This article shows that such a suit is not ruled out.

4.18. In this view of the law, as it emerges under the present section, the
question which falis for our consideration is whether we should recommend that
the section should be suitably amended to enable the creditor to sue for the
recovery of interest alone in cases where the debt or sum certain payable to him
by the debtor bas been repaid, ac whether the law should be amended in the
opposite direction.

We have carefully considered the pros and cons of this problem, and we
are satisfied that the initial bar against the competence of a claim by the cre-
ditor to recover only the interest—-a bar which would arise under the narrower
interpretation—is not justified on any ground of justice, equity or good con-
science,

We do not think it necessary to consider the question whether, on the text
of the section. the Calcutta view (the narrower one) is correct, or the Lahore one
(the wider one) is correct. On principle, however, we are of the opinion that a
suit merely for interest, where the principal has been paid, should be permissible.
Jf the narrower construction is allowed to prevail, the person liable would pay
up the principal just before the suit, and thus defeat the section. Thar would
be unjust, We, therefore, recommend adoption of the wider view and an am-
endment of the section for the purpose.

4.19, Tt may be stated that interest is usually granted as a compensation
for the unjust delay in payment. It is difficult to understand why a person who
unreasonably delays payment of an amount due should be exempted from the
liability to pay interest merely because the amount has been paid before ihe
suit is filed. In such a case, there is no cquitable consideration, Rather, the
equities are all against him, by reason of his unreasonable delay and wsjust de-
tention of the debt. and by reason of the profit which he would ordinarily have
made by investing the amount.

4.26. If the law is to be amended on the lines of the Calcutta view,‘ then it
would follow that if the debt payable by the debtor has been already paid by
him to the creditor, an action by the creditor against the debtor to recover only
the interest, which may be due to him in either of the two caiogories of eases
specified in the latter part of the section, would not be cempetent, The bat
against the competence of such a claim would, apparently, operate even if the
creditor might have accepted the debt subject to his right te reeover the amount
of interest dus by a suit. This position is, in our view unseund.

*BehariLal v. Nasimannessa Bibi, ALR. 1923 Cal. 527.
"See now the Limitation Act, 1963.
*para 4.18 and 4.19 supra.


The Interest Act, 1839

4.21. Let us ussume that the creditor gives notice to the debtor that if the
debt duc to tim is not pufd by a specitied date, then, he would claim interest on
the debt from the specilied date. If, in such a case, afler the issue of the notice
and after expiry of the date. the dehtor repays the debt due-from him, but fails
to pay intcrest on it which has become due, it scems unreasonable to prevent
the creditor from making a claim for the recovery of such interest except where
it is shown that he waives interest. The Court may. no doubt, exercise its dis-
cretion as to whether interest should be awarded, and if so. at what rate. But,
subject to this provision, a claim for interest alone should not be totally barred
from the very beginning. We would, accordingly, recommend an appropriate
amendment’ in section 1,

We have incidentally considered the question if our recommendations? to
allow a suit for mere interest necessitates any amendment in the Limitation Act.
In this connection, it may be pointed out that either article 25, Limitation Act,
1963 (old article 63), or the residuary article in the Act, would govern such a
suit. An amendment of the Limitation Act does not, therefore, appear 10 be
necessary. हि

4,22, This concludes consideration of the question of claims for interest. We
now come to other points concerning section 1. While revising section 1, it
should be made clear that—.

(a) nothing in this section shall apply in relation to any debt upon which
interest is payable as of right by virtue of any agreement, and

(b) nothing in this section shall affect the compensation recoverable for the
dishonour of a bill of exchange, promissory note or cheque.

The reason for such a savings clause is cbvious, In the first case, the agrec-
ment must prevail.* In the second case, the special provision of the Negotiable
Instruments Act regarding compensation for dishonour prevails.*

4.23. If there is an express contract nor to pay interest (i.e., prohibiting
interest), interest cannot be allowed under section 1.

423A. We are of the view that an express provision is needed to the effect
that the Act should not apply to—

(a) cases where the right to interest is separately conferred by law or con-
tract, or
(b) interest on dishonour of a bill of exchange, promissory note or cheque.

We are also of the view that the Act should not apply where interest is pro-
hibited by an express agreement.

CuapTer 5

AMOUNT ON WHICH INTEREST CAN BE AWARDED

5.1. As regatds the amount with respect to which the power of the Court
to award interest under section | can be exercised, it is to be noted, that it must
be “a debt or sum certain”’ This phraseology definitely excludes damages, and,
therefore, the question to be considered is whether damages should be included

in the section.

21

Savings recommended
for two cases—{a) in-
terest payable as of
right by agreement
or otherwise ; (b) bill
of exchange.

Section 1 and con-
trary Agreement,

Right to Interest con-
ferred by law or con»
tract and interest on
dis-honour of bill of
exchange etc.

Interest prohibited
by express agree-
meat.

Amount on which in-
terest awarded.

1, The re-draftof thescctionis given later.
3, Para 4.18, supra.
4. Astoprovisions of otherlaw,sce discussion relating tos. 1, proviso.
4, ए. 8. sec the Neogotiable Instruments Act, 1882, sections 30,31,79,80 and 117.
* As to “sum certain” sea para 5.5, iafia.
4-1LD(ND}75


22

English Act of 1934.

Meaning of “debt”
in section 1.

Meaning of “debi” in
common law.

The Interest Act, 1839

__ 5.2. It may be noted in this connection, that in England, the law on this
point? was amended in 1934. The current statutory provision in England is
quoted again’ below, for ready reference :—

“3. Power of courts of record to award interest on debts and damages—()
In any proceedings tried in any court of record for the recovery of any
debt cr damages, the court may, if it thinks fit, order that there shall be
included in the sum for which judgment is given interest at such rate as it
thinks fit on the whole or any part of the debt or dama@ses for the whole
or any part of the period between the date, when the cause of action arose and
the dute of the judgment:

Provided that nothing in this section—
(a) shall authorise the giving of interest upon interest. or
tb

shall apply in relation to any debt upon which interest is payable as of
right whether by virtue of any agreement or otherwise; or

(c) shali affect the damages recoverable for the dishonour of a bill of ex-
change.”

This sub-section replaces the provisions in sections 28-29 of the Civil Pro-
cedure Act, 1833, In some respects, the repealed provisions were, perhaps, wider
than those enacted’ in this sub-section, but, in relation to actions in tort, the re-
pealed provisions were certainly narrower, being limited to authorising interest
by way of damages for trover or trespass. The new provision permits the award
of interest on any award of damages for any tort. subject only to the discretion
of the court.

We think that the English provision,* allowing interest on damages, is sound
in principle, and should be incorporated in our law, to the extent indicated be-
low—

(a) In so far as this section of the English Act relates to interest on debt
or damages for the period Sefore the filing of the suit, the necessary
reform, for allowing interest on debts not falling, at present, within sec-
tion 1, that is. on damages. should be made by adding a provision in
the Act,

(b) In su far as the period after the filing of the suit is concerned, the matter
pertains to section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. That section®
appears to be comprehensive enough to allow the award of interest on
damages, for the period after the institution of the suit.

5.3, Apart from this specific question of damages, certain other points may
be considered as to the denotation of the expression “debt”. The meaning of
the expression “debt” in a statute often depends on the context. Even in the
same statute—e.g., the Bankruptcy Act,—what may be a ‘debt’ for one purpose
in bankruptcy may not necessarily be so for another purpose.*

5.4. The ancient common law meaning of “debt” was limited to causes of
action which were enforceable in an action of “debt”, such as those arising on
bonds, notes, and other express promises to pay’ quantum meruit and quantum
yalebat. Undoubtedly, ‘the Interest Act is intended to include such causes of

Ty Section 3(1), Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934.

3, See also para 4.3, supra.
3, Re Fine Industrial Commodities, Led., (1955) 3 All BR. 707, 709; (1956) Ch. 256, 261 (per Waisey, J.)

3, Carr ४. Boxalt, (1960) 1 AI E.R. 495.
5, Section3,Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934 (24 and25 Geo. 5, Ch. 41).
3, Bhagwant v. Gangabisan, ALR. 1940 Bom. 369.
7. As to interest on damages in general, scc—
(a) Dominion of India v. AER. Ltd., AJR. 1952 Nag-32;
(0) Atjunsa v. Mohanlal, A.LR. 1937 Nag. 345.
3, See note, “Meaningof ‘Debt’ in Bankruptcy’, (1949) 208 L.T. Journal 302.
*, Raborg v. Peyton, 2 Wheat, 385, 4 L.Ed., 268,


The Interest Act, 1839 B

action. But it is nor confined 10 such causes of action, i.e., to demands enforee-
able in actions of “debt”, Lord Coke,' referring to the statute of Merlon®, said’,
*Debitum signitieth not only debt, for which ua action of debt doth lie, but there
in this ancient Act of Parliament, it signifielh generally any duty to be yieided
or pai *

5.5. At common iaw/ if 2 creditor wished 10 invoke the cocrcive power of Action of "debt",
the static 10 recover goods wrongiuily detained, he had ta proceed through the
action of debt ar detinue’ The remedy to recover money secured by deed was
the action af “debr™. IL retained ils essential form and character through the
whole history of common faw procedure, so Jong as the forms of action were
preserved at all,

An action of debt might also be brought", without proof by deed, for such
things as money lent, or the price of goods sala and delivered, and au action of
detinue (which was but a species of debt) or chattels bailed, the cause of action
being still not any promise by the defenctant, but his possession of the plaintif’s
money {so it was Conceived) or goods.

Detinug proper ley only for specific chattels: a claim for delivery of goods
not yet identified was “debt in the detiner™.

5.6, But the writ for debt was a writ of tight for chattels, ~an action not (0
enforce a promise, but to get something conceived as already belonging to the
ploiniff; i: was called an action of property 25 late as the Restoration. A pro-
mise, where it was operative ai all, operared not by way of obligation bur as a
graat of the sum expressed.’ In Edgoomb v. Dee? it was painted out that con-
tracts of debt in this sense ure “reciprocal granis.”

3.7. Later, an action cf debt, could be on any consideration executed pro-
vided the sum be Siquidated, On a contract for the sale of either goods or land
also. an action may be maintained for fhe price before the goods ace delivered
oF seisin given of the land.

Nevertheless, the position remained that on informal executory agreements
there was, in general, no cemedy in the King’s Courts”

5.8, In this connection, the history of contract is of interest. It has been ob- History of contract.
served” that the development of contract can be divided into three stages. whic,
correspond ty the history of economic and legal institutions ef exchange. In
the first siage, all exchaoge is instantaneous. and therefore, “invatves nathing
corresponding 10 ‘sontrac?’ in the Anglo-American sense of the term. Bach patty
becomes the owner of a new thing. and his rights (४४, not on a promise, but on

property”.

In a second stage, “exchange first assumes a contractual aspect when jt is
left hulf-completed, se thet only an obligation on one side remains”. The “third
and fina siage in the development occurs when the executory exchange becomes
enforceuble”, _
7S atinter ९. RoBevesor, (9ZI7ULS. 243, 248: कर. Ba. 265, 271. oe

3, Statute of Merion 14 39. 12351.

2 Cake, Inseiiutes. Vol. 2. page 39, cited in MiNer v. Rabertun, (1924) 69 L.Ed. 265. 271.

3, Sec{a)T. Plucknett, A Concise History of the Cominon Law, (1956) 367-369,

19) Holdsworth, History of English Law, Yol.3, pages 244-285.
3, Plucknett, & Concise History of Common Law (1956), pages 382 and 463.
3. pollock & Maidand, Bist. Eng. Law Vor. 2, page 270-
7. 6 Harv. Law Rev. 399.
3, Edgcomh y. Dee (1070) Vaughat page tO,
¥, dgaes, “Patol Contracts prior 0७ Assumussit,” 8 Harv. Law Rev. 252, raprinted i Evsays in Anglo-American Legal

ilistory, Vol. 3, page 304.
3०, Marton Horwitz, “History of Conteact”(March (974) 87 Hacvard Lan Review, pages 917,919.

x, See oe. (a) L. Fuller & M. Eisenberg, BasieContract Law,(1972) pages 121-22;
(5) F. Kessler & G. Gilmore, Contracts (19707, pages 27-28,
+, Fuller & M. Eisenberg, Basic Contract Law, (1973), pages 121-122.



Debis payable in
kind.

Meaning of ‘instru-
merit’,

Meaning of ‘sum
certain’,

Recommendation.

Interest on damages
for death or personal
injury.

Interest on _ interest
to be prohibited.

Scope of Chapter,

The Interest Act, 1839

The evolution and expansion of the writ of “debt”, as outlined above, broad-
ly proceeds on the same lines,

5.9, Reverting to the Act, we may state that there appears to be some
controversy on the question whether a debt payable i Aind is a ‘debt’ under the
Act. The Bombay High Court takes a narrower view on the subject,’ while the
Madras view is wider* On principle, there does not appear to be any reason why
debls payable in kind should be excluded. We, therefore, recommend a clarifica-
tion for he above purpose, adopting the Madras view.

5.40. The word “instrument”, in section 1 of the Act covers a decree, ac-
cording to judicial construction.” On this point no change is necessary,

5.1, As to the expression ‘sum certain’ used in the main paragraph of 382०
lion 1, there seems to be considerable uncertainty about its exact scope. English
cases on the corresponding statute of 1833 (now repealed) lay down that it is
immaterial how the sum becomes certuin, the sum being vertain when ascertained
under the written instrument.! However, this expression docs not seem to cover
8 case where the sum is liable to subsequent adjustment; it must bs a certain sum
which is due absolutely and in all events from one party to the other, though it
may not come strictly within the expression ‘debt’>

We are of the view that these words are ynnecessary, All that is covered by
the expression “sum certain” woukd be covered by “debt™ as it is understood at
the present day. Moreover, since we are recommending the addition of a provi-
sion for interest on damages, these words would create confusion. As the same
time, “debt does not include an unascertained sum, and that could be brought

out.

5.12. Having considered the meaning which the cxpression “debt” should
bear in the Act, we are of ihe view that it would be useful 10 provide that a
“debt” means a liability for an ascertained sum of money and the words “sum
certain” should be omitted. We recommend accordingly.

5.13. The award of interest on an amount js discretionary under the present
seclion. In general, we do not propose to disturb this scheme, even after the ad-
dition of damages. However, where damages are awarded for death or personil
injury, interes; should be awarded under section I, uniess there are special reasons
to the contrary. Such a provision has been made recently in Eng jand.# and we
recommend that it should find a place in our Act also, being a salutary one.

§.14. There should be no interest on inicrest. It may be so expressly pro-
vided and we recommend accordingly.

CuapTer 6

RATE OF INTEREST AND DATE OF COMMENCEMENT

6.1, Jn this Chapter we deal with the rate of interest,’ and the date of com-
mencement of the running of interest’

1, Narayan v. Nagappa, (1910) 12 Bom. Law Reporter 831...
3, Govindan Nair ¥. Cheral, (1913) LL.R. 38 Mad. 464,
3, Savitribat v. Radhakishan, AJR. 1938 Nag. 49 (Decree creating charge for maintenance),

4, (a) Coake ४. Ross, 44 LJ. C.P. 315;
(b} Hill v, South Stafforekire Raitway, LR. 18 Eq. 154.
(©) Ward ४. Eyre, 49 LJ. Ch, 659 (Jessel, M.R.)
१, London, Chatham & Dover Railway v. South Eastern Ruitway, (1893) AC. 429 (LL)
8, Section 3(1A),Law Reform etc. Act, 1934, as inserted by section 22, Administcation of Justice Act, 1969 (०. 58)-
१. Para 6.2. and 6.3., infra. -
*, Para 6.4. infra.


The Iaterest Act, 1839

6.2, As regards the rate of interest, there ate, theoreticully speaking, several
alternatives possible. The rate could be fixed in the statute. Or, the maximum
rate could be fixed by statute, but, within the maximum, a discretion could be
given lo the court. Or, the rate could be described in terms of the current rate,
We may note that under section 1, the rate of interest is, in effect, in the discre-
tion of the court, subject to its not exceeding the current rate. We are of the view
that the rate should be left to the discretion of the Court, so that it can deal
with each case in the light of its circumstances, and do substantial justice, In view
of what is swttd above, we do not recommend any change in this regard.

हि 6.3. We may now refer to another point which is relevant to the rate of
interest. In England, the following provision® has recently been added in section
3 of the Act of 1934 :--

“(1B) Any order under this section’ may provide for interest (0० be calculat-
ed at different rates in respect of different parts of the period for which interest
is given, whether that period is the whole or part of the period mentioned
in sub-section (1) of this section.”

We have considered the need for making a similar provision, but have come
to the conclusion that it is not necessary. Such a discretion may be said to be
implicit in’ the formula employed in section ], and an express provision is not
needed,

6.4. As regards the date of commencement of the running of interest, the
present law, in substunce, is thal interest is to commence from the time when
the debt or sum certain is payable by virtue of a writien instrument; or, if the
debt cr sum certain is “otherwise” payable, then from the lime mentioned in a
written demand. The word “otherwise” has come up for judicial construction.
It has been held* that where the principal sum is not payable at a certain time,
interest on such sum is payable from the date of the written demund, referred to

in the section.

6.5. This part of the section requires some examination. Under the present
section, the position, as we have already stated’, is this—
(a) Io the case of a debt or sum certain payable at a certain time by virtue
of a written instrument, the interest can run from the date on which the
debt or sum certain is payable.

{b) In other cases, interest can run from the date mentioned in the notice
of demand of interest.

The first case creates no problems. The second case requires some discussion.

We may note that in the English Act, the date of cause of action is adopted
as the possible date for the running of interest in al! cases.

66. We have examined all aspects of the matter, and, in particular, the
question whether the cause of action should be substituted, as in England, as the
starting point’, After careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion that
except in the case of a debt payable by virtue of a written instrument at a certain
time, it is the notice of written demand of interest which should be crucial, as at
present. Where a definite dute is not fixed in writing’ for the payment of 4 sum,
justice requires that a person who has failed to perform a monetary obligation
(whether in debt or in damages) should, in cases falling under section 1, main
paragraph, be given notice, by the creditor or person entitled to damages, of the
intention to claim interest, so that the person liable may stop the negotiations

25

Rate of interest.

Provision in English

‘Act (as amended in
1969) 88 to ordering
different. rate of ine
terest.

Date of commence-
ment of running of
interest.

Starting point of in-
terest.

Notice of demand
preferred as the cri-
terion for fixing start-
ing point.

3, Existing section 1

4, Section 22, Administration of Justice (C. 58).

3, For the Act of 1934, seepata $.2., sepra.

4. See also discussion as to the amount on which interest can be awarded.

4, Province of West Bengal v. Basant Propertizs, ALR. 1966 Cal. 36.
"Para 6.5., supra.

१. Section 3, Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1964,

3, Para 6.4., supra.

०, The requirement of writing merely aids to the certainty of the date of payment.


Recommendation to
amend section 1—
main paragraph.

Section 1, proviso,

Equitable considera-
tion.

Scope and object of
the proviso.

Object of the pro-
viso.

The Interest Act, 1839

which he might have undertaken or examination of the facts of the case or legal
consultation, and pay the principal amount, if he so chooses. The notice of de-
mand serves wo purposes, namely,

(a) re-asserting the claim for the principal, and
(0) notifying the desire of the claimant for interest.

Moreover, there is a practical advantage in giving a notice of demand. It
avoids disputes as to the date of breach of contract or dute of commission of tort,
where the claim for the principal amount is relatable to breach of contract or
lort. The notice seeks to identify a particular point of time, for these events.
cases where the cause of action is based on any omission or failure rather than
on a positive act, this aspect becomes of particular importance, because it is often
difficult to locate the point of time of the omission or failure, There is, thus, ob-
vious convenience in having a definite date.

6.7. What we have said above agrees, in substance, with the section as it
now stands and, therefore, in the main paragraph of section 1, the commencement
of the running of interest will be from the date mentioned in the demand, except
where the sum is payable by wrilten instrument at a certain time.

(CHAPTER 7
SECTION 1, PROVISO--INTEREST NOW PAYABLE BY LAW

7,1, So far, we have considered the text and case Jaw relating to the mait
paragraph of section 1 of the Act. We now proceed to deal with cases which, at
present, fall outside the main paragraph. For this purpose. the proviso to section
1 is material, It reads thus:

“Provided that interest shall be payable in all cases in which it is now pay-
able by law.”

This cryptic provision, which mercly refers to cases where interest is “now
payable by law”, cannot be applied unless one conducts independent research to
find out in what cases interest is “now payable by law". It would, therefore, be
desirable to include expressly in the section at least the imporiant cases in which
interest is “now payable by law”. Experience shows that when this question
arises, considerable legal research has to be underlaken, resulting in expense and
waste of time. Many of the reported decisions relating to the Proviso have gons
up to the Supreme Court, and, having regard 10 the fact that the number of such
decisions is not inconsiderable, an attempt to codify the propositions laid down,—
at least in some of the important decisions—would be worthwhile.

7.2. Broadly speaking, courts have, in cases decided in reliance on the pro-
viso to section 1, awarded interest where the equity of the case so cequired. For
example, where immovable property is purchased or acquired, and the price or
compensation (as the case may be) has not yet been paid, there is readiness to
award interest. Same is the position where there is a fiduciary relationship.

7.3, The Supreme Court has observed', with reference to the words “interest
shall be payable in all cases in which it is now payable by law”, occurring in the
proviso to section 1, that the proviso applies to cases in which the courts ef Equity
exercised jurisdiction to allow interest.

Explaining the object of the proviso, the Privy Council has said* that it ap-
plies to cases in which the Court of equity exercises jurisdiction to allow interest.

3, Mahabir Prasad v. Durga Dull. (961) 3 8.C.R. 639; ALR. 1961 8.0. 990,
*,B.N. Raly Co. v. Pittanji Raruji, ALR. 1938 B.C. 65, 67, 79.


The Interest Act, 1839

1A. The proviso is, thus, of considerable juristic interest. There is a very

clear statement of the principle by Sir Robert Phillimore. in The Northumbria.
Distinguishing the authorities cited in support of the proposition that the right
to award damages depended solely on the Civil Procedure Act, 1833, sections 28
and 29, and that the Admiralty practice was efroneous as being at variance with

the

common law both before and since the passing of the statute, Sir Robert

Phillimore said :---

“But it appears to me quite a sufficient answer to these authorities to say,
that the Admiralty, ix the exercise of an equitable jurisdiction? has proceeded
upon another and a different principle from that on which the common law
authorities appear lo be founded. The principle adopted by the Admiralty
Court has been that of the civil law, that interest was always due to the ob-
ligee when payment was not made, ex more of the abligor; and that, whe-
ther the obligation arose ex confracte ता ex delicto,’

75. A similar approach is (illustrated by a Nagpur case.’ where it was

stated:

can

“We are of opinion that we are exercising equitable powers in maintenance
eases where a charge has been created by a decree.”

7.6. The important cases in which interest is payable by the rules of equity
be thus enumerated’ :

(1) Money obtained by fraud or retained by fraud can be recovered with
interest.

(2) Interest may also be recovered in equity in some cases where a particular
relationship exists between the creditor and the debtor, such as mortgagor
and mortgagee, obligor and obligee on a bond, executor and beneficiary,
principal and sub-agent, principal and surety, trustee and cestui gue trust,
and vendor and purchaser.

Interest may be recovered on arrears of annuities where there has been mis-
conduct or improper delay in payment.

(3) Interest is allowed on pecuniary legacies not paid within a certain time?
As regards annuities, the position is as follows न

“The general rule of the Court is, that arrears of an annuity de not carry
interest. In the older cases an exception was sometimes made in favour of
the annuitant where the annuity was a provision for a wife or a child. Lord
Hardwicke acted on this principle in Newman v. Auling.® But in Few v.
Lord Winterton,” Lord Thurlow repudiated this as a ground of decision:
and his view of the law has, as 1 conceive, ever since heen treated as sound
and satisfactory.

The cases in which, in later times, the Court, in the absence of express con-
tract, has allowed interest have been confined to those where the annuitant
has held some Icgal security which, but for the interference of the Court, he
might have made available for the obtaining of interest ; or where the accu-
mulation of arrears has been occasioned by the misconduct of the patty

bound to pay. In this case contract is out of the question ; and as the annui-
tants certainly held no legal security, the only question is, whether the great

27

Juristic importance.

English — law—fraud
and other equitable
considerations,

3. The Northumbria, (1869) L.R. 3A. &E. 6,10.cited in The Berwickshire, (1950) 1 All E.R. 699, 702,

4, Emphasts supplied.
%. Sitaram v. Wamurad, A.1.R. 1948 Nagpur 49,50 para 6.
4, Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 27, pages 9 and 10, para 9.

+. Johnson, v. N. (1904) A.C. 817, 822 (P.C.) (Lord Menaghten). (See also pata 7. 9A, infra).

5, For Indian Cases on fraud, see Appendix.

7, Halsbury, 3rd Ed. Vol. 16 (Bxecutors), pages 327, 328, 379, 380.
*. Torve ¥. Brown, (1855) 5 ALC, 555,578.

है. Newman v. Auting, 3 Atk. $79.

29, Few v. Lord Winterton, 1 Ves. Jun. 451,



Question of enume-
tating the cases con-
sidered,

Need to provide for
special circumstances.

Deposit.

Fiduciary —_relation-
ship.

Fraud.

Dower or mainten-

The Interest Act, 1839

accumulation of arrears can be attributed to the misconduct of the owners
of the property charged. It is distressing to think for what an excessive
length of time the rights of the parties interested in this estate have remained
unsettled. But on the best consideration of the facts, I am unable to fix
the blame of delay on those who were to pay the annuities rather than on
those who were to receive them.”

7.7, The fundamental question, however, to be considered is, whether, where
there are special circumstances creating an equity, it is still necessary to deal
with the matter on a level of discretion to be exercised in cach individual case,
or whether the emphasis should not be shifted to the other side, that is to say,
where a monetary claim has arisen in certain special circumstances, interest should
not, prima facie, be claimable unless there are special reasons to the contrary.

7.8. Having carefully considered this aspect of the matter, we have come to
the conclusion that it would be just and fair to provide for certain particular
situations, without, of course, impairing the generality of the power preserved by
the proviso, A few important situations are, accordingly, considered below.

7.9, In the case of security deposits, if a demand for interest is not made,
interest is not recoverable at present.’ We are of the view that the position in
this regard should be altered. Now-a-days, deposits are often taken for the per-
formance of contractual or statutory obligations, and it is but fair that interest
from the date of deposit should be allowed on such deposits by an express statu.
tory provision. A specific provision on the subject is desirable.

7.10, Where there is a fiduciary relationship, interest should be allowed by
& specific provision.

कया, Interest should also be payable where money is obtained or retained
by fraud,’ by a specific provision. This, in fact, is the present position, under
the case law. For example, the Supreme Court made the following observations

In Trojan & Co. v. Nagappa Chettiar |

“We think it is well settled that interest is allowed by a court of Equity in
the case of money abtained or retained by fraud. As stated in Art. 423 of
Vol. 1 of Halsbury, the agent must also pay interest in all cases of fraud and
on all bribes and secret profits received by him during his agency.”

The Supreme Court quoted with approval the judgment of the Privy Council
in Johuson प्र, Rex, where it was held:*

“In order to guard against any possible misapprehension of their Lordships’
view, they desired to say that in their opinion there can be no doubt what-
ever, that money obtained by fraud and retained by fraud can be recovered
with interest, whether the proceedings be taken in a court of Equity or a
Court of law, or in a court which has jurisdiction both equitable and legal.”

Tt would be useful to insert an express provision on the subject.

7.12. It has been held that where a claim for dower’ or maintenance® is de-
creed, it is in the discretion of the court to award interest on the amonnt till the
Tecovery of the amount. We think that in such cases also interest should be
specifically provided for.

This concludes discussion of the important situations which fall under the
proviso and which should be dealt with specifically. We shall now discuss a few
other situations.

1 Sheikh Mahtab v. Dharamsge. AIR. 1944 Nag. 330, 332, 333,

oe ke

Cf. The English Law, summarised in para 7.3., supra.

. Trojan &Co.,v. Nagappa Chettiar, ATR. 1953 $.C.235, 240.

. Johnson ¥. Rex. (1904) A.C. 817 (P.C.)

. Me. Mainuna Regor v. Sharafat Ullah, A.T.R.1931 All 403 (D.B.)
. (3) Shri Nathjiv. Mt, Panna Raiwar, ATR. 1935 All 239 (D.B.)

(b} Saraswati Kuer v. Sheraratant Kuer, A1R. 1934 Pat.99 (D.B.}


The Interest Act, 1839

713, It has been held’ that in case of delay in Payment of compensation to
the insurer under section 16 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, the
insurer is entitled to interest. This situation need not be specifically dealt with,
the case being of an isolated nature.

7.14, The question of interest on rent payable by a tenant to his landlord
has come up more than once before the courts, and the current view seems to be
that if the case does not fall within the Interest Act, such a claim cannot be
allowed* No amendment is needed on this point.

7.15. Interest may also be recovered in equity in some other cases ; for ex-
ample, where a particular relationship exists between the creditor and the debtor,
such as, mortgagor and mortgagee, obligor and obligee on a bond, executor and
beneficiary, principal and agent, principal and surety, trustee and cestui que trust,
vendor and purchaser, or in the case of arrears and annuities. These cases need
not be provided for by specific provisions, The general provision in the proviso
to section 1 will continue to take care of them.

7.46, We have enumerated above the situations where interest should be a
matter of right, in the sense that it should be awarded unless there are reasons
to the contrary. We shall indicate, in due course, the precise amendment to be
made’ in this regard. We may, at this stage, sum. up the situations as follows :—

(a) where money or other property has been deposited as security for the
performance of an obligation imposed by law or contract, from the date
of the deposit;

(b) where the obligation to pay money or restore any property arises by vir-
tue of व fiduciary relationship, from the date of the cause of action ;

(ले where money or other property is obtained or retained by fraud, from
the date of the cause of action;

(@) where the claim is for dower or maintenance, from the date of the cause
of action. n
7.17, This concludes consideration of points of substance as to the power
to award interest under the proviso. We now deal with a verbal point arising
from the words “now payable by law”. We are of the view that the word “now”
should be omitted from the proviso, The word is confusing, and, from the point
of view of drafting, inaccurate. We, therefore, recommend its deletion.

We also recommend that the words “enactment or other rule of law or usage
having the force of Jaw” should be substituted for the word “law”, in this part
of the proviso.

CuAPTER 8
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

8.1. We have concluded our consideration of the Act. We summarise below
the recommendations made by us in various Chapters of this Report.
(1) The preamble to the Act should be deleted.*

(2) The territorial extent of the Act should be widened so as to cover’ the
whole of India, except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.

(3) The Act should be so re-drafted as to ensure that it applies also to pro-
ceedings other than civil suits.’

29

Delay in payment of

compensation.

Interest on rent.

Other cases,

Recommendation to
add right to interest
in some cases

Verbal changes.

Summary.

3, National tnsurance Co, v. Life Insurance Corporation, A.1.R. 1963 S.C. 1171.

3. Gophala v. N, Ramaswami, A.LR. 1970 Madras 417, 418, 419, para 4.5 (reviews Madras cases).

२, See para 8.1, infra.

* Para 23.1, supra.

5, Pasa 3.5, supra.

3, Para 4.4, sumra.
5-1 LD (ND)75


30

io extent clause.

(4)
(5)

(8)

(7)

(8)
(8A)
@

(10)
(11)

(12)
(13)
(14)

(15)

The Interest Act, 1839

A written’ instrument should not be necessary before interest can be
claimed under the Act, if the other conditions are satisfied.

The Act should be re-drafted to make it clear that it applies even where
a suit merely for interest is filed?

The Act should not apply to---

(a) cases where the right to interest is separately conferred by Jaw or
contract, or

(9) interest on dishonour of a bill of exchange,’ promissory note or
cheque.

The Act should not apply where interest is prohibited by an express

agreement.*

Interest under the Act should be awardable on damages also!

“Debt” should be defined in terms of an ascertained sum of money.”

It should be made clear that debts payable, in kind are also within the

Act?

The expression “sum certain” should be deleted’

For damages for death or personal injury award of interest should be
mandatory, unless there are reasons to the contrary.”

Interest on claims for dower or maintenance should be specifically pro-
vided for."

Interest on deposits required by law or contract should be specifically
provided for.” .

Interest on money or property obtained or retained by fraud should
be specifically provided for.

Interest should be specifically provided for where there is a fiduciary
relationship.”

CHAPTER 9

RECOMMENDED AMENDMENTS

Reva datic 9.1, Tn the light of the above discussion, we recommend that in the Interest
dem clause,” Act, 1839, a provision" regarding territorial extent of the Act should be inserted

as follows: It will have to be numbered as section 1, and the present section 1

should be re-numbered™ as section 2 :—

“1,
Kashmir.”

This Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and

Para 4.6, supra.

Para 4.21 and 4.22, supra.

Para 4.22,  supra-
Para 4.23, supra.
Para 5.2, supra,
Para 3.2A, supra.
Para 5.9, supra.
Para 5.12, supra.
Pata 5.13, supra.

Para 7.12, supra.
Para 7.9, supra.
. Para 7.10, supra.
Para 7.8, supra.

Para 3.4, supra.

. Para 8.2, supra.


The interest Act, 1839
9.14. The preamble to the Act should be deleted.”

9,2, Section 1 should be replaced by the following sections :—

“2. (1) In any proceedings for the recovery of any debt or damages or in
any proceedings in which a claim for interest in respect of any debt or dama-
ges already paid is made, the court may, if it thinks fit, allow interest to the
person enjitled to the debt or damages or to the person making such claim,
as the case may be, at a rate’ not exceeding the current rate of intesest, for
the whole or part of the following period, that is to ६४५, --

(a) if the proceedings relate to a debt payable by virtue of some written
instrument at a certain time, then from the date when the debt is pay-
able to the date of institution of the proceedings ;

(0) if the proceedings do not relate to any such debt, then from the date men-
tioned in this regard in @ written notice given by the person entitled Or
the person moking the claim to the person liable that interest will be
claimed to the date of institution of the proceedings:

Provided that where the amount vf the debt or damages has been
repaid before the institution of the proceedings, interest shall not be al-
flowed under this section for the period after such repayment.”

(2) Where, in any such proceedings as are mentioned in sub-section (1),—

(a) judgment or order is given jar a sum which, apart from interest on da-
mages, exceeds four thousand rupees, and .

(b) the sum represents or includes damages in respect of personal injuries
to the plaintiff or any other person, or in respect of a person's death,

then, the power conferred by that sub-section shall be exercised so as to include
in that sum interest on those damages or on such part of them as the court con-
siders appropriate for the whole or part of the period from the date mentioned
in the notice to the date of institution of the proceedings, unless the court is
satisfied that there are special reasons why no interest should be given in respect
of those damages.

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply in relation to—

(a) any debt or damages upon which interest is payable as of right, by virtue
of any agreement, or

(b) any debt or damages upon which the payment of interest is barred, by
virtue of an express agreement, :
(4) Nothing in this section shalt affect—

{a} the compensation recoverable for the dishonour of व bill of exch-
ange,” promissory note or cheque ;

(0) the provisions of rule 2 Order 2 in the First Schedule to the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908.” है
(5) Nothing in this seation shall empower the court to award interest upon
interest.
Explanation.—In this section,—
(3) “court” includes a tribunal and an arbitrator ;

(0) ‘debt’ means any liability for an ascertained sum of money, and includes
@ debt payable in kind, but does not include a judgment debt:

(c) ‘personal injuries’ includes any disease and any impairment of a person's
physical or mental condition. fap

31

Recommendation.

Recommendation
lating to section 1.

Existing section
main paragraph.

(New)

Wew)

(New)

(New)

(New)

(New)

(New)

(New)

(New)
(New)

Se el
3, Alternative draft for rate— “at such rate as the court thinks fit’.
3, The various savings can be combitied, if so desised.

re

i,


32
Existing section 1,

Proviso.

iNew)

(New)

(New)

The Interest Act, 1339

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, interest shall be pay-
uble in all cases in which it i8 ..... .....--०००००००+ payable by any enactment or other
rule of law or usage having the force of law.

(2) Notwithstanding as aforesaid, and without prejudice to the generality of
ihe provisions of sub-section (1), the court shall, in the following cases, allow
interest fram the date specified below in each case to the date of institution of the
proceedings af such rate as the court may consider reasonable, unless the court is
satisfied that there are special reasons why interest should not be allowed—

(a) where money or other property has been deposiied as security for the
performance of an obligation imposed by law or contract, from the date
of the deposit ;

(b} where the obligation to pay money or restore any property arises by
virtue oj a fiduciary relationship, from the date of the cause of action;

3 (९) where money or other property is obtained or retained $y fraud, from
the date of the cause of attion :

(व) where the claim is for dower or maintenance, from the date of the cause
of action,

4. Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of section 34 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908.”

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable
assistance we have received from Shri Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commis-
sion in the preparation of this Report.

P. B. GAIENDRAGADKAR Chairman
P. K. TRIPATHI Member
S. $. DHAVAN Member
5. P. SEN-VARMA Member
B.C. MITRA Member
P.M, BAKSHI - Member-Secretary

New Delhi,

Dated the 21st February, 1974,


APPENDIX 1
INTEREST ACT AND FRAUD
This Appendix deals with selected cases relating to fraud. In Trojan & Co. ४.

Nagappa, the Supreme Court held that interest would be allowed by a Court of Equity
in the case of moncy obtained or retained by fraud. In this case, i{ was held that by
Hasan of the transacian ‘brovght. about by fraudulent coneealment’ ol facts ‘with. regard
to the purchase of shares in ceriain companies, the plaintiff’ paid to the defendants or
his agents a sum of Rs. 89,000 in cash which he would not have parted with otherwise,
and he alsa lost the moncy which stood to his credit with the defendants. The Supreme
Court held that the agents had a large sum of the plaintiff with them which they would
not have acquired but fot the fraud that they practised on him. The Court held that the
agent must pay interest in all cases of fraud and on all bribes and secret profits received
by him during his agency.

This case was followed by the Patna High Cour? In the Pata case, money was

entrusted to the defendant for a particular purpose at a fime when the defendant was
working as an employee of the plaintiff. The defendant was found to have wrongfully
and iHegally retained that money which was entrusted to him. The court purporting to
apply the principle in the Trojan case held that the plaintiff was entitled to the money
30 entrusted and the interest thereon, because the equitable jurisdiction of the court was
attracted. zs

Comment,—It is suggested that, in the Patna case, the defendant did mot get the

money. initially by any fraud though his retention of it’ was wrongful and illegal. “So to
this extent, it can be said that by wrongful retention of money interest would become pay-
able, The Patna case seems to have extended the principle in the Trojan case that interest
is payable where money is obtained by fraud to cases where money is wrongfully or ille-
gally retained.

In one old Madras case,’ the Madras High Court has held that any money obtained

by fraud can be recovered with interest under the law. In this case, A and B were two
brothers who jointly advanced a sum of Rs. 1,000 on a mortgage. In October 1901, A
realised Rs. 1,000 from the mortgagor in full satisfaction of the debt, without the know-
ledge of B's representative C. In 1906, at the time of division between C and A, the
Intier fraudulently misrepresented to him that the mortgage was still outstanding” Tn

ber, 1908, C became aware of the fraud, and, in 1909, sved to recover from A half
of the sum which was due from the mortgagor when A realised the debt from ihe mort-
Der. qt was held that C was entitled to a decree for Rs. 500, being the amount actually
collected by A, with interest from the beginning of 1906 till December 1908 and from
the date of the suit till recovery.

Conment.—ti is not clear why interest was not allowed for the period from December
1908, when plaintiff! became aware of the fraud to the date of the suit ?

APPENDIX 2

‘ PROVISIONS REGARDING INTEREST IN SOME LABOUR LAWS
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923

Section 4A(3} provides for simple interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum on
Gompensation not deposited by the employer within on month if the other’ conditions of

the section are satisfied.

‘The Payment of Wages Act, 1936
Section Hf), (0 and (ff).—These deal with deductions from the wages of an employed
nal

(0 of advances of whatever nature (including T.A. and conveyance allowance) and
the interest due in respect thereof;

(ff) ‘of loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare of labour in accordance
with tules approved by the State Government and the interest dite i respect there-
of;

(७) of loans granted for house-building or other purposes approved by the State
Government and the interest due in respect thereof.

3, Trojen & Co.v. Nagappa, A.1R., 1963 S.C. 645.

3, Jaggennath Singh v. Narayan Sarogi AUR. 1955 Pat. 300.

१, Avanchea Lakshminarasamma Vv. Lakshamma, (1913) 21 Ind-Cas.294 (Macras High Court}
4, Date of the suit appears to be in 1909.

33


The Interest Act, 1839

The Coal Mines Proyldent Fund and Bonus Scheme Act, 1948

Section {0F—Where an employer makes default in the payment of any contributiom
‘of bonus or any damages under this Act, the Central Government may recover’ from such.
employer damages not excedding 25% of the amount of arrears.

The Employees’ Provident Fund Act, 1952

Section 148—Where an employer makes default in payment of any contribution to-
the fund or in the payment of any charges, the appropriate Government may recover fram.
the employer such damages, not exceeding 25% of the amount of arrears from the em-
ployer as it thioks fit.

The Personnel Injuries (Compensation Insurance) Act, 1963

Section 7 deals with the amounts to be paid as compensation under this Act. This.
does not include any interest on the amount.

The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965

Section 2/—Where any money is due to an employee by way of bonus from his em-
Ployer under a settlement or an award or agreement, the employee may make an applica-
tion to the appropriate Government for the recovery of the money duc, and if the Gevern-
ment is satisfied that it is due, it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector,
who can recover the same as an arrear of land revenue.

There is ao mention of interest in this section.

The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972

Section 8—Recovery of gratuity—l€ the amount of gratuity payable under this Act
is not paid by the employer, within the prescribed time to the person entitled thereto,
the controlling authority shall, on application made by the aggrieved person, issue a certi-
ficate for that amount to the Collector, who shall recover the same, together with com-
pound interest thereon at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of expity of the pres-
cribed time, as arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the person entitled thereto.

GIPN—SI—1 L.D, (N.D.) {7£—8-8-75~2,000