LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SIXTY- FOURTH REPORT

ON

THE SUPPRESSION OF IMMORAL
TRAFFIC IN WOMAN AND GIRLS
ACT, 1956

MARCH, 1975


12.0, No. F.2(2)/74-L.C.

P. 8. Gajendragadkar, Shastri Bhawan,
‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,

New Delhi-110001
March 7, 1975

My dear Minister,

1 have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Sixty-fourth Report
of the Law Commission on the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in
Women and Girls Act, 1956. The opening paragraph of the Report will
explain the circumstances under which the Commission took up this Act
for study.

This is the third Report of the Commission after it was reconstitu-
ted on the Ist of October. 1974,

Having regard to the nature of the subject and its importance, the
Commission first made a preliminary study of the subject, ard framed a
Questionnaire in order to elicit views. This Questionnaire was sent to
the Ministries concerned, the State Governments, the High Courts, Bar
Associations, and other interested persons and bodies, including the
Central Bureau of Correctional Services. The replies received in response
to this Questionnaire were carefully considered by the Commission. A
draft Report was then prepared by the Member-Secretary, P. M. Bakshi,
for discussion; it was duly circulated to the Members and, after full
discussion the Commission decided to make its recommendations for the
amendment of several provisions of the Act. Accordingly, the draft was
finalised incorporating the agreed recommendations. That 's how the
Report has taken its present form.

I may point out that the provisions of the Act operate within a
limited sphere. They do not purport to penalise prostitution in general,
but deal with commercial er open prostitution, In fact, this limited scope
of the Act is consistent with the international Convention on the subject
in pursuance of which the Act was passed. The preamble to the Act,
makes this position clear.

When we took up this subject for our study, we considered two
main issues at the outset, The first was whether, in revising the Act, an
attempt should be made 10 cover a wider field dealing with prostitution
in general, and the second was whether the proposed revision should
bring within its purview male participants in the act of prostitution.
After examining in depth the pros and cons in respect of both these
“questions, we decided to limit our recommendations in regard to the
L{P(D)L2Morl J&CA—2


(i)

revision of the existing provisions, keeping in tact the bmited scope of
the Act. Our reasons for coming to this conclusion are explained in our
Report.

I would, however, like to add that, even within the limited scope
of the Act, we have meade recommendations which we trust may
rationalise the scheme of the Act and help its effective implementation
With that object, we have recommended a revised definition of “prosti-
tution” as well as of “protective homes” and “corrective institutions”.
Consequent upon the redefinition of the to latler expressions, radical
changes have been recommended by us in the operative provisions of
the Act.

As you are aware, the present year (1975) has been declared by the
United Nations as the International Women’s Year. It seems to us that
the present Report can well be regarded as appropriate, because it seeks
to rescue and rehabilitate girls and women who, owing to circumstances
over which they have no control, have falten in the trap of prostitution.
That, in our view, is an important aspect of the work which our nation
is expected to undertake during this year for the betterment of the
women’s position in general.

Before I conclude, 1 would like to invite your attention to the बट
that, in our Report, we have incidentally referred to another collateral
but important matter which needs immediate attention, In discussing
the question about revising the Act, one of the problems which we
incidentally considered was in relation to the children born to the prosti-
tutes. It is hardly necessary to emphasise that taking car2 of such child-
ren is an urgent and important problem which should occupy place of
high priority in our national effort for social reform. Since this aspect of
the matter falls outside the scope of our present inquiry, we could not
make any positive recommendations in regard fo it, However, we
thought it necessary to draw the atiention ot the Government to this
problem and have very broadly indicated the line of approach which
may be adopted in dealing with it.

‘Yours sincerely.

Sd.) 7. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR

The Hon'ble Mr. H. R. Gokhale.

Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Defhi.


Chapter No.
i

eas

Appondix 1.

Appendix 2

REPORT ON THE SUPPRESSION OF
IMMORAL TRAFFIC ACT, 1956

CONTENTS
Subject
Inteedavtion on os
Historical Background
Seope of the Ack . कि कि
Comparative Rosition - नह
Definitions
Offences . . = न
Proeedural Provisions

Miscellancous: on os

Implementasion of Uae Aet—x mio Peapureme) Porte

Summary of recommendations चर 7

APPER DICK
Comparative Position as ta prostitetion in other eounteios

en *

List of sections containing the expr
both the expressions >>

(iit)

mun? orgie, oe

Pane

BL


REPORT
ON

THE SUPPRESSION OF IMMORAL TRAFFIC IN
WOMEN AND GIRLS ACT, 1956

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1, Scope and genesis of the Report—This Report deals with the
Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956. This Act
will hereafter be referred 10 as “the Act”. The Commissior. has taken
up the subject, in view of the importance of the Act as a measure of
preventing the exploitation of women and girls for immoral purposes.
The Commission thought that the social importance of the Act justified
its consideration. It may also be mentioned that » Committee" was ap-
pointed to suggest amendments in the Act some time ago by the Govern-
ment of India, We shall give our commerits on the proposals of the
Committee’ at the appropriate place.

1.2, Scope of the revision —As we shall indicate later, the present
Act is limited in its scope, but we have also considered the question®
whether its scope should be expanded.

1.3. Evit of prostitution—Prostitution is, beyond doubt, a social
evil. It has been an obnoxious feature of every saciety. It has been
observed in recent study‘ of prostitution that’ “im a theoretically pood
society, where sexual fulfilment ought to be possible as are other kinds
of personal satisfaction, no one would be a prostitute or a client. . .”.
Despite the attempts made from time to time to check it, the evil of
prostitution persists. The Act is one such attempt to check the evil.

Prostitution is also thought of as a threat to the marriage-family
institution‘, “Law-makers are afraid that the delicate threads which bind
society together will be broken if people are tree to engage in sexual
activity for pleasure, Laws, it is stated. are often not enforced adequately
because the police have too many other things to do. Judges also know
that jail will not rehabilitate a prostitute. Nevertheless, laws exist to
emphasise that prostitution is not a socially acceptable form of behavi-
our.”

2 See Para 1-4, Enfeo.

® Para 9-0, infra.

हे It will be referred to es “the Committes”.

* Para 3०1 and 8०9 infra.

* Para 3-4 ta 3-8, tnfra.

* Charles Winick, author of the book “Tho Lively Commeros” (Quacdrangle, 070).

7 Publishers wookly (24 May, 1971}, Vol. 109, No. 21, page 53.

+ hatlss Winick, a8 quoted in the Pablishers wookly (24 May, A071}, Vol. 11s, Nu 24
pago 58.


2

Thus, being a threat to the family as an institution, and a means
of exploitation of females, prostitution is a social evil which leads to
social injustice.

1.4. - Constitutional .provision—It may be mentioned. that article
23(1) of the Constitution prohibits traffic in human beings. It also pro-
vides that any contravention of this provision shall be an offence punish-
able in accordance with law. Then, article 35(a)(i) of the Constitution
confers on Parliament exclusive power to prescribe punishment for those
acts which are declared to be offences under this Part of the Constitution
(which includes article 23). Article 35(a) also provides that Parliament
shall, as soon. as may be, after the commencemet of the Constitution,
make laws for prescribing punishment for the acts which are declared
to be offences under this Part of the Constitution.

Finally, article 39(f) of the Constitution provides that the State shall,
in particular, direct its policy towards securing that childhood and youth
ate protected against exploitation and against moral and material aban-
donment, It is, therefore, gratifying to note that soon after the com-
mencement of the Constitution, the Act with which we are now con-
cerned, made provisions which seek to carry out the constitutional
provisions .referred to above, although the Act purports to have been
made in pursuance of an International Convention.’

1.5. The institution of prostitution is the external manifestation of
the failure of man to control his animal will within the limits set by the
institution of marriage. The view of Westermarck and many other
scholars is that the institution of marriage has existed in human society
since time immemorial. This is the generally accepted view. In no period
of recorded human history has any civilised society existed.’ without the
institution ef marriage in some form or another, With the help of this
institution, man has tried. to tame and control his brutal instincts and
impulses. In this attempt, there has been a fair amount of success, but
not full and complete success, because man has not always remained
satisfied with the company of his wife and has sometiries sought the
pleasures of the flesh by straying beyond the limits of the marital wed-
jock, with the result that institutions like prostitution ard concubinage
have existed side by side with marriage since times immemorial. For the
greater good of the family and society, man has tolerated these institu-
tions as necessary social evils. In ancient India. concubinage and prosti-
tution were not unknown. Jn the Rig Veda Samhita, there is reference to
the jara (paramour) and his concubine. There were heavenly prostitutes
also. They were known as apsaras and urvashis. Quite often they were
sent by the king of gods (Indra) and other gods too to entice human
being who were engaged in the practice of austere penances for gaining
knowledge of the. Supreme Reality.

3 Para 2.1, infin.
2 (a) Hoebel, Anthropology (1966), page 331
(हो Hobhouse, Worals in Bvolation (1951), va co 135



3

The prostitute was known as ganika and veshya, etc, Chanakya
says, “salajja ganikah nastah” (Shy prostitutes are no 8000), In the
drama ‘““Mrichha Katika”, it is stated’:

“Like the pond, creeper or the boat. you. who ar a prosti-
tute, ycu (should) adore every person.”

1.6. Rome—The late Professor W. W. Buckland’ has, in his
famous book on Roman law, stated: —

“Concubinatus was a recognised connection short of marri-
age. which seems to owe its legal recognition to the restrictive
legislation of the early Empire on marriage......... [f was शान
couraged by the immorality of Roman women of ‘high rank;
men preferred to contract this union with women of !ower class
but higher character ?

1.7, Attempts ta stop prostitution not successjul—Any attempt to
stop prostitution by legislation or by any other means of social control
has always proved abortive. Prostitution has, therefore, been tolerated
as a necessary evil. No country in the world has been able to stop this
institution successfully. Even if the law stops it, then, in some other
insidious and subtle form, it is bound to re-appear in society’ and. that
may have greater potentiality of destroying the peace in family life and
also in society. The recent institution of call girls seems to be an
instance in point.

Hence, instead of banning it totally, the law in every country has
tried to regulate it so that it may be kept within its legitimate bounds
without unduly encroaching upon the institution of marriage and the
family.

1 (Mrichhe Katika).
त्वम्‌ वाणोब लतेव नौखि
वेदयासि सर्व जन भज ।

2 Buckland, Roman Law from Augustas to Justinian (1968), pege 199.
2 See also, pate 33. infra.


CHAPTER 2
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

2.1. Brief history of the Act—The Suppression of Immoral Traffic
Act is the first Central Act dealing with commercialised vice in a com-
prehensive manner, and has taken the place of several Provincial or
State Acts' that were operative on the subject in the various States.
Occasion for passing a Central Act on the subject arose when the Inter-
national convention dealing with immoral traffic in women and girls
was signed in 1950. But, even in the absence of such a Convention,
uniformity in this respect would have been desirable; avd it is, there-
fore, convenient that the law is now contained in a Central Act.

2.2. Early efforts at regulation—During the days of the East India
Company, the Company had regulations dealing with sex offences.’ In
1668, the Company Authorities issucd regulations against prostitution.
These were known as “Company Commandments”, and compliance
‘with those regulations was strictly required. Duting the years 1669
and 1677, Governor Anguri issued orders for the control of brothels
and for the prevention of soldiers from keeping wenches and loose
women. This was the first time that brothels came under the purview
of law in the British period. Before the year 1860, there were only a
few Regulations on the subject.

11 1860, the Indian Penal Code was enacted, and sections 372 and
373 of the Code were intended to prevent the inducting in prostitution
of women under a certain age and against their wish. The Contagious
Diseases Act. [868 aimed at compulsory examination of common
prostitutes and their detention in hospitals. till they were cured. This
Jaw proved irksome, and was repealed in 1888. The Presidency Town
Police Acts and District Police Acts made certain acts pertaining
to prostitution penal.

2.3. Developments in the latter half of 19th century—It was during
the latter half of the 19th century that the Government of India took
notice of the evil of prostitution. This was primarily because the Govern-
ment was concerned about the health of the British soldie:s who indulg-
ed in the vice. The problem was looked upon more or less as a public
health problem. and also as a law and order problem. In 1892.
the British House of Commons appointed a Committee to enquire into
the practice of prostitution in India and also into the spread of venereal
diseases. Tt was found that special arrangements were made for the
supply of women. Medical check up and segregation till the women
were cured, was the usual practice. All these etforts were. however.
not considered adequate. More vigorous steps were, therefore felt neces-
sary.

1 See pata 2०2 and 28, infra.
3 Based on Encyclopaedia of Social Work, (1970), Vol. 2, pages 103-108.

4



By

An Act aimed at discontinuance of brothels, known as the East
Bengal and Assam Disorderly Houses Act, 1907, was passed in 1907.
That Act was applicable to certain areas of East Bengal and Assam, and
provided for the prosecution of the brothel kcepers with the sanction of
the District Magistrate or on a report of the Chairman of Municipality
or on a complaint of three or more persons living in the neighbourhood.
For verifying facts, the police officers were empowered to inspect such
houses. For some years after this Act, no action of great significance was
taken in relation to this subject.

2.4. Local legislation since 1923—In 1923, the Calcutta Suppression
of Immoral Traffic and the Bombay Prevention of Prostitution Act
were passed. The Calcutta Act was replaced by the Bengal Suppression
of Immoral Traffic Act, 1930. In 1923, the Province of U.P. enacted
legislation for the suppression of immoral traffic in women and girls.
Punjab followed in 1935, and Mysore in 1936.

Heavy penalties were provided by these Acts for living on the earn-
ings of prostitution, for keeping a brothel, for allowing premises to be
used as brothel, for procuration, for unlawful detention for prostitution,
for importing a female for prostitution and for encouraging or assisting
in prostitution.

Legislation dealing with specific aspects of prostitution may also be
noted at this stage. For example, the U.P. Naik Girls Protection Act and
the Bombay Devadasis Act were passed in 1929 and 1934, respectively.
The Children Act passed in Bombay. Madras and Bengal gave some
protection to boys and girls in moral danger.

2.5. Prostitution in ancient civilisations —As is shown by the dis-
cussion in Chamber’s Encyclopaedia," religious prostitution was a feature
of many ancient civilisations, including those of Persia, Babylonia,
Assyria, Egypt and Phoenicia. Among most of these peoples the priests
and priestesses were a special class of prostitutes. In Babylonia, however,
a compulsory single act of prostitution was required of every woman as
part of the worship of the goddess Mylitta. The most plausible explana-
tion of religious prostitution is the belief of the ancients that benefits
would be conferred on any one who had intercourse with a god or with
one of the god’s servitors.’

2.6, First rescue home—Theodora, wife of Justinian. established
the first rescue home for women. Edward Gibbon’ attributes Justinian’s
action to his desire to marry Theodora, whose life had been notorious:
but, though, no doubt, she influenced him in the matter, Gibbon con-
cedes her virtue after marriage, and gives her credit for “the most bene-
volent institution” of Justinian’s region—the rescue home for fallen
women in Constantinople. Though this institution did not succeed, it
marks a. turning point in the treatment of a class which had never met
with public sympathy before.

1 Chambers Enoyclopacdia, (3961), Vol. TY, page 257.

4 Chambers Encyclopaedia, (1961), Vol. Il, page 257.

2 Gibbon, Rise and Fall of the Roman Empirc, cited ix Eneyolopaedia Britannica, (1965)
Vol. 18, page 698.


CHAPTER 3
SCOPE OF THE ACT

3.1. Scope of the Act—three broad categories of offences—A few
observations about the scope of the Act may be made. It is a common
misconception amongst laymen,—and sometimes even amongst lawyers—
that the Act is intended to prohibit prostitution. The Act, in fact, does
not go so far. 11 deals with prohibition only in some of its aspects. In
the first place, if a person promotes prostitution by another person, and
derives a monetary benefit therefrom, the Act applies.’ Again. if a per-
son exploits women and gitls and makes them lead a life of vice, the
Act is attracted.® Finally, if a person solicits customers for prostitution
in the specific circumstances, he is punished under the Act.‘ Under sec-
tion 7, for example, prostitution in the vicinity of public places is punish-
ed. In short.—

4) profiting by the prostitution of another person, or

Gi) exploiting another person for prostitution, or

Gii) soliciting in @ public place हॉट... are the broad categories of
the main otfences created by the Act. But a woman or girt
who offers her body for hire, without soliciting or doing any
of the other acts mentioned in the penal sections, is not
guilty of an offence under the Act. The Act, thus. stops short
of banning prostitution absolutely, and deals with only cer-
tain specified and concrete forms of immoral conduct. The
ultimate object is, no daubt, to check prostitution, but the
methods adopted are limited in their scope. The philosophy
teflected in the Act is that the law should stop only where
the vice either assumes a commercialised form, so that public
policy requires its suppression, or appears in a public place,
so that it constitutes a public nuisance. In the absence of
such special features, the mere immoral conduct which is
known as “prostitutton”.—and which is defined in the Act
aiso,’"—is not treated! as criminal.

3.2. Reasons for narrow scope of the Act—One could think of many
teasons that account for the present narrow scope of the Act.

The corresponding law in England-—previously, the Vagrancy Acts
and the common law as to bawdy houses, and now the Sexial Offences
Act. 1956 and the Street Offences Act. 1959—-has always been narrowly

Sections 8 and 4.

3 Sections 5 and 6.

2 Sections 7 and 8,

* For detailed analysis of offenees see Chapler 5, ésifra.
* Section 2¢F)—“ presi tution”.

6


drawn. The common law punished, as a public auisance, the keeping of
bawdy houses, and the letting of premises on hire for prostitution, and
some offences were added by the statutes mentioned above. But the
criminal law in England abweys steered clear of a total ban on prostitu-
tion. Even the Act of 1959 does not go so far. Secondly, it must have
been presumed by the legislature that a total ban on prostitution may
not be effective. Thirdly, the International Convention on the subject
did not go so far, and as we have already noted, it is on the Interna-
tional Convention that the Act is based.’ Lastly, the pre-existing provin-
cial or State Acts were also natrow in their scope.

3.3. Abolition nei practicable—There is. however, a ceeper reason
also. Prostitution, though an evil, has been regarded id almost all socie-
ties as an unfortunate but a necessary evil, and Indian society is no
exception.” Various measures have been adopted from time to time to
check the evil effects of prostitution and to control ite undesirable
uspects, but the inarticulate assumption that the law cannot abolish it
effectively, has been the basis of legislation in India as well as in many
other countries. Down from 1837, when the Penal Code was taken up
on the anvil,’ to 1956, when the present Act was passed, it has not been
considered necessary to go beyond the pravisions which we find in the
Act.

The Act is, therefore. concerned not with prostitution itself, but
with the manner in which the activities of prostitutes and of those asso-
ciated with them which offend against public order and decency, expose
the ordinary citizen to what is offensive or injurious, or involves the
exploitation of others,

3.4. Question of total prohibition —Theoretically, the question why
prostitution should not be totally prohibited. or restricted more inten-
sively than at present, could certainly be raised.

Such a questicn has, in fact, been raised outside India more than
once. This and similar proposals raise vital questions as to how far the
jaw ought to go in regard to interference with the freedom of an indivi
dual to act in the sphere of sex. As a general rule, only beAaviour which
causes harm to the individual or to the community should be prohibited
by the criminal law. There is. however, no universal agreement as to
what acts cause such harm. That the tree object of the nena! law is to
provide punishment whea injury has been inflicted. ——ordinarily with
the requisite mens rea, —is not denied. Rut the question to be asked in
making out the bounds of criminality would be, what constitutes suffi-
cient injurv, and when is the imposition of punishment लि causing that
injury justified. The question, therefore. that rises again and again is:
What conduct ought to be declared as a crime?

3 Para 251, super,
3 Sco Para 1-7, super,
3 The Penal Code was acutally posced inn 128%


8

3.5. Two views as to drawing the tine—This necessarily takes us to
the well-known controversy whether all behaviour which is deemed to
be morally undesirable ought 10 be punished by the Criminal law. That
a line must be drawn between the demands of sexual morality and the
requirements of the Penal Code, is not in dispute. But two views prevail
in the matter,-that is to say, with reference to the question where
precisely the line ought to be drawn. According to the narrower view,
the law should reach only acts causing positive harm. According to the
wider view, the law should also punish behaviour which, though not
causing positive harm to the individual. may damage the cherished moral
fabric of the society, and destroy values which are considered worth
preserving at all costs. The usual testing ground of this controversy has
been the subject of criminal sanctions for cerlain indecent acts between
males; but the controversy is of a recurring nature. In the West, Lord
Devlin and Professor Hart have been the chief exponents of these two
ideas.*

3.6. Wider view not recommended—It appears to us that so far as
prostitution is concerned, the adoption of a wider view should not be
recommended,-—in any case at this stage. Conduct of a particular type
may be—

(i) approved by law;

Gi) permitted without approval or disapproval by law;
(ii) disapproved but not prohibited by law:
(iv) prohibited by law.

Prostitution falls partly within category (ii) and partly within cate-
gory (iv) above." The fact that certain types of prostitution are not
totally prohibited by law, does not necessarily imply that they are
approved by the law.

We think that, in principle, in the absence of very sitong public
opinion to the contrary, the present legislative approach as regards prosti-
tution is, broadly speaking. satisfactory, Prostitution, in so far as it
consists of secret acts of consenting individuals without exploitation, and
im private, is nol appropriate for penal sanctions, and the fact that the
pleasute derived from such prostitution is one which is socially disap-
proved, is not in ifself a sufficient ground for the imposition of criminal
sanctions.

2 (a) H.L.A, Hart, Law Liberty and Morality (196%).
(0) B. Dworkin, “Lord Devlin and the Enforcement of morals”, (1966) 75 yalo L. J. 986,
(0) Hart “Social Solidarity and the Enforcoment of Morality”, (1967) 35 U. CHT. L.

Tex,

(व) Kadish, "The Crisis of Ove criminnlisati-n” (1967) 374 Annals of the American
Academy of Political Seiences 157.

(e) Stephen, Liberty, Rquality, Fraternity, in Radcliffe (100) Limits of Taberty) (1966)
p. 435,

(/) Rolf, Sarborius, “Enforcement of Morality” (1971) 81 yale L, त. 891.

(qf) Touch, “Sin and Cris” (1988) 43 Philosphy 38, 45.

(h) Rostow, “The Enforcement of Morals” (1960) Cambridge L.J. 174.

३ Bara 3+L tu 3-4 supra.


9

3.7. Moreover, it appears to us that where the law deals with sexual
behaviour between consenting parties in private, ils enforcement would
be difficult. Laws which prohibit sexual acts when commilted in private
—-assuming that the acts are considered appropriate for penal sanctions’
can, for obvious reasons, be enforced only to a limited extent, however
touch the conduct may be, the subject of moral condemnation.”

3.8. Views expressed on the subject of morality and law—While we
are dealing with this aspect, we may refer to the opinion expressed by
the Street Offences Committee—*

“As a general proposition it will be universally accepted that
the law is not concerned with private morals or with ethical sanc-
tions. On the other hand, the law is plainly conceraed with the
outward conduct of citizens in so far as that conduct injuriously
affects the rights of other citizens. Certain forms of conduct it
has always been thought right to bring within the scope of the
criminal Jaw on account of the injury which they occasion to the
public in general. [t is within this category of offences, if any-
where, that public solicitation for immoral purposes finds an ap-
propriate place.”

Secondly, as has been observed," “the immorality of an act should
never be the decisive factor in making it illegal, since the appropriateness
of a moral sanction does not entail the appropriateness of a legal sanc-
tion, What is grist to the fine mill of morality, may well escape the
clumsy engine of the law or be mangled by it. But any attempt fo ex-
clude the immorality of an act as a relevant factor in deciding whether
to make it illegal, is both dangerous and futile. [t is dangerous, because
it leads to the illusion that a legal system can function without the
foundation and the frame of reference of a moral syslem, and it is futile
because moral values have a way of infiltrating into even the most anti-

septic legal system.”

3.9. Report of earlier Committee in India —Before we part with this
topic, we may note that in 1968, the Government of India appointed a
Committee to consider various suggestions that had been received
regarding amendment of the Act.’ The Committee, in due course sub-
mitied its Report.’ Though the recommendations have not been forward-

ed to us formally, we have had the opportunity of going through them.
Recommendations made by the Committee in’matters of dtail will be

1 Para 86, supra.

2 See also para 3+16, injre.

३ Report of the Street Offences Committes (1924), Cimd. 0231, quoted in the Report of the
Cothmittes on Homosexual offences and Prostitution (1957), Cmd. 247, page 80, para 227,

“R.A, Samek, “Enforcement of Morals”, (May, 1971) 49 Canadian B.R. 188, 221.
§ Government of India, Department of Social Welfare, Memorandum No, 14/4/65, S. No.

5, dated 80th March, 1968,
* Report of the Committee on Amendments to the Suppression of Immoral ‘Traffic in
Women and Girls Act, 1968 (Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Commiitee’),



10

considered at the proper place. but we may state here that the Com-
mittee’ was of the opinion that the cbjcctive of the Act is the suppres-
sion of Immoral Traffic in women and girls in form of convnercialised
prostitution, and the amendments of the Act should be related to that

objective.

3.10. Profession of call-girls-——We should note, however, that the
Committee’ expressed its concern over the increasing prcblem of “call-
girls and clandestine forms of prostitution”. The Committee stressed that
it is “only through an integrated programme of public education and
community organisation that the moral and social health of the people in
general could be ensured”, In this connection, the role of the voluntary
organisations in creating the necessary social climate for tackling the
intricate problem of human degeneration was also emphasised.

The relevant paragraph of the Report, however. ends with the
following recommendations—

Recommendation No. 19

“The terms ‘prostitute’ and ‘prostitution’ should be made
comprehensive 50 as to cover all forms of clandestine prostitu-
tion including calk-girls.”

3.11. Amendment regarding call-girls not recommended—We have
given careful thought to this recommendation. If the intention is that
‘call-girls’, i.e. girls who are available for prostitution or. a telephonic
or other message being sent to them, should not be allowed to practise
their prolession if it is carried on for the gain of another person’ or
for the mutual gain of two or more persons.’ then the amendment
would be merely clarificatory, and we shall assume, for the moment,
that such a clarification is needed. But, if the intention is that there
should be a total ban on call-girls, we are afraid that it would go beyond
the general scope of the Act. As we have pointed out above, and as
indeed was noted by the Committee also,’ the scope of the Act is
narrow. The Act does not abolish prostitution as such. The main acti-
vities which it punishes are prostitution of another person for profit of
oneself, or promoting prostitution by letting out a house, exploiting
girls for prostitution in specified places and the like.

The fact that the appointment with a girl is made on telephone, or
that she is requisitioned to offer her services at the residence of the
customer who sends the requisition, would not, in our view, in itself,

+ Report of the Committeo on Amendments to the Suppression of Irumoral ‘Traffic in
Women and Girls Act, paragraph No. 62, end Recommendation No. 1.

7 Report of the Committee on Amendments to the Nappression of Travral Trafte in
Women and Girls Act, para G-7, ancl recommendation No. 19.

* Of section 2a), definition of ‘brothel’,
* See also para 2-12, infin.

3 Paragraph 3+6, anpra,

© Varauragh 9 sane r



tl

justify a departure from the general scheme of the Act, if the call-girl
does not parade her charms in the public, or indulge in soliciting or in
any of the other prohibited acts. I! prostitution is practised in a
manner ‘which is offensive to a neighbour, then a civil remedy for
nuisance is also ayailable, as such acts cause “undue and unreason-
able interference with the comfortable and convenient enjoyment
of the neighbour's premises,' and the whole character of the street
might change for the worse.’ But, so long as prostitution itself is not a
crime, the individual act of a girl who offers her services on phone
cannot be prohibited. It is hardly necessary to emphasise that these
observations are made in the light of the narrow scope of the Act.

3.12. Call-girl establishments—Call-girl establishments—-i.e. houses
or flats to which men go and to which prostitutes are summoned by
telephone message or some other arrangement—stand in a different
category. In most cases, they would satisfy the existing detinition® of
“brothel”, or attract the penal provision relating to living on the earn-
ings of prostitution.

3.13. Position in some other countries—We are not unaware that
in some of the other countries, prostitution when carried on as a busi-
ness has been prohibited, and the relevant statutory provisions appear
in a wider form than in India.

3.14. Statutes in some States in the U.S.A.—For example, in the
U.S.A., some modern statutes generally enlarge upon the common law
basis.‘ The following extract from one of the statutes in force in Iowa
‘will give some idea of the general pattern adopted by States which go
beyond the common faw, although the statutes differs substantially in
the different states:

“if any person, for purpose of prostitution or lewdness.
resorts to, uses, occupies or inhabits any house of ill-fame or
place kept for such purpose, or if any person be found at
any hotel, boarding house, cigar store, or other place leading a
life of prostitution or lewdness, such person shall be imprisoned
in the penitentiary for not more than five years.”*

3.13. The Model Penal Code of the American Law Institute’
recommends the following provision :-—

“Section 251.2. Prostitution and Related Offences.
(1) Prostitution. A person is guilty of prostitution, a petty
misdemeanor, if he or she:
“(a) is an inmate of a house of prostitution or otherwise
engages in sexual activity as a business; or
(9) Joiters in or within view of any public place for the
purpose of being hired to engage in sexual activity......... »

1 Phompson Schwab v. Costaki, (1966) 1 W.1.E.. 855; (1966) 1 All E.R. 622.

2 See also Chapter 4, infra.

3 Section 2(a); see para 4-2, int an

4 Perkins, Criminal Law (1957), page 335.

§ Tuwa Code Annotated, orticle 724+ 1, oited in Perkins, Criminal Law (1957), page 335,
# Model Penal Code, proposed (Official Draft, (1962), section 251-2



18

3,16. Lffective enforcement not practicable—We ate not, however,
satisfied that a wise provision which punishes not only the inmate of a
house of prostitution but also a person who “otherwise engages in
sexual activity as a business”,' can be effectively enforced.*

3.17. Prostitution a social problern—In our view, prostitution like
many other evils, is a social problem, and the eradication of such evils
cannot be achieved by legislation alone, as it requires the co-operation
of every individual citizen as well.

In the dialogue between King Ashwapati and the six Brahmins’
in one of the Upanishads, there occurs this passage:

“In my kingdom, there is no thief, no person indulging in
dirty and bad actions, no drunkard, no Brahmin who does not
keep and worship the Fire, no person who is not learned, no
man of loose morals—from where will come any woman of loose
morale?”

When the general moral level of the community rises te this exalted
idealistic level, prostitution also can be brought down or more effect-
tively reduced. But, as realists. we are not prepared to recommended such
radical changes, because we fear thal legislation based on such idea-
lism may prove to be an exercise in futility. Besides this, it may go
beyond the scope of the Act. The Act, as is shown by the title, is
confined to “suppression” of immoral traftic. and a measure prohibiting
prostitution would travel far beyond its present scope.

1 Para 316, supra,
व ५8७ - Iso para 97, supre.
* Obhadogyopanishad, Sth Chaptor, 1th Part.


CHAPTER 3A
COMPARATIVE POSITION

3A.1. Prostitution being a world-wide phenomenon, it may not be

out of place to make a brief comparative survey’ of the legal position
In respect of the problem. It appears that countries of the world can,
with reference to the legal attitude towards prostitution, be classified
into four broad categories : —

(a) total prohibition;

{b) regulation;

(©) repression;

(0) total toleration.

Countries in category (a) regard prostitution as illegal in all cases.
In these countries prostitution per se is a ctime. Hence, even clandestine
misconduct is punishable. Countries in category (b) regulate prostitution
by licensing or other measures, but do nat prohibit it totally.

Under the traditional system of regulation. licensed brcthels are
allowed, and the inmates of the brothels are issued cards and may ply
their trade subject to certain rules laid down by law. There is also what
has been called the “neo-regulationist system”, under which brothels
are prohibited, but prostitutes hold cards and are supervised by health
authorities,

Countries in category (0-०0 which India helongs—tepress pros

tution by forbidding its blatant manifestations: while those in category
(0) impose no prohibitions or restrictions on prostitution.

3A.2. Repressive measures why hampered—It has been stated* ihat
Tepressive measures’ against prostitution ate hampered by three main
considerations; the persistent demand for exclusive physical  satisfac-
tion which the prostitute offers; the existence of a type of wornen who
is drawn to prostitution her psycho-neutrotic make up; and the social
attitude towards sex, The modern view! is that the underlying causes
of prostitution today are not economic but psychological, theugh this
does not apply to the period of religious prostitution, or to the period
when prostitution was generally condoned, or when no other means of
livelihood was open to indigent women. Socio-economic factors are
still important in borderline cases, But, with a few exceptions prosti-
tutes show an anti-masculine attitude so strong as to be psychcneurotic

"Fora deleiled survey of the laws oF गम मगर या Survey of the laws of other countries, sea Appendix.
* Chambers Encyalopaodia (1961), Vol. HI, pages 258-250.
3 Para SAT (c), supra,
* Chambers Eneyolopardia (1961), Vol. 11, pages 258-259.
* Chambers Encyclopredia (1961), Vol. 11, page 259.
13
TIPE 2MOfLI&CA—3


14

and, for them, the performance of the love act for payment constitutes
selEassertion, while at the same time they derive satisfaction fram the
umque ‘independence’ of their profession. This inner coercion applies
equally to the so-called white slave trade, in which the ‘slaves’ arc
generally irce agents. Significantly,' a survey of 100 prostitutes reveal-
ed that married men constituted 70—80% of their clients. It is, there-
fore, possible to conclude that today prostitution is a necessary evil
targely because of an unlightened social atlitude resulting in a gencral
lack of understanding of the true place of sex in marriage and in life.

3A.3. Appendix—We have, in an Appendix to this Report.’ set
out in detail the comparitive position in other countries, and we need
not reproduce in this chapter all that is contained in the Appendix.

+ Ghambcrs Unegelan tia (LOB), Vol. 11. page 259,
8 See Appenili< va ths Report.


CHAPTER 4
DEFINITIONS

4.1, Sections of the Act considered—-We now proceed to consider
the Act section by section.

4.2. Section 2—Section 2 of the Act contains several definitions.
The first of these is in clause (a), defining “brothel” as follows:—~

“(a) Section 2a)—" brothel” —brothel’ includes any house, room
or place or any portion of any house, room or place which
is used for purposes of prostitution for the gain of another
person or for the mutual gain of two or more prostitutes.”

For properly appreciating this definition, it is desirable to refer to the
common law.

43. Position at common law—in common law, a “bro:hel” is a
place’ where people of opposite sexes arc allowed to resort for illicit
intercourse. whether the women are common prostitutes or not, and
keeping a bawdy house* is a nuisance at common law (sce 3 Co. Inst.
204) as well as a statutory offence (Sexual Offences Act, 1956, section
33), Indeed a statute over two hundred years old stipulates that any
two local inhabitants may give notice of it 10 a constable of the parish
who after taking certain steps. is bound to prosecute on pain of for-
feiting £20 to cach of them (Disorderly Houses Act, 1751, section 7).
Besides. on conviction, each of them is entifled to receive on demand
a reward of £10 from the overseers. who, if they fail to pay il, would
forfcit double than sum, (Disorderly Houses Act. 1751, section 5). More-
over, a person licensed to sell liquor who knowingly permits his pre-
mises to be a brothel is liable to the forfeiture of his licence as well as
to a fine, and the house must be closed.‘ So strict is the law on
point that it applies in this context the principle of absolute responsi-
bility. Accordingly the knowledge of a servant in charge is imputed to
the master." and an absentee co-licensce is liable for the acts of his co-
licensee to whom he has delegated responsibility for controlling the
business.*

+ Note “Criminal Law”, (1959) Vol, 228 Law Times, page 125, 187.
* Winter हू. wolfe, (1031) LKB. 549.

See also Chapter 3, para 8-21, supra.
4 Licensing Act, 1953, section (40.

§ Alten 5. Whitehewd, (1930) | K.B. 211.

© hinnelt ५. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, (1940) 1 AIL 12.17, 330.

(5


16

The law is not less technical tovurds Property owners, for a block
of flats inhabited by different women and used by them for prostitution
has been condemned as a brothel;' though two flats in one building
Separately let to prostitution, it has been held do not constitute «
brothel? Generally, it is an offence for any lessor or landlord or his
agent to let premises with the knowledge that any part thereof is to be
used as a brothel, or to tolerates such user.’ The saine applies to # tenant
or occupier who knowingly permits any part of his premises to be used
as a brothel or for the purposes of habitual prostitution, while a convie-
tion puts the lease or contract of tenancy in jeopardy.‘ Finally, notice
from a person of credit to a landlord that his house is usecl as a brothel
secs to be sufficient 10 make him liable, unless he forthwith takes
cflective steps to stop such user,

_ The definition in our Act is confined to prostitution, but the policy
is substantially the same.

4.4. Recommendation regarding ‘brothel’—We now consider the
Suggestions relevant to the definition. There is a suggestion” to add the
word “conveyance” in the definition of ‘brothel’." The regson given is
that difficulties have been experienced by police officers dealing with
cases in which taxies are regularly used as a brothel for the. purposes of
prostitution. This situation may aiso avise in some places where boats
may be used for similar purpeses, It is also pointed out, that within the
meaning of the Act, a ‘public place” includes a public conveyance.

We agree with the suggestion, as we think that the Teasons given
above are sound.

4.5. Recommendation to amend definition of ‘brothel’-- We. there-
fore, recommend the following re-drafi of section 2, clause (a) which
defines the expression ‘brothel’: —

“(a) ‘brothel’ inctudes any house, room, conveyance or
place or any portion of any house, reom, conveyance or place
which is used for purposes of prostitution for the gain of an-
other person or for the mutual gain of two or more prostitutes.”

4.6, Question of presumption to be drawn from common agency
considered —The Committee? made a recommendation for adding a
presumption to the effect that when two or more prostilutes assoviate
under a common agency or link, they do so for their mutual gain or for

1 Darose ए. Wilson, 11907) 96 L.T. Rep. 647.
3 Strath ए. Poxon, (1055) 3 AUER .
* Sexual Offences Act, 1956, section 34.

* Sexual Offences Act, 1956, section 3

tion U Services,

* Suggestion of the Conual Burean of (

© Para 4+2, supra,

* Section 20), ‘public pl ‘ce’,

® Report of the Commitice on amendments ti the Suppressicn of Immoral
para कै

Traffic Act


the gain of another person. The object of the suggestion is to facilitate
effective prosecution, by shifting the onus of proving to the contrary on
the accused. The Cominittee also stated that the question whether such
4 presumption could be extended to one prostitute or not, may also be
cxamined. The suggestion is relevant to the definition of “brothel”
given in section 2(a).

We have carefully considered the suggestion, We do not, however,
see the 1080 for inserting any such presumption: It may be true that
‘when two or more prostitutes associate under u common agency or link,
it is more likely than not that they do so either for mutual gain or for
the gain of a third person. But it #ppears to be unnecessary to insert
presumptions on 50 many matters of detail in this Act. or, for that
matter, in any other similar Act, unless practical difficulties. disclosed
by the reported decisions or otherwise. necessitate the drawing of such
presumptions. Moreover, section 1[4 of the Indian Evidence Act is
wide enough to empower the court to draw a presumption, haying
regard to the various considerations mentioned in that section. A host
of inferences are daily drawn by the court about various matters, too
numerous to be mentioned here conveniently. The substantive law need
not, in the absence of compelling reasons, be made replete with pre-
sumptions,

4.7, Recommendation to insert definition of ‘corrective institution’
-- We now come to a point which involves the addition of a new defini-
tion. We have. later in this Chapter. discussed the question of revising
the definition of ‘protective home’. The scheme which we contemplate
in this connection will be evident from that discussion. At this slage,
we may mention that according to our scheme, the two kinds of insti-
tutions should be kept separate. In caszs where protection 5 the primary
need, the girl will be sent to a protective institution. Corrective. institu-
tions will be reserved for women who need corrective training, and who
are criminals rather than victims. In order that this scheme may find a
place in the legislative frame-work, a definition of “corrective institu-
tion” is needed.

We, therefore. recommend that the following definition of “correc:
tive institution” should be inserted in section 2:—

Revised definition

+ (8) ‘corrective institution’ means an institution, by what
ever name called, in which women and girls, who are in need
of correction, may be detained under this Act, being an institu-
tion established or licensed! as such under section 21, and includes
a shelter where female under trials may be kept in pursuance of
this Act.”

2 Para 462, supra.

2 Sen para 4-33, infra (Protective home),


48

48, Section 2(b), ‘gir’ —Section 24b) defines “girl” as a female
under the age of 2i years.

There is a suggestion that’ thete does net appear to be any rational
justification, in the present stage of sucial development, in not treating
a girt who has completed the age of 18 years as a woman. It has, Unere
fore, been suggested that svcticn 20) may be amended by detining

gitl” as a female who has not completed the age of 18 years. This will

require a consequential amendment of section 20), and section 20] may
be amended to describe “woman” as a female who has completed the
age of 18 years.

We have considered the suggestion carefully, but ave not inclined to
aecept it, as gitls between 18 ard 21 years also require protection. We
may also not that the distinction between “woman” and “girl?
becomes materia!’ only in sections 1514), 16() and 1700), which are
confined to “girls”. The other sections use both the expressions.

The question whether the age should be reducetl to 18 years, as has
been suggested, is one of policy. Before making the change, the Con:
vention ia pursuance of which the Act was passed 210 may have to be
studied. Hence, we are of the vizw that the matter should be left to the
Department.

There is no provision in the Act using only the expression
“women”, except the definition of woma: The provisions containing
only the expression “girl” are quoted below: —

“15(4) The special police officer entering any premises under sub-
section (1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom any girl if in his
opinion she is under the age of twenty-cne years and is carrying on or
js being made to carry on, or altempts ate being made to make her
tatty on. prostitution.”

“16(1) Where a magistrate has reason 10 believe, fram information
i se, that a girl apparently under the
iwenty-one years, is living, or is carrying on, or is being made to
carey on prostitution, in a brothel, he may direct the special police
officer to enter such brothel, and 16 remoye therefrom such girl and
produce her before him.”

“17(1) When the special police officer removing a girl under sub-
section (4) of section 15 or rescuing a gitld under subsection (| of
section 16, fails to produce her immediately before the magistrate as
required by sub-section (5) of section [5 or subsection (2) of section 15,
he shall forthwith prodace her befere the nearest magistrate of any
class, who shali pass such orders as he deems proper for her safe
vustedy until she is produced befare the appropriate magistrate.”

1S. No. 46 (15th October, 1974) fengyestion of the Department of Baciat Welfare).
हे See Appendix 2.


19

Jt may also be stated that when section 3664-8, LP.C., was en-
acted by Act 20 of 1923, to give effuct to certain Articles of the Inter
national Convention for the Suppression of Traffic in Women and
Children and signed by various nations at Paris on May 4, 1910, a
faation was made, The material articles of the Convention ran as
01098 : —

“Article 1—Whoever, in order to gratify the passions of another
person, has procured, enticed, or led away, even with her consent, «
woman or girl under-age, for immoral purposes, shall be punished, not-
withstanding that the various acts constituting the offence may have
been committed in different countries.

Article 2--Whoever, in order to gratify the passicns of another
person, has, by fraud, or by means ता violence, threats, abuse of autho-
nity, or any other method of compulsion, procured, enticed, or led
away a womun or girl over-age, for immoral purposes, shall also be
punished notwithstanding that the various acts constituting the oilence
may have been committed in different countries,

Article 3—The contracting parlics whose legislation may not at
present be sufficient to deal with offences contemplated by the two
preceding Articles engage to take or to propose to their respective legis-
latures the necessary steps to punish these offences according to their
gravity.”

The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill which led to
the amendment Act runs as under: —.

“The principles in this International Convention were endorsed in
the International Convention regarding the Traffic in Women and
Children which was adopted by the Second Assembly of the League of
Nations. In Article I of this Convention it is provided that the High
Contracting Parties, in the event of their not being already partics to
the International Convention of May 4, 1910, shall transmit with the
least possible delay their ratifications of, or adhesions to, that instrii-
ment in the manner laid down therein. Further, the term “under-age”
which did mean under 20 completed years of age, according to pura-
graph B of the final Protocol of the Convention of 1910 is now inter-
preted as meaning under 21 completed years of age by virtue of the
provisions of Article 5 of the International Convention, adopted by the
second Assembly of the League of Nations.

“In view of the resolutions adopted by the Council of State on
January 31, 1922, and by the Legislative Assembly on February 7, 1922.
“the International Convention adopted by the Second Assembly of the
League of Nations was signed at Geneva on behalf of the Govenment
of India by His Majesty’s Minister at Berne on March 28, 1922. with
the following reservation:

1 Gazette of India for 1922, Part ए, page 143.


“Inid reserves the right of its discretion to substitute the age of
aixtcen years or any greater age that may be subsequently decided upon
for the age limit prescribed in paragraph B of the final Protocol of the
Convention of May 4, 1910, and in Article 5 of the present Conven-
tion.'”

Lt is not-known whether a similar reservation was made in regard
10 the Convention of 1950.

4.9. Sectian 2ic)- “Magistrate”
clause {c} of section 2, is as follows:
“(c) “Magistrate” means a District Magistrate, a Sub-Divi-
sional Magistrate, a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of
the first class specially empowered by the State Government by
notification in the Official Gazette ta exercise jurisdiction under

this Act.”

The terminology now adopted in the new Criminal Procedure
Code? in respect of Magistrates in Presidency towns is ‘Metropolitan
Magistrates’, which should, therefore, be substituted in this Act also.
Several other amendments are also required’,

The definition of “Magistrate” in

410. Suggestion to deleie not accepted— Powers of Magistrates
enunerated—-t has been suggested,’ that section 2(c), which we have
quoted above,” should be deleted.

The reason given is that ike restriction is unnecessary. It creates
difficulties in the matter of rescue work, searches and arrests.

The suggestion does not, unfortunately, take account of the detail-
ed provision as to various powers of Magistrates, It appears to us (hat
the matter will require examination with reference 10 each section in
view of separation of judiciary.

The expression “Magistrate” occurs in the following sections of
the Suppression of Immoral Traflig Act.

Section Giat of the section

uu) . न .. Prastitation in or in the vicinity of public plaer—spnbl.c
place to be notified by District Magistrate

Vite) जन on .. Trial for breach of the requiremen: to uotify asklcess
hy a ptevioasly convicted offender,

124) jeeurity fur good behaviour from hubiiual ofenders.

1505} Search withous warrant.

16 Reseus of girl.

पर Intermediate eustody of girls removed under seerien
J6 ov rexeued urder sectin 16,

19119 and (4) .. बन =. Closure of brothels and eviction of offenders from pure
mises.

19 . न . Applicatioa for being kept in a protective humm.

201) and (8)... + Removal of prostitates front ary place.

22 ‘Frias

1 Gaxette of India for 1922, part V, page 343.

2 See tho Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1994),
® Para 4°12, infra.

3 Suggestion of the Central Bureat uf Correctional Sea vices.

६ Para 459, supra,


23

4.11. Recommendation as to various powers in view of separation
in view of separation of the judiciary from the executive, our recom
mendations with reference to each of the powers of Magistrates, as
enumerated above, are as follows:

6) Power under section 7(1) is, at present, confined to “District
Magistrate”, and may continue in that form, not being a
judicial power.

Gi) As regards the power under section 11(4), it pertains to
trial, and should be confined to judicial Magistrates—i.e.,
Magistrates of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrates
who would be Judicial Magistrates,

(iii) The power to require security under section 12(4) is analo-
gous to the power under section 110, Cr.P.C. in 1898 and
the corresponding provision in the new Code. In the new
Cr.P.C., the power under the provision’ corresponding to
section 110 has been given to Magistrates of the first class.
and it would be proper to give the power under section 12(4)
also to a Magistrate of the first class, or Metropolitan
Magistrates,who would be judicial Magistrates.

(iv) As regards the power to make orders for custody under
sections 15(5} read with section 1761) and the power to
issue orders for rescue of a girl under section 16, these are
similar to the power under sections 100 and 552 of the
Cr.P.C, 1898, In the new Criminal Procedure Code*, powers
under the corresponding provision are given 10 the District
Magistrate and Sub-Divisional Magistrate (who are Execu-
tive Magistrates), as well as to Magistrates of the first class
or Metropolitan Magistrates (who are judicial Magistrates).
Powers under section 15(5) read with section 17 and powers
under scction 16 read with section 17 of the Suppression of
Immoral Traffic Act may, therefore, also be given to the
same Magistrates, ie. concurrently to both judicial and
executive Magistrates.

(iva) Powers under section 18 (closure of brothels and eviction
from promises) may be given to Executive Magistrates, be-
ing somewhat analogouns' to the power under section 20.
The powers may be given to District Magistrates and Sub-
Divisional Magistrates.

(श The reasoning applicable to section 16 applies‘ to powers
under section 19 of the Act, relating to applications by
women for being kept in a protective home. The power may,
therefore, be given to both classes of Magistrates.

1 Section 110, Criminal Procedure Cade, 1974 (old section 210).

2 Code of Criminal Procedure 1974, section 97-98 (oll sections 100 and 552),
2 860 below ag te powers under section 20

+ See abore-recommendalion relating to powers ander section 15,



(vi) The power under section 20 is analogous to that under sec-
‘tion 133, Cr.P.C., 1898 (prohibition of public nuisances).
Under the new Criminal Procecure Code’, the power under
the corresponding provision is given to District Magistrates,
Sub-Divisional Magistrates, and Executive Magistrates
specially empowered by the State Government, and the
power under, section 20 may also be given to them,

(vii) Section 22 provides that “No court inferior to that of a
Magistrate as defined in clause (c) of section 2 shall try an
offence under section 3, section 5, section 6, section 7 or
section 8.” As this is a judicial power, the power should
now be transferred to a Magistrate of the first class or a
Metropolitan Magistrate—who are judicial Magistrates.

4.12, Definition of “Magistrate” to be revised, and schedule of
powers to be inserted—We, therefore, recommend that the definition of
“Magistrate” should be revised so as to give effect to our above tecom-
mendations. For carrying out the substance of our recommendation,
several drafting devices are open. We think that the most suitable device
would be to annex a schedule’, listing the magistrates competent to
cxercise the powers under each section. The definition of “Magistrate”
in section 26 will refer to this schedule’. The substantive section would.
in general, merely speak of the “Magistrate”, without qualifying words

4.13. Recommendation as to section 2(c)-—So far as the definition
of “Magistrate” in section 2(c) is concerned, it should be revised as
under: —

“(c) ‘Magistrate’, means the Magistrate specified in the Schedule
as competent to exercise the powers conferred by the section
in which the expression occurs.”

4.14, Section 2(d)-— prescribed’—Section 2(d), which defines the ex-
pression ‘prescribed’, needs no change.

4.15. Section 2(e)—‘prostitute’—Section 2(e) defines a ‘prostitute’
as meaning “a female who offers her body for promiscucus sexual inter-
course for hire, whether in money or in kind”. The cbservations mace
in the Report of the Committee was that the term should be defined
more precisely and clearly, so as to check all possible avenues being used
by the antisocial elements indulging in the vice. The recommendation
of the Committee was that a proviso should be added to indicate that
when a female offers her body for promiscugus sexual intercourse, it
may be presumed that the act is motivated by the expectation of reward
in form of money or kind. It is stated that the suggested provision “will
make prosecution easier, by shifting the burden of proof to the accused.”

1 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1874, section 133 (old section 133).
3 ‘The definition of “Magistrate” will, then merely refere to the Schedule,

2 866 para, 4+13,-inf
4 Section 71), 11(4), 12(4). 15(5), 16, 17, 18(1), 1879), 18(4), 19, 20/1), 20(3), 22 to 06 amended
for the above purpose.

whereever nceess:


23

‘We do not, however, think that it would be desirable to have the
suggested presumption. Though discretionary, it is bound to be applied
either in all cases or in none at all. There is no evidence that any serious
difficulty has been experienced in proving the requirement about hire.
If prostitution is carried on as a business,—with the continuity which a
“business” implies.—such a presumption will certainly be drawn, even
without an express provision. But where there is no element of business,
it is not proper to draw a presumption. [t is hardly necessary to add that
our reluctance as to incorporating such a presumption does not mean
that there is any sympathy with a woman indulging in promiscuity. The
reluctance is based on the consideration of impropriety which we have
just now mentioned. It is also based on an apprehension that such a
presumption may be abused, and may unduly widen the present scope of
the Act, and we are not inclined to accept the suggestion. We have al-
ready stated that at least for the present we are reluctant to recommend
widening of the Act.

4.16. Suggestion to add “indiscriminate lewdness” it the definition
of prostitute—Then, there is a suggestion’ to re-draft section 2(e) as
follows :—

“prostitute” means a female who offers her body for indiscri-
minate lewdness for hire whether in money or in kind offered
immediately or otherwise.”

The reason given for suggesting the above amendment is that diffi-
culties are experienced in establishing actual sexual intercourse. It is
stated that the word “promiscuous” makes it necessary ta prove more
than one such case which makes it still more difficult to
establish that a woman is a “prostituie” before action under section 3 or
section 4 can be taken. It also becomes difficult to prove that immediate
payment of money has been made. Organised commercial vice develops
ways of indirect payment. Il is urged that the change sugzested is an the
lines of the Children Act of Bombay, and a US. judicial decision? It is
added that the proposed criterion of “indiscriminateness,” would prove
the case even when a single client happens to be involved. “Lewdness”
may be established even when a woman is within closed doors with total
strangers. At the same time, this definition would not affect a woman
giving her favours to one man who is well-known to her, nor would it
affect a woman who is promiscuous without reward in cash or kind.
Thus, the suggesied amendment will help he prosecution without enlarg-
ing the scope of the Act. A similar change for adding “lewdness” has
been suggested also with reference 10 the definition of “prostitution”.’
We propose to deal with this point while discussing the definition of
“prostitution”.

7 Suggestion of the Central Barean of Correczional Services.
® Kelly रु. State, 14 80. 2nd 699 (cited in the suggestion),
3 Section 2(f) Para 4°18. infra.


24

4.17, Recommendation to detete section 2(e)—-It appears to us that
the best course ‘would be to link up the definition of erostitite” with
that of ‘prostitution’, This will avoid the need for amending the one
whenever the other is amended. Accordingly, we recommend’ that, at
the end of the definition of ‘prostitution’, the following words should be

e

“and the expression ‘prostitute’ shall be construed accord-

ingly”.
This will take the place of the existing definition of “prostitute”.

4.18. Section 2(0-- prostitution’--Section 2(f) defines “prostitution”
as meaning “the act of a female offering her body for proztiscuous sexual
intercourse for hire, whether in money or in kind, The Committee
recommended the insertion of a presumption in this clause also, to the
effect thal where a female offers her body for promiscuous sexual inter-
course, it may be presumed that she does so with the expectation of a
yeward in form of money or kind. Our comments with reference to sec-
tion 2ie) apply to this suggestion of the Committee also.

There is another suggestion in which the following redraft of clause
(8) of section 2 has been suggested: —

* ‘prostitution’ means the act of a female offering her body
for indiscriminate lewdness for hire, whether in money or in kind
offered immediately or otherwise, and includes the indulgence of
a male in such an offer.”

The reason given in support of the suggestion is, that immediate
payment (which is required by the present definition) o: promiscuous
intercourse, is difficult to prove. Hence, it should be provided that the pay-
ment may be offered immediately or otherwise. A fresh criterion. viz.
that of the indulgence of the male, has also been proposed to be added.
jt is stated that logically, there can be no prostitution if there is merely
an offer. Even in common parlance the term ‘prostitution’ signifies both
the offer and the participation in the same, and involves the male as well
as the female. This change will, it is stated. have a significant effect in
helping the prosecution. At present, there may be circumstantial proof of
indulgence in prostitution with the client on the spot, but the prosecution
finds it difficult to establish such intention, if the woman involved has
disappeared. This kind of circumstaneial evidence, it is stated, is very
necessary for the effective implementation of the Act.

1 Spe recommendation as in seotion, Qif)-definition of ‘prostitution’, para 4-26 infra.

© Report of the Committee om arseadments ta the Saprsston ete, Act, geragraph JS
Recommendation No. 3. :

2 Seo diseaasion as to aeotion S(e}, para 4118, supra.

4 Suggeation of the Central Bucvan uf Coreestional Services


25

4.19. Change needed in definition of ‘prostitution’—Several points
arise out of this suggestion.’ The separate suggestion’ to define the cx-
pression “purpose of prostitution”, has also to be considered. Finally. it
is also necessary to carry out what has beea previously stated’ regarding
linking up the definition of “prostitute” and “prostitution”. The various
points are considered below, one by one.

4.20. Suggestion to substitute “indiscriminate lewdness” aot accept-
ed-—---First, the suggestion’ that the words “indiscriminate lewdness”
should be substitutéd in place of the words “promiscuous sexual inter-
course”, does not appear to be a sound one. We apprehend that the ex-
pression “lewdness” may prove to be too wide a test, in this context.

Tt would be of interest, in this connection, to trace the origin of the
expression “indiscriminate Jewdness”. In England, causing or encourag-
ing a woman to become a common prostitute is an offence under section
2241) of the Sexual Offence Act, 1956, Under section 23(1) cf the saine
Act, it is an offence for a person to procure a woman to become a
common prostitute. Under section 30, it is an offence for a man know-
ingly to live wholly or in part on the earnings of prostitution. है has been
held by the Court of Criminal Appeal’ that the words “commen prosti-
tute” and “prostitution” are not confined to normal sexual intercourse.
Mr, Justice Darling’s judgment’ of 1918, where “prostitution” was taken
to mean the offering by a woman of her body for purposes amounting
to common lewdness for payment, was, in substance, approved by the
Court of Criminal Appeal, and it was pointed out that Darling J. might
well have taken these words from the dictionary meaning—Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary—whereunder the first meaning given to
“prostitution” is the “offering of the body to indiscriminate lewdness for
hire”.

4.21, Position in the U.S.A. as to “lewdness’—In ar American
study of sexual behaviour and the law’, the position as to prostitution in
the U.S.A. has been briefly stated thus—

“The sexual act committed by a prostitute is directly punish-
able under statutes (i) which prohibit ‘the commission of prostitu-
tion’ without other definition, (ii) which provides various broad
legislation to reach such uctivities as ‘indiscriminate sexual
intercourse or any act of deviate sexual “‘conduct for
money’, ‘the offering or receiving of the body for sexval
intercourse for hire or......... without hire’, or (iti) other con-
duct which may or may not be limited to ‘normal’ heterosexual
intercourse or to compensated intercourse. The terms ‘lewdness’
and ‘assignation’ are commonly used as alternatives to ‘prostitu-

1 Para 4-18, supra.
4:27 and 4 28 infra

2 Seo discussion regarding section 2-New definition of “purposes of prostitutio
4-27 an 1 4 "28 infra,

See diseussion regarding section 2c) definition of “prostitute”, pare 4+17, supra.

«Para 4618, supra.

४ Rv Webb, (1963) 3 All E.R. 177 (0.0.4)

*R. b. D, Munk, (1918-1919) All E.R. (Re-print) 499 (Darling J.)

5 Selvanko, Sexual Behaviour and the Law (1902), page 646.



26

Hon’, primarily ta avoid the possibility of unduly restrictive
judicial interpretation which might hold the term ‘prostitution’
inanplicable to what to a layman, would be a clear case of com-
mercialised vice.”

__ As we have already indicated’, the word ‘lewd’ is vague. And, in
view of iis vagueness, we do not recommend its addition in the definition
of ‘prostitution’,

4.22, Payment need not be immediate—So far as the question of
payment for prostitution is concerned, we agree that a clarification to
the effect that payment for the intercourse need not be immediate, could
be usefully made, for the reasons given by the Committes’

4.23. Indulgence of the male—As regards indulgence of a male in
prostitution. the question of punishing it raises controversial questions
aS to what ought to be scope of the Act. In our view, it would not be
correct to add such indnilgence as a branch of ‘prostitution’. The question
whether the acquiescence of the male in the prostitution should be
punished could, if desirable, be separately considered, But such conduct
on the part of the male cannot be clubbed with “prostitution”, and not-
withstanding any evidentiary difficulties that may arise, it would not be
appropriate to de so.

4.24. Person hiring prostitute whether to be punished—The questior
is—Should a person who hires a prostitute, be punished? In other words
should the patron of a prostitute be punished? Tt must be pointed out
that such an amendment would go much beyond the present scope of
the Act, and mark a radical departure, What the Act punishes, is not
“prostitution” in the abstract, but prostitution under certain circum-
stances. A girl who offers her body for indiscriminate sexual intercourse
for hire. may be a prostitute. but, being a prostitute is not, in itself an
offence.’ The expression “prostitutien” ts defined for the purposes of the
Act, but the penal sections do not punish prostitution per se.

Whatever view one may hold as to how far a particular society
should put up with prostitution, and even if puritanism may impel a
difficult to accept the proposition that the Jaw should punish if as a
particular society to regard prostitution as deserving condemnation, it is
crime on the part of the male patron.

The trend of legislation—whether one may like it or not—is to-
wards leaving out of the sphere of criminal law conduct which takes
place between consénting adults in private, In any case. it is hardly
appropriate to add to the law a new provision which will punish the male
patron, and we da nat recommend any such change.

4 Para 4018, capri.
2 Para 4-20, supra,
3 Para 428, supros
४ Chapter 3, supra.


27

4.25. Definition of “prostitute” to be linked up with definiton of
“prostitution” —The definition of ‘prostitute’ should be linked up with
that of “prostitution”, as already recommended.’

4.26. Recommendation to revise section 2(f)—In the light of the
ubove discussion, we recommend that the definition of “prostitution”
should be revised as follows : --

“(®) ‘prestitution’ means the act of  fcmale offering her body
for promiscuous sexual intercourse for hire, whether in money or
in kind, and whether offered immediately op otherwise, and the
expression ‘prostitute’ shall be construed accordingly.

4.27, Section 2—new definition of ‘purposes of prostitution’ —sug-
gestion considered but not accepied—It has’ been suggested* that a new
definition of the expression “purposes of prostitution”, should be insert-
ed as follows

“Purposes of prostitution” includes activities and circum-
stances in furtherance of or ancillary to prostitution.

The reason given in support of the suggestion is that ordinarily,
police officers investigating a case find only circumstantial evidence, and
cannot establish either that a woman is a ‘prostitute’ as defined at pre-
sent in the Act, or that an act of “prostitution” bas been committed.
The Act, it is stated, has used the expression “purposes of prostitution”,
in severa! places. If the expression is explained so as 10 cover such cir-
cumstantial evidence which implicates the accused, then it would help to
establish cases against third parties,

4,28. Change not recommended—We have carefully corsidered the
suggestion, but have ultimately come to the conclusion that it is not
desirable to make the suggested amendment. Taking note of the diffi-
culty said to have been felt." we made an attempt to provide for such
cases, but it appeared to us that it would create complications. The
concept of “incidental” acts would be very vague. Moreover, since, even
under the suggested amendment it would be necessary to establish a
connection of the incidental acts with prostitution in the narrower sense,
it scems that its practical utility would be almost nil, It is for these
reasons that we are not recommending any such change.

4.29. Section 2(g)—“protective home”—Reconmendation to amend
-~We now take up section 2(g), which defines a “protective home”. The
Committee? recommended that the definition of “protective home”
should include an institution for the care and protection of rescued
women and girls, by whatever name called, which is so declared. We
agree that the clause may be amended to that effect in substance.

1 Soe recommentution as ta section Qe), supra.

* Snggestion of the Central Bucean of Correctional Services,

३ Para 427, supra.

+ Report of the Comvnitioc on amendments to Ue Suppression ete, Act, para 8-4, Reeom-
uendation No. 9.



28

___ 4.30. We may also note that the present definition is defective,
inasmuch as it makes no reference to section 21, under which the estab-
lishment and licensing of protective homes is specifically regulated. The
definition of “protective home” should refer to that section.

4.31. In one suggestion’ Telating to the definition of “protective
home”, the following re-draft of the definition has been suggested :—

“Protective home” means an institution, by whatever neme
called, in which girls may be kept in pursuance of section 17.”

The reason given in support of the Suggested amendment is, that
one of the most unsatisfactory features of this Act is that gitls who are
rescued under the Act are required to be kept in the same institutions
in which common prostitutes convicted under the Act for various
offences are to be kept. It is stated that even if the institutional arrange
ments are perfect enough to avoid contamination and to provide
adequate training, it would be difficult ta create the same confidence in
the girl, if she is kept in the same institution as prostitutes. The “protec-
tive” homes should be entirely protective. These should be specialised
training institutions, working for the rehabilitation of rescued girls. We
are in broad agreement with this approach.

4.32. As regards under-trial females mentioned in the present defini-
tion of “protective home”, it is urged in the same suggestion® that, on
practical considerations, one has to be reconciled to the idea that the
court would have to use the female wards of jails for keeping under-
trials. If such wards are good enough for being used even for political
and security prisoners and for all other types of female under-trials,
then, there is no reason why they should be considered unsuitable for
purposes of the Act.

We are not, however, inclined to accept this view. In our opinion,
it is undesirable to keep together under-trials and girls rescued under the
Act. Out of the former, some may be criminals. while out of the latter,
most would be victims. In dealing with this problem, the character and
category of rescued girls and the object of rescue should be borne in
mind.

4.33. Recommendation—In view of what is stated above, it would
be better to define the expression “protective home” as excluding a
corrective institution, We, therefore, recommend the following revised
definition of “protective home”.

Revised definition

“(g) ‘protective home’ means an institution, by whatever name
called, in which women and girls, who are in need of care and protection,

1 Sugecstion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services,

* Para 4-31, aupra,


29

may be kept under this Act, being an institution established or licensed
as such under section 21, but does not include

(0) a shelter where female under-trials may be kept in pursu-
ance of this Act, or

(ii) a corrective institution.”

4.34, Exclusion of ‘corrective institution’ from the definition of pro-
tective home—The expression “corrective institution”, should be
reserved’ for institutions where women and girls who are not rescued
but are themselves guilty of offences should be kept. The basic object in
keeping ‘protective homes’ separate from corrective institution is that
the former are really meant for women and girls who are victims of
circumstances, while the latter are meant for women who have reached
a stage of crimin: lity, though it is hoped that they can be reformed by
suitable treatment. That is why we are excluding corrective institutions
from protective homes’,

4.35. Section*(h)\—“Public  place’—No_ change _recommended—-
Section 2(h) provides that a ‘public place’ means any place intended for
use by or accessible to the public, and includes any conveyance, A
recommendation was made by the Committee" to the effect that the term
‘public place’ should include a thoroughfare. We do not, however,
accept the suggestion, because there can hardly be any doubt that a
thoroughfare is a “place accessible to the public”, and would, therefore,
fall within the present definition. We see no need for any amendment.

4.36. Section’ (Section 20) defines the expression “special police
officer”, and needs no change.

॥ Para 4-7, supra.
+ Para 4733, supra.

3 Report of the Committee to recommnd amendments to the Suppression eve. Aets

LfP(DLEM FLI&CA—4


CHAPTER 5
OFFENCES

5.1. Section 3(1)—Having dealt with the detinitions contained in the
Act, we now proceed to take up the offences. Section 3(1) punishes the
act of keeping or managing a brothel, or acting or assisting in the keep-
ing or makagement of a brothel. The punishment for the offence is as
‘ollows : —

(9) on first conviction—rigorous imprisonment for a term of
not less than one year and not more than three years, and fine
which may extend to two thousand rupees;

(0) on second or subsequent conviction—tigorous imprison-
ment for not less than twa years and not more than five years,
and also fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.

The section needs no change.

5.2. Section 3(2)-—Section 3(2), punishes a person who allows pre-
mises to be used as a brothel. Here also, no change is needed.

5.3. Section 3{3)—Under section 3(3), on conviction under section
3(2) in respect of any premises, any lease or agreement under which such
premises have been leased out or are held or occupied at the time of
commission of the offence shall become void. The sub-section needs no
change.

5.4. Section 4—Analysis—That takes us to section 4, which
punishes a person over 18 years who knowingly lives on the earnings of
prostitutign. This is one of the important sections of the Act. It consists
of two sub-sections and a proviso. Sub-section (1) is the operative part of
the section, and provides that the offence falling under it shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
There are two ingredients of the offence prescribed by this sub-section.
The first is that the offender must be a person above the age of 18 years.
and the second that he must knowingly live, wholly or in part, on the
earnings of prostitution of a woman or girl. When these two ingredients
are proved, the offence is committed and the offender is liable to be
punished as prescribed.

Subsection (2) of section 4 lays down a rule of evidence under
which a rebuttable presumption can be drawn by the Court that persons
falling under clauses fa), (0) or (0) of sub-section (2) shall be presumed
to be knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person
within the meaning of sub-section (1); in other words, where any person
falls under one or the other of the three categories prescribed by clause

Bu


31

a), (0) and (0 of sub-section (2), a rebuttable presumption can be drawn
against him thet he satisfies the second essential ingredient of sub-section
11)

5.5. Section 4(2), proviso—Some minor points concerning section
42)(b) and section 4(2)(c) will be dealt with later.’ But a question arises
concerning the proviso to section 4(2), The proviso is quoted below :—

“Provided that no such presumption shall bg drawn. in the
case of a son or daughter of a prostitute, if the son or daughter
is below the age of eighteen years.” .

The question to be considered is whether this proviso is needed at
all.

5.6. Character of circumstances giving rise to presumption—It would
be useful to refer to clause (a) of sub-section (2) to illustrate the character
of circumstances from which the presumption under that sub-section can
be drawn. Clause (8) provides that where a person is proved to be living
with, or to be habitually in the company of, a prostitute, he shall be
presumed to be knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution within
the meaning of sub-section (1). It will thus be clear that mere proof of
the fact that a person lives with, or is habitually in thée' company of, a
prostitute raises the statutory rebuttable presumption that he is doing so
knowingly to live on the earnings of prostitution.

5.7, Essential link between sub-section (1) and sub-section )—The
schéme of section 4 shows that sub-section (2) has to be read alongwith
sub‘section (1); and when sub-section (2) refers to “any person", it must,
on a fair construction of the two sub-sections read together, refer to any
person over the age of 18 years. It is clear that, before’ the Court pro-

-todeat.with the evidence relevant under any. ofthe ‘faree clauses
fa),,4b), or (c) of sub-section (2) for determining whether. a presumption
can be drawn-against a person, it must be proved that he is a person
above the agg af 18. years, because it is only persons who.are shown to |.

ih, है

9११1० ० the ipgeiofil8 years who can be prosecuted under section 4(1);
al orate knowns after the-.other. essential. ingredient of the
०0 at they: Knowingly live:on the carnings of prestitution—is alse *
proved: it. is spect of this latter ingredient that a rule of evidence

enabling the. Court to draw a rebuttable. presumption is ‘prescribed by
subspec tion; (2),.hherefgre.in, our. opinion, though. sub-section (2) refers.
to.,fany person’, it.applies only to a person above the age of-18. years,
because a person below the age of 18 years cannot fall within the mis.
chief of section 4(1), and hence there can be no question of epplying
sub-section (2) of section 4 to such a person. The rebuttable presumption:
will be drawn only against a person who is above 18 years and whe ig, |
therefore, interested in rebutting that presumption.

5.8. Provisa to section 4(2) superfleous—tf that be the true position.’
the question which needs to be considered is: does the proviso to section

3 Para 6:14 and +15, énfra,


32

4(2) serve any useful purpose? The proviso lays down that no “such
presumption”,-meaning the presumption which can be drawn under
sub-section (2),—shall be drawn in the case of a son or daughter of a
prostitute if the son or daughter is below the age of eighteen years. The
difficulty in accepting the view that this proviso serves any purpose is
that cases covered by the proviso cannot fall under section 4(1), and
there can, therefore, be no question of considering whether such a pet-
son knowingly lives wholly or in part on the earnings of prostitution.
We are inclined to think that, in enacting the proviso, this aspect of the
matter has apparently not been properly appreciated by the legislature.

5.9. It is possible that a person prosecuted under section 4(1) may
plead that he is below the age of 18 years and, in such a case, the Court
will have to try, as a preliminary issue, the question about the age of
the alleged offender, whether the alleged offender is a son or daughter
of a prostitute or any other person living with her; and it is only if it is
found that the said person is above the age of [8 years that the stage to
require the prosecution to prove that he lives on the earnings of prosti-
tution will be reached. At this stage, sub-section (2) will step in; and, if
the case is shown to fall under any of the three clauses (a), (b) or (c) of
sub-section (2), a rebuttable presumption will be drawn against that
person and he will be required to lead evidence in rebuttal.

It must be borne in mind that the order in which the two ingredients
of the offence are mentioned indicates the logical sequence of the issues
which call for decision while applying section 4(1), If that be the true
position, it would follow that the proviso to section 4(2) really serves no
purpose. It may be that the proviso has been added as a matter of abun-
dant caution; but, in view of our conclusion that it is superfluous, we
recommend that this proviso should be deleted.

5.10, Possible arguments considered—It may be argued that though,
on a fair and reasonable construction, sub-section (2) of section 4 applies
only to persons above the age of 18 ycars, the proviso might have been
deliberately inserted to make an express provision limited to the cases
of sons and daughters of prostitutes, in order to emphasise the fact that
such sons or daughters should not be exposed to the risk of moral
stigma by being prosecuted under section 4(1) even though they are
below 18 years. As we have indicateed' unless the prosecution acts in-
advertently or deliberately, a person who is below the age of 18 years,
including a son or daughter below that age, cannot be prosecuted under
section 41). In fact, when a person is charged under section 4(1), the
relevant facts pertaining to the two ingredients prescribed by that sub-
section.’ will have to be specifically alleged. and that means that the pro-
secution will have to state that the accused is above the age of 18. and
livés knowingly on the earnings of prostiuttion. Therefore, the suggestion
that, though the proviso may apparently be unnecessary and superfluous,
the legislature might have intended ta emphasise the special case of sons

1 See paragraph 5-9, supra.
३ Para 57, supra.


33

or daughters of the prostitute, does not appear to us to justify
its retention. The possibility that a son or daughter of 4. prosti-
tute below 18 years may be inadvertently or deliberately exposed to the
stigma of being prosecuted under section 4(1) cannot be avoided by
attempting to strength the plain provision of sub-section 441) by adding
the proviso in question.

5.11. Question of increase in the age under section 4(2) provise—
‘There is another incidental question which may arise out of the proviso
-—name!y, whether, in regard to a sou or daughter of a prostitute, a
specific provision should be made that no presumption should be drawn
against him or her if he or she is shown to be below 21 years of age. It
is urged in support of this view that a son or daughter of a prostitute,
who may be living with the mother, should be given adcitional protec-
tion in view of the fact that he or she would inevitably have to stay
with the mother, and it would not be unfair or unreasonable to assume
that he or she continues to be immature until he or she completes 21
years of age, because, normally, a boy or a girl in that position may
not be mature at the age of 18. Prima facie, there is some foree in this.
view; but, on the other hand, if the argument of immaturity is regarded
as relevant, then, its application cannot be reasonably excluded even
in regard to other relatives. of the prostitute who are below 21, because,
even in their cases, it may, with equal justification, be urged that they
are living with the prostitute as a imatter of economic necessity and
because of near relationship (for instance, sister, nephew, niece, first
cousin), and their immaturity upto the age of 21 should also afford them
a shield of protection.

- 5.12. Recommendation io delete the proviso to section 42)—We
have carefully considered the pros and cons of this problem, and we are
satisfied that the acceptance of the suggestion’ would, in a sense, lead
to its extension to all persons staying with a prostitute who are below
21, and that would, in effect. amount to a substantial amendment of
section 4(1). In our opinion, the adoption of such a course would not be
either expedient or justified. Our recommendation, therefore, is that the
proviso to section 4(2) should be deleted.

5.13. Recommendation to amend section 42), main paragraph—-
Having dealt with the controversy created by the proviso to section 442),
we would also record our view that it is desirable to avoid all future
debate as tu the scupe of section 42), To avoid further controversy,
therefore, we recommend that in section 4(2), opening ‘ime, after the
words “any person”, the words “over the age of eighteen years” should
be inserted.

3.14. Section 4(2)(6)--We now resume consideration of the main
paragraph of section 4(2Mb). With reference to section 4(2)(b). it has been
suggested’ thet the werds “the mavements of” should be removed. The

1 Para 6-11 , supea.
2 Suggestion of the Central Burean of Correctinnal Services.


34

reason given in support of the suggestion is that there is no street-walking
in this country. The existing provision, it is stated, is practically mean-
ingless. The proposed amendment will bring, under the purview -of-law,
devious method of control, direction, and influence exercised by orga-
nised commercial vice over prostitutes or over women under their sway,
and will make the purposes of the Act more effective. We do not, how-
ever, accept the suggestion, as, in our view, the word “movement” is
wide enough to serve the purpose. Moreover, pimps are covered by
existing section 4(2)(c)’. No change is, therefore recommended. हे

_ 5.15. Section 4(2)(c)—As to section 4(2)(c), it has been suggested"
that the words “on behalf of a prostitute” should be replaced by. the
words “for purposes of prostitution”, and the sub-clause may be revised
to read—
“to be acting as a tout or pimp for purposes of prostitution”,
5.16. The reason given to support the suggestion is that it is not
necessary to relate a tout or pimp to one particular prostitute. He may
be acting for a large number of them, and his activities may often take
the shape of maintaining registers, or offering membership of: certain
type of clubs, and other activities for the purposes of prostitution. We
are, however, of the view that the suggested amendment is unnecessary,
because the word “prostitute” is not, in our opinion, confined to the
singular.
5.i7, Section 4(2)—how to be revised—In the light of the above
discussion, we recommend that section 4(2) should be revised as fol-
lows : —
(2) Where any person over the age of eighteen years is
proved— हर
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the compan:
.of, a prostitute; or .
(७) to have exercised control, direction or influence over
the movements of a prostitute in such a manner as to show
that such person is aiding. abetting or compelling her prostitu-
tion; or
(0 to be acting as a tout or pimp “on behalf of a prosti-
tute,
it shall be presumed, until the. contrary is proved, that such per-
son is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another
person within the meaning of sub-section (1).”
* * *

(Proviso omitted)

2 Para 5-18, infra.
+ Suggestion of the Central Bureau ef Correctional Services.


35

5.18. Section 5(1) and section 5(2)--Under section 501), procuring,
inducing or taking a woman or girl for prostitution. is punishable with
the specified period of imprisonment and the specified amount of fine.
Tt needs no change. ‘Section 5(2) deals with subsequent conviction and
needs no change. . हे

5.19. Section 5(3)—Section 503) provides that an जींगाएह under 5९०
tion 50) or 5(2) shall be triable in the place from which the woman or
girl is procured, induced, etc. or the place to which she may have gone
as a result of the-inducement: It needs no change.

5.20. Section S—Suggestion to add “purchase or ‘sale of girls’ —It
has been suggested’, that a new sub-clause should be added in section 5
as follows—

“purchases, sells or aids or abets in the purchase or sale of a
woman or a girl.”

The reason given in support of the suggestion is that there have
been cases noticed in which the purchase and sale of adult girls could
not be prevented, as the “existing provisions of the law” relate either
to minors or sale for purposes of slavery, Presumably, sections 372 and
373 of the Indian Penal Code are “the existing provisions of the law”
which the suggestion has in mind.

3.21. Recommendation to amend sections 372, 373, Penal Code—
We have carefully considered the suggestion. We agree with the principle
of the suggestion. In our view. however, it would be more appropriate to
amend those sections of the Penal Code, as the subject matter of mere
purchase of girls or woman falls outside the Suppression of Immoral
Traffic Act—except where the purchase is for prostitution. In this con-
nection, we may refer to two sections of the Penal Code, dealing with
selling and buying minors for the purposes of prostitution, etc.—sections
372 and 373. A person wha sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of
any person under the age of 18 years “with intent that such person shall
at any age be employed for the purposes of prostitution or illicit inter-
course with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose or with
the knowledge that such person will be so employed, is punishable. under
section 372. Buying such a person is punishable under section 373. iy

The material part of section 372 of the Indian Penal Cade is quotéd
2५ ~ Tee ना
“372. Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of
any person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such
person shall at any age be employed or used for the purposes of
prostitution or illicit intereourse with any person or for any un-
lawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be'likely that'such
person will at any age be employed or used for any such purpose,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either. description for a
term which may exterid to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.” “os कं जे आए 5

1 Suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services,


36

The First Explanation to the sectidn provides as follows: —

“Explanation 1—When a female under the age of eighteen
years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise disposed of to a prostitute
or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so
disposing of such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be
presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that she shall
be used for the purpose of prostitution.”

Section 373 makes similar provisions for the person who buys ४०.
minors for purpose of prostitution etc.

In order to achieve the object, it will be necessary to amend sections
372 and 373 of the Indian Penal Code. so as to delete the werds “under
the age of eighteen years” (and to make consequential changes). in sec-
tions 372 and 373, We recommend accordingly"

5.21. Amendment of section 372 appropriate—We may state here
that an amendment of sections 372-373 on the lines suggested above
would not be inappropriate. No doubt, at preseni, under section 372.
it is only the sale, etc. of a person under the age of 18 years for the
specified purpose which is punishable. In fact, as originally enacted,
section 372 prescribed the ego limit of 16 years and it was in 1974 that,
by an amendment. the »ee was raised ta 18 years. The persen nider
the ege of 18 years may be married or unmarried‘, Normally, the sale
or letting to hire or other disposition of a person, as contemplated by
the section, will be difficult in the case of a person above the age of
18 yeurs, since he would be expected to resist the dispesition effectively,
Nevertheless, there is no reason why, if such an act is committed in
respect of an adult, it should not be punishable. Sections 372 and 373
are beneficial provisions, and we see no reason why the scope of such
mercenary crimes should be limited to acts in respect of minors.

5.21A, It has been pointed out that sections 372 and 373 were
originally enacted to deal with “trafficking in innocence’, It has also
been stated‘ that these sections protect female minors against their
guardians and third parties in respect of acts of disposal for a tife of
prostitution. These propositions correctly analyse the present section;
but they do not, in our view. militate against the extension of these
sections to adults, if the kind of control envisaged by the sections is. in
practice. found to have been exercised over adults.

Tt may be noted that the sections of the Penal Code relating to

slavery are not confined to minors.*
ne

1 Lo be carried out under section 372+ ¥ RC.

2 then v. Kamu, (1879) Puniah Record No. 12 (Criminal) 34, 38.
8 Powlet Boe vy. Sheikh Ali; 5 Madras High (vari Reports 473,
4 Venkw ¥. Makatinga, ULR. 11 Madras 393, 402,

3 Septions 870 and 371, Indian Penal Code,


5.22, Section 6(1) and section 6(2)—Section 6(1) putishes any per-
son who detaing any woman or girl, whether with or without her con-
sent,—

(3) in any brothel, or

(b) in or upon any premises wilh intent thal she may have
sexual intercourse with any man other than her lawful
husband,

The offender is punishable, on first conviction, with rigorous im-
prisonment for a term of not less than one year and not more than two
years, and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
Jt needs no change,

Under sub-section (2), on a second or subsequent conviction for an
offence under this section, a person shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term of not less than two years and not more than
five years, and also wilh fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees. It needs no change.

5.23. Section 6(3}---Under sub-section (3) of section 6, a person
shall be presumed to detain a woman or girl in a brothel or in or upon
any premises for the purpose of sexual intercourse with a man other
than her lawful husband, if such person, with intent to compel or
induce her to remain there,

{a) withholds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money
or other property belonging to her, or

(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away with
her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other property
lent or supplied to her by or by the direction of such per-
son.

Jt needs no change.

5.24, Section 6(4)—Sub-section (4) of section 6 provides that not-
withstanding any law to the contrary, no suit. prosecution or other
legal proceeding shal! lie against such woman or girl at the instance of
the person by whem she has been detained, for the recovery of any
jewellery, wearing apparel or other property alleged to have been lent
or supplied to or for such woman er girl or to bave pledged by such
woman or girl or for the recovery of any money alleged to be payable
by such woman ar girl,

It needs no change.

5.25. Section WML) —-Verbal change recommended —Under section
7), any woman ce girl who carries on prostitution and the person,
with whom such prostitution is carried on. in any premises which are
within a distance of two hundred yards of any place of public religious
worship, educational institution, hostel. hospital, nursiag home or such
other public place of any kind as may be notified in this behalf by the


33

Commissioner of Police or District Magistrate in the manner prescrib-
ed, shall be punishable with imprisonment.for a term which may ex-
tend to three months.

Section 7(1)--Under section 7 we may refer a suggestion’ providing
sterner punishment in the case of “the male partner’. A pcnishment of
imprisonment upto one year and a fine upto Rs. 1,000 is suggested in
respect of the male partner for the first offence. For the second and
subsequent convictions, the imprisonment may be upto 2 years, and
the fine amount may be upto Rs. 2,000.

We have found ourselves unable ta aocspc che suggestion. No
reasor.s have been giver: for the suggestion. Moreover, the suggestions
for punishing the male with ६ higher punishment than the prostitute
misses the main object of the seclion,—preventing prostitution near
specified places. The prostitute is as much guilty as the male partner

Only a verbal “change” is required in this sub-section, namely, in
place of the words “yards”, the word “meters” should be substituted,
LWe. recommend accordingly. हे

5.26. Suggestion regarding court to consider probation considered
ss-Etihas been suggested" with reference to section 7 that a provision
uphould be inserted to the effect that the court by which the person is
tfgund guilty shall not sentence her to imprisonment unless i: is satisfied
tehat, having regard to the circumstances of the case (including the

nature of the offence and the character of the offender), it would riot
be desirable to deal with her under section 3 or section 4
“tion of Offenders Act, [958 or under section 10 of this Act:
court passes any sentence of imprisonment on the offender, it shall
ctecord reasons for doing so. Further, it should be provided that for the
purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not be desirable to deal
with an offender under section 3 of section 4 of the ‘Probation of
Offenders Act or under section 10 of this Act. the court shall call for a
report from the Probation Officer and consider the report, if any, and
any other information available to it relating to the character and physi-
fal and mental condition of the offender. The object is to introduce the
\peobation method.

1... 5.27. Change recommended—We are of the view that the sugges-
tion should be accepted in substance, as introducing a salutary princi-
ple.

5.28. dmendment. of secticn 10 recommended—We are recom-
mending suitable amendment of section 10 fof the above purpose*

5.29, Section 742)—Under section 7(2), any person who—
(ai being the keeper cf any public place knowingly permits
prostitutes for purposes of their trade to resort to or remian
in such place; or

2 S.No. 4t--Suggestion of tho Depertment of Sucial Wellare,
5 Suggestion of the Contral Buroait of Corsactional Servicer.
रे See recommendation 58 to section 10, inf.


39

(0) being the tenant, lessee, Gecupier orperson in charge ot
any premises referred to in sub-section (1) knowingly per-
mits the same or any part thereof to be used for prostitu-
tion or

(©) being the owner, lessor 0 landlord of any premises referred
to in sub-section (1), or the agent of such owner, lessor or
landiord, lets the same; or any part thereof with the know-
ledge that the same or any part thereof may be used for
prostitution, or is wilfully a party to such use,

is punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two
hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a second or subse-
quent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months and also with fine which may extend to two hundred
Tupees. है

5.30. Suggestion considered—There is a suggestion’ to. make the
following change in section 7(2), clause (a): —-

“being the keeper of any public place knowingly permits
@ woman or a girl to resort to or remain in such @ place for
purposes of prostitution.” .

It has been stated that a keeper of a public place may take the
plea that he does not know that the woman is a “prostitute” as defined
in the Act. The purposes of the Act can, thus, be defeated. Hence the
need for amendment.

We do not, however, accept the suggested amendment, as it will
not, solve the difficulty referred to above. The principal requirement of
“purposes of prostitution” will still have to be proved, andthe proposed
amendment will be of no use in that respect.

5.31. Section 7(2)—-Another suggestion considered—As regards
section: 7(2)(c), the following re-draft has been suggested? : ---

“().. may be used for the purposes of prostitution.”

., It has been stated that the proposed change is necessary, as it may
be fifficult to prove actual prostitution within the very premises. A place
:used for operating a call-girl system should (it is stated) also be brought
‘within the scope of this Act. The suggested change however. becomes
unnecessary, in view of the wide definition of “prostitution”, which is
‘eparately recommended by ts.

5.32, Section 8—Section 8 reads as follows :—

“8. Whoever, in any public place or within sight of, and in
such manner as to be seen or heard from. any public place.
whether from within any building or house or not—

3 Suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Serviees.
+ Suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Serviews.
® See discussion ag to section 2(f) “prostitution”


40

(a) by words, gestures, wiiful exposure of her person
(whether by sitting by a window or on the baleany of a build
ing or house cr in any other way). or otherwise tempts or
endeavours to tempt, or attracts or endeavours to attract the
attention of, any person for the purpose of prostitution or

(b) solicits or molests any person, or loiters or acts in such
Manner as to cause obstruction or annoyance to persons resid-
ing nearby or passing by such public place or to offend against
public decency, for the purpose of prostitution; shall be punish-
able on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, or with both and in the event of a second
or subsequent conviction with imprisenment for a term which
may extend to one year, and also with fine which may extend
ta five hundred rupees.”
5.33. Section 8—Definition ef “solicit” not favoured—The Com-
- mittee’ made a recommendation that the expression ‘solicits’ in section
8 should be defined, so as to determine the action precisely. But we do
not think that a definition of this expression would be a1 improvement,
and we do not recommend any such amendment of the Act.

5.34. Section 8—Punishment-—It has been suggested,” as regads the
punishment under section 8 that—

{a) the offence should be punishable with imprisonment for ४
term which may extend ta six months (as at presenth,

(b) but it may be provided that the Court by which the person
is found guilty shall not sentence her to imprisonment uniess
it is satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances of the
case, including the nature of the offence and the character
of the offender, it would not be desirable to deal with the
offender otherwise;

(cl for the purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not be
desirable to deal with the offender under section 3 or section
4 of the Probation of Offenders Act or under section 10 of
this Act, the Court shall call for a report from the probation
officer and consider the report. if any. and any other infor-
mation available to it relating to the character and physical
and mental conditions of the offender.

The reason given for the suggestion is, that both fine and tmprison-
ment are totally unsatisfactory methods for dealing with such offences.
The satisfactory methods are probation with its diverse techniques, and
corrective training over a period of 2 to 5 years with a provision for
release on licence and supervision and after care,

1 Report of the Committee on amendments to the Suppresseion Act, para 5+3
© Para 5-32 oupre
3 Suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services,


4i

The suggestion may be accepted in principle, as a progressive one.
in respect of first conviction.

5.35. Amendment of section 10—We are tecommending suitable
amendment’ of section 10, for the above purpose.

3.36, Section 9-—Amendment recommended—We now come to sec-
tion 9, which reads—

“9. (1) Any person who, having the custody, charge or care
of any woman or girl, causes or aids or abets the seduction for
prostitution of that woman or girl shall be punishable on first
conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a tetm of not less than
one year and not more than three years, and also with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees.”

(2) In the event of a second or subsequent conviction of an
offence under this section a person shall be punishable with im-
prisonment which may extent to five years and also with a fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees.”

It has been suggested* that in section 9, after the words “having the
custody, charge or care of” the words “or a position of authority over
seseeeeee 7, be added. The phrase proposed to be added is considered to
be a modern need in legislation of this nature, as employers or their
agents ‘exercise immoral influence and induce girls to participate in
organised commercial vice occasionally. With the provision as it exists,
a very large number of offenders are fined. They have to work harder
to pay the fine, and the remedy defeats the purpose. “A tolerated system
of prostitution with the State realising revenue from the sarne through
fines comes into existence.” It is stated that such a development should
not be allowed, and we should provide for a scientific correctional ap-
proach.

5.37. Recommendation to amend section 9(1)—The suggestion is
worth acceptance, and sound in principle. We. therefore, recommend
that section 9(1) should be revised as follows:

“9(1) Tf any person having the custody, charge or care of
any woman or gitl, or standing in a position of authority over
any woman or girl, causes or aids or abets the seduction for
prostitution of that woman or girl, he shall be punishable on first
conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than
one year and not more than three years, and also with fine which
may extent to one thousand rupees.” ~

5.38. Section 10---Section 10 is an important section, and reads as
follows:

“10()a) A person convicted for the first time of any offence
under sub-section (2) of section 3, or under section 4, section 5,
section 7 or section 8 may. having regard to his age, character,

1 See redraft of section 10, infra.
3 Suggestion of the Central Buteau of Correctional Services.



42.

antecedents and the circumstances in which the offence was com-
mitted, be released by the court before which he is convicted on
probation of good conduct in the manner provided in sub-section
AD) of section 562 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898,

_{b) A person convicted for the first time of any offence under
section 7 or section है may, having regard to his age, character,
antecedents and the circumstances in which the offence was com-
mitted, alsa be released with admonition in the manner provided
for in sub-section (1A) of section 562 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.

(0) The provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3) and sub-
section (वी of section 562 and section 563 and section 564 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply to cases réferred
to in clause. {a) and clause (b).

, 2) Where a woman or girl is convicted of any offence under
section 7 or section 8 and,is not released under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) on probation of good conduct or under clause (b) of
that subsection with admonition, the court convicting the woman
orgitl mdy, having regard to the age, character, antecedents of -

otheicwoman ob'girl and the circumstances in which the offence
was: cominitted:pags in’ lieu of the sentence of-imprisonment or’
fine, a gentence!of detention in a protective home for a period of -

not less than two years and not more than five years.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Cri-

minal Procedure, 1898, or any other law for the time being in.

_. force, no. petson convicted under sub-section (1) of section 3 or

1. under section 6 or. section 9 shall be released on probation or
with admonition.” =

5.39, Section 10-—Analysis—On analysis it will be found that sec-
tion 10 contains two- types of provisions’ applicable to the various
offences: .

(71. Probation; 3:
हे ७) Detentiori in # protective home.

t are spread over’ a number of sub-scctions. The
mitiiner in'which the’ section is drafted, does not already bring out the
effect of the section on each type of offence. The following analysis has,
therefore, been prepared to facilitate a clear understanding :-—

Section 20) on a a जन . No probation—
Kenping a brothel. न = a "न + Seatinn 103)

Seption (2) व a “Pysbation
Allowing premises fo be ured as a brothel .. Seaton है। 44103
Sections | Oa, व कु 1 ”
Liv'ng on th aamnings of prostitution न ‘ ++ , Section 1D(1 Het

1 Pare 5-38. engpirte


43

-- i
Section 5 ve हु हा i. -+ Probation
Proouring, induving or taking woman or girl for prostitutio., ~+ Saotion 10(1)(2)
Section 6 . . = 7 -+ No probation
Dotaining a woman or girlin promisss whore prostitution ia carried on Section 10(8)
Seatlon 7. a दे बन कि ++ Probation
Peoatitutlowin or in rieinity of public placce 7 + Section 10(1)(a) Ad-
monition Seebion
20(1)(0),
Seotion 8 . मु . . ‘ ++ Probation
Seducing or soliviting for purpose of prostitution |. रु ++ Section 10(1)(a)
Admonition
Seotinn 10(1}8}
Beotion 9 . न नम + . :» No probation
Sedustion: of wows: or girl in oustody (for prostitution) 1५ ++ Beotion 103}.

5.40. Suggestion for revising section 10 considered—The provision
prohibiting probation—found in section 10(3)—raises an important
question arising from a suggestion, The. suggestion’ is that though the
offentes for which probation is disallowed under the Act—-¢.g. keeping
a brothel [section 3(1)] or detaining a girl for prostitution (section 6] ot
seduction of a girl in custody for prostitution [section 9],—are vicious
enough, .they could at times, be the result of an ill-considered or ill-bred
mind rather than of & well-planned criminal career, and it is desirable
that a categorical denial of probation should not find a place in the iaw.

3.41, Distinction between “protective home” and “corrective” insti-
tastion—That suggestion ‘has also dealt with one other aspect of the
matter.” We have referred earlier to the suggestion for making a distinc-
tion between “protective homes” and “corrective” institutions, Carrying
the same approach further, the suggestion now is that the court should,
under section 10, have a discretion to send the convicted person to a
corrective institution. It is stated that the wording used in the definition
—seetion 2(ghii)—for “corrective institutions” is the same as is used
notmajly for Borstal institutions, Borstal institutions are meant not for
first offenders or for those who show minor deviant traits, ut are intend-
ed for those who appear to be taking to life of crime, having already
committed two to three offences. In the existing provisions, “corrective
institution” is supposed to be a step towards leniency. It has been sug-
gested that such an institution really-conform to the standards of Borstal
institutions, and seek 10 train, re-educate and re-adjust the personalities
of 1056 who are seriously disturbed or are disorderly.

The scheme.set forth in the suggestion, therefore, is that ordinarily.
the court should—

(i) :admonish the person in case of first offence;
til) try extra-mural probation, in case a second offence:

7 Suggestion of the Contral Rmrean uf Correctional Serviers,
2 Suggestion af the Contral Bureau of Cort ction al Services.
3 See discussion colating to seet'o0 29, definiting of “protective home”.


44

Gi) order probation with residential requirements (institutional-
ised probation) in case of a third offence; and
(iv) order corrective training thereafter.

Imprisonment may be used, along with binding down otders under sec-
tion 12, when the person convicted appears to be incorrigible after
receiving corrective training, and supervision, and after care under the
same,

Further, the extra-mural probation mentioned above may include
compulsory attendance and counselling and guidance services, as well as
requirements for joining educational or training institutions or subjecting
oneself to medical treatment. The institutionaliscd probation mentioned
above may include Special Homes and Hostels. where vocational as well
as social rehabilitation may be attempted by professionally trained per-
-sons in small home—like atmosphere affording personal guidance and
counselling. All these can be arranged under the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958.

We appreciate the spirit underlying the suggesaion, but it raises
several important issues and we proceed to consider the relevant aspects
in detail.

5.42. Connected provisions of Probation Act—We may, at the out-
set, note that the power of the court to release a person on probation of
good conduct is now provided for in section 4 of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958. As regards persons under 21 years of age, section 6
of that Act requires the court to release the offender on probation, except
in certain cases. Keeping these two provisions of the Probation Act in
mind, we may refer to the connected provisions in section 10(1)(a) of the
Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act, which relates to the same topic
(release on probation) as is dealt with in sections 4 and 6 of the Proba-
tion Act.

The power of the court to release on admonition is now provided
for in section 3 of the Probation of Offenders Act. Section 10(1)(b) of the
Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act relates to the same topics,

Section 10(1Mc) of the Suppression Act is connected with section
1O(1Ma) and (b).

It would be convenient if the section in the Suppression of Immoral
Traffic Act makes a reference to the provisions in the Probation of
Offenders Act.

5.43. Amendment of section 10(1) to exclude probation for certain
offences—From section 10(1), we propose to remove offences under sec-
tion 3(2), section 4 and section 5. These are serious offences, not suitable
for probation. We propose to add them in section 10(3), which prohibits
probation.*

3 See redraft in para 5-60, infra.
3 Sea recommendation as ta section 1O{3) Pura 5-48, infra,


45

5.44. Section 10(1), Suppression Act to be amended and section 18,
Probation Act, also to be amended—We considered a suggestion to the
effect that section 10(1) should be deleted, in view of the over-lapping
between the Probation of Offenders Act and section 10(1). But the sug-
gestion cannot be accepted for reasons which we shall presently state. In
this connection, section 18 of the Probation of Offenders Act was also
referred to. Section 18 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (so far
as is material), provides as follows:

“Nothing in this Act shall affect the povisions of..............-
the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956

We have come to the conclusion that section 10(1) of the Suppres-
sion of Immoral Traffic Act should be retained, but the section should
be made into a self-contained provision. After this change, section 18
of the Probation of Offenders Act should be amended, so as to delete
the reference to the Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act, as it will be-
come confusing,’

5.45, Reference to new Code to be substituted—It is also necessary
to substitute reference to the new Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 in section 1000७), (0) and
(©), in place of the portion referring to the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898. Incidentally, we may state that the reference to the Code is now
required only for areas where the Probation of Offenders Act is not in
‘orce.

§.46. Points summarised—The net result of the points made above
under section 100) is that a person convicted for the first time of any
offence under section 7 or section 8, may, having regard to his age,
character, antecedents and the circumstances in which the offence was
committed, be released by the court before which he is convicted with
admonition or on probation of good conduct

(a) in the manner provided in the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958, if the said Act extends to the State:

(b) in the’ manner provided in section 360 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1974, if the said Act does not extend to the
State.

5.47. Section 10) to be amended—Section 10(2) of the Suppression
of Immoral Traffic Act provides for detention in a protective home.’ in
respect of persons convicted under sections 7 and 8. In place thereof,
we propose that detention in a corrective institution should be provided
for’. since we are of the view that for the offences referrect to in section

1 Section 18, Probation of Ofenders Act, 1958, to be amended, xo as te: remove reference
to the Suppression Act.

3 Pare 5829, supra.
३ Soe एक 5+50, fafrs (proposed new s. LA).
LIP) YMofI.J&CA—5


46

1002), the proper institution is a corrective institution where such Persons
are not released on probation etc. We recommend the insertion of section
10A for the purpose.

5.48. Section 1003) to be widened—Section 10(3) Prohibits release
on probation or with admonition for certain offences, i.e. offences under
sections 3(1), 6 and 9. According to the scheme which we contemplate’,
only offences under sections 7 and 8 are suitable for probation, and,
consequentially, it is necessary to amplify section 10(3) so as to prohibit
release on probation or with admonition for all offences? except those
under sections 7 and 8.

5.49. Reasons to be recorded for not granting probation—section
10 to be amended—We consider it desirable to insert a provision that
where in any case the court could have dealt with a convicted _ person
by ordering probation, but has not done so, it shall record in its judg-
ment the special reasons for nat having done so.’ This is in regard to the
first conviction for offences under sections 7 and 8. Section 10 is the
appropriate place for such a provision, and we recommend that it should
be amended accordingly,

5.50. Recommendation as to section 10 and to insert s. 1\OA—In the
light of the above discussion, we recommend the following re-draft of
section 10, and we also recommend that new section‘—-section 10A—
should be inserted, as under: —

Revised Section 10

10. [Existing section 10(1Ma)(b) in part, modified|--() A person
convicted for the first time of any offence under............ section 7 or
section 8 may, having regard to his age, character, antecedents and the
circumstances in which the offence was committed, be released by the
court before which he is convicted on probation of good conduct—

(a) in the manner provided in section 4 of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the “said Act”),
tf the said Act extends to the State;

(b) in the manner provided in sub-section (1) of section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974, if the said Act does not
extend to the State.

(LA) [Existing section 10(1Ma) and (b) in part, modified|—A person
.zonvicted for the first time of an offence under section 7 or section है
may, having regard to his age, character, antecedents and the circum-
stances in which the offence was committed. also be released with admo-
rition—

“(a) in the manner provided in section 3 of the said Act, if
the said. Act extends to the State:

7 cb. our recommendation a १५ section 10(1). para 5-43. aeprn,

1 For the suggested re-draft of sections 10 and 103, sun para 5:50, हटके,
3 ८.8, section, 341, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974,

4 Para 5-47, supra,



47

(0) in the manner provided in sub-section (2) 0} section 360
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974, if the said Act does net
extend to the State.

Explanation; In this section, “State” includes a part of a State.

(LB) The provisions of sections 5 10 17 of the said Act (both inclu-
sive) shall apply to the cases referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (13
and clause (a) of sub-section (1A).

(10) [Existing section 10(10(0, modified|—The provisions of sub-sec-
tions (2) to (10) of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974.
shall apply to the cases referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) and
clause (b) of sub-section (1A).

(2) [Existing section 10(3), modified] -Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Pocedure, 1974, or any other law for
the time being in force, no person convicted under sub-section (1) or (2)
of section 3 ot under section 4 or section 5 or section 6 or section 9 shall
be released on probation or with admonition.

(3) (New) The Court by which ihe woman or girl is found guilis
shall, on first conviction under section 7 or section 8, deal with her under
this section, and shall not sentence her to imprisonment unless the Court
is satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, including
the nature of the offence and “the character of the offender it would not
be desirable so to deal with her; and if the court passes any sentence o}
imprisonment on the offender on first conviction, it shall record its
reasons for doing so.

(4) (New) For the purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not
be desirable to deal with such woman or girl under this section, the court
shall call for a report from the Probation Officer appointed under the
said Act, and shall consider his report, if any, and any other information
available to it relating to the character and physical and mental condition
of the offender.”

Sectian 10A (New)

“104. [Section 10(2) modified] (1) Where—

(a) a female offender is found guilty of an oifence _under
section 7 or section 8, and is not released under sub-section (1)
or (A) of section 10; and

(b) the character, state of health and mental condition of
the offender and the other circumstances of the case are such
that it is expedient that she should be subject to detention for
such term and such instruction and discipline as are conducive
to her correction,

it shall be lawful for the court to pass, in lieu of a sentence of imprison-
ment an order for detention in “a corrective institution’ established

1 As to warvee ive institution, sox spotion 21 as proposed to be amendod.


48

under. this Act, for such term, not. being less than two years and not
being more than five years, as the court thinks fit:

Provided that, before passing such an order—

i) the court shall give an apportunity to the offender to
be heard, and shalt also consider any representation which the
offender may make to the court as to the suitability of the case
for treatment in such an institution, as also the report of the Pro-
bation Officer appointed under the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958; and

(ii) the court shall record that it is satisfied that the charac-
ter, state of health and mental condition of the offender and
the other circumstances of the case are such that the offender is
likely to benefit by such instruction and discipline as aforesaid.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the provi-
sions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974, relating to appeal,
reference and revision, and of the Limitation Act, 1963 as to
the period within which an appeal shall be filed, shall apply in
relation to-an order of detention, under sub-section (1) as if the
order had been a sentence of imprisonment for the same period
as the period for which the detention was ordered,

“(3) Subject to the rules made in this behalf the appro-
priate Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by
such Government may, at any time after the expiration of six
months from the date of an order for detention in a corrective
institution, if satisfied that there is a reasonable probability that
the offender will lead a useful industrious life, discharge her
from such an institution, with or without ‘such conditions as
may be considered fit, and grant her a written licence in’ the
prescribed form.

(4) The conditions on which an offender is discharged on
licence may include requirements relating to residence of the
offender and supervision over the offender’s activities and move-
ments.”

5.51. Section 11—This takes us to section 11. Section 110) pro-
‘vides that when any petson having been convicted of an offence punish-
able under this Act or punishable under section 363, section 365, sec-
tion 366, section 366A, section 3669, section 367, section 368, section
370, section 371, section 372, or section 373 of the Indian Penal Code.
with imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, is within a
period of five years after release from prison, again convicted of any
offence punishable under this Act or under any of those sections with
imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards by a court, such
court, may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing the sentence of im-

2 Amendm :; t of seetion 18, Probat‘un Act, to be separately considered. See para 5-44
saps


49

prisonment on such person, also order that his residence, any change of,
or absence from, such residence, after release be notified according to
rules made under section 23 for a period not exceeding five years from
the date of expiration of that sentence. Sections 11(2) and 11(3) con-
tain certain incidental provisions,

Section 11(4) provides that a person charged with a breach of any
tule referred to in sub-section (1) may be tried by a Magistrate of
competent jurisdiction in the district in which the place 185: notified
as his residence is situated.

The section needs no change.

5.52. Section 12--Section 12 deals with security for good be-
haviour from habitual offenders, and needs no change.

5.53. Abuse of outhority by police officer—whether provision
needed. Sections 174 and 178 (New)—We have examined the question
whether any specitic provision is needed to prevent immoral behaviour
by police officers who may be in charge of girls rescued under the Act.
Abuse of authority by a public servant in various. situations is dealt
with in several sections of the Penal code: Sexual misconduct of a
particular type by a public servant or others is also dealt with in several
other sections’ in the Code. In particular, inducing any woman to go
from any place in order to force or seduce her to illicit intercourse, is
punishable under the latter part of section 366, Penal Code

It may also be noted in this connection that a previous Law Com-
mission’ has, in its Report on the Penal Code, recommended the addi-
tion of certain provisions (in the Chapter on offences affecting the hu-
man body) for dealing with sexual misconduct, The object was to
punish persons who commit acts, which, though technically not proved
10 be rape, represent mis-conduct in sexual matters by an abuse of
position, The relevant portion of the Report is quoted below :—

“Thete.are certain situations in which, although force or frqud
cannot be established, the compulsion of the situation is such that the
women’s will is dominated by the will of the man, and taking an undue
advantage of the situation, the man takes liberties with the woman. The
woman’s submission to sexual intercourse in such a situation is really
not a willing consent, and we think that provisions punishing this re«
prehensible conduct on the part of the man should be included in the
Penal Code. We do not, however, wish to make the provisions very
wide, because they may furnish a weapon for blackmail in the hands
of unscrupulous women or their relations. We would confine it to
those situations where the need for throwing a cloak around the woman
for protecting her chastity outweighs the opportunity for blackmail. On
this principle we recommend the insertion of three new sections as
follows :”

1 [Sections recommended not quoted here]
+ Eg. seotion 220, LP.C.
2 Eg. sections 342, 364, 366, 268A, 376, ate.. L.P.C.
4 Wad Report. (Pena! Cade, page 279, para 1 123.


50

5.54. Recommendation to insert new section—We have considered
the matter carefully, While the recommendation made by a previous
Law Commission’ in its Report on the Penal Code, read with the
existing provisions in the Penal Code, furnishes the needed safeguards
in general terms, we have come to the conclusion that having regard
10 the possibility of misconduct in view of the nature of the duties
which police officers have to perform under the Act, and other relevant
cixcumstanoes, a specific provision in the Act on the subject is needed.
Accordingly, we recommend that the following new section should be
inserted in the Act—

“ITA. Ifa police officer having the charge or custody of a
woman or girl under this Act, compels or seduces to illicit sexual
intercourse -with any such woman or girl, he shall be deemed to
be guilty of—-
fa) an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, if he

compels her to such intercourse,

(0) an offence under section 376A of that Code, if he seduces
her to such intercourse.”

We may make it clear that in the above new section, where we
refer to section 376A, of the Indian Penal Code, we have in mind the
section proposed to be inserted by the LP.C. (Amendment) Bill, 1972!,
which is now pending before a Joint Committee of Parliament.

5.55. Delay in the production of girls—At this stage, we would
like also to deal with the question whether a provision is needed to
penalise Police Officers who are guilty of delay in the production of
rescued girls. We have devoted some thought to the problem because.
in our opinion, such a default by the police officers is likely to increase
the opportunities for misconduct which are inherent in the very nature
of the functions assigned to them by the Act.

The Act contains meticulous provisions for the prompt produc-
tion before the Magistrate of the girls rescued under sections 15 and
16. These provisions show the anxiety of the legislature to ensure that
the girls shall not be detained under the Act for a longer time than
is necessary in the circumstances of the case. In view # this anxiety
of the legislature as reflected in these provisions,— perticularly by the
use of the expression “forthwith” —we consider it desirable to recom-
mend the insertion of a suitable provision dealing with non-produc-
tion, so that the obligation cast on the Police officer to produce the
girl promptly does not remain a dead letter.

5.56. Offences of wrongful confinement discussed—No. doubt,
even in the absence of a provision on the subject, a Police officer who

1 Pera 6-58, eupra.
2 See tha IPC. me


51

delays production of the girl would be guilty of the offence of wrong-
ful continement under the Indian Penal Code', because the justification
for arrest and detention ‘which is provided by the statutory power
under sections 15, 16 and 17 of the Act would not be available if it
is established that the detention of the girl is made to extend beyond
the limit indicated by the provision for production “forthwith” before
the specified Magistrate, as contained in these sections.

5.57. Effect of illegal confinement-—General principle—It is well-
established that confinement under legal authority must conform to the
terms of that authority, and cannot exceed those terms, whether in
respect of place. duration, manner or otherwise, except in the case of
mistake of fact in good faith, dealt with in sections 76 and 79 of the
Penal Code 344 or other specific exceptions created by statute.

Thus, it has been held’ that police officer is not justified in de
taining a person for one single hour, except upon some reasonable
ground justified by the circumstances.

5.58. Two devices considered—In this connection we thought of
two alternative devices: The first device would be to irsert, in the
Indian Penal Code, a provision that a police officer who fails to pro-
duce a woman or girl removed under section 15 or 16, should be
deemed to be guilty of wrongful confinement under section 340 of the
Indian Penal Code.

The second alternative would be to introduce a rebuttable pre-
sumption that such police officer shail be presumed, until the contrary
is proved, to have wrongfully confined the woman or girl within the
meaning of the aforesaid section, Having carefully considered the
matter, we have come to the conclusion that it ‘would be better to
frame the provision in accordance with the second alternative, so that
the police officer may. if the circumstances of the case so justify, give
evidence proving his good faith and thus rebut the presumption, No
doubt, cases of failure to produce the girl owing to unavoidable cir-
cumstances, -e.g. escape of the girl—-would be rare. However, it is not
intended that such failure on the part of the police officer should be
punishable.

We may, of course, point cut that a penal provision punishing
delay by the police officer in these circumstances would be in tune with
the general principles recognised by judicial decisions under the Penal
Code, as already noted*. These principles, which have been evolved
to protect the personal liberty of those whom public servants or the
local authority take in their charge or custody, in general, apply with
greater force where females are concerned.

+ Seotion 340, Indian Penal Code.
© Ram Singh v. Emperor, ALR. 1923, All. 34.

3 Queen v. Behari Singh, (1867), Sutherland Woekly Reporte, Cr. 26 (Cal.)-

4 In re Dinanath, ALB. 1940 Nog. 186, 190.

5 Queen v. Suprasonnu @hosal, 6 Suth. W.R. (Cr.) 88-89 (Kemp & markby JJ).
© Para 6-57, eupns.


52

5.59; Recommendation to insert section 17B—We, therefore, re-
commend that the following new section should be inserted in the
Act: —

“17B. If a police officer, having removed a woman or girl
under sub-section (4) of section 15 or sub-section (2) of section
16, fails to produce the woman or girl—

Ya) before the appropriate Magistrate as required by sub-
section (5) of section 15, or

{b) before the Magistrate issuing the order as required by
sub-section (2) of section 16, or

(0) before the nearest Magistrate as required by sub-section
(1) of section 17,

it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved that he
has wrongfully confined the woman or girl within the meaning
of section 340 of the Indian Penal Code.”


CHAPTER 6
PROCEDURAL. PROVIGIONS

(Sections 13-—22)

6.1, fntroduction--A number of procedural provisions are contain
ed in sections 13—22.

6.2. Section 13 deals with the appeintnient of special police णी-
cers and an advisory body.

6.3. Section 13 change not suggested “The Committee recommend-
ed’ that the duties of the Special Police Officer, as enumerated in see-
tion 13, should be assigned to an officer not below the rank of Inspec-
lor, so that adequale personnel to discharge these functions could be
available in the country: But having regard to the wide 90wers con-
ferred on special police officers, we are opposed to such a change. We
give below a list of functions performed by Special Police Officers
appointed under section 13:—

(1) Section 14(1)---Arrest without warrant for offences under the
Act.

Section [4(2)—The special police officer can also authorise any
officer subordinate to him t arrest without warrant,

(2) Section 15--Search of premises without warrant can be done
by such officer in certain circumstances.

(3) Section 15(5)—The special police officer who has removed
any girl who is in his opinion below 21 years and is
carrying on, or made to carey on, prostitution under sec-
tion 15(4) has to forthwith produce ker before the appro-
priate Magistrate.

(4) Section 16-A—Magistrate may direct the special police
officer to enter a brothel and to rescue therefrom such girl.
whom he has reasons to believe is below 21 years and pro-
duce her before him. The special police officer has to pro-
duce the girl before the Magistrate forthwith after taking
the girl. है

(5) Section 17—When the special police Officer removing a girl
under section 15(4) or section 161) ils to produce her
immediately before the appropriate wistrate, he has to
forthwith produce her before the 7 st Magis!
class for his orders.

1 Reportuf the Committeo on arnundinte.
mendation No 7


54

6.4. Section 14—Section 14 provides that offences under the Act
shall be cognizable, but also imposes certain restrictions as to the rank
of the officers who can effect an arrest without wartant. The Com-
mittee recommended! that in section 1400) and 1400), an officer not
below the rank of Sub-Inspector should be authorised to assist the
special police officer. Having regard to the nature of the functions to
be performed by the designated police officers, we do noi recommend
such change.

6.5. Extension of provisions as tu rescue to women above the age
of adult women—Sections 154 arid 16—We now come to a question
which, though procedural, is of importance in connection with the
effective iunplementation of the policy of the Act which is ihe crea-
tion of a legislative set up towards achieving social welfare in this par-
ticular field. The question concerns the rescue of those women who
are made to carry on prostitution and who have completed the age
of 21 years. The Act makes a beneticial provision for the rescue of
“girls"—i.e., females under the age of 2] years but it is silent as to
the rescue of women above the age of 21 years who are made to carry
on prostitution.

Jt may be noted that the Act defines a “woman” as denoting’ a
female who has completed the age of 21 years, and a “girl” as denot-
ing female who has not completed the age of 21 years, In our discus-
sion of the present question we shall use the expression “women” as
denoting only adult women, ie., females who have completed the age
of 21 years.

6.6. Relevant provisions summarised---We shall first refer briefly
to the relevant provisions, Section 15 sub-section (L} authorises the
search of premises where any woman or girl is living in respect of
whom an offence punishable under the Act has been or is being com-
mitted, An offence “in respect of a woman or a girl’—an expression
not yery precise--could be of several kinds. Prostitution as such is not
an offence under the Act but certain acts connected with prostitution
are offences, and the definition of “prostitute” is not confined to girls
as that expression‘ is defined to mean “a female who offers her body
for sexual intercourse” etc.

Thus for example, section 3 which deals with one of the offences
under the Act and punishes the keeping of a brothel, may involve
girls as well as women. Section 4 which prescribes the punishment for
living on the earnings of prostitution would similarly involve any
female by virtue of the definition of “prostitution”, and in fact, sec-
tion 4 sub-section (1) makes this clear by using the phrase “prostitu-
tion of @ woman or girl”. Under section 5, certain acts.—mainly, pro-
curing, inducing or taking a “woman or girl" for the sake of prostitu-
tion—-ateé punishable, and under section 6, detention of a “woman or a

T Report of the Committon on amendments to the Sapprassion otc. Act, paragraph 6-4
Recommendation No. 8.

* Section 2(j)
3 Faction 2(6}.
4 Saction 2, eflnit’on of “Prostitution”.



65

girl’ in any brothel or in or upon any premises with the specified intent,
is punishable. A “woman or a girl” who carries on prostitution in pre-
mises within the specified distance of a place of public religious wat-
ship, educational institution and the like, is punishable under section 7.
Seduction of a “woman or girl” in custody is punished uncer section 9.
This brief resume of the relevant provision shows that section 15(1) is
not confined to girls.

6.7. Deficiency of the law in regard to rescue of woman under sec-
tion 15—Now, while in many cases the women carrying on prostitu-
tion at the premises searched under section 1501) would be doing so
without any sort of compulsion, it cannot be denied that sometimes
women ate made to carry on prostitution and they are not voluntary
participants in the activity. When such women are found at the pre-
mises searched under section 15(1), there ought tu be some provision
by which they could be rescued. Sub-section (4) of section 15, how-
ever, entitles the special police officer enteting the premises ९७ remove
only a girl who, in his opinion, is under the age of 21 years and who
is carrying on prostitution or is being made to carry on prostitution.
or attempts are being made to make her carry on prostitution. The case
of «women who are made to carty on prostitution is left out of this
beneficial provision for rescue.

6.8. Same comment on section {6-—The same comment applies to
section 16, under which the rescue of a girl whol is apparently under
the age of 21 years, can be ordered by a magistrate if the girl is living
in a brothel or is carrying on prostitution in a brothel or is being
made to carry on prostitution in a brothel.

In our view, this power should be available also where a woman
of any age is being made to carry om prostitution in a brothel.

Need for amendment—We are therefore of the view that the
scope of section 15(4) and section 1% should be widened as above.

No doubt, even after the Act is amended on the above lines, cases
of women who. are voluntarily carrying on prostitution will remain
outside the provisions for rescue in sections 15(4) and _16(1) or the
provision for subsequent custody contained in section 17, We do not
think that the law could appropriately make a provision for rescuing
such women because, ex Aypothesi, they are carrying on prostitution
voluntarily and the question of their “rescue” cannot arise. Since
ptostitution in the abstract is not an offence punishable under the
Act, it would not be proper for the present Act to empower the police
or the court to take any action for the removal or custody of such
women,

6.10. Institution to which rescued women should be sent—Assum-
ing, then, that an amendment extending the scope of section 15(4) and
section 16 is to be made as above', the connected question arises whe-
ther women to be coverd by the extended provision “should be sent to
eae Rc - िकौकोौकफकसक-+-

2 Para 9-9, supra.


56

a protective home, or whether they should be sent to a corrective
institution, We have considered this question carefully and are clearly
of the view that such women whatever their age, being involuntary
participants in prostitution, should be sent to protective homes and not
to corrective institutions. Corrective institutions, in our scheme, are
meant for women who voluntarily adopt a career of vice and have
hardened in that career. At the same time we appreciate that an
aduit woman whose experience in ॥ life of vice may be much more
detestable than that of girls below the age of 21 years should, while in
the protective home, be treated on a different footing from such, girls
and provision for theit residence should be made in separate cells, “This
safeguard could be provided for by the rules to be. made under the Act
under section 23(2).

6.11. Amendments needed in sections 15(4), 16, 17 and 2300) —
Implementation of the scheme proposed above will necessitate amend-
ments 10 sections 15(4) and 16 and consequential amendments in sec-
tions 17 and 23(2). We shall indicate at the appropriate place, the
precise amendments to be made in sections 15(4), 16 and 17. The
amendment of section 13(2) is a minor matter which could be taken
care of by the draftsman without further guidance from एड.

It has been held in a Bombay case’ that the distinction between
young “girls” (aged below 21) and women (above 21) which is made
In sections 15(4 and 1601 of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic
in Women and Girls Act, 1956 is a reasonable distinction in the con
text of prostitution and immoral traffic in sex. The discrimination bet-
ween them is fully justified by the fact that girls below 21 are likely,
to be exploited to a greater extent in the market of prostitution. The
distinction is therefore germane to the vice which is attempted to be
suppressed by the provisions of the Act and cannot be atlacked as
unreasonable or as prohibited by Article 14 of the Constitution. This
case does not, of course, necessitate an amendment of the section.

6.12. Power under section 18—no change—Section 15 empowers
the special police officer to conduct a search without warrant, The
power is unusual; but, having regard to the fact that it is confined to
special police officers and also to the fact that no serious complaints
of excess or abuse of this power have been voiced. it appears unneces-
sary to recommend a change in this respect.

6.13. Section 15(2)—-Need for appointing women: police officers—
With reference to section 15(2), the Committee’ discussed the various
procedural difficulties experienced by the concerned agencies in the
implementation of the Act, and observed that the main difficulty in
the enforcement of the Act had been lack of adequate co-operation

1 900 amendments recommended in section 1514), 16 and 17. prire 625, Fafea,

3 Section 23(2) to be amended by the draftsman.

2 Sayed Andul Khair ४, State of Maharashtra, (L974) 76 Bom. 1.R. 390 (Vaidya, F.).!

4 Report of the Committee on amencteatsto the Suppression ete, Act. para 3-8. Reeom:
mondation No 18,


57

{rom the public. The Act envisages an active partici;
peaple 10 tackling the problem of immoral traffic which unfortunate-
ly {s not generally forthcoming. Owing to the stigma attached to the
vice, decent people in the locality shirk their responsibility in bringing
culprits to book. The Committee further observed that even the essen-
tial requirement of women as witnesses as provided in section 15,
could not be met adequately, The Committee therefore made the re-
commendation that the words “at least one of whom shall be a woman”
should be deleted from section 1502),

We appreciate the practical difficulties experienced in this respect.
But we think that the provision as sound and salutary ard the diffi-
culties experienced and in its implementation should be met by
appointing more women special police officers. If that is done, there
will be less reluctance on the part of women to witmess the search.

No change in the law is therefore recommended.

6.14. Section 16—Section 16 deals with the rescue of girls appa-
rently under the age of twentyone years living in a brothel or carry-
ing on prostitution in a brothel.

6.15. In regard 40 this section the Committee’ made a recommen:
dation that “to bring ii (section 16) in line with section 2003), a provi-
sion for reference to protective homes of certain types of cases may be
made in section 16”.

6.16. We have not been able to appreciate this recommendation.
So far as sending girls to protective homes is concerned, section 17(2),
which applies after action is taken under section 16, already provides
for it. The reference {in the above recommendation)’ to section 2013) is
not intelligible as section 20(3) empowers the Magistrate to pass. an
order for externment, and does not deal with the power to send to a
protective home.

6.17. Section 161) Suggestion to authorise persons empowered hy
the State Government--It has been stated’ in one suggestion that some
persons considered suitable for the purpose should be appointed by
the appropriate Governments for furnishing information to the Magis-
trate regarding girls who necd to be rescued under the provisions of
section 16. This is in fact only an elaboration of a provision which al-
ready exists in this sub-section, viz., that the magistrate concerned may
not act on information received otherwise than rom the Police. Where
information involving families of the neighbourhood is concemed, res-
pectable people do not come forward to inform the law enforcement
agencies unless appointed by the Government to do so. Ordinarily the
only information which the law enforcement agencies get “otherwise”.
is either out of malice or from people of doubtful character. It is stated
that the States have not been in a position to assign any whole-time

1 Repovt of the Cammittes on amos
2 Para 6-15, supra,
4 Sugge tion’ nf the Central Bureat af €

bs to the Sappecasion Act



58

staff fer the purposes of the Act in general or for rescue operations in
particular which can be considered adequate enough to notice activities
0 fthis nature, Reliance may therefore have to be placed largely as
voluntary social work in this sphere, not only for making the processes
of detention more efficient but also for saving those rescued from
stigma. Hence the suggested provision,

6.18. We are of the view that the suggestion should be accepted
as introducing a useful feature. No doubt, the existing language appears
to be wide enough to cover such information. However an amend-
ment would bring out emphatically the ideas.

6.19. Recomniendation—We, therefore. recommend that section
16{1) should be revised as follows: --

“Where a magistrate has reason to believe, from information
received from the police or from any other persoa authorised by
the State Government in this behalf or otherwise............ (Rest
as at present).”

We are incorporating a suitable amendment of sub-section (1)
of section 16 on the above point’, in the redrafts which we give later.

6.20, Suggestion for verbal changes in section 1660) regarding the
phrase “in a brothel"’.-It has also been suggested’ that in section 1601),
the phrase “in a brothel” should be transposed and brought immedia-
tely after the word “living” so that the rest of the situations in which
fescue operations may be carried on, are not restricted to the girls Biv.
ing in brothels. The Act, it is stated, envisages a numbet of situations in
which a girl has to be rescued prior to her arrival in a brothel. such
as those in section 5; and it is urged that for the effective enforcement
of such provisions of the Act, it wauld be necessary to extend section
5 even when the girls are not in brothels.

We find that if section 16(1) is revised as suggested, then the
situations in which rescue operations may be carried out when the
girl is not living in a brothel, will be the following : —-

(a) when she is carrying on prostitution otherwise than in a
brothel;

(6) when attempts are being made to make her carry on pros-
titution; and

(c) when she is being procured for purposes of prostitution or
sale.

Category (8) above would considerably widen the powers under
section 16(1), This may be abused. We do not, therefore, accept the
suggestion.

1 See radeaft of avorions 18(4}, LG) ebe.; para 5-25, dajra,

* saggestion of the Co stral Bureau of Correctional Serviees.


59

6,21. Section 17(11)—Amendment recommended—We now pro-
ceed to consider section 17, There are two provisions of the Act, —
sections 15 and 16—whereunder a girl under the age of 21 years, who
is carrying on or being made to carry on prostitution, can be remov-
ed or rescued. Removal of the girl is dealt with in section 16 under
which the proceedings are taken by a special police officer by way
of search without warrant. Rescue is directed by a magistrate under
section 16, and the direction again is issued to the special police
officer. In both these sections, there are provisions—section 15(4) and
16(2)—whereunder the special police officer, after removing or rescu-
ing the girl, “shall forthwith produce her” before the appropriate
magistrate (in a case governed by section 15) or before the magistrate
issuing the order (in a case governed by section 16),

Now, a situation may arise where, owing to unavoidable rea-
sons, the special police officer cannot produce the girl before such
magistrate “forthwith”, In such a case, section 17(1) requires the police
officer to produce the girl before the nearest magistrate of any class.
We are not concerned with the substance of this provision in section
17(1) but there appears to be scope for improvement in a point of
detail. Section 17(1), when referring to the earlier sections, speaks of
the special police officer who “fails to produce her immediately be-
‘fore the magistrate” but the earlier sections themselves use the word
“forthwith”. Hence the word “immediately” in section 17(1) is inaccu-
tate. To remedy the inaccuracy, we have two alternatives—(i) to sub-
stitute the word “forthwith” in place of the word “immediately”, or
Gi) merely to remove the word “immediately”,

Tf the first device is adopted, the word “forthwith” would occur
twice ‘in section 17(1). This repetition would be jarring. We  there-
fore prefer the second alternative, and recommend the word “imme-
diately” should be deleted from section 17(1)'.

6.22. Recommendation to amend section 17(\) by adding a proviso
-—It has been suggested* that the following proviso may be added in
section 17(1):—

“Provided that no girl shall be () released or placed in
custody of a person who may, exercise harmful influence over
her, or (ii) be detained in such custody for a period exceeding
ten days from the date of such an order.”

The suggestion is worth accepting as it is based on a sound princi-
ple. We therefore recommend that the following proviso should be
added in section 17(1):—

“Provided that no girl shall be-—

(i) detained in custody under this sub-section for a period
exceeding ten days from the date of such an order, or

+ For redraft, seo para 6-25, infra
3 Suggestion of the Centra! Bureat of Corrections! Services.


Ay

Ui) restored or placed in the custody of a person who may
exercised harmfu! influence over her,”

6.23, Suggestion regarding section 17(2}--With reference to section
1/2), a suggestion has been made for revising it, The salient featares of
the suggested revision are —

(a) appropriate provision regarding intermediate custody;

(b) pre-hearing enquiries by Probation Officers;

{ch introduction of ihe criterion of the need for care and
protection tor orders by courts instead of the standard of correct
ness of the information receivedt and

(d) nor-institutional care. ¢
without supervision,

ance and counselling with or

Ii is stated that all these are vitally necessary for the proper disposi~
tion of the rescued girls and for employing in it social case work techni-
ques.

6.24, Reconmendation-—The suggestion is useful and salutary and
may be accepted, Section 17(2) should be suitably" revised for the pur-
pose. The redraft which «ve give later will explain the changes needed.

6.24A. Detention in a protective heme af a girl rescued under 2, 16
and convicted under s. V7—-Suggestion of the Deparimem—In one sug-
gestion,” it is staled that it has been found by experience that short term
of residence in protective homes or corrective institutiors does not have
the desired impact on the persons concerned. Tt is therefore suggested
that a minimum period of 1 year might be prescribed for detention in a
protective hame or a correctional institution.

in this connection we may stat: that the amendment. which we are
recommending in section 17 will take care of this aspect.’

6.25. Redrajts of certain sections—In the light of the ahove discus-
sion. we give below redrafts of sections 15(4), 15(5), 16€(1), 162), 174),
1712), 17(2A), to 17(2E) and section 1704).

Revised sections 15¢4), 15(5), 160), 16(2). 1711), 1700), 17(2A) to 17029
and section 17(4)

“15. (4) The special police officer entering any premises under sub-
section (1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom-—

(a) any girl if, in his opinion, she is under the age of twenty:
on years and is carrying on or is being made to carry on, prosti-
tution or attempts are being made to make her carry on prostitu-
tion, or

infer,

“6 (Suge

oi: 01 bne Depart



él

(b} any woman, if, in his opinion, she is being made to carry
on prostitution or attempts are being made to make Aer carry on
prostitution,’

15. (5) The special police officer, after removing the woman or girl
under sub-section (4, shall forthwith produce her before the appropriate
Magistrate.

16. (1) Where a magistrate has tezson to believe from information
received from the police or from atty other person authorised by the State
Government in this behalf or otherwise’, thai—

_ _ @) a girl apparently under the age of twenty-one years, is
living, or is carrying on, or is being made to carry on prostitu-
tion, in a brothel, ar

(b) @ waman is being made to carry on prostitution in a
brothel’

he may direct the specia! police officer to enter such brothel, and to
remove therefrom such woman or girl and produce. her before.

“16. (2) The special police officer, after removing the wamar of
girl, shall forthwith produce her before the magistrate issuing the order.”

Revised section 17)

“17. (1) When the special police officer removing a woman or gir
under sub-section (4) af section 15 or rescuing a woman ar girl under
sub-section (1) of section 16, fails to produce her..,... * before the magis-
trate, as required by sub-section (5) of section 15 or sub-section (2) of
section 16, he shall produce her forthwith before the nearest magistrate
of any class, who shall pass such orders as he deems proper for her safe
custody until she is produced before the appropriate magistrate:

Provided that no woman or girl shall be—

@ detained in custady under this sub-section for a period
exceeding ten days from the date of the order under this sub-
section, or

Gi) restored to or placed in the custody ef a person who may
exercise a harnrful influence over her*

(2) When the girl is produced before the appropriate magistrate, he
shall, after giving the girl an opportunity of being heard, cause an inquiry
to be made as to the cortectness of the information received under sub-
section (1), the age, character and antecedents of the girl and the suita-
bility of her parents, guardian or husband for taking charge of her and
the nature of the influence which the conditions in her home are likely

4 See pure 6-11, «pra.
2 Sea para 6-19, supra.
4 Sve par G11, supra.
4 & 8 para 6-11, stipe.

B 8 para 8-11 supra,
3 Tare °+22, supra.

1. "(01३ 10 [1क08-6



62

to have on her if she is restored to the same, and, for this purpose, he
may direct. a Probation Officer appointed under the Probation of
Officers Act, 1958, to inquire into the above circumstances and into the
personality of the girl and prospects of rehabilitation of the girl.

“17. QA) The magistrate may, while an inquiry is made into a
case under sub-section (2), pass such orders as he deerns proper for the
safe custody of the girl;

Provided that no girl shall be kept in the custody for this purpose
for a period exceeding three weeks from the date of such an order, and
no girl shall be kept in the custody of a person likely to have a harmpul
influence on her!

“17, (2B) When the magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry
as required in sub-section (2)—-

(a) that the information received is correct,

{b) that the girl is under the age of twenty-one years, and

(c) that she is in need of care and protection, he may, subject
to the provisions of sub-section (3), make an order that such girl
be detained for such period, being not less than one year and not
more than three years, as may be specified in the order, in a pro-
tective home or in such other custody as he, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, shall consider suitable :7

Provided that such custody shall not be that of person or body of
persons of a religious persuation different from that of the girl, and that
those entrusted with the custody of the girl, including the person in
charge of a protective institution, may be required to enter into a bond
which may, where necessary and feasible, contain undertakings based on
directions relating to the proper care, guardianship, education, training
and medical and psychiatric treatment of the girl as well as supervision
by a person appointed by the court, which will be in force for a period
not exceeding three years.”

“17, (20) When the woman is produced before the appropriate
magistrate, he shall, after giving the woman an opportunity of being
heard, cause an inquiry to be made gs io the correctness of the informa-
tion received under sub-section (\), the age, character and antecedents
of the woman and the suitability of her parents, guardian or husband for
taking charge of her and the nature of the influence which the conditions
in her home are likely to have on her if she is restored to the same, and
for this purpose, he may direct a Probation Officer appointed under the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, to inquire into the above circum-
stances and into the personality of the woman and prospects of rehabili-
fation of the woman.

1 Para 6-24, supra.
3 Paro 8-24, supra.
* Para 6-24, supra.
4 Para 0-24, sure,


63

“17, QD) The Magistrate may, while an inquiry is made inte a case
under sub-section (2C), pass such orders as he deems proper jor the safe
custody of the woman:

Provided that no woman shall be kept in the custody for this pur-
pose for a period exceeding three weeks jrom the date of such an order,
and no woman shall be kept in the custody of a person likely to have
harmful influence on her.

“17. QE) When the magistrate is satisfied, after making an inquiry
as required ir. sub-section (2D)—

(a) that the information received is correct and
(b) that the woman is above the age of twenty-one years, and

(0) that she is in need of care and protection, he may, sub-
ject to the provisions of sub-section (3), make an order that such
period, being not less than one year und not more than three.
years, as may be specified in the order, in a protective home, or
in such other custody as he, for reasons to be recorded in writ-
ing, shall consider suitable:

Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person or body of
persons of a religious persuation different from that of the woman, and
that those entrusted with the custody of the woman, including a person
in charge of a protective institution, may be required to enter into a bond
which may, where necessary and feasible, contain undertakings based on
directions relating to the proper care, guardianship, education, training
and medical and psychiatric treatment of the woman, as well as super-
vision by a person appointed by the court, which will be in force for a
period not exceeding three years.”

6.25. [section 17(3)—-No change].

“i7(4) Against every order under sub-section (2B) or sub-section
(QE), an appeal shall lie to the Sessions Judge, whose decision on such
appeal shall be final.”

6.26. Sections 17A and 17B (new)—We have already recommended
the insertion of two new sections—17A and 17B—to deal with seduc
tion by police officers of rescued women and girls and non-production of
rescued womens and gitls by police officers acting under the Act.

6.27. Section 18—Under section 18(1), a Magistrate may, on receipt
of information from the police or otherwise, that any house, room, place
or any portion thereof within a distance of two hundred yards of any
public place referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7, is being run or
used as a brothel by any person, or is being used by prostitutes for carry-
ing on their trade, issue notice on the owner, lessor of landlord of such
house, room, place or portion or the agent of the owner, lessor or-land-
lord or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or any other person in charge
of such house, room, place, or portion, to show cause within seven days

4 Son Para 8-53, supra.


64

of the receipt of the notice why the same should not be attached for
improper user thereof. Lf, after hearing the person concerned, the Magis-
trate is satisfied that the house, room, place, or portion is being used as
a brothel or for carrying on prostitution, then the Magistrate may pass

orders—

(a) directing eviction of the occupier within seven days of the
passing of the order from the house, room, place, or portion;
(b) directing that before letting it out during the period of one
ear immediately after the passing of the order, the owner,
lessor or landlord or the agent of the owner, lessor or Jand-
lord shall obtain the previous approval of the Magistrate.

Under sub-section (2) a court convicting a person of any offence
under section 3 or section 7 may pass orders under sub-section (1), with-
out further notice to such person to show cause as required in that sub-
section.

These are the important provisions of the section.

6.28. Suggestion to repeal section 18 not accepted—It has been
suggested that section 18 may be repealed’. It is stated that instead of
issuing notices, punitive action as contemplated in the Act should be
taken. “We do not warn thieves before catching them.”

We apprehend, however, that the suggestion is based 01 था incom-
plete and inaccurate conception of the scope’ of section 18. The section
does not deal with “notice” before prosecution or before punitive action.
Its main object is preventive. Moreover, it is wrong to suppose that in
every case. of conduct amounting to violation of the Act, prosecution is
the only remedy. Lastly, sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Act requires
no notice, and can operate immediately on conviction. For these reasons
we do not accept the suggestion that the section be repealed.

6.29. Section 19—Section 19 provides for applications by women
and gitls for being, kept in a protective home, and reads as follows: -

“19. () A woman or gitl who is carrying on, 67 is being
made to carry on, prostitution, may make an application to the
magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction she is
carrying on, or is being made to carry on, prostitution, for an
order that she may be kept in a protective home.”

“(2) If after hearing the applicant and making such inquiry
as he may consider necessary, the magistrate is satisfied that an
order should be made under this section, then, he shall make an
order, for reasons to be recorded, that the applicant be kept in
a protective home for such period as may be specified in the
order.”

1 Suggertion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services.

4 Para 6-274, supra.


65

6.30. Section 19(\)—-Suggestion accepted—tIt has been suggested,’
that section 19(1) should contain also a provision for an order that the
git! be provided care and protection by the court. This suggestion is, in
principle, sound, and we accept it.

6.31, Recommendation—We, therefore, recommend that for the last
12 words of section 19(1), the following should be substituted:
“(a) for an order that she may be kept in a protective home,
or
4b) for an order that she be provided care and protection by
the court in the manner specified in sub-section (2).”

6.32, Section 19(1A)—Recommendation regarding interim custody
—-We are of the view that pending an inquiry under section 19(1), the
Magistrate should have power to direct that the gitl be kept in proper
custody, This should be incorporated in section 19. in the form of sub-
section (1A), as follows: —

“(1A) Pending such inquiry, the Magistrate may direct ihat
the gitl be kept in such custody as the Magistrate may consider
proper, having regard to the circumstances of the case.”

6.33. Section 19(2)—Suggestion for inquiry accepted—It 1985 further
suggested’ that in sub-section (2) of section 19, an inquiry by a Probation
Officer into the personality, home and conditions and rehabilitation
prospects should be provided: for. His report will be before the Magis-
trate.

If, on such inquiry, the Magistrate is satisfied that an order should
be made under this section. then, he shall make an order, for reasons to
be recorded, that the applicant be kept in a protective home, ar a correc-
tive institution or under the supervision of a person appointed by him,
for such period as may be specified in the order. It has been stated that
in the revised scheme, a protective home has been envisaged as a home
for the rescued girls, who should be protected against the very stigma
of being considered as having been a prostitute at any period of their
lives. In this context, it will not be advisable to send all applicants under
section 19 to protective homes. A few of them may still justify such a
course. Hence, opportunity should be taken to provide for sending such
cases to corrective institutions, as well as for keeping them under super-
vision under a “non-institutional social case work system.”

We agree with the principle of the suggestion.

6.34. Recommendation to amend section 19(2}—We recommend
that to carry out the changes already indicated‘ sub-section (2) of sec-
(2) of section 19 should be revised as follows: —

“(2) If the magistrate, after hearing the applicant and making
such inquiry as he may consider necessary. fncludiny an inquiry

3 Suggestion of the Central Buregu of Correationul:
3 Suguestion of tha Central Bureau of Correctional Services,
3 Sen disonaion a¢ to section 2, “protective heme”, spr.
4 Ser para 6-53, aupre,



66

by a Probation Officer appointed under the Probation of Offi-
cers Act, 1958, into the personality, conditions of home and pros-
pects of rehabilitation, of the applicant, is satisied that an order
should be made under this section, he shall, for reasons to be
recorded, make an order that the applicant be kept—

() in a protective home, or
(id) in व corrective instijution, or
ii) under the supervision ef a person appoinied by the
magistrate,
for such period as may be specified in the order.”

6.35. Section 20—Removal of prostitutes--Section 20, which deals
with the removal of prostitutes from any place, deserves close considera-
tion. Briefly the scheme of the section is as follows: —-

Under sub-sections (1) and (2), a Magistrate, on receiving
information that any woman or girl residing in or frequenting any
place within the local limits of his jurisdiction is a prostitute, may
tecord the substance of the information received, and issue a
notice to such woman or girl requiring her to appear before the
magistrate and show cause why she should not be required to
remove herself from the place and be prohibited from re-entering
it. The notice must be accompanied by a copy of the record
referred to above, and the copy is to be served along with the
notice on the woman or girl against whom the notice is issued.

Sub-section (3) of section 20 provides as follows : ---

“(3) The magistrate shail, after the service of the notice
referred to in sub-section (2), proceed to inquire into the truth of
the information received, and after giving the woman or girl an
opportunity of adducing evidence, take such further evidence as
he thinks fit, and if upon such inquiry it appears to him that such
woman or girl is a prostitute and that it is necessary in the
interests of the general public that such woman or girl should be
required to remove herself therefrom and’ be prohibited from re-
entering the same, the magistrate shall, by order in writing com-
municated to the woman or girl in the manner specified therein.
tequire her after a date (to be specified in the order) which shall
not be Jess than seven days from the date of the order. to remove
herself from the place to such place whether within or without the
focal limits of his jurisdiction, by such route or routes and within
such time as may be specified in the order and also prohibit her
from re-entering the place without the permission in writing of
the magistrate having jurisdiction over such place.”

Under sub-section (4) of secton 20, a person who—

(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this section,
within the period specified therein, or whilst an order prohibiting
her from re-entering a place without permissicn is in force, re-
enters the place without such permission, or


67

(b) knowing that any woman or girl has, uader this section,
been required to remove herself from the place and has not ob-
tained the requisite permission to re-enter it, harbours or conceals
such ‘woman or girl in the place, is punishable with fine of the
specified amount.

6.36. Validity of section 20 upheld—The validity of section 20 was
chalienged in the past and in fact, the challenge was partly successful,
before the Bombay High Court,’ as well as before the Allahabad’ High
Court. But the Supreme Court has now upheld validity of the section.*

6.37. Suggestion for repeal considered—It has been suggested‘ that
section 20° should be repealed. The reason given in support of the
suggestion is, that mobilizing the community interest in reforming and
rehabilitating the offender, rather than encouraging an attitude of
ostracization, is accepted! as the right approach for the purpose of pre-
vention of crime as well as for the treatment of offenders. Section 20 is
not in line with this principle. “Such provision could be considered.
reasonable when prevention was attempted on municipal and local basis,
it is obviously a waste of effort all round, when we intend to safeguard
svety jurisdiction against the malady.”

6.38. Suggestion not accepted—We ate, however, of the view that
considerations of public interest should override the reasons set out
above, In our view, public interest requires retention of the section,
and we do not, therefore, recommend its repeal, We may point out that
the power under sub-section (3) is circumscribed.

6.39. Section 21--Preventive Homes--Section 21 deals with the
establishment and licensing of protective homes. Sub-section (1}, (2),
@) and (8) are important for our purposes, and read as follows: —

“(1) The State Government may in its discretion establish as many
protective homes under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes, when
established, shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.

(2) No person or no authority other than the State Government
shall, after the commencement of this Act, establish or maintain any
protective home except ander aud in accordance with the conditions of
a licence issued under this section by the State Government.

(3) The State Government, on application made to ir in this be-
half by 2 person or authority, issue to such person or authotity a licence
in the prescribed form for establishing and maintaining or as the case
may be, for maintaining a protective home and a licence se issued may
contain such conditions as the State Government may think fit to im-
pose in accordance with the rules made under this Act:

3 Begum v. Stele, ALR, 1008 Bom, 17.

® Shame Bia v. Stale, ALR. 1959 AML £7.

3 Stgte of U.P. v. Kauahalive, ALB. 1964 8.0, 416, 521, 422,
4 Suggestion of the Canteal Rarcan af Cocrantianal Sarvieos,
# Para 6" 30 supra.


68

Provided that any such condition may require that the manage-
ment of the protective home shall, wherever practicable, be entrusted
to women:

Provided further that a person or authority maintaining any pro-
tective home at the commencement of this Act shall be allowed a period
of six months from such commencement to make an application for
such licence. पु

“(8) Where a licence in respect of a protective home has been
revoked under the foregoing sub-section, such protective home shall
cease to function from the date of such revocation.

Whoever establishes or maintains a protective home except in
accordance with the provision of this section, shall be punishable in the
case of a first offence with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees and, in the case of second or subsequent offences, with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.”

6.40. Recommendation to add corrective institution-—In section 21,
sub-section (1), (2), (3) and (8), corrective institutions should be added",
in view of the proposed scheme’. We recommend acccordingly

6.41. Section 21 (9A)—Suggestion for power to transfer inmates
accepted—It has been suggested’, that in section 21, a provision should
be added whereby the State Government or an authority authorised by
it in this behalf may, subject to any rules that may be made in this
behalf, transfer an inmate of a protective home to a corrective institu-
tion or vice versa; the person transferred should not be required to stay
in the institution to which she is transferred, for a period longer than
she was required to stay in the institution from which she is transferred.

6.42. The suggestion may be accepted in principle. as providing a
useful procedure.

6.43. Recommendation to add sub-section (9A) ia section 21 -In
the light of the above discussion, we recommend that a sub-section
should be added in section 21, as follows:

“(QA) The State Government or an authority authorised by
it in this behalf may, subject to any rules that may be made in
this behalf, transfer an inmate of a Protective Home to a Cor-
rective Institution or an inmate of a Corrective Institution to a
protective home, where such transfer is considered desirable
having regard to the conduct of the person to be transferred,
the kind of training to be imparted in each institution and the
other circumstances of the case:

Provided that

1 0.f. compare suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services,
3 Sou discussion regarding sectiun 2, supre.

3 Suggestion of the Central Burau of Corrre गाव Services.


69

(8) no woman or girl who is transferred under this sub-
section shall be required to stay in the institution 10 which she
is transferred for a period longer than she was required to stay
in the institution from which she was transferred;

(b) reasons shall be recorded for every order of transfer
under this section.”

6.44, Section 22——Trials—-Under section 22, no Court inferior to
that of a Magistrate as detined in clause (c) of section 2, shall try any
offence under section 3, section 4, section 5, section 6, section 7 or
section 8. The expression “Magistrate” is defined in section 2(c) as
meaning the District Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class spe-
cially empowered by the Government to exercise jurisdiction.

6.45. Section 22—_Amendment recommended—As already indicat-
ed,' changes regarding the competent Magistrate, should be made in
this section.

6.46. It has been suggested’ that section 22 should be repealed. It
is stated that we should trust all our magistrates—and eventually even
Gram Panchayats—when we want to fight commercial yice not only
in cities but also in remote rural areas. It is not correct to think that
such vice exists only in cities.

The suggestion is based on a misconception. Section 22 does not
require that only Magistrates in cities can be empowered, Moreover,
Gram Panchayats are not debarred, by this provision, from trying an
offence, if they are otherwise competent (under the Panchayat Act in
force in the State), (o try that offence,

1 See discussion regarding section 2, definition of “Magistrate”.
4 Suygastion of the Central Bureau of Correction sl Servioas.


CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS
(Sections 23 to 25)

7A. Section 23(t) We deal in this Chapter with the remaining
sections of the Act. Section 23 deals with the power to make rules,
The power is vested in the State Government, under sub-section (1). It
has been suggested’ that section 23(1) should be amended as follows: —

“The State Government may, with the approval of the Cen
tral Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.”

The object of the suggested amendment is to require the epproval
of the Central Government before rule, are made by the State Govern-
ment. It, however, appears rathcr inappropriate to require the approval
of the Central Government in this respect. It is rarely’ the practice to
require the approval of the Central Government, for rules to be made
by the State Government. Moreover, there is no strong reason for in-
serting this requirement in this particular Act. Hence, we are unable
to accept the suggestion. ~

7.2. Section 23(2(b)—Change recommended—Section 23(2) enume-
rates in detail the matters as to which rules can be made. We shall deal
with only those clauses of the sub-section which require discussion.
Section 23(2)(b) authorises rules relating to—

“(b) the placing in custody of women and girls released
under sub-section (1) of section 10 or for whose safe custody
orders have been passed under sub-section (1) of section 17 and
their maintenance”

It may be recalled that section 10(1) deals with release of con-
vieted women and girls on admonition or on probation. Tae placing in
custody of such women and girls so released may sound inconsistent
with release on probation, and that-is the reason why there is a sug-
gestion® to delete this part of the clause. The suggestion is that the
words ‘released under sub-section (1) of section 10 or’ should be deleted.

It is stated that the concept of release from custody is inconsistent
with the idea of prebation,

We broadly agree with this approach. but we do not accept the
suggestion in foto. Instead, we recommend tbat in section 23(2)(b) the
words “where the women or girls are without a home” should be
added after the words ‘“‘sub-section (1) of section 10”. This will narrow
down the scope of this part of section 23(2), clause (6).

1 Suggestion of the Central Bureau of Correctional Services.
2 One sory rare oxample ix found in seotings 29 & 30, Registration of Births Act, 1971.
3 para 76

70


VW

7.3. Section 23(2)(c)—We shall deal later with section 23(2)(c).*

7A, Section 23(2)f)}—Section 23(20f) relates to rules for carrying
cout the provisions of section 18. 1६ has been suggested’ that sectton
23) should be deleted. But. if section 18 is not to be deleted, we do
not see uny reason why section 23200) should be deleted. We do not.
therefore. recommend any change in this regard.

7.5. Section 23(2)—Rules as to corrective institutions---Addition
of—In consequence of our recommendation* for having ६ separate
nomenclature for corrective institutions, it becomes necessary to ex-
pand the rule-making powers of the State Government, so as to enable
rules to be made on various matters concerning corrective institutions
(besides protective homes). In fact, there is also a suggestion* which is
substantially to the same effect. We proceed to indicate the detailed
changes required for the above purpose.

7.6. Section 23(2)(c)—change recommended—Sectiom 23124) pro-
vides for rules relating to:

“(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes cf weo-
men and girls under sub-section (2) of section 10, sub-section
(2) of section 17 and section 19 and their mainicnance;”

In view of the proposed substitution of corrective homes institu.
tions’ in section 10@), the relevant portion of this cleuse will require
change, and we recommend that it should be suitably revised for the
purpose*,

7.7. Section 23(2)(g)—Several consequential changzs arise for con-
sideration with reference to section 23(2)g).

(a) Section 23(2)(g)) provides for rules relating to—

“G) the establishment, maintenance, management and
superintendence of protective homes and “he appointment.
powers and duties of persons employed in such homes;”

We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in this
clause.
(b) Section 23(2)g)(v) provides for rules relating to-—
“(y) the manner in which the accounts of 9, protective home
shall be maintained and audited;”

We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in this
clause.

+ Para 7-8, aupre.
2 Suggestion of the Coutral Burst of Comeetional Survives.

3 Seq recommondation a to sostion 2), “proteet. ve howl"
institution.

4 Suggsstion of the Ccotral Bureau of Qorreetional Services.
© Para 74, supra.
* Draft not annexed.

and section 2-“eorractive



72
i
{c) Section 23(2)(g)vii) provides for rules as to—
“(vii) the care, treatment, maintenance, training, instruc-
tion, control and discipline of the inmates of protective homes,”
We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in this
clause.

(d) Section 23(2)(g)(ix) provides for rules as to—-

“{ix) the temporary detention of women and girls sentenced
to detention in protective homes until arrangements afe made
for sending them to such homes;”

We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in
this clause.

(e) Section 23(2)(g)(xi) and (xii) deal with rules as to—

“(xi) the transfer, in pursuance of an order of the court
from a protective home to a prison of a woman cr gitl found
to be incorrigible or exercising bad influence upon other in-
mates of the protective home and the period of her detention
in such prison;

(ci) the transfer to a protective home or women or girls
sentenced under section 7 ar section 8 and the period of their
detention in such homes,”

We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in
these clauses, wherever considered suitable.
(0) Section 23(2)(g)(xiii) provides for tules as to—-

“(xiii) the discharge of inmates from a protective home
either absolutely or subject to conditions, and their arrest in
this event of breach of such conditions,”

We recommend that the Corrective institutions should be added in
this clause.

(g) Section 23(2)(gXxv) provides for rules as to- —

“(xv) the inspection of protective homes and other institu-
tions in which women and girls may be kept, detained and main-
tained.”

We recommend that corrective institutions should be added in this
clause also.

7.8. Section 24—This takes us to section 24. It saves laws relating
to juvenile offenders, and needs no change.

7.9. Schedule of powers of Magistrates to be inserted--In view of
what we have stated above, in connection with (he definition of “Magis-
trate’”, the following Schedule* dealing with the powers of Magistrates
should be inserted in the Act.

2 98: 36 to secti
२ Sce pars 410. supra.

ion of *Magistrate”.


7B
SCHEDULE

4 . . .
Magistrates competent to exercise the powers under various sections of
the Act.

Explanatory Note: (1) In regard to offences under the Act, the
entries in the second column against a section, the number of which
is given in the first column, are not intended as the definition of the
offence in the Act, but merely as an indication of the substance of the
section.

(2) In this Schedule, (i) the expression “Magistrate of the first
class” includes Metropolitan Magistrates, but not Executive Magis-
trates; (ii) the expression “District Magistrate” includes Chief Metro-
politan Magistrates.

Magistrates competent to exercise various powers.

Gist of the seetion
7) Prostitution in or in the vieinhy of Distviet Magistrate.
public place ts be notified.
Wat Triat for breach of the requirement to Magistrate of the first olass

notify address by » previously con-
vieted offender.

1314) Seourity for good behavivue from habi- Mayistrate of the firet class.
‘tual offenders.

15(8) Search without wareant ++ Magistrate of the foot alas, Dist
Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magis.
trate.

16 Rescue of giel .. Magistrate of the lirst class, Distriot
Magistrat- or Sub-Divisiona! Magin-
trate.

7 Intermediate custody of girls remy. cd Magistrate of the first class, District

Rader section 15 or reseed tier see- Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magis.
tion 16. tree.

18(1)(3) &(4) Closure of brothels and evietion o! uff District Magistrate or Sub-c:vivional

enders from premises, Magistrate.
19 s+ Application for being kept in a pvtec- Magistrate of the first class, District
tive home, Magistra!s or Sub-Divigional Mayis-

trate.

£0(IME(3) Removal of prostitutes from any place District Magistrate or Sub-div's‘mel
Magitrate of any Hxeoutive Magin-
trate spacially empsweed by the
State Government.

+. Trials + Magiatrate of th. first clues.

ic

1 Seo para 4-10 of the Heport,


CHAPTER 8
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AC1—-SOME IMPORTANT POINTS

8.1. iniroductory--We would like to conclude this report by
drawing attention to an important aspect of the problem with which
the Act is concerned. We wish to emphasise that apart irom amend-
ments of the Act, many other measures are needed to mitigate the
evil of prostitution. The need for such measures has been stressed in
the past' also, but what may be conveniently called “non-egislative
measures” ate so important that we would like to draw attention tc
some points that require serious attention.

8.2. Need for well-managed institution—In the first place, we
would like to point out that the Act may be defeated by reason of
dearth of well-managed institutions. Implementation of the beneficial
provisions of the Act, particularly, the provisions as to the rescue of
fallen women and girls, postulates the existence of sufficient number of
well-managed institutions. This may sound axiomatic, but we think that
it is an aspect of very great importance, which should be borne in mind.

In this connection, it should also be stated that the line ot demar-
cation between institutions for the correction of hardened prostitutes on
the one hand, and institutions for the protection of new recruits to
this vocation on the other hand should be kept in the forefront. We
have discussed this aspect in detail, in the relevant portion of the
Report’.

8.3. Need for adequate women police officers—Secondly, we would
like to record our view that it should be ensured* that the number of
women police officers is adequate for the discharge of the duties that
may have to be specially entrusted to these police officers under the
Act.

8.4. Proper up-bringing-—Thirdly, it is well-known that many in-
mates of brothels have children who are brought up in the surround-
ings in which their mothers live. These children are, therefore, bound to
imbibe the undesirable atmosphere of the brothels. This aspect requires
paramount and immediate attention. [t illustrates how, apart from
legislation, other efforts are necessary to prevent the evil of prostitution
from assuming a larger dimension.

1 Parag 3, 11,-7, 6-13, 6-17, 6-25, supra,

® Yoo discussion ay ta section 2-efinition of “correciive iustifition” and “protective
homes”. Para 47, 4-33, supra,

3 Sea also para G- 13, supra.

74


75

The law can deal with serious and blatant manifestations of immo-
rality. But the problem is not only a legal one. We may point out that
there are institutions relating to children, and suitable vse should be
made of these institutions,

If there is any lacuna in the relevant legislation, the matter should
be dealt with suitably, by amending the relevant legislation. But, be-
sides legislative action, it is desirable that measures should be taken
to protect impressionable girls from imbibing such atmosphere. The
enlisting of the co-operation of yoluntary agencies is ciminently desir-
able, in this regard.


CHAPTER 9
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

Our recommendations are summarised below: —

I. The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls
Act, 1956-—Amendment,

Section 2(a)—‘brothel'—In the definition of ‘brothel’, the addi-
tion of ‘conveyance’ is recommended.

Section 2—“corrective institution”—The definition of “corrective
institution” should be inserted in section 2, to include an institution
where women and girls who are in need of correction may be detained’,

Section 2c)—‘Magistrate’—The term ‘Metropolitan Magistrate’
should be substituted for ‘Magistrate’ in the Act, to accord with the
terminology adopted in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973"

The definition of “Magistrate” in section 2(c) should be revised
so as to refer to a schedule of powers of Magistrates. which is recom-
mended to be inserted in the Act‘.

Section 2(e)-—“prostitute”—The definition of ‘prostitute’ should be
linked up with that of ‘prostitution’.

Section 2(f—‘prostitution’—The definition of ‘prostitution’ should
be revised so as to clarify that the payment for the intercourse need not
be immediate. Further, the definition of ‘prostitute’ should be linked
up with that of ‘prostitution’*.

Section 2(g)\—‘protective home’—Recommendation has been made
to amend the definition of ‘protective home’ so as to include an insti-
tution for the care and protection of rescued women and girls, being an
institution as is referred to under section 21. but as to exclude a shelter
for female under-trials or a corrective instilution’.

Section 4(2)—Recommendation has been made to revise section
4(2), so as to make it clear that it is those persons who are over the age
of eighteen years and found in the circumstances mentioned in this sub-
section who are punishable under sub-section (1). The proviso to section
4(2) should be deleted, as being superfluous’

3 Para 4-9.

4 Para 4-12, 7-9,

8 Paras 4:17 and 4.26,
* Para 4-26.

7 Pora 4-33.

3 Para 6-17.

76


17

The point relating to section 5 is considered. An amendment is
recommended in sections 372 and 373 of the Indian Penal Code’, to
cover girls above a certain age.

Section 7(\)—Verbal change—In section 7(1), for the words
“yards” the word “meters”? should be substituted.

Section 9(1)—Section 9(1) should be revised so as to punish a per-
son who stands in a position of authority over any woman or girl and
who causes or aids or abets in seducing her for prostitution’.

Section 10()—In section 10(1), the offences under section 3(2),
section 4 and section 5 should be removed, as these are serious offences
and not suitable for probation‘.

Section 10(1)(a), (b) and (c)—The reference to the Criminal Pro-
cedure Code, 1898 should be replaced by reference to the new Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958°.

Section 10(1) should be revised to provide that a person convicted
for the first time under section 7 or 8, may, having regard to his age,
character, antecedents and circumstances be réleased by the court with
admonition or probation under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
or section 360 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, if the said Act
does not extend to the State’.

Section 100) and Section 10A (New)—Section 10(2) should be
revised so that persons convicted under sections 7 and 8 should be deter-
mined in a corrective institution. For this purpose, a new section 10A
should be inserted’.

Section 10(3)—Section 10(3) should be widened, so as to prohibit
release on probation or with admonition for all offences except offences
under sections 7 and 8°.

Section 10—Section 10 should be amended so as to provide that
where a court convicting a person could have ordered probation, but
has not done so, it shall record the reasons for not having done 80,

Sections 15(4), 16, 17 and 23(2)—The scope of sections 15(4) and
16 should be widened, so as to make the beneficial provision for rescue
available also 10 a woman of any age who is being made to carry on
prostitution’.

Such women, being involuntary participants in prostitution, should
be sent to protective homes, and not to corrective institutions4,

5 Para 5:45.
6 Para 6-46.
? Para 5-47.
4 Para 5-48,
a Para 5-49



78

However, such adult women, while in the protective home, should
be teated on a different footing from girls below the aze of 21 years,
and suitable provision should be made in this regard in the rules to
be made under the Act’. .

In section 170), the word “immediately” should be deleted”. It is
also recommended that a proviso should be added to section 17(1) to
the effect that no girl should be detained in custody for more than ten
days or be placed in custody of a person who may exercise harmful
influence over her‘.

Section 17(2)—Section 17(2) should be revised so as to provide
for intermediate custody, enquiries by Probation Officers, need for care
and protection of orders by courts and non-institutional care and gui-
dance‘. A minimum period of one year and not more than three years
may be prescribed for detention in a protective home or in such other
custody as the court may order’.

Section 17A and 17B (New)—The insertion of two new sections—
173 and 17B—to deal with seduction and non-production by police
officers of rescued women and girls" is recommended.

Section 19(1)—Section 19(1) should be revised so as to include a
provision for an order that the girl be provided care and protection
by the court in a protective home or in the manner specified in section
1902).

Section 19014) (New)—interim custody—The insertion of a new
section 19(1A) regarding the interim custody of the girl, pending an
inquiry under section 19(1) is recommended".

Section i9(2)--Section 19(2) should be revised so as to include an
inquiry by a Probation Officer into the personality, conditions of home
and prospects of rehabilitation of the applicant, and the Magistrate
may then order her to be kept in a protective home, corrective institu-
tion or under the supervision of such person as he appcints’.

Sections 21(), 210), 21) and 21(8)—In section 21, sub-sections
(0, 2), 9) and (8), dealing with protective homes, corrective institutions
should be added”.

Section 21(9A)—Power to transfer inmates—(New'—-The insertion
of a new sub-section (A) in section 21, regarding power to transfer
an inmate of a Protective Home to a corrective institution or vice versa”
is recommended.

+ Pary 6-10.

४ Porn 6-21.

* Para 6-22.

# Paras 6-24 and

© Parad 6-24 and

ह Paras 6 fi8 and 6:
31



79

Section 22—The changes regarding the competent Magistrate
should be made in section 22, so as to accord with the recommenda-
tions regarding section 2°.

Section 23(2)(b)-—In section 23(2)(b) the words “where the women
or girls are without a home” should be added after the words “sub-
section (1) of section 10” in order to narrow down this part, regarding
custody’.

Section 23(2)(c)—The relevant portion of section 23000) should
be revised in view of the proposed substitution of corrective institutions
in section 10(2)'.

Section 23(2)(g)\—The term “corrective institutions” should be added
in section 23(2)(p), clauses 0), (v), (vii), (00, 601) and (xv) and in clauses
(xi) and (xii), wherever considered suitable.*

Schedule of powers of Magistrates to be inserted—A schedule
dealing with the powers of Magistrates should be inserted in the Act’

I. The Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, 1956

Implementation—Apart from the implementation of the Suppres-
sion of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, many other non-
legislative measures are required to mitigate the evil of prostitution’

Need for well managed institutions—The provisions regarding res-
cue of fallen women and girls postulates the existence of sufficient
number of well-managed institutions. This should te berre in mind.
The distinction drawn between Corrective Homes and Protective Homes
for different categories of prostitutes should also be kept in the fore-
front’.

Need for adequate women police officers—The number of women
police officers should be adequate to carry out the work entrusted to
them under the Act’.

Proper up-bringing of prostitutes’ children—The children of pros-
titutes are bound to imbibe the undesirable atmosphere of brothel life
Here again, institutions relating to children should be suitably used tif
necessary, relevant law be amended) and the assistance of voluntary
agencies should be enlisted to protect young girls’ particularly.

Para 6-45.
2 Para 7-2.
3 Paras 7-8 and 7-6.
«Fara 7:7.
* Para 759.
* Para 8-1.
7 Para 8-2.
३ Para 8-3,
* Para ४-4.


80

वा, indian Penal Code, 1860

Sections 372 and 373, Indian Penal Code—Sections 372 and 373,
indian Penal Code should be amended so as to extend these sections
regarding purchase or sale of girls to adults also'

IV. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.

Section 18, Probation of Offenders Act, 1958—Section 18 of the
Probation of Offenders Act should be amended, so as to remove refe-
rence to the Suppression cf Immoral Traffic Act*.

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of the
valuable assistance we have received from Shri Bakshi, Member-Secre-
tary of the Commission in the preparation of this Report.

P. B. Gajendragadkar Chairman

P. K. Tripathi Member

$, S. Bhavan Member

S. P. Sen Verma Member

8. ९. Mitra Member

P. M. Bakshi Member-Secretary
New Dethi;

7th February, 1975.

2 Paras 5-20 ond 5-21.
2 Para 5-44.



APPENDIX 1

COMPARATIVE POSITION AS TO PROSTITUTION IN OTHER
COUNTRIES

Prostitution at common law-—At common law, keeping a brothel is
not an offence. A prostitute receiving men-only inte her own room could
not be convicted of keeping a “brothel”.’

It may be stated that “scandalous and public” indecent behaviour
was, at common law, an offence’, The history of the offence of grossly
open and notorious “lewdness-indecent exposure” is illustrative of this.
To be indictable in earlier times, this act not only had to be public,
but had to actually be seen by “more than one” non-consenting persons.’
The “more than one person” rule was, however, soon relaxed, to the
extent that acts were held indictable if they were committed in a place
“so situated that what passes there can be seen by a considerable num-
ber of people if they happen to look”.‘ However, courts, retaining this
requirement as so modified, have still refused to indict the act when
committed in private before a single non-consenting person’

The law on the subject in England has now been modified by a
number of enactments’.

Statutory provisions in England—The main statutory olfences in
England relevant to prostitution are the following: —

Causing or encouraging women to become prostitutes:
By section 22(1) of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956,-—
“It is an offence for a person---

(a) to procure a woman to become, in any part of the world.
a common prostitute; or

{b) 10 procure a woman to leave the United Kingdom, in-
tending her to become an inmate of or frequent a brothel else-
where; or .

(0 to procure a woman to leave her usual place of abode
in the United Kingdom, intending her to become an inmate of,
or frequent a brothel in any part of the world for the purpose
of prostitution.”

2 Singleton v Ellison, (1895) 1 Q 8. 607; Archbold (1968), para 3854.
2 Note “‘Homo-sexual Conduot”, 70 Yalo Law Journal 623, 624, and footnote 11.
8 (6) Regina y, Watson, (1847) 2 Cox Crim. Cas. 378;
(8) Regina v. Orchard, (1848) 3 Cox. Crim, Cas, 248.
4 @) Van Houten v. State, 5 N.L.J, 311 (Hssox Quarter Sess. 1882), af 46 NLT, 16
(Sup. 0६. 1884) (act committed in store) (U.8.A.):
(b) Regina v. Holmes, (1953) 6 Cox Crim. Cas. 216 (act in omnibus);
(०) Regina v. Thallman (1883) 9 Cox. Crim. Cas. 388 (act in roof).
5 898 (1946) Burdick, Law of Crimes 867, cited in Note,"*Homosexual Conduct" 70 Yale
L.J. 623, 624 and footnote 11.
© Seo infra-“Statutory provisions in Sngland.”

81



82

The use of Premises for Prostitution:

(a) Brothel keeping—-By section 33 of the Sexual Offences
Act, 1956:

“Jt is an offence for a person to keep a brothel, or to
manage, or act or assist in the management of a brothel.”

By Section 34:

“It is an offence for the lessor or landlord of any premises
of his agent to let the whole or part of the premises with the
knowledge that it is to be used, in whole or in part. as a brothel,

or, whete the whole or part of the premises is used as a brothel.
to be wilfully a party to that use continuing.”

And by section 350):
“It is an offence for the ienant or occupier, or person in

charge, of any premises knowingly to permit the whole or part
of the premises to be used as a brothel.”

Tenant permitting premises to be used for prostitution:
By section 36 of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956:

“It is an offence for the tenant or occupier of any premises
knowingly to permit the whole or part of the premises to be
used for the purpose of habitual prostitution.”

Living on the Earnings of Prostitution:

By section 30 of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956:

“(L) It is an offence for a man knowingly to live wholly or
in part on the earnings of prostitution.

(2) For the purposes of this section a man who lives with
or is habitually in the company of a prostitute, or who exercises
control, direction or influence over a prostitute’s movements in
a way which shows he is aiding, abetting or compelling her
prostitution with others, shall be presumed to be knowingly
living on the earnings of prostitution, unless he proves the con-
trary.”

By section 4 of the Street Offences Act, 1959, the maximum
penalty for this offence was increased from two to seven years.

A woman exercising control over a prostitute:

A closely related offence under section 31 of the Sexual Offences
Act, 1956, may be committed only by women:

“It ig an offence for a woman for purposes of gain to exer-
cise control, direction or influence over a prostitute’s movements
in a way which shows she is aiding, abetting or compelling her
prostitution.”


83

Loitering or Soliciting in Public Places:

In all the offences 50 far considerzd, the crime is committed not
by the prostitute but by another. The Iegisfation now to be considered
is aimed at the prostitute herself. Its object is not the suppression or
dicouragement of prostitution, but the elimination of au offence against
public order and decency arising from the activities of prostitutes in
public places. The present law is to be found in the Street Olfences Act,
1959, which provides, in section 1—

“() It shalt be an offence for a common prostitute to loiter
or solicit in a sireet or public place for ihe purpose of presti-
tution.”

Section 1(4) of the Street Offences Act, 1959 provides:

“For the purpases of this section ‘street’ includes any bridyc,
road, lane, footway, subway, square. cour, alley or passage.
whether a thoroughtare or not, which is for the ime being open
fo the public; and the doorways and enteances of premises
abutting on a street (as hereinbefore defined), ond any ground
adjoining and open to a street, shall be treated as forming part
of the street.”

“Soliciting” takes place in a street or public place where the soli-
citation takes effect there, even though the accused may be outside the
street or public place. In Smith v. Huges' attracted the attention of
men in the street by tapping on the window pane, and by gestures in-
vited them and indicated the price of her services. Applying the “mis:
chief rule’ of construction, the Divisional Court dismissed her appeal:

“Hyery body knows that this was an Act intended ta clear
up the streets, to enable people to walk along the s:cests without
being “molested or solicited” by common prostitutes. Viewed in
that way, it can matter little whether the prostitute. is soliciting
while in the street or is standing in a doorway or on a balcony,
or at the window, or whether the window is shut or open or half
open; in each case her solicitation is projected to and addressed
to somebody walking in the street.”

OF course, a person whe is net criminaliy punished by the law.
can slill be denied its protection. Thus, the doctrine that the inn-keeper
must admit all travellers is not applicable to a prostitute? A landlord
who lets a fiat for fornication may not recover his rent.’

Other countries—Having dealt with English law, we give below a
brief summary’ of ihe position in 2 “ew other countries.

मे पलक +. Hughes (1960) 2 All 1.9, 859, 881
2 (a) Raider ¢. Ths Dizile Inn (1928) 198 Ky 248 8. एए, 229 (1022) (TNA).
(b) Sultan Turkish Rath, Inc. v. Board of Police Commissionera, 169 Cal. App. 20 186.
337 P. 20 203 (Dist. Ck App. 1959) (U.8.A.).
3 रोकी! v. Weight, (1911) 1 KB. 606.
*Malarial mostly based on International Review of Criminal Policy (Detober 19581, No.
वह



84

Cambodia—in Cambodia, a number of licensed brothels and
houses of prostitution exist under special regulations other than licens-
ing. Clandestine prostitutes are prosecuted under Article 430 of the
Penal Code. Their arrest is the responsibility of the “public morals
police”, which keeps a special register of persons so arrested and sent
e treatment centres, as well as of inmates of licensed or recognised

‘othels.

Canada—Position as to Canada is dealt with later.’

In Chile, on October 4, 1955, the Ministry of Health issued a new
regulation concerning the prevention of venereal disease, which pro-
vided for the suppression of ali brothels in the country and the dis-
continuance of the medical inspection relating to the occupants of such
establishments.

Denmark—In Denmark, prostitution is not an offence as such.
The police, may, however, arder a prostitute to seek lawful occupation
under section 199 of the Criminal Law and if the prostitute fails to
comply with the order, she can be imprisoned upto one year. Section
233 of the Criminal Law provides that any person who olfends public
decency by her way of life, or by importuning other persons, is liable
to simple detention or to imprisonment upto one year. The sentence
is normally suspended for the first offence.

France—In France, Act of 24th April, 1946, and the decree of
1947 contain the law on the subject. The Ministry of Health has estab-
lished a Central health and social card index of prostitutes. Prostitution
per se is not an offence. The Act of 1946 provides for penalties for its
public manifestation. Also, the Act punishes procurers of all types, but
this law is not effective.

Haiti—In Haiti, prostitution is regulated by the Decrce of 13th
June, 1927. Prostitutes who are not inmates of recognised brothels are
not subjected to general or administrative measutes; they are tolerated.

Hungary—in Hungary, registration of prostitutes was abolished
in June, 1950.

freland—In Ireland, no licensed or recognized brothels nor any
system of registration of prostitutes exists. Section 16 of the Criminal
Law Amendment Act, 1935 provides that every common prostitute who
is found loitering in any street, or other place and soliciting passersby
for the purpose of prostitution shall be guilty of an offence and on
conviction be liable, in the case of the first offence, to a fine not ex-
ceeding two pounds or in case of subsequent offences to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding six months.

Poland—In Poland, heterosexual prostitution is not a punishable
offence. But, as regards homosexual prostitution, artic’e 207 of the
Penal Code provides that any person who offers himself for reasons of
profit to a person of the same sex for the purpose of committing an

1 Bee below under “U.S.A. and Canada”.


85

immoral act shall be liable to a term of imprisonment for 3 years. Under
further provisions of the Penal Code, consorting with relatives in the
direct line, with a brother or sister or with minors, exploiting the pros-
titution of others and inducing another person to engage professionally
in immoral acts, are punishable offences, In a number of cities where
the problem of prostitution is acute, names of all prostitutes who had
committed an offence were previously entered in a special card register
which also contains personal data e.g. education, age etc. This system
was abolished in April, 1956, and now no system of registration exists
in Poland.

Spain—In Spain, the Penal Code provides for the cffences of pro-
tecting or abetting prostitutes, and inducing other persons by deception,
violence or threats to satisfy the unlawful desires of others. If the woman
involved is under 21 years, offenders are liable to heavier Penalties, and
any person who fails to place under restraint a minor subject to his
legal authority who is, ta his knowledge, engaging in prostitution or
residing in a house or place of illfame, is liable to arrest on a major
charge, and may be disqualified from acting as guardiar. and deprived
of his parental authority. Persons engaged in clandestine prostitution
as a means of livelihood, and the protectors of such Person, are also
liable to sentence of confinement or special supervision under the
Vagrants and Beggars Law. The legislative Decree of 3rd March, 1956
declares prostitution to be an illicit traffic and prohibits brothels and
other similar establishments.

Sri Lanka—In Sri Lanka, there are no licensed or recognised
brothels, and prostitutes are not Subject to registration. Prostitution is
an offence under the Brothels Ordinance and the Vagrants Ordinance.
The Brothels Ordinance does not provide for the punishment of the
women found in a brothel presumably for the purpose of prostitution,
but a charge. could be made against them under section 9(1A) of the
Vagrants Ordinance. Such a charge, however, is extremely difficult to
Prove, and a great handicap to the raiding of such houses arises from
the fact that the courts frown on the police practice of using “decoys”
in order to trap the women.

U.S.A. and Canada—Under the different laws in force in the
U.S.A. and Canada, the term “prostitution” is generally construed to
mean the offering or receiving. of the body for hire for the purpose of
sexual intercourse. In some States, a further qualification is added: the
term “prostitution” includes the offering or receiving of the body for
indiscriminate sexual intercourse, without hire. It may be assumed
that a “promiscuous” woman (as distinct from @ prostitute) shows some
degree of discrimination and emotional involvement, and that pay-
ment to her does not take form of a fee for services rendered, although
some less tangible consideration may be received, The Ine of demat-
cation, however, (between promiscuity and prostitution) is not a hard
or fast one, Further, the same woman may shift back and forth bet-
ween “prostitution” and “promiscuity” as the economic and other
conditions of her life change.


86

_ Generally speaking, the prostitute group includes women who
derive entire earnings from this, as well as those who are waitresses,
barmaids, dance hall girls ete.

The Federal Act in the U.S.A. (known as the While Slave Traffic
Act) prohibits and penalises, as aj felony, the act of any person who
transports, causes to be transported, or aids or assists in transporting
any woman or girl in inter-state or foreign commerce for the purpose
of prostitution or debauchery or any other immoral purpose, or who
knowingly procures or obtains, causes to be procured or obtained, or
aids or assists in procuring or obt#ining any ticket or tickets or any
form of transportation to be used by any woman or girl in inter-state
or foreign commerce for the purpose of prostitution or debauchery or
for any other immoral purpose’. Knowingly to persuade, induce, en-
tice, or coerce, or to aid or assist in persuading, inducing, enticing,
or coercing any woman to go from one place to another in inter-state
or foreign commerce for the purpose of prostitution, debauchery, or
other immoral purpose’, or knowingly to persuade, induce, entice, or
coerce any woman or girl under the age of eighteen years from any
state or territory or from the District of Columbia to any other state
or territory or District of Columbia, with the purpose and intent to
induce or coerce her or that she shall be induced or coerced to engage
in prostitution or debauchery or any other immoral practice, or in
furtherance of such purpose knowingly to induce cr cause her to go
and to be carried or transported as a passenger in inter-state com-
merce upon the line or route of any comomn carrier or carriers’ are
also declared to constitute felonies.

Prostitution in one form or another has existed on the North
American continent since the very early days of its history. In the
19th century, the white slave traffic prospered in business and residen-
tial areas. Brothel keepers and pimps grew rich, but the prostitutes
themselves were always in debt to the brothel owners.

With the dawn of the 20th century, there was public awakening,
in Western Europe, patticularly in England and in France, In Lon-
don, the first International Conference for the Suppression of Traffic
in Women in 1899 was held. In 1902. the first International Confe-
rence for the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic met in Paris to
draft a Treaty. By 1904, an international agreement for suppressing
the international traffic in women had been adopted by 13 nations:
Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Great Britain, the
Netherlands, Norway. Portugal. Russia, Spain, Sweden and Switzer-
land. The U.S. accepted to it in 1906. In 1917, the U.S. Congress
passed an Act which prohibited prostitution within a prescribed area
around military or naval installations. Following these, several states
enacted Jaws against all phases of commercialised prostitution, and
passed ‘injunction and abatement’ laws. The laws against traffic in

718 US. Code ५. 397.
218 U.S. Codo s. 398.
3 | 8 U.S. Code s. 400.


87

women and girls aimed at the prosecution of Procurers aud other pro-
moters of vice. The ‘injunction and abatement’ laws provided for the
suppression of disorderly houses as public nuisance. These resulted,
in many states, in the closing of many houses of prostitution; this
marked the beginning of the end of these districts as an American
institution.

By 1948, every State in the U.S.A. had enacted some kind of
improved vice-repressive laws. By defining “prostitution” so as to in-
clude both the giving as well as taking of the body in indiscriminate
sexual intercourse for hire, and by penalising the customer us well as
the prostitute, some States’ marked a long step forward in legislation
शा this field.

Between the two World Wars, there was growing interest in pub-
lic health and a campaign for control of venereal disease and for vice-
repressive laws was adopted. The May Act, 1941-10 prohibit pros-
utution within such reasonable distance of military and/or naval
establishments as the Secretary of War and/or Navy shall determine
10 be needful to the efficiency, health and welfare of the Army and/
or Navy” is worth particular notice.

By 1948, every State in the U.S.A. had enacted some kind of
repressive legislation.

The “regulationist” system, involving the registration of prostitute
and the regulation of brothels, had been tried out in one form or
another in the United States and Canada. This proved ineffective, and
was abandoned in favour of a policy of strict tepression. The American
point of view on regulation was influenced by the fact that (1) “regu-
lation does not regulate” but simply increases the demand for prostitu-
tion, and (2) the regulationist system involyes the Governments con-
cerned as partners in licence fees and levying taxes.

At present, the federal law. in Canada against commetcialised
prostitution and the State laws in the U.S.A. classify prostitution and
traffic in persons as a crime, and call for iis strict repression. The trend
is towards decreased comimercialised prostitution, because of effective
law enforcement, and improvement in economic conditions,

Tn the U.S.A., the Federal Government may enact special legislation
10 protect servicemen from the threat of prostitution activities. and the
commanding officers of army, navy and air force installations may
place out of bounds to servicemen the neighbouring brovhels and other
Tesorts where illegal sex contracts are made or attempted. However, the
role of the Federal Government is restricted largely to the Immigration
and Naturalisation Service, and to the F.B.I. which takes action only
when the traffic in persons crosses state lines,

State attorneys can take action where the law is not complied with.
Further, state health authorities may bring pressure on municipal gov-
ernments to secure the enforcement of these laws,

3 Ey. Arizona, Florida, New Hampshire and Wisconain,


88

The State laws differ. In New York City, for example, a prostitute
when apprehended is taken to the police station, where she is charged
and if of a icgal age taken to a house of detention to await trial. A minor
is placed temporarily in a home for delinquent girls, With least possible
delay, they are brought before the Couzt for Women Vagrants, or if
under age, before the Juvenile Court; bail may be granted, the Court
moves quickly. If it is a first offence and evidence is sufficient to wat-
rant conviction, a suspended sentence may be given, or the convict
may be placed on probation. If she is a recidivist and of legal age, she
is often given prison sentence of 30 days to a year. IE she is a minor,
she is given an indeterminate sentence in a rehabilitative institution. New
York does not fine convicted prostitutes. A large fine is found to be
a deterrent, but a smaller fine is useless.

Law in New York—Sections 230.00 230.05 and 230.10 of the 1965
New York State Penal Law read as follows':—

“Section 230.00 Prostitution,

A person is guilty of prostitution when such person engages or
agrees or offers to engage in sexual conduct with another person in
return for a fee.

{Prostitution is a violation. 1. 1965, 2. 1030, eff. Sept. J, 1967].
A person is guilty of patronizing a prostitute when:

1. Pursuant to a prior understanding, he pays a fze to another
person as compensation for such person or a third person having
engaged in sexual conduct with him; or

2. He pays or agrees to pay a fee to another person pursuant to
an understanding that in return therefore such person or a third per-
son will engage in sexual conduct, with him; or

3. He solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual con-
duct with him in return for a fee.

Patronizing a prostitute is a violation’.

Section 230.10 Prostitution, and patronizing q prostitute,

Sex no defence.

If any prosecution fer prostitution or patronizing a prostitute, the
sex “of the two parties ot prospective parties to the sexual conduct
engaged in, contemplated, or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defence
that:

1. Such persons were of the same sex; or

1 See Pomola, A. Roby, “Polities and Criminal Law-Revision of New Stato Prnal Law on
Prostitution”, (1889 Summer), Vol. 17, No, 1, Socie! Problems 83, 85.
2 TL, 1065, ०. 1030, eff. Sept. 1. 1987.


89

2. The person who received, agreed to receive or solicited a ९९
with a male and the person who paid or agreed or offered to pay such
fee was a female’ *,

It was after public hearing that the New York Penal Law and
Criminal Revision Commission added. section 230.05, concerning pat-
rons, In its comments on article 230, the Commission termed the addi-
tion of the New offence, “Patronizing a Prostitute", the most impor-
tant change in the article. In explaining the change, the Commission
wrote’:

“Though not presently an offence in New York, such ‘patro-
nizing’ conduct is prescribed in various forms by the penal
codes of several other jurisdiction, including the recently revis-
ed Codes of Illinois and Wisconsin.

“At the public hearings held by the Commission with respect to
the proposed Penal Law and in conferences and correspondence with
the Commission and its staff, a number of persons and organizations
have strongly urged the inclusion of a “patronizing” offence. The rea-
sons most vigorously advanced are:

(1) that criminal sanctions against the patron as well as the pros-
litute should aid in the curtailment of prostitution; and (2) that to
penalize the prostitute and exempt the equally culpable patron is in-
herently unjust.

“After consideration of these contentions, the Comraission decided
to include the indicated patronizing offence in the new dill as a proper
corollary to prostitution.”

The power of forces opposing the “patron’s” penalty was discussed
by Flexner‘ in the twenties:

“The professional prostitute being a social outcaste may be periodi-

cally punished ‘without disturbing the usual course of society. -
. the man. however, is something more than a partner in an
immoral act; he discharges important social and business relations, is
a father or brother responsible for the maintenance of others, has com
mercial or industrial duties to meet. He cannot be imprisoned without
damaging society (i.e., those with influence in socicty).”

In 1966, Davis wrote, “Although the service is illegitimate, the
citizen cannot ordinarily be held guilty, for it is inadvisable to punish
a large portion of the populace for a crime ............... that has no
political significance. Each such citizen participates in the basic acti-
vities of the society, in business, government, the home, the church, etc.

3, L. 1965, 6- 1090, eff. Sept. 1, 1967

3, Algo see B. Gorge, ‘Legal, Mcdi¢al avd Psychiatric Consideration, in the Control of
Prostitution”, (1962), 60 Mich. Law Review.

3, New Vork Penal Law, Comments 8. 230.08 (Mckinney 1969) cited hy Eamela A. Roby
"Politics and Criminal Law, (1969 Summer), Vol. 17 Social Probicms No. 1, 83.92.

4. Flexner, Prostitution in Europe. (1920) pages 108, eited in Pamela A. Roby, “Politios
and Criminal Law (1969) (Suramer), Vol. 17, No १, Social Froblems 83, 108, footnote.



90

To disrupt all of these by throwing him in jail for a mere vice would
cause more social disruption and inefliciency than correcting the alleged

crimed would be worth’.

In 1968, in New York State (contrary to Davis’ expectations), the
patron can be held guilty, but the theory upon which Davis based his
expectations remains true, for the law is seldom eniorced.”

Model Penal Code—The Model Penal Code’, original draft.
section 207.12, was as follows: - -

“S. 207.12—Prostitution and velated offences.

(1) Prostitution, A person who engages, or offers or agrees to en-
gage in sexual activity for hire, or is an inmate of a house of prosti-
tution, or enters this state or any political sub-division thereof to en-
gage in prostitution, commits a petty misdemeanor.....,

The following comment was annexed to the draft.

“Although prostitution appears to respond to a widespread de-
mand. and despite indications that a substantial proportion of prosti-
tutes are victims of social and psychic conditions beyond their control,
most students of the problem fayour penal repression of commercialized
sex. Religious and moral ideas undoubtedly “are the main forces be-
hind the demand for repression, but utilitarian arguments are also
available. Prostitution is an important source of venereal disease, al-
though some contend that the “amateurs” to whom men turn in lieu
of prostitutes present a great danger in this respect. It has been obsery-
ed that prostitution is 2 source of profit and power for criminal groups
who commonly combine it with illicit trade in drugs and liquor, illegal
gambling and even robbery and extortion, Prostitution is also a
source of corrupt influence on government and law enforcement machi-
nery. Its promoters are willing and able to pay for police protection;
and unscrupulous officials and! politicians find them an easy mark for
extortion. Finally, some view prostitution as a significant factor in
social disorganisation, encouraging scx delinquency and undermining
marriage, the home, and individual character.

“Counter-arguments have been made by some students of the pro-
blem. who favour legislation of prostitution under public supervision.
Regulation rather than total repression has been advocated on the fel-
lowing grounds:

(1) Prostitution cannot be eliminated by law.

Eee

1 Davis, “Sexual Bohaviour’ BR. Merton and Nisbet, Contemporary Social Problems
{4 984) 358 citod in Pamela A. Roby, “Politics and Criminal Law ete., “1969) (Summor) Vol. 17,
No. 1, Social Problems, 83, 108.

2 Pynela, A. Roby “Polities and Crimina! Law ete., (1869) (Sammer) Vol, 17. No. 1 Social
Problems, 83, 108.

3 Mo [51 Penal 00१6 (Amerioan Law Institute), Tentative Draft No, 91959] Comments ut
pages 170 to 174, quota lin Paulson and Kadish, Criminal Law on eroceasne (1968), page



1

(2) Sumptuary laws that cannot be generally enforced lend them
selves to extortion and arbitrary and episodic prosecution.

“(3) Failure to provide a professional outlet for male sexuality
will result in more rape and other sexual crimes.

(4) Registration and periodic health inspection are ‘he best means
of controlling venereal disease; disease is much more likely to be spread
by the promiscuous amateur than by professional prostitutes concemed
and instructed to aveid infection.

(5) Legalised prostitution offers less opportunity for official corrup-
tion than an unrealistic effort at total repression.

(6) By confining prostitution to particular neighbourhood police
surveillance is facilitated and the safety of the general community is
promoted......

“Many of the issues between those who favour repression and
those who would tolerate some prostitution cannot be resolved on the
basis of available evidence. However, on the question of medical risk,
the record is persuasive that inspection of licensed prostitutes would
give no assurance against venereal infection

“Accordingly, the Institute's proposals on prostitution, embodied
in Section 207.12, pursue the same basic policy of repressing commer-
cialised sexual activity, as does present American law ........0.....

Later, however, a modified draft was adopted, as follows:
“Section 251.2 Prostitution and Related Offences.

(1) Prostitution. A person is guilty of prostitution, a petty mis-
demeanor, if he or she:
(a) is an inmate of a house of prostitution or otherwise engages
in sexual activity as a business; or
(b) loiters in or within view of any public place for the pur
pose of being hired to engage in sexual activity पु


92

APPENDIX 2

LIST OF SECTIONS CONT AINING THE EXPRESSION “WOMAN”
OR “GIRL” OR BOTH THE EXPRESSIONS

Section Refernee to Reference ta Referense te
“Woman” “@irl” “Weman or
only only girl.
8. 208) —
definition of “gis!” on जन on Girl
8. 2907: हि
detinition of “Woman” .. te .. Women
B4.
Punishment fe living on the earnings of “'pro- Woman or gir]
stitution” of a woman or girl.
BBS
Punishment for procuring, inducing or taking Wamen or girl
woman or girl for prostitution.
8. 6— a
Punishment for detaining a woman er gitl in Woman or girl
premises where prostitution is carried or.
28. 161) --
Rescae by Magistrate ul girtliving or earry- Girl
ing on in. brothel,
8. 17-
Tramediate custody of girls removed uader a. Giel
15(4) or resoued undar s. 16(11-
8. 19 हि
Application for being kept in a protective Wampn or gizt
home.
$.29-~Removal of prostitute from any place by Women or girl
8 Magistrate.
8. 7 (1}--Woman or girl carrying on prostitution Woman of girl
in of in the vicinity of public places.
S. 9—Sedurtion.for prostitution of a womannr Woman or girl
girl by person having her custody, charge or
tare.
@ 15(1}-~Search without warrent of premises Woman ur girl

where offenes nader the Act committed in res-
poct of a worrtan or girl living® there.

8. 15/4) ~The special police officer 990 remove inl
any girl from premises searched uniler 8. 15(1)
who is carrying on or being made to curry on
prostitution,

*Seetion 1612] renuirea the presence of as least one “woman”, at the seareh.

1) OL Mog L&C --00%--9-4-76---0118&