LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

PLD-92.LXV
2,000

SIXTY- FIFTH REPORT
ON
RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN
DIVORCES

April, 1976

PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NASIK-422006
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS DELHI- 110006
1977


P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR 0.0. No, F. 2(5)/75-L.€.

‘A’ Wins, 7TH Floor.
Sastre] Buavan,
New Detin-1{0 001,
April 5, 1976.

My Dear MINISTER.

4 have grout pleasure in forwarding herewith the 65th Report of the Law
Commission on “The Recognition of Fereign Divorces’

You mey recall that, in your Istier addressed to me on the 13th March,
1973, you had invited the attention of the Commission to certain observations
made by the Supreme Court in Set. Satya v. Teja Singh (ALR. 1975 8.९. 105),
and had suggested that the Commission should examine the matter and “favour.
the Government” with its Report.

In accordance with jis usual practice. the Commission first made a pre-
liminary study of the subject und a draft report was prepared. This draft Report
was subsequently revised afler discussion in the Commission. and the revised
draft Report was again discussed and has now been finalised.

This is the 63th Report since the inception of ihe Commission. After the
reconstitution of the Commission in September 197], it has forwarded to the
Government twenty-ane Reports (Nos. forty-five to sixty-five) including the pre-
sent one “after the present Commission was reconstituted in September, 1974, it
has forwarded !ve reports inelucding the present one

वी may not be inappropriate io point out that the nature of the — subject
matter of the present Report is substantially different from the subject-matter of
the Reports so far forwarded by the Coumission.

Conflict of laws often raises sensitive and delicate questions ; and the sub-
ject of recognition of foreign matrimonial adjudication happens 16 be particularly
sensitive and delicate.

Our rules of private Interoetional Law have not been codified and in this
branch, particulacly in regard to don ic relations, there are few statutory pro-
visions directly relevant. The law is essentially judge-made, and even so in India
not many judicial decisions are available on the subject.

Having regard to the nature of the subject, on which not much assistance
ans is available. il became necessary for the Commission to
study the comparative mutetials in depth in order that the var‘ous aspects of the
problem could be properly juctged and formulation of recommendations made in
a satisfactory mauner, Besides, in dealing with the problem, the Commission
found that certain dillicull questions of intorpretulion of the relevant statutes had
to be faced and the Commission has attempted the task as best as it could.

In drafting its Report, the Commission has dealt with the historical deve-
lopment of the various rules of law and brought out their relevance on the points
under examination. The recommendations which the Report ultimately makes
along with the theoretical examination of the problem will speak for themselves,

f
1-5 LD(ND)76


ii

I would like to mention that we have made a radical departure in suggest-
ing that, in considering the questions about th: recognition of foreign decrees of
divorce, our courts should base their decisions not only on the question of domi-
cile, but also on the basis of habitual residence and nationality. The Report also
considers the problem about the ancilliary orders passed by the foreign courts
in dealing with matrimonial proceedings and on this matter, the conclusion of the
Commission is that these ancilliary orders should not be treated as binding by
our courts even though the foreign decrees of divorce are recognised. These
ancilliary orders concern the custody of children and other allied questions, and
we thought it would be juristically imprudent to treat them as binding.

While forwarding this Report, I would like to suggest that it would be
useful if. after the Report is printed, its copies are sent to the Law Faculties of
different Universities in India, to the Bar Councils in different States, the Bar
Council of India, as well as the Supreme Court and the High Courts. I am mak-
ing this suggestion because the Report deals with a matter of importance which
is not covered by any statute, and on which material had to be collected from
different sources. I venture to hope that the academic institutions in this country
would find the Report to be interesting, informative and instructive.

In fact, if you agree, my present suggestion would apply to ali the Reports
that the Commission makes, because if, after our Reports are printed, they are
circulated to the relevant academic and professional institutions, it may encourage
a debate on the questions considered by the Commission, and that may assist
the Government in coming to its own conclusions on the relevant recommenda-
tions made by the Commission in its respective Reports.

Wirth warm persona! regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd./-
(P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR)

Tut How'ste Sure H. R. GOKHALE,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhbt-110 001.


COGNITION OF FOREIGN DIVORCES

REPORT ON RE

CONTENTS

CHAPTER ‘Sugrect Pane
1. Jntreduztozy - «८: ्््््ि Laie
2 Heads of Recognition 2 eee . ॥[/-25
3. Law applied by courts
व. Indian Law asto Recognition of foreign judements . 0.
i. Indiat Law as te jurisdiction under enactments other than the
Indian Divorce Act Be FO

6. Jurisdiction under Indian Divarce Act. 1869

7 nglis Common Law as co Beczgrition
8. Extra-judicial Divorces 2 Lo coe

9 The Hague Convention पु न्‍-

10... Engiists Act of L97l as te Recognition 2 5 #9॥ "७५

It, English law as to jurisdicion amd the Act of 1973

12. Recipracity Bo +३ ४. ---.- -

atiag etouods मी न 2

13, Aocormmenlalions 28 10 ex

(4. Recommendations as 10 new grounds af Recognitian 5,
18. Domicile and Nationality of the wite Soe

16, Exceptions to Recognition =.

12 Public policy © ee + + . ,. - -
Wo Pwd ५... ५ ५ «५४ - -+- «|. . -.

1३... AneiLary ozcers :

20. Grders fer custody—Vaciation by the matrimonial court ५

Maddificalion of section 13, Code of Civil Procedure ard section 41,

Evidence Act TM ass

22, Recommendations © 6 et . 14s
Appewolx व... ५... ५ + -+ + GE
139

नैमास्रएछ 2. पु : . . - . * + . .

Hi


CuapTer 1
INTRODUCTORY
1. SCOPE OF THE REPORT

11. This Report deals with the question of recognition by Indian courts of
divocezs and judicial separations obtained in foreign countries. The subject has
been taken up by the Law Commission on a reference made by the Union Goy-
emment.' The scape of the Report will be explained later.*

1,2. On reveipt of the reference made by the Government, a draft Report on
the subject was prepared, and discussed at the meetings of the Commission.
Since the Commission was given to understand’ that Government would like its
advice at an eurly date, i has mol been possible to place the subject before the
public—as is the usual procedure of the Commission—for inviting views or com-
ments of interested persons and bodies.

1.3. At the outset, it should be made clear that this Report is not confined to
divorces or judicial scparations obtained by persons of 2 particular community.
Although the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sutva’s case,’ to which cefer-
ence has been made in the Ictter received from the Government,’ related to a
marriage between Hindus, the question of recognition im its basic juristic nature
requires that it should be considered in respect of persons of all communities.
This position will be clear from the following observations made by the Supreme
Court as to the nature and scope of the question: —-

‘The High Court framed the question for consideration thus: “Whether a
Hindu Marriage solemnised within this country can be validly annulled by
a decree of divorce granted by a foreign court.” In one sense, this frame
of the question narrows the controversy by restricting the inquiry to Hindu
* marriages, Jn another, it broadens the inquiry by opening up the larger
question whether marriages solemnised in this country can at all be dis-
solved by fereign courts. {n any case, the High Court did not answer
the question and preferred to rest its decision on the Le Mesurier doctrine
that domicile of the spouses affords the only true test of jurisdiction. In
order 10 bring out the real point in controversy, we would prefer to frame
the question for decision thus: Is the decree of divorce passed by the

Nevady Court U.S.A. entitled to recognition in India ? The question is a
vexed one to decide and it raises issues that transcend the immediate

interest which the parties have in this litigation. Marriage and divorce
are matters of social significance ........... ००० bee

The present reference’ by the Government indicates clearly that the Com-
mission has been requested to consider the problem in all aspects, in the light
of the suggesliuns made in Sutya'y case.

‘Letter of the Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs to the Chairman of the
Law Commission, No, F. 7(6)/75, dated 13th March, 1975 (Sie Appendix}.

Paras. 1.3 and 1.4, fifra.
‘Request made orally by the Ministry of Law.

‘Garea v. Teia Singh ALR, 1975 5. C. 105, 102, para. 7 (para. 1.4, infra).
SParagraph 1,1, supra, aad Appendix

‘See Appendix to this Report.

introductory.

Procedure adapt-
ed.

Report 1१७ con-
fined to _ persons
of particular com-
munity.


Supreme Court's
judgment in Sa
sya v. Teja Singh.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 1—Intreductory.)

1.4. Before proceeding further, we would like to summarise the facts in Satya’s
case, in order to indicate the nature of the question to be considered. In that
case, the appellant—a Hindu married woman—filed a petition for maintenance
under section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (now section 125 in
the Code of 1973), against her husband. The respondent, who was in America
for 5 years, pleaded that his marriage with the appellant had been dissolved by
a decree of divorce granted by the Court of the State of Nevada, U.S.A. in 1964,
and the uppellant had, therefore, ceased to be his wife.

‘The question to be considered was whether the divorce granted by the
Nevada Court on the basis of bona fide residence should be recognised in India.
The Punjab High Court held —

G) that the Nevada Court had jurisdiction to pass a decree of divoree
on the basis of the domicile of the parties, and

tii) that the domicile of the wife during marriage followed the domicile
of the husband.

For this conclusion, the High Court primarily relied on the decisions of
abe Privy Council in—

(1) Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier *
(ii) Ateorney General of Alberta v. Cooke?
and of the House of Lords in—

(iii) Lord Advocate v. daggery*

7
1.8. Against this decision of the Punjab High Court, the petitioner took an
appeal to the Supreme Court. The question for consideration in the appeal be-
fore the Supreme Court was whether the decree of divorce passed by the Nevada
Court (U.S.A.) was entitled to recognition in India, as had been held by the High

Court.

5A. Reviewing the law on the subject, the Supreme Court noted® that, accord-
ing to private international law, as interpreted in Le Mesurier! the domicile for
the time being of the married couple afforded the only true test of jurisdiction to

dissolve their marriage.

This test, however, was subject to statutory modifications in England.
These modifications were also discussed by the Supreme Court, but the discus-

sion need not be reproduced here.

The Supreme Court then referred to the latest English Act, namely, “The
Recognition of Divorces and Legal Separations Act 1971”, which brought about
certain radical changes in the Jaw relating to the recognition of divorces, and in
that connection, il summarised its important provisions,’

Saiya v, Leja Singh, ALR. 1975S. C. 105 (On appeal from ALR, 1971 Punj. 80).
the Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) AC. 517 (PC).

24, 6, of Alberta v. Cooke, (1926) A.C. 444 (P.C.
‘Lord Advocate v. Jaggery, (921) AC, 146 (HLL).
“Page 107, Para. 6, in A.LR, 1975 S.C.
Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A.C. 517 (PC).
"Page 113, para, 32, in ALR, 1975 8. C.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 1 —Introductory.)

The Supreme Court also took care to add thai the test of domicile was not
adopted in many countries, and observed that, “we cannot adopt mechanically
the rules of private international law evolved by other countries”.' American
law on the subject of recognition was also discussed.

1.6. Coming to the facts of the case, the Supreme Court noted that the judg-
ment of the High Court was based on the assumption that the parties were domi-
ciled in Nevada? But, on the facts, the parties’ domicile was not in Nevada.
The husband had misled the Nevada Court, which had exetcised jurisdiction on
the basis of his bona fide residence. by stating that he wished to stay there.
Actually, he left immediately. The Supreme Court pointed out that if the foreign
decree was obtained by the fraud of the petitioner, it would not be recognised.
The plea of fraud was not seriously argued before the High Court, but was very
material on the facts.

Tn the present case, the record showed that the respondent left India for
U.S.A. in January, 1959, and spent a year in the New York University and four
years in the Utah State University, and later sccured employment there. He
filed a petition for divorce in the Nevada Court in November, 1964. He falsely
represented to the Nevada Court that he was a bona fide resident of Nevada, and
left Nevada immediately after obtaining the decree. Thus, the Nevada Court
lacked jurisdiction. The Supreme Court observed‘ that residence for a particular
purpose being accomplished, the residence would cease ; and the residence must
answer a “qualitative as well as a quantitative test”, ic. the two elements of
factum and animus must concur. On these facts, the Le Mesurier doctrine lost its
relevance to,the case

1.7. The Supreme Court also referred to section 13 of the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, under which a foreign judgment is conclusive, subject to the excep-
tions mentioned in various clauses of the section. The Supreme Court, how-
ever, pointed out* that under clause (a) of that section, a foreign judgment is not
conclusive where it has not been pronounced by a competent court. Tn this case,
the Nevada Court was not competent to dissolve the marriage, for the reasons
mentioned above.

Again, section 13(e) of the Code provides that a foreign judgment is not
conclusive “where it has been obtained by fraud.” That clause was also applic-
able to the facts of this case.

For these reasons, the divorce granted by the Nevada Court could not be
recognised. The foundation on which the High Court had recognised the decree,
did not exist. Accordingly, the Supreme Court allowed the appeal.

18. The Supreme Court noted that the result of the decision would be that the
parties would be treated as divorced in Nevada, but their bond of matrimony
would remain unsnapped in India.—the country of their domicile?

Page 109, para 9, in ALR. 1975 S.C.
*Page 116, para 45, in ALR. 1975 S.C.
3Page 109, para. 15, in ALR. 1975 S.C,
‘Page 116, para 45, in A.LR. 1975 S.C.
SPage 116, para 46, in A.LR. 1975 S.C.
"Page 117, para 49, in A.ILR, 1975 S.C.
Pages 117-118, para 52, 10 A.LR. 1975 S.C.


Necd for legisla-
tion.

Code of Conven-
toa,

Most — convenient
mode of dealing
with misc ae
arate legista~
don.

Report on Recagaition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter #—Introductory.)

The Supreme Court further observed that our legislature ought to find a
solution to such “schizoid situations”, as the British Parliament had, to a large
extent, done by pussing the Act of 1971. Perhaps, the Hague Convention of
1970, whick contained a comprehensive scheme for relieving the confusion caused
by different systems of conflict of taws, may scrve as a model. But, the Supreme
Court added, any such law shall also have to provide for the non-recognition of
foreign decrees procured by fraud bearing on jurisdictional facts, as also for the
Mon-recognition of decrees, the recognition of which would be contrary to our
public policy, Until then, the courts shall have to exercise a residual discretion
to avoid Nagrant injustice? for no rule of private international Jaw could compel a
wife to submit to a decree procured by the husband by trickery. “Such decrees
offend against our notions of substantial justice.”™

{t is in the light of these observations tha: the general problem of recog-
Hition will be discussed in this Report.

19. We shail later deal with the existing law as to recognition and connected
mutters, and she position in England. Before proceeding further, we would like
to stress the relevance and importance of this inquiry. The increasing migration
to and from India, of indians as well as other persons underlines the need for
legislation. ladia is not a party to the Hague Conyention,' but that fact is imma~
terial in a consideration of the broad question whethes legislation is needed on the
subject.

1.10, We may. incidentally mention here that the possibility of limping mar-
Tiages. would be reduced, if all counteies became party to the Hague Convention
and adopted, as a basis for the recognition of foreign divorces, such of the criteria
provided for in the Convention as are ecceptable 10 each country paving Tegard
to its conditions.

H. LEGISLATIVE DEVICE TO BE ADOPTED

4.11, In view, of the wide scope of this Report as explained above,’ another
question may aiso bg dealt with, before we proceed to deal with the subject-
matter of this Report. The question is this—What specific legislative device
should be adopted to give legal effect to our recommendations ? This question
arises because of the peculiar position that prevails in India on the subject of
matrimoniul and connected legislation. First, there is no enactment in India
dealing directly with the recognition of foreign dectces of divorce and judicial
Seperogion,--excepi the provisigns” in section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908. and section 41 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which are general in cha-
facter and do not deal specifically with the probiem of recognition of divorces.

Secondly, we may also point out that the law relating 10 marriage and di-
vorce in India is not contuined 18 one enactment. Im so far as the law is codified,
it is contained in several enactments’ applicable to members of several communi-
ties respectively, These enactments do not contain specific provisions as to the
recogaition of foreign judgments of divorce or legal separation, and that is logical,
because the quéstion of recognition of joraign judgments is outside theit legitimate
scope. In this position, our recommendations could not be carried out by merely
amending ane Act, as such a course would leave out communities governed by
other Acts.

"Page 118, para $3, in ALR, 1978 S.C.
*Page 118! para 53, in ALR. 1975 S.C.
°Page 118. para §3, in AUR. 1975 S.C.
‘Information cbtained frem the External Affairs Ministry.
‘Para 1.3, supra.

"Chapter 4, infra.

‘Chapters 5-6, infra,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 1. —Introductory.)

One possible mode of implementing our recommendations would be to
amend cach of those enactments. Obviously, this is not a very convenient course.
Also, it is open to certain theoretical and practical objections. Moreover, it
would Jeave out communitics whose personal law is not codified. We shall deal
with those objections in detail later.

The second allernative mode of implementing our recommendations would
be to amend the provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure and in the. Indian
Evidence Act, to which we have already adverte: which are general provisions
as to forcign judgments and certain judgments concerning status. That also is
not a very appropriate course, because those provisions are not confined to de-
erees of divorce or legal separation. Besides, they are procedural. Moreover,
as will be evident from the various points which will be made in this. Report’
hereinafter, an elaborate set of provisions will be required to give effect to our
recommendations, and, as a matter of drafting convenience, it will not be feasible,
in our opinion, to incorporate them by a mere amendment of the provision. in
the Code of Civil Procedure, or in the Indian Evidence Act. In our opinion,
therefore, the appropriate course will be separate and self-contained legislation,
which would deal with recognition, in India, of foreign divorces and legal sepa-
rations.

112. We have referred above‘ to certain theoretical and practical objectiqns
which could be raised to the device of merely amending the yarious enactments
dealing with the marriages of persons belonging to various communities... We
may now claborate those. objections. What requires to be pointed out in this
context, is that while most, if not all. of these.enactments deal with .persons, be-
longing to a particular religion—excepting the Special Marriage Act, 1954, where-
under the religion of the patties marrying is immaterial,the decrees of divorce
or judicial separation to which our recommendations relate would be decrees
passed in foreign countries, and would not be. confined to persons professing
those religions. The decrees could even relate to persons professing no religion.
Secondly, those decrees would, even in the case of persons married under Indian
legislation, have been passed, not necessarily on the grounds referred to in the
relevant Indian legislation, but on grounds which are regarded as admissible
under the law applied by the foreign Courts, whose. decrees Jater come up for
recognition.

We need not, in the present chapter, deal with the vexed question a’ to
the law which should be applied by the courts of a particular country when pass-
ing decrees of divorce. But we may state that the foreign Court which exercisés
jurisdiction would, atleast in the Commonwealth, ordinarily apply not the Tidian
enactment, but its own law as to the grounds of divorce.* है

1.13. Even where the parties were domiciled in India when they were married,
it is not inconceivable that a foreign Court may dissolve a marriage between
Hindus or Muslims who were married in India, and who are, at the time’ of the
proceedings in the foreign court residing in the foreign country. tm doing ‘x0,
the foreign Court, if il is otherwise competent, may, ‘without conimitting “any
breach of the relevant rules of its own private international law, dissolve the mar-
riage on grounds or in circumstances valid undet’ the Hindu Marviage Act-or

Wee para. 1.12, infra.

See supra.

'See particularly, Chapters 10-11, infra.
‘Para 1.11, supra.

SSee Chapter 3,+ infra.

Theoretical and
practi +, Piece
tions to amending
existing enact-
ments.


Fundamental
estion as to gent-

ral approach.

Wide
choice.

Tange

que

of

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter I.—Introductory)

under Muslim Law as administered in India, or its statutory modifications. In
this position, addition of the proposed provisions for recognition to the Hindu
Marriage Act or other comparable law, would not be a very appropriate method
of dealing with the subject

Apart from this, there is the practical aspect, namely, the cumbersome
procedure that will obviously be necessary if Parliament is to amend कारण
enactments now in force, dealing with the marriages of members of various com-
munities.

The parties who have obtained the divorce in the foreign country, might
be domiciled in India or not so domiciled. Their marriage might have taken
place in India, or it might have taken place outside India but under an Indian
enactment, or it might have been celebrated outside India but not under an
Indian enactment. Obviously, the problems arising out of all these various per-
mutations and combinations can be better dealt with by separate enactment?

वा, GENERAL APPROACH

1.14. Having dealt with the proper legislative device to be adopted to imple-
ment our recommendations, we proceed to advert to one fundamental question
which is to be considered, namely, what ought to be the general approach in such
matters? It is easy to say that a limping marriage must be avoided. But we
venture to suggest that this proposition cannot be raised to the status of a dogma.
There must be cases where one of the parties to the marriage may, for legitimate
Teasons, like the marriage to survive and the foreign divorce to be disregarded.
A familiar example is the case where the divorce was granted by “the foreign
court without giving a hearing to the opposite party.’ It is obvious that in such
cases the consideration that a limping marriage should be avoided, is over-ridden
‘by other considerations of justice.

There could be other comparable situations also. To formulate the cri-
teria for the recognition of a foreign divorce in wide and unqualified terms
would, no doubt, tend to decrease the number of limping marriages, but it would
not always lead to justice. There are a number of cases where justice to the
opposite party (the party who was the respondent in the divorce proceedings in
the foreign court), requires that the matter adjudicated npon by the foreign court
should be considered again. The fundamental aspect to be considered, therefore,
is this—the rules to be laid down on the subject should be such as to do substan-
tial justice to both the parties and, subject to that consideration, as to avoid limp-
ing marriages as far as practicable.

1.15. The range of choice is a wide one. Between the extremes of no recogni-
tion of divorce on the one hand, and the recognition of every divorce on the other,
there is obviously a wide scope for possible variations. At a time when, as a
matter of internal law, divorce was severely restricted, it was natural that a simi-
larly guarded view should be taken with respect to jurisdiction for divorce and
the recognition of foreign divorces. This was reflected in the famous language
of Lord Penzeance in Wilson vy. Wilson.*.

3566 Chapter 3, infra.

’Para, 1.11, supra.

‘Compare article है of the Hague Convention.
‘Wilson v. Wilson, (1872) LR. 2, P. & ७. 435, 442.


Report on Récognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 7_—Intreductory.)

“It is both just and reasonable, therefore, that the differences of married
people should be adjusted in accordance with the laws of the community
io which they belong, and dealt with by the tribunals which alone can ad-
minister those Jaws. An honest adherence fo this principle, moreover,
will preclude the scandal which arises when a man and a woman are held
to be man and wife in one country, and strangers in another.”

116. As Wolff observes. it is impossible to recognise all judgments of all courts
in any country all over the world, despite its manifest advantages, as the disad-
vantages are equally manifesi in so unrestricted a recognition:

“Tt is not advisable to trust every court in the world to administer justice
irreproachably. Bribery of Judges may have become so rare as to reduce
this risk to 4 minimum ; but in some countries unsatisfactory legal educa-
tion, appointment of Judges from political motives, and the influence
which the state or some powerful criminal organisation within the State
brings to bear on the Judges are considerable obstacles to a universal re-
cognition of judgments. Further, cven where there is no danger of any
kind of corruption of courts, differences between two countries in their
fundamenial attitude to questions of morality or public policy, must often
make the recognition of some individual judgments seem undesirable.
Finally, general recognition might result in grave injustice where the same
telationship was regarded differently by the courts of two countries as in
cases of marriage, divorce, inheritance, etc.”

1.47. Cardozo, in his Paradoxes of Legal Science, dealt with the problems of
rest and motion, stability and change, particularly as they are reflected in the
Jaw? His words have often been quoted—‘The reconciliation of the irreconcil-
able, the mergef of antitheses, the synthesis of opposites, these are the great pro-
blems of the law.”

1.18 Ultimately, the rules relating to conflict of laws have to be examined from
the point of view of justice and the broader consideration of social policy which

conflicting laws may evoke.*

IV. NATURE OF RULES AS TO CONFLICT OF LAWS

1.19, At this stage, we would like to make certain observations as 10 the nature
of rules as to conflict of laws. These rules are often mistaken to be rules of inter-
national law, but, in reality, they do not belong to the domain of the “law of
nations”,—they do not purport to regulate the conduct of nations infer se. Their
subject-matter is “international” only in the sense that they involve relations,
acts or events or other questions having a foreign element, or—to put it in differ-
ent words—involving questions transcending the boundaries of one nation. But
they are not administered by international tribunals. They do not draw their
content from the traditional sources of international law.

1.20, Essentially, conflict rules originate in each individual legal system. The
expression “conflict” is, of course, merely a convenient simile, indicating two
aspects, namely,—{i) that the fact or legal relation in question is possibly govern-
ed by several legal systems or jurisdictions, and (ij) rules are needed to decide
which of these several legal systems or jurisdictions should be applied to the

Wolff, Private International Law (1945), cited in Abdul Wazid v. Wishwanathan, ATR.
1953, Mad, 262-264.
*Cardozo, The Paradoxes of Legal Science (1928), page 4.

3Cavers, in (1933) 47 Harvard Law Review 173.

Views of Wolff.

Cardozo’s view.

Justice—the ult
mate considera
tion.

Nature of rules,

Rules as to con-
flict of laws—Na-
ture of,


Courts enforcing
homologous
rights.

Problem cf recog-
aition—essential
nature.

History of recog-
nition of 19185
ments—civil law.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter I -—Introductory.)

actual case. Because several legal systems co-exist, it becomes necessary to deter.
mine their applicability The decision as to which rule should apply has ulti-
mately to be just and fair, as far as possible, to all concerned.

1.21. One of the great American judges, Learned Hand, has repeatedly. stated,
in differing phrases,’ that courts enforce only rights of their own, and never
‘foreign’ rights.*

Thus, in Guinness v. Miller, Judge Learned Hand said‘: — . .

“When a court takes cognizance of a tort committed elsewhere, it is indeed
sometimes said that it enforces the obligation arising under the law where
the tort arises .......... However, no court can enforce any law but that
of its own sovereign, and, when a suitor comes to a jurisdiction foreign to
the place of the tort, he can only invoke an obligation recognised by the
sovereign. A foreign sovereign under civilized law imposed an obligation
of its own as nearly homologous as possible to that arising in the place
where the tort occurs.”

Lord Parker spoke to much the same effect in an English case’:

“Every legal decision of our courts consists of the application of our own
law to the facts of the case as ascertained by appropriate evidence, One
of these facts may be the state of some foreign Jaw, but it is not the foreign
law but our own law to which effect is given, whether it be by way of
judgment for damages, injunction, order declaring rights and liabilities, or
otherwise.” ta

¥. PROBLEM OF RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS

1.22. In order that’ the problem ‘of recognition may suitably. dealt with
in the light of the general observations made above, it is desirable to ‘put the:
problem in a proper perspective. The problem of recognition is, in its essence,
one of attributing validity to a foreign judicial act. We shall have occasion
to deal also with extra-judicial divorces obtained in foreign countries’ but.
principally, the matter will be discussed with reference to judicial determina-

tions of foreign courts.

The problem is not totally new, and the issues that arise for our discussion
are also not unknown, But it may be Stated that because of the increase‘in!
mobility of individuals, and because of the variety of legal systems which: as
individual may encounter by reason of his crossing the ‘boundaries of his* state,
the frequency of the issues arising has increased in modern times. ‘

1.23, Even in the civil Jaw system’ with its many independent, territorial
units, the problem of. recognition of foreign judgments has been of compara-

tively recent origin.
(1964) Vol. 13, “Amieritan

186९ “Current Developments in Private International Law
Journal of Comparative Law, page 542.
29) Guinness ४. Milter, (1925) 291 F. era . “i
The Fame's McGee, (1924) 300 F. 93, 96 + . ह
हट Direction der Disconto-Gesellschafi v. 2. S. Steel Corp, (1924) 300 F. 741, 744.
(व) Scheer.v. Rockne Motors Corp.,.(1934) 68 F, (2D) 942, 944.

+ (ले Siegman v. Meyer, (1938) 100 F, (2D) 367. hoe
366४ Earnest Lorenzen, Book Review in (1948) 64 L.Q.R. 129, 130. . .
‘Guinness v. Miller, (1923) 291 Fed. 768, 770 quoted by Oheshire (1975), page 28.

and see Cavers (1950), 63 Harv. LR. 822. .
*Dynamit Action-Gesellschaft v. Rio Tinto c.
‘Bhrenswieg Conflict of Laws (1962), page 16.

'०., (1918) AC, 292, 302.


Report on Recognition ef Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 1 —Introductory.)

(a) The classical Roman practice of freely executing Roman judgments
anywhere within the provinces of the realm,’ in apparently carried
over into the ideological entity of the Christian Empire of the Mid-
dle Ages. “The fact that there existed in the Middle Ages among
the Christian Peoples a Jus commune resting upon Roman Law,
made the enforcement of judgments appear as a very natural precept
af justice and of mutual assistance.” This practice is fortified by
une natural and international Taw concepts of the 16th and 17th
centuries? . है

(b) Even when the rise of the dogma, of sovereignty’ came to arouse
- Misgivings concerning the recognition of foreign judgments, respect
for the susceptibilities of the foreign sovereign continued, to preclude
re-cxamination of his decrees based on his accepted “Jurisdiction”.

“To undertake to examine the justice of a definitive sentence, is to attack
the jurisdiction of him who has past it”. This is what Vattel’ Wrote.’-’

-Gnly with the later growth of nationalism was this attitude of intemational
courtesy (often rationalised by ieferences to tacit agreement or concert), turned
into a “bars comity”, which defi ta each state complete freedom in scrutipising
the’ findings of foreign: courts. .

1.24,, The Jast mentioned attitude (theory of comity—ic, discretion) is’ reflect-
ed. ia. present-day European law and its derivatives, where hearly all divergent
opinions and atlitudes have survived, ranging from a flat. deniat or recognition
by insistence upon a trial de novo: through a law granting récognition on con-
dition of reciprocity: to a neatly unconditional enforcement of foreign
judgments.” aan ‘ हे

French uttitude to foreign judgements* has been traced back to Article 121
of the so-called Code Michant, an Ordinance of 1629, which provided that any
foreign judgement recovered against French citizens may be litigated anew.
125, The problems of conflict of jurisdiction, particularly in relation’ to
Matrimonial matters, is essentielly a human onc. Whatever the law, whatever the
theology. whatever the social order, the same kind of problem arises between
human beings of opposite sexes at all times and in all countries. “Huntan
beings make the problems law-inakers. adumbrate the rules applicable to the
probleiiis: lawyers are merely the technicians. trying, not always successfully,
toApply ihe rules to the solution: of their clients’ immediate difficulties, so dt
was and so it wilt ever be." nos *

‘ ibest, De re judicata,-42, 1, 15, 1 (Uipianus). 3
*Moiii Das Internationale Ziyilprozessecht auf Grund der. Theurie, Casetagobung. and
Praxix (1906) 13, cited by Bhrenswieg, Conflict of Laws (1962), page If,

1. aSee Nussbausi, A Concise History of the Law of Nations (1947), page 69.

‘Nussbaum, A Concise History of the Law of Nations, (1947), page 56. ‘hd Cond

" syattel Law of Nations or Principles of the Law of Nature. ‘Applied 10 the Conduct
and peony GE Nations and Sovereigns (ranal, 1760) Val. 1, 148 ‘Bool Ml. Ch. Vil, Section
$4) cited by Bhrenswieg (1962), page 16. : जय
eVattel, cited by Bhrenswieg, Conflict of Laws (1962), page 16.
Na) Lorenison: “The Enforcement of American Judgments Abroad”, (1919) 20 Yale L. 3.

1885" : A पु . ee es
(०) Kennedy, “Recognitidn of Judgments iw Persanne 3) The,, Meaning of Reciprocity",

(1957) 35 Can. B, Rev; 123. : 7
‘Cf. Hilton v, Gnyot, (1895) 159 (7, 5. 173,

Bee ¢
(a) Johnson, “Foreign Judgments in Quebec", (1957) 35 Can, Bar Rev, 91:

बीए Bhrenswicg, “Conflict of Laws” (1962), page 17." ह
"Cf. Toseph Jackson, Review of William Hay’s Lectures on Marriage, (969 85 L. 9. 8.

at p. 291.

9

Effect of the ap-
ptowch in the
nature of | “co-
rity”.

Problem a-homan
one,


10

Problem of Con-
flict inherent in
co-existence of
various legal
ordera.

Complexity of the
problem.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 1.—Introductory)

1.26. The problem of conflict is inherent in the co-existence of more than
one legal order. So long as the courts of two or more States may claim juris-
diction over the same case and the laws are different, the problem of conflict

is bound to arise,

Ta dealing with this problem, the court of the country ccencerned has to
determine which law is to be applied, 1.९., its own law or the law of any other
country. Where the matter is res intera, the inquiry is as to which system of law
should be applied. Where, however, there is already a judgment of a foreign
court, this inquiry must be supplemented by an inquiry as to whether the
foreign judgment should be recognised; and, if so, to what extent and in what
respects and subject to what conditions—substantive or procedural.

27. In a Catcutta case’, Rankin C.J. made the following observations which
lucidly bring out this aspect :

“It is manifest that, so long as the matrimonial law of different countries
vary widely, as they do, it is necessary that for every marriage there
should be ascertainable forum for the purpose of adjudicating upon the
question of divorce. All countries do not take the same view of inter-
national Jaw. But the view of international Jaw which obtains in England
in these Courts is that the power to grant divorce rests with the Court
of the country in which the parties are domiciled at the date of the
petition. Other countries may take different vicws of international law
in that respect, But it is well settled now that that is the view upon which
the English law proceeds and that view, for all purposes of this Court, is
the law without exception or qualification by the comamand of the

legislator.”

1,28, Besides being inherent in the co-existence of legal orders, the problem
of conflict is a complex one, as is illustrated by Breen's case, The question before
Karminski, J., in Breen ५४. Breen® was whether an Irish court wou'd recognise an
English decree of divorce.’ Under article 41, section 33), of the 1937 Constitu-
tion of Ireland: “No person whose marriage has been dissolved under the civil
law of any other state but is a subsisting valid marriage under the law for the
time being in force within the jurisdiction of the Government and Parliament
established by this Constitution shall be capable of contracting a valid marriage
within the jurisdiction during the life-time of the other party to the marriage 50
dissolved.” This provision was invoked by the wife petitioner, who sought
annulment of her marriage with the respondent at 8 registrar’s office in Dublin
in 1953, on the ground that her husband’s former wife, when he married in 1944,
was still alive. The husband stated that his previous marriage had been dissolved
by the High Court, he being domiciled in England at all material times. The
wife’s reply to that was that English decree was not recognised by the law
in Eire, and consequently the marriage in 1953 was bigamous.

Karminski, J., observed, in the course of his judgment, that there was 20
question here of any difficulty in the form of the marriage ceremony under Trish
law, and it had not been suggested that either the wife or the registrar who

iLinton v. Guderian, A, 1. R. 1929 Cal. 599, 601.

"Breen ¥. Breen, (194) Probate 144,
ee note, “Conflict of Laws—Recognition of English Divorce”, in (1961) 232 Law

Times 15, 16,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter } —Iuraductory.)

performed the ceremony was deceived in any way as to the status of the husband.
The wife was well aware of the husband’s earlier marriage and of its dissolu-
tion in England, and the husband was described in the marriage certificate as
“divorced”, His Lordship recalled that a difference of opinion on the point in
question had been expressed by Maguire, CJ., and Moore J., in the Irish
Supreme Court in Mayo-Perrot; v. Mavo-Perrott.: The former was of opinion that
sub-section (3) said as plainly as it could be said that a marriage dissolved under
the law of another state remained in the eyes of the law of Eire a subsisting
valid marriage. The latter, while recognising that the Cireachtas could pass a
Jaw that no dissolution of marriage, wherever effected even where the parties
were domiciled in the country of the court pronouncing the decree. was to be
effective to dissolve the pre-existing marriage, was of opinion that it had not
done so, and the law existing when the constitution was passed was that a
divorce effected by a foreign court, of persons domiciled within its jurisdiction,
was valid in Eire. Karminski, J., thought it was highly unlikely that the consti-
tution intended, without cleat words, to reverse a practically universal rule of
private international law. He could find nothing in article 41 to suggest that the
courts, in the absence of further legislation, were entitled to do, otherwise than
regard as valid and effectual a divorce granted by the courts of 8 foreign country
where the parties were domiciled, Accordingly, he found that the law of Bire
recognised the validity of the decree of dissolution pronounced by the English
court dissolving the marriage between the husband and his first wife, and also
recognised the validity of the marziage celebrated in Eire between him and the
petitioner. The wife's petition was dismissed accordingly.

4,29. To cite one more example of the complexity of the matter in Mayfield, v.
Mavyfield® the husband, a domiciled Englishman, had brought proceedings for
divorce in Germaay where his wife, 2 German national, was resident. After the
Germar, court had granted him a divorce, be brought 2 petition in the English
coutts for a declaration that the German decree was valid and should be recog-
nised in English law. We are not concerned with the actual decision in the case,
put the case is mentioned here to illustrate how occasion may arise for obtaining

a declaration.

VI. SOME ASPECTS OF RECOGNITION

1.30. For understanding the effect of recognition, it is desirable to refer to a
few theoretical aspects thereof. A foreign judgment may be recognised by being
enforced (immediately or upon suit), or ‘by being treated as “res judicata”.

fa judgment, by treating it as res judicata, may consist of:
the original cause of action at the instance of the plaintiff.
judgment for the plaindijf: (he can pray
-try the origital cause of action at the
instance of the plaintiff, by virtue of @ bar established by the foreign judgment;
(c) sefusal by virtue of a collateral estoppel,’ 10 re-try questions of fact or Jaw
litigated in the suit which has resulted in the foreign judgment; and (3) accept:
ance of a status declared by the foreign judgment.

Recognition of
(a} refusal to re-try
by virtue of its merger in the foreign
only for execution); (9) refusal to ८:

IMayo-Perrott Vv. Mayo-Perrott (1958) 1. R.. 336.

‘Mayfield ९, Mayfield (1969) 2 W.L. N. 1002.

*See Scott, “Collateral Estoppel by Judgment”, (1942) 56 Harv. L. Rev. 1.
4Note, (1948) 57 Yale L, 31. 339.

Recognition
enforcement.

1

and


13 Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter £. -—datroductory,)

Refusal under (2) and (b) above is based on that aspect of res judicata
Which is often described as “merger”, Refusal under (c} relates hot to the entire
cause of action, but to the re-litigation, of particudar questions. While categories
fa), (b) aud (c} ace operative only between the parties and their privies, category
(व) applies in relation tc strangers as well.

Vil. NATURE OF PROCEEDINGS AND THEORIES OF RECOGNITION

Nature of pro: 4.31, We-may mention here that the nature of proceedings ia which the ques-
ngs, tion af recognition may come up for consideration is not subject to any
particular restriction, The question may come up directly between the parties,
Or, it may arise between third. parties.- Then, the Prayer may be fora declaration
thatthe divorce is valid. Or, the prayer may be that the divorce may be declared
to be void. The proceedings themselves, could be of seyeral types. One of the
partics may re-marry;.on the strength of the divorce granted in, the foreign country,
and, then, the: apposite party may initiate proceedings for declaring the second
nrarriage void, or may take appropriate steps for prosecuting the re-marrying
party for Ute offence of bigamy. Or, the question of validity of a divorce may
arise incidentally——for example, where the parties to the marriage, alleged’'to
be divorced: by a foreign. divarce, are arrayed on opposite sides, in a suit or
Beliied for the grant of maintenance, the contention being that the previous
marsibge subsists, and has. not been, validly dissolved. by the foreign court, so
that the obligation 10 maintain: the petitioning Spouse, created, by the marriage,
subsists.

Theory of recos- 4.32, There are several theories of recognition of forcign judgements.

nition.

1 When Story wrote his text dn'Conflict of Laws in 1834, कट, found Vattol’s
respect. for, the foreign sovereigi’s “definitive sentence”? more uniformly. adhered
toby comimon law courts than in the jurisprudénmce of Continental Eurape,
Nevertheless, he. preferred to follow the approach of Chief Justice Marshall? who,
presymably following civil law reasoning, subjected the foreign judgment to an
examination of the rendering court’s “lawful” jurisdiction over the cause and
the parties* The scope of further permissible scrutiny would. according. to
him, vary according to whether the judgment was ore in rom or in perronam,
The former. he thought, “ought to hewe universal conclusiveness.”* Judgments in
pevsoncin, on the other hand, “inder a distinction founded in “international
justice, {though being का absolute bar as res judicata to any new suit by a Josing
plaintiff), were subject to examination “into the merits” if-sued upon by, a pre~
vailing plaintiff,’ For, the forum, in ‘executing a foreign judgment, acts “upon
the principles of comity; and ‘has, therefore. aright to prescribe the terms and
limits .of that comity. However, the question how far aforeign judgment
cold be “impeached” while ‘bding'regarded an prima facie evidence of the
claims,’ remaiced unsettled: © : .

story, Conti: of Laws, 1994, न
“ SRase ४. Himaly, (1808) 4 Cranteh48-W. 5.) 240, 269.

*Stary, 492.

Wiklionss x. Avmpy4, 61813) 7, Craneh (1 U. 5. 423: Rupoiio ४

491७ ‘
Sa पाई For a jafer ‘case, ste Canis ४. Berth, 14. How. (58

Wiktien
Diary, 2 Dall. 12 U. §, 231) (3799),
U, Sy 399 11852).
Story, 497.
‘Story, 497. See also Smith v. Lewis 3 Johnn, 157. 168 (N. Y. 1808), per Kent. Ch. J,
relying on the opinions of “most approved jurists on the law of nalions”.

‘Stary, 497
Story, 508,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Diverces

(Chapter I.—Introductory.)

Lord Bottingham once held’ “that it was agatrst the Lav of nations not
te give credit to the judgment and sentences of foreign countries. For, what righ
had one kingdom to reverse the judgment of another ? What confusion would
follow in Cheistiandom if they should serve us so abroad, and give no credit
to our sentences.”

Apart from these theories of comity and international Jaw. many other
theories have been put forth—the theory of vested rights (a foreign judgment
creates a legal obligation between ihe parties), the theary of harmony, and so
on.

VIN- HISTORY

£33, The theoretical bases for recognition have, thus, remained controversial.
Let us now Jook at a few historical aspects. Though certain particular judicial
proceedings may have been recognised earli it appears that English courts
began exforcizy foreign judgmnets somewhere in the Wh century” In the
seventeenth century. i

Fnglisit courts decided that it was “against the law af
nations not to give credit to the judgments and sentences of foreign couniric

Ag to what was the law of nations, Jonkins. a judge af the Prize Court in
the mid-1600s, though it was not the Civil Imperial Law, but “the generally
received customs among the European governments which are most redowned fot
their justice, vulour and civility.”* However, a requisite which was [cid down
was that the foreign court must have possessed “proper jurisdiction” ft hus
been suggesicdl that there were orginally no specific jurisdictional requirements.
The fereien court was merely required to have observed the elementary precepts
of natural justice. However, with the acceptance ‘of the obligation or “vested
tights” theory’ in the nineteenth century, the jurisdiction requirements crystai-

lised.

1.34, There cannot be any doubt that as early as 1845, a foreign judgment in.
favour of the defendant, if final and conclusive, was a good defence to an action
in England for the sume matter‘

Later developments were—(i) statutory, particularly in regard to monetary
judgments. and (ii) judicial, particularly in regard to divorce.

In a note from bis manuscript quoter Kennedy v. Earl of Cassailes, 2 Swans. 313, as
quoted by Wiscount Baldane in Batveso's case (1922) A. C. 641, 659.

sgack, “Conflict of laws in the History of English Law", in the book 199; Century of
progress 1835-1935, Val, 3, pages 342-382,

tNewland ४. Horsran, (1681). 23 English Reports 275 (Annotation and see Hosworth.
History of English Law, Val. 11. pages 269, 270.

‘Contingtes’s Case in Kennedy v. Caseillis, (1878) 2 Swans, 313, 326; 36 E. R. 635,
640; see also Reach ¥, Garyan, (1748); 1 Ves See. 157, 159; 27 S. R. oe 955. This view
oe: found favour ia ibe United States; see Rase v. Himely, 8 U. S. (4 Cranch) 249; 2 1:
Ed. 608 (1808).

sHofdsworth H. 5. L. Vol. 3, p. 654.

(a) Fx v. Yewis. (1749) 1 Ven. 298; 27 5. R. 1043;

(by Ex p. Oltliar, (1795) 2 Ven, Jun. 587: 30 8, R. 790.

(eWHuchanan v. Rucker. 11908) 9 East 192; 103 M, R. 546.

"Para. 1.163, spre.
SHicarde v. Garcias, (1845) 12 Cl. & F_ 368, 406

2-5 LD(ND) 76

13

History of recog-
nition in England.


14

Recognition of
foreign decree
and jurisdiction of
foreign courts.

Aspect of — reci-
procity.

Relevance of di
cussion of princi-
ples on which
Indian courts ex-
ercise. jurisdic
tion.

Expression “legal
separation” why
used,

Introductory.

Connecting —fac-
tors,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 1.--Introductory. Chapter 2—Heads of Recognition.)
IX. CONNECTED MATTERS

1.35. It may, in this context, be of importance to point out that the problem
of recognition of foreign judgments is, 10 some extent, connected with the
problem of the jurisdiction of foreign courts. In order that the forum in Indie
may recognise the foreign judgment, it is relevant to consider the question
whether the foreign judgment was pronounced by a court having jurisdiction in
ihe international sense,—to borrow the words of Wright, J..—‘“in such a sense
that in conformity with general jurisprudence and ordinary international law
and usage the courts of other States will regard its judgments as binding.”

135A. There is another aspect of the maiter. If our courts insist that the foreign
judgment should be in conformity with general jurisprudence and ordinary
international law and usage in order that we may regard the foreign judgment as
leading: our own courts should, broadly speaking, also exercise jurisdiction on
a ground in conformity with general jurisprudence and ordinary international
law.

We shall revert to this aspect later?

1.36. These comments are made at this stage. in order to show how it is not
irrelevant to discuss the principles on which, under Indian legislation, Indian
courts are regarded as competent to exercise jurisdiction in respect of the grant
of divorce or judicial separation. Though the rules belonging to the domain of
conflict of laws originate in municipal law, their function is international.

1.37. We may, before closing this Chapter, make it clear that though the
expression used in Indian ‘egislation dealing with matrimonial relief is “judicial
separation”, we are using the expression “legal separation” in this Report, first,
because that expression is frequently used outside India, and secondly, because.
“legal separation” is a term which will cover separation by mutual agreement
also.

CHAPTER 2

HEADS OF RECOGNITION
DOMICILE—NATIONALITY—RESIDENCE

I. INTRODUCTORY

2.1. Tt will be convenient, at this stage, 10 make certain general observation
as 10 the possible heads of recognition of divorce and legal separation.

22 Recognition of a judgment essentially means recognition of a connecting
factor. The possible connecting factors may be classified, in conflict of laws, with
reference to a variety of considerations, such as*—-

(a) domicile;
(b) residence, which again may mean—

(i) permanent residence, (ii) habitual residence, (iii) ordinary resi-
dence, or (iv) residence simplicitor at a given moment:

'Furnball v. Walker, (1912), 69 Times Law Reports, 767 (Wright, J.
See Chapter 12, infra (Reciprocity).
2he list is illustrative only.


Report on Recognition ef Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)
{c) the situation of the legal relation:
(7) origin of the legal conduct:

(c) nationality.

We shall discuss a few of them which are of practical importance in the
present context.

2.3. According to generally accepted principles of private international law. the
courts of most states will decide issues of personal status and allied matiers
(marriage, divorce, devolution of property upon death, ete.), by applying the
“personal” [aw of parites: In states with a legal system based upon the
common law, this “personal” law will be the law of the domicile (the place
where the individual concerned has, or had at the appropriate time, his perma-
nent home);? but, in civil law systems, the personal law is often that of the
state of nationality.’

2.4. The sovereign power of a State finds expression in two respects:

(8) in its personal pawer, by which it controls the name of ils nationals:
and

(b) in its territorial sovereignty. by exercising power on its territory.

The theory of domicile“ as a test of jurisdiction in matrimonial cases.
altaches greater importance to the second aspect, while the theory of nationality"
attaches greater importance to the first aspect.

However, it may be noted that the possible effect of applying the test of
nationality, is, in continental countries. such sub-dued, by reason of the upplica-
tion of various special doctrines, chief amongst which is the doctrine of public
policy (order public). We shall. in due course, examine the doctrine of public
poli and its relevance to the recognition of decrees of divorce.

व. DOMICILE—THE GENERAL CONCEPT

25 Coming to the specific heads of recognition, we may begin with domicile.
According 10 traditional English law. recognition of a divorce granted by a
foreign court was limited to cases where both the parties were domiciled in the
roreign coutry, Certain modifications or qualifications of this rigid doctrine
found their place later. But, we shall discuss these at the proper place’.

25A. The word in Latin is domicilliwm, which is derived from the word
domus—meaning home. The exact legal definition of this word has caused
jurists a considerable difficulty, and there is no one definition which has been
unanimously accepted.

1Enrenswsigh, Conflict of Laws (1962). p. 372.
"Goodrich. Conflict of Laws 4th ed,, pages 32-38.
SGrieg, International Law (19731, pare 303.

“Para, 2:3. supra.
Spara. 2:3, supra,

"See Chapter 17, iniro
"See Chapter 7. infra.

15

Personal law.

Two aspects of
sovereignty.

Domicile,

Derivation of the
word,


16

Rules as to domi-
cile.

Rules as to domi-
cile,

Variation in
rules.
Importance of

domicile in rela-
tion to jurisdic-
tion.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)

Broadly speaking, domicile connotes the place where a person intends to
make his permanent home. Domicile is “an idea of law”, as Lord Westbury
said'. It connotes different ideas in different legal systems. Domicile cannot
be a precise concept. Excessive emphasis on animus (intention) as a constituent
of “domicile”, has led to certain problems, as will be seen Tater.

In India, there are detailed provisions on the subject of domicile in the
Indian Succession Act? but their scope and applicability is limifed.* The coa-
cept of domicile is mentioned in article 5 of the Constitution of India, but not
defined.

2.6. Every individual has a domicile of origin, which can be lost by the acqui-
sition of a domicile of choice. A domicile of choice is more easy to shed than
the domicile of origin. In general, according to English law. the domicile of
origin is revived when a domicile of choice is terminated and another domicile
of choice is not yet acquired. Again, according to the traditional rules of
English common law, the domicile of a wife generally follows that of the hus-
band,—a rule which has now been abrogated in England by statute.

27. One's domicile is fixed by the law. If one be a legally competent adult,
one may establish a home which the law will say is one’s domicile. This is
called u domicile of choice’ but it is a matter of free “choice” on the individual's
part only because he has complied with the law's requirements for acquisition
of a new domicile. If he has two homes, the Jaw determines which of them is
his domicile. If he has no home, the law designates a particular place as his
domicile regardless of his choice in the matter. At the moment he is born, the
law assigns him a domicile, called his domicile of origin. Minors, married
women and persons deemed legally incompetent are, by law, each assigned a
domicile which may, in turn, be changed by facts outside the individual's
control.

2.8. The concept of domicile is, thus. one of a legal relation between व. per-
son and a place, created by the Jaw and not by the persons. In other words,
the factors of a person’s life constitute domicile because the law so says. The
law prescribes the constituents of domicile. If this is true, it must be expected
that the exuci requisites of domicile, ic., its definition, may vary slightly accord-
ing to the purposes for which the term is used. This variation may appear not
only from state to state, but even in the same state. Since domicile is a “tool”

concept, it will be fitted to the job for which a tool is needed! It is conceivable
that courts which purport to adhere to the idea of singleness of domicile might

nevertheless find a person’s domicile to be at one place for one purpose and at
another place for another purpose. And, of course, different courts may find
ane's domicile to be at different places.

वा. DOMICILE AND MATRIMONIAL JURISDICTION

2.9. The importance of domicile in the context of matrimonial jurisdiction
was established beyond doubt by the Privy Council in Le Mesurier,” holding
that the Courts of Ceylon had no jurisdiction to dissolve a marriage unless the

\Bell v. Kennedy, (1868) Law Reports | Sc. & Div. 307, 320.
Sections 5 to 20, Indwian Succession Act, 1925.

321, Ratanshaw v. Bananji, A. 1. R. 1938 Bom. 238.

‘Section 1, Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973 (Eng.).
SRestatement (second) of Conflict of Laws (proposed Official Draft, 1967), seetion 15.
"See Robes v. Kennedy, 219 F, Supp. 892 (D. D. C. 1963).

Le Mesurgier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A_C. 517 (P.C).


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2—Heads of Recognition.)

parties were domiciled in Ceylon. This decision was construed as also implying
that English Courts would have no jurisdiction ta dissolve a marriage unless the
parties were domiciled in England,—in the absence of special statutory provi-
sions. The recent English Act of 1973, dealing with jurisdiction in matri-
monial causes, now specifically provides as follows: —

“(2) The court shalt have jurisdiction to entertain proceedings for divorce
or judicial separation if (and onfy if) cither of the parties to the
marriage —

(a) is domiciled in England and Wales on the date when the pro-
ceedings are begun; or

(0) was habitually resident in England and Wales throughout the
period of one year ending with that date.”

This provision, in a way, gives legislative effect to the concept of domi-
cile as a basis for jurisdiction, though, as will appear from the section itself,
it is no longer the exclusive basis.

2.10, Domicile in relation to recognition of divorce may now be dealt with.

2.41. The question of recognition had been involved in earlier English cases,
and their reliance on the rule of the domicile was undoubtedly a factor in the
case of Le Mesurier!

2.12. When, in 1834, Story formulated the domicile rule in the U.S.A., the state
of domicile was the state “to which the parties belonged,” the permanent domi-

cile, or the “actual domicile” bona fide‘ The same conception appeared as
Jate as 1883 in the eighth edition of bis work.’

2.13, In this connection, it is interesting to recall how the rule of domicile came
into carly English cases." It can be traced back to Story? and Story got it from
some early Massachusetts decisions.'* These cases arose under a Massachusetts
Statute (Mass. Acts 1785) c. 69) which provided that divorce suits might be

{Section 52), Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973.
Ya) Rex v. Lolley Russ. & Cr, Cas. (1812) 237, 168 Eng. Rep. 779;
(b) Warrender v. Warrender, (1835) 2 Cl. Fin, 438, 6 Eng. Rep. 1239 (HL);

(०) Dolphia र, Robins, (1859) 7 H. L. Cas. 390, 11 Eng. 156 (H. LJ;

(d) Shaw ¥, Could, (1868) L. R. 3 HL L. 55;

(ने Harvey y. Farnio, (1882) ४ App. Cas. 43;

(0 Manning v. Manning (1871) L. R. 2 ए, & D, 223.

Le Mesurier, pata. 2.6, supra.

(a) Hopkins v, Hopkins, (1807) 3 Muss. 15%;

(b) Carter v. Carier, (1310) 6 Mass. 263 cited by Story 189.

Stnhabitants of Honover Vv. Turner, 14 Mass. 227, 231 (1817), cited by Story, (1834), 190,
“Barber v, Root, (1813) 10 Mass., 260 cited by Story (1834), 190.

Story, Coaflict of Laws (8th ed, 1883), para. 230.

"ts “Haddock y. Haddock” overruled? (1943) 18 Ind, L. 1. 165. See also ८ i
And Legal Bases of The Conflict of Laws (1942), ra 463, also Cock, Logical

*Story, Commentaries On the Confiict of Laws (1834), 228 ot seq.
See

(a) Richardson v. Richardson, (1806) 2 Mass. 182;

10) Hopkins v, Hopkins (1807) 3 Mass. 158,

(०) Hanover ¥, Turner, (1817) 14 Mass, 227.

17

Domicile.

Recogaition on
the basis of | do-
micile.

Story's view,

Early English
cases,


Domicile firmly
established.

Nationality,

France and other
countries.

Savigny's view.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 2—Heads of Recognition.)

brought in the country “where the parties live’. The purpose was to remove
divorce from the purview of the governor and council and place it within the
purview of courts, because, in the words of the statute, “it is a great expense
to the people of this state to be obliged to aitend at Boston upon all questions
01 divorce, when the same might be done within the counties where the parties
live,”

The rule was appropriately based on considerations of convenience and
it is not surprising that the English courts adopted it when they came to con-
sider questions of divorce.

2.14. For some time, the test of residence prevailed as to recognition, but it
ceased to be the law after the decision in Le Mesurier. In Salvesen v, Adminis-
trator of Austrian Property,’ the majority view of Niboyet’s case was formally
overtuled, “It is established that the law of England recognises the competence
and the exclusive competence of the Court of domicile to decree dissolution of
a mariage.” The general rule is relaxed by certain statutory provisions. But,
subject to the statutory exceptions, the main rule still prevails,’ and has not beer
abroguted by the English Act® of 1971.

IV. NATIONALITY

2.18. In some of the countries on the Continent, the Courts exercise matrimo-
nial jurisdiction on the basis of nationality, and it may be presumed that these
countries adopt the same approach, as regards recognition also,—ie., recogni-
tion of decrees of countries which are foreign countries for the purposes of those
countries, They, therefore, recognise foreign decrees granted on the basis of
nationality,

2.16. In this connection, France is an outstanding example. Since the French
Revolution and the introduction of Civil Code of France, its connecting factor
of personal law changed. Domicile was superseded by fex Barriae—i.e., nationa-
lity* replacing domicile in regard to personal relations.

The French rule is followed in other civil law countries also, The most
representative legislations of the civil law take imto consideration the position
of the Jaw of the state whose nationals the parties are, with regard to one or
both of the following points:

(i) Jurisdiction in the case of foreign nationals is not assumed, unless
the national law of the parties is willing to recognize this jurisdic-
tion.

Gi) Divorce is not granted, unless it is agreeable to the internal law of
the national state of the parties.

2.17, However, it should be mentioned that the test of nationality has not al-
ways been favoured, even on the continent. Adverting to the variety of opi-
nions among both writers and courts respecting conflicts of laws, Savigny never-
theless conceived that, from the exceptional and active common concem in the
problems of this field of law, there would develop a universal community of

'Sulvescn v. Administrator of Austrian Property, (1927) A. C. 641, 685.
“Dann ५. Sarba (1955) Probate 178.

*See Chapter relating to 1971 Act, Chapter 10 infra.

3586 also para, 2:19, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)

legal understanding and legal life. The further suggestion that the principle of
nationality, then coming into prominence, would not make itself felt in a sub-
ject, the nature of which involves the resolution of conflicts of national laws
within a recognised community of the various nations, equally reflects Savigny’s

international point of view."

But these anticipations of Savigny were soon to be disappointed. Two
years after Savigny wrote, the doctrine of nationality, which in its exaggeration
has so much contributed to international disorder during the past century, was
proclaimed by Mancini as the fundamental principle of the law of nations, and
shortly become the distinctive basis of legislation in continental Evrope.*

2.18, Apart from continental countries, nationality is a valid criterion in a few
others. For example, according to article 35 of the Brazilian Code’, the per-
sonal consequences of the marriage are determined by law of the common “habi-
tual residence” of the husband and wife; but the Brazilian law applies if he is
a Brazilian citizen or domiciliary.

9५. NATIONALITY—HISTORY

2.19. At this stage, a brief history of nationality in the context of conflict of
laws would be of interest. Nationality as the basis of personal law is not older
than the Code Nepoleon,‘ and has acquired its predominance in many countries
of the civil law orbit only since the time of Mancini. Since then, in these coun-
tries the analysis of the concept of nationality has become one of the most im-
portant topics of conflicts law.’

On the other hand, the Commonwealth and the United States, like many
civil law countries, have adhered to the ancient rule of domicile as distinguished
from the comparatively new concept of nationality.

Even between countries of the English-speaking world, important differ-
ences have been created by the continued English emphasis on the domticile of
origin! in contrast to the domiciles of choice and domiciles by operation of law
which are solely relevant in the U.S.A.

2,20, A remarkable advance has been conceded to the principle of “domicile”
in recent international treaties. The Codige Bustamante’ proclaimed inter
national jurisdiction for divorce to be at the matrimonial domicile, in contrast
with the general policy of the Convention not to specify the personal law and
despite the protest of Brazil, which then followed the nationality principles.*
The Franco-Italian Treaty of June 3, 1900, on the enforcement of Judgments
(art, 11, part, 1) secured recognition for the decisions of the court of the

iprofessor Fatema, in Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws, (1958), Vol. I, Foreword

p. xvi.
“Professor Yntema in Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws (1958), Vol. 1, Foreword
Pp. XXvi,

AActicle 35, Brazilian Code on Private International Law: De Nova, “Development of
private International Law” (1964) 13 American Journal of Comparative J.aw 452, 561.

‘Cf. para, 2.16, supra.

‘Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws, Vol. 1, page 161-172 discusses the various ratio~
nalie (iradition, politics, econmics, practicability), and at 171, the shortcomings of the

nationality principle.
‘Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws, (1958), Vol. f, page 118.
tarticle 52, Bustamante Code.
*Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws (1958), Vol. 1, page 532.

19

Provisions in Bra-
zilian Code.

History,

Recent trend,


Scandinavian.
Jaw.

Venezuelan draft.

International Con-
ventions—Hati-
tual residence at
emerging tes,

Residence.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)

domicile or, in their absence, decisions at the residence of the defendant, without
excepting matters of status, and the same devices have been adopted in other
European treaties, despite the fact thal ail the countries involved are traditional-
followets of the nationality principle.

2.24, In the “Scandinavian Union” as 10 family law. signed by Sweden, Nor-
way, Denmark, Finland and Iceland, the principle of nationality has been te-
placed by a reference to the law of an individual's domicile,—which recognises
that the life of a person centres largely around the country of his domicile.*

2.22, 1 may be noted’ that the most striking feature of the Venezulean draft
on Conflict of law is that aationality is replaced by domicile as a connecting
factor in matters of personal lew. ‘This shift emphasises the sleady 1085 of
favour that the idea of the lex natrias has suffered since the war, both in legis-
lative workshops and in scholarly circles."*

2.23. 11 has been slated’ that an cven more portentous sign of this crisis of na-
tionality as a criterion for jurisdiction and choice of law is the challenge and
keen compevition that it faces from “habitual residence’ at the latest Hague
Conference.

“Residence habituelle”, it ig stated, is domicile in modern garb, for inter-
national consumption.

224. In 1960, during the debates that took place at the ninth session of the
Conference on tbe snbiect of guardianship? and in 1963, when a group of ex-
perts worked out a preliminary draft on adoption." and again in 1964, at the
tenth session of the Conference, when a text on: international adoption was
agreed upon, some sort of balance was struck between the competence of the
courts and the Iaw of the country of nationality, and the competence of the
courts and the Jaw of the country of habitual residence. But the scales were

often tipped in favour af the fatter.

VI. RESIDENCE

225, The next criterion to be considered is that of residence. In India, this
criterion is net in force as a basis of jurisdiction in divorce, but it should be
noted that the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, section 2, was, for some time, con-
steued as empowering the Courfs to grant a divorce if the parties were resident
in India. This is not the law now= under that Act, in regard to dissolution of
marriage,-though it cominues as to nullity under that Act.

~“G1534) 153 League of Nations Treaty Series page 135, 141.

sConvention on Marriage, Adoption, and Guardianship, of Fee, 6, 1931, 5 Hudson. 105
er Hee ee ation 477 (i936), Convention on Inheritance and Succession of Nov. 19,
1934, 6 Hudson 947 (1937),

“See J.P. Niboyet, Professor of Private Internationa! Law, Paris, “Tercitoriality in the
Confiat of Laws" (1952) 65 Harvard Law Review, 552-583.

‘Rabel. Comparative Confit of Laws (1958), Vol. 1, page 33, Note 85.

‘De Xova, “Developments of Private International Law” (1968) 13 A. 1. ९. L. $42, 562.

CDe Nova, “Developments of Private aternational Law”, (1964) 13 A. 1, 0. 1.. 542, 55%

"be Nova. “Developments ete.” (1964) 13 A. 7. C. L. 542, 560, R. Hi. Groveson, “Com.
parative Asnects of the General Princtples of Privaic International Law", ‘Academic de Droit
jnternational, 109, Recueil des Cours (1963, 2) 7, at 68 7,

ePara. 2. 30 et. seq. infra.

६३. Seo R. De Nova, “Le 1X Conference dell Aja,” 14 Diritto Toternationals (1960) 305,
at 309 1.

75७७ 1९, De Nova, “IE progette preliminare dell’ Aja aul!’ adozione internationale,”
(1963) 17 Dicitto Internationale 199.

USee Chapter 5, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)

In section 200) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in section 19,
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the test of residence does occue, as a basis for the
exercise of jurisdiction in respect of matters dealt with by those provisions. The
applicability of section 19, Hindu Marriage Act to cases involving a foreign ele-
meat is a matter which we shall reserve for later discussion?

2.26. Residence does not require an intention to settle dawn. It has been
pointed out? that it is not even necessary to have a roof over one’s head, and a
nomad can be a “resident” in a country within which he wandered.

2.27. “Residence” has always been regarded as cssentially a physical fact?
The combined effect of two decisions of the House of Lords,’ rendered in taxa-
tion Saw, is that “ordinary residence” is the reverse of “extraordinary”—some
residence which is “according to the way in which a man’s life is usually order-
ed” (Lord Warrington} “part of the order of a man’s life
adopted voluntarily and for certain purposes (Lord Summer)—not casually but
in the ordinary course of his life.” This is also clear from the analysis of the
subject by a scholar.

2.28. In India, the expression “reside” has been construed by the Supreme
Court in Mst. Jagir Kaur 0. Jaswant Singh’ The question that came up for
decision was as to what the word “resides” and the words “where he last resided
with his wife’ mean, in section 488(8) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
which gave a sight, inter alia, to the wife to file a petition for maintenance ‘be-
fore the compztent Magistrate, While dealing with this case, the Supreme Court

observed as below:

“A makes only a flying visit and he has no intention to live cither per-
manently or temporarily in the place he visits. It cannot, therefore, be
said that he ‘tesides’ in the places he visits.”

Earlier in the judgment, it was also observed that:

“Whichever meaning is given to it, one thing is obvious and it is that it
does not include a casual stay in, or a flying visit to, a particular place.
In short, the meaning of the word would, in the ultimate analysis, de-
pend upon the context and the purpose of a particular statute. In this
case the context and purpose of the present statute certainly 00 not com-
pel the importation of the concept of domicile in its technical sense, The
purpose of the statute would be better served if the word ‘resides’ was
understood to include temporary residence.”

These observations are of interest, as pointing to the distinction between
residence and domicile.

‘See Chapter 5, infra,
®nternal Revenue Contmissioner ¥. Lysaght, (928) A. C, 234, 244 (Viscont Summer).
'Ramsay v. Liverpool Royal infirmary, (1930) A. C. 588, 597 (Lord Macmillan).
‘Levenvire v. Internal Revenne Commissioner, (1928) A. C, at page 225.
Anternal Revenue Commissioner y. Lysaghe, (1928) A.C, 234, 242, 243, 248,
“See further para. 2, 29, infra.
tFarnworth. in 67, L, 0. 12. 32, 34.

29, ‘Faroworth, “Residence in the Anglo-American Law", 38 Crotius Society Transactions
SMst, Jagir Kaur v. Laswant Singh, A. LR, 1963 5. C. 1521,
*Now, section 125, Cr. B,C, 1973.

21

Intention not re-
gui

Residence a phy-
sical fact.

Meaning of  resi-
dence,


22

Ordinary resid-
ence.

Habitual resid-
ence,

History.

English provi-
sion.

Recent case,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)
VU. ORDINARY RESIDENCE

2.29, The next expression relevant to the question under discussion is “ordi
mary residence”,—an expression which one meets with in taxation law: Ordi-
nary residence should be residence in the ordinary course of the man’s life, not
exceptional or accidental. Here again, intention as such is not material, except
in-so-far as it may indicate whether the residence is exceptional or accidental.

VII. HABITUAL RESIDENCE

2.30. “Habitual residence” is a more precise ground than residence, and re-
quires io be considered at some length.

3.31, The expressicn “habitual residence” was first employed internationally*
as long ago us 1902. The concept has also been employed in Convention
Sponsored by the League of Nations, the United Nations and the Council of
Europe.

In the Nottebohm case,* the Tmernational Court of Justice stressed the
importance of habitual residence, where the question was whether the State of
Liechtenstein could confer nationality on a person habitually resident in
Guatemala

2.32. “Habitual residence” has been employed in English statutes relating to
succession,’ adoption,’ contrast’ and divorce and legal separation.’--"",

The limits of the concept have been explored academically."
2,33. With reference to this expression (habitual residence) as used in the

Recognition of Divorces etc, Act, 1971, section 3(1}a), the judgment of Lane J.
in Cruss v. Chittum'?, is of interest. We shall discuss it later.”

1866 para, 2.27, supra.
*Hague Convention on Guardianship (June 12, 1902), Article 2,
‘See K. Lipstein, “Che Tenth Session of the Hague Conference on private International
Law" (1965) Camb. LC. J. 224, 225, n, 3.

‘Nottebohm case, (Second Phase} (1955) 1. C. J. Rep. 4:22.

‘Section 1, Wilis Act, 1963, 8, 1.

‘Section 1111) Adoption Act, 1968, [following Hague Convention on Adoption 1964,
Atts. 1, 2(b)]-

7Section 71), Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act, 1973,

#a) Section 3(1) (४), Recognition of Divorces and Legal Separation Act, 1971 (follow:
ing Hague Convention on Recognition 1969, Art. 2);
(b) Domicile and Matrimonial proceedings Act, 1973, 5. 5(2).

SPara. 2:33, infra.

Ngee also Administration of Justice Act, 1956, Sections ३(8) and 4(1)(a).

Na) R. H. Graveson, The Conflict of Laws (6th ed., 1909), pp, 195, 512;

(b) K, Lipstein in (1965) Camb, L. J. 224, 225-227;

{c) J. Hom. “The Adoption Act, 1968 and the Conflict of laws”, (1973) 22 1, 0.1... 0.

109, 134-136.
(9) J. D. McClean and K. W, Patchett, “English Jurisdiction in Adoption” (1970) 19

LCL. 0. 1, 14-16.
Kruse v. Chirtun, (1974) 2 All 8. ६. 940, 942, 943.

जबाब, 2:34, infra,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

{Chapter 2.—Heads of Recognition.)

The judgement in Indvka v. Indyka’ may also be seen as establishing a
possible test of habitual residence. ‘There, “Each of their Lordships expresses

much the same broad view of what should be the new recognition rule, although
stating it in quite different terms,’ as was observed by Ormrod J. in Angelo v.
Angelo!

234. In Kress v. Chittum’ Lane J. accepted the formulation by counsel of
certain features of habitual residence with reference to the Act of 1971, They

were as follows:

(i) Habitual residence indicates “a quality of residence rather than
period of residence”.

Gi} “Habitual residence” is similar to the residence normally required as
part of “domicile”, although in habitual residence there is no need
for the element of animus which is necessary in domicile.

(iii) The phrase in the Mississippi decree in the case, (which was in issue)
that residence was “actual and bona fide,” really defines habitual in
this context, and denotes “a regular physical presence which must
endure for some time.”

(iv) Some characteristics of residence negate the possibility of its being
habitual,—for example, if it is of “a temporary or a secondary
nature”,

tv) “Habitual residence requires an element of intention, an intention to
reside.”

(vi) Ordinary residence is different from habitual residence, “in that the
latter is something more than the former”.

With respect, it may be stated that same of these propositions may re-
quite further consideration—particularly, the last one,

2,35. The criterion of habitual residence may sometimes coincide with other
criteria. An example, though not from the field of matrimonial law, may be

cited. In Aztauiah’s case’, in the context of the position of inhabitants of coded
territories, it was observed by the Calcutta High Court :—

“In some cases, therefore, an option is stipulated in favour of the inhabi-
tants of the ceded territory and thus avert the charge that inhabitants
are handed over to a now sovereign agamst their will.

“The terms of option may vary from case to case, but the general prin-
ciple applied has been that a person habitually resident’ in a ceded terri-
tory acquires ‘fpse facto’ the nationality of the State to which the terri-
tory has been transferred, and loses the nationality of the ceding State”
(page 506-Oppenheim).

“From the principle referred to above, it will be significant that a person
habitually resident’ wilhin a particular ceded territory acquires ‘ipso facto’
as a result of the cession, the nationality of the State to which the terri-
tory is transferred.”

Yndyka v. Indyka, (1969) 1, A.C.
Aanglolo v. Angalo, (1968) 1 WLR. 401, 403.

8Krese v. Chittum, (1974) 2 All, 8. है. 940, 942, 943.

SAttqutlah ¥, Altautlah. A. 1. R. 1953 Cal, 530, 533 {per R. 9, Mookerjee, I).
'Emphasis supplied.

Emphasis supplied.

23

Habitual resid:
ence may coincide
with other  crite-
rion.


a4

Sco: of = the
Chapter.

Questions that

usually arise.

General statement
of the position in
India, England
and USA,

Transactions —in-
volving contracts
with more than
one State.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
CuapTER 3
LAW APPLIED BY COURTS
1. INTRODUCTORY

41, In this Chapter, we shall briefly deal with the law which is applied when.
a Court dissolves # marriage. A consideration of this aspect is relevant to the
question of recognition of divorce.”

3.2. Three questions arc usually discussed in dealing with the problems aris-
ing in the field of conflict of laws—

(1) Bases of jurisdiction.
(2) Choice of law.
(3) Recognition.

We have dealt, in a general way, with the first.| We propose now to dis-
cuss the second ; the specific question to be considered in this context is how far.
for the purpose of recognition, it should be a pre-requisite that the law of the
recogaising forum was applied by the foreign court.

jn other words, besides the criterion of existence of the requisite basis of
jurisdiction (habitual residence, nationality or domicile), should it also be neces-
sary that the foreign court must have applied the jaw in force in the country
where recognition is sought 7

33. At the outset, we may, by way of introduction, state that in India, as
well as in England* and in the United States®, the “jurisdictional approach”, and.
the ensuing identity of forum and lex, have been long accepted as a matter of
course, as regards divorce. Therefore, if an Indian or English Court exercises
jurisdiction to dissolve a marriage, it applies the Indian or English law, as the
case may be, in the absence of special statutory provisions to the contrary. The
position is not different in other countries in the Commonwealth.

However, as a theoretical examination of the position on the subject
might be helpful, we shall, deal with a few important aspects, before reverting

to the English law.

1. CHOICE OF LAW—GENERAL ASPECTS

3.4, Where a transaction involves contacts with more than one State, the detec-
mination of the law applicable to the transaction may present problems. “The
extra-forum” element is sometimes taken into account, and sometimes not.
General observations by text-book writers on the conflict of laws draw atten-
tion to this aspect ; but. thase observations do not imply that in every case in-
yolving an extra-forum element, the foreign law must be applied. The answer
to the question whether foreign law should be applied, and, if so, which foreign
Yaw should be applied, may depend on the nature of the cause of action, the

relief sought and many other factors.

tPara, 2:19 to 2135 supra.
2pe Nove, “Developments of Private Intern
of Compurative Law.

{Pe Nova, “Development
of Comparative Law.

ational Law, (1964) 13 American Journal

ts of Private International Law, (1964) 13 American Joormal


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3—Law applied by Courts.)

Moreover, where the relief sought is governed by statutory provisions,
those provisions cannot be ignored. Tt is suggested that the correct approach
is first to peruse the relevant enactment. If there is an enactment on the subject,
its territorial scope must then be ascertained. No doubt, there is a judicial tradi-
tion to “read down” wide slatuics, so as to avoid extra-terriforial application
where necessacy. However, what requires to be emphasised, is that the text of
the applicable enactment cannot be toially disregarded.

Tf this process fails to yield a conclusion based on convincing reasons,
then, no doubt, it is legitimate to inquire whether any other system of law
should, having regard to the nature of the cause of action and the relief, and
other relevant considerations, be taken inte account.

It is not in every case that foreign law becomes the governing law merely
by reason of some foreign element. A court of a country would be bound to
apply the law of its own legislature. unless it is found that by the rules of private
international law or of the rules relating to the construction of statutes, that law
is not applicable.

3.8. Where there is no domestic statute on the point which possesses an ex-
press or implied tervitorial scope embracing the particular case, and the court
is faced with a case invelving an extra-forum clement, the court generally ap-
plies the principles of private international law to determine the governing law.
A foreign statute will be relevant, if it is a part of the legal system whose law
is applicable by virluc of the choice af law rule of the forum. But—to repeat
what has already been stated above'—it is not in every case that the law of the
forum will be displaced by the foreign law.

3.6. The possible systems of law applicabie,—-to mention the important ones,
—are:

(8) faw of nationality ; or
(b) law of domicile in modern times habitual residence +

(०) law of place of celebration of marriage, where the question arises out
of marriage ;

(व) law of place where the matrimonial misconduct was committed ;

(e) law of the forum

The Court of the forum has to decide whether it should apply its own
law system (८) above—thus disregarding all foreign laws—or whether it should
regard any other system of law as applicable out of systems (a) to (d) above.
The answer to this question depends on a variety of factors.

3.7. Tt should first be stated that on some topics—other than divorce,—the
foreign law may be appropriately considered by a court. For example, the posi-
tion as to the choice-of-law rule in regard to the vatidity of marriage, has been
defined us follows?:—

Para. 3.4 supra.

Mendes da Costs. “The Formalities of Marriage”, page 257, referred ta in “Temporal
dimensions in the conflict of laws" (1963) B. ४. 8. 1, 1... 122.

25

Possible = systema
of law,

Marriage—vali-
dity of.


26

Torts,

Law in Ametica.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

“The formal validity of a marriage js referred to the lex loci celebrationis
as is deemed to have existed at the date of the marriage or by the lex
foci celebraéionis as it stands when the validity of the marriage is called
into question, either because a second ceremony of marriage is entered
into, or because the issue is raised by a court of competent jurisdiction.”

3.8. Then, as regards torts, sometimes the forcign law has to be considered.
Many laws of the United States and of other systems, save the British, refer to
the Jex loci delicti commissi as the primary measure and standard of liability
in tort cases.—subject, of course, to the limits set up by the forum as to ques-
tions of procedure and public policy.’

English law, following Willes J. in Phillips v. Eyre’, took the position that
to be actionable in English forum, the foreign tort must both be an act—{a)
which, if done in Britain, would be a tort, and (0) which is not justifiable accord-
ing ta the law of the foreign country? where it was committed. Recently’, the
requirement has been modified, and it should read---“which is actionable accord-
ing to the foreign law.”

This rule has frequently been criticised, and it seems to be generally
regarded as a ‘rigid rule of secure, though very unhuppy standing’’ Professor
Yentema‘* even maintains that this English doctrine involves a ‘gratuitous mis-
construction’ of the opinion of Mr. Justice Willes’, thus constituting an ‘isolated
and irrational’ position in law.

3.9. The American view, in regard to torts, is that ihe lex loci commtisst
governs, In the 4Awerican Banana Co. vy. United Fruit Co.! the U.S. Supreme
Court said, “the character of an act as lawful or unlawful must be determined
wholly by the law of the country where the act is dane”.

3.10, In this connection, the following famous passage in Justice Holmes's opi-
nion in the case of the American Banana Co. v. Uniied Fruit Co8 may be

cited—

“In the first place, the acis causing the damage were done, so far as ap-
pears, outside the jurisdiction of the United States, and within that of
other States. It is surprising to hear it argued that they were governed
by the act of Congress.

- go

fa) Yntema, ‘Dicey: An American Commentary’, 4 International Law Quarterly;

(b) Rabel, Conflict of Laws (2nd cd. 1960), Vol. 2, pages 235-236;

(c) Justice Holmes, in Cuba R. Co. v. Crosby (1922) 222 U.S, 473, 477 (1914); and

(a) Justice Holmes, in Western Union Telegraph Co. v. Brown, (1914) 234 UL S.

542, 547

°Phillips v. Eyre (1870) L. R. 6 0. 8. 1, 28, 29.

51963) British Year Book of International Law page 117.

‘Chaplin v. Bos (1971) A. C. 356 (H. 1.)

Ha) Rabel, Conflict of Laws, page 239;

{b} Inglis, Conflict of Laws (1959), page 476 (notion not justifiable, far from satis-

factory’):

€Yniema in (1949) 27 Canadian Bar Review, pp. 116-22 and in (1951) 4 International
Law Quarterly, pp. 8-9.

TAmericen Hanana (०, ¥. United Fruit Co, (1909) 213 ए. 5. 347, 355, 356, 357 (Holt
J)

American Banana Co. y. United Fruit Ca. (Supra),



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

“The general and almost universal rule is that the character of an act
as lawful or unlawful must be determined wholly by the law of the country
where the act is done ...........* For another jurisdiction, if it should hap-
pen to lay hold of the actor, to treat him according to its own notions
rather than those of the place where he did the acts, not only would be
unjust, but would be an interference with the authority of another save-
reign “contrary to the comity of nations, which the other state concerned
justly might resent. -

The foregoing considerations would lead in case of doubt,
to a construction of any statute as intended to be confined in its opera-
tion and effect to the territorial limits over which the law-maker has
general and legitimate power. ‘All legislation is prima facie territorial’.
(Citing cases). Words having universal scope, such as ‘every contract
in restraint of trade’, ‘every person who shall monopolize’, etc. will be
taken as a matter of course to mean only every one subject to such legis~
lation, not all that the legislator subsequently may be able to catch. In
the case of the present statute (the Sherman Act), the improbability of
the United States attempting to make acts done in Panama or Costa Rica
criminal is obvious, yet the law begins by making criminal the acts for
which it gives a right to sue ....

“for again, not only were the acts of the defendant in Panama or Costa
Rica not within the Sherman Act, but they were not torts by the Taw of
the place and therefore were not torts at all. however contrary to the
ethical and economic postulates of that statute.”

It may be noted that even as regards tort, recent trends are in the direc-
tion of not adhering very rigidly to the rule in Philip v. Eyre. It is sufficient
to refer to two decisions,--one of the House of Lords’, and the other of the
High Court of Australia’—which show the emphasis placed on the law of the
forum in regard to certain aspects (for example, the quantum of damages in the
House of Lords case).

3.11. As regards contracts, the general principle is that the proper law of a
contract is that legal system which is 10 govern the obligations of the parties
by virtue of the particular contract. Tn England‘, and in some other common
law jurisdictions’ also, it is the law which the parties have either expressly or
by implication chosen to govern their contractual relations. Thus, intention is
the connecting factor.

There are other cases also where foreign statutes have been applied to
regulate contracts, where they formed part of the governing state's law’.

‘Philips Vv. Eyre, (1870) Law Reports 6 Q. 8. 1. 28, 29, para. 3.8, supra.

2Chaplin ¥. Boys, (1971) 8. ९. 356 ; (1969) 2 AH E. R. 1085 (H. 1.3.

3Anderson v. Eric Anderson, (1966) 114 ८. L. R, 20 (Australia).

‘See Mount Albert Borough Council v. Australasian Temperance Society, (1938) A. C.
224, 240 {per Lord Wright): Re. Claim by Helbert Ware & Co, Erd., (1936) 1 Ch.
323, 340.

See (1963) B. ४. 8. 1. 1... page 134.

Sco for example. fi re. Claim by Halbert Waeg & Co. Etd., (1956) 1 Ch, 323 (German
Moraistinm Taw applicable to a contract the proper law of which was German); Kahler
Mepdland Bank id, (1950) A, C. 24 (Czechoslovak legislation applicable to a contract
governed by Czechoslovak lawl: हे, ¥, International Trustee for the protection of Bon-
dholders Aketiengesellschaft, (1937) A. Cc. 500 (U. S. Congressional Resalution having the
Farce at law applicable to a contract gaverned by American law).

Contract.

27


28

Present inquiry
not concerned
with tort or con-
Tract.

Decisions _ under
the Indian Law.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

3.12. But we are not concerned with the question of proper law of tort or con-
tract. The precise question to be considered is-what law is applied by the
courts when granting dissolution of marriage ?

We proceed to consider this question, first with reference to the Indian
law'; and then with reference to English? and American law.’ Thereafter, we
shall consider the question whether any change is needed,

वा. INDIAN LAW

3.13. As regards Indian law, we shall first refer to the Act applicable to Chris-
tians. There are numerous decisions under the Indian Divorce Act. 1869, where
ths courts in India have granted divorce on the basis of a ground specified in
what Act, irrespective of the question whether that ground wes, or was not, re-
cognised as a ground of divorce in some other country having a connection with
the marriage, such as, the country where the marriage was solemnised*, or where
the matrimonial misconduct took place’ or the country of the nationality of the
parties’,

3.14. A study of the following illustrative cases under the Indian Divorce Act
relating to divorce or judicial separation, shows that the grounds of relief were
taken as entirely governed by the Indian law, even though a foreign element was
involved. Existence of the requisite head of jurisdiction was considered
enough:

SELECTED CASES ON THE INDIAN DIVORCE ACT

1. Hartencia v. John Sebastian, ATR. 1935 Bom. 121 (Beaumont, C.J.).
(Patties lived in Bombay together—Then went to Nairobi—Wife returned
to Bombay—Judicial separation granted--Foreign law not considered).

2. Rose Hill vy. Luck C. Hill, ALR. 1923 Bom. 284, 285 (Adultery of wife
on ship at Marseilles was enough to justify grant of divorce).

3. W.D. ७. E.D.. Ad.R. 1933 Sind 27.
(it was observed that the parties must have been married under the 1872
Act, but this was obiter).
4 Mrs. Nan Greenwood vy. L. V. Greenwood, ALR. 1928 Oudh 218(1),
(Pullan, J.).
(Parties not domiciled in India—Married in Ireland---Divorce granted).
3. Giordano’s case, (1912) 1.L.R. 40 Cal, 215 (Italian couple)?
5A. Shireen Mall’, AAR. 1952 Punj. 277,
6. Bright v. Bright, LR. 36 Cal. 964,

7 Grant v. Grant, ALR. 1937 Pat. 82.
(Adultery outside India—Parties domiciled in India).

wPara. 3.13, ef seg. infra.
*Para, 3.20, ef seq. infra.

SPara. 3.334, et seg, infra.

tRose Hill's case, (pata. 3-14, infra).

5Mrs, Nan Greenwood's case, (para. 3.14, infra)
SGiordano's case. (pata. 3.15, infra..

*See para. 3.15, infra.

SSeo para. 3.16, infra,


Report on Recognition of. Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

3.15. In Giordano's case’, the husband was an /talian subject, with an Italian
domicile, and instituted proceedings in India for divorce on the ground of his
wife’s adultery. The marriage had been solemnised in India, and the parties
were residing in British India. (As the Indian Divorce Act then stood, resid-
fice was enough to confer jurisdiction for dissolution).

It was held that under the provisions of the Indian Divorce Act, the Court
was bound to grant a divorce on proof of adultery, although the divorce would
have no effect outside India. It may be noted that Italy had no provision for
divorce at that time.

2.16, In Shireen Mall's case", the respondent husband was a British soldier,
though temporarily he lived in British India. The High Court observed that
otily the Indian law was applicable. Section 7 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869

. (Court to follow the English practice) made no difference, because it was ex-
pressly stated to be-—‘Subject to the provisions contained in this Act

The High Court added—

“Hence, if the provisions which ate given in section 10 of this Act give
oaly certain ground on which a marriage can be dissolved, I am of the
wiew that the grounds of dissolution of marriage cannot be extended by
virtue of section 7 to grounds which might be prevailing for the time be-
ing in England. I, therefore, must hold that the provisions of the amend-
ed section 176 of the Act prevailing in England (Supreme Court etc. Act,
1925), which allow dissolution of marriage on the ground of desertion of
the wife by the husband without cause for a period of three years or up-
wards would not apply to this country. In this country, “desertion by a
husband of his wife without cause would be a ground for dissolution
of marriage if the desertion is for a period of two years and upwards and
is coupled with adultery.”

No doubt, in this case, the marriage. was found to be void, but the above
dicta show the trend.

7, Thus, it is clear that in various decisions under the Indian Divorce Act,
169, Indian courts have, while exercising their jutisdiction under that Act,
confined themselves to a consideration of tlie grounds of divorce as given in that
Act. Of course, the proceedings must be within their competence, and, in this

Tegard, the test laid down in section 2 of the Act must be satisfied. But, once ~

the court in India is competent to exercise jurisdiction under section 2 of the
Apt, then the grounds for relief are to be sought owly in that Act.

318. It may be stated that the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act,
1926, empowered courts in India or elsewhere in His Majesty’s donrinions, as
down by order in council, to grant divorce to persons domiciled in the
United Kingdom as if they were domiciled in the territory in question. While
domicile was, thus, nominally or notionally. retained as the basis, jurisdiction
wees exercisable on the ground of residence! of the petitioner at the time of pre-
senting his petition and of the Jast residence together by the parties. The sub-
wientive law to be applied was the English law. This very provision, which is
exceptional, in character, helps to bring out clearly the general rule.
a es nas
i 1G@iordano v. Giordano, (1912) LL. R. 40 Cal. 215.

3Shireen Mall v. Tayler, A. 1, R, 1952 Punj. 277, 279 (Soni, J). (British soldiec),

‘Chapter 6, infra.

43 Halsbury’s Statutes (2nd Edn.) 1158.

$5 B.D. CN. B.)I76

Indian decisions.

Act of 1926.


क्र

Hindy = Marriage
Act,

Dissolution of,
Muslim Marriages
‘Act, 1939.

General rule as to
divorce,

A sase of divorce,

Position as to
‘Nallity.

Report oh Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

3.19. It may, next, be noted that under the Hindu Marriage Act’, the fact that
the marriage was performed outside those territories or the matrimonial this-
conduct took place outside those territories, is immaterial. In other words, ance
it is established that the parties are Hindus and are domiciled in India, the pro-
visions of the Act relating to matrimonial relief come into play. The Act does
not contain any express provisions as to choice of Jaw; but it appears that relief
has to be given according to, and only according to, the provis‘ons of the Act,

if the proceedings are filed in India and if the Court in India is otherwise com-,
petent. Had the legislation intention been different, the legislature would have.
said so. हु

We do not pause to discuss in detail the provisions of the Special Mar-
riage Act and other Jaws; but it would be enough for our purpose to state that
that Act and other laws relating to marriage and divorce. do not provide for
applying a foreign law. ae
3.20. It may be noted that the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939,
does not impose any restriction that the marriage to be dissolved at the instance
of the wife under that Act should have been solemnised in India, or that the
matrimonial misconduct which constitutes the basis of the relief sought by the
wife should have occurred in India. In substance, it is enough if the parties
are governed by Muslim Jaw. it may be presumed that by “Muslim law” is
meant that portion of the Islamic law which is applied in India to Muslims as
a personal law.

Iv. ENGLISH LAW

3.21. So much as regards Indian law. The general rule in England is that in
proceedings for divorce propérly brought in England, English law, as in force at
the time of the proceedings, exclusively governs the grounds of divorce. Other
factors, such as—

(a) the law under which the parties were married,

(b) the national law of the parties, or ‘

(c) the law of the place where the matrimonial offence was comunitted,
are completely irrelevant, according to English practice. pay
be a statutory modification of this position, but, apart from statute,
this is the general rule.

3.22, Thus, in the case of Zanelii v. Zaneit#, an Italian national married,- in
1948, an English woman in England, where he was then domiciled. छा wad
Jater deported from England, and thereupon reverted to the Italian dome. i
The Englishwoman was granted a divorce in England by an application of:
English law despite the rule of Italian law (the law of her domicile at that time)
which disallowed divorce.

3.23. The position regarding proceedings for nullity of marriage may be «if-
ferent. An action or proceeding for the annulment of a marriage differs fsom-ay
divorce proceeding, in that the latter is instituted to sever a marriage::reiggion:
admitted to exist, whereas an annulment proceeding is for the purpose of de@lasi:
ing judicially that, because of some disability or defect which existed at the @me
of the marriage ceremony, no valid marriage ever took place between the parties,

or that no valid marriage relation ever existed between the ‘parties. An -amnul-
ncn Sa: Sy

1Sections 1(2), 2 and 10 to 13, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

®2Zanelli v. Zanelli, (1946) 92 Solicitor's Journal 646 (Court of Appeal), Cjyeqhire,
Private International law (1970), 354,



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorcey
(Chapter 3—Law applied by Courts.)

‘ment is also to be distinguished from a divorce in that, as a general. rule, an
annulment proceeding is based on factors justifying the avoidance of the mar-
Hage existing at the time of the marriage, whereas a divorce is ordinarily for the
causes arising after the marriage,—although some statutes, in defining grounds
for anoulment or divorce, do not adhere to these distinctions.

324. (We are not concerned with the law applicable to nullity proceedings.
But, as regards divorce, the general rule is as stated above. The rationale of the
English rule seems to be that the question whether the court will dissolve a mar-
Flage is one that must be decided by “English conceptions of morality, religion
pnd public policy’? and is “one that is governed exclusively by rules and condi-
tions imposed by the English legislature”.

It is immaterial that the facts constituting the ground took place outside
FBngland. ‘
Wolff states the position clearly, in this regacd—
“The English court, when entertaining divorce or separation proceedings,
applies noting but English law, because the question of the conditions
under which the nuptial tie may be Joosened or dstroyed touches funda-
mental English conceptions of morality, religion, and public policy. There
can, therefore, be no doubt that where in exceptional cases, the English
court is not the court of the domicile, it is nevertheless English law that
applies and not the law of the foreign domicile.”

3.25, Conversely, if a foreign divorce is jurisdictionally valid, it will be recog-
nised in England, notwithstanding that the foreign divorce was obtained on a
ground not recognised by English law.‘

. Successive editions of Cheshire have consistently taken the view that in
‘suit for divorce brought in England, the substantive law of the forum must be
applied without exception.” In the overwhelming majority of cases, jurisdiction
being based on domicile, the courts have never been asked to decide specifically
_ Whether they apply English Jaw as the lex domicil#i or as the lex fori, Never-
theless, such case Jaw as is available establishes this position beyond doubt.
7 English jurisdiction and divorce Jaw will be available even if the matrimonial
misconduct on which the petition is based. took place in a foreign country where
the parties were then domiciled. Consequently, it is regarded as equally imma-
aerial that the misconduct constituted no ground for divorce at the time of its
_ commission if, in fact, it is a ground for divorce in the subsequently acquired
English domicile at the time of the suit.

JAmerican Jurisprudence, 2nd Ed. Wol. 24, pages 177, 178,
ge 386७ also pata. 3.42 infra.

int 4Woldf, Private International Law (1950), page 374, quoted also by Cheshire in his 1975
edition at page 353,

‘Crepok v. Czepok, (1962) 3 All England Reports, 990, 992 (Desertion outside England).

.. . Wolff, Private International Law (1950), pages 373-374,

# १. Wa) dnityka ¥. Indyke (1969) 1 A. C. 33, 66, 73-745 approving Barer v. Bater, (1966)
; Probate 209;

es

“(e) Tianic ¥. Tijanie, (1963) Probate 181, 184;
०) Brown v. Brown, (1568) Probate 518 ; (1968) 2 ANE. R11
a) Cheshire, Private Internationa! Law (6th ed., 1961, 393 cited 196:
१ Sin Hoot of International Law at p. 1171 DP in (1963) British
(by Cheshire Private International Law (1970), pages 353 to 368, and (1975) pages

Rationale,


Wilson's case,

Report on Recognition vf Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

3.26. In Wilson v. Wilson, the question was whether an English Court had
jurisdiction to grant Wilson’s suit filed in 1871 for the dissolution of his. marriage
‘on the ground of his wife’s adultery. Wilson was a Scotsman married in Qcot-
land to a Scottish wife, and was a partner in a business carried on at Glassgow.
After their marriage, Wilson and ‘his wife resided near Glassgow. Wilson hetl
also a lease of some Jand near Loch Lomond, where he had built a shooting
lodge. On discovering his wife’s adultery in 1866, Wilson broke up his -Beta-
blishment and went to London, where he lived thereafter with his mother. He
continued to draw an income from his business in Glassgow and when the: subs-
cription of his club fell due, Wilson begged his partner to pay the amount and
wrote to his partner that he did not wish to dissocite himself entirely . from
Glassgow. He renewed the lease of the land on which he had his shooting tédge
and spoke of it as the Jand of his father. The only property which Wilson pos-
sessed, it was shown, was in Scotland, and in London he was mainly pee
by his mother. A Court in Scotland had held that Wilson had never f
an English domicile. Wilson himself asserted, when giving evidence, that when
he went to live in London in 1866, he did so with the intention of making Eng-
Jand his home for the future. Lord Penzance stated that if Wilson had been
dead and nothing werg known of his intention, except what could be gathered
from the more circumstances attending bis residence in England, the evidence
would not have been sufficient to enable the Court to arrive at the conclusion
that he had adopted an English domicile. But he said:

3.26-A. “Still, when the man is here, and when he swears that his intention was
to agopt an English domicile, why should he not be believed in the absence of
any circumstances in the case tending to show that what he says is not true ‘or
likely to be true ? In this case, then, the question is not so’ much whethef te
circumstances of his English residence tend to prove English domicile, as whe-
ther, notwithstanding the man’s; cath to his intention to create an English domi-
cile, there are sufficient circumstances on the other side to warrant the Court
in throwing over his oath and disbelieving him. I am not aware there ere any
such circumstances,” a

“Well, I do believe him, and if I believe he came to England with the
intention of permanently giving up his connection with Scotland, and fixing apim
England as his future home, is there any question but that a new domicile? was
thereby constituted ? 1 apprebend not.” ,

This question was, thus, consideted at length. But the jurisdiction having
been established, the substantive law applied was the English law.

3.27. It was observed by the High Court’ in Mezger with reference to a foreign
decree of divorce as follows: —

“Jt is quite true that this decree was pronounced on grounds which are
not recognised in this country. As I have said, the record is full and clear and
it appears that it was pronounced on the ground that by insulting behaviour
and incompatibility of temper, and other matters of that sort, the wife had
failed to fulfil her marriage obligations—quite plainly a ground that is not re-
cognised in this country—which the court below was assured has not been thal-
lenged here. That was the foundation for a divorce in the country where the
divorce was pronounced and to the courts of which country these parties were

“Wilson v, Wilson (1872) 2 P. & 0. 45; 27 1.. T. 351; 41 L.-J. ९, & M. 74; 20
W. R. 891. हु

2Mezeer v. Mezger (1936) 3 All 8. R, 130, 134 (Refusal by Magistrate to revoke order
for maintenance.) .



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

fmenabdle, In those circumstances, in my opinion, the justices have got noth-
ing whatever to do with the question whether the grounds for divorce are recog-
nised in this country or whether they approve of them or do not approve of them.
The matter was put with characteristic terseness and accuracy by Hill, J., in
the case of Pastre ५, Paste.’ The case was somewhat similar though not exactly
the same as this case. The question was, this court having pronounced a decree
of judicial separation with the consequential allowances, whether that should be
allowed to survive a decree of divorce pronounced by a French court. HILL, J.

aaid this at p. 82.

The decree of the French court was made upon a ground which would
not be a good ground here—namely, the existence for three years of a decree
of judicial separation. But it is the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction
in a proceeding in which the wife was an active party.

I stress those words. “It follows that the petitioner and the respondent
are no longer husband and wife.”

“There the matter begins and ends; that is all with which any court in
this country is concerned, and it is no business of the justices, in my opinion, to
inquire whether there is lacking the element of aduhery, which is a necessary
ingredient of divorce in this country, For that reason their decision, in my
Opinion, is invalid.”

3.28, In a case* decided in 1957, Hodson, L. J. said: —

“If it be said that since the parties are not British subjects, the common-
law of England does not apply to him, my answer is that such is the law
prima facie to be administered in the courts of this country.”

3.29, In Tijanic’s case,? a decree granted to both husband and wife in Yugosla-
via was recognised. For the recognition of the decree by English courts, it was
immaterial that the ground of divorce was not one on which divorce was ob-
tainable in England. This position was specifically laid down.

The parties in that case were married in Yugoslavia in 1934, both being
Yugoslav nationals, and lived together in Yugoslavia until the ontbreak of war
in, 1939. The husband fought in the Yugoslav army, was taken a prisoner of
war in Italy, and, after three years in custody, joined the British Army. serving
for some two years. In 1949, he came to England and acquired a domicile of
choice in that country. In 1954, he applied for and obtained British nationality.
On 2 number of occasions in subsequent years, particularly in 1956, he wrote to
his wife inviting her to join him in England. This the wife was unwilling to do.
In 1960, she sent him a document ostensibly giving him permission to re-
marry. Thereafter the husband initiated proceedings in Yugoslavia for the dis-
solution of his marriage under a provision of Yugoslav law whereby a marriage
copld be dissolved if the parties had been living apart for a long period and
they both consented to the divorce. In October, 1961, a competent court in
Yugoslavia pronounced a decree of divorce to both parties. Altbough the decree
recited that it was pronounced in the presence of the litigants, the only persons
referred to explicitly as being present were the husband’s proxy and his solicitor.
On a petition by the husband for, infer alia, a declaration that the Yugoslav
decree of divorce validly dissolved the marriage, it was held that the reality of

“iPastre ४ Pasire, (1930) Probate 80. —
"Tikzanako v. Tikzanaki (1957) Probate 301, 06.
{Tijanie v. Tijanic, (1967) 3 AIL, R. 976.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3—Law applied by Courts.)

the proceedings in Yugoslavia were that the wife joined with the husband in.
seeking relief and, in so far as she joined in the application and the decree.was
granted to her, it was granted to a woman who had been for the whole, of her
jife within the jurisdiction of the court concerned and, as the British court
would assume jurisdiction in such circumstances, recognition would be accorded
to the Yugoslav court’s decree; i being immaterial thar the ground of divoroa
was not one on which divorce would be granted in England.

3.30. In dadyka's case’ itself, the foreign divorce granted in Czechoslovakia,
(which was ultimately recognised), had been granted on the ground of disrup-
tion of marital relations, a fact which was, as such, not a ground of divorce in
England in 1949 when the District Court of Ostrava (Czechoslovakia), had gient-
ed the divorce. In fact, in that very case? Lord Morris observed:

“Tn this field, there have been some statutory provisions and many judi-
cizi decisions. It is too late, in my view, to urge that recognition should be
limited to cases where by statute provision is made for it. So also it is, in my:
opinion, too late to urge thet recognition of a foreign decree should in any
event and, apart from other considerations, be limited to cases where such de-
crees have been based on grounds which are grounds for a decree of dissolu-
tion in this country. Recognition should, however, always be subject to the
proviso thet the foreign decree is not vitiated by fraud nor contrary to natural
justice (compare Lepre v. Lepre)? In his speech in Salvesen’s case,' Lond”
Haldane said -* 4

“Qur courts, ............... never inquire whether a competent foreign
court has exercised its jurisdiction improperly, provided that बढ sub-
stantial injustice according to our notions has been committed.

“Tt has followed from the acceptance of domicile as the basis for assuyj-.
jng jurisdiction in England that, if a husband and wife are domiciled in|
another country and if there is a decree of divorce in that country, i will
here be recognised, There has been no insistence that the grounds for a
Gecree in the other country should conform or correspond to those Jaid
down in Bngland.” {See Bater v. Bater)

331, Mather v. Mahoney’ is an interesting decision—interesting for the variety
of territorial contacts exhibited by tht facts. It shows that English courts, when |
considering the question of recognition, do not pause to inquire into the ques-,
tion how far the foreign decree took into account the laws of other countries
havi @ territorial contact.

In that case. the husband had been born in Scotland. He acquired व.
domicile of choice in Englend. This he retained at all relevant times. In 1961,’
he married in Rome a woman who had lived most of her life in Pennsylvania.
The parties thereafter lived together (where. i¢ docs not clearly emerge), for
rather more than three years. In 1964, the wife left her husband and returned पर

to the United States.

ndyka v. Indyka, (1967) 2 AUB. R, 689, 692 GH, L).

Sndyka v. Indgka, (1967) 2 AME, R. 689, 700 (H. 1.2 (Lord Mortis).
*Lepre v. Lepre (1969) 2 ALB, R. 49 ; (1965) Probate 52.

‘Salvesen's case, (1927) All B. R. Rep. 78; (1927) A. C. 641.

SSatvesen's case, (1927) AUB. R. Rep. 78, 85; (1927). C. 641. 651,
SBater v. Bater (1906) Probate 209.

TMather v. Mahoney, (1968) 1 W. L. R. 1793.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts.)

The following year,—ie. in 1965—the wife obtained a decree of dissolu-
tion of the marriage in Neveda, on the ground of mental cruelty. She had gone
to the State of Nevada for the express purpose of obtaining this decree. In sub-
sequent Engiish proceedings, the husband petitioned for a declaration that the
Nevada decree had validly dissolved the marriage, or alternatively, for a decree
nisi of divorce on the ground of the wife’s desertion

Payne J. held that the Nevada decree must be recognised as effective in
England: the question of his pronouncing a decree nisi did not, therefore, arise.
Ie may be noted that Payne J. did not consider it relevant to discuss the ques-
tion whether the foreign court had taken into account the English concept of
“cruelty”. In fact. no reliance was placed on the fact that cruelty was also a
ground for divorce in England. That was merely a co-incidence.

3.32. According to the English rule, thus, the reasons upon which a foreign
eourt bases its decree are immaterial in regard to recognition of its decree. The
grounds of the foreign decree need not be in accord with the grounds for divorce
established in English matrimonial law.--provided, of course, the decree does
not violate good morals.

333. Thus, English courts’ when entertaining divorce or separation proceed-
ings, apply nothing but English law, because the question of the conditions under
which the nuptial tie may be loosened or destroyed touches* fundamental English
conceptions of morality, religion and public policy. There can, therefore be no
doubt that where, in exceptional cases, the English court is not the court of
the domicile, it is, nevertheless, English law that it applies, and not the law of
the foreign domicile.

In Robinson's case* Wilmot J. observed: —

“But if a man originally appeals to the law in England for redress, he
must take his redress according to that law to which he appealed for such
redress.”

Some such reasoning seems to constitute the basis of the principle on
which the English Courts act. namely, that it is the English law which is
ordinarily to be applied, if relict is sought from an English court in regard to
dissolution of a marriage.

V. POSITION IN U.S.A.
933A. This seems, by aid large, to be also the state of the law in the United
States! Occasionally, however, United States courts require that the misconduct
ghould be recognised as a cause for divorce by the law of the State where it
occurred.*

Ya) Harvey ¥. Parnie: (1880) 5 P. D. 153;

(by Pemberton v, Hughes, (1899) 1 Ch. 781:

(ले Bater v. Bater, (1960) Probate 209:

(a) Mezger, ४. Mezger, (1957), Probate 19, (1963) 3 All E. R. 130.

Wolff, Private Tnternational Law (1950), page 373-374.

मं, para. 3.24, supra.

4Robinson ¥. Bland, (1760) 97 English Reports 717, 721 (King’s Bench).

See, eg, Torlonia ¥, Torlonia, 108 Conn. 292, 142A, 848 (1928): and Chestham,
Coodrich. Criswald and Reese, Conflict of Laws; Cases and Materials (4th ed, 1937), page
790. cited in (1963) 8. Y. B. 1. L. page 127-128,

see Parcel v. Parzel, (1891) 91 Ky. 634, 15 5. W. 658 cited in (1963) B YB TL
page 127-128.

35.

Reasons for for-
eign judgment not
relevant.

English rule
Reason of,

American Law.


Application of its
own = law ४4
courts of the
forum in the
USA,

Position in some
other legal —sys-
tems.

National law ap-
Plied in some
countries,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 3.—-Law applied by Courts.)

3.34. In the USA in regard to interstate conflicts, Leflar’ has stated the posi-
tion thus; .

“Today, the standard choice-of-law rule calls for a forum state to apply
its own substantive divarce law, as to what are grounds for divorce, even
when the alleged grounds across in other states in connection with spouses
at the time domiciled in other states.”

Leflar has added that? a state may also, if it chooses to grant divorces
for other causes, set up, as grounds for divorce in exercising its own jurisdic-
tion, grounds recognised by the law of the place where the particular facts
occurred, or where the parties were domiciled when the facts occurred. Con-
versely, if a State so chooses, it may deny divorces unless the grounds relic
upon were grounds for divorce by the law of such other states. This is wholly
a matter for each state to decide for itself when it enacts its statute.

For example. in the U.S.A., the Arkansas Statute? originally required
that, if the grounds for divorce occurred, outside of Arkansas, to parties not
the resident in Arkansas, those grounds should be grounds for divorce both by
the law of Arkansas and by the law of the place where they occurred.* The last
part of the requirement was climinated when Arkansas enacted its “quicker”
divorce laws.

3.35. Similarly, a state might limit grounds for divorce to acts occurring at
the forum.’ But, in general, where a court assumes jurisdiction in relation to the
grant of divorce, it usually approaches the matter with reference to its own law.
ie. the substantive law of the forum.

VI. OTHER SYSTEMS

3.36. Some other legal systems apply, as regards the grounds on which divorce
can be granted by their courts, the lex fori, or the fex domicili which as a rule
coincides with the law of the forum This is the case in Soviet Russia, Estonia,
Latavia. Austria, Greece, Denmark, Norway, and in some Latin-American states,
such as Chile, Scuador and Urguay."

3.37. Most of the European and Latin-American laws decide, in principle. jn
favour of the national law of the spouses or the husband; but they modify this
by ordaining the application of the /ex fori where public policy—‘“ordre public” —
is in issue? We shall consider the scope of “ordre public” later.

VU. HAGUE CONVENTION

3.38, Articles 6, 7 and 19 of the Hague Convention may be seen in this con-
nection.

Weflar, Conflict of Laws (1968), page 547.
*Leflar, Conflict of Laws (1968), page 547.
*The Ark, Stat, Ann 3505 (0, & M, 1921), cited by Leflar, Conflict of Laws (1968),
S47. .
POS uilanbond ¥, Multanband, (1919) Ark. 505, 208 5. W. 801.
SNicholas v. Maddex (1900) 52 Le. Ann. 1493, 27 Sc. 966,
"जगत, Private International Law (1950), page 373.
Wolff, Private International Law (1950), page 373.
sWolff, Private International Law (1950), page 373.
SChapter 14, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 3.—Law applied by Courts. Chapter 4—indian Law as to Recognition
of Foreign Judgments.)

VII RATIONALE

3.39, The question may be raised as to the rationale of the English and
American practice. In the U.S.A., application of the lex fori seems to have been
sought to be justified by the merely statutory nature of divorce.' The argument
‘is that the effect of statutes is necessarily territorial—-a theory going clearly back
to such fathers of territorialism as D’Argentre and Ultricue Huber.

3.40. The view has also been adavanced that divorce remedies are special or
equitable, and therefore cannot be exercised except by the courts of the state
‘establishing the remedy. Sometimes, there is invoked the general motivation for
Yerritorialism that, the “res” being located within the state, the state’s interest
prevails. However, most of these theories have had their critics. It is not neces-
sary for our purposes to consider the merits and demerits of these various
theories. If parties acquire domicile or nationality in any country, they join the
stream of that country. Whatever the proper theoretical basis. there is immense
Practical convenience in applying the law of the forum; it eliminates the need for
research into, and interpretation of, the substantive foreign law.*

IX. CONCLUSION

3.41. In the light of the above discussion, we may now consider the question
which we have formulated at the beginning of this Chapter? We should point
ott that in answering that question, several aspects should be considered.

(a) Juristically, it may be stated that the general rvle is that ordinarily
r a court applies its own law'. So, if the foreign court has followed its
own law, it has followed the ordinary practice. If we are to require
it to depart from the practice, same weighty reasons would appear to
be needed.

(0) Sociologically, the parties habitually resident or domiciled in a
a court applies its on law, So, if the foreign court has followed its
the community where they have taken up their abode, as reflected in
the law of divorce of the country concerned. If so, it would be in-
appropriate to require that the courts of that country should apply
the substantive law of some other country as to the grounds of
matrimonial relief.

(0 From the practical aspect, a court usually finds it easier to ascertain
and apply the law of the forum. We are therefore of the view that
the present position needs no change.

CuapTer 4
INDIAN LAW AS TO RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS
th I, INTRODUCTORY

4.1. In this Chapter, we shall briefly discuss the Indian law on the subject of
recognition of foreign divorces. We have already pointed out® that there is

Rabel, Comparative Conflict of Laws (1958), Vol. 1, page 154,

4As to England, see pata. 3.23, supra.

See para. 3.2, supra.

‘Cf. Robinson's case, (1760) 97 English Reports 717 (Para. 3.33, supra),
‘Chapter 1, supra.

Reasons for ap
plying lex fori,

Aspects to 98
considered.

Antroduction.


Section 13, Code

of Civil
dure, 1

Section 14. O18 4
Code.

Proce-

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 4.—Iadian Law as to Recognition of Foreign Judgments.)

no specific provision as to recognition of foreign divorces in Indian Statute Law.
There are certain general provisions as to the effect of foreign judgments. which
we now proceed to consider.

The need for such provisions is obvious. As between.different provinces
under one sovereignty (e.g. under the Roman Empire), the legislation of the
sovereign may distribute and regulate jurisdiction; but no territorial legiskitiah
can give jurisdiction which any Foreign Court ought to recognise against foreigners
who awe no allegiance or obedience to the power which so legislates.

In a personal action, to which none of these causes of jurisdiction apply,
a decree pronounced in absentem by a Foreign Court, to the jurisdiction of which
the defendant has not in any way submitted himself, is by international law ag
absolute nullity. He is under no obligation of any kind to obey it, and it must
be regarded as a mere nullity by the Courts “of every nation, except (when autho-
rised by special local legislation) in the country of the forum by which it, was

pronounced.”*

II. SECTION 13, CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908

42. We may first refer to section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. That.
is a general provision as to the conclusive effect of foreign judgments. This sec-
tion is operative only when a number of conditions are fulfilled, of which the
most important is the condition that the foreign court must be a court
of competent jurisdiction. While, therefore, this section does empower
Indian courts to recognise foreign judgments and enforce them in certain cases,
it postulates that the foreign court must be a competent one, and the question
in what circumstances the foreign court is to be regarded as competent, is not
answered by the section, The section reads:

“13, When foreign judgment not conclusive——A foreign judgment shall be
conclusive as to any matter thereby directly adjudicated upon between
the same parties or between parties under whom. they or any of them
claim litigating under the same title except—

{a) where it has not been pronounced by a court of competent juris-
diction :
{b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case;

tc} where it appears on the fact of the proceedings to be founded on
an incorrect view of international law or a refusal to recognise
the law of India in cases in which such law is applicable;

(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are
opposed to natural justice:
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud:
(f where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force
in India.”
Tt may be noted that in the Code of Civil Procedure of 1882. the section
relating to foreign judgments*—section 14—began as follows: —

7 \Gurdaval v. Raja of Paridkot, I. L. R. 22 Cal. 222 (P. ९) (Lord Selborne).
"Section 14, Code of Civil Procedure. 1882.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 4.—Indian Law as to Recognition of Foreign Judgments.)

“14. No foreign judgment shall operate as a bar to a suit in British
India......".

The negative form of this section in the Code of 1882 made it clear that
it was an exception to the general provisions of the section dealing with res
judigata.' But for the provisions of this section relating to foreiga judgments, the
general bar of res judicata might have applied."

4.34. As one looks at section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, one can-
not but be struck by its comprehensive nature and, at the same time, its pre-
cision and conciseness. Each of these six exceptions forms an effective tool in
the hands of an Indian Court. whereby these courts can legitimately refuse to

recognise any foreign judgment

438. It may be pointed out that common law principles of res judicata are also
applicable to foreign judgments, as to judgment of our own courts. Section 13° of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, became necessary in order to qualify the
wwider provisions of section 11 of the same Code, which—but for a specific pro-
vision,—might have applied to foreign judgments also.

4a. _ We may now mention a few aspects of section 13. It is well-settled that
when present section 13(c)' speaks of “international law”, and when present section
13(a) speaks of a court of competent jurisdiction, not merely intra-territorial com-
petence, but also the extra-territorial competence’ ~" of the foreign court, is pre-
dicated.
ah
4%. The provision in section 13 of the Code that a foreign judgment is con-
clusive. is of intercst. In Fuller v. Fuller” Brougham L.C. stated—“whatever irre-
gelarities or mistakes might have been committed in the course of the foreign
pe. not amounting to fraud, “the Court of Chancery in England had zo juris-
iction as a court of appeal, to review the decrees of the Court of Chancery in
Jamaica, merely because they had proceeded on ignorance of facts or error of
law.”

These observations show the significance of the word “conclusive”. That
word also indicates that the judgment is unimpeachable,—unless, of course, one
gi.the specified vitiating circumstances exists.

46, In a Madras case,’ Holloway J. and in a Calcutta case,’ Sir Barnes
Peacock CJ. elaborately reviewed the law regarding judgments in divorce cases
and how far they were admissible in evidence. Sir Barnes Peacock C.J. observed:
cesta the effect of a decree in a suit for a divorce a vinculo matrimoni
is to cause the relationship of husband and wife to cease. It is conclusive
‘upon all persons that the parties are no longer husband and wife; but it
is not conclusive or even prima facie evidence against strangers that the
cause for which the decree was pronounced existed. For instance, if a

’Section 11 of the present Code.; section 13 of the Code of 1882.

*Para. 4.4, infra. पर

sSection 13, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘Para. 4.2, supra. हे

55Mohan Lal v. Prem Suck, A. 1. R. 1956 Nagpur 273.

‘8Ahdul Waid v. Vishwanathan, A. 1. R. 1953 Madras 261.

*Fuller v. Pullers (1831) 1 Myl, & K. 297, 39 8. R. 693.

sy¥arkalamma Nagamma v. A. Naremma, (1864-65) 2 M. H.C. R. 276.

*Kanhye Lal v. Redha Churn, (1867) 7 WR, 338, 344; Meng. L. J. Sup. Vol. 662 (P. 83-

Section 13—A
comprehensive
provisian. ड़
Competent Court.
When conclu-
sive.

Effect ‘on - third
parties.


Bar to suit.

Natural justice,

Effect of the
word “except.”

Indian law as to
recognition of
judgments con-
wary to interna-
tional law.

‘Othe!

c ipvisions
छह the .

Report on Recognition of Foreisn Divorces
(Chapter 4.—Indian Law as to ‘Recognition of Foreign Judgments.)

decree between A and B were granted upon the ground of adultery
of B with C, it would be conclusive as to the divorce, but it would not
be even prima facie evidence against C that he was guilty of adultery
with B, unless he were a party to the suit.”

4.7. A foreign judgment, when conclusive under section 13 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, may be pleaded as a defence as a bar to a suit in India,’ pro-
vided it is given on the merits’ as prescribed by section 13.

48, It may be noted that section 13(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
also provides that a foreign judgment is not conclusive when the proceedings in
which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice, In that sec-
tion, the expression “natural justice” refers to the form of procedure, and’ not
to the merits.” Failure 10 appoint a guardian for a minor may render the foreign
judgment unenforceable under this section.'

49. Tt is not very clear what is the effect of a foreign judgment where the
judgment is vitiated by one or more of the factors mentioned in clauses (a) to
(f) of section 13. The judgment is certainly aot conclusive—as section 13 itself
enacts. But does it retail.any relevance at all? This much is clear—that section
13 will not apply where the vitiating circumstances exist, and the judgment would
not be conclusive. But what would be the position regarding relevance where a
vitiating factor exists? It would seem, on principle, that the judgment should
be disregarded totally.

The word “except” in the section is important in this context. As regards
the meaning of the word “unless”,—an analogous’ word—Lord Esher, MR.
pointed out in the Car! XV": |

“When you have the word ‘unless’ in the English language, it carries with

it that, if something happens, then what has been said before will ‘not

apply.”
4.19. A foreign judgment contrary to the principles of international law may
be impeached in India.© This general provision is also recognised by section 13(c)
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

4.11. It may be noted that while section 13 of the Code is relevant for the
purpose of recognition of foreign judgments in general, it does not deal with
enforceability. One has to file a suit.on.a foreign judgment im order to obtain
a decree which can be executed,

The Code of Civil Procedure also.contains certain provisions’ as to the
direct enforcement of certain foreign judgments. But these. provisions are not
material as regards divorces, for the reason that a judgment of divorce, or a
judgment granting legal separation, does not, in general need “enforcement”.

'Chockalingam v. Duraiswami, AULR, 1928 Mad, 327, 336.

Sonta Singh vy. Balla Singh, (1919) Pupj, Record No. 14, page 30.
3Rama Shenoi v. Hailagana, (1918) LL.R. 41 Mad. 205.

‘Govindan Vv. Laxmi Bharathi, ALR. 1964 Ker. 244, 248, para. 22,
3The Carl XV (1892) Probate 324; 68 Law Times Reports 149.
(a) Nallatambi v. Pormuswami, 1.L.R,.2 Mad. 400.

(b) Hinde v. Ponnah, LLR. 4 Mad. 359.

40 Bikrame v. Bir, (1888) P. R. 191,
(d) Christian v. Delanney, (1900) ३ C. W. N. 614.
"Sections 44 and 4A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
{Chepter 4.—indian Law as to Recognition of Foreign Judgmetits.)

4.12, Even a decree which is pronounced in absentem by a foreign court is
valid and executable in the country of the forum by which it was pronounced,
when authorised by special local legislation.’ A decree passed by a foreign court,
to whose jurisdiction a judgment-debtor had not submitted, is an absolute nullity,
only if the local legislature had not comferred ‘jurisdiction on the domestic courts
over the foreigners either generally or under specified circumstances. Section 20(c)
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, confers jurisdiction on a court in India
over foreigners, if the cause of action arises within the jurisdiction of that court.
Hence a cecree passed against a foreigner in such circumstances is not an
absolute nullity? It may be more appropriate to say that the decree in question
is not executable in courts outside this country.

गा. EVIDENCE ACT

#13, . So much as regards the provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure. We
may next refer to section 41 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. which reads—

“AL. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction—A final
judgment, order or decree of 2 competent court, in the exercise of
probate, mafrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which con-
fers upon or takes away from any person any legal character, or
which declares any person to be entitled: to any such character, or
to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified per-
son but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal
character, or the title.of any such person to any such thing, is rele-
vant.

“Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof—

‘that any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when
such judgment, order or decree came into operation;

that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be
entitled, accrued to that person at the time’ when such judgment order
or decree declares it to have accrued to that person;

that any legai character which it takes away from any such person
ceased at the time from which such judgment, order or dectee declared
that it bad ceased or should cease;

and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled
was the property of that person at the time from which such judgment,
order or decree declares that it had been.or should be his property.”

#14, It may be noted that, like section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
section 41 of the Evidence Act also postulates that the court which pronounces
the judgment must be a competent one. Its applicability, therefore, depends on the
determination of the question cf competence of the Court, and, where the court
comcerned is a foreign court, the determination of the question, necessarily takes
to a consideration of the law relating to recognition, because the foreign court
must be competent in the extra-territorial sense also. This has been well esta-
tilibhed by a series of judicial decisions In, other words, the foreign court must
have exercised jurisdiction on the basis of a criterion recognised by Indian law.

मूक Raja v. Hansraj Vathuram, ALR. 1971 S.C. 974, 977,
अब Raja v. Hensraj Vathuram. ALR. 1971 S.C, 974, 977.
"Para. 4.13, supra.
Para, 4.15, infra.

Section 41, Evid-
ence Act.


a

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 4.—Indian Law as to |Recogetition of Foreign Judgments.)

Section = 41—In-_-« 415. A few propositions emerging from judicial decisions on section "वी, Ebb

terpretation of.

Baactments relat-
img to matrimo-
nial jurisdiction,

dence Act, may be set out at this stage for convénience—

(a) It is well settled that, in section 41, the expression “competent court”

ay

means the court of any country, if the court is otherwise competent

to pass such judgment as is referred to in the section.

A number of cases have held’ that judgments of foreign courts’ até
not excluded from the scope of section 41. In a Bombay‘ dase’, this
proposition was accepted as correct by Beaumont C.J. and BJ. Waitia
J., although the particular judgment in issue in that case way held

to be outside section वा.

(b) It is also not disputed that a judgment of a matrimonial court, decree-
ing divorce, is, by virtue of section 41, binding as to the status of the

parties concerned, on the whole world, provided the other coaditidme

mentioned in section 41 are satisfied’.

(0) The judgment is conclusive only regards status but not as

gards the grounds on which it is based‘.

Ie-

(9) If a judgment is regarded as falling within section 41, then, that sec-
tion dispenses with the proof of the legal character conferred or de-

clared by the judgment’.

IV. MATRIMONIAL LEGISLATION

4.16. So far, we have dealt with the general provisions of Indian statute
applicable to foreign judgments. What, then, are the rules of recognition specifi-
cally applicable to judgments of divorce ? We first search for such rules in
the enactments relating to matrimonial causes. In India, matrimonial jurisdic-
tion is exercised by the courts under a number of cnactments, and the cnact-
ent applicable depends, in most cases, on the religion of the parties. The prin-

a

cipal enactments in chronological order, are the following: —

(a) The Converts’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866 (21 of 1866), under
which dissolution of a marriage can be obtained by a convert to
Christianity, if his or her spouse refuses to be converted to that

religion.

(b) The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 (3 of 1936), relating to

divorce among the Parsis.

(०) The Dissolution of ‘Muslim Marriages Act, 1939, which js confined tp

divorce at the instance of the petitioning Muslim wife.on cortain spe-

cified grounds :

Xa) ALR. 1950 Mysore 57, Para. 4.
(b) ALR. 1999°Raj. 149, 152.
(©) ALR. 1959 Mad. 410, 421.

id
भर ;, (1938) 40 Bombay Law Reporter 871, ALR. 1938 Bons.
‘Mesa ४. Mesa, (1938) Goh he Fist

(Beaumont C. J. ja, 3.) approving Chandavarkar J.’a view in
1917) LL.R. 35 Bom. 139.
‘Ma Po Khin v, Ma Shin, (1933) LL.R. 11 Rangoon 19.

{'D. G. Sahasrabudhe v. Kinchand Devchand & Co. LL.R. (1947) Nagpor 85,
‘Vishwanath v. Abdul Walid, ALR. 1963 5. C. 1



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 4.—Indian Law as to \Recogitition of Foreign Judgments.)

(d) The Special Marriage Act, 1954, which, on a proper view, is appli-
cable only to persons marrying under that Act.

(०) The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (39 of 1955), which is applicable to
Hindus:

(f) The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969,

4.17. We need not reproduce here the provisions of these Acts. We shall,
however, briefly discuss the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969, which is of special
interest. The Act makes provisions in respect of marriages of citizens of India
while they are abroad. The term “foreign marriage” is not expressly defined,
‘but section 4 of the Act would imply that term refers to a marriage between
parties, one of whom at least is a citizen of India, by or before a marriage officer
im a foreign country.

By the Act, the Central Government is authorised to appoint any of its
diplomatic or consular officers to be a marriage officer for any foreign country.
According to section 5 notice of intention to marry has to be given to the
marriage officer, and there are certain requirements as to residence before the
marriage can be solemnised.

The Act provides that matzimonial reliefs in respect of foreign marriages
would be governed by the provisions of the special Marriage Act, 1954,—with
certain modifications, not material for our purpose.

The Central Government is also empowered, by section 23, to declare that
marriages soleranised “under the law in force jn any foreign country” shall be
recognised by courts in India as vatid if the Central Government is satisfied that
‘the foreign law contains provisions similar to the Foreign Marriage Act. There
$ no provision as to the recognition of foreign divorde.

दि This Act, in short, while necessarily 0० we ofelttan ith marriages having a
foreign element, does not tell us anything about of foreign divorces.

418, The various enactmenis relating to the marriages of persons belonging 16
various communities are* also silent on the subject of recognition of foreign
divorces as such, and do not contain a direct provision for the recognition of
foreign judgments of divorce or judicial separation’.

. Therefore, it becomes ingcessary to consider the judicial decisions on the
qubject, in order to ascertain the'iegal position.

‘ V. RULES APPLIED BY COURTS

419. Indian case-law on the specific question of recognition of foreign divorces
ig.not so abundant as in England, but a perusal thereof shows that English
eles are generally followed in this field. An examination of the case law indi-
yes that it would be correct to say that, in general, Indian courts will, in
matters pertaining to the field of conflict of laws, follow the view taken by
Baglish courts at common law. It may also be noted that the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Satya v. Teja Singh’, to which we have already referred’, con-
tains an extensive discussion of the English law, besides various other materials.

3WSee para. 4.17, infra.

*Para. 4.16, supra.

"also see Chapters 5-6, infra.

‘Satya v. Teja Singh, ALR. 1975 8, C. 105.
apter 1, supra.

Foreign Marriage
Act, 1969,

Other —arriage
lawa,

English law fol-
lowed.


A case 02 divorce.

Domicile — mace-
tial in other

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapier 4.-—Indian Law as to Recognition of Foreign Fudgmentsy

Most of the judicial decisions give primary importance -to domicile ia
matters of status. .

कथा, In Nourjehin Besum v. Engene Tiscence', a Russian woman, after’ jeaving
ker Russian bussand न Earoze, arived in Inc:a, embraced isiam, and, om the
husband’s refusal tc $1 converted to I:lam, sought, under section 42. of the
Specific RelieZ Act (J of 1877) tthe Act then in force), a declaration from the
High Court to the effect that her marriage had been dissolved in

with her personal law. Ske relied, for this purpose, on a rule of Mohammedan
Law under which a convert 10 Islam is entitled to a dissolution of his ot ber
marriage, if on an offer by him or her, the other spouse refuses to become a
Muslim. The Court held that it had no jurisdiction to declare.a marriage betweep

parties not demiciled in India ta be dissolved, and further characterised the, rule
of Muslim law as being neither the general law of India nor in accardance. with
the rules of private international law. This decision shows? that jurisdiction to
divorce is not, in general, asstaned- by Indian Courts in the absence of domicile,

4.21, Even in proceedings other than for divorce, domicile may be material,

In regard to adoption, ‘Tefetence may be made to the decision~bf fhe
Bembay High Court in Vasant vy. Dauoba', and that of the Privy Coineil-in
Nataraja v. Subbaraya'. Ta both these cases, the judgments of that foreign courts
telating to the declaration that the claimant in. each cas had been validly adop-
ted according to the law faw of domicile of the widow making the adoption. ©

Tn the Privy Council case, it was held that the judgment of the Court at
Pondicherry, recognising the validity of the adoption as having been.duly made
in accordance with the law of donticile of the widow, was “to be weightly ip all
the matters with which a dedlt”.in the suit at Madras, As the appellants. oaey
not parties to the suit at, Pondicherry, 11008 was -no question-of ras fedigata , 19
the circumstances of the case, their Lordships were of the opinion that “the
French judgment 1४६ to bé fegdttied a8 strong and uunebutradicthd inka tn
Apparently, this conclusion was’ reached with ‘refetbnes to-eecdon £4 1
Evidence Act, under which a, “transaction, or instance” by which a right is
exercised or asserted etc. ig relevant.

42%, The question cf domicile is sometimes ‘raided in Yodiain/‘tmpard to करत
state conflict 92 laws also. Thud,'hi"Lachinindraisl ५. Fatta- Bahadur’, the question
arose whether a persco-belangjng to the Oudh Province, who maar we Bod
trom contracting by Seing declared a ‘dicqualilied Br ctor” under 'ब ie i-
sions of the Oudh Land Revenue Act (17 af 1836) ‘could valiiity हारा B :
in the North Western Province, within the jurisdiction of the Allahabad

Court.

. ae हि . ti after: discussing
Applying the principles of private international law and afte a

views of Dicey, Story and other writers, the High Court of Albhabad Beld thar
the incapacity under the lex dosicilif’ extended to contracts éhtered ‘into by ‘the
_ है ही हा Flees

tNoorjehat Begum v. Eugena, Tiscence, LR. (1942) 2 Cal. 185. 7

4As to jerisiiction wader Indian matrimorial legislation ; see chapters 5-6, infra.
'Vensant v. Dattaks, ALR. 1956 Bom, 49. हि

‘Nataraj प्र, Subbaryn, ATR. 1950 PLC. 34. 36 Para, 11 (appeal from AIR 1977 1694.
{Section 13, Evidence Act),

‘Lackminarcin ¥. Fateh Bahadur, 11902) LL.R. 25 All. 195.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divoréés
{Chapter 4.—Indian Law as t0 Recognition of Foreign Judgments.}

person concerned, even though the contract there relating to property outside the
Province of Oudh. Again, in the Bombay case of Shanker Vishnu v. Maneklal
Hfaridas', a debt incurred in Bombay was held aot to be discharged under pro-
ceedings which tock place in accordance with the Central Provinces Debt Con-
ciliation Act, 1933, as the Bombay law was the proper law of the contract, and
hence a discharge was not possible by a method not recognised by the proper law.

To quote the observations of Beaumont, C.J. in Shanker Vishnu's case,
“No doubt, the Provinces of Bombay and the Central Provinces are both parts
of British India, but in my opinion, where the law of one province of British
India is distinct from the law of another province, the two provinces must be
regarded for the purposes of this rule (of proper law) as foreign countries inter se”.

423, There may be, on the other hand, situations where domicile is not material,
Reference may, in this connection, be made to the judgment of Venkatasubba
Rao J. in Ratansi Moraji v. Administrator General of Madras*. A European Jady*
became converted to the Hindu faith, married the petitioner, a Hindu, accord-
ing to Vedic rites, and, when she died, was cremated according to Hindu custom,
She had left an unattested will, and the question arose in the probate proceed-
‘mgs, whether the testatrix was a ‘Hindu’,—in which case alone, the unattested
will would have been valid. (Before 1927, the will of a Hindu executed in a
mofussil place was valid, even if it was unattested). The Court, answering the
question in the affirmative, held that a European who becomes a Hindu, becomes
also subject to the Hindu law, the test in such @ case being not of domicile,
but of religion.

Jn Ratanshaw vy. Bamanji‘, the plaintiff claimed land on the basis of a
Sitt-deed from the second of a Parsi, who had died domiciled in Baroda. The
Ntst marriage of the Parsi was dissolved by ‘fargat’ or ‘mutual release’, in
accordance with a lawful custom prevalent among Parsis domiciled in Baroda.
Such a divorce was not, however, recognised by the personal law of Parsis in
British India. The court held, that for the purposes of succession to land in
India, the validity of the divorce should be tested by Indian law. Off course, this
decision is not directly concerned with the recognition of divorces. Indian law
was applied because the land in issue was situated in India. The principle applied*
was that the “lex loci rei sitai governs exclusively the tenure, title and descent of
immovable property.”

424, The much discussed case of Kamiabai vy. Devaram’ was a Bombay one.
The Bombay Hindu Divorce Act, 1947 (Bombay Act 22 of 1947), allowed divorce
aniong Hindus on certain grounds, but there was no similar Act in the State
of Madhya Pradesh. A husband, resident of Madhya Pradesh, had deserted his
wife, who thereupon settled in Bombay with her father. The wife sued for divorce
under the Bombay Act. It was not applicable to her case, as her husband and
hence she herself was ‘domiciled’ in Madhya Pradesh. We are not concerned
with the knotty problem whether there can be domicile in a State as much. But
thig case shows that the concept of domicile is material.

ihankar Vishnu १. Maneklal Haridas, ALR. 1940 Bom, 362,

"Ratansi Morarji y. Adm. Gen. of Madras, (1938) 55 M. L. J. 478 (Venkatasubba Rao
ante

"For a discussion of the cases, see T. 8. Rama Rao in (1955) € Ind, Year Book of In-
ternational A(fairs, 2.

‘Ratanshaw ¥. Bamanji, ALR, 1938 Bom, 238, 240, 241 (N, J. Wadia 7).

Menton v. Wingston, (1859) 115 8. RB, 1062.

‘Kamlabai v. Devaram, A\.R. 1955 Bom. 300.

4. .हैहर्फ Li (N76

48

Cases where Do-
micile

material

Domicile in one
Stato.


Relevance
Soglish law.

of

Introductory.

Parsi
Act.

Marriage

tainty as to
of section

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 4.—Indian Law as to Recognition of Foreign Judgments. Chapter §.—
Indian Law as to Jurisdiction under enactment other than the Indian Divorce
Act.)

4.25. The above resume of sclected Indian judicial decisions in the field of
divorce and in other fields of family law shows that English rules in these
fields have been generally followed in India, so far as conflict of laws is con-
cerned. It therefore, becomes material to examine the English common law on
the subject, and it is premissible to proceed on the assumption that in general,
though not necessarily in every detail, the English common law would, in the
absence of specific statutory provisions enacted in India on the subject. be fol-
lowed by Indian courts.

CHAPTER 5

INDIAN LAW AS TO JURISDICTION UNDER ENACTMENT OTHER
THAN INDIAN DIVORCE ACT

1. INTRODUCTORY

$1. ६ shall now refer briefly to the provisions as to jurisdiction to dissolve
marriages, as contained in some of the enactments' relating to matrimonial
jurisdiction in India.

वा. PARSI MARRIAGE ACT

5.2, Of these enactments, the Convert’s Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866 is
not of much practical importance. The Indian Divorce Act, 1869, requires fuller

discussion and we shall deal with it Later®.

The Parsi Marriage Act, 1936, which is chronologically the first of the
remaining enactments, provides as follows’ on the question of, jurisdiction of
courts, in section 29—

“29.(1) All suits instituted under this Act shall be brought in the court
within the limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant resides at the
time of the institution of the suit.

(2) When the defendant shall at such time have left India such suit
shall be brought in the Court at the place where the plaintiff and
defendant last resided together.

(3) In any case, whother the defendant resides in the territories to
which the Act extends or not, such suit may be brought in the Court
at the place where the plaintiff and the defendant last resided together,
if such court, after recording its reasons in writing, grants leave so
to do.”

5.3, Section 29 of the Parsi Marriage Act, quoted above', brings in the foreign
element only in sub-sections (2) and (3); and, even in those sub-sections, it is
not clear whether the sub-sections are intended to regulate, as a matter of private
international law, the jurisdicion of Indian courts. In this respect, the provision
in the Special Marriage Act is more specific’.

1See para. 4.10, supra, for a list of the enactments,
2See Chapter 6, infra.

'Section 29, Parsi Marriage Act, 1936

*Para. 5.2, supra.

‘Section 31, Special Marriage Act, see para. 5.4, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 5.—Indian Law as to Jurisdiction under enactment other than the Indian
Divorce Act.)

वा. SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT
$4. Under the Special Marriage Act,'—

“31, (1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be pre-
sented to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdic-
tion the marriage was solemnized or hushand and wife reside or last
resided together.

(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under
sub-section (1), the district court may, by virtue of this sub-section,
entertain a petition by a wife domiciled in the tervitories to which
this Act extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resi-
dent in the said territories and has been ordinarily resident therein
for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation
of the petition and the husband is not resident in the said territories.”

55. It may be noted that the section 31 of the Special Marriage Act, quoted
above, is specific in one respect, inasmuch as sub-section (2) of that section
seems to contemplate a case involving a foreign element. It emphasises the as-
pect not of internal venue, but of jurisdiction with reference to private inter-
national law. This is apparent from the reference to a wife domiciled in the
Jerritories to which the Act extends, and from the requirement that she should
be resident “in the said territories’. These words do not insert any require-
ment that the wife should be resident in the disfricy or local limits of the dis-
trict court, Rather, they focus attention on the territories as @ whole. In this
semac, they seem to contemplate a case having a foreign element.

$6. With reference to this Act, the question of private international law was
considered in Neelakantan’s case’. The question which emerged for determina-
tion, was thus formulated in the judgment—

“Whether an application for divorce by a husband domiciled in India‘
and living within the jurisdiction of the District Judge, Jodhpur, can be
made in the Jodhpur Court under the principles of Private International
Law, although admittedly the marriage between the parties was not solem-
nized within the jurisdiction of the said court, nor did the husband and
wife reside at the time of the marriage or thereafter within the jurisdic-
tion of that court as required by section 31 of the Special Marriage
Act?”

It was held that the Jodhpur Court had jurisdiction, on principles of pri-
yate international law, though section 31 of the Act did not, on the facts, apply.
Zn doing so, the Court pointed cut that the husband was domiciled in India.

Tt is not necessary, for the present purpose, to examine the validity of
the conclusion reached in this case to the effect that a marriage not solemnized
under the Special Marriage Act can be dissolved thereunder. Nor is it necessary
for us to express any view on the observations as to private international Jaw.
We are referring to this case merely to show the emphasis placed in the judg-
ment on the husband’s domicile in the judgment.

Thain dn Speci Manage Ay एफ.» 31, Special Marriage Act, 1954.

Para 5.4, supra,

3Neelakantan v. Neelakantan, AIR. 1959 Raj. 133.
‘Emphasis added.

Special Marriage

Scope of section
ES

Neelakantan’s
case,


Hindu
—Sectio

Act-
12) and.
9.

Case
Hindu
Act.

Provision
uous,

Marriage
Dy 1
Section

law on
Marriage

ambi-

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divoreés

(Chapter 5.—indian Law as to Jurisdiction under enactment other than the Indian
Divorce Act.}

TV. HINDU MARRIAGE ACT

5.7. In the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, there are two provisions which should
be noted’ Section 1(2) of the Act provides as follows :—

“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, and applies also to Hindus domiciled in the territories to
which this Act extends who are outside the said territories”.

Next, we may cefer to the provision relating to jurisdiction in the Hindu
Marriage Act, which reads as follows: —

“19. Every petition under this Act shall be presented to the District
Court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil juris-
diction the marriage was solemnized or the husband and wife reside
or last resided together”.

5.8. Decided cases on section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act illustrate the
application of the section. Thus, it has been pointed ००७ that a plain reading
of section 19 shows that it gives a choice either to the husband or to the wife
to institute proceedings at three places,—namely, where the marriage was solem-
nized, or where the husband and the wife both reside at the time of presentation
of the petition, or where both of them last resided together. Hence, where the
marriage was solemnized at Delhi and the parties last resided for a short period
at Chandigarh, the Court at Chandigarh would have jurisdiction. The phrase
“last resided. together” is not to be interpreted in a pedantic manner, and must
be construed liberally and the Chandigarh Court will have jurisdiction apart
from the Dethi Court. Of course, casual residence would not suffice.

It has also been held’ by the Madras High Court that reading sections
19 and 21 of the Hindu Marriage Act;'l4955, and section 3 and 20 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, together, the Court will be justified in holding that the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure are also applicable to applications
under the Hindu Marriage Act, and the Court within whose jurisdiction the
defendant is residing will, by virtue of section 20 of the Code, have jurisdiction,
where the tests Jaid down in section 19 of the Act are not satisfied on the facts.

59. Section 19 of the Hindu Marriage Act’ does not, however. very clearly
indicate whether it is intended to apply also to cases involving a foreign element.
In other words, it is not beyond doubt whether the section deals with jurisdic-
tion amongst Indian Courts infer se, or whether it is also intended to incor-
porate a rule of conflict of laws in regard to jurisdiction.

‘There is, 10 doubt, the general provision’ as to application of the Act
to Hindus domiciled in India who are outside India—section 1(2). It could
be argued that section 1(2) impliedly brings in the criterion of domicile, in
regard to the exercise of jurisdiction by Indian Courts in general. But the
matter is not entirely beyond doubt. For our present purpose, it is not meces-
sary to express an opinion on the point.

’Section 1(2), and section 19, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,
Sushma v. A. K. Dewan, ALR. 1973 P. & H. 256, 257, Para. 6 (M. R: Sharma,”

J).
IM, Gomarhi v. 5. Natarajan, ALR. 1973 Mad, 247.

‘Section 1(2), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
‘Section 1(2), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
"Para. 5.7, supra.


Report on Recognition of Forelgn Divorces

CHAPTER 6
JURISDICTION UNDER INDIAN DIVORCE ACT, 1869
1. INTRODUCTORY

&L. We shall briefly deal, in this Chapter. with the provisions of the Indian
Divorce Act, 1869, relating to the jurisdiction of courts thereunder in regard to
divorce. The Act applies only to Christians; but the provisions are not con-
fined to marriages solemnized in India, and are wide enough to empower Indian.
Courts to dissolve a marriage solemnized outside India, if certain conditions
exist. है

I. POSITION BEFORE 1926

2. The principal provision of the Act, relating to the conditions to be satis-
fied for the exercise cf jurisdiction, is in section 2. Before the amendment of
the section in 1926, there was no restriction under the Act that the parties should
be domiciled in {British) indiz, in order that the court may grant a divorce.
Residence in British India was enough. After ils amendment, the section does
insert such a requirement, We shall deal with section 2 in detail, ater*

63 Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which is the general
provision as to venue in personai actions, brings in the test of either residence
‘on the एथ of the defendant or the accrual of the cause of action or part of it
within the jucisdiction of the Court, in order to enable the Court to entertain
the suit. However, section 45 of the Indian Divorce Act, which makes the
Code of Civil Procedure applicable, expressly makes it ‘subject to the provi-
sions herein contained’. We need not, therefore, discuss the provisions of the
Code of Civil Procedure as to jurisdiction.

Thus. in determining questions as to the jurisdiction of the Court to ea-
tertain a matrimonial suit, no reference can be made to section 20 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908, even if that section can be construed as dealing with
proceedings having a foreign element. Jurisdiction te entertain a matrimonial
sit between Christians, is to be decided solely by a reference to sections 2 to
4 of the Indian Divorce Act. This position seems to have been accepted for a
Jong time.
6A, Section 2 of the Indian Divorce Act (before its amendment in 1926), so
far as is material, wes in these terms:

“2, Nothing hereinafter contained shall authorise any Court to grant
any relief except in cases where the petitioner professes the Chris-
tian religion, and resides in India at the time of presenting the

PETION ....... ५--+५०*
or to make decree for dissolution of marriage except in the following
Cases?

(a) where the marriage shell have been solemnized in India, or
(0) the adultery complained of shall have eon commitied in India.”
6. Some of the cases on this section decided before 3926 Isid down that

residence was enough under the Act to confer jurisdiction on the court to try
suits for dissolution of marriage”

7566 paras. 6.4 and 6.11, infra.
{(g) Giordano v. Giordano, (1912) LL.B. 40 Cal. 215:
(6) Warwick v. Warwick, 64 P. R. 1900;

a

Introductory.

Section 2, Divorce
Act.

Section 45,
Divorce Act.
Provision in
Indiag, Divorce

Divorce

Act, 1869 before

iment of
1926.

Previous cases,


50

Test of domicile.

Keyes v, Keyes,
and its criticism.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Divorce Act. Chapter 6—Jurisdiction under Indian Divorce Act, 1869.)

6.6. Before the amendment’ of 1926, thus, the view taken by Courts in India
was that they could dissolve the marriage of spouses who were not domiciled
in India. The result was, that the dissolution of a marriage by Indian Courts,
of parties not domiciled in India, was valid so far as Indian statutory frame-’
work was concerned, but it had no effect on the status of the parties in the cowh-
try of their domicile. .

This gave rise to a deplorable state of affairs, and to “scandals” of the
nature mentioned by their Lordships of the Privy Council in the concluding sen-
tence of their judgment in Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier*: “the scandal which
arises when a man and woman are held to be man and wife in one country and
strangers in another .............-.--००-- 7

67, The question of recognising such a divorce, granted in India, arose in
England. Sir Henry Duke, president of the Probate Division, decided in Keyes
v. Keyes that the Courts administering the divorce Jaw in India had no juris-
diction to decree dissolution of a marriage where the parties were not domiciléd
in India. He also decided that the Indian Councils Act, 1861, did not warrant
the making of a law by the Indian Legislature to empower Courts in India to
decree dissolution of the marriage of persons not domiciled within their juris-
diction.

That decision was discussed in several reported cases in India‘. It was
pointed out that it would have been enough for the Court in Keyes v. Keyes to
say that since Le Mesurier’s case" or, at any tate, since Bater v. Bater,’ the
jurisdiction to decree dissolution of marriage depends, according to English Jaw,
upon the domicile of the parties, and that as the domicile of the parties in Keyes
vy. Keyes was English, English Courts would not recognise. as valid in England,
a decree pronounced by a Court in India whose jurisdiction was based on a
principle—that of the residence of the parties at the time—which according to
English law was not accepted as conferring jurisdiction.

In fact, in an early part of the judgment, the President said: “The peti-

tioner has brought this suit to determine the validity at any rete in England, of

the decree made at his instance in India.” It was, therefore, the extra-territoriat
validity of the Indian decree that was primarily in question in the suit, It wts
not necessary to go further to the extent of enquiring whether the power con-
ferred by the Indian Councils Act, 1861, had been exceeded in enacting the
Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

However, the decision in Keyes v. Keyes had the effect of rendering vul-
nerable, in England, the validity of many divorces granted by Indian Courts
between parties who were resident, though not domiciled, in (British) India.
This position was dealt with later by legislation, to which we shall refer in due
course’. That legistation changed the basis of jurisdiction by substituting domi-
cile for residence. As to the past, validating legislation was also enacted’,

1Vide amending Act 25 of 1926.

Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A. C. 517 (P, C.).
"Keyes v. Keyes, (1921) Probate 204.

‘Wilkinson v. Wilkinson, A.LR. 1923 Bom. 321.

SLee v. Lee, ALR, 1924 Lah. $13.

‘Bater v. Bater, (1906) Probate 209.

Para. 6.9, infra.

*Para, 6.12, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 6.— Jurisdiction under indian Divorce Act, 1869.)

68 After the decision in Keyes v. Keyes, -* there were three courses open
to the High Courts in India—

(a) to follow the decision in Keyes v. Keyes that the Indian Legislature
had no power to give the Courts jurisdiction to grant decrees for dis-
solution of marriage to non-domiciled parties ; or

(0) to hold that the Indian Legislature had the power, but had aot exer.
cised it; or

(0) to hold that the Indian Legislainre had the power, and had exercis-
ed it

For some time, uncertainty and confict prevailed as to which of these

courses should be adopted. The positicn was clarified by the Indian Legisla-
ture, by amending section 2 of the Act.

IL POSITION AFTER 1926

69. Section 2 of the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 was amended by Act 25 of
1926 and Act 30 of 1927. ‘The effect of the amending Act of 1926, broadly
stated, has been to limit the power of the Indian Courts, in respect of granting
decrees for dissolution of marriage under the Act, fo persons wito are domiciled
ia India.

610. Now, the jurisdiction of the Yodian Courts (under the Indian Divorce
Act}, in the matter of dissolving marriages, is expressly limited by section 2
to persons domiciled in India at the time of presentation of the petition. There-
fore, if the domicile of the parties is not Indian, there can be no dissolution by
the Courts’ in India.

611. Present section 2 of the Divorce Act reads—

“2. This Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

Nothing hereinafter contained shall authorise any Court to grant any

relief under this Act, except where the petitioner or respondent professes

the Christian religion,

oc to make decrees of dissolution of marriage except where the parties to
the moerriage are domictted in India at the time when the petition is
presented,

छा to make decrees of nullity of marriage except where the marriage has
been solemnised in India, and the petitioner is resident in India at
the time of presenting the petition,

or to grant any relief under this Act, other than a decree of dissolution
of marriage or of nullity of marriage, except where the petitioner
resides in India at the time of presenting the petition.”

Keyes v. Keyes, (1921) Probate 204.

Para. 6.7, supra.

"Para. 6.9, iafra.

‘Para. 6.4, supra.

मंत्री Wilson v, Wilson, ALR, 1931 Lab. 245; (Nullity);

tb) Pyar v. Pyatt, ALR. 1929 Lah. 56501:

te) Hell v. Hail, A.LR. 1933 Sind 70;

(वी. Waller v. Waller, LR, 10 Lah, 64; ALR. 1928 Lab, 557;
(e) Grant v. Grant, A.LR. 1937 Pat. 82.

3

Courses open to
High Courts efter
Keyes v. Keyes,

Amendments of
1926 and 1923,

teat.

Present section 2,


|

U.K, Acts from
$926 to 1947.

[

ile 88 on
of petition.

3

Jurisdiction in
aullity.

English ish Statute of
क्र

Report on Recognition +f. Foreign Divorsas
(Chapter 6—Jurisdiction under Indian Divorce Act, 1869.)

6.12, Certain statutes of the U.K. Parliament relevant to the above discussion
may also be noted. The divorces granted in the past were validated in 1921
by an Act of Parliament.’ Under the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act, 19262 as amended by the Government of India (Adaptation of Acts of Par-
liament) Order, 1937, and the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act,
1940! a High Court in British India, was given jurisdiction to make a decree
for a dissolution of a marriage. and other incidental reliefs in certain cases not
covered by amended section 2 of the Indian Divorce Act of 1869. The law to
be applied by the High Court was the English law.

Section 17 of the Indian Independence Act, 1947,‘ provided that no Court
in the newly created Dominion of India should have jurisdiction under the
Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Acts, 1926 and 1940, in or in relation
to any proceedings for a decree for dissolution of a marriage (except for pend-
ing proceedings, but all Courts in India should have the same jurisdiction undes
the said Acts, as they would have had if the Act had not been passed, subject
to any further amendment of the law, either by an Act of British Parliament
or by India.

The U.K. Statutes are, therefore, of no practical importance now. But
they have been referred to here as illustrating the proposition that in the absence
of special statutory provisions, domicile came to be accepted as the only crite-
rion for exercising jurisdiction under the Indian Divorce Act. 1869

IV. MEANING OF ‘DOMICILE’ UNDER THE DIVORCE ACT

6.13, Thus, domicile is the exclusive head of jurisdiction under the Indian
Divorce Act, 1869 for dissolving a marriage. It has been held* that for the gur-
poses of the Act, the domicile must be decided as on the date of the petition
for dissolution.

6.14. Jurisdiction in regard to nullity is wider under the Act. In the case of
Wilson v. Wilson’, jurisdiction was exercised in regard to a petition for nullity
even though the petitioner was not domiciled in India, because the marriage was
solemnized in India, and the petitioner was resident in India at the time of the
petition. This is permitted by section 2 of the Divorce Act.

On the other hand, it was held in Pyatt y. Pyatt, that after the amend-
ment of 1926, Indian courts had no jurisdiction under the Indian Divorce Act
to dissolve the marriage of persons who are not domiciled in India.

6.15. Certain problems arose in regard to the Act of 1926-the Indian and
Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act—16 & 17 Geo. 5. Ch. 14, for example, the
question which High Courts are competent thereunder arose. But we are not
concerned with those problems.

Act of 1921.

'%ndian & Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926 (16 & 17 Geo. 2 ९, 40).
4ndian & Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction Act, 1926 (3 & 4 Geo. 6 ९, 35).
‘Indian Independence Act, 1947 (10 & 11 Geo. 6 C. 30).

SArtauilah v. Attaullah, ALR. 1953 Cal. 580 (६, है). |

6Wilsen v. Wilson, ALR. 1931 Lah. 245.

'pyatt vw. Pyatt, ALR, 1929 Lah, 565(1).

'Waller v. Waller, ALR. 1928 Lah. 557.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces ig

(Chapter 6.—Jurisdiction under Indian Divorce Act, 1869. Chapter 7—-English
common Law as io Recognition.)

In a Sind case’, the effect of the Indian and Colonial Divorce Jurisdiction
Act of 1926, was nated and it was pointed out that while High Courts estab-
lished by Letters Patent could exercise certain additional jurisdiction there-
uader, other courts’ jurisdiction was based exclusively upon domicile, and it was
expressly held that the fact that the marriage was solemnized in India, or the
adultery was committed in India, was of no consequence.

616. In determining the domicile of the parties in a proceeding for dissolu- Indian law under
tion of marriage, it is the domicile of the husband alone which is to be con- Be aree act nan
sidered. inasmuch as 2 wife takes the domicile of her husband upon her domicile of wife.
marriage.’

616A. If the husband has deserted his wife, the original domicile of the wife Woman's domi-
is not automatically revived, and the domicile acquired by her upon her mar- le.

Tiage does not come to an end. This is well established by a series of decisions’

in India.

6.17. We have referred to the U.K. Acts supplementing the Divorce Act.‘ The Act of 1948.
only other statutory exception to the requirement of Indian domicile by a party
seeking a decree for divorce from an Indian Court under the Divorce Act is pro-
vided in the Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages) Act®, which bas been adopted
on the lines of the similar English Act of 1944, The Act enables a wife married
to a person domiciled outside India, to have the marriage dissolved or annulled
on the grounds mentioned in the Indian Divorce Act’, provided (a) the marriage
was solemnised during the war period (Second World War), (b) the wife was
immediately before the marriage domiciled in India, and (c) the parties have
not, since the solemmisation of the marriage, resided together in the country of
the husband’s domicile. In addition, the parties must be Christians.

Tf these conditions (and certain other minor requirements not material
for our purpose) are satisfied, the High Court shall have jurisdiction in, and in
relation to, proceeding for nullity or divorce, ‘as if both parties were at all ma-
terial times’ domiciled in India. The proceedings will be governed by the Indian
Divorce Act. The Act also provides that the validity of any decree or order
made in the U.K. under the U.K. Act of 1944—which is the corresponding U.K.
Act—shall, by virtue of this Act, be recognised in all courts in India.

CHAPTER 7
ENGLISH COMMON LAW AS TO RECOGNITION

71, The subject matter of this Chapter is the English common law on the Scope of =the
subject of recognition of foreign divorces and decrees of judicial separation. pier.
We have already indicated its relevance to the present discussion.”

fall ९. Hall, A.LR. 1933 Sind 72, 73.

®Ataullah v. Attaullah, ALR. 1953 Cal. 530, 534, 535.

(a) Prem Pratap v. Jagat Poleg, A.LR. 1944 All, 97, 100;

(9) Rooke v, Rooke, A.LR. 1934 Bom. 230;

(९ Linton v. Guderian, A.1.R. 1929 Cal. 599, 601;

(0) Sumathi Ammal v. 0. Pant, AIR. 1936 Mad. 324, para. 9-10 (Mocket, J. in order
of reference);

(e) Neelakantan v. Neelakantan, AJR. 1959 Raj. 133, 134.

‘Para. 6.12, supra.

‘The Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages Act, 1948) (40 of 1948).

The Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

*Chapter 6, supra.


Chronological
developments—
Domicile.

Lolley’s case and
subsequent = deci-
sions upto Shaw
y. Gould.

Niboyet v. Nibo-~
yet (test of actual
Tesidence).

Le Mesurier v.
Le Mesurier.

Factors not affect:
ing validity of
decree.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 7.—English common Law as to Recognition.)

7.2, It would be convenient to deal with the subject chronologically, and to
discuss the various developments in order of time.

The orthodox doctrine of English common law was that, in general, @
foreign court is competent to grant divorce only if the parties are domiciled
within its jurisdiction at the commencement of the proceedings of divorce. Such
a divorce, but no other, would be recognised by English courts. The “domi-
cile”, for this purpose, is taken in the English sense. Mere temporary residence

does not fall within the purview of “domicile”.

7.3. This position, however, did not come to be established without consider-
able fluctuation in opinion. In R. v. Lolley’, the opinion had been expressed
that as to the dissolubility of marriage, regard was to be had to the lex loci
contractus, and the “English marriage” could be dissolved only in England.
This approach was, however, refuted by Lord Westbury in Shaw v. Gould’.

7.4, The majority decision of the Court of Appeal in Niboyet v. Niboyet* had
laid down the principle of actual residence for the exercise of English domestic
jurisdiction ; but this decision retained only a temporary sway. The majority
in that case would seem to emphasise the fact that the spouses actuaily resided
in England, and were not merely present there casually or as travellers. On this
basis, the English courts were (according to the majority view) competent to
dissolve their marriage even though the parties were not actually domiciled in
England. Of course, the issue in Niboyet was not one of recognition of a foreign
judgment, but of the jurisdiction of English courts. However, its indirect im-
pact on recognition could have been tremendous, if it had held its sway.

7.5. But Nibovet® did not retain its sway for long, and in Le Mesurier v. Le
Mesurier’, domicile was regarded as the only test for the exercise of jurisdic-
tion. It was not a case relating to the jurisdiction of English courts, but had an
indirect impact thereon. Since it was decision of the Privy Council, it did not
formally overrule the decision in Niboyet v. Niboyet; but the rule laid down
was unquestionably regarded as a rule valid for the exercise of jurisdiction 29

English Courts also.

Thus, in Indyka’s case’, Lord Wilberforce observed—‘Le Mesurier was
nol a case concerned with recognition at all, but it would not be right merely
to dispose of what was then said as obiter dicta. For, not only have later cases
on recognition made it a ground of theie decision, but also the reasoning itself
rests on the hypothesis that a common legal structure can be found to contain
both the domestic jurisdiction of English courts and recognition by them of
foreign decrees.”

74. After the decision in Le Mesurier’, then, the principal criterion for recog:
nition of a foreign divorce was that of domicile. If the foreign court has com-
petence on the basis of the test of domicile, the decree passed by that court is

unaffected—

IShaw v. Gould, (1865) L, R. 3 H. L. 55.

4K. ४. Lolicy, (1812) Russ & Ry. 237.

5Shaw ए. Gould, (1868) Law Reports 3 House of Lords 55,
+*Niboyel v. Niboyet, (1892) 4 P. 0. 1.

8Niboyet v. Niboyet, Para. 7.4, supra.

‘fe Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A. C. 517 (P. [enh
JIndyka v. Indyka, (1967) 2 All E. R. 689, 720.

‘Para. 7.4 and 7.5, supra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 7.—English Common Law as to Recognition.)

() by the domicile or nationality of the parties at the time of the
marriage’;
(ii) by the Jaw of the place where the marriage was celebrated; or

ii) by the fact that the act constituting the ground of divorce was com-
mitted outside the jurisdiction of that court.

With reference to proposition (i) above, it may be stated that in Harvey
vy. Farnie*, for example, the English court recognised the decision of a compe-
tent foreign tribunal which dissolved the marriage of a couple domiciled within
its jurisdiction at the time of institution of the proceedings. The Court ignored
the point that the woman was domiciled in England at the time of the marriage.

77. The test of domicile was claborated and subjected to certain refinements
in course of time. One refinement may be noted in this connection. If the
husband is domiciled in State X, and obtains 2 divorce in the courts of State
Y. English courts will recognise’ the validity of this decree, if it would be recog-
nised by the courts of X.

Secondly, it was held‘ that it is irrelevant for this test whether the parti-
cular ground upon which the divorce is granted, by the forcign court would or
would not be recognised by English municipal law.

1६ was also laid down that the decree will be recognised by the English
court if the foreign court of competent jurisdiction applies local or any other
law to grant the decree, even though that law differs from English law as to the
ground of divorce. This rule is, however, subject to the doctrine of public
policy.

78. Judicial decisions also made it clear’, in 1958, that recognition would
be granted where facts existed which would have given English Courts jurisdic-
tion, even though the foreign court had assumed jurisdiction and granted a
decree on a ground not recognised in English Courts as a ground for divorce.
Thus, when applying this rule, the English Court is not concemed with the
ground on which the foreign decree was granted, but with the facts in the con-
text whereof it was granted.

The law in England on this subject is now to be found in statute‘, which
we shall discuss later.

79. The result of these judicial decisions was that domicile of both parties
was the principal test for the--{a) exercise of jurisdiction in divorce—by domes-
tic English courts, and (b) recognition of a divorce,—granted by foreign courts.

To the general rule of domicile, additions were made in course of time.
The first such addition’ took place in 1953, when the principle was laid down
that if a wife obtains a divorce in a foreign country where she is not domiciled,
and the facts are such that the English courts would excrcise jurisdiction to

3$ee Harvey v. Farnie, (1882) 8 App. Can. 43.
Harvey v. Earnie, (1882) 8 App. Cas. 43.

sAsmitage ¥. A. G., (1906) Probate 135, approved by Lord Reid, Lord Pearce and Lord
i 6 १2008 v. Indyka, (1967) 2 AILE. R. 689 (1969) 1 Al C. 33 GL 1.)

‘4Bater v. Bater, (1906) Probate 209.

5Rebinson Thod vy. Robinson Thod, (1958) Probate 1.
English Act of 197.

‘Travers v. Holley, (1953) Probate 246.

Decree
able by
domicile.

Ground
diction
terial.

Result

recognis-
court of

of juris-
immate-

suromary.


Real and  subs-
tantial connection.

Grounds of 18-
cognition summed
up according to

४) at com-
won law.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

. (Chapter 7.—Engiish Common Law as to Recognition.)

entertain her petition for divorce (on the ground on which the foreign court exer-
cised jurisdiction), then the divorce could be recognised in England. This rule
owes its origin to the fact that in certain circumstances, an English court could
itself exercise jurisdiction to hear the petition of a wife for divorce by virtue
of a specific statutory provision even though the parties were not domiciled in

England.

The Court of Appeal made another break into traditional principles, in
the case of Travers vy. Holley’. The question in that case was whether the
English court could recognise as valid, a decree of divorce granted by the Sup-
reme Court of New South Wales under legislation analogous to section 18 of
the English Matrimonial Causes Act, 1950 (jurisdiction to grant divorce to the
wife im certain cases). The Court of Appeal allowed recognition of a foreign
decree based on a residential jurisdiction common to the English and the foreign
law. “On principle it seems to me plain”, said Somervell L.J., “that our courts
in this matter should recognise a jurisdiction which they themselves claim,”
Hodson L.J. added: “The principle laid down and followed since the Le Afe-
surier case must be interpreted in the light of the legislation which has extend-
ed the power of the courts of this country in the case of persons not domiciled
here.”

7.10. In 1969, the House of Lords, in the case of Indyka®, added a further
ground, whereunder recognition is afforded to any foreign decree of divofce
“wherever a real and substantial connection is shown between the petitioner
and the country or territory which granted the decree.” 08 course, the facts of
the case were rather complicated and, moreover, since several judgments were
given by the various law lords, it has not been found easy to make any definite
statement as 10 the proposition laid down by the House.’ But, in general, the
above is believed to be a fairly accurate statement of the gist of the decision,
so far as is relevant to the question of recognition.

7.11. On the basis of what we have stated above, the rules of English common
law on the subject of recoggition of a foreign decree of divorce or legal sepa-
tation (apart from statute) could be summed up, by stating that such recogni-
tion would be granted by an English Court if—

(a) the parties were domiciled in the foreign country concerned‘; or

(b) the decree is obtained by the wife, and the facts are such that the
English Court would have jurisdiction’ to grant divorce +

(c) the decree is such that though not granted by a court of domicile,
it would be recognised by a court of domicile*: or

(d) a real and substantial connection is shown between the petitioner and
the country which granted the decree’.

1Travers v. Holley, Probate 246, 251, 257.
2indyka ४, Indyka, (1969) A. C. 33 (HL. 1...

®As to nullity, see Law v. Gustin, (1976) 1 AE. R. 113.
‘Paragraph 7.2, supra,

‘Paragraph 7.3, supra.

‘Paragraph 7.6, supra.

"Paragraph 7.10, supra.


Report on Recognition of Forelen Divorcés

(Chapter 7.—English Common Law as to Recognition. Chapter 8.—Extra-
Judicial Divorce.)

As to the last mentioned ground, however, it should be repeated that
this ground, based on the case in the House of Lords in Indyka v, Indyka', is
only 8 statement of the law as probably was laid down, and not as a very defi-
aiite statement. In any case, the law on the subject is now to be found in the
recent Act of 1971, which contains a statutory’ provision which, in effect, bars
the extension of the grounds of recognition.

7412. So much as regards the grounds on which recognition would be granted.
at common law. Ii is an over-riding requirement of recognising any foreign
decree that it was not obtained fraudulently’, or in circumstances which, accord.
ing to fundamental principles of the English law. amounted to a denial of na-
tural justice, or (according to one view) even substantial justice.

713. This brief discussion of the English law does not have mere academic
interest, because, as we have already stated‘, in the absence of specific statutory
provisions to the contrary, in general, English rules as to the conflict of law, that
is, the rules existing on the subject in the common law, as unmodified by statute,
would be of assistance.

‘CHAPTER 8
Extra-Judicial Divorces
I. INTRODUCTORY

81. In discussing the English law of recognition, we have so far confined
ourselves to the recognition or nonrecognition of foreign judicial divorces,—i.e.,
the competence of a foreign court to grant a divorce or judicial separation. We
have not touched the more difficult question of recognition of foreign exera-judicial
methods of divorce granted under the personal religious law of the parties. We
shall now deal with it.

82 = By “extra-judicial” divorces we mean divorces where there is no decree
of the court.

The varieties of extra-judicial divorces are numerous’. There may be some
unilateral act—as, for example, the unilateral act of the husband, known as
‘talaq’ in Muslim law or the consensual act ‘Chett’ of Jewish law’—or there
sould be some other form.’

Sometimes, there may be a minor judicial formality also. At the trial in
im Russ y. Russ’, for example, evidence as to Egyptian law was given by Dr.
Jamal Nasir, an advocate in Mohammedan taw who had practised in Moham-
medan courts in Egypt. The effect of his evidence was conveniently summarised
by the judge in the course of his judgment, as follows: —

lindyka ९, tndyka, pata. 7.10, supra.
‘Chapter 8, infra.

SMiddleton र. Middleton, (1967) Probate 62.

‘Chapter 4, supra.

"See para. 8.3 and 8.4, supra.

Para. 8.6, infra.

Para. 8.5, infra.

See Para. 8.4, infra (enumeration of various forms).

*Russ v. Russ (1962) 1 All B. R. 649, 651, quoted by the Court of Appeal also in (1964)

Probate 315.

Restrictions on
recognition.

Indian law.

Recognition of
extta-judicial

foreign

divorces.

Scope and varie
ties,


Report on Recognition of Foréign Divorced
(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorces.)

“(a) Egyptian law recognises and gives effect to Mohammedan religious
law as the personal law of a Mohammedan domiciled in Egypt.

(b) Under Mohammedan law a man may have four wives, in other words,
marriage is potentially polygamous.

(०) Under Mohammedan law a man may divorce his wife irrevocably
by pronouncing “Talak’ three times in the presence of witnesses. No
judicial proceeding or investigation is required before a man exer-
cised this right. The divorce is constituted by the unilateral declara-
tion of the busband in the presence of at least two witnesses. The
wife need not be present, nor be given notice of the intention to
divorce.

(9) Egyptian law recognises, and gives effect to, a Talak divorce pro-
nounced by a Mchammedan domiciled in Egypt. The marriage is
recognised by Egyptian law as dissolved with effect from the date
of the declaration; and this is so wherever the marriage was
solemnised. It gives effect to the dissolution in a number of ways;
for instance, Talak may be and almost always is pronounced before
an authorised officer of the Egyptian court concerned with questions
of personal status, whose duty it is to record the divorce in the
records of the court. The record then constitutes, as Dr. Nasir was
at pains to point out, the solemn recognition by the courts of Egypt
of the fact of divorce. And the parties to the dissolved marriage may
have recourse to the appropriate Egyptian court in matters of the
maintenance and support of the divorced wife.”

I. CLASSES OF EXTRA-JUDICIAL DIVORCES

83. Extra-judicial divorces could be broadly classified into those dependent
entirely on the parties’ volition and those requiring the approval of some autho-
rity, The authority, again, may be administrative, religious, quasijudicial or
judicial. Often, the administrative or other authority does not make an indepen-
dent inquiry, but merely sets its imprimatur, by way of record, upon the forma-
lities undergone by the parties. Again, reverting to the first class of extra-
judicial divorces—i.c., divorces purely by action of the partics, the divorce may
be effected by act of one party, or it may require the concurrence of both.
To some extent, this endless yariety and numerous classes of extra-judicial
divorces have contributed to the obscurity of the position regarding their recog-
nition that prevails in England’.

84. Writing in 1952, Graveson* classified extra judicial divorces as—-
@~ unilateral;
{ii} consensual;

Gii) pronounced by some non-judic’

jal authority of tHe State, whether
legislative or executive; or :

(iv) religious.

iGee para, 6.8, et seq., infra. ;
’Graveson, “Recognition of Foreign Divoree Decrees” (1952) 37 Grotius Society Tran-
sactions 149, 160.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 8.—E.xtra-Judicial Divorces.)

But he added that of these, the fourth case—religious divorces—would
seem to fall either into the category of unilateral divorces, in which some
religious official takes a minor part; or into the broad class of judicial divorces,
as in the Rabbinical law.

For our purposes, it is sufficient to bear in mind that divorces entirely
dependent on the act of parties present greater problems than divorces re-
quiring some kind of formal ‘proceeding’. This will be evident from the dis-
cussion of the words “judicial proceeding” in the later paragraph of this
Chapter’.

8.5. A few examples of extra-judicial divorces may now be referred to. A
Jewish divorce is effected by the husband delivering a Ghat (bill of divorcement),
1.6., a written document, to his wife. The consent of the wife is essential to the
divorce. The ceremony takes place before “‘a Rabbi and two witnesses”. The
divorce. however, takes effect by the act of the husband; the requirement of
the rabbi and witnesses is more to authenticate the delivery and to ensure that
moral grounds exist for the divorce and that the parties both consent and
understand the nature of the act.’”

3.6. A Muslim divorce in the Talak form is traditionally effected by the
husband pronouncing three time the word “Talak” (1 divorce you). The wife
need not be present, and she need act be given prior notice of the intention
to divorce her.

According to ancient Islamic law, these procedures can be undergone
without any reference to any court or other authority. In modern times, how-
ever, the civil authorities in many Muslim countries do require further forma-
lities which make the act of divorce more public, or (as in Pakistan and Egypt)
give greater protection to the wife’, .

वा, ENGLISH LAW BEFORE 1971

8.7. As to extra-judicial divorces, the English rules of recognition before 1971
developed mainly in relation to polygamous marriages and underwent many
changes. Initially, there was reluctance to recognise them, but later, there was
greater readiness to do so.

The leading English case on extra-judicial divorces is Har shefi—to
which we refer here because the rule laid down therein was valid at least when
the Act of 1971 was passed. In that case, a domiciled English woman married

a domiciled Israeli in Israel. For a time they lived together in England, though
at all material times the husband retained his domicile in Israel. The husband

delivered to the wife in England a Jewish “bill of divorcement”, purporting to
dissolve the marriage, and returned to Israel. The wife remained in England.
She sought a declaration in the English courts that her marriage had been

Ya) Sasson ४, Sasson, (1924) A, C, 1007 (8, C).

(०) Priger v. Priger, (1925) 42 T. L. 12, 281.

(©) Spivack v. Spivack, (1930) 46 T. L, R. 243,

*para. 8,13 et seq., infra.

3Sce 37 Modern Law Review at page 611.

‘See 37 Modern Law Review at page 612.

(a) Har Shafi पे. Har Shaft No. 1 (1953) 1 All E. R. 983. For comments, see (1953)
30 8. ¥. BI. L. pages 524-527.

(०) Har Shafi No. 2 (1953) 2 AILE, R. 373.

Extra-judicial
divorces,


Judicial law.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorces.)

validly dissolved and no longer subsisted, or, alternatively, that she was nd
Jonger married to the respondent.

Tt was argued on behalf of the wife that, following the divorce, the wife
had resumed her English domicile of origin and that was sufficient to give the
court jurisdiction to declare her status. Denning L.J. said: “Now that involves
a nice question, whether she has resumed her English domicile, and that
depends on whether the divorce was valid or not. If the divorce was valid, she
was free to resume her English domicile and she bas in fact resumed it; but
if the divorce was invalid, she is still married to her husband and she retains
his domicile. So the jurisdiction of the court depends on the validity of the
divorce; and that depends in turn on the law of Israel. I do not think that we
should send the wife to Israel to determine that question. The English courts
can hear evidence of Israel law and can decide whether the divorce was valid
by that law or not. If it was valid by that Jaw, then the English courts have
jurisdiction to declare it to be so.”

The divorce was ultimately recognised, because it was valid by rhe law of
domicile,

88. Thus, in Har Shafei v. Har Shafei', where the question of recognition
arose in relation to a Jewish divorce by delivery of a bill of divorcement, it
was implicit in the decision of the court of appeal that the question depended,
not on the existence of any decree, but on whether such a divorce would be
recognised by the court of the domicile, viz., the Republic of Isracl. In Sasson
vy. Sasson, 1-1 the decision of the Privy Council was founded on the fact of recog-
nition by the court of domicile of the validity of a similar Jewish divorce.
Armistage v. A. G.,) shows that a divorce will be recognised, notwithstanding that
there is no decree of the court of the domicile, provided it is proved that it
would be recognised by the court of the domicile.

In Ratanachai vy. Ratanachai’, recognition was accorded to divorces valid
by the Jaw of the domicile, even though not pronounced by any court.

89 The view that English law will not recognise a foreign divorce unless
“decreed by a court of law” or “involving some judicial process” has not, thus,
found fayour.« The Court of Appeal in Russ (ors, Geffers) y. Russ’ did, how-
ever, expressly rely on the fact that the forcign divorce involved some judicial
process as a feature distinguishing it from the Hammersmith Marriage Case’.

In the case of Lee v. Law’ an agreement of divorce entered into by a
husband and wife in Hongkong, which had been unaccompanied by any judicial
act, was held to have validly dissolved the marriage between them. In this case,
the husband and wife were born in Hongkong, and lived there during their

childhood.

Har Shafei (1953) 1 All ER 783.
2.2 Sasson १, Sasson, (1924) A, 0. 1007.

Urmitage १. A. G. (1906) Probate 135. हु है
'Ratanchai, y, Ratanchai, (June 3, 1960, “The Times”, June 4, 1960, cited in Russ vy.

Russ. (1964) Probate 315.
हु ‘Kennedy in (1957) 35 Can. Bar R. 642, 645; Cowen (1952) 68 L. Q, R. 88, 92.

5Russ v. Russ. (1964) Probate 315.

SHammersmith Marriage case, (1917). ;
"Lee v, Lau, (1964) 2 All E. R. 248; Comment by Webb in (1965) 28 Modem Law Rev.

109.



Report om Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorce,)

In Manning v. Manning’ a Norwegian divorce was recognised by the
English court. It bad been granted not by a court of law, but by an adminis-
trative authority,—the County Governor of Beggen

10. On the basis of the above case law, the position before 1971 can be
summed up as follows:

{a) If, by the law of domicile, the married status has been extinguished,
parties.

(8) If, by the law of domicile, the married status as been extinguished.
that fact should be recognised in England’.

The question thus turned solely on the domicile of the parties at
the time of the dissolution.

G) If the parties were, at that date, domiciled in England, the
divorce had no effect on their marriage, according to English
law’, ¢ पु

Ui) But. if, at that date, the parties were domiciled abroad in a
country, the law of which recognised that the parties (or one of
them) had a power effectively to put an end to the marriage
without the need for recourse to the courts, then the exercise of
such a power validly dissolved the marriage in English law‘.

(c} For this purpose, it is not relevant for the court to ask either where
the mariage was celebrated, or even where the dissolution was effect-
ed. Consequently, the English courts have recognised a talaq divorce
even though the marriage had been celebrated in England in accord-
ance with the requirements of English law and the non-judicial pro-
cedure had taken place in England’

IV. ACT OF 1971

8.11. We may now discuss the position under the English Act of 1971—the
Recognition of Foreign Divorces and Separations Act, 1971 regarding extra-
judicial proceedings. In the Act’ of 1971, under section 2, divorce by “judicial
or other proceedings” is recognised, subject to the other conditions laid down
in the Act. It is not, however, clear if these words cover “Talaq”. If these words
cover ‘talaq’ then, as is often pointed out, the only protection of the wife is
that she must be given notice of the proceedings’ and recognition may be
withheld if the proceedings are mainfestly contrary to public policy*.

8.12. But is should be pointed out that “public policy” has rarely been invoked
in this area of the law. So, one has to face the ‘question whether “proceedings”
in this Act includes a ‘talaq’. This is not an easy question to answer.

‘Manning V. Manning, (1958) 1 All 8. R. 291, Comment by Unger in (1958) 21 Modern
Law Review 415.

See, for example, Qureshi v. Qureshi, (1972) 1 All ६. R. 325,

Prager, v. Preger, (1926) 42 T. L. R. 281, 283.

‘Har Shafei v. Har Shafei (No. 2) (1953) Probate 220, 224.

Qureshi v. Qureshi, (1971) 1 ALE. R. 325.

"Section 2, Act of 1971.

Section 2, Act of 1971.

‘Section 8/2) (0), Act of 1971.

* ६.5 LDEND)I75

Position sui
up.

6t

mined

Position —_regard~

ing extra:
divorces
Act of (971,

icial

under


42

Expression
“Judicial or other
proceedings”.

Position under
Act of 1971.

Act of 1973 in
relation to English
divorces,

Literature.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorce.)

8.13. The Act of 1971, section 8, sub-section (2)(0), applies its provisions to
divorce which has been obtained by means of “judicial or other proceedings”,
in any country outside the British Isles, if they are “effective under the law of
that country’. The question whether “proceedings” inclules extra iudiciad
divorces was inconclusively discussed in the House of Lords’= in the debates on
the Bill.

In the case of Randwan’, decided after the Act of 1971, it was assumed,
but not decided, that section 2 of the Act? of 197] was applicable to an extra-
judicial divorce, it being “other proceedings” within the meaning of section 2.

8.14. In view of the ambiguity of the words “other proceedings” in the English
Act‘ of 1971—an ambiguity which is found’, also in the relevant paragraph of
the Hague Convention’-’ it appears that it is possible to take the view that
extra-judicial divorces—{i) are not governed by the Act of 1971, and (ii) are
governed by the Common law.

&.15. Tt cannot be said that the problem is new. It may be noted that the
Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce’ had recommended the recognition
of a foreign divorce “obtained by judicial process or otherwise” which has been *
granted in accordance with the law of the country in which one spouse was,
or both spouses were, domiciled at the time of the proceedings.

‘V. 1973 ACT

8.16. At this stage, we may also state that the position as regards extra-judicial
divorces pronounced by a party or by a non-judicial authority in the United
Kingdom has now been changed by section 16(1) of the Domicile and Matrimonial
Proceedings Act, 1973, which provides that “No proceeding in the United King-
dom, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man shall be regarded as validly dissoly-
ing a marriage unless instituted in the courts of law of one of these count-ies”.
However, under section 16(3), this provision does not affect the validity o” any
divorce obtained before 1974 which would be recognised as valid under *the
previous recognition rules, i.e., under the common law rules” Thus, section 16
appears to deny recognition to any extra-judicial divorce obtained in England
after 1973, and reverses the decision in a case like Qureshi vy. Qureshi”

But ambiguity survives as to overseas divorces, obtained extra judicially.

8.164. In a recent issue of the Law Quarterly Review", the question of extra-
judicial divorces has been considered, and the earlier article on the subject has
been referred to. The discussion shows that the position is not certain.

'Ror House of Lords Debates, see Vol, 315, Volume 483 to 497, Vol. 316, Col. 1043
to 1051, and Vol, 322, Col. 851 and 854.

‘aFor Debates in the House of Commons, see para. 8:18 infra.
*Randwan v. Randwan, (1972) 3 W, L. R. 735, 739,

'Para. 8.4, supra.

‘Para. 5.5, supra.

SSee, further, para. 8:19 et. seq., infra.

‘Article 1 of the Hague Convention.

‘Para. 8.17, infra.

*Royal Commission Report, Omd. 9678 (1956), draft s. 8.
Section 16, The Domicile etc. Act, 1973.

“Qurashi v. Qureshi (1971) 3 AIL E. R. 315.

NJafrev, “Recognition of Extra Judicial Divorces” (Note); (1975 July) 91 Law Quarterly
Review 320.

*North, “Recognition of Extra-Judicial Divorces”, (1975) 91 Law Quarterly Review 36, -


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 8.—Extra-fudicial Divorce.)
शा, UNCERTAINTY UNDER 1971 ACT

8.17. Thus, the position regarding overseas extra-judicial divorces is uncertain,
so far as their recognition in England is concerned.

Article 1 of the Hague Convention refers to the recognition of divorces
and jegal separations “which follow judicial or other proceedings, officially re-
cognised in the State where the divorce was obtained.” The use of the phrase
“other proceedings” appears in the first original draft convention, and it is stated
in the commentary thereon that’

“the term proceedings shows that only those forms of the severing of
qnarital bonds fall within the Convention, where it is an official authority,
independent of the parties, that has acted. The officers, e.g. of a notary
public, who would act at the request of the husband only and would
merely take official notice of the repudiation of the wife, would be re-
moved from the Convention.”*

However, a number of States were uneasy as to the scope of the require-
ment of “proceedings”, and specially whether that requirement would permit
recognition of Jewish and Muslim divorces’. The United Kingdom prcposed
an amendment to clarify the situation so that the Convention would apply
“whatever be the forms or methods of divorce which the State provides or per-

mits.”*

The United Kingdom amendment was, however, rejected although doubt
was expressed as to whether some forms of divorce, for example, ‘talak’ divorce
would fall within the original draft.

8.18, During the debates on the Recognition of Divorces aod Legal Separations
Bill, 1971, implementing the Hague Convention, concern was expressed in the
House of Commons, both in Committee’ and on the Report stage’, over the
meaning of the words “other proceedings” in section 2 of the Act of 1971.
Amendments were’ introduced to make more specific provisions for talak and
other informal divorces, The main cause for concern was whether the use of
“proceedings” in other sections of the Act" did not pre-suppose:

“Some sort of quasi-judicial nature and involve some kind of decision
by some person or tribunal in regard to contending parties, or parties
that may be able to contend, rather than simply the pronouncement of
a divorce by one party to the marriage.”

1gome of the material as to Article 1 of the Convention is taken from P. M. North,
“Extra-jdicial divorces” (1975) January, 91 L. Q. 1९. 36, 48 to 50.

°Ppoceedings of Ith Session, Hague Conference 1970 at page 19, and see at page 58,

®Proceedings of 11th Session, Hague Conference (1970), at pages 76, 81, 83.

‘Proceedings of 11th Session, Hague Conference (1970), at page 94,

5Standing Committee B, June 22, 1971, Cols. 310.

पृ, 0. Debates, Vol. 821, Cols. 165-171 (120 July, 1974).

iE, G. Mr. Silkin, “act or proceeding”.

®Sections 3, 4, 5, 8.

‘Standing Committee B. 1076 22, 1971, Col, 4.

63

Debates in Hague
Conference.

Debates in House
of Commons,


“Singke act ण
event” whether
sovered, by “other
proceedings”.

Report o# Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorce.)

4.19. A further problem that was discussed during the debates on the Bill,
was whether “other proceedings” was an apt phrase to cover a divorce by a
Single act or event, as in some cases of talak, rather than the more usual case
of ६ sequence of event!, However, these objections were mot accepted by the
then Solicitcr-General’ who pointed out that the Act is not intended to afford
tecognition to all informal divorces, but only to those which have the nature
or quality of an official act’.

Mr. Silkio* proposed the insertion of words to make it read “judicial or
other act or proceedings.” But the Solicitor-General said’, “I suggest that the
inclusion of the words ‘or other proceedings’ at least makes it plain, first of all,
that the other proceedings need not themselves be judicial, as I think the hon.
and leamed Gentleman accepts.

“It follows that the other proceedings can include administrative pro-
ceedings, including possible registration in a Government office or divorce by
legislation. It can also inctude proceedings which dc not imyolve the interven-
tion of an official; a formal series of steps following a strict legal pattern such
as those taken in a talak divorce, where the official plays no part and where
no official step is necessary to register them.’*

“The hon. and learned gentleman's point is so far so good, but “pro-
ceedings” implies a sequence of measures, a degree of formality and bureau-
cracy and judiciality which could result in excluding from the Bill some singlt
ac( taken by the parties resulting in divorce by the country in which that aet
is being taken. The difficulty is that if one takes a single step like that, an act
as opposed to proceedings’, or even a proceeding—which was one of the alter-
natives I thought of at one time—one.might arrive at a proceeding so informal
as to make it difficult to bring it within the frame-work of this kind of recogni-
tion. हे

The Bill, and any Bill of this kind, must depend on the possibility of
identifying a particular moment of time jurisdicticnally at which the act or pro-
ceeding can be identified between the act and the jurisdiction under whose law
the matter would be valid.”

8.20, Intervening at this stage, Mr. Silkin said :

“Would the informality matter so long as the country concerned accept-
ed the validity of the divorce or legal separation resulting from it? Is
not thal the key to the intent of the Convention 2”

To this. the Solicitor-General replied—

“I hesitate to go back to analysing the intent of the Convention, but
in terms of finding the key to what is workable and acceptable in this
country the point must be that if we are providing for 2 quick, auto-

1H. C. Debates, Vol. 821. Cols. 167-168 (12th July, 1974).

%Sir Geofrey Howe.

7H. C, Debates, Vol. 821, Cols. 169-170 (12th July, 1974).

‘Mr, Silkin K. C. now Attomey General.

*H, C. Debates, Vol. 821, Cols, 169-170.

‘Emphasis added.



Report on Recognition. of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 8.—Extra-Judicial Divorce.)

matic machinery for the recognition, which is really what the Clauses do,
it should be possible to identify quickly and automatically the nature
of the act or proceedings which qualified for recognition and be satisfied
that at the time the act or proceeding was taken or was taking place
the necessary jurisdictional link of nationality or whatever it may could
be fulfilled.”

821. The Solicitor General elaborated the point in these words—

“Tf one looks at that in the context of the word ‘act’, for example, rather
than ‘proceedings’ and then at a judicial act, one immediately runs into
possible difficulties in deciding whether the judicial act in question is
the service of the petition or the granting of the decree nisi or of the
decree absolute. One is not then able to identify it with any clarity because
under clause 3 as it stands we have”......at the date of institution of the

procecdings......”
“If we insert
“wat the date of the act or of the institution of the proceed-

we become a little uncertain on that ground.”

The Solicitor-General wound up his comments’ by saying—

“1 suggest to the hon. and leamed Member and to the House that the
answer to his problem is to say that when we reach a proceeding or
act as informal as that which he has in tind, the parties would have to
rely on the provisions of Clause 6 which enables a divorce and legal
separation which is valid by virtue of a rule of law arising from the
domicile of the parties still to be recognised in this country, but it re-
quires it to go through an admittedly yather more complex means of
proof and establishment of recognition. But that is the long stop and the
safety net, which is sufficient to deal with this problem.”
5
The matter rests there, so far as interpretation of the Act of 1971 is

concemed.

_ 8.22. The above discussion would show that the words “or other proceedings”
are not clear enough to cover extra-judicial divorces;—at least those divorces
which do not take place before an authority.

VI. RECOMMENDATION

$23. For these reasons, it is desirable to provide that the proposed Bill should
apply to non-judicial divorces also. This could be achieved by defining “pro-
‘ceeding” as including any act which might be legally sufficient to effectuate a
:dissolution of marriage, however informal that att might be, and whether. or
not any formalities or legal process isrequired, It may alsoibe provided that
the word “institution” shall, where the proceedings are not before any authority
but are constituted by any other act, mean the commencement of that act.

extra-judicial
divorces.

Conclusion,

65


Introductory.

Scope of the
Convention.

Obligation to re-
cognise—habitual
-feaidence and
nationality.

Domicile.

Report on Recognition ef Foreign Divorces
CHAPTER 9
THE HAGUE CONVENTION

9.1. We shall, in this Chapter, summarise the important provisions of the
Hague Convention’.

9.2. The scope of the Convention is dealt with in Article 1. The Convention
shall apply to the recognition, in one contracting State, of divorces and legal
separations obtained in another contracting States which follow judicial or other
proceedings officially recognised in that State and which are legally effective
there.

The same Article (Article 1) provides that the Convention does not apply
to findings of fault or to ancillary orders pronounced on the making of a decree
of divorce or legal separation; in particular, it does not apply to orders relating
to pecuniary obligations or to the custody of children.

93. Article 2 provides that divorces and legal separations to which the Con-
vention applies* shall be recognised in all other Contracting States, subject to
the remaining terms of this Convention, if, at the date of the institution of the
proceedings in the State of the divorce or legal separation (referred to as “the
State of origin”), —

(0) The respondent had his habitual residence there; or

(2) the petitioner had his habitual residence there and one of the follow.
ing further conditions was fulfilled—

{a) such habitual residence had continued for ‘not less than one year
immediately prior to the institution of proceedings;

(b) the spouses last babitually resided there together; or
(3) both spouses wefe nationals of that State; or

(4) the petitioner was a national of that State and one of the following
farther conditions was fulfilled—

(a) the petitioner had his habitual residence there; or

(b) he had habitually resided there for a continuous period of one
year falling, at least in part, within the two years preceding
the institution of the proceedings; or

(5) the petitioner for divorce was a national of that State and both the
following further conditions were fulfilled—

(a) the petitioner was present in that State at the date of institution
of the proceedings and

(b) the spouses last habitually resided together in a State whose law,
at the date of institution of the proceedings, did not provide for
divorce.

94. Under article 3, where the State of origin (State of divorce etc.) uses the
concept of domicile-as a test of jurisdiction in matters of divorce or legal sepa-
ration, the expression “habitual residence” in Article 2 shall be deemed to in-
clude domicile as the term is used in that State. |

"Tor text of the Convention, See (1969) 18 1, C. L. 0. 657.
4Acticles 1, para. 9:7, supra,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 9—The Hague Convention.)

Nevertheless, this proposition shall not apply to the domicile of depen-
dence of a wife.

9.5. Article 4 makes it clear that where there has been a cross-petition, a
divorce or legal separation following upon the petition or cross-petition shall
be recognised if either falls within the terms of Articles 2 or 3.

96. Under Article 5, where a legal separation complying with the terms of
this Convention has been converted into a divorce in the State of origin, the
recognition of the divorce shall not be refused for the reason that the conditions
stated in Articles 2 or 3 were no longer fulfilled at the time of the institution
of the divorce proceedings.

9.7. The first paragraph of article 6 provides that where the respondent has
appeared in the proceedings, the authorities of the State in which recognition
of a divorce or legal separation is scught shall be bound by the findings of
fact on which jutisdiction was assumed.

98. Under the second paragraph of article 6, the recognition of a divorce or
legal separation shall not be refused—

(a) because the internal law of the State in which such recognition
is sought would not allow divorce or, as the case may be, legal
separation upon the same facts, or,

(0) because a law was applied other than that applicable under the
rules of private international law of that State.

39. Under the third paragraph of article 6, “without prejudice to such review
as may be necessary for the application of other provisions of this Convention,
the authorities of the State in which recognition of a divorce or legal separation
is sought shall not examine the merits of the decision.”

9.10. Article 7 states that contracting States may refuse to recognise a divorce
when, at the time it was obtained. both the parties were nationals of States
which did not provide for divorce and of no other State.

9.1L. Under article 8, if in the light of all the circumstances, adequate steps
were not taken to give notice of the proceedings for a divorce or legal separa-
tion to the respondent, or if he was not afforded a sufficient opportunity to
Present his case, the divorce or legal separation may be refused recognition.

912, Contracting States may, under article 9, refuse to recognise a divorce or
legal separation if it is incompatible with a previous decision determining the
matrimonial status of the spouses and that decision either was rendered in the
State in which recognition is sought, or is recognised, or fulfills the conditions
required for recognition, in that State.

9.13, Under article 10, contracting States may refuse to recognise a divorce or
Jegal separation if such recognition is manifestly incompatible with their public
policy (‘order public”).

9.14, Article 11 provides that a State which is obliged to recognised a divorce
under this Convention may not preclude either spouse from remarrying on the
ground that the law of another States does not recognise that divorce.

Cross-petitions,

‘Legal separation
converted into a
divorce,

Findings of fact.

Law.

Merits,

Refusal to recog-
nis,

Notice.

Incompatibility
with previous de-
cision.

Public policy.

Remarriage.


Suspension of
ings,

Other provisions.

Tatroductory.

General provi-
ont in the
finglish Act as ta
recognition.

Section 3(1}— The

ounce “for © re-
itiga vainly
dealt with in sec-
tion 3.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 9—The Hague Convention. Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to
Recognitions.)

9.15. Under article 12, proceedings for divorce or legal separation in any
Contracting State may be suspended when proceedings relating to the miatri-
noonial status of either party to the marriage are pending im another Contrac-
Hing state.

9.16. Articles 13 to 16 deal with certain matters relevant for ascertaining the
legal system applicabic.

Article 17 saves more favourable cules of recognition.

Articles 18 to 31 deal with certain miscellaneous matters, including reser-
vations, accession to the Convention, interpretation and so on.

CHAPTER 10
ENGLISH ACT OF 1971 AS TO RECOGNITION
I. INTRODUCTORY

10.1. We shall, in this Chapter, summarise the important provisions of the,
recent English Act on the subject of recognition.” We may make it clear at
the outset that we shall concentrate on the important provisions relevant to
grounds or recognition, and shall not go into various matters of detail, We may
also make it clear that the English Act, besides dealing with the recognition of
overseas decrees, also contains provisions as to the recognition of decrees in
the British Isles? but we shall not refer to provisions relating to such decrees,
as they are sot of any importance for our purpose.

MI. MAIN PROVISIONS

10.2. As respects recognition in Great Britain of the validity of overséas divor-
ces and Jegal separations, the first provision is contained in section 2 of the
Act, which provides that sections 3 1035 of the Act shall have effect, sudject to
section है, in regurd 10 divorces and legal separations which—

(a) have been obtained by means of judicial or other proceedings in any
country outside British Isles; and
(b) are effective under the Jaw of that country.
10.3. Under section 3(1), the validity of the overseas divorce or legal separa-

tion shali be recognised if. at the date of the institution of the proceedings in
the country in which it was obtained—

“(a) either spouse was habitually resident in that country; or

{b) either spouse was a national of that country.”

It may be noticed that this gub-section does not speak of domicile. That
is dealt with separately? Jt may also be pointed out, that the habitual residence
or nationality of either spouse is sufficient to confer competence on the foreign
court, whose decree is now the subject-matter of recognition. This represeats

TThe Recognition of Foreign Divorces and Legal Separations Act, 1971 (Chapter 53).
For example, section I of the English Act of 1971.
para, 10:4 and 10: 10, iafra—Section 3(2),


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

the most important departure from the conventional English rule under which.
subject to certain additions or qualifications, the test of domicile of both the
parties is the test for the recognition of foreign decrees.’

404. It should be pointed out in this comnection, that section 3(2) of the Act
of 1971 provides that in relation to a country, the law of which uses the
concept of domicile as a ground of (domestic) jurisdiction in matters of divorce
or legal separation, sub-section (1a) of section 3—that is to say, the test that
either spouse must be habitually resident in the foreign country’—shall have
eflect as if the reference to habitual residence included a reference to “domicile
within the meaning of that law’. Broadly stated, the effect of this provision is
that if the foreign country itself adopts the test of domicile as the test of
jurisdiction in granting divorces for its own internal purposes, a decree of
court of that foreign country,—being a foreign country in which either spouse
was domiciled at the date of the institution of the proceedings,—would be re-
cognised in England. It is obvious that in part, this sub-section preserves the
English ‘common law’ rule of recognition on the ground of domicile, but, in
part, it modifies that rule, since it is enough that either spouse is domiciled in
the foreign country. Tt is not necessary that both* must be so domiciled.

10.5. It would be noticed that the provisions in the English Act relating to
grounds for recognition, which have been so far summarised, speak of “the
country” in which the decree was obtained and of “the law” of the country.
Now, as is well-known, there are countries where, by reason of the federal
structure, the various territories forming part of the country are governed by
different systems of law in matters of divorce or legal separation.

Provision had to be made for such countries, and section 3(3) of the Act
of 1971 provides that “in relation to a country comprising territories in which
different systems of law arc in force in matters of divorce or legal separation,
the foregoing provisions of this section (except those relating to nationality)
shall have effect as if such territory were a separate country.”

10.6. Section 4 or the Act of 1971 contains two provisions. Sub-section (1)
provides that where there have been cross-proceedings, it is sufficient if the
jurisdictional tests mentioned in section 3{1), (a) and (b), are satisfied either
as regards the original proceeding or as regards the cross proceeding, and it is
immaterial which of the two led to the decree of divorce or legal separation.
This is not the precise language of the sub-section, but it is its gist is stated
in simple terms.

To take a hypothetical case, 1-11) the wife applies for divorce in a
forisdiction where she was habitually resident, and (ii) later, the husband, who
is neither a resident of that country nor a national of that country nor domiciled
in that country, brings cross proceedings for divorce, and (iii) the wife ceases
to be habitually resident in that country, the decree in the husband’s favour, if
ultimately passed, will nevertheless be recognised in England, by virtue of sec-
tion 4(1), The fact that the wife was habitually resident at the time of her
petition, serves to validate the decree on the husband's proceeding, even though,
for the husband’s proceeding, the jurisdictional test is not satisfied in this case.

IChapter 7, supra.
"Pata. 10:3, supra.
3Para, 10:3, supra,

Section 32) of the
Act of 1971,

Section 3(3) of the
Act of 1971,
country
comprising vari-
ous territories.

Section 4 of the
Act of | 1971—(i)
Cross proceeding
and (0 Ley
separation —-con-
verted into 3
divoree,


Section 5 of the
Act of = 1971—
Proof of facts re-
levant to recogni-
tion.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

Section 4(2) enacts that where a legal separation, the validity of which
is entitled to recognition by virtue of section 3 or section 4{1), is converted, in
the country in which it was obtained, into a divorce, the validity of the divorce
will be recognised whether or not it (the divorce) would itself be entitled to
recognition by virtue of those provisions.

Stated in simple language, this sub-section provides that in such cases
the jurisdictional criteria laid down in section 3 need be satisfied only at the
date of the institution of the proceedings for legal separation in the foreign
country, and it is immaterial that, at the time when the subsequent proceedings
for converting the decree of separation into divorce are instituted, the parties
do not satisfy any of the tests laid down in section 3. This provision is inten-
ded to apply to decrees of those countries under whose legal systems a separa-
tion can be automatically conyerted into a divorce at the end of 3 prescribed
period. An example usually given of such a country is Denmark and it may be
useful in relation to Belgium and France also,

10.7, The question can arise whether the finding of fact on the basis of which
the foreign court assumed jurisdiction is binding on tHe court in which the
question of recognition of the dectee of divorce or legal separation passed by
the foreign court arises. Such a problem, in fact, arose in the United States
in the case of Williams v. North Carolina’ In that case, the question arose
whether a decree of divorce granted by a court in Nevada, was entitled to full
faith and credit in North Carolins. Under the law, as applied by the courts of
North Carolina, the decree would be entitled to recognition if it was based on
domicile in the State of Nevada. But the question that fell to be considered
was whether the finding of the Nevada court. of facts amounting to domicile,
was itself binding on the North Carolina court. {ft was held that it was not
conclusive.

Previously, there was some confusion in the U.S.A. on the subject in
relation to sister state judgments. The confusion had stammed from the famous
ease of Haddock y. Haddock? which delimited earlier cases on jurisdiction and
full faith and credit. In the Haddock case, a husband had secured a divorce
at his new domicile in Connecticut, after wrongfully deserting his wife at their
last common domicile. New York, where the wife’s domicile remained. The
United States Supreme Court held, that New York need not give any faith and
credit to the Connecticut decree, though the Supreme Court did not declare that
the decree was void. This created some confusion.’ The confusion persisted
until 1942 when, in the first William's case’ the United States Supreme Court
expressly overruled the Haddock decision and declared that an ex parte divorce
decree granted by a state which was the domicile of the suing plaintiff was not
only valid under the due process clause, but was also entitled to full faith and
credit in sister states.

‘Williams v. North Cardlina, No, 2 (1945) 325 U. 8. 226.
*Haddock v. Haddock, (1906) 201 U. S. 362.
SBaale, “Haddock Revisited” (1926) 39 Harv. L. Rey. 417.

‘Williams v. North Carolina (1942) 317 U, S, 287, This was_a prosecution for ‘illegal
cohabitation. in North Carolina with a purported second spouse, after Nevada divorce from
a first spouse. पु


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

The second Williams case’ held that collateral enquiry was permissible
to determine whether the plaintiff securing the ex parte dectee was actually
domiciled in the state granting it. There were, however, some dissenting
judgments. This case has not been followed in Australia in cases relating to
sister state decrees.

108. In England, such problems are dealt with by section 5(1) of the Act of
1971. Section 5(2) of the Act makes it clear that “finding of fact” includes, in
this context, the finding about habitual residence or domicile or nationality.

Section 5 reads—
Proof of facts relevant to recognition

5. (1) For the purpose of deciding whether an overseas divorce or legal
separation is entitled to recognition by virtue of the foregoing provisions of
this Act, any finding of fact made (whether expressly or by implication} in the
Proceedings by means of which the divorce or legal separation was obtained
and on the basis of which jurisdiction was assumed in those proceedings shall—

(a) if both spouses took part in the proceedings, by conclusive evidence
of the fact found; and

(>) in any other case, be sufficient proof of that fact unless the contrary
is shown, न

(2) In this section “finding of fact” includes a finding that either spouse
was habitually resident or domiciled in, or a national of, the country in which
the divorce or legal separation was obtained; end for the purposes of sub-section
(Ifa) of this section, a spouse who has appeared in judicial proceedings shall
be treated as having taken part in them.”

209. It is well-known that the findings of a court often involve mixed ques-
tions of fact and law. The precise finding that a spouse is habitually resident or
domiciled in, or a national of, the country, could be a mixed finding of fact
and law, inasmuch as the attribution to a person of domicile, nationality, or
habitual] residence, may involve not only an inference from the facts, but also
a number of legal conclusions. Section 5(2) of the English Act of 1971 has the
efipct of making the whole finding of the foreign court conclusive evidence or
sufficient proof, as the case may be. It avoids any objection being raised that
the precise finding as to domicile was not one of pure fact.

JH. EXISTING GROUNDS—DOMICILE

" 18.10. Since the Act of 1971 was not passed on a clean slate but after the
evolution of a number of rules of the common law relating to recognition, and
alter the enactment of a few statutory provisions pertinent to the question of
matrimonial jurisdiction, it became necessary for the U. K. Parliament to decide
how far the new Act was to be regarded as exhaustive of the law. The matter
was dealt with in section 6, which, as originally enacted, was as follows: —

IWilliams v. North Carolina, (1945) 08 U.S. 226. In the same prosecution, North
Carolina found that the plaintiff had mo Nevada domicile and गंगा ustai
See Rice v. Rice, (1949) 336 U.S, 674. Hie_and conviction was sustained.

3For 1973 amendment, see para 10-13, infra.

a

English Act,

Mixed — finding—
Section 5(2) of
English Act.

Section 6 of the
Act of 1971—Cer-
tain existing rules
of recognition to
continue in force.


7)

Effect of Section
6{a) on common
law.

Section 6{f) other
enactments,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

“6. This Act is without prejudice to the recognition of the validity of
divorces and legal separations obtained outside the British Isles—

(a) by virtue of any rule of law relating to divorces or legal separations
obtained in the country of the spouses’ domicile or obtained ¢lse-
where and recognised as valid in that country:

(b) by virtue of any enactment other than this Act:

but save as aforesaid, no such divorce or legal separation shall be recognised as
valid in Great Britain except as provided in this Act.”

10.11. The effect of clause (a) of the section is to retain those common law
rules or recognition which relates to divorces or legal separations—

(i) obtained in the country of the spouses’ domicile; or

Gi) obtained elsewhere but recognised as valid in the country of the
spouses’ domicile. ,

The first situation covers the proposition laid down in the case of
Le Mesurier) under which a divorce or legal separation is recognised by English
Courts if it is granted by a Court of the country where the parties are domiciled.

The second situation dealt with in clause (a) covers what is known as
the rule in Armitage v. Attorney-General,’ under which a divorce or legal sepa-
ration will be recognised in England if it is recognised as valid in a country
where the parties ate domiciled at the commencement of the proceedings, even
though they were not domiciled in the country whose Court granted the decree.

10.12. Besides preserving these two common law grounds of recognition, sec-
tion 6 preserves grounds of recognition provided for by any other enactment.
It is unnecessary to enumerate the enactments of the U. K. Parliament on the
subject, but it will be of interest to mention that one of them’—the Indian
Divorces (Validity) Act—dealt with divorces granted by Indian Courts. This
enactment came to be passed, because Courts in India had been exercising juris-
diction in divorce under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 over Britons resident in
British India, though not domiciled therein. Since, under the rules of private
international law, those deerees were not valid, decrees so passed had to be
validated by an Act of the U. K. Parliament. It may also be stated that in
times of war, special legislation is passed regarding war marriages.‘ “

Having provided for the preservation of some of the common law grounds
and of the statutory grounds, section 6, in the last sentence, takes care to
abolish all other grounds of recognition. In particular, the grounds of recogni-
tion Jaid down in Travers v. Holley; and in Indyka vy. Indyka,‘ are no longer
valid in England, because the last sentence of section 6 specifically provides
that “no such divorce” or legal separation (that is to say), a divorce or legal
separation obtained outside British Isles “shall be recognised as valid in Great
Britain except aq provided in this Act.”

le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A.C, 517 (P. C.).

t Armitage ४. Attorney-General, (1906) Probate 135.
SIndian Divorce (Validity) Act, 1921 (588).

‘Matrimonial Causes (Wat Martiages) Act, 1944 (English).
"Travers v. Holley, (1953) Probate 246.

*Indyka v. Indyka, (1969) 1 A. C, 33 (प्र. 1...


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

10.13 In 1973, the U.K. Parliament' passed legislation dealing with various
aspects relevant to domicile and matrimonial proceedings. For the purposes of
the present discussion, it is enough to mention that (i) section 1 of the Act of
1973 empowered the wife to acquire a domicile of her own, thereby amending
the general rule, and (ii) in view of this amendment of the general rule as to
donticile, it became necessary to revise scclion 6 of the Act of 1971, relating
to recognition of foreign divorces. The amendments are consequential, and
need not be gone into in this rapid survey.

10-14, Various systems of lew impose prohibitions against re-marriage after
divorce. These prohibitions may affect both parties equally, or may affect only
one party. They may last for a limited time, or indefinitely. We are not, at
the moment, concerned with prohibitions of a limited character. But we are
concerned with the general prohibition against re-marriage which arises from
the fact that there is no valid divorce according to the law of the country of
nationality. This question usually arises where the partics are divorced by the
court of country X, and now wish to re-marry in country Y, but the law of
‘the country of nationality—corntry Z dices mot recognise divorce at all, They
are no longer husband and wife, so far as country X is concerned, but they
still cannot re-marry, and their previous marriage is regarded as subsisting in
country Z under the law of their nationality because, according to the rules of
that law, the decree does not dissolve the bond between thé two spouses. Such
a situation, in fact, arose in an English case? Usually, it arises where the law
of the country of nationality does not recognise divorce at all and that law is
pleaded as a bar.

To deal with such a situation, section 7 of the English Act cf 1971 (as
amended in 1973), provides—

“7. Where the validity of a divorce obtained in any country is entitled to
recognition by virtue of sections 2 to 5 of this Act or by virtue of
any rule or enactment preserved by section 6 (5} of this Act, neither
spouse shat be precluded from re-marrying in Great Britain on the
ground that the validity of the divorce would not be recognised in
any other country.”

The section follows the Convention, which has an erticle substantiaily
similar.

Though the section is a bit abstract in its terms, what is intended thereby
ig that the non-recognition of divorce by a zhird country is no bar to re-marriage.

10.15. [n certain circumstances, recognition of a decree of divorce or legal sepa-
tation would not be desirable. The need for making an exception in respect of
récognition may, for example, arise where, according to the Jaw of the forum
tn which the recognition is sought, there was no subsisting marriage between
the partics. It is obvious that if there was no—pre-existing marriage according
to the legat system of the couniry where recognition of the divorce is sought,
the courts of that country cannot recognise a divorce in respect of such marriage,
because, to recognise the divorce or legal separation in such cases would amount
.to-an implicit recognition of the mariage. A cule forbidding recognition in

WDomicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973 Eng).

AR, v, Brentwood Superintendent Rerisirar of Merviages (1968) 3 AM E. 8. 272 comment-
ed upon by Chesterman in 32 Moder: Law Review 84.

tArtecle 11, para. 9.14, supra.

Amendment of
1973 relating to
domicile.

Section 7 of the
Act of 19TI—Re-
marriage.

Section 3 of
English Act—Ex-
ceptions from re-
cognition ~No
subsisting mar-
Tiage.


4

Natural justice.

Public policy.

Three __ situations
dealt with

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.-—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

such cases may, in a sense, be treated as stating the obvious. But, it is equally
obvious that when the Jaw on the subject of recognition is being given statutory
form, a provision should be inserted to ensure that the courts of the country
would not recognise a divorce or legal separation if, under the law of the
country—which will include such rules of private international law as are
applied in that country—there was no marriage in existence.

10.16. While the above situation is a technical one, there may be other reasons
for refusing recognition. An important category is constituted by circumstances
showing that the foreign court granted the divorce or legal separation in viola-
tion of the rules of natural justice.

10.17. Finally, apart from the two situations referred to above, the courts of a
country should have jurisdiction te refuse recognition where the divorce or legal
separation is inconsistent with its public policy. .

10.18. These three situations’ have been dealt with in section 8 of the English
Act. It reads—

“Exceptions from recognition

8. (1) The validity of—

(a) a decree of divorce or judicial separation granted under the Jaw of
any part of the British Isles: or

(0) a divorce or legal separation obtained outside the British Isles,

shall not be recognised in any part of Great Britain if it was granted or obtain-
ed at a time when, according to the law of that part of Great Britain (including
jts rules of private international law and the provisions of this Act), there was
no subsisting marriage between the parties.

(2) Subject to sub-section (1) of this section, recognition by virtue of this
Act or of any rule preserved by section 6 thereof of the validity of a divorce or
legal separation obtained outside the British Isles may be refused if. and only
if—

(a) it was obtained by one spouse—

(i) without such steps having been taken for giving notice of the
proceedings to the other spouse as, having regard to the nature
of the proceedings and all the circumstances, should reasonably
have been taken; or

(ii) without the other spouse having been given {for any reason
other than lack of notice) such opportunity to take part in the
proceedings, as, having regard to the matters aforesaid, should
reasonably have been given; er

(b) its recognition would manifestly be contrary to public policy.

(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as requiring the recognition
of any finding of fault made in any proceedings for divorce or separation or of
any maintenance, custody or other ancillary order made in any such proceed-

ees”
"Para, 10.16 and 10.17, supra,



Report on Recagnition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 10.—English Act of 1971 as to Recognition.)

10.19. Section 8 of the English Act, thus, states thrze exceptions to recognition,
viz:— हु

(0) Where there was no subsisting Mattiage to be dissolved, etc.:
(1) infringement of natural justice;

Gi) manifest clash with public policy.
These arz stated to be the only grounds for withholding recognition.
10.20. The first exception is self-explanatory,’ and has been already dealt with.

10.21. As to the second exception, it is recognised that circumstances may jus-
tify a foreign court in dispensing with service or in substituting service’. Prima
Jacie, if the respondent can prove that he has had no notice, then the decree
is not entitled to recognition.

But it will be recognised if—

(i) the foreign court has held that its rules of service have been duly
complied with,*

(ii) those rules themselves are not contrary to natural justice; and

(iii) the lack of notice is not consequent upon the petitioner’s fraud.s**

However, recent dicta, confirmed in Hornett v. Hornett*, suggest that the
respondent may be held to have waived his right to attack the validity of a
decree—in this case by “himself petitioning for the recognition of the decree”.—
but presumably also by marrying again.

10.22. In considering the materiality or otherwise of notices, all the circumstan-
ees have to be considered. In the case of a Tepudiation. or other unilateral
divorce, notice is irrelevant, since notice would not enable the respondent to
contest the divorce.’

10.23. The last exception—the head of “public policy”—is justified by article 10
of the Hague Convention, The word ‘manifestly’ in the English section has
been criticised as adding nothing.” In fact, there was a move to delete the
word ‘manifestly’ at the committee stage of the House cf Commons, but it was
negatived. Since ordre public bulks larger in continental law than “public
Policy” does in English law, Article 10 of the Convention was, trying to restrict
a too liberal application of order public. The Solicitor General stated" in the
House of Lords: “The expression (manifestly) makes the horse (public policy)
a trifle less unruly The word ‘manifest’ is intended to imply a
degree of inherent strength in the horse.”

"Para. 10.15, supra.
कुल Macalpine v. Macalpine, (1958) Probate 35, 45.

"See, 9.8५ fgra v. Igra. (1951) Probate 404; Hornet v. Harnett, (1971) 1 All 8, R. 98,
‘Macalpine v. Macalpine, (1958) Probate 35, 45.

‘Middleton v. Middleton, (1967) Probate 62.

‘Harnett v, Hornett, (1971) 1 AWE. R. 98.

TAs to fraud, see Chapter 17, infra.

‘Hornet v. Hornet, (1971) 1 AJLE. R. 98, 102.

"Maher v. Maher, (1951) Probate 342, 344-345,

10566 H. L. Vol. $16, Cols. 1552-1555, 1557.

UH. L. Debates, Vol. 816, cal. 1553 (Solicitor-General).

75

No | __ subsisting
marriage.

Natural justice,

All the  circum-
stances 10 be con-
sidered.

Manifestly be
contrary to pub-
lic policy.


76

Section 82) (0!
Poblic Policy. a

Fraud,

Incidental order.

Section S—0 of
the English Act,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter !0.—Engtish Act of 1971 as to Recogni

1624, As to the cicumstances where recognition would be contrary to distinc-
tive English public policy, no definitive list can be compued. Macalpine’ illus-
trates one application of public policy.

in re Meyer? was a case of duress, An ‘Aryan’ wife of a German Jew had been
forced (0 obtain a decree of divorce against her will. She petitioned to the court
for a declaration that the divorce was invalid. The court held the decree 10 be
viliated by duress,—a concept which has been developed in relation to marriage*

10.25. Under section 8(2\(b), already referred to’, recognition of the vali-
dity of a divorce or legal separation may be refused if “it is manifestly contrary
10 public policy.” Two comments are in order with reference to this clause.
Jn the first place, there is no definition of “public policy”, and the power thereby
conferred is certainly wide. However, the word “manifestly” cautions the: Court
against interfering unduly. It is alse to be noted, that article 10 of the Hague
Convention provides thar “contracting states may refuse 10 recognise a divorce
oc legal separation if such recognitian is manifestly incompatible with their pub-
Tic policy (order public) ...... ....... ... ७... Such a clause is fonad in many of the
international conveations on the subject of private law: far example,—Conven-
tion on Alimentary Obligations (1th April, 1958, article 2), Convention on
Adoption (15th November, 1965, article 15] and so on. But it should be point-
ed out that the expression “order public” refers rather to the continental con-
cept of ordre public than to the common lew concept of public policy, The
width of the continental concept, meéntioued in the convention, is somewhat
narrowed down by article 6 of that Convention which, inter alia, provides that
the State in which recognition is sought, shall not review the merits of the deci-
sion, subject to the provisions of article 10. In the English section (section 3),
on the other hand, only the expression “public policy” is used.

10.26, The other point to be noted with reference to section 8(2\(b) of the
English Act is that it is silemt on the question of fraud,—except that fraud could
fall wihin ‘public policy’. We are of the view that it is desirable that it should
be specifically dealt with. I: may be mentioned that freud is specifically men-
tioned in section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. “We may also state
that it figures in the Supreme ourt case.’ We shall tevert to this topic later.”

10.27, Under section 83) of the English Act, certain incidental orders are not
recognised.

YI. MISCELLANEOUS
16.26. Section 9 and section 10:) and section 102) af the English Act are not
ratenal for ans purposes.
Section 10(3) of that Act defmes “country” as Zoicws—

7) Ja this Act, “couztcy” includes a colony or other dependent terti-
tory of the United Kingdom, bul, for tbe purposes cf this Act, a per-
son shell be treated as a national of such a territory only if it has a

'Macaipine v. Macalpine, (1958) Probate 35.
2Re Moyer, (197) 2 WLR. 401.

3See Szechter ¥, Scechter, (1970) 3 AIL, R, 905.
“Pera, 10.23, supra

‘Para. 1.1, supra.
‘See Chapter relating to fraud, infra, (Chapter 18}.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 10.—English Act or 1971 as to Recognition. Chapter 1L.—English Law
as to jurisdiction and the Act of 1973.)

law of citizenship or nationality separate from that of the United King-
dom and he is a citizen or national of that territory under that Jaw.”

Section 10(4) of the English Act reads—

“(4) The provisions of this Act relating to overseas divorces and legal
separations and other divorces and legal separations obtained out-
side the British Isles apply to a divorce or legal separation obtain-
ed before the date of the commencement of those provisions as well
as 10 one oblained on or after that date and, in the case of a divorce
or legal separation obtained before that date,—

(3) require, or, as the case may फट, preclude, the recognition of its
validity in relation to any time :before that date as well as.in
relation io any subsequent time; but

(b) do not affect any property rights to which any petson became
entitled before that date or apply ‘where the question of the
validity of the divorce of legal separation Kas been decided by
any competent court in the British Isles before that datz.”

This, in short, is a brief survey of the Act.

CuarTer 11
ENGLISH LAW AS TO JURISDICTION AND THE ACT OF 1972

Hl. We shall now deal very briefly with the English law as to jurisdiction in
regard to dissolution of marriage. The subject has ati interesting history. The
tollowing stages of evolution of the Jaw on the subject are discernible

(1) The eta before Le Mesurier ie, befare 1895.

(2) The doctrine of Le Mesurier. ह

(3) Statutory development after Le Mesurier.

(4) The Act of 1973—The Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act.
1973

44:2. English Courts were not given authority to entertain divorce cases until
4857.' The ecclesiastical courts had, in general, given only separation from bed
‘aud broad Jurisdiction in ecclesiastical courts depended on residence, not on
domicile’, and Parliament, when it granted. divorces. by.a private Act, granted
divorces without regard to the petitioner's domicile’.

When exercising matrimonial jurisdiction under the Matrimonial Causes
Act, 1857, English Courts did not, in the’ bégitming, definitively adopt the

1Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857 (20 and 21 Vict. ८. asi. . . ड़
*Waltl v. Wall, (1949) 2 वा E. 1२. 927, 928 (Pearee J,).

See—
Graveson, “Judicial Interpretation of Divorce Jurisdletton’ in the Conffict of Law.
(1954) 17 Mod. L. Rev. 501; :
{b) Griswold, “Divorce Jurisdiction and Recognition of Divorce Decrees—A Compara-
tive Study,” (1951) 65 Harf. L, Rev. 193;
(c) Note, (1945) 22 Brit, ४, B, Int'l Law 264,
6-5 1. 9 (ND)/76

|

Scope of the
Chapter.

The era... bef
Mesurier, °F


The doctrine of

Le Mesurier.

‘The case of Nibo-
yet.

Domicile test
traced 10. Ameti-
can law.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 11.—English Law as to turisdiction and the Act of 1973.)

domicile rule, That rule came to be adopted later in 1895, in Le Mesurier’. Priot
to Le Mesurier, there apparently prevailed the “contractual theory”, limiting
jurisdiction to the courts of the country of marriage’,

Cresswell, L. J. observed in Forster v. Froster*:

“I should have been very glad indeed if the legislature had said that the
court had no jurisdiction except over persons domicifed in England. When
Lord Cambell was Lord Chancellor, I asked him to bring in a bill to settle
the question and to define my jurisdiction; but he said, ‘I cannot do it.
Whenever that question is raised, it must be decided upon legal principles.
Tt cannot be defined’.”

11.3, After some vacilation, however, the doctrine of domicile was firmly esta-
blished. In 1895, the Judicia! Committee of the Privy Council, in Le Mesurier
y. Le Mesurier, on appeal from Ceylon reviewed the English and Scottish cases,
and came to the conclusion that according to international law, the domicile for
the time being of the married pair afforded the only true test of jurisdiction to
dissolve their marriage.

Ever since Le Mesurier v. Le Mesulier', English Courts have construed
the general words in a statute conferring jurisdiction to dissolve valid marriages,
as limited to marriages the parties to which are domiciled in England*’-*.

114. Neither the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857, nor the Supreme Court of
Judicature Act, 1873, contained any express provision limiting the jurisdiction of
the court to decree dissolution of marriage by reference {0 the domicile of the
spouses 10 the suit. That is the reason why, initially, there was some uncertainty
and even judicial uneasiness as to the position in this regard. This is iMlustrated
by Niboyet v. Niboyet in which the Court of Appeal applied, but analogy to the
new jurisdiction to grant dissolution, the rule applicable to the former jurisdiction
exercised by the ecclesiastical courts in cases of aullity—the rule based on resi-
dence. This is an application of the general rule of construction of statutes that,
in the absence of clear words to the contrary, they should be construed so as
not to conflict with public international Jaw, or with comity in the sense of
generally recognised rules of private international law.

41,8. The test of domicile as a basis for jurisdiction was thus adopted in 1895,
in Le Mesurier, and it has been stated" that this was done mainly in reliance
on Aclican law. It has been pointed ouf™ that in Le Mesurier v. Le Mesurier’
the Privy Council in holding that jurisdiction to dissolve a marriage was con-

ie Mesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895) A. C. 517 P. C).

*Dicay, Conflict of Laws (7th ed, 1958), page 290.

‘Rarster v. Forster, (1862) 3 Sw. & Tr. 144, 155.

आह Mesurier v, Le Mesarier, (1895) A. ©. 517 PC).

हाल Muesurier v. Le Mesurier, (1895-99) All B. R. 836; (1895} A. ०. 517.
54, 2. for Alberta v. Cock, (1926) AIL E, R. 525; (1926), A.C. 444

TH. ५. H., (1928) Probate 206.

SHerd v. Herd, (1936) 2 ANE, R. 1516; (1936) Probate 205.

®Niboyer v. Niboyet, (1878) 4 P. 0. 1.

WEbrenzweigh, Conflict of Laws, (1962), page 235.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 11.—English Law as to durisdiction and the Act of 1973.)

fined to the courts of domicile, elied on Shaw v. Gould, which, in turn, re-
lied on Story’s Commentaries, The test of domicile as the exclusive basis for
jurisdiction to ‘dissolye a marriage was firmly established under the doctrine of
Le Mesurier. For this purpose, the wife’s domicile is the same as that of the
husband. She could not, in general, have a separate domicile.

11.6. The rule relating to the wife's domicile —ie-, that she could have no
separate domicile—caused hardship. The Matrimonial Causes Act, 1937 (Sir
Alan Herbert’s Act), removed some element of hardship in the case of English
wives who were—{a) deserted by their husbands who thereupon acquired a
foreign domicile, or (b) deprived of their remedies in divorce in England by
their husbands being deported; in either case instead of having to proceed in
the court of the husband’s new domicile, the wife could, under the Act of 1937,
resort to the English Court. if the husband was domiciled in England.

A change was’ made in the basis of jurisdiction in divorce at the instance
of deserted wives whe had grounds for dissolution of marriage but whose
husbands were domicile abroad’. Such wives could, under the Act of 1949,
sue‘ for divorce in England if they were resident in England and had been
Ordinarily resident in England’, for a period of three yeats immediately preced-
ing the commencement of the proceedings. 1

This provision was re-enacted in section 18 of the Matrimonial Causes Act,
1950, section 40 of the Act of 1965 and in subsequent re-enactments thereof.
There was imported into this section “a somewhat unusual statutory provison”™,
namely, that in the exercise of this special form of jurisdiction, “the issues shall
be determined in accordance with the law which would be applicable at the
time of the desertion or deportation’.

This provision of the Act of 1937 was, in subsiance, re-enacted in later
revisions of the law.

11,7, The anomalous position of a wife was tendered more acute owing to
the marriage of so many English-women to members of the Commonwealth
and Allied forces stationed in England. during the second world war,-men who
never were domicled in England’. Ths led to the passage, in 1944, of the
Matrimonial Causes (War Marriages) Act, which gave another concession. It
rendered it possible, subject to certain safeguards, for the English wives of such
men to haye recourse to the Divorce Court in, England,. notwithstanding that
their husbands were domiciled abroad. It should, however, be noted that this
concession applies only to marriages between September, 1939 and June, 1950.

haw v. Gould, (1868), L. R. 3 H. L. 55, 85.

*Para. 11:5, supra.

*Mr. Commissioner Latey, Q. C, “Divorce and Nullity” (1955) 40 Transactions of the
Grotivs Society 111, 112, 113.

Section 1(1) (a), Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1949,

‘As to the expression “ordinarily resident”, see Hopkins v. Hopkins, (195!) Probate 116;
(1951) 2 All H.R. 1035.

‘Mr. Commissioner Latey, Q. C. “Divorce and Nullity” (1955) 40 Transactions of the
Grotius Society 111, 113.

79

Developments
after Le Mesurier
—Act of 1937--

‘Deserted wives.

Act of 1944—War
marriages


80

Position ‘before
immed

1973—~su
up.

Act of 1973,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 1i.—English Law as io Jurisdiction and the Act of 193)

11.8, & 11.9. The above position continued, in substance, until 1973. The
position before 1973 can be conveniently described in the words of a witlely
used work! on the subject— Poo

“Enplish courts have jurisdiction to entertain proceedings for the .dis-

soluticn of a marriage and the pronouncement of a decree of divorce in

the following circumstances, the first of which applies to a petition pre-

sented by either husband ‘or wife and the others to a petition only bya

wife: ee

1. If both parties to the marriage are domiciled in England at the time
of the commencement of the proceeding [Zeon (1977

2. If a wife has been deserted by her husband, or a husband’ has beet
deported from the United Kingdom, and he was immediately “petdte
his desertion or deportation domiciled in England [Act of 1963. है.
49(1)].

3. Ifa wife is and has been ordinarily resident® in England for a
period of three years immediately preceding the commencentent bf
preceedings, aud her husband is not demicifed in ary othzr part dt
the United Kingdom or in the Channel Istands or the Isle of Mét.

“The ‘as; twa events conferring jurisdiction are plions vo the general
priaeiple that divcroe jurisdic-ion is based om domicile and were intro-
duced tc eieviate the harcship of wifes who otherwise in thes: था
currsterces would hav: besn compelled 00. instibate praceading’s for
divorce abroad due tc the rule tnat = wife's domicile is always the sere
as her husband's. a

“Neither {he nationality of either of the parties nor the place where @
marriage was celebrated is of any relevance to jurisdicticn.”

119. In 1973, the Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act! was passed
in England, and the Act made substantial modifications in the above position.
We need not recite all its provisions. For our purposes, it is enough % state
that it made twe important amendments relevant to jurisdiction} The wife
can now acquire separate domicile: (ii) English courts can exercise divargs
jurisdiction on the ground -of “habitual residence” also, ‘besides the general

ground of domicile. . हि

Secion 5(2) of the Act of 1973 is important, and reads— - .
“Section 5(Z}—The court shall have jurisdiction to entertain proceediogs
for divores or judicial separation if fend only if) either of the parties
10 the marriage+- हे
(9) is domiciled ix England and Wales on the date wien the pro-
ceedings are begun: or
(h) was habitwally resident in England and Waies throughout the
period of one year ending with thet date.” हट

~ जा वश

गणतड़ण Grant, Family Law (1970), page 110.

tLeon v. Leon, (1967) Probate 275 (Wile

2A wife is ordinarily -vesidént id England if she
years’ petiod must be continuous, but, for example,
[Stransky v. Stransky (1954)]

‘The Domicile and Matrimonial Proceedings Act, 1973,

need not have residence). :
‘thas her real home there. The: three
holidays abroad do not interrupt it


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces $1

{Chapter 11.—English Law as to Jurisdiction and the Act of 1973. Chapter 12.—
Reciprocity.)

14.10. Other jurisdictional grounds for divorce are abolished by the Act—that Qld frowned abo-

being the effect of the words “only if” in section 52) quoted above. हु

A wife will no longer be able to petition for divorce on the basis,—i)
that she had been deserted or her husband deported and be was domiciled in
England and Wales immediately prior to such acts, or (ii) on the ground that she
is; and she has been for three years, ordinarily resident in England and Wales
and. her husband is not domiciled in any other part of the British Isles’.

CrapTer 12
Reciprocity
1. INTRODUCTORY

121. 11 legislation as to recognition is needed, the most important question Introductory.
is," what should be its basis. In this Chapter, we propose to consider the ques-

tion’ whether, in relation to the grounds of recognition’, it is necessary that the

retognition of a divorce or separation on a particular basis should be pro-

vided for only where the foreign country concemed itself recognises Indian

dectets of divorce or separation granted on that basis.

Tl. RECIPROCITY-—FIRST MEANING

12, Thi 4 . “rai ity”. Two senses of thi
2. is naturally brings to the forefront .the aspect of “reciprocity”. Now, expression OL pad

weé-would like to make it clear that the expression ‘reciprocity’ could be used  ciprocity’.
itt two senses. In the first sense, it means that the same criteria of recognition
shétld, as far as possible, be adopted, by our iaw in relation to the recogni-
‘of foreign decrees in matrimonial causes, as are laid down by law in
respect: of the exercise of matrimonial jurisdiction by our own courts. This
dipectis better described asthe theory of “equivalence”. Reciprocity, in this
sense, is not concerned with the test adopted by foreign. courts in recognising
our decrees, but with the test adopted by Indian courts in exercising their own
jurisdiction’. This aspect, that is, the aspect of equivalence as explained above,
js certainly relevant to the subject of recognition as a whole. Our own view
oh the subject is that reciprocity in this sense can be legitimately taken into

cottsideration.

123. This approach was adopted in, and is illustrated. by, the English cast Dean Griswold’
of Travers y. Holley. Even before that decision, the approach had its sup- Y!¥-
porters—e.g. Dean Griswold."

Para, 11:4, supra.
3Para. 11:6, supra.
ws Ghapters 10-11, supra.

‘Cf, Von Mehren and Trautman (1968), “Recognition of Foreign Divorces” in 81 Harv,
Law Review, 1600.

See para, 6:4, supra.
See also Chapter 1, supra.

Travers v. Holley, (1953) 2 &॥ 8. R. 794.

‘Griswold, “Recognition of Foreign Divorces” (1952) 65 Hatv. Law Rev. 193, 227.
{For his later comment, sce Griswold in (1954) 67 Harv.'Law Review.



82

Justification.

English _ practice,

Reciprocity in the
second sense,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 12.—Reciprocity.)

For example, if the decree of the foreign Court was one dissolving the
marriage between parties domiciled in the foreign country, Indian courts
should recognise the dissolution as effected by the decree, irrespective of the
question whether or not, the foreign court would itself recognise a decree of
divorce granted in India on the basis of domicile.

12.4. This aspect could be better described by using the term “equivalence”,
as already stated'. Ordinarily, it is umdesirable that recognition should be
denied where the forum in which recognition is sought, itself employs a juris-
dictional basis equivalent to that employed by the rendering court. The word
“equivalence” is convenient in this context to connote this aspect.

12.5. In this sense, the principles on which our courts exercise jurisdiction,
and the principles on which our courts recognise jurisdiction exercised by a
foreign court, should, in justice, tally with each other, wherever practicable,—
although it is not necessarily implied that at a particular moment of time
the two should be identical in all respects with each other. One need not
over-simplify the problem by assuming that the two policies—the policy under-
lying the standards for assuming jurisding and the policy underlying the
standards for recognition—are identical. The policies that underlie the choice
of standards for assuming jurisdiction, however, do furnish a useful starting
point for recognition also.

126. One writer bas pointed out* that many British states now claim jurisdic-
tion and purport to exercise it on substantially wider grounds than the territoria-
list concepts embodied in the international jurisdictional rules which aré basis
of the enforcement and recognition of foreign judgments at common law. it
was, thus, not unnatural that some attempts were made to enforce and recognise
forcign judgments rendered by courts which though not internationally competent,
had, purported to exercise a jurisdiction basis which corresponded to a ground.
which the forum claimed. Such an extension was made in the area of recognition
of foreign divorce decrees’.

गा, RECIPROCITY—SECOND MEANING

12.7, We shall now come to reciprocity in the second sense.'! We are not in
favour of adopting that as a basis, but we may state that theoretically recipro-
city in the second sense means that the ground of recognition by our courts
and the grounds of recognition by foreign courts, should be identical, or, in
other words, our law should not compel our courts to recognise a foreign decree
granted on a particular jurisdictional basis, if that particular basis is not
adopted by the foreign law as a test of recognition in relation to the decrees of
our courts. .

‘Though reciprocity, in this sense, is familiar in many field of law’, we
are of the view that it should not be insisted upon in the context of decrees
of divorce or legal separation. It should not be overlooked that private

Para, 12:2, supra,
*pryles “Recognition of Foreign Fudgment” ia (1972) 12 1, J. 1. 1.. 30, 31, 36.

(a) Travers ¥. Hoiley, (1953) Probate 346;
{b) Re Mrapeines 1.7. (1960) 1, W. L.R, 1973.
35.8. section 44A, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 12.—Reciprocity.)

citizens are helpless individuals, and to make the recognition of matters affect-
ing their status dependent on the course adopted by the authorities of a foreign
country would lead to injustice.

The very object of the Jaw relating to recognition, in the present con-
text, is to “preclude the scandal which arises when a man and women are held
to be husband and wile in one country and strangers in another.” ‘There could
be other objections to pursuing this object too zealously, and there could be
need for imposing various safeguards and conditions, but reciprocity is net one
of them. .We think that on principle there is no rational justification for
insisting on reciprocity in the second sense. However, we shall briefly discuss
the views prevailing on the subject.

12.8 it would be convenient to begin with the position in the U.S.A, since
‘the doctrine seems to have found some favour there. In the U.S.A. the doctrine
that recognition will be denied unless the rendering jurisdiction would re-
cognise an analogous judgment by the requested forum. was announced by the
Supreme Court of the U.S.A. in Hilton v. Guyno®, which based its decision “upon
the broad ground that international law is founded upon mutuality and reci-
procity.” Four justices, however. dissented, stating that res judicata doctrine
should apply “fon the same general ground of public policy that there should
be an end of litigation”, and that “it is for the government, and not for its
courts, to adopt the principle of retorsion, if deemed under any circumstances
desirable or mecessary.”

In that case, the lower court had enforced a French money judgment
passed in France against a U.S. citizen. The majority opinion held that:

“The comity of our nations does not require us to give conclusive effect
to the judgments of the courts of France;” and this was “in view of
want of reciprocity on the part of France, as to the effect to be given
to the judgment, of this and other foreign countries.”

The same rule seems to be adopted in German Jaw for most classes of
cases?

12.9. In both countries (U.S.A. and Germany), however, there is consider
able disagreement in academic circles about the extent of the rule‘.

Scholars in the U.S.A. in general oppose such a requirement, because—
G) it arbitrarily penalizes private individuals for positions taken by foreign
governments, and because (ii} such a rule has little, if any, constructive effect,
but tends, instead, to a general breakdown of recognition practice’.

१, Wilson v. Wilson Law Reports 2 Probate 435, 442.

AHitton v. Guy sot, (1895) 159 U. 3. 113, 228, 229, 234.

See Von Mehren and Trautman “Recognition of Foreign Diverse” (1968) Harv. Law
Rev, 1600, 1660, 1661.

a in This of Judy Rentered. Abroad", (1950) 50
cote ay Mee ag ae Sa cute aplics only when the Améiean party was the cofenéant

abroad, and fost, हु
(b) Nedelmann, “Non-Reécognition of Ameria Money Judgments Abroad and What

To Do About It”, (1957) 42 Towa L. Rev, 236, 24:
ta) See, e.g, Ehrenzweig, Conflict of Laws (1952) gage 46, 166,
(b) Nadelmann, “Reprisnls Against American Judgments” (1952) 65 Harv, L. Bev. 1184,

1185-41;
(छो Goodrich, Conflict of Laws, page 392.

83

Reciprocity 10 the
USA. and Ger
many,

Criticism in
USA.


Doctrine not ado-
in some
छा in USA,

Position in
England,
France,

Conclusion,

Introductory.

Divorce granted
in country of do-
micile,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 12.—Reciprocity. Chapter 13.—Recommendations as to existing grounds
for Recognition.)

12.16. In any case, the doctrine has not been followed in several American
jurisdictions notably, New York', Georgia’ and California* Moreover, "के is
important to point out that even where it is followed, it is not applied to
judgments in ren.

12.11 lt may also be stated that no reciprocily requirement is imposed in
relation to the recognition of foreign divorces by— पु पु

(a) England’, or
(b) France’.
Even before the law was placed on a statutory footing by the English
Act of 1971, the House of Lords, in the case of indyka’, stated that “considera-
tions of policy” rather than the principle of “reciprocity” were relevant in this
regard. ~
।

12.12, Having considered all aspects of the matter, we have come to the con-
clusion that reciprocity in the second sense* should not be insisted upon in
the present context, We are, accordingly, making our recommendations ‘with-

out any restriction or arplifcation in this regard, and our recommendations

should apply whether the foreign country does or does not recognise our dectees
on jurisdictional bases similar to those proposed in the law recommended 09

us.
Cnaprer 13
RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO EXISTING GROUNDS FOR
RECOGNITION
13.4. We shall now deal with certain topics which concem some of the exist-
ing grounds of recognition or ether miscellaneous matters, namely,—
(a) divorce or legal separation granted in the country of domicile;
(0) divorce or legal ‘separation recognised as valid im the country of
domicile; हि ba
(०) non-recognition of divorce by third country not to be @ bar to divorce.

13.2. Divorce granted in the country of domicilé is recognised in Talia, since:
we follow the common law rules. The question whether this rule should ‘be:

1 C Gene! nsarlantique, (1928) 242 N. ¥. 331, 152
N. heed by. Von" Rage Gen at ४ oie Alon ete (1968) सकल
Rev. 1600, 1660, 1661; ह

(b) Cowans v. Ticondefoue Pulp & Paper Co., (1927) 219 App. Div. 120, 219 N.Y.
Supp. 284, Af'd 246 N. ४. 603, 159 N, 8, 669.
Ya) Truscon Steel Co, Lid, v. Bieglar, (1948) N. B., 24., 623;
(b) Goulborn v. Joseph, (1943) 195 Ga, 723, 25-8. E. 20. 576. :
88७ Pryles, “Recognition ‘of foreign judaments etc.” (1972) 12 1. J. 1. 1... 30) 3400 +

‘Ehrenzweig, Conflict of laws. (1962), Page 165, para. 46, and page 163, footnats 25.

‘English Act of 1971.
‘Nadelmann “Recognition .of Foreign Money Judgments in France”, (1956) 5 Am, J.

Comp. L. 248, 251. ° :
Undyka v. indyka, (1967) ANE. R. at page 689.

"Para. 12:2, supra.


Report on Recognition, of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 13.—Reconmendations as to existing grounds for Recognition. Chapter
14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

codified, is a question of detail. But the principle is as stated above. Tt may
also be stated that Indian Courts have themselves been exercising their juris-
diction in matrimonial causes on the principle of domicile. Moreover, some
of our statutory provisions are also based on the assumption that the country
of ‘domicile has this jurisdiction. Accordingly, it is proper that we need not
disturb the present position.

13,3. Where the divorce or legal separation, though not granted in the country
of domicile, is recognised as valid in the country of domicile, it stands to
reason that it should be recognised in India. Such a provision is contained in
the English Act of 1971, and the matter should be expressly provided for.

13.4. Besides this, it is also necessary to save the provisions of any other
enactment, which provides for recognition’. There is, so far as could be ascer-
tained, only one Indian enactment’ directly relating to the recognition of decrees
of divorce. But the provision as regards recognition by virtue of any other
enactment will have to be general.

43.8. Lastly, it appears to be advisable to provide that the non-recognition
of a divorce by a third country shall not be a bar to the recognition of the
divorce in India. Such a provision is contained in the English Act*. The main
utility of such a provision lies in this, that it makes the provisions of the pro-
posed Act operative irrespective of the attitudes of other countries—particular-
ly, countries which adopt other tests for recognising divorces.

. CHAPTER 14
ज RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO NEW GROUNDS OF RECOGNITION
1. INTRODUCTORY

444. Having dealt with the existing law, we shall now proceed to consider
what changes should be made in it. The first major topic, which we propose
técdliscuss in this Chapter, will be concerned with the addition of new grounds
of-secognition. Retention of the existing grounds has been already dealt with’.

14,2 The question may naturally be raised, at the outset, why any additional
grounds of recognition should be inserted. and whether the existing grounds of
recognition, which are mostly based on the central concept of domicile, are not
sufficient for practical purposes. In order to deql with this question, it is
nécessary to refer to certain drawbacks resulting from the concept of domicile,
atid! also to take note of certain other aspects relevant to the matter.

UL. DOMICILE—DEFECTS

14.3. Now, so far as the concept of domicile is concerned, though, by and
large, its outlines in theory are clear, its practical application leads to certain
difficulties, the most important of which is the difficulty of determining that
pi of the concept which represents the mental element. Broadly speaking,
domicile, as understood according to the traditional concepts of the common

in
Iection 6a), English Act of 1971,
Cf. section 6(b), English Act of 1971.
%Enactment relating to war marriages.
4+Cf, section 7, English Act of 1971.
SChapter 13, supra.

88.

Recognition as
valid in the
country of domi-
लाए

Recognition by
virtue of any
other enactment.

Non-recognition
by a third coun-
try not a bar to
divorce,

Introductory.

‘Need for addition

to the — existing
grounds—con-
cepts of domi-~
cile.

Drawbacks in
the concept
of domicile.


Mental element.

Rigidity of the
English concept,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 14.~—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

law world, comprises two elements, which can be conveniently described as the
physical element and the mental element. Casc-law on the subject is legion;
but, for the purposes of the present analysis, it is sufficient to refer to the
observations of Lord Wensleydale’: “There are several definitions of domicile
which appear to me pretty nearly to approach correctness, One very good
definition is this: habitation in a place with the intention of remaining there
for ever, unless some circumstances should occur to alter this intention.”

The combination of fact and intention, which is required to- constitute
domicile, is also indicated Jucidly in the observations of Russell, J2>—

“The domicile flows from the combination cf fact and intention, the

fact of residence and the intemion of remaining for an unlimited time.

The intention required is not an inteation specifically directed to a 2 ghangs
of domicile, but an intention of residing in a country for an unlimi

time”.

14.4. The physical element in domicile may not present problems of magni-
tude. The mental element does. Iz may be easy to determine whether a person
is or is not residing in a particular place at the time when the proceedings for
divorce were instituted. But it is not so easy to determine what his intentions
were at that particular moment. A person may not always have a very definite
intention as to what country he proposes to make his permanent home. The
inference drawn by the court may do injustice to the person who may not have
such intention.

‘The mere fact of a man residing in a place different from that in which
he has been previously domiciled (domicile of origin), even though his residence
there may be long and continuous, does not, of necessity, show that he has
elected that place as his permanent and abiding home. Therefore, though the
concept of domicile as a test of recognition of a foreign decree is simple in
formulation, it is difficult in its application.

145. Another difficulty created by the concept of domicile is the fact that it
is a very rigid one. In Arnold ¥. Arnold, it was observed—

“The general rule of jurisdiction in divorce in England is that English

domicile only is the test and that has to be the domicile of the husband,

Pausing there, English conception of domicile is the most rigid in the

world, It must be residence with the intention of permanent settlement

jn that place.”

It does not, for example, tally with the American concept of domicile,
which, in this context is, 10 some extent, more liberal. The American concept of
domicile is, in practice, if not in theory, different from the English one. The
English concept emphasises the subjective element. While judicial pronounce-
ments and other cutrent formulations of the requisite intent in the U.S.A. do not
look very different irom those employed in English law, yei, in actual Practice,
‘American courts, in general, have not taken the subjective test as literally as their

British counterparts.

Remote possibilities, or evem rather strong probabilities, of a future recurs,
to the country of the previous domicile, or other removal from the actuz] place
of abode would, by the yardstick applied by English courts, probably prevent

Ipfhicker v, Hume (1858) 7 House of Lords Cases 124, 164.
tRe Annesley, Davidson ¥. Annesley, (1926) Ch. 692.
s4rnold v, Arnold, (1957) 1 AIL E, R. 570, S72.



Report on Recognition of Foréign Divorces
(Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

the acquisition of a domicile of choice. But these have usually been disregard-
ed by American courts. This has been done even where the acquisition of a
new domicile involved abandonment of a domicile of origin.

Again, in the U.S.A., a change of domicile is said to depend not so
much upon the intention to remain indefinitely in the new place, as upon a
lack of any present intention to establish a home elsewhere.

Under the Restatement prepared by the American Law Institute, for
example, it is enough if the person intends to make a place as home “for the
time at least.’

14.6. Another drawback of the English concept is that apart from statutory
modification, the domicile of the wife follows that of the husband in general,
so long as the marriage is subsisting. It is not only settled that a wife on her
marriage acquire by operation of law the domicile of her husband, which she
retains so long as the marriage subsists’-" but it is also well-settled that she retains
this domicile even if she is deserted by her husband‘, and even though she may
have obtained a decree of judicial separation’.

This aspect of the concept of domicile naturally causes injustice when
the husband deserts the wfe, with the result that while the de facto residence
of the wife is different from that of the husband, the pre-existing domicile,
which arose by reason of the marriage, confers jurisdiction on, and only on,
the courts of the foreign country where, before the desertion, the husband was
domiciled. Until the marriage comes to an end, this position survives where
the common law applies.

14.7. To sum up what has been stated above, the concept of domicile suffers
from the following principal drawbacks, namely,—

(i) difficulties of application’;
(ii) rigidity of content’; and
(iii) injustice to the wife’ in certain circumstances.

However, we may note that many countries adopt the test of domicile
as a basis for exercising jurisdiction in divorce.

44.8, In relation to those countries, it will obviously be desirable to recognise
the decrees of divorce or legal separation passed in these countries on that
basis. Such a provision is contained? in the English Act of 1971 also, and its

iRestatement (Conflict of Laws), section 15(2)(b), section 18.

34 lberta ५. Cook, (1926) A. C. 444 (०, C.).

®This is the common aw rule.

4¥elberton रू. Yelberton, (1859) 1 Sw. and Tr. 574.

See discussion in Garthwaite v. Garthwaite, (1964) 2 All 8. R. 233, 236 (Court of Ap-
peal) (Wilmer, L. 13.

"Para. 14:4, supra.

"Para. 14:5, supra:

Para. 14:6, supra.

Section 3(2), English Act of 1971.

4

Domicile of wife,

Difficulties of do-
micile summed. up.

Domicile,


Legislative de-
vice.

Habitual resid~
ice as a ground
of recognition,

Definition of “ha-
_bitual residence”
not necessary.

a
Habitual resid-

ence of = cither
spouse,

Article 2 of the
Convention.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces.

{Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

utility, even after insertion of the proposed new tests of recognition, lies in this,
that Indian courts, while considering the question of recognition, will not be
called upon to examine and investigate questions of fact relating to habitual
residence or nationality—-the proposed new tests, है

We therefore recommend that the present position in this regard sho
be preserved. '

14.84. The legislative device to be adopted in this connection should, haw-
ever, be slightly different from that adopted in the English Act. The English
Act includes domicile under habitual residence, in section 3(2). We would pre-
fer to mention it separately, and thus adopt a more direct way of dealing with
the matter,

UI. HABITUAL RESIDENCE

14.9. In view of the drawbacks of domicile to which we have referred, it is
desirable to consider the addition of other tests. The first ground of recogni-
tion to be newly added, to which we address ourselves, is that of habitual
residence. Though the concept of residence is not known to the common ‘law
in this field, it is not unfamiliar to Indian legislation. Before certain judiclal
decisions' (commencing with the year 1921) changed the position, residente
was treated as a basis for the exercise of jurisdiction under the Indian Divorce
Act, 1869, section 2. It ig belleved that the concept of “habitual residence”
strips the concept of “domicile” of technicalities and concentrates on the dura-
tion of the residence. In particular. it eliminates inquiries as to the mentat

element,

14.10. Since the question whether residence is habitual will be a questién
depending on the facts of each case, a definition of “habitual residence” would
not be necessary. The expression “habitual residence” does not, of courst,
necessarily mean the last conjugal residence in the country concerned, though,
in many cases, the two might coincide. Le
14.11. A more difficult question,—though a question of detail,—arises “where
the habitual residence of the respondent and the habitual residence of the
petitioner differ. What should be the test adopted in this regard? Habitual
residence of the respondent creates no problems, because, if the country is one
where the respondent was habitually residing. in most cases recognition of a
decree of a court of that country wauld not cause any injustice to the res-
pondent, However, the situation where only the petitioner was habitually tesi-
dent in the foreign country, is‘a difficult one. It is sometimes believed that
such a test of jurisdiction—a test connected with the petitioner's residence—
might favour what is known as “_forum-shopping”, that is to say, the peti-
tioner going from one placé to another and taking up residence in a country
mainly in order to select a forum favourable to him.

14.12. 11 appears that at the Hague Conference on private international law;
also, there was some reluctance to admit habitual residence of the petitioner
as a ground of jurisdiction. But the delegates of the Scandinavian countries—
Denmark, Finland and Norway—insisted upon the inclusion of a forum based.
on the habitual residence of the petitioner. The conference ultimately admitted
this as a ground of jurisdiction, though with certain safeguards,—briefly, at
least one year’s residence of the petitioner, the fact that the spouses Tast habi-
tually resided together in the country, and the fact that the petitioner who

also a national of that State.

Wee Keyes v. Keyes, supra.


Report on Recognition’ of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 14--Recommendations as to new grounds of recagnition.)

The precise provision in the Convention' is elaborate. Article 2 is as
follows:

“Article 2

Such divorces and legal separations shall be recognised in all other
Contracting States. subject to the remaining terms of this Convention, if, at the
date of the institution of the proceedings in the . State of the divorce or legal
separation (hereinafter called ‘the State of origin’}—

(1) the respondent had his habitual residence there, or

(2) the petitioner had his habitual residence there and one of the fol-
lawing further conditions was fulfilled :

(a) such habitual residence had continued for not Jess than one year
immediately prior to the institution of proceedings:

(b) the spouses last habitually resided there together; or
(3) both spouses were nationals of that State; or

(4) the petitioner was a national of that State atid one of the fcllowing
further conditions was fulfilled:

(a) the petitioner had his habitual residence there; or

19) he had habitually resided there fot a continuous period of one
year falling, at least in part. within the two years preceding the
institution of the proceedings; or

(5) the petitioner for divorce was व national of that State and both the
following further conditions were fulfilled:

(a) the petitioner was present in that State at the date of institu-
tion of the proceedings; and

(b) the spouses last habitually resided together in a State whose
law, at the date of institution of thé proceedings, did not provide
for divorce.” i

We shall discuss the question of either spouse later.

IV. NATIONALITY

1413. We shall now discuss the test of nationality. In general, and individual
has the nationality of State which confers it upon him, provided there exists
a genuine link between the State and the individual’.

The requirement of 8 genuine link is the ‘logical result of the decision
of the International Court of Justice in the' Nottebchns case’. The question of
existence of a genuine link may present problemd when the particular country
attempts to confer nationality upon @ persoii ‘not resident within its borders.
without that person’s consent. It inay also happen that more than one State.
may determine that an individual in its national. For the present purpose it
js not necessary to go into these details ‘of datibality.' But it is pertinent to

Article 2 of the Hague International Convention.
2American Law Institute, Restatement of Foreign relations Law, Second (1905), page 74,
para. 26.

‘ to.
BNanebohm case, 1 C. J. Report 4, 49 American Journal of International Law, 396.

Nationality cons-
tituted by a

nuine link justity-
ing duly of-allegs4
ence, आ


Use as to desira-
pility of recognis-
ing the test of
nationality.

Another ground
of recognition is

nationality.
‘spt of natic-
2 and
ty.
Roman Law.

Tost“ of nationa-
304 i

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

point ont that nationality is a concept which is normally evolved in order to
determine whether a person owes permanent allegiance to the country con
cerned’. a

- aad
14.14. Examining the desirability of the test of nationalily in relation to
secognition of divorces, we would state that on this subject, two views are
possible, Many civil law countries treat this as a basic ground for the exercise
of jurisdiction in matrimonial causes; and not to recognise this test amounts
to non-tecognition of their decrees in almost every case. At the same time,
however, it is to be pointed out that nationality, in itself, does not indicate a
sufficiently close connection significant for the present purpose between a persoo
and a country.

14.15. Injustice might, therefore, result where a person has abandoned the
country of nationality long before institution of the proceedings in which the
decree was obtained. Recognising these aspects, the Hague convention requires
certain other safeguards to be complied with, where recognition on the ground
of nationality is dealt with.

14.16. Nationality has a political aspect, and may involye various methods,
such as place of birth, formal allegiance to a sovereign, race or ancestry and
many other facts which are not necessarily related to domicile, As Leflar bas
pointed out’. “It is entirely possible for a citizen of one country to be domiciled

in another.”

14.17. The difference between nationality and domicile is of interest. In
Roman times, the two ideas, (nationality and domicile), were not clearly
separated. The relationship of a person to the laws of a community could be
regarded—
(0 from the point of view of his domestic home being located withia
the community, or
(ii) from the point of view of political ties binding him in common with
other members of the community.

14.18, The Romans did not regard domicile as unitary, im the sense that 8
person could be domiciled in only one jurisdiction at a given time. The idea
was introduced later‘, An important factor causing certain countries to derive
personal iaw from nationality, while causing other countries to derive it from
domicile, has been the development of federalism’. ~

14.19, The test of nationality may now be considered in the Indian context.
Jt can be stated that the majority of the cases coming up before Indian courts
for recognition, directly or indirectly, will of Indians who, before their return
to India, were residing in foreign countries, such as the United Kingdom. some
of the Far Eastern countries, the United States and Canada. As to such cases,
the test of nationality, even if inserted as a ground for recognition of the foreign
divorce, will be merely academic. The nationality of the parties, in the vast

GR, The U_ 8, A. Immigration and Nationality Act, 1552, section 10122), (1958);
8 United States Cade, section 1101(ax22).

Article 2, para. 14:12, supra.

HLeffar, American Conflict Laws (1968). page 31, paragraph 16.

‘See Story, Conflict of Laws (8th ed., 1883), Ch. 3.

SC}, Cook. The Logica! and Lega! Bases of the Conflict of Laws 1942. Ch. 8.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition)

majority of such cases, would be Indian, and the test of nationality would not
add anything to the competence of the foreign courts.

However, in a small number of cases, where the parties are not Indian
nationals, or at least one of the parties is not an Indian national, the acceptance
or rejection of the test of nationality, in relation to recognising the jurisdiction
of the foreign court, could be material, If the foreign country exercised jurisdice
tion on the basis of nationality and the parties, though of Indian origin, are
its nationals, such a decree may be passed by the foreign court. Utility of
Tecognition of the decree in such cases is obvious.

14.26. Adoption of the test of nationality has another consideration to com-
mend itself, namely, that the test is applied by many of the civil law countries
for exercising their matrimonial jurisdiction. Jt follows that if the test is not
accepted and incorporated into our law for recognising the decrees of divorce
granted by those countries, than divorces granted by those countries would not
..be valid in India. The parties would then have to institate proceedings for
solution again in India. Assuming that this situation will not often arise in
_factice because of the small number of non-Indians' whose marriage, having
, been dissolved by a foreign court, would be the subject-matter of litigation in
Indian courts, it is still to be borne in mind that if the situation arise, there
will be practical inconvenience, because the question of divorce will have to
be re-litigated.

In addition to this aspect of practical inconvenience, there is a theoretical
aspect which cannot be brushed aside, namely, the parties, unless they are
domiciled in India—may not even be able to invoke the jurisdiction of an

\, Indian court, at least when they are Christians. This is for the reason that
“ander the Indian Divorce Act, 1869, which is the principal enactment for
Christians, jurisdiction’ in relation to divorce is exercised exclusively on the
basis of domicile. If this be the correct position, then it means that, non-
domiciled Christians would neither have a foreign decree to stand back upoa,—
if it is not recognised,—nor can they seek the aid of our courts for establishing
the ground of divorce (whatever that ground may be), and seeking appropriate
matrimonial relief. Even if they are prepared to undergo the inconvenience of
instituting fresh proceedings in India, the scheme of the Indian Divorce Act
would come in their way if they are Christians, as explained above.

14.21. Even where, in the above situation’, the parties are Hindus, though not
of Indian nationality, a similar difficulty could arise, because the provision‘ in
the Hindu Marriage Act relating to the jurisdiction of courts is ambiguous.

Tt is not clear beyond doubt whether the provision is intended simply
to deal with the internal venue, ic., the particular Indian court that should
exercise jurisdiction, or whether it is intended to deal with the broader question
“of the jurisdiction of Indian courts in general with reference to private inter-
national law.

14.22, Having regard to the difficulties which would result if the decrees of the
court of nationality are not recognised, we are inclined to take the view that
such recognition should be accorded. If this principle is accepted, the next

3886 para 14:19, supra.

*Sce discussion as to section 2, Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (Chapter 6, supra).
*Paras. 14:19 and 14:20, supra,

‘Section 19. Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (See Chapter 5, supra).

भर

Points in favour
af recognising on
the ground of
national

Position —_ regard-
ing Christians.

Difficulties of the
Situation — where
parties are Hin-
dus.

Test of nationa-
lity recommended.


Whether other
considerations *
should be incor-
Perated,

Test. of habitual
teaidence etc. of
either party, whe-
oe to be adopt-

Difficulty of _ de-
ciding the basis of
recognition,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

question to be considered is one of detail, namely, whether the principle of
nationality should be subjected to any such additional requirements as are
contemplated by Article 2 of the Hague Convention’ * or whether nationality
simpliciter should be enough. In either case, another question of detail will
also require to be considered, namely, whether the nationality of both parties
should be the test, or whether the nationality of onc party should suffice. We

we

think that a simple test is enough.

14.23. We note that in Engiand, this test has been adopted without any. further
qualifications. On the other hand, in the International Convention’, the: test
has been inserted with certain restrictive provisions. The former is preferable,
in our view, as simpler to apply, and it does not suffer from any * jutistie
infirmity. fovatt
sore wil
14.24. On the question whether the iest of nationality should be encunssered,
with the various qualifications that are found in article 2 of the. International
Convention’, we repeat our view! that it should not be so encumbered... for
two reasons. In the first place, such! restrictions are not recognised by apme, ~~ *
the civil law countries, and, in the second place, such restrictions might एप
the practical utility of :the provisions for recognition. Jn practice, this,,test, Is
not likely to be invoked oftem in relation to persons of Indian origin, and wilt
be mostly invoked in relation-to persons of foreign origin. Such cases ate not

likely to be many. od
IV, WHETHER BOTH PARTIES SHOULD SATISFY THE TEST,

14.25. We shall now discuss the question whether it is enough if the -jurisdicr
tional requirement is satisfied in respect of one of the spouses, or whether that
requirement should be satisfied as regards both the spouses. This aspect hag
éaused some concern to us, and has received our anxious -consideration. -sineg
any decision we may take, would vitally affect the parties. 3

44,26. It may be noted, at the outset, that it is always a difficult question 10
decide whether a particular basis “for recognition should be adopted ini the
wider form or in the narrower form. Against the desirability of recognising
only divorces where the parties Have a real social connection with the country
of its own, there must be weighed the need to avoid situations where the ‘partics
are tegarded as being married id‘one country and not married in another’.
However, the difficulty is in the application of this broad principle. In what

cases can we assert, without fear of serious contradiction, that there is a Teal
social connection? This is 4 difficult question to answer, and there is # 70016
for divergence of approach, as is Wlustrated by the course adopted in the इशारा

Act as contrasted with the course-adopted in the Convention.

Under the English Act, it is enough if either spouse Gi £., one of the
spouses), satisfies the prescribed’ tast. We have already noted this provisign. ४. हि

tpara, 14:21, supra.

*articte 2. an
sSection 3{1)(b) of the English Act of 1971.
“Article 2 of the Convention,
sArticle 2, para. 14:21, supra.

Para, 14:23, supra. 1 गान

“Report of the Royal Commission on Marriage and Divorce (1956), Comstind Paper
No, 9678. pages 12 and 13.

*Section 3(1) (a) (b) and section 3(2), 1971 Act, pata. 10:3, supra,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapier 14—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

14.27. The Hague Convention’ is more restrictive in this regard, and lays down
a number of conditions to be fulfilled where both the parties do not satisfy

the jurisdictional test, Article 2 of that Convention’ makes a distinction
between the respondent and the petitioner. The habitual residence of the res-

pondent within the territory of the state of the divorce or separation is, by
itself, a sufficient ground of jurisdiction, under Article 2(1). This is likely to
be the most convenient forum from the respondent’s point of view, and was
therefore admitted, at the Convention, with little discussion. But there was
more reluctance to admit the habitual residence of the petitioner as a ground
of jurisdiction. Some delegates apprehended that such a head of jurisdiction
might favour “forum-shopping”. The delegates of the Scandinavian countries,
however, having im mind the case of a Scandinavian woman deserted, say, by
an Italian husband, insisted upon the inclusion of a forum based on the babitual
residence of the petitioner—apparently to secure recognition for divorces grant-
ed to the deserted Scandinavian women in a Scandinavian country. In the result,
the Conference admitted the petitioner's habitual residence in a state as a
ground of fecoguition but only when coupled with such “fortifying’ clements
as the length-of the petitioner's residence, the fact that the spouses last habitually
resided together in that State, and the fact that the petitioner was alsa a national
of that State.

Tt was argued by the Belgian delegate in 1967 that the fact that the
spouses had their last conjugal residence in a State should, by itself, found
the competence of that state in matters of divorce and sepaiation, but this
suggestion was ultimately rejected.

14,28. Some difficulty also arose, in the debates preceding the Convention, as
to the admission of ationality as a ground of jurisdiction. Since nationality is
the basic ground of jurisdiction in most civil law countries, there was no
objection to applying it in general, It was argued, however, by certain delegates
that the political tie of nationality did not always point to a sufficiently close
connection between a person and a State, to justify, in relation to the persou,
its assumption of jurisdiction in divorce. Jt might lead, for example, to the
application to a person, against his will, of the laws of a State which he had
Jong abandoned This reasoning was so far accepted that the mere nationatity
of the respondent is never, by itself. a recognised head of jurisdiction’ under
the convention. Nationality of the petitioner suffices only when it is coupled
with such “fortifving” elements as——{1) the petitioner's own habitual residence
within his national State, (2) his habitual residence there for a continuous period
of one year falling, at Jeast in part, within the two years preceding the institu-
tion of the proceedings, and (3) the respondent’s also possessing the nationality
of the State of the divorce.

The Convention makes yet another concession tc the nationality principle.
Article 2(5) recognises that a petitioner may seek the remedy of divorce in the
state of his nationality if (a) he was present in that State at the date of institu-
tion of proceedings and (b) the spouses last fubitually resided together in a
State whose Jaw, at the date of institution of the proceedings, did not provide

fot divorce.

Article 2, Hague Convention.

ara. 9.3. supra,

3Its inclusion. though pressed by the delegates of Austria, Belgium, Germany, Greece
and Yugoslavia, was rejected by a large majority of states.

75 LDND 176

Acticle 2, Hague

Convention,

Question of
tionality.


94

Our approach.

Peculiar social
fact relevant to
Indian women
with husband’s re-
sident abroad.

Recommendation
as to habitual re-
sidence ete. of
both parties,

Revision in
English Act o1
‘Hague — Conyen-
tion net favour-
ed.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 14.-Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition.)

This provision is designed to meet the case where, for example, a girl
of Swiss nationality who is married to an Italian wishes to obtain in divorce
in Switzerland without necessarily taking up or resuming an habitual residence
there. Though this provision clearly opens the way to a species of “air ticket
divorce” for the wealthy, the delegates of Italy and Ireland were among those
who voted in its favour.

14.29, So much as regards the provision in the Convention. The question now
to be considered is, what should be our approach? Should we adopt—{ij the
English Act, (ii) the Convention, or (iii) any other course ? Adoption of the
English Act! would mean that the jurisdictional test need be satisfied only in
relation to one party. Adopting the Convention* would mean that (i) | both
parties must satisfy the test, or (ii) if only one party satisfies the test, certain
other requirements should also be satisfied.

14,30. In making our recommendation on the subject, we cannot disregard the
social fact that many Indian women in India marry young Indians who, soon
after marriage, return to a foreign country where they have already taken up
their residence, the wives remaining behind. The Indian husband may then
obtain a divorce in the foreign country on the basis of, say, his own habitual
residence in the foreign country. The wife may not have visited the foreign
country, or may not have resided there for a long period.

If, in this hypothetical situation, a court in a foreign country grants, a
divorce and the divorce is recognised in India, injustice would be caused to
the wife, because, on the facts assumed in the above hypothesis, the wife
cannot be presumed to have accepted the foreign country as her legal home.

Of course, the same reasoning applies where a husband returns to India,
leaving the wife in the foreign country and the wife obtains a divorce in that
country. But this situation is not likely to be as frequent as the situation mention-
ed above.

14.38. Having regard to what we have stated above, we have, after careful
consideration, come to the conclusion that in order that recognition may be
granted by Indian law to a foreign ‘divorce, the proposed law should require
that both the parties should satisfy the jurisdictional tests. In coming to this
conclusion, we have been chiefly impressed by the fact that if recognition is
granted on the basis of the domicile, habtitual residence or nationality of one
of the parties, injustice would often be caused to the woman, in the special
circumstances already mentioned*.

14.32. It follows from what we have stated above that we do not consider the
provision in the English Act* as appropriate for India. We may also mention
that we are not inclined to adopt the compromise formula adopted in article 2
of the Hague Convention*. Such a formula might prove rather cumbersome.
That article is not a model of pristine simplicity. But, that apart, we are not
certain if the formula given in that article will be easily workable in practice,
hedged in, as it is, with a number of restrictions which might require the re-
cognising court to satisfy itself about a number of iests.

'Para. 14.26, supra.
“Para, 14:28, supra.
"Para. 14:30, supra.
SPara, 14:26, supra.
*Para. 14:28, supra.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 14.—Recommendations as to new grounds of recognition)
(Chapter 15.—Domicile and Nationality of the wife.)

14.33. We would, therefore, prefer the stricter approach’, namely, that both
Parties must satisfy the jurisdictional tests. No doubt, such an appreach carries
certain implications, since it lays down a narrow scope for recognition. If the
husband is, say, habitually residence in country ऊँ, and his wife is habitually
resident in country Y, a divorce obtained in neither country would be recognised
in India. The same applies to cases where the parties are domiciled in, or
nationals of, different countries.

14.34, However, this is the position even now under Indian private interna-
tional law, which, following the English rules, requires the domicile of both
parties in the foreign country, before the divorce is recognised. In any case,
this aspect must be weighed against ihe possibility of serious injustice, parti-
cularly to the woman, as explained above’, if the test of habitual residence
etc. of either party is adopted.

¥. RECOMMENDATION

14,35, Having regard to all aspects of the matter, and after taking into account
the various points discussed above, we have come to the conclusion that it is
desirable to provide for the* recognition of divorces or legal separations granted
by countries where both were habitually resident, or by countries of which both
are a national. In addition, the present test of domicile should be continued.

CHapTER 15
DOMICILE AND NATIONALITY OF THE WIFE
1, DOMICILE

46.1. Two questions concerning married women may now be dealt with—domi-
cile and nationality. A married woman's domicile follows, in general, that of her
husband. This is described as the domicile of dependence. Domicile of depend-
ance as a basis of jurisdiction has attracted much criticism over a long period,
particularly in that it may be unfair to a married woman who can have no inde-

pendent domicile.

152. It may be noted that so far as domicile is concerned Indian courts have,
in general, followed the English rules whenever occasion arose,—as for example,
in cases under the Indian Divorce Act. The Indian Succession Act’ has a specific
provision whereunder the domicile of the wife, in general, follows that of the
husband—though, the applicability of this part of the succession Act is imited.‘
Ia this position, if the rule of English law is to be modified, an express provision
appears to be desirable,

183, While the advantage of domicile is that it covers people who psychologi-
edly “belong” to a country, the theory of dependent domicile of a wife is the
main disadvantage. This theory of dependant domicile violates the modern prin-
ciple of equality of sexes, and has been discarded in many commonwealth coun-
tries, such as, Canada,’ Australia’ and New Zealand.’

Para, 34:31 and 14:32, supra.

‘Para. 14:30, supra.

°Sections 15 and 16, Indian Succession Act, 1925.
‘Section 4, Indian Succession Act, 1925.
8Divorce Act, 1968 (Canada).

(Australian) Matrimonial Causes Act. 1963
TNew Zcaland Matrimonial Causes Act, 1963,

95

Effect of the re-
commendation
considered.

Recommendation,

Dependent do-

micile of wife,

Indian law,

Criticism of
theory of depen-
dent domicile,


Recommendation

as to wife's
micile.

Introductory.

do-

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 15—Domicile and Nationality of the wife.)

Abolition of the wife’s dependant domicile has been achieved in England by
section 1 of the 0०४ of 1971, which reads—

“Uy (1) Subject to sub-section (2) below, the domicile of a married woman
as at any time after the coming into force of this section shall, instead
of being the same at her husband's by virtue only of marriage, be
ascertained by reference to the same factors as in the case of any
other individual capable of having an independent domicile.

(2) Where immediately before this section came into force 2 woman was
married and then had her husband's domicile by dependence, she is
to be treated as retaining that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it
is not also her domicile of origin) unless and until it is changed by
acquisition or revival of another domicile either on or after the com-
ing itto force of this section.

(3) This section extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Norther
Ireland.”

15.4. Some countries stil! apply the common law rule.

15.5. In our view, it would be fair to provide that for the purposes of the pre-
sent proposals, the domicile of the woman should be determined independently
of that of the husband, Such a provision is required not only in view of the
rule at present applied in India* but also in view of the fact that some countries
still apply the common law tule* Such approach would be in conformity with

the spirit of the Indian Constitution.

वा, NATIONALITY—GENERAL DISCUSSIONS

15.5A. The next topic to be considered is the nationality of a married woman.
Legal systems have adopted different approaches in this regard. .

The possible alternative principles which may govern the nationality of
martied woman are :*

(1) that marriage shall have no effect; or
(2) that the wife shall take such nationality as shall depend on her owa
election:

put these are subject to variation. That marriage shall have no effect was the
common law tule in England,’ but it was changed by the Naturalisation Act of
1870, for the second rule, and this was in force for some time. It was the rule
in the United Staics until reversed by the “Cable Act” of 1922, and, since then,
a British woman marrying a United States citizen does not, without express
naturalisation, become a citizen of the United States.‘ On the other hand, sha
Jooses her British nationality, and is, therefore, stateless, while a woman of the
United States who marties a British subject at the same time retains American
nationality, These cases of statelessness and double nationality are the result of
the present contradictory systems. Jn general. they are avoided under the French

‘Section 1, English Act of 1971.
ePata. 15.2, supra.

sPara. 15.4, supra.

4See (1930) Law Journal, page 144.
$See (1930) Law Journal, page 144,
*See (1930) Law Journal, page 144.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 15—Domicile and Nationality of the wife.)

nationality Jaw of 1927, which substantially adopts the third rule, 2nd makes the
woman's change of nationality depend om her election.*

We consider it essential that married women shall have the right to deter-
mine their own citizenship, corresponding to their present equality in respect of
property and political sights. The tendency in Europe appzars to be to adopt
the English rule, and make the wife's nationality follow that of the husband.’
Apart from the abstract point of liberty and cquality, this is probably the con-
venient rule. At any rate, the most pressing matter is to source, not that a mar-
ried woman shall have any perticular nationality, but that she shall not, by
martiage, lose her original nationality without gaining another. In other words,
the loss of one nationality should be conditional on the acquisition of the other:
and this was one of the suggestions of the League of Nations Codifving Committee
which dealt with the subject.

There is a careful survey of the whole question in a paper read by Mr. F.
Liewellya Jonem, M. P., before the Grotius Society’, where the position was des-
eribed in detail, As rapporteur for the International Law Commission, Hudson
expressed the following opinion.‘

“Under the law of some States nationality is conferred automatically by
operation of faw, as the effect of certain charges ir civil status: adoption,
legitimation, recognition by affiliation, marriage.

Appointment as each at 2 university also involves conferment of natio-
nality under some national laws.

While these reasons fer the conferment of nationality have been recognis-
ed by the consistant practice of States and may, therefore, be considered
as consistent with international law, others have not been so recognised.”

UI, NATIONALITY—ENGLISH LAW

156, Under the English common law, at least upto 1834, marriage did not affect
a woman’s nationality. In the Countees Conway's case* reported in that year,
Baron Parke said:-—
4 6. ७.६७०५-७५-०००००-०-- A French woman becomes in no wey 2 British
subject by marrying an English man; she continues an eben, and is not
entitled to dower.”

He referred to Coke on Littletonn’ in this connection, the position in this regard
has, however, been altered by statute in England.

The Naturalisation Act, 1870, in section 18, first laid dowa that a woman
who is a British subject and marries an alien, should be deemed an alien. Section
1७1) of the British Nationality and Status of Aliens Act, 1914, expressed the
same principle more elaborately, and enacted’ that “wife of a British subject
shall be deemed to be a British subject, and the wife of an alien shall be deem-

ed to be an alien.”

1562 (1930) Law Journal 144,

28588 (1930) Law Joumal 144.

“36. Liewellyn Jones, M. P., Transactions of the Cretius Society (1930), Vol, 15.

4¥rbk, 1. L, ९. (1952) 11.8. The rubric employed is: “Conferment of nationality by
operation of Lar

"Countess Conway's case,
Bom. 81, 84.

6Coke on Littleton, page 326.

Creig, International Law, {1970), page 292,

(1834) 2 Napp. 364, 368, cited in Rai Asha, A. 3, R. 1929

”

English law 0
1834, aw पका


Provision in Citi-

zenship Act,

Case law as

nationality
wife.

Legislative
vice.

to
of

de-

Report on Recognition of Foréign Divorces
(Chapter 15.—Domicile and Nationabity of the wife.)

The position was again changed as a result of international conventions on
the subject, and an amendment which was made in 1933 reversed the rule. The
later Act of 1948, which contains the present British law on the subject, pro-
vides, in effect, that marriage does not, in itself, change the nationality of a
woman.

IV, NATIONALITY—INDIAN LAW

15.7, As regards Indian statute law relating to nationality, it may be stated that
under section 5(1)(c) of the Citizenship Act, 1955, a woman married to a citizen
of India does not automatically become an Indian citizen, though she may make
an application and be registered as a citizen of India. A decision of the question
whether she should be registered, is left to the discretion of the Central Govern-
ment. In substance, the scheme of the Citizenship Act is in conformity with the
U.N. Convention on the Nationality of Married Woman.

The provisions of the Citizenship Act are, however, of no use in deter-
mining the question how far as Indian woman married to a foreigner becomes @
foreign citizen. Nor does that Act deal with the question how far a non-Indian
woman, on marriage, acquires the nationality of another country of which her
husband is a national. These questions have to be determined apart from the
Act.

15,8. It has been held® by the Assam High Court that there is, in India, no pre-
sumption that the wife would, by marriage, acquire the hubsand’s nationality.

So far as nationality is concerned, the theory of unity of the husband and
wife for the purpose of determining the nationality does not seem to have found
favour in England, or in other commonwealth jurisdiction?

However, this theory seems to have been accepted in some foreign coun»
fries and it is because of that position that it may be desirable to provide, in the
proposed law, that the nationality of the wife should be determinable separately
from that of the husband.

५. RECOMMENDATION

15.9. The position, therefore, that emerges from the above discussion is that
it is desirable to provide that the rule that on marriage the wife acquires the
domicile’ or nationality’ of the husband ‘shail not apply in relation to the recog-
nition of foreign divorces and separations. There are several ways of providing
what we have stated above, and, so long as the object is achieved, it does not
matter what drafting device is adopted.

We give below some drafts for the purpose.

Article 3, U. N. Convention, U. N. Series, Vol. 139, page 87.

‘Aseam L, S, 1970, Assam 209 (Quinquennial Digest 1966-70, page 275, right hand,
under Citizenship Act, section 2(6}]

*Rood Phillips, Constitutional & Administrative Law (1967), pages 416 and 418,
‘Para. 15:7, supra.
"Para. 15:3, supra.
"Para, 15:4, supra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 15.—Domicile and Nationality of the wife. Chapter 16.—Exceptions
to Recognition.)

Proposed section as to domcile and nationality of wife

(1) For the purposes of this Act, and subject to the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (2), the domicile of a married woman as at any time after the commence-
ment of this Act shall, instead of being the same as her husband’s by virtue
only of marriage, be ascertained by reference to the same factors as in the case
of any other individual capable of having an independent domicile.

(2) Where, immediately before the commencement of this Act, a woman
was married and then had her husband’s domicile by dependence, she shall be
treated as retaining that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also her
domicile of origin), unless and until it is changed by acquisition or revival of
another domicile either on or after the commencement of this Act.

Alternative drait

(1) For the purposes of this Act. and subject to the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (2), the domicile of a woman who is, or has at any time been, married,
shall be determined as if she had never been married.

(2) Where, immediately before the commencement of this Act, a woman
was married and then had her husband’s domicile by dependence, she shall be
treated as retaining that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also her
domicile or origin), unless and until it is changed by acquisition or revival of
another domicile either on or after the commencement of this Act.

Another Alternative draft

(1) For the purposes of this Act, and subject to the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (2), any rule of law whereby a woman on her marriage acquires her hus-
band’s domicile or nationality shall not be taken into account.

(2) Sub-seciion (2) as 18 main draft.
Carrer 16
EXCEPTIONS TO RECOGNITION—NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY

16.1. Recognition of a foreign divorce or legal separation, whether un the pro-
posed new grounds, or on grounds’ already regarded as valid in our existing law,
must be subject to certain overriding requirements which justify the making of
exceptions to the general rule of recognition.

46.2, The attacks on a judgment may be classified as collateral, direct
and equitable. A collateral attach operates in regard to a judgment only if it
is void for want of jurisdiction, the theory being that a Court without the power
to act can, in no way, affect legal relations.’ Direct attack on a. judgment is an
attempt in the original proceeding to have the judgment set aside for error.
Lastly, a prayer for equitable relief—cither by way of an independent proceed-
ing or by way of defence—protects a party from the effect of a judgment sought
to have been obtained by improper means. Fraud belongs to the last category.

‘The last alternative draft is preferable.
‘Chapter 14, supra.

Chapter 13, supra.
‘Mote, “X Developments—See judicata”, (1952) Harvard Law Review 818, 850.

9

Introductory.

Grounds of attack
on judgment,


100

Cases where  ex-
ception needed.

Na subsisting
marriage.

Certain special
situations illus-
trating the — ab-
sence of a valid
marriage after
divorce valid
under proposed
Act.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 16.—Exceptions to Recognition.)

16.3. Broadly speaking, the need for making such exceptions to recognition
appears to arise in the following cases—

(a) where there is no subsisting marriage according to Indian law;

(b) where the rules of natural justice have not been observed by the for-
eign court?

(०) where public policy requires non-recognition of the divorce or legal
separation,’

(d) fraud."

We shall deal with the first two in this Chapter, reserving a discussion of
the rest to ather chapters.

16.4. First, as 10 the case’ where there is no subsisting marriage according to
Indian law (including its rules of private international law and also including
the provisions of the proposed Act)," the justification for non-recognition of the
divorce in such a situation is obvious. Where there was no subsisting marriage
according to Indian law in the sense explained above, and the situation is one
where the indian law of marriage is properly applicable, the grant of recognition
to the divorce or legal separation would be illogical, and would create confusion.
Recognition of the divorce would mean recognition of the marriage—and if there
is no marriage according to Indian law. this would create an inconsistent situa-
tion.

16.5. In this context, one aspect should also be referred to. Where the effect
of applying the provisions of the proposed Act would be to confer validity on a
divorce granted by a foreign country X, then, obviously, the marriage in respect
of which divorce is decreed cannot subsist after the decree of divorce, if the
decree falls within the class of decrees covered by the proposed Act. Now, it
may happen that country ¥ (i.e. another country), does not recognise that divorce,
and a court of that country later grants a divorce to the same parties in respect
of the same marriage. This later divorce cannot be recognised by our courts;
since our courts are bound to recognise the first divorce, the marriage does not
subsist according to our law. The second divorce has, therefore, to be treated
as void by our courts.

A negative illustration can also be taken, Let us assume, that by virtue of
ibe proposed provisions, a particular foreign divorce cannot be recognised in
India, The divorce is, however, recognised by, say, country X and a party to
the marriage, now divorced, enters into a re-marriage with a third person in
country X. This re-marriage is not a valid marriage in the eye of our law, since
cur courts do not recognise the divorce. The second marriage is, thus, void in the
eye of our law. If this recarriage ie. itself disolved by a decree of divorce in
a foreign country, that divorce cannot be recognised in India, there being no sub-
sisting (valid) marriage according 10 the conceptions of our courts, In order to
ensure such a position, it is desirable to make a suitable provision by way of
exception to the normal rules for recognition.

wara. 16:4, infra,
*Para, 16:7, infra.
sChapter 17, infra.
‘Chapter 18, infra.
8Para. 16:4, supra.
"Para, 16:5, infra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 16—Exceptions te Recognition. Chapter 17.—Public Policy.)

A general formula, such as—“‘where there is ao subsisting marriage”—
would cover all these cases. The English Act’ has a provision on the subject,
on similar lines.

16.6. Tt may be added that the situation may be one where Indian Law (inter-
nal Indian law), docs not apply to the divorce.

Rules of private international law, as is force in India, are to be taken into
account in that case, and if the result of the application of these rules is that
there is no subsisting marriage, then, again, the divorce cannot be recognised,
This situation may arise where the marriage is null and void by reason of the
application of Indian rules of private international law. For example, if the
matriage was solemnised i India in violation statutory requirements as to pro-
hibited degrees, the dignity and consistency of our legal and judicial system would
demand that the divorce be disregarded.

16.7. This takes us to the second exception’ needed in relation to recognition.
That relates to a foreign decree passed in breach of natural justice. The English
Act? has a specific provision on the subject, the gist of which is that a foreign
decree will not be recognised in England if either the other party had no reason-
able notice of the proceedings, or if the other party had, apart from notice, no
reasonable opportunity of hearing. For both the purposes—ie. for determining
the reasonableness of the notice and reasonableness of the opportunity—regard
ig to be had to the nature of the proceedings and “all circumstances” (of the case).

The relevant provision in the English Act reads—

(2) Subject to sub-section (Z) of this section, recognition by virtue of this
Act or of any rule preserved by section 6 thereof of the validity of a
divorce or legal separation obtained outside the British Isles may be
refused if, and only if—

(a) it was obtained by one spouse—

(i) without such steps having been taken for giving notice of the
proceedings to the other spouse as, having regard to the
nature of the proceedings and all the circumstances, should
reasonably have been taken; or

(ii) without the other spouse having been given (for any reason
other than lack of notice) such opportunity to take part in the
proceedings as, having regard to the matters aforesaid, he
should reasonable have been given; or”.

This could be adopted in our Iaw also, being obviously fair and required
by the canons of justice.

CuapTer 17
PUBLIC POLICY
I. INTRODUCTORY

17.1. Public policy constitutes another possible exception in regard to the re-
cognition of foreign judgments.

3Section &(1), English Act of 1971, para, 10.15, supra,
Para. 16.3, supra.
sSection 8(2), English Act of 1971

101

Breach of natural
justice,

Introductory.


102

Public Policy not
a definite expres-

ion,

Public policy not
with

conceme

the ideal.

Reporfon Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 17.—Public Policy.)

17.2. It must be stated, at the outset, that public policy may not be a very pre-
cise ground for non-recognition.' The expression “public policy” is not a very
definite one, In broad terms, however, it may be described as a reflection of the
general ideological approach of the legal system.

Edwin W. Patterson® points out that “policy”, in its etymological signifi-
cations, refers to plans for governmental action rather than to moral or ethical
principles. However, the expression is now familiar, and almost all legal systems
have some provision or other for not recognising foreign judgments on the ground
of “public. policy” or “order public” or some similar concept. The details and
names muy differ, but the concept is substantially the same.

The aspect of public policy was mentioned in Satya’s case where the
Supreme Court observed—

“3g, As we have stated at the outset, these principles of the American
and English conflict of laws are not to be adopted blindly by Indian
courts, Our notions of a genuine divorce and of substantial justice
and the distinctive principles of our public policy must determine the
rules of our private international law. But an awareness of foreign
law in a parallel jurisdiction would be a useful guideline in deter-
mining these rules. We are sovereign within our territory but “it is no
derogation of sovereignty to take account of foreign law” and as said
by Cardozo J., “We are not so provincial as to say that every solu-
tion of a problem is wrong because we deal with it otherwise at
home”; and we shall not brush aside foreign judicial processes uuless
doing so ‘would violate some fundamental principle of justice, some
prevalent conception of good morals, some deep-rooted tradition of
the common weal." Loucks ¥. Standard Oil Co. of New York (1918)

224 N.Y.99 at p. 111.”

The various approaches to public policy have been described more often
than once, and we shall also refer to them Jater’, The concept is essentially
elastic. In a case where the matter is not governed by a statute or by clear estab-
lished principles, the consideration of what is “public policy” must necessarily
involve the balancing of advantages against disadvantages,’ to the community at
large, in the light of current notions of propriety.

173. Public policy is not concerned with what ought to be the law. Winfield®
pointed out long ago, that while some ethical standard may be discoverable in
judicial legislation, it will not be found in public policy. That doctrine, he said,
may answer the question, “What is it that the community wants now?” It is
dumb before the question, “What is it that an ideal community ought to want?”

iFreud, “Reflection of Public Policies in the English Conflict of Law”, (1954) 39 Tran-
sactions of Grotius Society 38,83.

2Winfield, “Public Policy”, (1929) 42 Harv. Law Rev. 76.

3Patterson, Jurisprudence, (Brookyln 1953), page 282.

sSatya ¥. Taja, सै. 1. के. 1975 5. 0. 104, 115, para. 38.

5७) Norman March, “Severance of [llegality” (1948) 64 Law Quarterly Review 230, 347;

(by Mussbaum; “Public Policy in Conflict of Laws”, (1940) 49 Yale Law Journal 1027;

(0) Knight, “Public Policy in English Law”, 38 Law Quarterly Review, 207,

Spare. 14:11 to 14.14, infra.

1Apr. v. Apt. (1947) 2 Ali Eng, Reports 677 (Coben L. 33.

*Wintield “Public Policy” (1929) 42 Harvard Law, Rev, 76, 87.


Report on Recogaition of Foreign Divorces 103
(Chapter 17-—Public Policy.)

“A judicial decision on public policy will give us something more subtle
than the common place of a Greek tragic chorus, but it will not soar to
the ideal of the citizens in Plato’s Republic, and, if one may say so with-
out impertinence, nothing but danger and confusion could result if the
judges made any such attempt. Our common law is at such a mature age
now that the lines of its trunk are settled, whatever may be the direction
of its new branches”.

17.4, As to public policy, it is not surprising to find contradictory opinions ex- History of public
pressed as to its value by different judges. or even by the same judge on different policy,
occasions.'! In 1824, in the Court of Common Pleas and Court of the King's

Bench,’ there are dicta which are not easy to reconcile. In the King’s Bench

case, Abbott, C. J. not only took public policy as he found it, but carried it a

step further than it had gone before him.’ In the Common Pleas case‘, on the

other hand, Best, C. J. thought that the courts had gome much further than they

were warranted on questions of policy, and that where such questions were doubt-

ful, thy ought to be left to the legislature. It was in the same case'—Richardson

y. Meflish—that Mr. Justice Burrough took a similar view and used the expres-

sion “unruly horse”’—a phrase which he is said to have borrowed from Chief

Justice Hobart and which has now been quoted times out of number.

17.5. It was a Roman practice 10 incorporate, in statutes, a saving clause to the — Roman law.
eflect that iz was no purpose of the enactment to abrogate what was sacrosanct or
just’ Public policy achieves some such result.

176. Public policy in the realm of contracts is well-known. It is recognised Public policy in
im section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. One hears of public policy in Contracts.
contracts in restraint of trade certainly, as early as Elizabeth’ and, though, in

many of the cases, public policy is not mentioned, or is preferred to only as one

of the grounds of the decision, one can safely say chat it was clearly recognized

by the time of Mitchel y. Reynolds,’ whick was decided in 1711 anc was, for a

long time, a land-mark in this branch of the law.

Various shades of this concept are found in judgments reported in the
17th and 18th centuries.

17.7, Then, public policy bulks Jarge in that great decision on the rule against Public poliey and
the perpetuity

perpetuities, the Duke of Norfolk's case.’ tule,
To the question, “where will you stop, if you do not stop here?”, Lord

Nottingham retorted, “I will tell you where 1 will stop: I will stop wherever

any visible inconvenience doth appear.”

‘Winfield, “Public Policy”, (1929) 42 Harvard Law Review 76, 87.

*See Plumer, V. C., and Eldon, L. C., in Vauxhall Bridge Co. ४. Spencer, (1817), 2 Madd.
356, 365 Abbot, C. J. in Card v, Hope, (1824), 2 8. & C. 661, 670.

SCard v, Hope, (1824), 2 B. & C, 661, 676. While public policy is not mentioned in
the judgment, it underiines the decision.

‘Richardson v. Meltish, (1824) 2 Bing. 229, 242-243, 252.
SRichardson |. Meltish, (1824) 2 Bing. 229.

Winfield, “Public Policy”, (1929) 42 Harvard Law Rev. 76, 159.
?Winficld, “Public Policy”, (1929) 42 Harvard Law Rev, 76, 85.

*Apainst the policy of the common Jaw”, I. P. Wms, 181, 183 (1711); “against the
icy of the law”, ibid, at 187. Cf. “Encounter ia necessity del commonwealth". Anon,
loore K. B. 242 (1586); Claygaie v, Barchefor, Owen 143 (1600); “contrary to ‘common

8००7," Julies v. Broad, Nay 98 (1619).

*Duke of Norfolk's case, (1581) "Policy of the Kingdom,” Ch, Cas. I, 20 “ineonvenieace,”
ibid, at 49, 51.



164

“Conflict of Laws
and public

policy”.

Public policy in
relation to extra-
state causes of
action.

American cases.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 17.—Public Policy.)

17.8. We have, in the above discussion, drawn some examples from other
branches of the Jaw. We shall, in due course. deal with the ambit of public
policy in the conflict of laws. But, before we do so, its proper scope in general
may be conveniently dealt with, with reference to a few cases.

वा. AMERICAN CASES ON PUBLIC POLICY IN CONFLICT
OF LAWS

17.9. Public policy is not necessarily identical with the current laws of the par-
ticular country. Judge Cardozo, in the famous Loucks case,’ observed that “we
are not so provincial as to say that every solution of a problem is wrong because
we deal with it “otherwise at home”. In the Mertz case, the New York court
reverted to the old rule, after Cardozo was gone. But, again recently, the New
York Court of Appeal (Cardozo’s court), has re-established his enlightened hos-
pitality to extra-state causes of action,—causes of action which New York’s subs-
tantive law would not have allowed in the first place.

That was the case of Intercontinental Hotels Corp, v. Golden; the New
York action was on a cheque and several “I. O. U.’s” which the defendant (New
York resident) had given in Puerto Rico, in return for money subsequently lost
at play in the plaintiff's gambling casino there. These gambling debts were valid
under the Puerto Rican law, but the contracts involved would not have been valid
in New York. Recovery was, nevertheless, allowed.

Local public policy, as a ground for denying access to local courts, was
not abandoned, but was restricted to transactions “inherently vicious, wicked, or
immoral, and shocking to the prevailing moral sense”. Emphasis was placed on
the idea that public policy, for this purpose, is to be discovered by the courts not
so much from statutes or constitutions (law in the books), as from currently
prevailing community attitudes.

17.10. In the case of fa re Liberman’ the New York Court of Appeal held that
a condition in a trust arrangement, to the effect that the beneficiary should lose
the right to the trust fund if he should contract a marriage without the consent of

the trustees, was contrary to public policy.

In Big Cottonwood Tanner Bitch Co., ¥. Moyle,’ the Supreme Court of
Utah made the following statement: —

“In view of the fact that Utah is an arid state and the conservation of
water is of first importance, it is with great hesitancy that we subscribe to
any contention which would make it appear to be more difficult to save
water. It has always been the public policy of this state to prevent the
waste of water.”

“Loucks ¥. Standard 00 Co. (1918) N. ४. 99, 111, 120, N. E. 198, 201, cited by Laflar,
American Conflict of Laws (1968), page 105,

Merz v. Mertz, (1936) 271 N. ¥. 466, 3 1६. B. 2d 597, 108 A. L, R. 1120 (tort action
by wife against husband; New York refused to enforce, though Connecticut, where the facta
ocurred, would give a cause of action); cited by Lefiar, American Conflict of Laws (1968),
page 103.

oh inental Hotels Corp. v. Golden, (1964) 15 N. Y. 2d 9, 13, 203 NE 2d 210,
22, ee ee esa Br Sor (Majority view), cited by Leilar, American Conflict of Laws
(1968), page 105,

4n re Liberman, (1939), 18 N, 8, 2d 658, cited in Bodenheimer, Jurisprudence (1967),
page 314,

SBig Cottonwood Tonner Ditch Co. v. Moyle, (1945) Utah 197, 203, cited in Modenhei-

mer, Jurisprudence (1967), page 314,



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 17—Public Policy.)

17.11. These cases will show tha scope of public policy, and the emphasis plac-
ed on various considerations in the U.S. A.

गा, CONFLICT OF LAWS--PUBLIC POLICY ON THE CONTINENT.

17.42. On ithe continent, in the field of conflict of laws, the principle of public
policy is of great importance. It appears that under this rubric, the application
of foreign legal rules is barred where such application would conflict with the
fundamental moral ideological, social, economic or cultural standards of the
forum, or where it is necessary that the domestic legal rules should be uncondi-
tionally and absolutely applied, or where the principle of the foreign legal rule
conflicts with the mandatory rules of the law of nations. or international commit-
ments of the state of the forum, or the requirements of justice, as generally recog-
nised by the international legal community.

17.13, An carly “statutist” version of the “orders public” can, perhaps, be seen
in the refusal to apply statutes odfosa, and an equivalent may be seen in Huber’s
cautious and incidental reliance on the overriding interest of ordre pubtic against
such modest universality as conflicts law based on mere comity could command."
But only Mancini’s allembracing principles could move the ordre public into the
centre of attention’.

17.14. In the Russian Civil Code. for example’, it is provided that “foreign law
cannot be applied if it is inconflict with the foundations of the Soviet system.”

According to the Hungarian law’ on marriages, foreign law cannot be
admitted “if it infringes the Constitution or a rule of Hungarian law which in-
sists on absolute application.” Again, according to the Hungarian Law of Civil
Procedure® the decision of a foreign Court cannot be recognised in Hungary, if
recognition infringes the Constitution or a rule of Hungarian law which insists
on absolute application.

17,15. It has been stated by William Butler’: —

“The conception of ordre public, or public policy as the somewhat nar-
rower principle is known in common law countries, has not produced fundamen-
tal ideological cleavages among continental European and Anglo-American juris-
dictions, although many jurists have justly been apprehensive of its inchoate and
potentially unlimited scope. To Soviet jurists, however, the option of excluding
the application of foreign law deemed incompatible “with the essential principles
of justice and morality of the forum seemed to be a tailor-made excuse for re-
fusal to recognise the social and legal reforms wrought by the revolution of 1917.
And indeed this fear appeared to be confirmed when, particularly in the interwar
period, many Western courts declined to give extra-territorial effect to Soviet
nationalization decrees partly on the basis of public policy. Soviet courts, of

iEhrenzweigh, Conflict of Laws, (1962), page 342.

2Ehrenzweigh, Conflict of Laws, (1962), page 342.

§Gection 568, Civil Code of Russian Federation, (June 11, 1964).

4As to Russia, see, further, para. 17, 15, infra.

SSection 45, Hungarian Decree No. 23 of 1952—Marriage, family relations and guare
dianship.

sDecree No. 22 of 1952 (Code of Civil Procedure) Section 16.

‘Williaa e. Butler (Reader in Comparative Law. University of London). Book Review
६ Andre Carnefsky, Public Policy in Soviet Private International Law, (1970) (2d ed.) १०,
18, A. J.C. L. 604.

105

Public policy on
the continent in
conflict of laws,

Example from
Eastern Europe.


106

Public policy in
France.

French cases.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 17—Public Policy.)

course, might have retaliated by framing their own doctrine, of ordre public. But
there is an aversion to judge-mades law in the U.S.S.R., and public policy seldom
is cited in reported Soviet decisions.”

IV. FRENCH LAW

17.16, In French law, the corresponding concept is “ordre public”. Th2 concept
“ordre public” is applied, in private international law, to prevent undesirable
results from a too objective an “international” approach. To start with, there is
a system (more or less clearly defined), of choice of law and other conflicts prin-
ciples. But this system is liable to be checked by public policy or “ordre public”.
The effect of the check is 10 prevent the application of forcign law and to subs-
titute French law.

Public policy may be said to operate in two ways in private international
law‘; (a) it may ignore foreign prohibitions which are distasteful to the lex
fori:? (b) it may: introduce objections and prohibitions not contained in the foreign
Jaw. In illustration of (b), it may be stated that in practice, cases before the
French courts may be decided by French law, even if the personal law of the
parties is derived from another system. This could take place when the foreign
solution shocks French conceptions of morality or justice; for example, a foreign
law which permitted the marriage of a brother and sister, or recognised slavery
as a legal status, would not be recognised in France.

17.17. Specific French ruling as to the non-recognition of foreign divorces are not
available in the context of “public ordre” However, it would appear that French
practice makes a distinction between (i) cases where rights have been already
acquired by foreigners and only enforcement or recognition is sought in france,
and (ti) cases where the suing party directly seeks to acquire rights in France
in accordance with the provisions of a foreign legal system. In the former case,
the French Courts are ready to give a wider recognition to the foreign judgment.
than in the latter case.

Thus, although the French courts will apply the divorce law of the nationa-
lity of the parties, “public ordre” will not permit a decree to be granted by a
French court on grounds not p:rmitted by domestic French law. But a decree
of divorce obtained by foreigners abroad would be upheid in France, even though
the ground of divorce is not one on which a French court would grant divorce.
Again, as regards the ceremony of marriage, French law permits foreign nationals
marrying in France to enjoy the benefits of their own domestic law, except where
the foreign law ignores vital social considerations—as for example, minimum age.
Again, a marriage celebrated between foerigners abroad in accordance with the
foreign law, between an uncle and niece which, if solemnised in France, is per-
mitted only by special dispensation, would be upheld without the safeguard of
the dispensation, but a marriage between brother and sister would be regarded

as void under all circcumstances.°

. A French court would reject a German judgment ordering a putative father
to maintain his child, as being contrary to “public ordre”, since the judgment
could be used to found a claim of paternity under the Civil Code which could
not otherwise be maintained’.

1See Niboyct, Traite de Dreoit international private franchise (Vol. V, 1948), section
1492, referred to in (1961) Can. Bar Rev. 307.

IC}. Sottomver ¥. De Barros, (No. 2) (1879), 5 P. 0. 94 as to English Law.

SLloyd, public policy (1953), pages 80-82.

‘Lloyd, Public Policy (1963), pages 96-97,


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter, 17.—Public Policy)

ए. COMMON LAW

17.18. In ithe common jaw sysiem, public policy has a more limited role in the
field of conflict of laws. There is no choice of law problem in regard to divorce.
Also, there has not been, on the whole, so much emphasis on methodology as in
French law’ {and in some other European systems)—involving a division of the
problem into (a) the application of the conflicts rutes, (b) the effects of public
policy. If the fex fori is not applied, then the choice of law determinants which
affect recognition problems, are (i) the personal law, and (ii) the rule locus regit
actuny. The former enters into questions of capacity to marry in many jurisdic-
tions. and the usual attitude of the courts is to reject a foreign law solution indi-
cated by the personal law, only where the solution is considered to be inconsistent
with fundamental moral or social concepts. Public policy is thus an ultimum
remedium, aud there have been few English cases’ in which it has been raised
explicitly in the context of private international law.

17.19. A query has been raised whether this means that the common-law systems
consider the content of the foreign law only in exceptional circumstances, where
the foreign law might offend some of the most deeply held policies of the forum.

In this context, Drucker quotes, from a book on private international Jaw
by Professor Lund of Moscow University, published in 1949, a statement to the
effect that in the Anglo-American jurisdictions, private international law is : “One
of the means of legal technique directed to restrict the applicability of foreign
laws, and to widen the sphere of municipal law........ नर पु

This would show that the objective employed is the same, both on the
continent and in common Jaw. though the scope for the application of the doctrine
of public policy is more limited in common law than in continental countries.

17.20. English reported cases dealing with public policy, ate comparatively few,
im the field of conflict of law.’ Most of the English cases which’ are habitually
adduced to prove early appication of public policy, are not really’ in points And,
indeed, there was neither need nor use of the doctrine until the establishment
of the “vested rights” dogma at the end of the last century.

In this field, as in others, “public policy” appeared when the common law
filed to keep “in touch with the needs of the day.”

1Cf. Para, 17.13, supra,

°(1961) Can. Bar Rey. 309,

See for instance—

(a) Pugh v. Pugh (1951) Probate 482; (1951) 2 AIL E, R, 680 (Capacity to marry).
(by fn re. Paine, (1940) 1 Ch. 46; (Capacity to marry), For comment, see 56 L. 0. R.

(०) Brook v. Brook, (1861) 9 H. L. C, 193; (Capacity to marry) (Deceased wife's sister).

(d) Mene v. Mette; (1859) 1 Sw. and Tr. 416. (Deceased wife's half sister).

sDrucker in (1955) 4 Int, & Comp. L, Q. 386.

3866 para, 17.18 supra.

See also Katzenbach, “Conflicts on an Unruly Horse: Reciprocal Claims and Toleran-
ces in Interstate und International Law”, (1956) 63 Yale L. J. 1087.

7Ehrenzweigh, Conflict of Laws (1952), page. 342.

"Robinson v. Bland, 2 Burt. 1077, 97 Eng. Rep. 717, (1760) (contract unenforceable
under both laws); De Wasz, पर. Hendricks, 2 छह, 334, 130 Eng. Rep. 326 (1824) (contract
held “contrary to the Jaw of nations” as directed against friendly government); Senios ४,
Widga 8 C. 8. (N, S} 861, 141 Eng. Rep. 1404 (1860 (interpretation of statute in terme of
applicable to foreign transaction); Creil v. Levy, 16 C. B. (N) S) 73, 143 Eng. Rep, 1052
(किक (contracts to be performed in England), Only Hope v. Hope & De 0. M. & G. 731,
743, 44 Eng. Rep. 572, 576 (1857) was based on the forum's “policy”,

*Holdworth, A History of English Law (1926), Vol 8 page 56,

107.

Public policy in
common law in
relation to conflict
of Jaws.

English cases,


108

Alternative to
blic policy-—
Rhory's approach.

Classification by
Cheshire.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 17.—Public, Policy}

17.21. In 1827, Louisiana court remarked “that in the conflict of laws, it must
often be a matter of doubt which (law) should prevail, and that whenever that
doubt exist, the court which decides, will prefer the law of its own country, to
that of the stranger.” Story found “great truth” in this statement, and returned
to its message in virtually every chapter of his analysis’, without baving to resort
to an “exception” of public policy.

Only in those few areas where past centuries had produced a semblance

of rules “by which nations are morally or politically bound,” was there need, and
indeed room, in his work for such an exception.‘

17,22. Cheshire, in an earlier edition’ of his Private International Law, divided
English cases on public policy into four classes, viz.
(1) Where the fundamental conceptions of English justice are disregarded

for example. where a party has been denied a proper hearing, or there
is fraud, undue influence or duress as in the case of Kaufman v. Ger-

son?

(2) Where English conceptions of morality are infringed? This is appa-
rently confined to sexual immorality.

(3) Where the transaction prejudices the interests of the United Kingdom
or its relations with foreign powers; ¢.g., agreements involving rela-
tions with enemy aliens*, or to further revolt abroad,” or for the import
of liquor contrary to foreign prohibition laws." The cases cited were
concerned with English contracts. It may be, however, that the rule
of internal public policy would probably be applied externally in the
case of similar contracts governed by foreign law.

(4) Where a foreign status offends the English conception of human liberty
and freedom of action,—e.g., a contract relating to slavery, or the
status of a ‘prodigal’ in French Jaw", or a foreign rule prohibiting re-
marriage after a decree of divorce has finally dissolved the marriage.

The last mentioned class, according to Lloyd”, seents indeed to be no. more
than an illustration of English public policy in retation to personal freedom, and
it probably needs to be broadened to cover such other freedoms as freedom of
trade, which the common law regatds as its distinctive policy to protect.”

~ “Soul v, His Creditors S Martin R. (N. 5.) 569, 595 (La 1827).
“Story 29.

Story गा.
‘Thus, Story believed that “by the general Jaw of nations, jure pentium (a contract
valid under the law of the piace whore it is made, is) held valid everywhere”. Story
2814 हर से the results of this (erroneous) assuption. the lex fori re-enters as to con:
ris “waist good morals, of region or public rights". Id.; at 213, See also as to marriage

contracts, id, at 104. है
‘Cheshire, Private International, Law (1952), pp. 145-9, cited by Lloyd, Public Policy

(1953) of Cheshire 1975, page 152-155,
Kaufman v. Gerson, (1904) 1K. 8. 591.
7Robinson ¥. Bland, (1760) 2 Burr. 1077, 1084.
8Dynamit A. G. v. Rio Tinto, 1918), A, C. 292.
396 Witz v. Nedricks, (1824) 2 Bing, 314,
\Fester ४. Criscall, (1929) 1 K. B. 470.
जुडे Worms v. De Caldor, (1880) 49L. J. (Ch) 265;
(b) Re Selor's Trusts, (1902) 1 Ch, 488.
BL Jeyd. Public Policy (1953), page 95.
जह।, {a) Roussillon ए. Roussillon, (1880) 14 Ch. D. 351;
(b) Warner y- Helsar. (1937) 1K. 8. 209.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 17.—Public Policy)’

17.23. Public policy could be a useful head for dealing with duress. If fraud
is regarded as a vitiating cause, then duress also should be so regarded. The
Means employed should not matter, if the freedom of will of a party is in issue.
It should also be immaterial whether the vitiating factor operated on the party
directly or so acted indirectly. Lord Devlin observed, in another context; “All
that matters to the plaintiff is that. metaphorically speaking. 2 club has been
used. Jt does not matter to the plaintiff what the club is made of—whether it
jg a physical club or an economic club, a tortious club or an otherwise illegal
club.”

17.24. We may refer to a case illustrating duress. In Szechter v. Szechei*, the
petitioner consented to marriage, in order to escape from imprisonment in truly
appalling conditions and from threats of a mental home: a severe sentence of im-
prisonment, followed almost certainly by re-arrest; and, in any event, by the pros-
pect of penury, inability to obtain any employment other than of a mental nature
and inability ever to lead a normal fife. Sir Jocelyn Simon, President, in giving
his reasons for making a decree of nullity, said—

“Tt is, in my view, insufficient to invalidate an otherwise good marriage
that a party has entered into it in order to escape from a disagreeable situa-
tion, such as penury or social degradation. Im order for the impediment
of duress to vitiate an otherwise valid marriage, it must, in my judgment,
be proved that the will of one of the parties thereto has been overborne
by genuine and reasonably held fear caused by the threat of immediate
danger (for which the party is not himself responsible), to life. limb or
liberty, so that the constraint destroys the reality of consent to ordinary
wedlock”.

He also added that for a threat to be an immediate specific threat, “It is suffi-
cient if there is a present continuing danger, though the apprehended death, in-
jury or deprivation of liberty may not happen until an unknown future time.
Equally, in my judgment, though dangers of mere penury or social degradation
will not of themselves invalidate an otherwise good marriage, they cannot be
disregarded if they form an essential element in the danger to life, limb or
liberty.”

17.25. In the case of Mayer’, Bagnall! J. after discussing Szechrer v. Szechter',
observed : —

“The doctrine of duress then applies to the contract of marriage; does it
apply to a dissolution of marriage? If the question arose in relation to a
system of law which recognised divorce by consent, I should have no
doubt that the doctrine would apply. For, as in marriage, there would be
3 special type of contractual arrangement which altered status. But the
doctrine is not confined to acts which are contractual, or bilateral or mul-
tilateral; it applies to making a will and it applies to a voluntary dispo-
sition infer vivos. I can see no reason in logic or in principle why it shovld
not apply to a decree of divorce obtained under duress, at any rate where
an English court is considering a decree granted by another jurisdiction.

1 Rooke v. Bernard, (1964) A. 0, 1129, 1209 (per Lord Devlin}, also ibid, at pp. 1109,

*Szechter v. Szechier, (1971) 2 W. L. R. 170, 180.

4m re Mayer, (1971) 2 W, L. R. 401, 407, 408 (Bagnall J.).

*Szechter v. Szechter, (1971) 2 W. L. R. 170, {Para, 17-24, supra.)
8-5 LD(ND)/76

109

Public policy and
duress.

Duress in relation
to matriage.

Duress in relation
to dissolution,


10

Public policy as
the ultimate foun-
dation.

Doctrine else-
where.

English Act.

Conclusion.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

“(Chapter 17—Public Policy)

It may be that different considerations would apply if an English court
were considering a decree pronounced by an English court; but 1 am not
concerned with that situation.

“T should add that I am fortified in my opinion by an obiter dictum of
Barnard J. in Burka v. Burka shortly reported in the Times, March 17,
1955, where after holding that a marriage contracted in Russia, was in-
valid, the judge added that if the marriage had been valid, he would have
held that a decree of divorce obtained in Russia would have been ineffec-
tive to dissolve it because the wife was being “persecuted and tyramnised
to obtain a divorce”. It appears from the file, which I have examined,
that there, the Russian wife and her mother were being threatened with
terms of imprisonment unless she obtained a divorce.”

17.26. In India, England, America and other countries, generally rules which
protect a person against undue influence, exploitation bordering on blackmail or
extreme restriction of personal freedom, are wellknown. These rules could be
regarded as the special manifestations of the principle of good faith and decency;
but, in the ultimate analysis, they could be treated as application of the doctrine
of public policy. The application of the doctrine, no doubt, varies in time and
space, and also with the sense of justice of the Judge.

Further, it involves a value judgment, standing above the literal text, of the
Jaw; but the rationale of its application, in general, is that the foreign legal pro-
yision which is otherwise regarded as applicable under the rules relating to the
conflict of Jaws is not acceptable, being inconsistant with the values, explicit
ता implicit, in the internal legal order.
श्र
17.27. It is to be noted that the doctrina of public policy is not confined to con-
tinental countries, and similar doctrines are found in many other countries, for,
example, Argentine’, Brazil’, and Mexico! The application of the doctrine is
not confined to recognition of judgments. The doctrine is also relevant in con-
nection with the proceedings in progress or terminated abroad. and in connec-
tion with certain other procedural matters.

VI. STATUTORY PROVISION IN ENGLAND

17.28. The recent English Act as to the recognition of foreign divorces and sepa-
rations allows the English courts to refuse recognition on the ground of public

policy®.

VO. CONCLUSION

17.29, Having regard to all aspects of the matter, we are of the view that a
simple provision on the subject of public policy should be inserted.

‘Burka v. Burka (untepotted).
2Argentina Federal Code of Civil Procedure, section 599.
SBrazilian Code of Civil Procedure, section 792.
‘Mexican Code of Civil Procedure, section 785.

English Act of 1971, section 8(2)(b).


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

CHAPTER 18
FRAUD
1. INTRODUCTORY

181. Fraud as a ground of non-recognition of decrees of divorce and legal
separation appears to be a topic having an importance of its own.

The importance of a consideration of the matter in the context of recog-
nition of foreign decrees of divorce is obvious. On the one hand, confidence
must bé placed in the judicial process of other countries. and too frequent a
doparture from the general rule could mean creating limping marriages. On
the other hand, there are special circumstances which should be taken note of.
That is the broad consideration which underlies the exception for fraud.

18.2, We may mention that there are two categories of fraud—{i) fraud as to
the merits of the case, and (ii) fraud as to the jurisdiction of the Court. In
general, fraud of the first category is not taken into account by the courts in
India when exercising the power preserved by specific statutory provisions!
in relation to questioning the validity of a foreign judgment ia particular, or
judgments in general. In the field of matrimonial law also, the cases more
frequently relate to the second category of fraud.

Tn the U.S. A., it is stated that courts will consider only that fraud which
deprives a court of jurisdiction, such as service of process oblained by fraud.
Fraud, which may give rise to equitable relief (often called extrinsic fraud) does
not deprive a court of jurisdiction. It is, therefore, stated’ that the real basis
for the attack on a judgment is want of jurisdiction, the fraud only being a cause
therefor. We need not express an opinion on this view. In any case, if this
view is correct, it reinforces the need for recognising fraud as a ground of attack.

वा. INDIAN LAW

483. With seference to Indian law, we shall first examine the effect of fraud
on judgments in general. In India, it is well-established that the validity of a
jadgment is subject to attack on the ground of fraud. In Ahmedbhoy's case’,
the Bombay High Court considered at length the question of fraud as affecting
judgments, on general grounds of English law. with reference to three classes of

persons, namely—
(a) privies:
(0) persons, who though not privies, were represented in the proceed-
ings;
(c) strangers.

The High Court observed—

“In the first place the judgment may be an honest. ene, oblained in a suit
conducted with good faith on the part of both plantiff and defendant. In
such a case, the previous judgment is clearly binding both on class (a)
and class (0); class (c) will be in no way’ affected by the judgment if it is
inter parties, but if it be one in rent passed by a competent Court they will
be bound by and cannot controvert it. In the second place. the judg-
ment may be passed in a suit really contested by the parties thereto. but
may be obtained by the fraud of one of them as against the other. There

ection 13, Code of Civil Procedure and section 41, Evidence Act.
See, (a) Note “Foreign Judgments and res judicata” (1928) 41 Harv. L. R. 1955, and (0)
“Developments—res judicaza” (1952) 65 Harv. L. है, 818, 851.

Mhmedbhoy ५, Rubibhoy. (1882) 1. L, R.6 Bons. 703.

1b

Introductory.

Two types of

fraud,

Effect of fraud is
judgments—Ana-
lysis in Bombay

case of
situations,

various


412

Ex-parte decrees.

Power of Court.

Fraud as a de-
fence to a judg-
ment.

Legislative ap-
‘coach in India—-
tion 13, CPC,

and section 44,

Evidence Act.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 18.—Fraud)

has been a real battle, but a victory unfairly won. In this cas¢, again.
class (a) and class (0) and, as regards judgments in rem, class (c), are in
one and the same position, which is that of the parties themselves. The
judgment is binding on them so long as it remains im force, bne it may
be impcaced for fraud and set aside if the fraud be proved. In the #ird
place, the previous judgment may have been obtained by the fraud and
collusion of both the parties to the former suit. In this case, there has
been no baltle. but a sham fight. As between the parties to such .a
judgment, it is binding. The same rule will apply between the privies:
of these parties, except probably where the collusive fraud has been on
a provision of the law enacted for the benefit of such privies.”

We have quoted this passage to show the general approach adopted by
courts in India in relation to fraud as affecting the validity of a judgment. —,

48.4. It may be noted that these principles apply even where the procedural
law allows other remedies to deal with the particular species of fraud. Thus,
in the case of an ex parte decree, the defendant can file a suit to have it set
aside on the ground of fraud, even though he has failed to have it set aside under
Order 9, rule 13, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The two remedies are
distinct. The remedy under Order 9, rule 13, is a summary one. The suit on
fraud is really an analogue of the Equity ‘Bill’?

18.5, The authorities on the question as to the powers of a Court to treat de-.
crees which had been obtained by fraud as nullities, are reviewed at some
length in the judgment on the original side in the High Court at Calcutta by
Stonley, J. in the case of Nistanini Dassi v. Nundo Lat Bose.’ 10 the latter case
of Rajib Panda पर, Lakhan Sendh Mahapatri,' also, the true meaning and cffect
ot section 44 of the Evidence Act were considered.

18.6 Fraud, besides being made a ground of attack, can be a ground of defence
also. When a subsisting judgment, order or decree, which is relevant under
sections 40, 41 or 42 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, is set up by one party
to a suit as a bar to the claim of the other party, it is not necessary, for. the
party against whom such judgment, order or decree is set up, to bring a sepa-
rate suit to have the same set aside, but it is open to such party, in the same
suit in which such judgment, order or decree is sought to be used against
him, to show, if such be the case, that the judgment. order or decree relied upon
by the other side was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was
obtained by fraud.*

18.7. These principles are not confined to judgment of Indian courts: they are
equally applicable to foreign judgments. We may mention, in this. connection,
that section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to which we have already
made a reference’ in our general discussion of the Indian law as to recognition
of foreign judgments, specifically mentions fraud when enumerating the circums-
tances in which a foreign judgment is nor conclusive proof. Similarly, the Indian
Evidence Act, in section 44, while providing for the relevancy of certain judg-
ments, expressly’ allows a judgment, even if otherwise relevant, to be attacked

‘Radha Raman v. Pran Nath, 1, LR, 28 Cal. 475 (P. C.). हु

2Cf. Wyett v. Palmer, W. N. (20th May, 1899), page 74, referred to in Nistarini assi v.
Nundala! Bose, I. 1.. R. 26.Cal. 891, 915.

Nistarini Dassi v. Nundo Lal Bose, (1899), 1, L. R. 26 Cal, 891, 907 to 910.

जय Panda v. Lakhan Sendh Mahapatri. (1899) LL. R. 27 Cal. 11, 15, 21 (Melean
C.J. and Banerjee, 1).

SBansi Lat v. Dhapo, (1902) 1. 1... R. 24 All. 242, 247 (Stanley, 0. J. and Brirkin, J.)

‘See Chapter 4, supra.

Section 44, Indian Evidence Act, 1872, quoted in- para. 1817, infra.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces 3
(Chapter 18.—Fraud)

on the ground of fraud. This provision of the Rvidence Act applies also to
judgments mentioned in section 41 of that Act—i.c. certain judgments affecting
status. These statutory provisions give sufficient indication of the legislative
recognition, in India, of the common law principle that the validity of a judg-
ment can be questioned on the ground of fraud.'

188, We need not, for the present purpose, discuss the precise boundaries of
this principle, or the proper procedure that should be adopted for invoking the
jurisdiction of the court. But it is desirable to mention a few points of impor-
tance, and we shail discuss these points after dealing with the English law on
the subject of fraud.

TH. ENGLISH LAW
Fraud in Bog and,

18.84. In England, the general principle that the validity of a judgment can be a
attacked on the ground of fraud’, is accepted. Coe v. Langford’, for exampte, as affecting Jute
decided that where the judgment has been obtained by fraud, the court has

futisdiction, in a subsequent action brought for that purpose, to set the judg-

ment aside.

In Jonesco v. Beard,’ it was said by Lord Buckmaster—

“It has long been the settled practice of the court that the proper method
of impeaching a completed judgment on the ground of fraud is by action
in which, as in any other action based on fraud, the particulars of the
fraud must be exactly given and the allegation established by the strict
proof such a charge requires.”
48.9. It is sometimes stated that, in Englahd, advantage of a fraud can be Whether remedy
taken only by a stranege to the judgment who is not privy to the fraud, the confined to stran-
reasoning being that a party to the proceedings could have applied to vacate
the judgment. The theory advanced in this regard is that— (i) a party if guilty,
cdimot take advantage of his own wrong, and (ii) a party, if innocent, should
have pursued the remedy by way of appeal. However, the position on the sub-
ject is not entirely beyond doubt’ In any case, so far as challenging a decree
of divorce on the ground of fraud is concemed, English Courts seem to have
adopted’ a liberal attitude on this point, and have not regarded a party to the
decree as debarred from claiming relief"
1440. It is well established in England that foreign judgments can be impeach- Position in
ed gn the ground of fraud, 2,9.10.11.17,13 in 50 far as it affects the jurisdiction of bag bt लि

the foreign court.

3868 paras, 18:8 to 18:10, infra.
” sDavid Kennedy v. Dangrid, (1943) 2 All England Reports 606.
8Coe v, Langford, (1893) 2 0. 8. 376.
MJonesco v. Beard, (1930) A. C. 298, 300,
५ S§ee D, M, Gordon, “Actions to set aside judgments” (1961) 73 L, 0. R, 533.
‘Bonaparte v. Bonaparte, (1892) Probate 402.
See para, 18:7, supra and 18:13, infra.
SA houllof v. Oppenheimer, (1882) 10 Queen's Bench Division 295.
yadala v. Lawes, (1890) 25 Queen's Bench Division 310.
God v. Delan, (1905) 92 Law Times 510.
nyip Fong Hong v. Neotia, (1918) A.C. 888 (Privy Council).
ugiterman Lines v. Read, (1928) 2 King’s Bench 144.
usyql v. Heyward, (1948) 2 AME. R. 576 (९. A).


“td

Position as to
judgments in rem,

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorcés
(Chapter 18.—Fraud)

18.11. Jt is pertinent to point out that it is not denied in English Jaw that fraud
is a valid ground for not recognising a foreign decree of divorce.’ Fraud as to
the merits of the case decided by the foreign court would ordinarily be ignored
in England ; but fraud as to the jurisdiction of the foreign court would be taken
into account’. The case of Middleton v. Middleton' dealt with both aspects of
the matter. In that case, the husband had obtained a decree of divorce in the
State of IHinois (U.S.A.) by making two false allegations : first, that he had
been resident in the State for over a year, and secondly, that his wife had desert-
ed him.

Both the allegations were false, but were believed by the Illinois court.

It was held in England that—

(i) the husband’s false evidence as to be matrimonial allegations (deser-
tion in this case) was not a ground for refusal to recogtise a decree,
but

ii) his fraud as to the jurisdiction of the [linois court justified a refusal
to recognise the decree in England.

18.12. As to the rule‘ that foreign judgments can be set aside for fraud it is
sometimes stated that there isa possible exception in England as to judgments
ia rem. Halsbury states*, for example—
“In accordance, however, with the general principle that judgments i”
rem are conclusive and binding on ail the world, an action here based op
fraud in obtaining such judgment will not be entertained so long as the
judgment stands in the original country.”

However, it should be stated that even this view is not universally acceptett.
For example, as one writer’ concludes :

“There seems no reason why a foreign judgment in vem obtained by
fraud should be sacrosanct.”

Similarly, Dicey’ states:
“Any judgment whatever, and therefore any foreign judgment, is, if ob-
tained by fraud, open to attack.”

Dicey further remarks* that the doctrine “may apply” as between litigants
to a judgment in rem”,—though he acknowledges that there are some doubts
whether it vitiates a judgment in rem so as to affect the rights of third partes.

In Me Alpine's case’, the husband obtained a divorce in Wyoming (U.S.A.)
by misrepresenting to the Court the wife’s address, and by reason of this fraud,
the wife had no notice. The divorce was not recognised, for this reason. ‘

\Bonaparte v, Bonaparte, (1892) Probate 402.

“Middieton v. Middleton, (1966) 1 ANE. R. 168. See, for, detailed discussion. of the
case, 29 Modern Law Review 327 and 41 British Year Book of Intemational Studies.

'Middleton v. Middleton, (1966) 1 AUB. 12, 168.

‘Para. 18:8, supra.

'dalsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 7, page 148.

eWolff, “Res Judicata in Divores” U. West, Austl, Ann, L. Rev. Vol. 1 0948-50), page
369 at pages 373-80 (1948-50), quoted in Pyrles, “Recognition of foreign judgments etc.’
(1972) 15 1. 4.1.1.. 31, 44. :

"Dicey, Conflict of Laws (1967), page 1007.

"Dicey, Confict of Law, (1967), page 1010.

'Mc Alpine v, Mc Alpine, (1957) 3 WLR. 698, noted in (1958) 74 L. Q. R. page 8.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorcés
(Chapter 18.—Fraud)

IV. FRAUD, PUBLIC POLICY AND NATURAL JUSTICE

48.13. The categories of fraud and breach of natural justice might sometimes
coalesce,—as for example, where the foreign court is deceived by the statement
of the petitioner that the whereabouts of the respondent are not known. In
such a case, the foreign decree would not be recognised’, and the Jegal grounds
for non-recognition are two-fold, though the same set of facts gives rise to the
two grounds, namely, (i) fraud affecting the jurisdiction of the court: and (ii)
breach of natural justice in that respondent, the wife, had 90 notice.

18.14. At this stage, we may refer to the view sometimes taken on the question
whether fraud forms part of public policy. In the Hague convention, public
policy is specifically mentioned as a ground of non-recognition. But the con-
Yention is silent as to fraud. It appears that, in the discussion on the draft
international Convention on recognition of divorces, the delegate from Austria
did press for the inclusion of the ground of fraud as constituting a separate
exception to the general rule of recognition, but their suggestion did not find
favour with the Conference, apparently because the practical importance ot
fraud in Continental countries was not considered to be very great. It is. how-
ever, well established in the common law that the judgment of a foreign court
procured by fraud is not binding on English courts, and will not be recognised
in an English court, even if the judgment is otherwise valid and even if all the
other requirements of recognition are satisfied. In view of specific Indian legis-
lative precedents on® the subject, it is advisable to mention fraud separately as
a ground for non-recognition.

18.15. Fraud and breach of natural justice are sometimes taken as connected
with each other. In Middleton's case’, the Court observed :

“Finally, 1 might mention an old decision which has nothing to do with
divorce, but is of some assistance on the attitude of our courts towards

foreign judgments obtained by fraud‘, aud which indicates that the con-
ception of what is contrary to natural justice may be wide enough to
cover the present facts. Oschesenbein c. Papelier’, was a case before the
Tedicature Act, 1873, where the Court of Chancery was asked to grant
an injuction to restrain a party, who had obtained judgment for a debt
in a foreign court, from bringing an action on the judgment here ‘because
the judgment had been obtained by fraud. On appeal, it was held by
Lord Selborne L. C. and Mellish L. J. that the injuction could not be
granted because a common Jaw court would take cognizance of the fraud.

“The Lord Chancellor said*:

‘] should be sorry to think that anythisg should fall from this court
which might give the least colour to any doubt as to the power of
court of law to take cognizance of fraud in obtaining foreign judg-

ments.”
“And Mellish L. J. said":

\Macalpine v. Macalpine, (1957) 3 All BL R, 134.

MPara. 18:2, supra.

aMiddleton v. Middleton (1906) 1 All 8. R. 168, 2W.L. R, at page 523.
‘Emphasis added.

SOschsenbein v. Papelier, (1873) 8 Ch. App. 695.

6Oschsenbein ¥. Papelier, (1873) 8 Ch, App. 698.

Oschsenbein v. Panelier, (1873) 8 Ch. App. 700,

115

Natural justice,

Fraud—Whether
part of public
policy.

Fraud and nato-
tal justice.


Ae

Facts must have
been — discovered
ince the trial.

Recommendation.

Introductory.

Report on‘ Recognition. of Foreign Divorcés
(Chapter 18.—Fraud. Chapter 19.—Ancillary orders)

‘It was always held that a foreign judgment could be impeached at
law as contrary to the principles of natural justice, as for instance.
on the ground of the defendant having had no notice of the foreign
action, or not having been summoned, or of want of jurisdiction or
that the judgment was fraudulently obtained.’

“The interesting point is that Mellish L.J. treated both want of juris-
diction and obtained a judgment by fraud as instances of a judgment be-
ing contrary to the principles of natural justice.

“From these citations I reach the following conclusions:

“The rule in Armitage v. Attorney-General’ is not an over-riding
Principle, but is subject to exceptions. One exception is where the
decree was obtained by fraud going to the point of jurisdiction. If
the rule is as stated in some of the authorities yhsy yhr only excep.
tion is where the decree was made in circumstances which offend
natural justice or ‘substantial justice, the definition of what is con-
tary to natural justice or substantial justice, is wide enough to
cover such a fraud as was perpetrated by the husband in this case.””

Cf course, the same set of facts may amount to fraud as well as to breach

of natural justice’, as we have already pointed ont.

18.16. English law permits a domestic judgment to be challenged on the ground
of fraud only if the facts upon which the challenging party relies were discover-
ed since the trial’, However, this general rule creates some problems in rela-
tion to perjury’.

¥. CONCLUSION

18.17. Having considered all aspects of the matter, we are of the view that—

(a) fraud should be specifically mentioned as a ground for non-recog-
nition, and should not be left to be dealt with under the bead of
“public policy” or as breach of natural justice’ ;

(0) the provision in this regard should be a simple one, as in section 44
of the Evidence Act*.

CHAPTER 19
ANCILLARY ORDERS
I. INTRODUCTORY

19.1. So far, we have discussed the question of recognition of the principal ad-
judication as to divorce or legal separation. It is well-known that, in almost
every country, when a court orders the dissolution of marriage under a legisla-

~ “armitage ¥. Attorney-General, (1906) Probate 135.

"Para. 18:9, supra.
Ya) Duchess of Kigston’s case, 2 Sm. 1... C, 754 (12th Ed)
(0) Young v. Keightiy, (1809) 16 Ves, 348, 33 8, R. 1016.
(० Wason v, Westminister, (1861) 4 L. T. 80.

“Para. 18:10, supra.

SPara. 18:11, supra.

"Para. 18:12, supra,


Report on Recognition of, Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19—Ancillary orders)

tive enactment, the enactment contains provisions empowering the court to pass
orders for maintenance, custody of children, alimony and similar matters. For
the sake of convenience, we may refer to these orders as ‘ancillary orders’—an
expression frequently used' in the literature on the subject.

In this Chapter, we shall discuss the question, how far ancillary orders
passed in matrimonial proceedings by foreign courts should be recognised.

19.2. The jurisdiction to pass ancillary orders in matrimonial causes has an
interesting history, According to common law, the spouses were bound to live
together, but, in certain circumstances, a decree of divorce a mensa at thoro
could be passed by ecclesiastical courts. A learned writer has stated* the posi-
tion in these words—
“Where the decree was pronounced at the suit of the wife, the mere per-
mission to live separate would not give her adequate relief. By the
mere fact of the marriage the whole of her property passed under the
control of her husband, and she could not live apart from him unless
provided with the means to live. The court, therefore, would pronounce
in her favour a decree for alimony as ancillary to the decree for separa-
tion.”

19.3. This is the germ from which modem jurisdiction to pass ancillary orders
is derived, The precise question to be considered on the subject is, whether
such orders passed by foreign courts should be recognised in India. For reasons
which we sball indicate in detail later’, we are of the view that there should be
no automatic recognition of ancillary orders past by a foreign court, even
where the grant of divorce, in consequence of which the ancillary order is pass-
ed, is required to be recognised under the proposed law.

19.34. Findings of fault also need not be recognised. The finding of a court
regarding fault is, of course, different from an ancillary order. But, apart from
certain other aspects which will be mentioned later‘, it may be stated that there
is no real illogicality in not recognising such finding, because non-recognition ot
the finding does not affect recognition of the divorce or legal separation. It
may also be stated that if the finding of fault is made conclusive, injustice may
sometimes arise—for example, where the proceedings in the foreign court were
ex parte.

Apart from this consideration, the theoretical justification for not recog-
nising the finding of fault is that what the law should recognise is the effect of
the determination by the foreign court on status, it being the general policy of
the law that in the absence of certain special circumstances, persons who are
divorced in one country should not be regarded as married in another country.
This policy of the law is satisfied by recognising the decree in so far as it dis-
solves the marriage, and there is no compelling necessity further to recognise the
finding of fault also.

I. PROVISION IN ENGLISH ACT AS TO NON-RECOGNITION OF
ANCILLARY ORDER

19.4. At this stage, we may, in order to indicate more precisely what we have

in mind, refer to section 8(3) of the English Act of 1971, which reads'\—

IE, G., see para, 19:2, infra.

4, L. Batton, “Enforcement of Financial Provisions, in Graveson (Ed})-A Century of
Family Law, pages 352, 353.

%Paras 19:10 and 19:11, infra.

sParas. 19:4 and 19: 11, infra.

*Section 83), English Act of 1971.

any

History.

Question to be
considered.

Findings of fault,

Section 8(3) of the
English Act oof


418

Principle underly-
ing the English
Provision.

English case of
Wood v. Wood.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorcés

(Chapter 19.—Ancillary orders)

“(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as requiring the recognition
of any findings of fault made in any proceedings for divorce or sepa-
ration or of any maintenance, custody or other ancillary order made

in any such proceedings.”

19.5. The principle underlying this provision in the English Act is that a decree
of divorce primarily determines status, and it is not necessary for another country
to recognise ancillary orders passed in consequence of the decree, nor is it
necessary for that country to recognise the findings of fault. Both these matters
are, so far as the foreign country is concerned, unimportant. Moreover, the first
belongs to the realm of obligation’. As Parker L. J. (as he then was), observ-

ed with reference to ancillary orders in general’,—

“The application of the foreign law as to status does not involve apply-
ing the foreign law as to obligation.”

It is true that these observations were not made in the context of divorce,
put they do apply to divorce. Thus, it has been held* that dissolution of a mar-
ciage by a foreign court does not put an end to maintenance, even where an
English court has made an order for alimony in a suit for judicial separation.
It was so held by the Court of Appeal in Wood v. Wood".

19.6. In the English case of Wood v. Wood", referred to above, the Court of
Appeal drew a distinction, im regard to divorce Jaw, between, on the one hand,
matters of status, and on the other hand, matters of personal right and obli-
gation flowing from a decree. The English court accepted the foreign decree as
ending the status of marriage, but did not accept the contention that the foreign
decree discharged existing personal rights under the maintenance orders. To
that extent—but only to that limited extent—is the doctrine of “divisible
divorce” accepted—a doctrine often put forth’ as a description of the rule under

discussion.
In a note on Wood y, Wood (supra), a learned writer observed‘: —

“So far as the problem under discussion is concerned, it would seem to
be both good Jaw and good policy that an adjudication by the courts of
the husband’s domicile upon his wife’s right to maintenance should not
be recognised without possibility of question simply because the dissolu-
tion of the marriage which was the outcome of the same proceedings
would itself be so recognised As a matter of policy, it is scar-
cely desirable that, regardless of the circumstances, an English court
should in aif cases be compelled to deprive a woman, resident and pro-
bably now domiciled in England, who has possibly committed’ no
offence known to English law, of her rights and those of her children
under a maintenance order, leaving her to obtain what relief (if any) the
court of a possibly distant country has decided to give her in proceed-
ings of which she possibly and reasonably knew nothing.”

1-8. Para, 19:6, infra.
IMetliss ¥. National Bank of Freece, (1957) 2 AU ER 1:13 (0, A) 2 ANE, 8. 1, 13

(0. A.) (per Parker, L, 1).
Wood v. Wood, (1957) 2 AD E. R, 14:24, 29, 100 S, J. 860, reversing (1956) 3 All E, R.

645.
‘Wood ¥, Wood (1957) 2 AILE, R. 14.

SPara. 19:10, infra.
sp, B. Carter in (1957) 33 British Year Book of International Law 336.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divarces
(Chapter 19.—Anciflary orders)

Ul. AMERICAN DECISIONS

19.7. It may be mentioned that the decision of the Divisional Court in Wood
हज. Wood', which led to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the same case
to which we have referred above,’ was the subject of a note by Professor Good-
hart in the Law Quarterly Review? In that note, he referred to certain Ame-
rican cases, and particularly to Estin v. Estin'—a decision of the Supreme Court
of the United States, and Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilti—a decision of the Court of
Appeals of New York. (After the note, the decision in Vanderbilt was approv-
ed by the Supreme Court). The rationale of these decisions is that a court can-
not adjudicate a personal claim or obligation unless it has jurisdiction over the
person of the defendant.

In both these American cases’, the questions before the court were pri-
marily directed to the impact of Article TV, section 1’, of the Constitution of
the United States (commonly called the “full faith and credit clause”), on the
Jaw of New York State as expounded or enacted. That article provides that
*Fyll Faith and Credit shall be given in each State to the public Acts, Records,
and. judicial proceedings of every other State,”

19.8. In Estin v. Estin',—a judgment of the Supreme Court of the U.S.A.—the
wife had obtained, against her husband, a support order (equivalent to our main-
tenance order), from the New York court, at a time when both parties were do-
miciled in that state. Later, the husband, having acquired a domicile in Nevada,
obtained an “ex parte” decree of divorce. The highest court in New York hav-
ing (as the majority of the Supreme Court thought) held that its jurisdiction to
maintain the support order survived the divorce, the question was whether that
conclusion was consistent with the full faith and credit clause of the Constitu-
tion.

There was a division of opinion in the Supreme Court, Jackson J., being
of opinion that New York was discriminating against a particular kind of de-
cree, an “ex parte” decree, and that it could not do so consistently with the obli-
gation of the full faith and credit clause ; Frankfurther, J., however, not being
satisfied that the New York Court of Appeals had, in truth, reached the con-
clusion attributed to it, favoured a reference back to the New York court

accordingly.

The view of ihe majority of the Supreme Court of the U.S.A. in this
case rested on the circumstance that the decree was an “ex parte” decree. Tak-
ing the view that the highest court in New York had held that a support order
could survive such a divorce, and that the support order in the case before them
had so survived, they were of opinion, first, that a change in marital status did
not necessarily invoive the result that all the legal incidents of marriage—in-
cluding the quasi-proprictary personal rights of a wife under a support order—
were thereby affected ; and, secondly, that in the case of an “ex parte” divorce,

2 eed ¥. Wood (1956) 3 All E. R, 645 (0, ए, on Appeal Wood v. Wood. (1957) 2 All
‘Para. 19:4, supra.

8Goodhart in (1957) 73 L. 0. R. 29.
On appeal, Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, (1957) 354 U. S. 416, 418,

‘Estin र. Estin, (1948) 334 U. S. 541, Para. 19:8, infra.
‘Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilr, (1956) 135 N. 8. 2d 553. (New York Court of Appeals).
On appeals, Vanderbilt v. Vanderbilt, (1957) 354 U. 8. 416, 418.

“See discussion in Wood v. Wood, (1957) 2 All 8. ४, 14 (C. A.).
TArticle TV, section 1 of the Constitution of the U, S. A.
*Estin v, Estin, (1948) 334 U. $. 541, 546, 547, 549.

is

American cases,

American cases,


136

Principle of Ame-
Tican cases,

Collateral
and

divorce’,

orders
‘divisible

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorcés
(Chapter 19-—Ancillary orders)

there was nothing offensive to the full faith and credit clause in the view taken
by the New York courts that scope of the Nevada decree did not, outside
Nevada, extend beyond a determination of the marriage status, The majority
pinion of the. Supreme Court delivered by Douglas J., contained this passage
“Nevada ............५५० apparently follows the rule that dissolution of the marriage
puts an end to a support order.” The majority further said that the claim of
the husband, if accepted, would involve “nothing Jess than an attempt by
Nevada to restrain (the wife) from asserting her claim under (the judgment) of
the New York court.

19.9, We need not discuss Vanderbilt's case. But, it clearly emerges from the
two cases that, if—to take a hypothetical case—a wife obtains from her hus-
band, (then domiciled in New York), a maintenance order or its equivalent {as
by the law of the state she might clearly do), and if, thereafter, her husband
acquires an English domicile and obtains an ex parte divorce in England, the
courts of the New York State would regard themselves as perfectly free to con-
tinue or vary, as they thought fit, their own pre-existing maintenance oréer,
either (i) on the ground that the principle of comity did not require any greater
acknowledgment of the “ex parte” English decree than a recognition of the
determination of the marriage status, or (ii) on the ground that, since the English
decree, on its face, did not purport to do more than determine the married status
(and particularly did not purport 0 affect the New York law as to maintenance
and the order made thereunder), it was a matter wholly within the competence
of the New York courts to decide what, according to their own law, was the
effect cf the English decree on the position and personal rights of its own citi-
zens (including the children of the marriage).

Thus, the American view as can be deduced from the above decisions
and the English view are, in substance, the same.

TV. DIVISIBLE DIVORCE

19.10. It is in this context that the expression “divisible divorce” is often used',
but, strictly speaking. the expression is not accurate’. What is divisible is not
the divorce, but the composite order, of which divorce is the occasion.

A right to support normally exists under the marital status, but it is a
purely personal right, owed by one spouse to the other as an individual. Though
alimony is often awarded as an incident to a divorce decrec, it may be granted
without divorce, as 2 decree for separate maintenance. The decree for main-
tenance thus given does not affect the existence of the marital status; that re-
tains as before, still subject to a divorce action brought at the proper forum.
Leflar? has explained this aspect.

Leflar then points 001:

“Conversely, a prior alimony award is not always superseded by a later
ex parte divorce decree to which the one to whom alimony has been
awarded was not a party. It will sometimes be impossible to secure a
valid award of alimony in connection with an admittedly valid divorce
decree, since the divorce action may proceed in rem against the domici-
liary marital status, with only the suing plaintiff before the court, The

JE.g. See Lefiar, Caflict of Laws (1968), page 551.
"Para, 19:6, supra,

*Leflar, Conflict of Laws (1968), page 551.
‘Lefiar, Conflict of Laws (1968), page 551.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Ancillary orders)

action for alimony must be based either on personal jurisdiction over the
defendant sued, or on attachment or garnishment brought against his
Jocal property. In such case, the prior decree for separate maintenance
still remains in force after the divorce, if the law of the state in which
the prior decree was rendered says that it dies.”

19.11. In this connection, it may be noted that the second paragraph of Article
1 of the Hague Convention? indicates that the Convention is limited to securing
recognition of the fact that the marriage hay been dissolved. The underlying
objective, in the minds of most delegations attending the discussions that led
to the Convention, was to reduce artificial barriers to the re-marriage of either
spouse after divorce. This made them unsympathetic to a German proposal,
espoused also by the delegations of Austria, Holland and Belgium, to secure the
recognition, under the Convention, of findings of fault. This proposal of Ger-
many scemed to ignore the fact that, in different countries with different social
conditions, different views may be taken of what amounts to “fault” or whether,
indeed, any account should be taken of fault. Jt may be noted that in some
countries, divorce is allowed irrespective of fault, e.g., by mutual consent.

Apart from findings of fault, the delegations were reluctant to extend
the Convention to ancillary orders. such as, those relating to maintenance and
to the custody of children, partly because of the existence of other Conventions*
relating to such orders, and partly because of the fear of introducing complica-
tions which might prejudice agreement on the essential objectives of the Con-
vention.

Ancillary orders, such as, orders for the payment of maintenance or
orders regulating the custody of or access to children, present special problems.
because they are seldom final in their effect.

19.12. These were the reasons which explain article 1, second paragraph, of the
Convention, and broadly speaking, these reasons justify the inclusion of a spe-
cific provision on the subject. For this purpose, section 8(3) of the English
Act, which we have already quoted‘, furnishes a suitable precedent. We agree
with the principle on which it is based’, and we recommend that it should be

adopted.

V. NEED FOR PROVISION FOR ANCILLARY ORDERS

49.13. Of course, the non-recognition of ancillary orders, which we have re-
commended above’, may leave a vacuum’, What will be the legal position bet
ween the parties on matters on which ancillary orders were or could have been
passed ? Such problems can arise. The difficulty is illustrated by the English
ease of Torok v. Torok’, which we shall discuss later’.

Lstin v. Estin, (1948) 334 छा. 5. 541.

2Article 1, second paragraph of the Hague Convention.

गे, 2., (a) the Convention of October 24, 1956, on the law applicable to alimony obli-
gations towards children, and

(b) the Convention of April 15, 1958, relating to the recognition and execution of deci-
sions concerning alimentary obligations towards children.

‘Para, 19°4, supra.

spara. 19-5, supra.

SPara. 19:12, supra,

See also para, 19-15, supra.

*Torok v. Torok, (1973) All England Reports 101, (1973) 1 Weekly Law Reports, 1066.

See para. 19°24, infra.

1241

Provision in the
Convention

aga ‘inst recognition
of finding of fault
and anci
orders,

Recommendation
not to recognise
ancillary orders.

Effect of recagni-
tion of — divorce
and position at
to maintenance,


122

Outline of provi-
sion needed to
empower Indian
Court to pass ap-
propriate order,

Existing statutes
maa intemance.

Report on Recognition of Fereign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Ancitlary orders)

19.14, We may, at this stage, state briefly, in outline, the provision that is need-
ed to empower Indian Courts to pass appropriate orders'. Where the foreign
divorce or judicial separation is recognised by virtue of the proposed new Act,
then, whether the foreign court has or has not passed orders for the maintenance
of either party. or orders for the custody, education or maintenance of the chil-
dren of the marriage, or orders for the disposal of any property of cither of the
parties or their joint property, or other ancillary orders, either party may apply
to the competent court for passing ancillary orders.

In this context, the “competent court” will mean the court—

(a) which, under any law for the time being in force, would have been
competent to try a proceeding for divorce or judicial separation, as
the case may be. if such a proceeding had been instituted on the
date on which the present application is filed. by the party now
applying for an ancillary order, on a ground available under that
Taw, and

(b) which, under such law, would have power to pass such ancillary
order, (that is, the ancillary order now applied for), on or after ter-
mination of the proceedings for divorce or judicial separation.

19.15. The need for such a provision arises by reason of the combined opera-
tion of the following two factors :—

(a) The divorce granted by the foreign court is to be recognised under
the proposed law, and the parties would no longer be husband and
wife.

(0) At the same time, since the proposed law is going to provide* (in
effect) that the ancillary order passed by the foreign court may not
be recognised, the ancillary order will be of no consequence in India.

The result will be that there will be an hiatus’, in regard to matters
governed by ancillary orders. It is in order to fill up this hiatus that a provision
of the nature suggested above* is needed.

VIL. PROVISIONS IN VARIOUS ACTS AS TO MAINTENANCE AND
CUSTODY

19.16, It may be mentioned in this connection that the existing provisions of
Indian statute law may not over all aspects of the situation. For example, as
regards maintenance, the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956, and
section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—to take two important
provisions—would not cover the case, since, after’a judicial divorce, neither of
these two legislative provisions applies. Thus, section 18 of the Hindu Adop-
tion and Maintenance Act, 1956, provides for the maintenance of a ‘Hindu wife’
—which expression would not be applicable after a legally recognised foreign
divorce. Section 125 of the Code of 1973 is not meant for a wife divorced judi-
cially. Nor would it be possible to resort to any supposed common law doct-
rine imposing an obligation to maintain, because, once the marriage is regarded
as having been lawfully terminated, there is no such obligation to maintain the
ex-wife at common law.

!This is not a draft section.
*Para, 19:12, supra.
SPara, 19:13, supra.
‘Para. 19:14, supra.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Ancillary orders)

19.17. Similarly, as regards the custody etc. of minor children, the other Cen-
tral Acts will not cover the situation. An application for the appointment of a
guardian of the person can, for example, be made under the Guardians and
Wards Act, 1890, and orders for custody can also be passed under that Act in
certain circumstances, but that Act is not framed with the object of dealing with
the situation arising on dissolution of the marriage. Same applies to the Hindu
Minority etc. Act, 1956. Moreover, because of the very restrictive provisions
contained in the various Acts,—e.g. section 6, Hindu Minority and Guardian-
ship Act’, 1956, and section 19, Guardians and Wards Act*, 1890,—certain diffi-
culties arise. These difficulties are illustrated by a few reported cases’-*.

19.18. In this conection, we may quote section 19 of the Guardians and Wards
Act, 1890, which provides as follows: —

“19. Nothing in this Chapter shall authorise the Court to appoint or de-
clare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under
the superintendence of a Court of Wards, or to appoint or declare
a guardian of the person—

(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not,
in the opinion of the Court, unfit to be guardian of her person,
or

{b) of @ minor whose father is living and is not, in the opinion of
the Court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or

{c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a
Court of Wards competent to appoint a guardian of the person
of the minor.”

Clause (b) of the section is of particular relevance.

19,19. In the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, section 6 provides
(in effect), that the father has a preferential right to guardianship, though the
mother has the preferential right to custody upto a certain age. By section 190)
of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, (quoted above), it is enacted, in sub-
stance, that the Act does not authorise the court to appoint or declare a guar-
dian of the person of a minor whose father is living, if the father is not, in
Opinion of the court, wafit to be the guardian of the person of the minor. These
two provisions are slightly weighted in favour of the father. But, section 26 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, which deals with orders for the custody etc.; of
the children in the course of, or on the termination of, the matrimonial proceed-
ings under the Act, is on a different fine. Under that section, the court may
make such orders with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of
minor children, as it may deem just and proper, consistently with the wishes
of the child wherever possible.

"Para.
SCaptain Rattan Amrit Siagh v, Kamaljit, A. 1. 1, 1961, Punj, 51.

‘Sunil Kumar v. Sativani, A. 1. R. 1969 Cal, $73.

‘Kamalakshmi Amma v. Bhaskar Menon, A. 1. R. 1961 Kerala 154, 155, para. 2.
"Raghavan Nayar v. Lakshmi Kutti, A. 1. RB. 1961 Ker. 193.

1Kusa Parida v. Vaishnab, A, 1, R. 1966 Orissa, 60

*Avinash Devi v. Dr. Khazan Singh, A. 1. R. 1962 Panj, 326; Para. 19.19, infra.

°Para 19-18, supra.

123

Custody.

Provision io
Guardians ole.
Act,

Hindu [aw as to
guardianship,


tet

Case law

U.N. Conven-
tion.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Ancitlary orders)

The contrast between the Hindu Marriage Act and the Acts relating to
guardians was noted in a punjab case, It was pointed out that the section im
the Hindu Marriage Act introduces no restriction, (in contrast with the pravi-
sions in the Guardians and Wards Act, or the Hindu Minority ete. Act) as 10
the orders that can be passed, and gives no special status to the minor's father.

19.20. The shift in emphasis in the various statutory provisions is also illus-
trated by a Calcutta case*. In that case, $. K. Chakravarti, J. held that though
under section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, if the father is not un-
fil to be the guardian of the person of a minor aged more than 5 years, the father
should be the guardian,’ still, under section 13 of the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, the prime and sole consideration will be the welfare of the
minor. Section 19 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, will, therefore, have
to be read subject to section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act,
1956, so far as Hindus are concerned.

P. N. Mackerjec, J. discussing the point at still greater length, held that
section 13 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act had brougat about a
material change, so far as Hindus were concerned. It made it quite clear, that
in all cases, irrespective of the status of the person cleiming the guardianship,
the welfare of the minor would be the paramount consideration, He held that
under the Guardians and Wards Act, so far as the father is concerned, his cial
for guardianship im the case of a boy of more than 5 years of age would be the”
paramount consideration. In regard to ofher persons claiming guardlanship, the
said Act put the welfare of the minor im the forefront, and made ir the para-
ynount consideration. He also added that the welfare of the minor, though not
the paramount consideration in cases coming under section 19, is not altogether
without significance. It will be one of the considerations, or जाए of the facts,
to be considered in the matter of the claim of guardianship, even of the father,
and as one of such considerations, it may, in the ultimate result, outweigh the
otherwise paramount claim of the father.

19.21. No doubt, the various provisions stil! leave a discretion to the Court,
and, with a change in social concepts, a change in judicial attitude can be anti-
cipated. Recently, for example, the Supreme Court bas pointed out the need
to have regard to the special circumstances under which the mother could be
held to be the natural guerdian.*

1922. Tt may be noted that the U.N. Commission on the Status of Women*
recommended the following provisions as to rights of women in regard to

~guardianship:

(a) Women shall have oqual rights and dutics with men in'respect to
guardianship of their minor children and the exercise of parental
authority over them, including care, custody, education and main-
tenance ;

TAvinask Devi पे, Dr. Khazan Singh, A. 1, BR. 1962 Pon}, 326: 62 Punj. L, Reporter 354
(A. N Grover J.)

2eunit Kamar प. Sati Rani. A. 1. R. 1969 Cal. 573, 575, 577, patagraphs 10 and 13 (P. N.
Maokerjee and 5, K. Chakravarti, JJ).
ABinta Bala, 3961) 65 Cal. “N. 1138; EL. 8. (:961)” 2 Cal. 40, referred to.

4Jija Bat v. Pathan Khan, A LB. 1975 5. ८. 315.
520th Session, 13th February to 6th March, 1967 (U. N. Commission on Status of
‘Women)- है


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Ancillary orders)

(b) Both spouses shall have equal rights and duties with regard to the
administration of the property of their minor children, with the legal
limitations necessary to ensure as far as possible that it is adminis-
tered in the interest of the children.

(c) The interest of the children shall be paramount consideration in pro-
ceedings regarding custody of children in the event of divorce, annul-
ment of marriage or judicial separation.

(d) No discrimination shall be made between men and women with
regard to decisions regarding custody of children and guardianship
or other parental rights in thé event of divorce, annulment of mar-
tiage or judicial separation,

This also shows the changed social attitude, Nevertheless, the weighi-
age in favour of the father is obvious under the Guardians and Wards Act’.

19.23. So much as regards the various statutory provisions relevant to guardian-
ship. We may now note that sections 25-26 of the Hinda Marriage Act, which
provide, inter alia, for orders as to custody etc., cannot be resorted to in connec-
tion with a foreign divorce, unless we provide for it. It has been held? that the
provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act can be resoried to by the court only if
the marriage is dissolved under the Hindu Marriage Act, and not if the mar-
riage is dissolved under any other Act, such as the Madras Aliyasanthana Act.

Section 15 of the Madras Macumakkathayam Act, 1932, provided that—

“the mother shall be the guardian of the person and property of her
minor children if their father is dead or the marciage of their parents is
dissolved.”

t was held that only this provision would govern the parties, where the
divorce was obtained under that Act.

VI. ENGLISH CASE OF TOROK

49.24, The above discussion shows the need for a provision that would take
care of matters normally dealt with by ancillary orders in matrimonial causes.
The need for some specific provision as to ancillary orders in the proposed law
is iMustrated by the English case of Torok v. Torok*.In that case, the parties
left Hungary at the time of the Hungarian rising in 1956, and came to the United
Kingdom. They married, became naturalised British subjects, and lived in
England together with their children until the husband left the wife in 1967
‘and went to live in Canada. The wife and the children continued to live in
Hngiand, in a house of which the parties were the joint owners. In 1972, the
Iesband, who, by the laws of Hungary, was still a sational of that country,
Wwought proceedings in a Hungarian court:fer divorce based on the ground that
the parties had lived apart for 5 years. The wife entered an appearance. The
Hungarian court pronounced a “partial decree” of divorce, and the wife gave
notice of and lodged an appeal in Hungary against the pronouncement of the
decree.

19.25. The wife also petitioned in England, for divorce. Since the English
courts would recognise the Hungarian deeree if it was made final, under sec-

1 aPgra, 19:18, supra.

2Prema v. M, Anad Shetty, A. 1, R, 1973 Mysore 69, 71, para, 17 (Dissolution under
the Madras Aliyasanthana Aci).

*Porek ¥. Torok (1973) 1 W.L.R. 1066,

125

Hindu = Marriage
Act,

English case of
Torok y. Torok.


126

Observations
made in the
English case.

Recommendation
as to orders for
Maintenance etc.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 19.—Aacitiary orders)

tions 3(1) and 5(1) of the Recognition of Divorces and Legal Separations Act,
19717, and the court would then have no jurisdiction, under the Matrimonial
Proceedings and Property Act, 1970, te make orders concerning property and
financial provision for the wife, the wife petitioned for a divorce under section
2(1)(e) of the Divorce Reform Act, 1969 (which was the law then in force). She
also prayed for exercise of the discretion of the Court to expedite the making
of the decree absolute.

On the question whether the court should grant a decree and exercise ifs
discretion to expedite the making of the decree absolute, it was held, granting
a decree, that the English court had jurisdiction on the wife’s petition to grant a
decree of divorce and there was no ground on which it could refuse to do 80:
that, since the court had jurisdiction only under the Matrimonial Proceedings
and Property Act, 1970 if a decree had been granted by an English court, the
wife would be disabled from using or taking advantage of that Act if the Hun-
garian decree were made final before the English decree was made absolute and,
accordingly, since she would thereby suffer a severe injustice and the husband
no injustice if the decree absolute was expedited, the decree would be mide
absolute forthwith.

19.26, In this way, substantial justice was done. The Court, however, observ-
ed® that the situation presented in the case-—relating to two people, who had
been living in England, with children who had been brought up in England,
and with a matrimonial home in England,—was unforeseen when the Recogni-
tion of Divorces and Legal Separation Act, 1971 was drafted ; because the effect
of the Act is to oust, in effect, the jurisdiction of the English court to deal with
a family living in England and with property in England (if the foreign divorce
is one which has to be recognised under the Act).

Fortunately, in this case, the foreign divorce had not yet become final.
But, if it had become final, the situation would have been hard. The need for
a specific provision is illustrated by the facts of this case. Such a situation
could arise in India, or, for that matter, in any country, if a couple divosced
elsewhere comes back to that country or if even one of the spouses, so divorced,
comes back. पु

जा. RECOMMENDATIONS

19.27. In view of what we have stated in the above discussion, we recommend
that a provision of the nature already suggested’, empowering the appropiate
Indian Court to pass orders as to maintenance etc. and other ancillary mopttees
discussed above should be inserted-in the proposed law. What we have sug-
gested above is, of course, not a: draft section, but it gives all the essential requi-
sites thereof. 7 !

This provision will be in addition, of course, to the provision for sion-
recognition’ of the foreign ancillary order,

sp “पे 7पप://“/“:प:णयणख/,ण//
1Recognition of Divorces and Legal Separations Act, 1971, section 3(1). oo
sTorok v. Torok, (1973), 1 W, L. R. 1066, page 1069, portion Hi, page 1070, portions A-B.
°para. 19. 14, supra. -
*para. 19.12, supra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

CHAPTER 20

ORDERS FOR CUSTODY
VARIATION BY THE MATRIMONIAL COURT

t I INTRODUCTORY

2@.1, In the course of our consideration of the subject of ancillary orders’ we
had occasion to consider the question whether an order for the guardianship
of the person under the Guardians & Wards Act, 1890, would be subject to an
otder passed later by a court which exercises matrimonial jurisdiction and passes
an ancillary order in regard to custody, education and maintenance of children.
In othtr words, can 3 matrimonial court pass an order modifying an earlier
order passed by a competent court under the Guardians and wards Act as to
the custody of children ? Or, the order earlier passed by the Court competent
wader the Guardians and Wards Act, must hold the field—subject, of course, to
variation by that very Court? This was the question raised for our considera-
tion.

20.2. A typical provision empowering the matrimonial court to pass orders
for custody of children is in section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, quoted
below:

“26. In any proceeding under this Act, the Court may, from time to time,
pass such interim orders and made such provisions in the decree as
it may deem just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance
and education of miaor children, consistently with their wishes wher-
ever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition
for the purpose, make from time to time, all such orders and provi-
sions with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of
such children as might have been made by such decree or interim
orders in case ‘the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still
pending, and the court may also from time to time revoke, suspend
or vaty any such orders and provisions previously madc."*

3.3. In order to enable us to consider the issues raised by the query, we studied
the legal position on the matter and on an examination thereof, ultimately come
to the conclusion that it falls outside the scope of the present Report.

However, we thought that since we have studied the matter, and since the
matter is of some importance and may fall to be considered by the Commission
in the future, it would not be inappropriate if we state. below, in brief, the ques-
tion, the legal issues raised thereby and the present position.

204. We may, at the outset, point out that’the matter is really of a general na-
ture, and is not confined to the Guardians and Wards Act. The query was raised
with reference to the Guardians and Wards Act, but it really involves a wider
question relating to the competence of the ntatrimonial' court to modify previous
orders as to custody passed by other courts by virtue of powers conferred by
the relevant Acts. Law conferring such a power is not to be found in any single
enactment. We are mentioning this aspect because if, in the future, further legis-
lation is contemplated, this aspect will be of some impartance in coming to a
conclusion as to whether further legislation is needed. Even if further legisla-
tion is considered proper, it cannot prima facie, take the shape of a provision in
a law relating to the recognition of foreign divorces.

‘Chapter 19, supra.
*Section 26, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

127

Conflict, between
order of the ma-
tcimonial Court
and order under
the Guardians &
Wards Act,

Section 26, Hindu
Marriage | Act,
1955.

General nature of
‘the question.


Guardianship
and cutody.

Various provi-
rions,

Guardians and
Wards लए... Act.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 20.—-Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court)

20.5. It may also be stated that matrimonial legislation in India is not contain-
ed in one enactment, but is to be found in several enactments. We need not
respect all that we have already stated on the subject earlier’ in this Report.

Before we deal with the relevant legal provisions, we may also make it
clear that guardianship and custody are ‘not identical concepts. The guardian
may well not have the custody and yet, by virtue of his guardianship, he may
still exercise powers regarding marriage and education. “Guardianship is 'des-
tainly a more comprehensive and: ‘nore valuable right than mere - custedy.”"a
Though under section 24 of the Guardians and Wards Act, the guardian is charg
ed with custody’, the two coucepts are not identical.

After these introductory observations, we shall consider the present laya

वा. PRESENT LAW
20.6. Proceedings concerning custody. or guardianship of the person. or both,
fall under a variety of legislative or other provisions and can be instituted ina
variety of modes, Amongst these are:—

{i) The Guardians and Wards Act. 1890:

(ii) The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956:

(iii) The provisions of sections 97 and 98 of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973 ;

(iv) The writ of habeas corpus ;

(v) The original jurisdiction of the Chartered High Courts to appoint
guardians ;

(प्र) Suit in a civil court;

(vii) Matrimonial tegislation, such as, section 26 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 and comparable legal provisions.’

The precise question to be considered in this Chapter raises the issue as
to how far an order under (vii) above can modify an order under () ta w)

above.

“Wardship” of a court under state legislation is another institution of the
law. Under the relevant State Act, a minor may, by appropriate actiog, be
made a ward of court under the provisions of that Act. However, in most cases,
orders made under those Acts do fot, in practice, affect the control of the persom
of the minor, and we shall not therefore go into those Acts.

ns
i
20.7. Coming to guardianship of the person, we may state that such gudréian:
ship of the minor is governed by the relevant rules of personal law. a tae
certain conditions, it can be conferred by the court in proceedings for gudtdign-
ship. The principal Act.on the subject is the Guardians and Wards Act,’ 1890.
We have, in an earlier Chapter, alfeady discussed its provisions, so far as they
are material for the purposes of this Report. .

जा ;
La, Kumaraswamy' v. Rajammal, है. 1. R. 1957 Mad. 563, 567, Pata. 13,

°Section 24, Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
apara, 20:2, supra.
‘Chapter 19, supra.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court)

For the present purpose, it will suffice to state that under section 7 of that
Act, the court may appoint a person as the guardian of the person or property of
a minor. The court must be satisfied that such appointment will be for the wel-
fare of the minor. But this appointment cannot disturb the guardianship of a
person who has been appointed by a will or by other instrument or by the court
or who has been declared by a court.

As to the award of custody, the jurisdiction of the court under section 25
of the Guardians & Wards Act arises only where the application is for an order
for the return of the ward to the custody of the guardian and where it is alleged
that the ward has left or is removed from the custody of the guardian. The order
for the return is made only if the minor should be made to return from the point

of view of the minor’s welfare.

288. The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, is primarily concerned
with natural guardians, and not with appointment by the court, though section 13
which deals with the principles for appointing guardians, is so worded as 10 apply
also to guardians appointed hy the court.

As to natural guardians, section 6, so far as is material, provides that the
natural guardians of a Hindu minor in respect of his person are:—-
(9) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl—the father, and after him,
the mother ; provided that the custody of a minor who has not com-
pleted the age of five ycars shall ordinarily be with the mother ;

(6) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unmarried girl—
the mother, and after her, the father

(©) in the case of a married girl—-the husband.

Under the uncodified Hindu law, where natural guardians are not alive,

rédourse for the appointment of the guardian’-’ must be had to the court as
representing the rights of the King. The principle that the appointment of a
guardian rests with the ruling power is, thus, not unknown to Hindu law. In
modern times, this jurisdiction ig exercised under the Guardians and Wards Act,
tite’ provisions whereof have been expressly saved by the Hindu Minority etc.
Act.
2@9. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure; 1973—sections 97 and
98—émpower the competent Magistrate to pass orders for custody in cerlain
cates: These sections are meant principally for cases of abducted persons and
pbtyons illegally detained for an improper purpose,

2, The writ of habeas corpus is sometimes resorted to for obtaining orders
24% custody of minors. The underlying principle’ it the protection and well-
beingoi the person brought before the court.’
a --क्न्‍जज--+...
+ See

(a) Rosy Jacob v. Jacob, A. 1. R. 1973, 8. 0. 2090;

फ्री Pemeia Williams v. Patrick Martins, A. LR. 1970 Mad. 427.

*Gulbal, 10 re. 1. L. R. 32 Hom. 560.
*Thayammal v. Kuppanna, (1915) 1. L. R. 38 Mad. 1125, 1126 (Sadasiva Ayyar, J).

See the passage from Mc, Naghten’s Precedents and Prieciplés of Hindu Law, quoted
in Chennapa ¥. Chennapa, A. 1. R. 1940 Mad. 140 (Leach, है

Sarabibi y. Abdul Razzak, (1911) 12 Bom. 1.. 8. 891.
*Gohar Begum v. Suggi, A. 1. RK. 1960 §. C. 93, 96, Para, 10,

136

Hindu minority
etc. t.

Code of Criminal
Procedi

Habeas corpus,


10

Chartered
‘Courts.

High

Report on Recognition of Foréign Divorces
(Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court)

At common law, once out of 2 father’s or guardian’s control, 2 minor
could be resorted only by the issue of a writ of habeas corpus requiring the’ per-
son in charge of the minor to produce him and justify his detention. If the child:
were over the age of discretion {fourteen for boys and sixteen for girls), a writ
would not issue to the father or guardian as a matter of right against the wishes
of the minor.

In India also, the guardian is entitled to custody of the person of ths
minor, which he may vindicate either by a writ of habeas corpus or by an appli-
cation under section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, unless his fights

are modified by special iaw or by an order of the court.

20.11, Then, in the exercise of its special jurisdiction, a Chartered High Court
may make any order it thinks fit in the matter of the guardianship of a minor,
The Chartered High Courts have special or inherent jurisdiction conferred pon
them by their Charters or Letters Patents, which no other Courts possess. They
enjoy such jurisdiction apart from the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, that,is to
say, in addition to the jurisdiction conferred by that Act upon a High Court in
its ordinary civil jurisdiction.

‘We are referring to these High Courts as Chartered High Courts,- because
they have this jurisdiction by virtue of their Charter or Letters Patent.

The jurisdiction referred to above is wide. For example, it is now well-
settled that under Hindu law, a guardian cannot properly be appoiitted in respect
of the infant's interest, in the property of an undivided Mitakshara family. But
the Chartered High Courts can exercise this power. है

This jurisdiction stands expressly saved by section 3 of the Guardians
and Wards Act. 1890, in the case of the High Courts established under the, statute,
the High Courts Act (24 and 25 Vie. ०. 104). .

Tt was provided by section 9 of the High Court Act’ that the High Court:
shall exercise all such poweré as shall be granted by the Letters Patent, and,
except as otherwise provided therein, it shall have and exercise all jurisdiction
vested in the Supreme and Sudder Courts. Clause 17 of the Letters Patent aft
1865, stated that the High Court shail have the like powsr with respect to §ofants
and other in the province as wasivested in the High Court immediately peior.to
the publication of the Letters Patent, i.c., the power that it had under clams 46,
of the Letters Patent of 1862, which had stated that the Court should have the
same jurisdiction as was then vested in the Supreme Court. <The powerk ‘vested.
in the Supreme Court wete the same as those possessed by ‘the Courts’ 221९! कै
cery in England—See clause 25 of the Charter of 1774, establishing the Seprerae!
Court at Fort William, Clause 32 of the Charter of 1800, constituting the S¢preme
Court at Madras and Clause of the Charter of 1823 relating to the Supreme
Court at Bombay. है

ee— ‘

{a) R. v, Clarke, Re Race, (1857) 119 B. R. 1217;

(b) R. ४. Hawes ex p. Barford, (1860) 3 B&B, 332;

{c) Ry v. Greenhill, (1836) 111 ह. है. 922, 927, _.
*Gharibuliah v. Khalap Singh, (1903) 1. L. R. 25 All, 407; L. R.-30 1, A. 165 Bd)
"The High Courts Act, 24 & 25 Vie, 6. 104. :


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
{Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court)

As was observed by the Madras High Court in Annie Besant v. Naraya-
nigh, “the jurisdiction in connection with the estates and persons of minors is
Aesteetertesereneeeenees the jurisdiction which was exercisable by the Lord Chancellor

“in England acting for the sovereign as parens patriac, when the Supreme Court
नमन मिमी was instituted.”

In Engiand, the Court of Chancery has always had the power of appoint-
ing guardians for infants on a proper case being made, whether such infants
have property or not.*.*

29.12. This jurisdiction is often referred to as jurisdiction to make a person
“ward of court”. Wardship of court differs from other types of orders, inasmuch
as if a child is made a ward of court, the custody vests in the court. Of course,
-for practical reasons, care and control of the child is given to an individual—it
can, in appropriate cases, be given to a local authority in modern times, but the
person or authority so placed in charge will be in the nature of an agent of the
court, responsible solely for the day-to-day supervision of the ward. He or it
must keep the court informed of the progress of the case, and may always turn
to the court for guidance and assistance.‘

Being 8 jurisdiction flowing from the Crown’s prerogative and exercisable
om the merits of cach individual case, the jurisdiction transcends purely territorial
Himits as well as difference of race.

Latey J.’ traces the origin of this wardship jurisdiction as follows :

“All subjects owe allegiance to the Crown. The Crown has 2 duty to pro-
tect its subjects. This is and always has been specially so towards minors,
that is to say, now the young under the age of 18. And it is so becausé
children are especially vulnerable. They have not formed the defences
inside themselves which other people have, and therefore, need special
Protection. They are also a country’s most valuable asset for the future,
So the Crown as parens patriac delegated its powers and duty of protec-
tion to the Courts.” ;
20.13. Thus, it has been held that the original side of the Calcutta High
-Court* has jurisdiction to entertain an application for the appointment of a guat-
dian of the person of a minor who ordinarily resides within its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction as also those resident within the Bengal Division of the Presi-
dency who are “British subjects”. The jurisdiction oyer infants under clause 17
ef the Letters Patent, preserved by section 3 of the Guardians and Wards Act, is
operative on the person and estate of all infants within Bengal Division of the
Presidency’ in regard to British subjects. हु

~ The Guardians and Wards Act does not take away this special jurisdic:
tion of the High Court. Section 3 of the Act provides that “nothing in this Act
shall be construed to affect or take away ppwer possessed by any High Court
established under the Statutes 24 and 25 Victoria, Chapter 104. (An Act for

1Annie Besant v. Narayaniah, (1913) 25 M. L. J. 661, 686 ALR. 1915 Mad, 157 (White,
C.J. and Oldfield, 1.).

अपर Spence, 2 Phil. 247, 252.

*Re Flynn, 2 De G. & Sm, 457, 481 NLC. !

‘See Cross, “Wards of Court” 83 L.Q.R. 201.

*Rex (a minor), (1975) 1 All. E. R., 697,

“In the matier of Lovejoy Patell, LE.R. (1943) 2 Cal. 554; A.LR. 1944 Cal. 433, 438,
439 (Das, 1).

Un re Taruchandra Ghose, AIR. 1930 Cal. 598 (Lort Williams, 1).

Wardship,

131


132

Chartered. High
Courts,

Suits for custody.

Aocillary _ orders
in matrimonial
cases.

Variety of  dis-
putes.

Custody—a_ divi-
gible cight.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
{Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court)

establishing High Courts of Judicature in India).” The power is also saved by
the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act.

20.14. Subject to the paramount consideration being the welfare of the minof and
his estate, a chartered High Court may, in the exercise of its special jurisdiction
referred to above make any order which it deems fit.’ Its jurisdiction being inde-
pendent of the Guardians and Wards Act, a chartered High Court is not restrict-
ed by the specific provisions of that Act.

20.15. Apart from proceedings of the nature mentioned above, it would appear
that a sui; can be filed for custody. How far such a suit can be filed by the father
is a matter for controversy. Accortling to the Bombay view’, a suit by a ‘father
for the custody of his child is maintainable, especially since because of section 19
of the Guardians and Wards Act, no remedy at the instance of the father exists
under that Act.

According to the Madras High Court’, on the other hand, a mofussil Court
other than the District Court has no jurisdiction to entertain a suit by a fatber
for the custody of his minor child.

We need not go into further details of this controversy. But the proposi-
tion that in certain circumstances a suit for custody can lie. is not in dispyte.
Such a suit is expressly mentioned in the Provincial Smali Causes Courts act!

20.16. Finally, matrimonial legislation usually contains provisions empowering
the court to pass orders for the custody of children of the marriage both during
the pendency and on the termination of matrimonial proceedings. When maatri-
monial relief is decreed, custody is granted specifically by the court’as a con-
comitant to such relief, on such relief, on such terms as the court may deem just,
An example in point is the provision’ in section 26, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

I, VARIETY OF DISPUTES

20.17. This brief resume of provisions empowering the court to deal with the
custody of children, shows the variety of powers possessed by various courts.
It may also be stated that legal disputes concerning children are of miahy ब्काक,
and may arise—{i) independently, or (ii) pending matrimonial proceeding ‘et
(ii) in the aftermath of matrimbnial proceedings between the parents. “Thie ‘dis+
pute itself may be between the parents themselves, or between the padints
(united or divided) and the third parties like -inlaws, and grand-parents. > ts
subject matter can be the question who is best suited or placed to bring‘dp-a
child, or merely a specific point of disagreement,—for example, over agpeds
education or maintenance.’

20.18. “Custody” is a divisible right, which enables a court, in proceedings re-
lating to a child, to make an ordet for custody subject to qualifications, og to
divide the rights inherent in custody between the parents or other, parties+-for

nn ne ताज

+ --
1$¢e section 12, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
*Raja of Vizianagaram ¥, The Secrdary of Staie for. India, 1. L. 8, (1937) Mad. 383;
ALR, 1937 Mad, 51, 76. . 3
*Acharajtal ¥, Chimanial, (1916) LL.R, 40 Bom. 600, 605. +
S§athi v, Ramandi, 1919 LLR. 42 Mad. 647; 37 M. L. J. 93, ALR. 1920 Mag, 937
B).

है 'See Provincial Small Causes Courts Act, 1887, Article 37—"A suit for........0 custody *

of 3 minor”. है
556९ Chapter 19, supra, and the opening paragraphs of this Chapter,

iGrant, Family Law (1970), pages 132, 133.


Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces
(Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Veriation by the Matrimonial Courty

example, by giving custody to A subject to care and control to B, or custody to
A and B subject to care and control to A or B or even C. These permutations
enable a court to give both parents, and other persons who may be concemed,
a share or stake in the upbringing of a child where such arrangement is likely
to be of benefit’.

IV. POWERS OF THE MATRIMONIAL COURT

28.19, We now come to the specific question to be considered in this Chapter,
namely, the extent of power of the matrimonial court to modify an earlier order
passed by a court under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, The statutory
provisions relating to the matrimonial courts competent under the various enact-
Juents are silent in this regard, inasmuch as they do not specifically permit the
tmatrimonial court to vary an earlier order of another court, nor do they prohibit
it from doing so.

20.20. So far as we could ascertain, the question whether the matrimonial court
ean vary an order passed by the guardianship court does not appear to have
arisen in any reported case under Indian matrimonial legislation.

La Of course, the power of a guardianship court to vary its earlier order is
swell recognised. 1

Orders as to the custody of a child under the Guardians etc. Act are
‘always of a temporary nature. Those interested in the minor are at liberty to
ee the Court for modifications or alteration of such order whenever neces-

Ly arises.*

Similarly, the power of a matrimonial court to vary its own order is not
disputed, In a Calcutta case‘ between Parsis, it was Jaid down that merely be-
cause of an ancillary order passed in matrimonial proceedings,’ the father has
been given the custody of the children and there is nothing against him so far
as the children are concerned, it cannot be said that he has an absolute over-
riding right in the matter of custody of the children. Jn this case, an order for
gustody was passed in a suit in which judicial separation had been granted to

the wife.

Necessity for review of the order arose, it seems, because of some differ-
ences of opinion between the parents as to the school in which the children
should be educated. Taking the view that the earlier order could be reviewed,
the High Court pointed out that under section 49 of the Parsi Marriage and
Divorce Act, the position would have to be considered in the light of all the
“eircumstances and in the context of the children’s welfare.

7921. The question dealt with in this Chapter does not appear to have directly
agisen in any English case also, although caselaw is available as to the power
of the High Court to vary an earlier Magisterial order. In one case, the High
Gourt, in exercise of its wardship jurisdiction, was asked to modify an order

sell Mi (196) AUR, 479, the Court of Appeal approved of a care and control
भर to one party, without any other order for custody.

*Sareswati Sripad, LL.R. (1941) Bom. 455; 43 Bom. L. R. 791; ALR. 1941 Bom, 103.
Rattan Amoh Singh v, Kamaljit Kaur, A. 1. है, 1961 Punj. 51, 54, Para, 17.

Yambhed v. Zerin, ALR, 1974 Cal. 111, 114, 115, patagraphs 15 and 18 (S. K. Mukher-
fee and 5. K, Dutta, JJ.).

"Section 49, Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936.

133

Statutory —provi-
sion.

Case law.


134

Two views pos-
able.

Modification —_ of
section 13, C.P.C.
and section .
Evidence Act.

Report_on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 20.—Orders for Custody—Variation by the Matrimonial Court.
Chapter 21,—Modification of section 13, Code of Civil Procedure and section 41,
Evidence Act)

made earlier by the Magistrate’s Court.' Stamp J. held that although be जान
doubtedly held jurisdisction to hear the case, he should exercise it only in sncep-
tional circumstances,

It would appear that such jurisdiction could be exercised by the High
Court where the case had special complexity* or where the jurisdiction of the
High Court is more extensive, efficacious or convenient, or where it is necessary
to supplement the order passed by the Magistrate by giving relief which the
Magistrate had no power to give. It may be noted that in the exercise of the
wardship jurisdiction, the High Court may issue an injunction prohibiting a
person from taking the child out of the jurisdiction. In one English case? such
an order was passed by the High Court to give effect to the Magistrate’s order
awarding custody to the mother. 7

V. CONCLUSION

20.22. Since the case law throws no light on the question which we are now in-
vestigating, the question is of first: impression and had to be so approached.
Now, it would appear that two veiws are possible on this question. On the one
hand, the order passed earliér under the Guardians and Wards Act or other
cognate provision would have been passed on a consideration of the state of
affairs then existing. If there is a material change of circumstances by rtasom
of the dissolution of marriage or by the grant of judicial separation, a new fac-
tual element is introduced, which at least requires consideration by the matri-
monial court. On this reasoning it could be argued that the jurisdiction of that
court should be treated as wide enough so as to enable it to take into account
‘the factual element just now referred to. On the other hand, a fresh order would
mean a modification of the onder of another court, and since, prima facie, the
section is silent on the subject, it.can be argued that it does not permit of any
such course.

It is not necessary for us to express any opinion on the question, since,
in any case, the matter falls outside the scope of this Report. If and when the
question comes up for consideration, several aspects may have to be botte ja_
mind. The brief discussion in this Chapter of the legal issues will serve td Inti-
cate broadly the scope amd magnitude of the problem. But, as we have already
indicated, this problem is outside the scope of this Report.

Cuapria 21

MODIFICATION OF SECTION 13, CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE AND
SECTION 41, EVIDENCE ACT

211. Our recommendations will gover many matters which are, at prebesie,
touched upon by certain statutory provisions’ to which we have already ‘inhade
a reference. It is necessary, as a consequential amendment, to modiy fon
provisions,—namely, section 13, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and इच्छा 41,
Evidence Act, 1871,—s0 as to exclude their application in telation to the masters
that will be covered by cur recommendations, when they are given leglilgtive

effect. पु
___ ..[.[. | ७॒  _ ७ स्‍

176, P., (1967) ३ ALB, ४. 229.
कु, P. (1968) 1 W.L.R. 1976,
मर H., (1966) 1 AILE, R. 952.
*Chapter 4, supra.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(Chapter 21.—Modification of section 13, Code of Civil Procedure and section 41,
Evidence Act. Chapter 22.—Recommendations)

21.2. It is obvious that in so far as there is, on any matter, a specific provision
in the recommendation in regard to recognition of decrees of divorce, the posi-
tion should be governed exclusively by the recommended provisions, and not
by the provision in section 13 of the Civil Procedure Code, or section 41 of the
Evidence Act, as the case may be. Hence the need for a consequential amend-
ment. In the absence of a consequential amendment, there will be overlapping,
and this might create confusion.

CHAPTER 22
RECOMMENDATIONS

22.1. In the light of the discussion in the preceding Chapters, we recommend
the enactment of a separate Jaw on the lines indicated in the Bill annexed to
this Report! The Bill is, as is the usual practice of the Commission, a rough
draft, intended to indicate in a concrete form our recommendations.

We may repeat what we have stated, namely, that suitable amendment
excluding the application of section 13, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and sec-
tion 41, Evidence Act, will also be required, if our recommendations are accept-
ed and the Bill introduced.

See Appendix.
Chapter 20, supra.

Recommenda-
tions.

135


Short title,
extent and
sommencement,

Definition.

Cf, section 83)
English Act.

Recognition of
foreign divor-
oes and legal
‘separations.
‘Cf. section 2,
English Act.

Grounds of
recognition,

Gross peccend
ings and separa-
tion converted
into divores,

CE. section 4,
Englith Act.

APPENDIX 1

The Recognition of Divorces and legal Separation Bil, 1976.

(1) This Act may be called the.... .
(2) Tt extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

(3) It shall come into force on such date the Central Goverument may, by notifica-
tion in the official pazette, appoint in this behalf.
2 In this Act—

fa) “country” includes a colony or other dependent territory of the United King-
dom, but for the purposes of this Act, a person shall be treated as a national
of such a territory only if it has a law of citizenship or nationality seyarate
from thet of the United Kingdom and he is a citizen or national of that काश:
tory under that law; “s

(by “proceeding” includes any act which might be sufficient to effectuate a dissolv-
tion of marriage, however informal that act might be and whether or not any
formality or legal process is required;

(c) institution, in relation to a proceeding constituted by an act otherwise than before
an authority, means, commencenynt of that act.

3. Sections 4 to 6 shall have effgct, subject to the provisions of section 7, as re: is
the recognition in India of the validity of foreign divorces and legal separations, ” 12282 is to
say, divorces and legal separations which—

{a) have been obtained by means of judicial or other proceedings in any country
outside India; and
{b) are effective under the law of that country.

4 (1) The validity of a foreign divorce .or legal separation shall be recognised if, at
the date of the institution of the proceedings im the country in which it was obtained—

(a) either spouse was habitually resident in that country; or
{b) either spouse was a national of that country; or
(0) both spouses were domiciled in that country.

(2) Jn relation to a country comprising territories in which different systems of law ate

in force in matters of divorce or legal ion, the provisions of sub-section (1) (except
those relating to nationality) shall have i tan as if each territory were a separate country.
5 (J) Where there have been cross-proceedings, the validity of a foreign divorce or ley

separation obtained either in the original proceedings or in the cross-proceedings shall
recognised if the requirements of clause (3) or (0) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 4 are
satisfied in relation to the date of the institution either of the original proctedings or of
the cross-proceedings,

(2) Where a legal separation the validity of which is entitled to lets i) ition by virtue
of the provisions of section 4 or sub-section (1) of itis this section is com |, in the country
in which it was obtained, into a divorce, the validity of the divorce shall be recogniséd
whether or not it would itself be entitled to recognition by virtue of these provisions.

6 (1) For the purpose of deciding whether a foreign divorce or legal sepatation is entitl-
ed to recognition by virtwe of the provisions of sections 3 10 5, any finding of fact

(whether expressly or by implication) in the proceedings as a result of which the divoree
or legal separation was oblainéd and on the basis of which jurisdiction was assumed io

these proceedings shall—

{a) 1६ both spouses took part in the proceedings, be conclusive proof of the facts
found; and .

(b) in any other case, be sufficient proof of that fact unless the contrary is shown.

(2) In this section, “finding of fact” includes a finding that either spouse was habe

tually resident or domiciled in, or a national of, the country in which the divorce or legal

separation was obtained; and for the purposes of clause (a> of sub-section (1), a spouse
who has appeared in judicial proceedings shall be treated as having taken part in then,

136



Report on Recognition of Foreign. Divorces

7 (1) Divorces or legal separations obtained in a country other than the country of
the spouses’ domicile, and recognised as valid in the country of their domicile, shall be
recognised in India.

tainea (2, 1 20Y,cifoumstances in which the validity of a divorce or legal separation ob
ained in a country outside India would be recognised by virtue of sub-section (1) if
eather

(a) the spouses had at the material time both been domiciled in that country;
or

{b) the divorce or separation were recognised as valid under the law of the spouses’
domicile,

its validity shall also be recognised if sub-section (3) is satisfed in relation to it,

(3) This sub-section is satisfied in relation to a divorce or legal separation obtained
in a country outside India if either—

“* (व) one of the spouses was at the material titne domiciled in that country and the
divorce or scparation was recognised as valid unter the law of the domicile of
the other spouse; or

(b) neither of the spouses having been domiciled in that country at the material
time, the divorce or separation was recognised as valid under the law of the
domicile of cach of the spouses respectively,

(4) For any purpose of sub-seetion (2) of sub-section (3), “the material time”, in

telation to a divorce or legal separation, means the time of the institution of proceedings
in the country in which jt was obtained.

(5) Sections 4 to 6 shall be without prejudice to the recognition of the validity of
divorces and legal separations obtained outside India by virtue of sub-sections (1) to (3),
or of any enactment other than this Act; but, subject to this section no divorce or legal
separation 30 obtained shall be recognised as valid in India except as provided by these

sections.

8. where the validity of a divorce obtained in any country is entitled to recognition
by virtue of the provisions of sections 3 to 6 or by virtue of any rule or enactment pre-
served by sub-section (2) of section 7. neither spouse stall be Freciuded from re-matrying
in India on the ground that the validity of the divorce would not be recognised in any

other country.

9. (1) The validity of a divorce or legal separation obtained outside India shall not
‘be recognised in India if it was granted or obtained at a एकल, when according to the law
of India (including its rules (of private international law attd the pro’ s of this Act),
there was no subsisting marriage between the parties.

{2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), reco; pgnition by virtue of sections
3 to 6 or sub-section (2) of section 7 or of sub-section (5) है section 7 of the validity of
a divorce or legal separation outside India shall be refused if, and only if,—

(a) it was obtained by one spouse—
0) without such steps having been taken for giving notice of the proceedings
to the other spouse as, haying regard to the nature of the proceedings and

all the circumstances, should reasenably have: been taken; or

fii) without the other spouse having been given (for any reason other thar
lack of notice) such opportunity to take part in the ie proceedings, as, having
regard to the matters aforesaid. he should reasonably have been given:

or

(b) it was obtained by fraud; or

(c) its recognition would manifestly be contrary to public policy.

(3) Nothing in this Act shall be congirued as requiring the recognition of—

(a) any findings of fault made in any proceading for divorce or separation,
or

(७) any maintenance, custody or other ancillary brder made in any such proceed-
ings.

10. The provisions of this Act relating to foreign divorces and legat ‘separations apply
to a divorce or legal separation obtained before the date of the commencement of this
Act as well as to one obtained on or after that dats, and, in the case of a divorce or

lega! separation obtained before that date—

§37

Recognition of
the ground of
domicile,

Re-marriage.
CE. section 7,
English Act
as amended

in 1973.

No subsisting
marriage.

CE. secti
को विश
Act.

CE. Section &(2),
English Act as
amended in

Cf. section
8(2Ma), English
Act,

CE. section
8(2)(b) English
Act,

CE section 8(3),
English Act,

CF. section 6(4),
Engin Acts


138

Modification of
application of
certain provi-
sions in rela-

tion to certain
decrees.

Ancillary
orders,

Domicile and
nationality
of wile.

Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

(a) require, or, as the case may be, १००० the recognition of its validi ty in
say ti a a yal
Tatton, to any time before that date as well as in’ relation to apy ‘sul equsat

(0) do not affect any property rights to which any person became entitled before
that date or apply where the question of the validity of the divorce or ‘legal
separation has been decided by any competent court in India before that ‘date.

11. In relation to the effect of decrees of divorce or legal separation to which this
Act अत ss the, following provisions shall not apply as regards matters provided for by
Ss namely',— है

(a) sections 41 and 44 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872;
(b) section 13 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

12, (1) Where the foreign divorce or Iegal separation is recognised by virtue of this
Act, then, whether the foreign. court has or has not passed ancillary orders, either party
may apply to the competent court for passing ancillary orders?

Expianation [—"Ancillary order”, in relation to a proceeding for divorce or legal
separation, jachides an order—~

(a) for the maintenance of either party to the proceeding, or
(>) for the custody, education or maintenance of the children of the family, or
(०) for the disposal of any property of either of the parties or their joint property.

Explanation 2—~“Competent Court*, in relation to an application for an ancillary
order, means the court which, under any law for the time being in force in India,—

(a) would be competent to try a proceeding for divorce or judicial separation, as the
case may be, if, on the date of the application for ancillary order such a pro-
ceeding were to be instituted by the applicant, seeking divorce or judicial sepa-
ration on a ground available under that law for divorce or judicial separation,
as the case may ba, and

(0) would have power to pass the ancillary order now applied for, on or after ter-
mination of the pracesding fpr divorce or judicial separation.

(2) On such application being made, the Court shall hear and dispose of the appli-

cation according to Law.

13. (1) For the purposes of this Act, and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
the domicile of a married woman or at any time after the commencement of this Act shall,
instead of being the same as her husband's by virtue only of marriage, be a! i

reference 10 the same factors as in the case of any other individual capablo of baving an

independent domicile "™*.

(2) Where,. immediately before the commencement of this Act, a woman was par are
vied and then had her husband's Somicile ‘by dependence, she shall be treated as 2
that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also her domicile of origi inp, untess and
until it is changed by acquisiton or revival of another domicile either on or the com-

mencement of this Act.

Alternative draft
(1) For the purposes of this Act, ‘and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
the domicile of a woman who is, or has at any time been married, shall be determined as
if she had never been married.

(2) Where, immediately, before the commencement of this Act, a woman was matried

व then had her husband's domicile by dependence, she shall be, treated as retaining that
domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it 8 not also her domicile of origin), unless enti]
it is changed by acquisition or revival of another domicile either on or after the commence-

ment of this Act.
Another alternative draft
11) For the ses of this Act, 'aad subject to the provisions of sub-section (2).
any role of law ‘whereby ‘a woman on ber marriage acquires her husband's domicile or

nationality shail not be taken into adcount.

(2) Where, immediately, before the commencement of this Act, a woman was Mear-
fied and then had her husband's domicile by dependence, she shall be treated as retaising
that domicile (as a domicile of choice, है it is not also her domicile of origin), unless and
until it is changed by acquisition or revival of another domicile either on or after the
commencement of this Act.

18७8 Chapter 20 of the Report. 5

18६6 Chapter 19 of the Report Para. 19.14 and 19:27.
‘See Chapter 15 of the Report.

‘The lest alternative draft is preferable.



Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces 139:

APPENDIX 2

LETTER FROM THE MINISTER OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY
AFFAIRS

DG, No. F. 76/751९

New Dew /11000] Marcu 13, 1975.
My Dean GavenpRAGADEAR SAHEB,

joa I am sure the learned Members of your Commission have read with interest the
igment of Supreme Court in Smt, Satya v. Teja Singh (AJ.R. 1975 S. ©. 105) refusing to
Tecognise a decree of divorce obtained’ by Hindu husband against his Hindu wife from 5
Nevada court on the eround, infer alia, that it was obtained by fraud. The Court (Chandra-
chud J.) after noting that a divorce decree granted by a foreign court is recognised in
another jurisdiction ss a matter of comity, public policy and good morals but that comity
does no! require a country to give effect to the divorce laws of another which are 19085
Nant to its own laws and public policy, observed at page 117:--

nhappily, the marriage between the appellant and respondent has a timp. They
will be treated as divorced in Nevada bet their bond of matrimony will remain
wnsnapped jn India, the country of their domicile............

“Qui legislature ought to find a solution to such schizoid situations as the British
Parliament has, to a जाए extent, done by passing the ‘Recognition of Divorces and
Legal Separations Act, 1971’, Perhaps, the International Hague Convention of 1970
which contains a comprehensive scheme for relizving the contusion caused by differ
ing systems of conflict of laws may serve as a mode! But any such faw shall have
to provide for non-recognition of foreign decrees procured by fraud bearing on
jurisdictional facts as also for the mnom-recognition of decrees, the recognition of
which would be contrary to our public policy.”

May 1, therefore, request you to get the matter examined by the Law Commission
and favour us with a report.

‘Wik warm personal regards,
Yours sincerely,

छठ. xX

- (H. R, GOKHALE)
Dr. P. B. GAENDAAGADKAR, >

Chairman, Law Commission, New Delhi,


140° Report on Recognition of Foreign Divorces

We would like to place on-record our warm appre-
ciation of the valuable assistance we have received from
Shri Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in
the preparation of this Report.

P, 8, GAJENDRAGADKAR Chairman
P. K. TREPATHE ह Member
S. S. DHAVAN Member
S. P. SEN-VARMA Member
B. 0. MITRA Member
P. M. BAKSHI Member-Secretary

Dated New Delhi the April 5, 1976.

GIEN—S6—5 L.D. (ND, )/76—7-12-76—-2,000.