PLD-92.LXVI
7,000

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND
COMPANY AFFAIRS

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SIXTY- SIXTH REPORT
ON
MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY
ACT, 1874

MAY, 1976


9.0. NO. F. 2(4}/75-L.¢.
P. 8. GAJENDRAGADKAR,

Chairman | Shastri Bhavan,
| 1 New Delhi-110 001
ह May 12, 1976.
r I have ‘great pleasure in forwarding herewith the  Sixty-
sjkth Report of the Commission on the Married Women’s Pro-
Tty Act, 1874, Tn the latter half of 1975, the Commission took
up this subject swo mou, because it thought that, in the Inter-
national Women Year 1975, it would be appropriate to revise this
ct.

As usual, a preliminary study of the relevant material was
made, a draft report prepared and discussed in detail. In con-
sequen. changes were made in the draft report and it was then

_ finalised.

You are aware that the present Act, which was passed in

"1874, is based mainly on the earlier English Statute of 1870.
Thereafter, statutory developments in England and elsewhere in

regard to the question of married women’s right to property have

been fairly extensive; as a consequence, the whole concept and

-character of married women’s right to property has been revolu-
tionised. This revolutionary change is consistent with modern

«juristic thinking on the sudject and the changed sociological
notions. This development, which has taken place during the

century after the passing of the Act, the” Commission thought,

required a comprehensive revision of the Act. 7

In order to decide what recommendations the Commission
should make in regard to the changes in the Act, the Commission
thought it necessary to consider the background of the Act and
itake notice of the historical development of the various rules of
Common Law and Equity relevant to the subject.

The Commission also thought it necessary to undertake a
study in depth of the comparative material in order to enable the
Commission to consider and decide the various aspects of the
problem pertaining to the formulation of. the Commission's recom-

‘mendations or the subject. The recommendations made by the
Commission will speak for themselves; but 1 think it would not be
inappropriate if, in this covering letter, I indicate some. of the
broad features of the radical changes we suggest in the Act.

The old common law notion that the wife’s person was, for

९ all legal purposes, merged in that of her husband and that, while
the marriage lasted, her real estate and (with certain exceptions}
her personal property became her husband’s property, has now
become completely obsolete. That is why we have made suitable
recommendations in that behalf to bring our statutory law in con-

formity with modern juristic principles.
ti)

1-1 ७0176


(iid ~

The Commission also thought that the separate liability of
the wife should na longer be proprietary only, but should be a per-
sonal liability quite independent of her husband. This, we thought,
should be made clear by legislation, not merely in regard to married
women of the particular community to which this Act applies at
present, but also in regard to married women of other <4
as well. That, in brief, is the approach adopted by the Commission
in making its recommendations. . J

Section 6 of the Act which deals with the policies of life
insurance is undoubtedly a provision of considerable sociological
importance and, as at present worded, it presents certain ‘difficul
questions of interpretation. The problems posed by section 6 have,
therefore, been dealt with in our Report in a separate Chapter in
order to enable the Commission to set out its views both from the
sociological and juristic points of view.

After the Commission was constituted in September 1973,
it has forwarded to the Government Twenty-two Reports (Nos.
forty-five to sixty-six) including the present one and after the pre-
sent Commission was re-constituted in September 1974, it has for-
warded six Reports including the present one. है

Before I conclude, I would-like to invite your attention to
the request made by me while forwarding the sixty-fifth Report, I
had suggested—and I wish to repeat my suggestion that, after the
present Report is printed, copies of the Report should be circulated
to the relevant academic and professional institutions so that it
may encourage a debate on the questions considered by the Com-
mission and that, in turn, may assist the Government in coming to
its own conclusions on the relevant recommendations made by the
Cammission in this Report. I trust you will appreciate my point
and accept my suggestion.

With warm personal regards.

Yours sincerely,
(Sd./-)
(P. 8. Gajendragadkar)

The Hon’ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhawan,

NEW DELHI-110001.


CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER- 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12

CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER. 14

CHAPTER 15

CONTENTS

Introductory.

History of English law on the subject.

Women’s Position in India—brief historical study.
Scheme of the Act of 1874.

Cognate provisions in other Acts.

Extent and application of Act of 1874.

‘Married Women's wages and earnings.

Insurances by wives and husbands,

Legal proceedings.

" Wife's liability for husband’s debts.

Husband's liability for wife's debts.

Husband’s liability for wife’s breach of trust or
devastation.

Other matters.

Recommended amendments in the Act of 1874 by
way of simplification in a few sections.

Amendments in other Acts.

(ii)

10
26
2
33
4
35
51
63
65

65
66
67


APPENDIX 1

APPENDIX 2

APPENDIX 3

APPENDIX 4

APPENDIX 5

APPENDIX 6

APPENDICES

‘The Married Women’s Property and Miscellaneous
Provisions Bill, |

Beisting sections 20 to 22, Indian Succession Act,
1925,

Section 11, Married Women's Property Act, 1082
(Eng.}.

Law Reform (Marricd Women and Tort Feasors)
Act, 1935 (Eng).

Married Women (Restraiit upon Anticipation) Act,
1949 (Eng.),

Law Reform (Husband and Wife} Act, 1962 (Eng).

(iv)

3

vel

5

76

W


Cuaprer |
INTRODUCTORY

1.1. A hundred years ago was passed the Married Women’s Right to Property Scope of the Re-
Act, 1874, which' sought to free married women from certain anachronistic rules Po

of the common law which were regarded as applicable to persons of certain com-

munities in India also. This is a short Act, containing only 10 sections, but, as

our Report will show, it raises certain important issues.

A few years before the Act was passed, section 4 of the Indian Succession
Act, 1865, had established the principle that by marriage the husband does not
acquire any rights in the property of the wife. A few years later, legislation re-
cognising what is known as the restraint on anticipation in case of married
women, was enacted in section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. These
legislative provisions have, during a century or so of their existence, given rise to
certain problems and difficulties and the Law Commission, in the International.
Women’s Year, 1975 considered it appropriate to take up these provisions for
examination with a view to suggesting such changes as may be necessary for their -
improvement.

£2. The need for revision of the Act of 1874 and cognate provisions has arisen Reason for revi-
from various factors, which may be briefly enumerated : sion.

(a) Change in social notions.

(b) Difficultics felt with reference to application of the beneficial provi-
sions of the Act, particularly section 6.

© Scope for drafting improvements for removing certain apparent in-
consistencies. पु

1.3... While many of the provisions of the Act of 1874 are not applicable to the Applicability of
majority of Indian women, a very important section—seclion 6—is so applicable. the Act of 1874,
That section deals with the effect of certain arrangements that may be made by

the husband for the benefit of his wife or children or both his wife and children,

in relation to policies of life insurance. The sociological importance of these पु
arrangements is obvious. In making this provision, which is a very beneficial

one, the legislature showed awarene’s of the financial interests of the wife, and

her dependence on the husband as the provider for the family. The provision is

intended to protect the monetary security offered by such arrangements which, in

a sense, are to be considered as substitutes for the economic security offered by

matrimony. While marriage does not grant to either spouse a right in the pro-

perty of the other spouse, it does create expectations of emotional as well as

economic support from the other spouse. This is particularly so in the case of

the wife. The family is still an economic unit. Section 6, which is vitally con-

cerned with the economic welfare of the wife and children, takes note of this as-

pect, and proceeds to make certain provisions intended 1o render more effective

the arrangements made by the husband in relation to the disposal of moneys to

be teceived on an insurance of his life.

1.4, While, therefore, a radical change in the principle of the existing section is Need for amend:
not required, there is an urgent need for amendments which will more effectively ment of section 6.
carry out the principle which underlies the provisions of section 6.

हे गुड Act will be referred to im brief as the Act of 1874,
1


2 Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 1—Introductory—Contd.)

It is in this context, that we have considered it proper to examine section
6 at length. It so happens that apart from the practical importance of section 6,
jt bears examination from the theoretical point of view, as it deals with the inter-
esting subject of the mode of assignment of an actionable claim. For historical
reasons, the freedom of assignment of actionable claims was, in common law, be-
set with technical difficulties throughout its history. Though there was no funda-
mental objection, in the laymind, to such assignments, a sound and uniform doc-
trine of assignments failed to develop in common law, and the kind of assistance
which the law courts could give was “surreptitious and spasmodic”.' Section 6
gives a positive mandate as to the effect of an arrangement.

Economic aspects +15. So long as the family is a going concern, rights in property and rights to

of family law. maintenance are of purely academic interest. But the economic aspects of family
law become important when the marriage breaks down during the parties’ life-
time. These aspects also become important on the death of one of the parties,
and, similarly, they become important if one spouse becomes insolvent. The de-
velopment of the status of the wife from a subservient member of the family to
the co-equal head of the family has been substantially achieved ; but a few points
of detail are still in need of reform. In general, rights in property ate not greatly
affected by the relationship of husband and wife, but in some respects, the law
requires to be brought up-to-date,

. Inferiority of wo-, 1.6, Voltaire, in his Dictionnaire Philosophique*, asserted, with respect to the
men. / word “woman”: “It is not surprising that in every country man has become
~ woman's master, because everything is based upon strength. He usually possesses
great superiority by virtue of his body and even his mind .......... ५०००-०० Women
are commonly concerned to be sociable and conciliatory. Generally speaking, it

appears that they are made to assuage men’s manners.”

This notion will today appear as obsolete ; but, in early times, this notion
of woman’s inferiority was reflected in the legal status assigned to her in the
West.

The social changes of the nineteenth century, however, increasingly ob-

liged industrial socicties to modify the woman’s position in society in a manner

ड़ that has tended towards her emancipation. Our law is tending towards treat-

ment of the woman as an individual, not only in the family but also in society
generally.

Jt is hardly necessary to add that in India, the Constitution guarantees
complete equality of the sexes. In fact, the Constitution’ allows the State to
make special provisions for woman. The statutory provisions with which the
Report is concerned also illustrate the trend towards equality of the sexes. But,
as we have already stated* those provisions require to be brought up-to-date.

from the questions pertaining directly to the existing provisions,
ing section 7. there are (wo matters on which we propose to make recommendations with @
ffect of section 7 of the Act. Our object in

yiew to widening the scope and ९ an sc ;
making these recommendations is to provide and clarify statutorily that all married

women in our country, whatever be the religion they profess, are free to sue and
be sued in respect of claims arising under contracts, torts or otherwise. Before

Need for widen- 1.7. Apart fr

ipailey, “Assignment of debts", (1932) 48 L.Q.R. 547. 7
Voltaire, Dictionnaire Philosophique.

‘Chapter 3, infra.

‘Para 1.5, supra.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 1—~Introductory—Contd.)

we reached this conclusion, we examined the problem in depth and, as the dis-
cussion in the relevant portion of our Report shows’, we carefully considered the
important judicial decisions bearing on the point,

1.73. We shall now briefly indicate, the background in which the Act of 1874,
and other cognate provisions were enacted. Prior to January 1866, the law
applicable in India, to persons who were 10 Hindus, Muslims, Budhists, Sikhs
or Jains, was, in general, the English common Jaw as regards matters concerning
personal status. Hindus, Muslims, Buddhists, Sikhs and Jains were governed
by their own personal law. The persons to whom the English common law was
thus applicable, for want of their own personal law, included. Europeans and
Tndian Christians, Jews, Armenians and Parsis,—tco meniion some of the most
important communities. Accordingly, the restrictions as regards possession and
alienation of the property of an English woman generally applied to women
belonging to these communities. The position in this respect, as it prevailed be-
fore 1866, could he analysed as under:

(a) As to “real estate”, the husband acquired by marriage an interest im
the property of the wife, and, during marriage, the wife could not
alienate the property without the consent of her husband. In the
event of her death leaving children, the husband became a tenant by
curtsey, subject to certain limitations’. In fact, it is understood’ that
in the conveyances by Parsi married women, executed prior to January
1866,—that is, prior to the enactment of section 4 of the Indian Suc-
cession Act, 1865—the husband was made a party for the purpose of
giving his consent to the alienation. This was because, by a statutory
provision’ ir was provided that a married woman was empowered to
dispose of her estate by deed acknowledged with her husband's con-
currence ; and it was also provided that no deed would be valid पान
Jess her husband concurred therein or in case of disability of the hus-
band unless the deed was acknowledged before the judge of the
Supreme Court.

(b) As regards moveable property belonging to the wife, the husband ac-
quired, by marriage, a vested interest in moveable property in posses-
sion of the wife, and also acquired the right to reduce into possession
the wife’s outstanding personal choses in action.

1.8. These disabilities of the wife were abolished by the enactment of section
4 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865,—later replaced‘ by section 20 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.

As regards Hindus, Muslims and other communities mentioned above, it
was not considered appropriate to deal with the matter by legislaiion, because
they were governed by their persanal law. For this reason; section 2 of the
Married Women’s Property Act, 1874, excluded those communities from the ope-
ration of section 4 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865. This exchision has been
re-enacted in seclion 20216) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, Consequently,
section 393 (9th Schedule) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, has repealed sec-
tion 2 of the Marricd Women’s Property Act, 1874.

IChapter, 9, infra.

*Parvek, Indian Succession Act, (1966), page -33.

*Paruck, Indian Succession Act (1966), page 33. ~

‘Section 3 of the Act 31 cf 1854 (The Conveyance of Land Act, 1854), repealed by the
Repealing and Amending Act, 48 of 1952.

"Para 5.2, fefra.

English law

appli-
"

cable to person:

of certain
munities,

com-

Section 4 Indian

Succession
1865,

Act,


Object.

Equitable inter-
vention with rules
of common law
and subsequent
developments — in
England.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter |.—Introductory—Contd.)

1.9. In the statement of Objects and Reasons,! annexed to the Bill which ied
to the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874, the object was thus stated—

“The Indian Succession Act (X of 1865) section four, declares that no
person shail by marriage acquire any interest in the property of the person
whom he or she married. This section, however. does not apply to mar-
flages contracted before the Ist January, 1866, and, in the case of persons
married after that day, the Act does not protect the husband from liability
from the debts of his wife contracted before marriage, nor does it ex-
pressly provide for the enforcement of claims by or against such wives.

“The objects of the present Bill are, first, to extend the protection afforded
to wives by section four of the Succession Act (so far as regards future
wages and earnings and policies of insurance) to women married before
15 January, 1866; secondly, to declare that a married woman may sue in
her own name for any property which by force of the Succession Act, or
the proposed Act, is her separate property; thirdly, to relieve the hus-
band of a wife married after the 31st December, 1865, from her ante-
nuptial debts ; and, lastly, to declare that any person entering into a con-
tract with a wife (otherwise than as her husband's agent), shall be entitled
to sue her, and, to the extent of her separate property, to recover against
her whatever he might, have recovered had she been unmarried.”

1.10. We shall, in this एफ" जा, very briefly refer to the development in
England?

(a) In England, the progressive emancipation of the married woman from
the restrictions imposed by the Common Law upon her capacity to hold and to
deal with real and personal property was, until the second part of the nineteenth
century, almost exclusively the result of equitable intervention. At common law,
a wife’s chattels became the absolute property of the husband, He possessed
also the power to reduce her choses in action into possession; whilst, upon the
birth of issue, he enjoyed the seisin for life »f such present estates of inheritance
as his wife might have possessed, as a “tenart by the curtsey”.

(0) From the reign of Elizabeth onwards’, however, the Court of Chan-
cery steadily evolved the doctrine of the separate estate of the married woman,
although it does not seem that this doctrine was applied to real property before
the Restoration. In pursuance of this doctrine, the Court of Chancery estab-
lished that wherever property was given to ¢rustees for the separate use of @ mar-
ried women, she could hold and dispose of it in Equit’ free from her husband’s
interference ; and such property was protected effectual!y against the husband’s
debts and other obligations. Eventually, it was decided eat wherever the dener
bad expressed a plain intention that the property was for the separate use of the
married woman, this should be effective, whether trustees had been appointed or
not, the trust being, in the last resort, imposed on the husband himself.

Tt should be noted that it was not until the Legislature had accorded to a
married woman financial independence from her husband that it was finally estab-
Jished that she had a similar right to her personal liberty.

iGazette of India, 1873, Part V, page 457.
_ For detailed discussion, see Chapter 2, infra —
SSanky v. Guiding, (1879), Cury 86: Gorge v. Chansey (1639), 1 Rep. Ch. 125; Darcy
¥. Chute. (1663) 1 Cas, in Ch. 21; Cotton v. Corton, (1690). 2. ५, rn. 290. है


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 1—Introductory—Contd.)

In R. y. Jackson,’ the wife applied for a writ of habeas corpus-against the
husband, and it was held that it was no defence that the husband, was merely
confining ber io exercise a right of consortium. Jt was then that the concept
that the wife is a chattel, came to an end.

(c) As a further development of the doctrine of separate property, Lord,

Thurlow, at the end of the eighteenth century, evolved the “restraint on anticipa-
tion” clause, the object of which was to protect the wife against the solicitations
of her husband (or her natural inclination) to surrender her beneficial enjoyment
of the property to him. Such a clause made either the capital or the income of
property (or both) incapable of alienation or anticipation so long as she was sub-
ject to coverture, and the effectiveness of the clause was finally established before
Lord Eldon in Jackson v. Hobhouse. हु

(3) Nineteenth century statutes, whose purpase was carried a stage fur-
ther in the property legislation of 1925, have now permitted the enjoyment of
full proprietary rights by a married woman at law, and have therefore greatly
minimised the importance of a very characteristic product of Equity, which only
became possible through the evolution of the modern law of trusts.

(e) Under modern social conditions, however, the necessity for protecting
a married woman against the designs of her husband has practically disappeared
and, in spite of statutory provisions for lifting the restraint on anticipation on
various occasions, it nevertheless remained a serious obstacle to the enforcement
of the claims of the married woman’s creditors. The Law Reform (Married
Woman and Tort-feasers) Act, 1935, therefore abolishcd the “separate property”
of a married woman, putting her in the position of a feme sole, and virtually
prohibited the imposition of restraints on anticipation in the future.

(f) By the Married Women (Restraint upon Anticipation) Act, 1949, all
existing restraints were abolished. Section i(1) of that Act provides that “no
restriction upon anticipation or alienation attached, or purported to be attached,
to the enjoyment of any property by a woman could not have been attached to
the enjoyment of that property by a man shall be of any effect after the passing

of this Act.”

1.11. The present position in England, therefore, is that on marriage each spouse ,

continues to own separately the property that belonged to him or her before
marriage. Property acquired by one or the other during marriage remains the
property of the acquiring spouse. In short, marriage creates no property rights,
nor does it create any disability in respect of property.

1.12. In India, the Act of 1874, and the provisions of section 4 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1865, were in the (rue sense, fundamental reforms in the 19th
century in respect of married woman’s right to property. - The legal device em~
ployed was, no doubt, based on an equitable concept, namely, the doctrine of
the wife’s “separate property”. But it served its purpose. The Act of 1874,
however, did not abolish the doctrine of restraint on anticipation. In fact, be-
cause of the provisions of section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, it
ig still possible to certain communities, in such a way as to prevent her from
dealing with it, while similar restrictions cannot be imposed on @ married man.
A total restraint on alienation cannot be attached in respect of property trans-
ferred to a married man, but it can be attached in the case of property trans-
ferred to a married woman of the specified community.

This, in brief, is the background of the Act,

ना हा ० Jackson, (891) 1 QB. 671 (Court of Appeal),
Yackson v. Hobhouse, (1817) 2 Mer, 483.
2-1 LADITE

Present —_ position
in England.

Position in India.


Introductory.

Property.

Property of Mar-
tied =woman—En-
glish statutes,

.

Acts of 1882 and
1935—provisions
as to property.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874

CHAPTER 2
HISTORY OF ENGLISH LAW ON THE SUBJECT

2.1, Jn this Chapter, we propose to deal in brief with ihe evolution of the
English law on the subject. This has more than academic interest, because
many of the provisions of the Act af 1874 would be better understood if the back-
ground in which it was passed. is kept in mind ; it is not disputed that that back-
ground was mainly the English non-statutory law.’

2.2. The principal doctrine of the common law concerning the propetty*® of
married persons was that while marriage did not deprive a woman of any pro-
perty which she already had, or affect her right to acquire property as such, it
gave the husband certain valuable righls, which had important consequences.
This position was gradually modified by legisiation,—legislation which was mostly
enacted under the title of “Married Women’s Property Act” or under a title sub-
stantially similar thereto.

2.3. $0 far as legislation relating to property’ of married women is concerned. °
the major Acts in England were of 1857, 1870, 1882, 1935 and 1949. Section
25 of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857, provided that so long as a judicial sepa-
ration was in force, the wife was to be deemed to be a feme sole with respect to
any property which she should acquire. Secondly, section 21 of that Act pro-
vided that if a wife were deserted, she might oblain a protection order, which
would have the effect of protecting from seizure by the husband and the husband’s
creditors, any property and earnings to which she became entitled after the
desertion, and of vesting them in her as if she were a feme sole. These two pro-
visions modify the common law rule to which we have referred.*

The Masried Women’s Property Act, 1870, created a further exception
to the common law rule, by providing that in certain cases specified in the Act,
properly acquired by the wife should be deemed to be held for her separate
use. Amongst the important cases of property so specified were her earnings,
deposits in savings banks, stocks and shares, and, in very limited circumstances,
property devolving upon her on intestacy. This Act was repealed by the Married
Women’s Property Act, 1882, which is considered below.

24. The Married Women’s Property Act, 1882, provided’ (a) that any woman
marrying after 1882 should be entitled to retain all property owned by her at
the time of the marriage as her separate property, and that, (b) whenever she was
married, any property acquired by a married woman after 1882 should be held
by her in the same way’ It also enacied that “A married woman shall ...........+
be capable of acquiring, holding, and disposing by will or otherwise, of any real
or personal property as her separate property, in the same manner as if she were
a feme sole, without the intervention of any trustee.”

Tt further provided that the law relating to restraint upon anticipation
should remain unaffected*
ny

1Para 1.9 to 1.12, supra.

Seo para 2.10, infra, for a detailed discussion.

3Fer some of these Act, see Appendices 3 to 5.

‘Para 2.2, supra,

*Appendix 3.

"Sections 2 and 5. ,

Section 101. eo.
Section 9,



Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 2.—History of English Law on the Subject—contd.)

It now became impossible for a married man to acquire any further
interest in his wife’s prop:rty “jure mariti” by operation ot law.’

Other provisions of the Act of 1882 need not be considered at this place.
Important amongst them are—the spouses’ liability in contract, tort and criminal
law, claims in bankruptcy, policis of insurance in favour of a spouse or children
and disputes over property arising between spouses.”

2.5. The Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935, is the
next Act of imporlance. By 1935 almost all married women’s property was
owned by them as their separale property. To speak of “separate property”
was, therefore, becoming something of an anomaly, since married women in al-
most all cases had the same capacity to hold and dispose of it as a man or a
Jeme sole. Because of this position, the Legislature, in the Law Reform (Married
Women and Tortieasors) Act, 1935, abolished the concept of the separate estate,
and gaye to the wife the same rights and powers as were already possessed by
other adults of full capacity. The material provision’ was as follows:

he A married woman shall be capable of acquiring, holding, and
disposing of, any property ........-.- in all respects as if she were a feme
sole.”

" All property which—

(a) immediately before the passing of this Act was the separate property
of a married woman or held for her separate use in equity ; or

{b) belongs at the time of her marriage to a woman married after the
passing of this Act; or

(0) after the passing of this Act is acquired by or devolycs upon a mar:
tied woman,

shall belong to her in all respects as if she were a feme sole and may be
disposed of accordingly.”

The Act did not touch any existing restraint on anticipation But it
sounded the death knell of the latter, for it rendered void any attempted imposi-
ton of a restraint on anticipation in any instrument executed after 1935 and in
the will of any person dying after 1945, even though the will was executed be-
fore 19365

2.6. The Marricd Women’s (Restraint upon Anticipation) Act, 1949, totally
abolished’ the validity of restraints जा anticipation, In 1882, it was appar-
ently necessary to protect a married woman's property, but the restraint could
no longer be justified in the middle of the present century, when it served no
useful purpose but merely acted as an undue fetter on the wife’s power of

alienation.

गण a married woman still could not be made bankrupt ualess she came within the
express provisions of section 1(5) by carrying on a trade separately from her husband,

3889 para 2.7 10 2.10, infra.

Sections Ifa) and 2(1) of the Act of 1935, (Appendix 4),
‘Section 2(1). (Appendix 4).

Sections 2(2), 3 and Appendix 4.

tappendix 5.

Act of 1935—Pro-
visions as to pro-
perty,

Restraint on anti-
cipation.


Contracts.

Statutory = provi-
sion as to cons
tracts—Acts of
1857, 1870 and
1874.

Act of 1882—pro-
vision as to con-
tracts,

Act of 1935—pro-
vision as to con-
tracts,

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 2.—History of English Law on the Subject—contd.)
n

2.7, We have so far discussed properly rights in general. As regards con-
tracts, at common law.' a married woman possessed no contractual capacity
whatever, and could not, therefore, make a binding agreement either with her
husband or with any other person. This general rule was subject to certain
exceptions, which are not important now. Further, the marriage automatically
yesied in the husband the benefit of all contracts already made by the wife, and
during marriage both spouses were liable 10 be sued on them, At equity, a
wife could bind separate property effectively on contract—that is, upto the extent
of the property ; but she could not render herself personally liable”

2.8. On the principle of the common law relating to contracts mentioned
above,’ the first statutory inroad in England was made by the Matrimonial
Clauses Act, 1857, section 26, which provided that so long as a decree of judi-
cial separation was in force, a married woman could be considered as a feme
sole for various purposes, ingluding the making and enforcement of contracts.
The Married Women’s Property Act, 1870 enacted (by sections 1 to 11), that
a married woman’s wages and carnings should be regarded as her separate pro-
perty, and gave her a power fo maintain an action to recover them in her own
name (by section 12). The Act of 1870 also abolished the common law rule
that a husband should be liable for his wife’s pre-marriage contracts; but this
Jed to certain anomalies.

Subsequently, by the Married Women’s property Act, (L870), Amendment
Act, 1874, this part of the Act af 1870 was replaced by a provision Jimiting the
husband’s liability for his wife’s pre-marriage contracts to the extent of the value
of the wife’s property which vested in the husband by virtue of the marriage
under the law as it then stood.

2.8A. The Married Women’s Property Act, 1882, made certain important pro~
yisions regarding a married women’s separate property, which have already been
mentioned‘ ‘That Act (as amended by the Married Women’s Property Act,
1892), also gave the married woman full contractual capacity, but even these
Acts did not make her personally liable. Lastly, the Act of 1882, in section 14,
enacted that a husband should be liable for his wife's antenuptial debts and con-
tracts only to the extent of property belonging to her which he acquired or to
which he became entitled. This was 2 retention of the principle of the English
Act’ of 1874.

2.9, The major reform im the field of contracts was made by the Law Reform
(Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935. Section 1 of the Act provided*.
that a married woman shall be capable of rendering herself liable and being
rendered liatie in respect of any contract, debt or obligation and of suing and
being sued for “contract, and also that she shall be subject to the law of bank-
ruptcy and to the enforcement of judgment and orders, in all respects as if she
were a fenie sole. This Act also abolished the concept of separate estate, and
enabled a married woman to hold her property in ali respects as if she were a
feme sole. Finally, the Act abolished the liability of the husband for contracts
of the wife entered into before marriage—the reason being that the husband does
not, by marriage, acquire any property of the wife with which he could meet
her debts.

4868 also para 2.10, infra.
*Pollock, Contracts (20th Ed.), pages 557-561.
Para 2.7, supra.

‘Para 2.4, supra.

"Para 2.8, supra.

Act of 1935 (Appendix 4).



Married Women’s Property Act, 1874 9
(Chapter 2.—History of English Law on the Subjeci—contd.)

2.40. The position emerging irom these slatutey may be contrasted with the Position at com-
commen law. The position at common law was well summarised by a writer > विण,
in the Harvard Law Review’, in these words: —

“At common law a woman’s capacity to hold or receive tilie to property
was not destroyed by marriage, but marriage had important consequences.
It gave a mau a right to use and enjoy whatever property his wile owned
at the time of marriage or acquired during coverture. A husband acquir-
ed a right to possess his wife's real estate and to enjoy the rents and pro-
fits thereof, but th: fee remained in the wife. His interest was-described
as an estate for joint lives, since coverture normaliy could be terminated
only by the death of one of the parties, but more accuraisly it was:an
estate for the duration of coverture. If he predeceased his wife, the fee
was in ber; if she predeceased her husband, the fee went to her heirs,
subject to a life estate in the husband by the curtesy if issue had been born ड़
alive. The husband had a right io use his wife’s cheses in action, and to
this end to reduce them to possession, after which they became chailels
personal, In view of the perishable nature of chattels, and the common
law denial of estates therein, his right to use these involyed such com-
plete dominion as to amount to ownership, and consequently marriage
was said to give him the legal title by operation of law.”

“A married woman had no capacily to contract for herself, and her exe-
eutory undertakings were void, but she had capacity to act as agent for
others, including her husband. She had no capacity to convey her fee
to real property, except in England by fine and recovery, and in the United
States by joining with her husband in the conveyance. Consequently,
husband and wife were under equal disability and lack of capacity to con-
tract with or coavey to the जाट,

“The husband was entitled to his wife's services and earnings whether
. performed in the home or elsewhere, for himself or another‘; and the
husband was under a duty to support. A matricd woman had no capa-
city to sue or be sued alone in her own name, but whenever she had a
substantive capacity, or was substantively the holder of a right, or sub-
ject to a duty, suit must be brought in the name of husbang and wife,
and judgment was enforced in favour of the husband or against both
husband and wife. In the case of torts committed against a married
woman, her legal personality was substantively recognized, and in so far
as the tortious act caused injury to a legally recognized interest of the
woman herself, it was a chose in action of the woman’s, and if the hus-
band predeceased the wife before having reduced her chose, it remained
to the wife :° but, insofar as the injury was to the husband alone, either

MWilliam Mecurdy, “Torts between persons in domestic relation” (1929-1930) 43 Harv.
L. Rev. 1030, 1031, 1033.

388 to property at common Jaw, see Mccurdy, Cases on persons and domestic relations
(1927) 507-19, and cases therein cited, :

348 to post-nuptial contracts, conveyances, and transfers at common law, see Mecutdy,
cases on Persons and Domestic Refations at $20-36, and cases therein coilected.

‘Prat v, Taylor, Cro, Eliz. 61 (1587); Brashford y. Buckingham, Cro. Jac. 77 (1606);
Buckley v, Collier, 1 Salk, 114 (1701); see Warren, ‘Husband's Right to Wife's Services™
(1925) 38 Harv. L. Rey. 321, 622.

. tel Mccurdy, Cases on Persons and Domestic Relations at 709-35, and cases therein
cil

. enor, eases on Persons and Domestic Relations at 770-81, 794-818, and cases there-
in .


16 Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 2.—History of English Law on the Subject—contd.)

by depriving him of some interest, such as services and earings, or by
increasing the burden of his duties, such as support, it was a chese in
action of the husband’s. And the converse is likewise true. A married
woman substantively had capacity to commit most forts, but her liability
was in a sense suspended during coverture, and the husband subjected.
If she committed a tort during marriage, or committed a tort or contracted
a debt before marriage, although the duty was substantively hers, suit
must be brought against husband and wife, and judgment could be en-
forced against property of either; but if the husband predeceased the wife
before judgment, the action remained against the wife alone,’ If the wife
should predecease the husband before judgment, a question of survival
of causes of action would arise.”

Cuaprer 3
WOMEN’S POSITION IN INDIA—BRIEF HISTORICAL REVIEW
3. INTRODUCTORY

Introductory. 3.1. In the preceding Chapter, we have traced the history of, the English law
as to the property rights of married women. A brief historical survey of the
position of women in India would be useful at this stage.

Ideals of society. 3.2, The estimation in which woman is held, the status occupied by her in
society and the treatment accorded to her, have been justly regarded as an index
of the degree of civilization and culture attained -in any country. Our moral
ideals regarding women have been too often conceived in a narrow sense—as
concerned with sexual morality and the obligations of chastity and marital
fidelity?

But such an approach would. give a very incomplete picture of the atti-
tude of society in its totality. The ideals of a socicty as to womanhood include
not merely the relation of husband and wife or mother and children, or the other
intimate relationships of family life, but also the notions we form about her
capacity, her character, her claim to equality, independence and freedom for
development, her rights to personal liberty, to the ownership and control of pro-
perty, to the choice of her vocation and other rights as well a5 duties as a member
of society?

Two general ob- 3,3, Keeping this in mind, we propose to make a brief historical survey of the

servations. “pe + aa . ‘ A .
position of women in India in general, with special reference to, their legal rights
regarding property. We would like to preface the survey with two general obser-
vations regarding the legal rights of women. First, these tights have been fluctuat-
ing during various historical periods for reasons which we need not go into.
Secondly, these legal rights seem to have been recognised earlier in India than
elsewhere.

Mccurdy, Cases on Persons and Domestic Relations at 677-708, and cases therein

cited,
4p, 8, Sivaswami Iyer, Evolution of Hindu Moral Ideals (Kamla Lectures, Calcutta

University}, (1935), page 34


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—I¥omen's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

3.4. As to the first aspect—fiuctuations in legal rights—the participation of
women in heritable property’ may be taken as an instance.

Jn the Hinda system, Bhattacharya’ traces two antagonist principles,
one excluding women generally from inheritance, and the other giving them par-
liad right. But he adds that icalousy and antagonism are equally discernible.
Bhattacharya® furiher states, that, in general, exclusion is the primitive type, while
admission to partiai rights is moder; but he points out that the law is not
cantiquously progressive in every case.

Thus, far example, though the law of properly promulgated in the Daya-
bhaga is of later gcowth than the Mitakshara system, yet ihe Mitakshara’ is in
advance of the Dayabhaga' as regards the rights of the daughter in the father’s
property where there are sois existing.

३.44, Secondly, we would like to point out that the right of a woman to hold
separate property of her own was recognised in the Hindu law, long before it was
admitted in the European countries*

Thus, presents given to a woman at her marriage by her own relations
or her husband, and what she received after marriage from her husband and his
farnily belonged to her, though the husband had certain claims thereto. Property
received by a maiden in the shape of ornaments or olber presents from her own
family or from her affianced bridegroom was regarded as her own property.
Women had considerable right of disposal of property much earlier than else-
where.

All these features indicate a comparatively liberal attitude in regard to
property rights.

35, With the position as it prevailed in Indis, we may contrast the position
in Rome. In Rome‘, a marriage with conventio in manus, which was the regular
form of marriage iz early times, gave the husband a right to all the property
which the wife had when she married, and entitled the husband to all she might
acquire afterwards whether by gift or by her own labour. Later on, no doubt.
the marriage without manus became the ordinary Roman mariage, and the
position improved. But the point to be noted is that the recognition of women’s
Tights togk place much earlier’ in India than elsewhere.

IL POSITION OF HINDU WOMEN—THE MAIN CHRONOLOGICAL
DIVISIONS

3.6. The fluctuations in women’s rights, and the comparatively early recog-
nition of their status, will be evident from the historical survey which follows.
We propose to divide our historical survey of the position of women im India
into the following divisions:

(1) The period from ०. 4000 B.C. to 1500 B.C.—breadly corresponding
to the age of the Vedas.’

1866 also para 3.28, infra.

‘Bhattacharya, foint Hindu Family, (T.L.L. 1884, 1885), pages 63-64.

'hMitakshara, Chapler 1, section 7, paragraphs 11 & 14,

'Dayabhaga, Chapter 3, section 2, paragraphs 36 & 37.

कु, 5. Sivaswami Iyer, Evoiution of Hindu Moral Ideals (Kamla Lectures, University
of Calcutta), (1935), & 50.

Banerji, Marriage and Stridhana (1923), page 394.

‘Para 3.4. mipra.

As to the ope of the Rig Veda, See Kane, History of Hindu Dharmasastras, Vol. 2,
Patt J, page xt.

i

Herita ble pro-
perty.

Right of Bindu
‘Woman recognised
along before its

admission elso-
where,

Position in Rome
Marriage with
manus.

Historical survey.


First period—
(4000 B.C, to 1500
BC).

Marriage.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Wormen's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

(2) The period from c. 1500 B.C. to 500 B.C.—broadly corresponding to
the age of the later Samhitas,’ Brahmanas and Upanishads.

QG) The period from है, 500 B.C. io 500 A.D.—broadly corresponding to
the age of the Dharmasutras, Epics and carly Smritis.

(4) The period from ९, 500 A.D. io ०. 1800 A.D.—broadly, corresponding
to the age of the later Smritis, Commentators and Digests.

(5) The period from 1861 A.D. 10 1955 A.D. (which may be conveniently
called the British period).

(6) The period from 1956 A.D.

वा. THE VEDIC PERIOD

3.7. By common consent, the first period is a glorious chapter in the social
history of Tndia. The Vedas themselves are rich in their description of natural
phenomena, in their inspiring invocations of the deities belonging to the pan-
theon as conceived by the Aryans, and in the full-blooded images of all that gave
them delight or captured their fancy. In the expression of man’s sense of awe
and thrill at the beautiful, the wondrous and the magnificent, they have never
been surpassed, and rarely been equalled. This cicep interest in nature, and this
capacity for soul-stirring delineations of all that they perceived or imagined,
bespeak a healthy society,

Society in that age was predominantly agricultural, but not necessarily
primitive. Women cnjoyed equal status with men? The “initiation” ceremony
(“Upanayana”—literally, taking near the teacher’s house), was performed for
girls as well as for boys, Women studied the Vedas, and even composed Vedic
hymns! In public life, they participated freely. Monogamy was the general
rule, and the wife of-a houscholder had an honourable place. There were certain
disabilities regarding the proprietary rights of women, but this was primarily due
to the fact that the Aryans were just settling down, and were not sure that women
could defend their property against hostile races.‘

The position of women in India in the Vedic age was far from being analo-
gous to what it usually was in early uncivilized societies.

3.74. The Rig Veda’ clearly shows that the Aryan bride was an adult,

The ideal marriage of the Vedic period was a religious sacrament, which
‘made the couple joint, owners of the household—which is evident from the ety-
mological meaning of the Vedic word “Dampati”.‘-"a. The old. tradition that the
wife was the property of the husband had not yet completely died down ; the
famous hymn about gambling in the Rig Veda" shows that sometimes confirmed
gamblers would take away their wives to their opponents. But the advice given
to the gambler in this hymn, shows that social conscience had already begun to
disapprove of this practice.

1As to the Second. Third and Fourth periods, see Altekar, Position of Women in Hindu
Civilization (1956), page 336.
2Altekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization, (1956), page 409 and pages 335-
339.
‘Para 3.8, infra. -
éAltekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization, (1956), page 409.
sRig Veda, X.85.42.46.
oe, दम्पती,
*gAltekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization, Chapter on married life.
"Rig Veda, X38,



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3—Wouen’s Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

These are the verses’ relevant to gamblers:

“10. The deserted wife of the gamester is afflicied: the mother (grieves)
for the son wandering wherever he likes ; involved in debt, even in fear,
anxious for wealth, (the gambler) goes forth by night to the dwellings of
others (to plunder).”.

“1. The gamester, having observed the happy wife and well-ordered.
home of others, suffers regret: yet in the forenoon he puts to the tawny
steeds, and at night ihe sinner lies down by the fire.”

The position of women, then, was satisfactory. rdinarily, girls were,
no doubt, less welcome then boys, for economic reasons.

But, there were also some parents in society who would perform special
religious rituals for getting learned and capable daughters. This is evident from
the text of one of the Upanishads.” Girls were educated like boys and had
to pass through a period of Brahmacharya. The marriage of girls used to take
place at fairly advanced. age, the normal age being 16 or 17 years.

38, We read of women being conceded the highest intellectual honours‘ in the
ancient past, paslicularly during the Vedic period. For example, three classes

of hymns have been altributed 10 women in the Rig Veda and the Upanishads.
Certain hymns belong entirely to female “Rishis”, certain hymns are partly
chanted by them, and about a lew hymas, there is some uncertainty. In the
first group, we can certainly’ include Vishvavara and Apala.” To the second
group belong Lopamudra and Shashiyasi'--to mention only two examples. In
the third group—te take one example—falls the hymn of Ghosha, a leper maiden,
who is believed to have been cured of the discase by the divine physicians and
composed hymas in their houour.-¥ हि

In another Vedic hymn, Vak (Speech personified) is described as a
“Queen of Gods”. She is said to be the daughter of the sage Ambheina. Vak
is the “word”, the first creation and yepresentalive of the spirit, and the means
of communication between men and Gods.*

She describes one of her qualities in these inspiring words*—

“3. I am the Queen, the galherer-up of treasures, most lhoughtful, first of हैं

those who merit worship.
Thus Gods have established me in many places with many homes to enter
and abide in.

7 TRig Veda, X. उठ, Verses 10-11, H. A. Wilson (Ed), Rig Veda (1928), Vol, 6, page

शर्त, Up, शा, 4, 27.

®Altckat, Position of Woman in Hindu Civilization, Chapter on Childhood and edu-
cation.

4Padmini Sen-Gupla, The Story of Women of India (1974), page 42.

Shakuntala Rao Sastri, Women in the Vedic Age, pages 25, 26

*Rig Veda V, 28, and VII, 9.

Rig Veda, Book WIM, Hymn 80.

Rig Veda I, 179, 1 and 2, and Rig Veda V. 62, 5-8.

‘Rig Veda, ४, 39, X, Hymns 39-40,

WEor an exhaustive list see R. K. Mookarji, Ancient Indian Education (Macmiflan

1951), page 51.

URig Veda, Book VII, Hymn 89, Verse 10: Ralph Griffith, Hymns of the Veda (Chow-
‘chamba Sanskrit Studies Series No. XXX¥) (1963). Vol. I, p 251,

‘sRalph Griffith, Hymns of the Veda (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies Series, No. XXX¥),
(1963), Vol. Tf, p. 571, footnote.

BRig Veda, Baok X, Hymn 125, Verses 3 and 4; Ralph Griffith, Hymns of the Rig-
Veda (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies Series, No. XXXV), (1963), Vol. Il, page #71

3-1 LADITS

13


14

Second _ period—
(1500 B.C. to 500
BC).

Social status.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Women’s Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

4. Through me alone all eat the food that feeds them,—each man who
sees, breuthes, hears the word outspoken.

‘They know it, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one and all, the truth
as I declare it.”

3.84. From one of the inscriptions in the Bharhut sculptures (2nd century
B.C)! it would appear that some of the pupils of an ascetic were rishis”

IV. THE POST-VEDIC PERIOD

39. The second period shows no radical deterioration in the position of
women. Down to about 500 B.C., the custom of Sati and Child Marriage did
not exist to embitter the Jot of the woman. She was properly educated, and
given the same religious privileges as man. She could have a voice in the settle-
ment of her marriage, and occupy an honoured position in the household. She
could move freely in family and society, and take an intelligent part in public
affairs. It was possible for her to take to a career, if urged by an inclination or
a necessity’ In fact, there is contemporary evidence of the careers pursued by

_ women, to which we shall refer later.’

Women of higher castes were indispensable partners of their husbands in
the yajna.5 Women could hold property, and widows could remarry. The age
of the Upanishads produced philosophers like Gargi who challenged the invincible
Yajnavalkya in debate, and Maitreyi who spurned .wealth because it would not
give her immortal light (amrta).

3.10. The Upanishads, it may be noted, present the highest point reached in
Indian metaphysics. Although differently worded. the principal strands of~
thought, in their essence, remain the same in all these works. They voice the
jnner visualisation of the ever—existent unity between the universal principle and
the phenomena, even though the embarrassing multitude of all individual experi-
ence may dim the vision of that unity.

One of the noblest prayers in the literature of the world occurs in one
of the Upanishads—the prayer which implores the universal spirit to take one
from darkness to light’ from untruth to truth, and from mortality to immortality.

Great questions are raiscd in these debates, and the answers given are
simple: Yet, the dialogue never loses its sublime quality.

We are referring to this aspect to show that a married woman not pos-
sessing an extraordinary jntellectual capacity—or, for that matter, any person of
ordinary intellectual status—could not have participated in the discussions.

3,11. to 3.13. No doubt, some deterioration in the social statusof women did
take place in the second period. But. still, the position of Indian women com-
pared favourably with women in other countries. Tn fact, while, in the first

TR. K. Mukerjes, Ancient Indian Edocation, (Macmilian 1951), plate No. 1, facing
page 68 (Hermitages in Bharhut sculptures).

2Caunningham’s view, referred to by R. K. Mukherjee. ~ : हे

tAltekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization (1956), page 343,

‘See para 3.11, infra.

SGazeteer of Tndia (1973), Vol. 2, page 147.

'prihad 1, 328.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3—Women's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

period, women had certain disabilities regarding property, in the second period
the position improved in this regard, at least as regards marriage gifts of movable
property.’

ए. THE AGE OF THE DHARMA SUTRAS, EPICS, ETC.

344. In the third period, which was the age of the Dharmasutras, the Epics
and the early Smritis, the position of women deteriorated to some extent. This
is attributed by Altekar to the practice of inter-marviage with the local (non-
Aryan) taces. He says—

“The introduction of the non-Aryan wife into the Aryan household is the
key to the gesferal deterioration of the position of “women that gradually
imperceptibility started at about 1000 B.C. and became quite marked in
about 100 years. This was because of the fact that the non-Aryan wife,

with her ignorance of the Sanskrit language and Hindu religion, obviously "|

did not enjoy the same privilege in religion as the Aryan wife. Evidently,
the whole class of women was declared ineligible for study and religious
duties.”

It was during this period that marriage was substituted for initiation”)
in the case of girls. .

+ 315, But, even during this period, one comes across sayings not implying the
subordination of women and pointing to a more enlightened opinion. In the
Mahabharata, for example, a unique place is assigned to Saraswati, who is des-
cribed as “Mother of the Vedas”.

316. In fact, the situation in India seems to have been better than what it was
elsewhere. It may be noted that the Roman law regarded the wile as the
“daughter” of her busband, as far as her juridical status was concerned ; for a
long time the wife could not sign a will, make 8 contract or become a witness’
under Roman law.

This ‘property’ in women, sons and slaves is said to have been familiar
to the ancient Greeks and Romans."

“Community” of wives was known to the Greeks*.

3.17. In India, the deterioration in the position of women is perceptible in the
Gupta age (320-540 A.D.). The Svayamyara (choice of the groom by the bride
after a contest of valour) and the Gandharva form of marriage, fell into compa-
rative disuse during this period. The re-marriage of widows was coming into a
disfayour, though not absolutely forbidden.’ In general, there was a decline in
the social status of women. .

Radha Kumud Mookerji, “Women in Ancient India” in Baig (Ed), Women of India
(1958), Pages 1, 6.

tAltekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization (1956), Chapter on Retrospect and
Prospect (Chap. 12).

कृत “Initiation, see Para 3,2, supra,

‘Cambridge History of India, Wal. 1, pago 261.

‘Mahabharata, Shanti Parva, 12,920. -

tAliekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization, (1956), page 331.

1 "5 Li D.125 AD}-Lycurgus (Ward Lock), page 36, Cato the
Youren paves ae she, onus, 22 870 polite Ub. 2; भा Rae le’ IMG all ee
Founger Pe 'Gour, Hindu Code (1938), page 8, para 17,

THerodotus TV 104; Plato's Republic (Conford Ed), page 152, footnote. -

ORC. Majumdar, (Ed) History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol. 3 (Ire Classi-
cal Age), page 567.

15

+ Third period—
(500 B.C. to 500
AD). .

Subordination of
women not ap-
proved in some
sayings.

Position in Rome
and other coun-
tries.

Gupta age.


16

Literary pursuits,

Married Women's Property “Act, 1874
{Chapier 3—Women's Position in India—Briet Historical Review.)

Even so, there ate many instances of women acquiring exceptional pro-
ficiency in sciences and letters. The names of Lilavati and Khana, legendary
masters of arithmetic and astronomy, may be noted in this context, There was,
as yet, no purda or seclusion,'—except for ladies of the Royal families, and that
too not so strictly observed as in later times.

In Kalidas’s famous drama, the heroine Sakuntala appears at the Royal
court with a veil, but unveils herself when pressed to prove her identity? In
Harshacharita*, princess Rajyasri wears a veil of red silk when seen by the
bridegroom.

But these were women of higher classes, The silence of Hiuen Tsang and
T-tsing,' as to the seclusion of women, indicates that there*was no such general
practice, because such a peculiar custom would surely have been noticed by
them.

Two classes of women’ students are mentioned in the literature of the
times: Brahmamavadini or life long students of sacred texts, and Sadyddvaha
who prosecuted their studies till their marriage—also called sadyo--Vadhu!

374. The literary pursuits of women during this period could be gathered
from several sources. The great grammurian, Panini’ in his work named Ashta-
dhyayi,* cites illustrations of his grammatical rules which show how women were,
like men, going in for regular Vedic studies.

Thus, the formation “Kathi” means a female student of the katha sakha
of the Veda in that particular rescension. Similarly, the term “bahurichi” means
a female student who is well versed in many hymns, i.e. of the Rigveda.’

Learned ladies of those days naturally functioned as teachers,

Katyayana." in his Vactlika't (commentary) refers to women teachers who
were called Upadhyaya, or Upadhyayi, as distinguished trom Upadhyayanis, ie.
wives of tcachers. The necessity of coining a new term shows that the women
teachers were large in number. Patanjali also refers to a special designation for
the women scholars who made a special study of Mimamsa philosophy.

गए, C, Majumdar, (Ed.) History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol, 3 (The Classi-
cal Age), page 569 and Vol, 2, page 575.

*Sakuntala, Act V.

*"Harshacharita IV.

‘Majumdar (Ed), History and Culture of the Indian People, Vol, 3, (The Classical
Age) page 569,

5R. 0. Majundar (Ed), History and Culture of the Indian People (The Age of Impe-
tial Unity), Vol. 2, page 563.

पर, K, Mookerjee, Ancient Indian Education (Macmillan 1951), 208 and 51,

*Panini’s period falls somewhere between 600 B.C. and 300 B.C., Kane, History of
Hindu Dharmashastras, Vol. 2, page xi (600—300 B. R. G. Bhandarkar, Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Vol. age 340 (Sth Century B.C); Keith,
History of Sanskrit literature, page 425. (Sth Century 8.0.)

SPanini IV. 1.63.

"Radha Kumud Mookerji, “Women in Ancient India”, in Baig (Ed.), Women of India
41958), pages 1, 6.

“Katyayana’s period was roughly 200 B.C.

MKatyayana on IV. 4, 48: Radha Kumud Mookerji, “Women in Ancient India” in
Raig (Ed) Women of India, (1958), pages 1, 6, पु

®R, C, Majumdar, History and Culture of the Indian People. (The Age of Imperial
Unity), Vol. 2, page 563.



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Women's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

3.17B. Apart from literary pursuits, military pursuits also seem to have been
open to women. For example, the great grammarian, Patanjali, in bis Maha-
bhashya,’ uses the formation “saktiki” 10 indiwaie a female bearer of a spear! |

Tt may be noted that there is a seulptute at Bharhut of about the 2nd cen-
tury B.C. which represenls ६ woman carrying a slandard-on borse-back as belong-
ing to the vanguard of the cavalry*

We also hear of the Amazonian bodyguard of armed women employed
by the Emperor Chandragupta Maurya, in his place, as described by Megas-
thenes,® the Greek Ambassador to his Court, Similarly, Kautilya,t in his Artha-
sastra, refers to women soldicrs armed with bows and arrows (striganaih dhan-
vibhih).

3.17C. It would appear that the lowering of the age of marriage during this
period affected the general education and culture of women in an adverse way.
But the final stage in this downward movement was not reached during the period
under review. The period upto 320 A.D. was rather a transitional period, and
we really find two entirely different pictures of women, reflected in the literary

works.*

318. Curiously, in the third period, the position of women in India improved
in the sphere of proprietary rights—<.g., the increased recognition in Katyayana’
of the women’s right to her property.

VI. THE AGE OF THE LATER SMRITIS

3.19. In the fourth peciod—which is the age of the Jater Smritis, Commentators
and Digest writers,—the position of womun further deteriorated in the social
sphere. Permission for child widows to re-marry became obsolete in this period.
The practice of Sati also gained ground.

3.20. The only sphere in which the position of women improved in this age
was the one of proprietary rights. The right of the widow to inherit the share
of-her husband came to be eventually recognised all over the country by ०. 1200
AD, In Bengal, the posilion was further improved by conceding her this right
even when her husband had not separated from the joint family at the time of
his death. The scope of Sturidhana was further extended by the Mitakshara
school, by including in it property acquired even by inheritance and: partition.
How far this position survived, will be discussed Jater’. The widow's estate con-
tinued to be a limited one, but in some parts of South India she was allowed to
gift it away for religious purposes without the consent of the reversioners.

‘Patanjali on IV. 1, 15(6).

2Radha Kumud Mookerji, “Women in Ancient India” in Baig (Ed) Women of India
(1958), pages 1, 6.

3Mc Crindle, Megasthenes, page 72.

‘Kautilya, quoted in Radha Kumud Mookerji, “Women in Ancient India” in Baig (Bd.)
Women of India (1958), pages 1, 6 हि

हए, 0. Majumdar (Editor), History & Culture of the Indian People, Vol. 2, (The Age
of Imperial Unity), page 562.

tKatyayana, Verses 921-927; R. 0. Majumdar, (89), History and Culture of the Indian
People (The Classical Age), Vol. 3, page 569.

"Para 3.29 and 3.30, infra.

17

Military pursuits.

Lowering of age
of marriage.

Improvement in
proprietary rights.

Fourth period.

Proprietary rights,


18

Social position in
general during
fourth period.

Hindu women in
administration.

Right of disposal.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
{Chapter 3.—Women's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

3.23. Reverting to the social aspect, we may state that although the social posi-
tion of women declined in this period, there were bright exceptions. Women
excelled in several pursuits. In the Mithila school, for example, there is a work
called Vivada Chandra (and also other treatises) by a woman Lakshmi “Devi,
who wrote under the name of her nephew ‘Misaru Mistra”. It was written in the
18th century*.

3.24. In the field of administration, Hindu women produced some notable
figures during this period. There was Rudramba, the Kakateya queen’, of whom
Marco Polo (1254-1324 A.D.) speaks, The Mahtatta heroine Tarabai (1700-1707)
A.D.) was the life and soul of Mabratta resistance during the last determined on
slaught of Aurangzeb!’ The benign rule of Mangammal is still a green memory
in the South’.

Mention must be made in this context of Ahalyabai Holkar’, who was &
lady with great administrative genius.

VIL DEVELOPMENTS AS TO POWER OF DISPOSITION

3.25. At this stage, it may be convenient to recapitulate the developments in re-
gard to right of disposal of property. The Hindu wife’s right of disposal of pro-
perly seems to have undergone several vicissitudes in the course of history. Vedic
literature is silent as to whether the wife could dispose of the property without
her husband’s permission. During secular developments in course of time, the
question duly received the attention of jurists. In the beginning, the Smrili
writers’ were not prepared to invest the woman with full powers, and would
insist on the husband’s sanction but in courge of time the iniquity of this posi-
tion was realised, and they later divided the property into two categorics—Sauda-
yika and A-Saudayika. The first category of property included gifts given at
ihe time of marriage by relations out of affection ; such property was under the
complete control of the women.

Property in the second category,—though technically it was the property
of the woman—could not be alienated by her, though she could enjoy. the

property,

Jt may be that the restriction in the case of the second category was link-
ed with the joint family concept, since it was not in the interest of the joint family
to allow the co-parcener to fritter away its resources by allowing the husband to
make an unconditional gift to his wife—the gifts in the second category property
would be usually of the family property.

‘Morley, Administration of Justice in British India, page 225.
"Cambridge History of India, Vol. 1, page 261.
3K, M. Panikkar, “The Middle Period” in Baig (Bd) Women of India (1958), pages 9,

10, 1.

मर, M. Panikkar, “The Middle Period” in Baig (Ed.) Women of India (1958), pages 9,
10, वी. ~

गए, M. Panikkat, “The Middle Period” in Baig (24) Women of India (1958), pages 9,
10, वा.

°K. M, Panikkar, “The Middle Period” in Baig (Bd.) Women of India (1958), pages 9,
10, 11.

‘Manu, 9, 299.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3—Wormen's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

3.26. While, as already stated’, Vedic literature is silent about the scope of
stridhana, Manu gives a comprehensive enumeration comprising 6 varieties’, and
be even says that those who would deprive the woman of his property, particu-
larly, ornaments and costly clothes, after the husband’s death, would be com-
mitting a great sin. पर

1

“Stridhana” did not include the gifts given by non-relatives subsequent to
matriage and wages eared by the wife for her’,—apparently, it was felt that such
Property or earning should be utilized in assisting the husband to shoulder the
burden of the family’,

From the 7th century A.D., there was a tendency to enlarge the scope of
stridhana—a tendency which is illustrated by the text of Devala which includes
maintenance allowance and accidental gains within stridhana. This tendency
culminated in the text of Vijaaneshvara, whose gloss on a text of Yajnavalkya
amplified the definition, and made it so comprehensive that it would include every
type of property in the possession of a woman, howsoever the property may have
have been acquired. We shall revert to this later’.

VHI. THE BRITISH PERIOD

3.27. As regards the fifth period (1801 to 1955 A.D), we may note that the
Shasiric law was still the main source of the rules on the subject. It is not neces-
sary to examine’ the rules that were in force on various rights to property, nor
would it be practicable to deal with the position in every century. Some salient,
features relevant to this period can, however, be usefully stated —

(a) Stridhana, was property of which the woman was the absolute owner.
The various schools differed in their interpretations of ancient texts as to exactly
what property constitutes stridhana, and also as to her powers af alienation. But,
in general, the dominion of a woman over stridhana gave her substantial rights of
enjoyment and disposal. Examples of sinidhana are giffs and bequests of pro-
perty to a woman from her husband and her relations during maidenhood, cover-
ture or widowhood, including gifts made to her at the nuptial fire.during the
marriage ceremony or at the bridal procession ; gifts by the husband as conso-
lation when taking another wife ; gifts of affection from her parents-in-law, and
so on,

(b) As regards her power to dispose of stridhana, a woman had, as a
general rule, an absolute power during maidenhood and widowhood. During
marriage, her right of disposal depended on the character and source of her pro-
perty, and also on the school of Hindu law by which she was governed,

(©) Succession to stfridkana was governed by special rules where the
woman had issue, then the first.in order of succession was the daughter,—un-
married daughters being preferred to married ; the daughter’s daughter ; then the
daughter’s son. Then the property passed to the son and the son’s son. Succes-
sion to the stridhana of a woman without issue depended on ‘the form of mar-
riage. It went to the husband if she was married in an approved form ; other-
wise to her mother and father’

*para 3.25, supra.
*Manu 9, 200.
®Katyayana.
4Altekar, Position of Women in Hindu Civilization (1938), page 263.
‘See para 3.29 and 3.30, infra.

‘Banerji, Marriage and Stridhana, (1923), Lecture 9, page 400 हा, sec.

19

Scope of Sirid-
hana.

Fifth period (1801
to 1955 A.D).


20

Property inherited
women.

Limitations on
woman's power of
disposition,
Yajnavalkya.

Benares school—
Mitakshara.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3—Women's Position in India—Brie{ Historical Review.)

3.28. As to property inherited by women, we may state thag though earlier
writers like Baudhayana', declared the total incompetency of women for inherit-
ance on the ground of thetr deficiency of sirength, the text of Manu which? deals
with the inheritance of the nearest Sapindas, has been interpreted by the com-
mentators as recognising the rights of the wife as a Sapinda’, notwithstanding
Manv’s declaration* to the contrary. There are also other passages to be found
in Manu, recognising the capacity of a woman to hold property’,

3.29. It may be stated that the texts of Yajnavalkya and Vishnu under which
the widow, the daughter, aid other females are recognised as heirs, do not seem
to make any distinction between the estate taken by them and the estate taken by
male heirs who take under the same texts. One would, therefore, suppose that
so far as Smrili authority is concerned, there is, indeed, very little in it to sup-
port the Jinited estete of women in inherited property.

329A. Yajnavalkya, whose text on the definition of stridhana has been the sub-
ject of much discussion, declares" :

“What wus given (to a woman) by the father, the mother, the husband,
or 8 brother, or received by her before the nuptial fire, or presented to her
on her husband's marriage to another wife (adhivedanika), and the rest is
denominaled stridhana. So, that which is given by kindred, as well as
her fee and anything bestowed alter marriage.”

The highes. authority in the Benares school is Milakshata, which is also
universally respected throughout India’, The author, adopting the text of Yajna+
yalkya as the basis of his definition of stridhana, has the following commentary
on the first sloka on the subject (IT, 143): —

“That which was given by the father, by the mother, by the husband, or
by a brother; and that which wag presented by the maternal uncles and
the rest, at the time of wedding, before the nuptial fire; and a gift on a
second marriage or gratuity on account of supersession, as will be sub-
sequently explained in the text, ‘To a woman whose husband marries a
second wife, let him give, & c.,” [and, as indicated] by the word adya (and
the rest), property obtained by inheritance, purchase, partition, acceptance,
finding ; ull this is stridhana according to Manu and the rest*.”

Vijnaneswara then remarks: “The term stridhana (woman's property)
conforms in its import with its etymology, and is not technical: for. if the literat
sense be admissible, a technical acceptation is improper’.” .

‘Baudhayana, Prasna J, Kanda Il, 273 Banerji, Marriage and Stridhana (1923), page

369.
बताए, IX, 187.

'Manu VILL, 416.

“Banerji, Marriage and Stridhana (1923), pages 369 and 373,

1p. 8. Sivaswamy Iyer, Evolution of Hindu Moral Ideals (Kamla lectures), University
of Calcutta (1935), page 63. है ह पे

cYajnavalkya Uy 143, 144. ‘The text in the original rums thus:—

Jimutavahana reads : . {and also
adhivedanika) for (adhivedanika
and the rest).

‘Banerji, Marriage and Stridhuna (1923), page 328.
tMitakshara, Ch, ता, séc. X1, 2. The translation is from Banerfi, Marriage and Stri-

dhana (1923), page 328
'Mitakshara Ch. IT, section XL 3.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.-Women's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

3.30, The Mitakshara thus includes al! property belonging to a woman in the
_ term ‘stridhana’, and i nowhere imposes any limitation as to her dominion over
it. There ate restrictions and prohibitions upon her husband and any other kins-
_- men: using her property, but sone upon the woman herself. It should. further,
be stated that the Mitakshara, after referring to Manu’s cnumeration of Stridhana.
observes: -

“The enumeration of six 5015 of women’s property by Manu: is intended
not as a restriction of greater number, but as a denial of less.”

Jt is scarcely necessary to say that Vijnaneswara’s statement that stridhana
is not to be understood in a technical sense (Mitak, Chapter YI, section 11, S. 3)
was not a mere philological observation. “By laying down that proposition,
Vijnaneswara and other great commentators, who followed him, succeeded in
effecting a beneficial change in the archaic Smriti law and placed women almost

oo

on a footing of equality with men as regards the capacity to hold property".

This view of the commentator, at once just liberal and correct, was uo-
fortunately rejected by the Privy एक,

Mulla has the following comment’:

“Lastly, we shall note how the Judicial Committee has, notwithstanding
repeated warnings given by it that the Courts of India should take the
Hindu law not from the Smritis, but from the commentaries brushed aside

the whole of Vijnaneswara’s expansion of.the word ‘adya’.

WIE RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

3.31, Subsequent developments in the judicial and legislative field are matters of
recent history, and we need mot set (hem out, We shall not therefore go into
details of the sixth period, marked, mainly, by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

3.32, However, before concluding this discussion as to the rights of Hindu
women, we may draw altention to the following observations of Sir Henry Maine,
on the nature and origin of ‘stridhana’:— ,

“The settled property of a married woman, incapable of alienation by her
husband, is well known to the Hindus under the name of ‘Stridhana’. It
is certainly a remarkable fact that the institution seems to have been deve~
Joped among the Hindus at a period relatively much earlier than among
the Romans. But instead of being matured and improved, as it was in
the Western Society, tnere is reason to think that in the East, under various
influences, which may partly be traced, it has gradually been reduced to
dimensions and importance far inferior to those which at one time belong-
ed to it” . - 7

‘Salemma र, Luichmana, (1898) LL.R. 21 Mad. 100, 103,
IBitagwandeca v. Myne Ball (1867) 11 MLLA. 482.
‘Mulla, Hindu Law, (1974), page 168.

*Maine, Barty History of Institutions, pages 321-324 cited by Banerjee, Marriage and
Stridbana (1923), page 397.
4. LAD/76

21

Concept in Mitak-

share,

Sixth period.

Sir H. Maine's re-
‘etre

8
dhana’,

on


22

Examples
Greece.

of

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Woinen's Position in India—Briej Historical Review.)

IX. CHANGING SOCIAL CONDITIONS IN INDIA AND ELSEWHERE

3.33. Before we go to the next topic, it may be pertient to observe that social
conditions in any country do not remain static. This is as much true of any
other country as of India. Take Greece, for example. Women in the age of
Homer! occupied a much more honourable position in society than women in the
days of Pericles. In Homer’s Odyssey, the description of many of the female
characters’ shows that a considerable amount of freedom was enjoyed by
women. :

. The divine figures depicted by Homer show this to a still larger extent.
The goddess of Wisdom—Athene—is the most. prominent character in the Odys- .
sey', being the one who guided the hero throughout. The Greek deity presiding
over justice was also a woman—-Themis. | ,

Although Greek society in the time of Homer was patriarchal, the Greek
woman, as described by Homer, was not a mere chattel. A good personal rela«
tionship between man and woman was highly valued,—as is obvious from the
blessing given by Odysseus (the hero of Odyssey), to Nausicaa, the daughter of
King Alcinous

The blessing was as follows*‘—

. may the gods grant you your heart’s desire; may they
give you a husband and a home. and the harmony that is so much to be
desired, since there is nothing nobler or more admirable than when two
people who see eye to eye, keep house as man and wife, confounding their
enemies and delighting their friends, as they themselves know better than
any one.”

3.34. In contrast, Pericles (492-429 B.C.) contemplated a rather modest role for
women, as is apparent from his saying: “Great is the glory of the woman whose
name is not in the mouths of men for either good or evil’.”

We may also contrast, with Homer, the later social background in which
Plato (428-347 B.C.) wrote the Republic.

Plato’s own ideas as to the education of women,—and generally as regards
social organisation—were, in many respzcts, ahead of his times. But the fact
that he. had to make a strong and impassioned plea for giving equality to women
leaves no doubt that the actual conditions were not very favourable to women.
In his concept of the ideal commonwealth’, one suggestion which startled some
Of his contemporaries was that men and women should have the same education
and the same pursuits’.

1Probably, 850 BC. see Odyssey (Readzrs’ F:
page 7, and Encycl. Brit. Vol. 10, page 793, left hand

*Roughly, 445-431 B.C.

%E.g., Nausicaa and Burycleea_ (Nurse of Odysseus), and Areta. For Nausicaa, se¢
Odyssey, Books 1, HI, ¥, VII. For Areta (wife of Alcinous), see Book VII.

4Odyssey, Book VI; Readers’ Enrichment Bdition, pages 58-66.
4B, ५. Rieu (Ed.) Odyssey (Penguin Classies) (1973), Book VI, page 107,
gp, ‘Ch Reader's Enrichment Edition of Odyssey (Washington Square Press), (1966), nage
2.
‘Encyclopaedia Britannica, Volume 7, Education—History of; page 984, ieft hand.
‘Roughly, 429 B.C.

wont to the contemporary reactions, sec G. C. Field, Plato and His Contemporaries,
n. -

‘hment Edition), Reader's Supplement,



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Women's Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

According to the Republic’, men and women are to receive the same edu-
cation and share equally in ail public duties. At Athens, where women lived in
seclusion and took no part in politics, this proposal would be regarded as revo-
lutionary. .

It is, in fact, the theme of one of the later comedies of Aristophanes—
Ecclesiazusae (Women in Parliament).

The quality of thought of Plato transcended the limits of time and place,
and his major pronouncements as found in the Republic and in the Laws show
a scheme, rather than a survey of the factual conditions of his time.

Compare the speech of Ismene in the Play “Antigone”’ where she says—
This is what she stated—

“O think, Antigone,

We are women ;

It is not for us to fight against men”.

It could be inferred from what is quoted above—that a’ certain amount
of special position of women, in contrast with the position of men, was a reality.

X. MUSLIM WOMEN

3.35. We have so far dealt with the position of Hindu women. As regards the
legal position of Muslim women, it is well recognised that 8 Muslim married
woman has generally the same power to do all jurisdic acts (ic. acts recognised
by law as affecting rights and liabilities), as if she were not married,—except, of
course, in respect of matters in regard to which the contract of marriage itself
alters her rights or liabilities.

3.36. Islam recognised no equivalent of the “manus” of Roman law*, nor did
it have any theory of merger of the personality of wife and husband.

3.37. The Muslin wife has, accordingly, power to dispose of ber own property
by, gift, sale, or lease without the consent of her husband’—to cite one example

‘of her independent status.

Because of the nof-recognition of the theary of unity in Muslim law, the
wife may be convicted of theft of her husband’s property’.

337A. Ameer Ali, ia his Spirit of Islam’, notes that in the early centuries of
Islam, women continued to occupy as exalted a position as in modern society.
He mentions the example of Zubaida, the wife of Harun, who played a cons-
picuous part in the history of the age. According to him, Humaida, wife of
Faruk, a citizen of Macdina who was the sole guardian of her minor son Rabya-
R-Ray, educated her son to become one of the most distinguished Jurisconsults
of the day.

3Plato Republic, Part 1, Book 1५, 445 B to 457 8; Cornford Ed. (1946), pages 141,

” 150, 151.

°Sophocles, Antigone, हि
8Antigone, 45-127; Sophocles, The Theban Plays, (Penguin Classics), (1974 Reprint),
8.

‘Para 3.5, supra,

’Nichhabhai v. Isse-Khan Abduia Khan, (1866) 2 Bom. H.C.R. 297; Tyaleji Muslim
(1968) page 57 footnote 23.

(a) Cf. Lala Kundat Lal v, Mt. Mushar‘afi, (1936), 40 CW.N. 1903 (PC);

(b) Lureefoonissa v. Syed Rejoor Rahman, (1867) 8 WR. 84; (Cal).

(०) R. ¥. Khato Bai, (1869) 6 Bom. HLCR. (Cr, Ca) 9.

tAmeer Ali, Spirit of {slam (Chritophers London) (1953 Reprint), 9. 254-255,

28

Muslim women.

Exalted position
of women,


a4 Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 3.—Women'’s Position in India—Brief Historical Review.)

Ameer Ali also mentions the improvement effected in the position of wo-
men by the Prophet which has been acknowledged by all unprejudiced writers.
“He says: “......%.. the Teacher who in an age when no country, no system, no
community gave any right to woman, maiden or married, mother or wife, who,
in a country where the birth of a daughter was considered a calamity, secured
“to the sex rights which are only unwillingly and under pressure being conceded
to them by the civilised nations in the twentieth century, deserves the gratitude
_of humanity. If homammed had done nothing more, his claim to. be a bene-
factor of mankind would have been indisputable. Even under the laws as they
stand at present in the pages of the legists, the legal position of Moslem females
may be said io compare favourably with that of European women.”

Legal position as iter’ iti —_
Lesal | position as 3.38 The same writer’ has summed up the legal position thus.

men. “An ante-nuptial settlement by the husband in favour of the wife is a
necessary condition, and’ on his failure to make a settlement the law pre-
sumes one in accordance with the social position of the wife. A Moslem
marriage is a civil act, needing no priest, requiring no ceremonial. The

. contract of marriage gives the man no power over the woman's person,
beyond what'the law defines, and none whatever upon her goods: and pro-
perly. Her rights as a mother do not depend for their recognition upon
the idiosyncrasies of individual judges. Her earnings acquired by her own
exertions cannot be wasted by a prodigal husband, nor can she be ill-
-lreated with impunity by one who is brutal. She acts, if sui juris, in all
matters which relate to herself and her property in her own individual
rights, without the intervention of husband or father. She can sue her
debtors in the open courts, without the necessity of joining a next friend,
or under cover of her busband’s name. She continues to exercise, after
she has passed from her father’s house into her husband’s home, all the ~
tights which the law gives to men.-: All the privileges which belong to her
as a woman and a wife are secured to her, not by the courtesies which _

. “come and go,” but by the actual text in the book of law. Taken as a.
whole, her status is not more unfavourable than that of many Europgan,
women, whilst in many respects she occupies a decidedly better position. ~
Her comparatively backward condition is the result of a want of culture |
among the community generally, rather than of amy special’ feature in
the laws of. the fathers.” :

* Muslim women in 3.38A. In the field of administration, many Muslim women showed their excel-
Administration. 100०8), like Razia Begum (1236-1239 A.D.) and Chandbibi (16th century).
Chandbibi, it may be noted, appeared on the ramparts of the fort of Ahmadnagat
dressed in male attire and put heart in the defenders of that town against the
prowess of Akbar in his battle against her (1595-1596 A.D.). The participation

of Noor Jehan in administration is well-known. \

- XL CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS हि
‘Articles 15-16 of 3.39 The Constitition of India, in articles 15 and 16, makes a clean sweep of
the Constitution, aj] discrimination against women on the ground of sex. . Article 15 is of particu-
lar importance, and provides as follows: —
“15, (1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds
only of religion, race. caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.

TAmeer Ali, Spirit of Islam (Christophers London 1953), page 257. पु
°K, M. Panikkar, “The Middle Period” in Baig (Ed.) Women of India (1958), pages 9,
10, 1. हि


Married Women's Property Act, 1874 25
(Chapter 3—Women’s Position in India—-Briej Historical Review.)

(2) Nothing in this article shall preveynt the State from making any spe-
cial provision for women and children.”

‘ This provision has been invoked more than once before the courts.

3.40. Recently, it was held' that though the State can make special provision Caselaw.
for women, the State cannot discriminate egainst them only on the ground of sex.

On this ground, it was held ‘that rules laying down that women cannot succeed

to any Brahmottar grant, discriminated between men and women only on the

ground of sex. “On the plain interpretation of the provision, it is hit by article

15 and is void.” पु

XIL VIEWS OF GANDRUI AND 15085

3.41. We may, before closing this discussion, refer to the ideals cherished by  Ganghiji’s views.
Gandhiji and Tagore. In a speech made as early as 1918, Gandhiji said?—

“Woman is the companion of man, gifted with equal mental capacities.

She has the sight to participate in every minutest detail in the activities

of man, and she has an equal right of freedom and liberty with him.”

3.42. In 1929, Gandhiji again wrote in the “Young India*’—

“Tam uncompromising in the mattet of women’s tights. In my opinion,

she should labour under uo legal disabitity not suffered by man, I should

treat the daughters and sons on a footing of perfect equality”.
3.43. At this stage, we may state that the position of women is a reflection of Position of wo-
the general social conditions in the country. This can be illustrated from Tagore’s man a reftection
works, The heroines of Tagore—the important female characters of his novels, of the general so-
short stories, dramas and poems,—depict the changing social pattern of India,
and, specially, Bengal, from 1875 to 1941. To quote the words of one author’.
“They represent the tcansformation of indian society.”

If a detailed anatysis.is made of the economic, social, religious and poli-
tical backgroand of the period covered by Tagore’s works, it will be apparent
809 his heroines are the typical products of the period in which they were created
or are, in some cases, reflecting the diverse phases of rural and urban society
during the sixty-six years of his creative life. With profound. understanding and
an insight both objective and critical, the great writer brings out, most effectively,
tbe various stages of the emancipation of Indian women, fighting not only for
their ows rights but also for those of dowa-trodden humanity.

This does not, of course, imply that the heroines of Tagore are mere pro-
ducts of their age. The poct’s transcendental touch makes them stand out as
uaiversal figures, “that light that never was on sea or land,” with which Tagore
touches them all, making them vafcrgettable and immortal.

WWhatanath ¥. State, ALR, 1974 Orissa 135, 139.

“Gandhij’s speech at the Morarji Gokhale Hall—20th February, 1918, reprinted in
“To the Women”, page 18.

‘Gandbiji in the “Young Jadia’, 17th Octover, 1929, reprinted in “To the Women”,
page 12. .

‘Biman Behart Majumdar, Heroines of Tagore; A study in the transformation of
Indian Society, 1875-1941 (Pirma K. L. Mukopadbayay, Calcutta, 1968),



26

Verse in the Rig
Veda.

Views as to de-
pendence.

Scheme of the
1874 Act.

Sections 1 to 4.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 3.—Women’s Position in India—Brief Historical Review. Chapter 4.—
Scheme of the Act.) है

XIII. CONCLUSION

3.44. We may close this Chapter by quoting what the Rig Veda has to say about
the position of the woman. In a verse adoring the role of the wife, it says'—
डवभुर भव सच्राज्ञो '
सच्राज्नी स्व अब शव 1
जवागहरि भव सच्राशी
want अधं हे वृष ॥॥
We need not quote literal translations of the text’. The sentiments could
be thus expressed in English, on a very free rendering—'
May you, like an Empress, rule the
household of your father-in-law :
may you, like an Empress, win the
admiration of your mother-in-law:
may you, like an Empress, win
the Jove of your sister-in-law ;
and may you, like an Empress, secure
the respect of your brothers-in-law.

3.45. We are not unaware that there are to be found, in some of the Smritis,
texts which spoke of the subordination of women or which expressed views to
the effect that women deserve dependence’ or that women do not attain independ-
ence. Ip this connection, it is pointed out that, in those very smritis, there are.
also to be found texts which uphold the honour and respect that is due to
woment-", Apart from that, it may be that, in the course of time, the sentiments
regarding the proper status of women went on fluctuating—which accounts for
the fact that views at both extremes are met with in the sacred texts.

‘CHAPTER 4
SCHEME OF THE ACT
4,t, We shall now examine in brief the scheme of the Married Women’s Pro-
perty Act, 1874. .
Sections 1 to 3 deal with preliminary matters.

Section 4 deals with the wages and earnings of the wife, and corresponds
to section 1 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1870 (Eng.).

IRig Veda, Mandala 10, Hymn 85, Verse 46.
%a) Ralph Griffith, Hymms of the Rigveda (Chowkhamba Sanskrit Studies, Series No,
35), Vol. 2, page 506, Mandal 10, Hymn 85, verse 46.

(b) मे, H. Wilson, Translation of the Rig Veda, Volume VI, pages 152.46 (1928. Re-
Print) published by H. R, Bhagat, Poona, through Ashtekar & Co.

Ya) Yajnavalkya, 1.855

(०) Manu IX, 3;

(लो. Baudbayana H. 3.44.

‘Vasishtha V. 3.

5Yajnavalkya 1.82.


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 4.--Scheme of the Act. Chapter 5.—Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

42, Section 5 declares that any married woman tay effect a policy of insurance
on her own life. or on her husband's life on her own behalf, and that the amount
shall be her separate property. As the law stood then, if a wife effected such a
policy otherwise than out of her separate estate and died in the husband’s life
time, then the husband became the owner of the policy in-the capacity of her
administrator. Hence the need for the provision.

Section 6, which we shall have occasion to consider in great detail’,
broadly corresponds to the second paragraph of section 10 of the English Act
“of 1870, It provides for a statutory trust in regard to a policy for wife’s benefit,
but with an important difference, namely, that while the English Act mentioned
the trustee appointed by the Court of Chancery or the County Court, this section
mentions the official trustee under Act 17 of 1864. There are other differences
also between the Indian section and the English law, to which we shall revert
when we shall consider section 6 in detail. The section provides that an insur-
ance effected by her husband on his life and expressed to be for the benefit of
the wive or children or both, shall be deemed to be a trust for the benefit of the
wife and the children, and shall not be subject to the claim of the creditors of
the husband, except where the transaction wag intended to defraud the creditors.
But for the section, such an arrangement made by the husband would have
suffered from the weaknesses from which voluntary settlements suffered in
England?

Section 7 deals with legal proceedings by married women, and broadly
cotresponds to section 11 of the English Act of 1870. हे

Section 8, in effect, declares that the law as,to the liability of a wife for
her. post-nuptial debts is the same as was laid down in the decision of Justice
“Phear’ of the Calcutta High Court. That decision was binding only in Bengal,
while section 8 extends its authority throughout the territories to which the Act
extends. - ॥ .

43. Section 9 provides for the non-fiability of a husband for the debts incurred
by the wife before marriage. It corresponds to section 12 of the English Act of
1870.

Section 10 deals with the husband's liability in certain miscellaneous
cases. +

This, in brief, is the scheme of the Act.

Cuaprer 5
COGNATE PROVISIONS IN OTHER ACT!

i. SUCCESSION ACTF

5.L Having noted the scheme of the Act of 1874, we shall, in this Chapter, refer
te certain provisions contained in other Acts which have a bearing on the rights
of masried women in respect of property. -

5.2, Of these provisions, the most important is containéd in section 20. of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 which replaced section 4 of the Indian Succession Act,
1865. it may be noted that this secfion really does not affect the law of succession,

3869 discussion as to section 6, infra (Chapter 8).
“Para $4 and 8.5, infra,
Archer पे Watkins, 8 Bengal Law Reporte 372.

Sections 5 to

Sections 9-10,

Introductory,

27

8,

Section 20, Indian

Suecession
1925.

Act,


28

Limited — applica-

tion of section 20,

Section 21, Indian
Succession’ Act,
1925.

Sections 38-39, In-
surance, Act,- 1938,

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 5.—Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

but relates to the immediate effect of marriage on property belonging to either of
the married persons.’ Where the restraint on alienation is created by a settlement
on the occasion of marriage, this section has no application? .

The section reads:

“20. (1) No person shall, by marriage, acquire any interest in the property
of the person whom he or she marries or become incapable of doing any act
in respect of his or her own property which he or she could have done if
unmarried.

“(2) This section—

(a) shall not apply to any marriage contracted before the first day of January
1866 ;

(b) shall not apply, and shall be deemed never to have applied, to any mar-
riage one or both of the parties to which professed at the time of the
marriage the Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religion.”

5.3. The section does not apply to marriages contracted before Ist January, 1866,
Nor does it apply to any mafriage one or both of ‘the parties to which profess, at
the time of the marriage, the Hindu, Mohammaden, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religion.
The reason is that the Legislature did not consider it appropriate to deal with the
effect of marriage on property in the case of those communities as they were not
governed by the English common law in matters concerning matrimonial status.

The principal effect of this section fs to get rid of the principle, so far as pro-
perty is concerned, that the husband and-wife are one person in law. An important
effect of the section is that not only does a person not acquire any interest in the
property of the spouse by reason of marriage, but also marriage does not bring in
any incapacity for doing any act in respect of his or her property, which he or she
could have done if unmarried. The field of property and proprietary capacity is,
therefore, almost totally covered by this section. .

5.4. Section 21 of the Indian Succession Act. 1925, corresponding to section 44
of the Act of 1865, deals with the effect of marriage between a person domiciled in
India and a person not so domiciled. The section is, in a sense, an addition to the
rule contained in section 20 of the Indian Succession Act’, inasmuch as the applica-
bility of section 20 (previously section 4) in relation to the movable preperty of a
person not having an Indian domicile was. jin dispute for some time‘. The effect
of section 21 is that where either of the parties had an Indian domicile and the
marriage takes place in India, the rights of the parties both as to movables and
immovables are, in respect of the matter dealt with by the section, governed by the
territorial 189 of India. As Markby J. pointed out‘: “The jus gentium or common
law of nations has been set aside or modified” to that extent.

IL INSURANCE ACT

55. We may now refer to certain provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 which
deal with the question of assignment and nomination of life insurance policies—a

“subject also dealt with in section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874,

Milt y. Administrator General of Bengal, (1896) L.L.R. 23 Cal. 506.
Peters v. Manuk, 22 Weekly Report 175 (Cal.).

SPara. 5.3, supra.
‘Miller v. Administrator General, (1874) LL.R. 1 Cal. 412

SChapter 8, infra.


“Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter $.~-Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

Before the enactment of the Tasurance Act, in 1938, the general 105 was that a
person who had his name in the policy as ihe one to whom payment due under the
policy is to be made, did not have any rights under the policy, merely by reason
of his name being mentioned, and it was necessary for him to get a succession certi-
ficate-or letters of adminisiration’. In general, assignment of the policy was goveru-
ed only by section 130 of the Transfer of Property Act’, as a transfer of actionable
claims, except where section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874 became
operative. This position was changed by the Insurance Act, 1938. Section 38 of
the Act deals with the assignment and transfer of life insurance policies. Sub-
section (1} provides that a transfer or assignment of a policy of life insurance, whe-
ther with or without consideration, may pe maue only by an endorsement upon the
policy itself or by separate instrument signed in either case by the transferor or by
the assignor or his duly authorised agent aad attested by at Jeast one witness. speci-
fically setting forth the fact of transfer or assignment. In order that the transfer
or assignment may be complete and effectual as between the parties, this is enough.
But, in order that the transfer or assignment may be complete and effectual against
the insurer, it 18 also necessary that written notice of the transfer or assignment is
given and certain other formalities are complied with, as provided in section 38(2)
cof that Act.

Section 39 of the Insurance Act deals with nomination by the holder of a
policy of life insurance. Sub-section (1) of that section, so far as is material, pro-
vides that the holder may, when effecting the policy or at any time before the
policy matures for payment, nominate the person or persons to whom the money
secured by the policy’shall be paid in the event of his death. The rest of the section
deals with certain formalities for nomination, the effect of the nomination on an
assignment or transter ander section 38 and other connected matters not material
for our purpose. Jn gencral, the nominee is nothing more than an agent to receive
the money, which money remains the property of the insured and at his disposal
during his lifetime and on his death forms part of the estate. For our purposes,
sub-section (7) of section 39 is important, and it reads as follows: —

“(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any policy of life insur-
ance to which section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874 applies
or has at any time applied:

Provided that where.a nomination made whether before or after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946, in favour of the
wife of the person who has insured his fife or of his wife and children or any
of them is expressed, whether or not on ‘the face of the policy, as being made
under this section, the said section 6 shall be deemed not to apply or not to
have applied to the policy.”

5.6. The combined effect of section 397) and the proviso quoted above, is to
create a wall between a nomination under the [nsurance Act and a trust umder the
Married Women's Property Act.

The scheme is intended to avoid, as far as possible, disputes arising as to
whether the arrangement made in a particular case falls under the Insurance Act
or under the Married Women’s Property Act. Of course where (i) the arrangement

is in the form of a “nomination”, but (i?) it is not expressed as made under section

1A.LR, 1935 Rangoon 211, 212.
21.8, 1955 Mad, 459, 460,
Seek LADIG

29

Object of section


$0

Section 10—Trans-
fec of Property
Act—Restraint on
anticipation,

Position in equity.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 5——Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

39 of the Insurance Act, such a controversy can still arise. This situation could
not be dealt with by a mandatory provision and the decision would, therefore, de-
pend on the circumstances of each case.*

IM. TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT

5.7, The next important provision for our purpose is contained in section 10 of
the Transfer of Property Act. 1882, which deals with what is commonly known as
a “restraint on anticipation”. The section reads as follows: —

“10. Where property is transferred subject to a condition or limitation abso-
lutely restraining the transferee or any person claiming under him from part-
ing with or disposing of his interest in the property, the condition or limita-
tion is void, except in the case of a lease where the condition is for the bene-
fit of the lesser or those claiming under him:

Provided that property may be transferred to or for the benefit of a
womat (not being a Hindu, Muhammadan or Budhist), so that she shall not
have power during her marriage to transfer or.charge the same or her bene-
ficial interest therein.”

‘The general rule is that conditions in a transfer of property which restrain
alienation are null and void. This is in the main paragraph of section 10. To
this, the proviso is an exception. It should be recalled that at common law, by
reason of the doctrine of unity, the wife could have no power of disposition over
her property for her separate benefit, independently of her husband. Equity, how-
ever, allowed property to be given fo trustees én trust for the Wife separately. Pro-
perty so given to trustees for’ the separate use of the wife could be dealt with by
her in equity as it she were 2 Jeme sole, that is, as if she were unmarried.

58. But the wife could still be “morally influenced*” by the husband to dispose
of her properties as he pleased. To avoid the exercise of such an influence the
Courts of Equity allpwed property which had been settled for the separate use of
married woman io be so tied down for her own personal benefit that she should

have no power during coverture to “anticipate” of assign her income. This is the

origin of the restraint on anticipation.

In Tulletz v. Armstrong’, Lord Langdale, MLR., in discussing the validity of
a clause in restraint of anticipation, observed as follows:

“The estate for separate use, as sanctioned by Courts of Equity, has its
peculiar existence only in the married state. Tt operates as a protection
to a married woman, against the legal power. over the wife’s property:
which is vested in her husband, Tt acts in contravention and control of
the legal right of the husband, and, as against his Tegal power, it isa
sufficient protection ; but the power of alienation remaining in the wile,
the separate estate, unfettered, is no protection against rhe moral influ-
ence of the husband, and many instances have occurred and daily occtr
jn which the wife under the persuasion or influence of ‘her husband, has
een and is induced to exercise his power of alienation in his favour or
for his benefit, and thus defeat the protection jntended for her.”

3 ta the Insurance Act, see pata 8.42, 8.53, 8.54

and

2For certain recommendations a
Chapter 15, infra.

WSee Fullett v. Armstrong, infra.

tpulled y, Armstrong, (1939) 49 RR. 280, 281.


Marrled Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 5.—Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

“But, as the separate estate itself owed ils origin and support to the
Courts of Equity, it was understood, that the same Courts might so
modify it, as to secure the protection which was intended; and accord-
ingly it was intimated by Lord Thurlow that if a gift clearly expressed
that the separate estate should be incapable of assignment in anticipation
or of alienation, that intention should be carried into effect, and his
Lordship being “of that opinion, himself set the example in a case in which
he personally took an interest; and from that time, now nearly half’ a
century ago, it has been usual to introduce into wills and settlements a
clause giving to women real and personal estate for their separate use,
independently of their husbands, without power of assignment, by way
of anticipation or of alienation ; and such clauses, though their operation
has been considered to be, as undoubtedly, it is, anomalous and irrecon-
cilable with the ordinary legal rules: affecting the limitations of estates,
and the legal incidents of property, have been repeatedly approved and
carried into effect by this Court and settlements and provisions for family
to a very great extent have been tramed in reliance upon them.

“And, in Jackson तप. Hobhouse!, Lord Elden emphatically declared that
it was too late to contend against the validity of a clause m resjraint of

anticipation.”

$9. The concept of a restraint on alienation was. thus, complementary to
that of the separate property of the married woman. Separate estate in equity
did much to mitigate the harshness of the common law rule. But there was
nothing to preveat a married woman from assigning her beneficial interest to
her husband and thus vesting in him the interest which the separate use had
gought to keep out of his hands, and the temptation presented to a grasping,
spend-thrift or insolvent husband was real. [t was to ‘circumvent this, that
equity developed the restraint upon anticipation? This restraint could be imposed
only if property was ‘conveyed, devised or bequeathed to a woman’s separate tse,
and, once it attached, it prevented her from anticipating and dealing with
y fell due. A restraint could be, and usually was,

any income until it actual.
in which case the whole fund became completely 115

attached to the corpus too,
alienable during coverturc,

‘The restraint on anticipation was designed to protect not only the wife
but also the members of her family who would be entitled to the property on

her death.

5.10, A restraint on anticipation could even be attached to the separate pro-
perty of an unmarried woman. But, in this case, she could deal with the pro-
perty as if there were no restraint, and could also totally remove the ‘restrant
by executing a deed poll to this effect. A woman to whose separate property
‘a restraint had been attached before or during coverture could do the same after
the marriage was terminated by her husband’s death or by divorce. But, in
the absence of any such decd, as soon as she married or remarried, the restraint
became operative as regards any property not alienated whilst she was a feme

sole.

Yackson v. Hobhouse, (1817) 2 Mer 483 ; 16 RR. 200, 203.
8$ee Hart, “The Origin of the Restraint upoo Anticipation", 40 L.Q.R. 221.

ot

Concept, of res-
traint complemen:
tary.

Position regarding
unmarried woman,


Relaxation of the
restraint—Act of
1881.

Abolition of the
restraint—Acts of
1935 and 1949.

Provisions in the
‘Trusts Act.

Right to specific
execution.

Right to _ transfer
of possession.

Right to transfer
‘beneficial in-
terest,

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 5.—Cognate Provisions in Other Acts.)

5.L1, Wiiilst the restraint effectively kept the property out of the hands of the
husband and his creditors, it had one obyious drawback. There might be a
number of occasions on which it might be in. the wife’s interest to deal — with
Property subject to a restraint, but nothing short of a private Act of Parliament
could remove it. It was in order to overcome this difficulty that the Convey--
ancing Act, 1881 gave the court in England power to bind her interest in such
property, provided that this was for her benefit’. But the court could render
only @ specific disposition, binding ; it had no general power to remove the res-
traint altogether.

5.12. The restraint on anticipation was abdlished for ‘the future by the Law
Reform etc. Act, 1935. However, the Act did not alféct the validity of res-
iraints already imposed. Since the pre-existing restraint acted as undue fetters
on the wife’s power of alienation unless the restraint was removable by the
order of the court*, there was some hardship in practice, particularly because
the restraint was not now needed by the wife for whose protection it was desig-
ned, nor was it needed by the members of her family who would be entitled
to the property on her death. Ultimately, by the Married Women’s’ (Restraints
upon Anticipation) Act, 1949, all restraints. whenever imposed upon anlicipa-
tion, were removed."

1५. TRUSTS ACT

5.13. So much as-regards the history of the restraint on anticipation and the
developments in England relevant to the subject matter of proviso to section 10
of the Transfer of Property Act. Provisions relating to the restraint on antici-
pation occur also in sections 56 and 58 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882. In
view of our recommendation later in this Report to amend section 10 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882’, it is necessary to amend these two sections of
the Trusts Act® also, and we recommend accordingly. The two sections, as
they now stand, are quoted below

“36. The beneficiary is entitled to have the intention of the author of
the trust specifically executed to the extent of the beneficiary’s interest ;

and, where there is only one beneficiary and he is competent to con-
tract, or where there are several beneficiaries and they are competent to
contract and all of one mind, he or they may require the trustee to trans-
fer the tcust-property to him or them, or to such person as he or they
may direct. प

When property has been transferred “or bequeathed for the benefit
of a married woman, so that she shall not have power to deprive herself
of her beneficial interest, nothing in the second clause of this section
applies to such property during her marriage.” (llustrations not quoted),

“58 The beneficiary, if competent to contract, may transfer his interest,
but subject fo the law for the time being in force as te the circumstances
and extent in and to which he may dispose of such interest

‘ection 39, Conveyancing Act, 1881 replaced by section 7, Conveyancing Act, 1911,
replaced by the Law of Property Act 1925, section 169. .
Section 169, Law of Property Act, 1925.

®Appendia 4,
4See discussion as to section 10, Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (Chapter 15),

®Sections 56 and 58, Indian Trust Act, 1882.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 5.—Cognate Provisions in Other Acts. Chapter 6—Extent and
application of Act of 1874.)

“Provided that when property is transferred or bequeathed for the benefit
of a married woman, so that she shall not have power to deprive herself
of her beneficial interest, nothing in this section shall authorise her to
transfer such interest during her marriage.”

They will require suitable ‘amendment, as already stated.

CHAPTER 6
EXTENT AND APPLICATION OF ACT OF 1874

61, We now discuss the Act of 1874 in detail. Sections 1 and 2 of the Act
deal with the application and extent of the Act and other preliminary matters.
Of these, the only provision which requires consideration here is section 2,
second paragraph, which reads—

“But nothing herein contained applies to any married woman, who, at

the time of her marriage, professed the Hindu, Mohammedan, Buddhist,

Sikh or Jain religion, or whose husband, at the time of such marriage,
- professed any of those religions.”

62. We would like to point out that this provision is too widely expressed.
inasmuch as, by virtue of section 6(2}, section 6 of the Act applies to the persons
excluded by section 2, second paragraph, as from the date mentioned in section
6(2) in that behalf. This is the position after the amendment of section 6 in
1959. 1६ is, therefore, desirable that in the second paragraph of section 2, the
opening portion should be revised so as to read—

“But, except as otherwise provided by sub-section (2) of section 6, noth-
ing herein contained applies. . .

We recommend that the second paragraph should be amended as above
if the present structure is to be maintained.

63. The second paragraph of section 2, which we have alrgady quoted’, ex-
cludes from the Act, cases where only one party is governed by the Act. Thus
where a spouse belongs to the excluded community, the Act does not apply
even' if the other spouse belongs to a commiunity to which it applies. For
example, a Christian wife marrying a Hindu would be excluded from the opera-
tion of the Act by virtue of this paragraph. The assumption scems to be that
the persoval law would:apply to the husband in such a case and that the Hindu
husband would not acquire common law-rights merely by marrying a Christian
woman.

On the above hypothesis, the English common law does not apply and

there is no need to apply the 1874 Act to such a situation. Moreover, section

. 20, Indian Succession Act would be attracted by virtue of, the specific provision

in the Special Marriage Act, which enacts that if the parties marry under the

Special Marriage Act, the Indian Succession Act will apply. We do not think
that there is any need to change the position in this respect.

Para. 6.1, supra,
"Section 21, Special Marriage Act, 1954.

हे

Sections | and 2—
Extent and appli-
cation,

Recommendations
to amend section
2

Second paragraph.

Case of inter-mar-
Triage where one
pariy is governed
by


Section 2, third
paragraph.

‘Section 4,

Sey porate property
History of.

Act of 1935.

Martled Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 6.~—Extent and Application of Act of 1874. Chapter 7.—Married
Women’s Wages and Earnings.)

64. We notice that in section 2, the third paragraph gives a wide power to
the State Goveniment to grant exemption from the provisions of the Act to
certain sections of the community both prospectively and retrospectively. It
appears that in so far as these communities are concerned, because of their
peculiar customs and habits, it may not be advisable to extend the whole or
some part of the Act to them, and it will also appear that where exemption has
not already been granted, it may be discovered later that if the operation of the
Act in respect of these communities is not modified with retrospective effect,
some hardship may arise. Apparently, having regard to these reasons, the legis-
lature has given the wide power mentioned above. In the absence of any con-
troversy or objections in this regard, we do not think it proper to disturb it,

CHAPTER 7
MARRIED WOMEN’S WAGES AND EARNINGS

74, Section 4 deals with the wages and earnings of married women and is
in these terms:

“4. Married women’s earnings to be their separate property—The wages
afid earnings of any maryied woman acquired or gained by her after the
passing of this Act, in any employment, occupation or trade carried on
by her and not by her husband,

and also any money or other property so acquired by her through the
exercise of any literary, artistic or scientific skill,

and all savings from and investments of such wages, earnings and pro-
perty, shall be deemed to be her separate property, and her receipts alone
shalt be good discharges for such wages, earnings and property.”

7.2. Tt may be noted that the section uses the expression “separate property”,
which has now been abolished in England’. The expression has a history. In
England, by the end of the 16th century*, it was established that if property was
conveyed to trustees to the separate use of a married woman, then the married
woman retained in,equity the same right of holding and disposing of it as if
she were a feme sole. She could, therefore, dispose of it during her life or by
will like any other beneficiary of full age who was absolutely entitled, and, like
such beneficiary, she could call upon the trustees to convey the legal estate.
Only if she died intestate in respect of ber “separate estate” did the husband
obiain an interest in her equitable property which he would have got had it not
been settled ‘to her separate use. This is the origin of the concept of “separate

property”.

73. This concept has become out-of-date in modern times, and that is why,
in England’, the legislature, in 1935, recognised the reality and abolished the
concept of separate estate, and gave to the wife the same rights and powers as”
were already possessed by other adults of full capacity. We have discussed the
history of English legislation in an earlier Chapter’. हु पु

\Para 7.3, infra.
SHoldsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 5. pages 310-315.
aLaw Reform (Married Women and Tort-feasers) Act, 1935.

‘Chapter 2, supra.


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

{Chapter 7.—Married Women's Wages and Earnings. Chapter 8.—Insurance by
Wives and Husbands.)

7.4. The expression ‘separate property’ in section 4 is unnecessary at the pre-
sent day, since now there is no “joint” property by law from which “separate”
property may need to be distinguished. The word “separate” should, therefore,
be removed, and we recommend accordingly.

CHAPTER 8

INSURANCE BY WIVES AND HUSBANDS
1. INTRODUCTORY

8.1. {n this chapter, we propose to deal with the provisions of the Act relat-
ing to insurance by wives and husbands, contained in sections 5 and 6. Section
6 is of considerable practical importance as it applies to persons of all commu-
nities and has raised numerous questions of interpretation and application.

I. SECTION 5
82, Section 5 reads—~

“5, Any married woman may effect a policy of insurance on her own
behalf and independently of her husband ; and the same and all benefit
thereof, if expressed on the face of it to be so effected, shall ensure as
her separate property,’and the contract evidenced by such policy shall be
as valid as if made with an unmarried woman.”

83. We have already explained the significance of the section’ and how it
modifies the rules previously prevalent. We are of the view that in this section,
the word “separate” is unnecessary.” हु

We are also of the view* that ‘the requirement that the policy should be
“expressed on the face of it to be so effected”, should be deleted as unnecessary:
if the section is retained in its present form.

We recommend that the section should be so revised.

गा. SECTION 6
GENERAL
8A. We now come to section 6, which reads—

“6, Insurance by husband for benefit of wife—(1) A policy of insurance
effected by any married man on his own life, and expressed on the face of
it to be for the benefit of his wile, or of his wife and children, or any of
them, shall enure and be deemed to be a trust for the benefit of his wife,
or of his wife and children, or any of ther, according to the interest so
expressed, and shall not, so long as any object of the trust remains, be-
subject to the control of the husband, or to his creditors, or form part
of his estate. ‘

1Para 4.2, supra.
8See also Chapter 14, infra.
Gee also Chupter 14, infra. -

3s

Recommendation
10 amend s, 4 by
removing the word
“separate”.

Introductory.

Section 5.

Section 6.


36 . Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—insurance by Wives and Husbauds.)

“When the sum. secured by the policy becomes payable, it shall, unless
special trustees are duly appointed to receive and hold the same, be paid
to the official Trustee of the State in which the office at which the insur-
ance was effected is situate, and shall be received and held by him upon
the trusts expressed in the policy, or such of them as are then existing.
“And in reference to such sum he shall stand in the same position in all
respects as if lte had been duly appointed trustee thereof by a High Court,.
under’ Act No. XVII of 1864 (to constitute an office of Official Trustee)
section 10.

“Nothing herein contained shall operate to destroy or impede the
right of any creditor to be paid out of the proceeds of any policy of
assurance which may have been effected with intent to defraud creditors,
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, the provisions of
sub-section (1) shall apply in the case of policy of insurance such as is
referred to therein which is effected—

(a) by any Hindu, Muhammadan. Sikh or Jain—
(i) in Madras, after the thirty-first day of December, 1913, or

(i) in any other territory to which this Act extended immediately

before the commencement of the Married Women’s Property
(Extension) Act, 1959, after the first day of April, 1923, or

(iii) in any territory to which this Act extends on and from the com-

mencement of the Married Women’s Property (Extension) Act,

1959 ; -

Provided that nothing herein contained shall affect any right or liabi- -
lity which has accrued or been incurred under any decree of a competent
court passed— पु
(i) -before the first day of April, 1923, in any case to which sub-clause 0)

or sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) applies ; or
(ii) before the commencement of the Married Women’s Property (Exten-

sion) Act, 1959, in amy case to which sub-clause (iii) of clause (a)

or clause (b) applies.

Section 6—Origin, 85. This is the most important section of the Act, and a policy of insurance
by the husband for the benefit of the wife or children, carries certain important
consequences This provision was considered necessary because it was thought
that in the absence of such a provision, the transaction would be considered a

‘voluntary settlement” on the lines of the position in English law as, unmodified
by statute’,

According to the old doctrine of the English Courts, such a policy, by
the hushand for the w:fe’s benefit, would only be in the nature of a voluntary
settlement,'-a and hence would be liable to the dangers to which such settle-
ments are exposed. Tt is wellknown that the legislature wanted to encourage
those life insurance policies which made provisions for wife and children and -
not to subject such policies to the dangers to which they were subjected under
the English decisions. Judges of the English Courts being bound down by tech-

snicalilies and precedents.- In introducing the Bill, Mr. Hobhouse said:? “Some

For statutory provi
lea, Para 8.6, dtfra.
"Sec extra supplement of 2nd August, 1873 of the Gazette of India,

mm see pata 8.7, infra.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874 37
(Chapter 8—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

gentlemen connected with Insurance Offices in this country appealed to the
Government a short time ago stating-that those provisions,” (ie., the provisions
of the English statute which over-ruled the English decisions), “were found
exceedingly beneficial and they did not see why they should not be applied to

* India. We now propose, therefore, to introduce an Act which will embody
for India the.same provisions as those which had been thought fit for the ‘people
of England.”

86. As regards voluntary setilements—that is to say, settlements made with- Voluntary settle-
- out consideration,—there were certain special rules in equily. Tn the first place, ™ents
where the trust is not completely constituted by reason of the ineffectual me-
thod of its credtion, the maxim that equity will not assist a- volunteer applied.
Apart from the fact that specific performance would not be allowed in favour
of volunteers, there was the other aspect, namely, that under a statute’ of 1571,
~a voluntary settlement could be set aside even if the beneficiaries were entirely
ignorant of the settler’s intent to defraud the creditors? The Act of 1571 was,
in England, later replaced by section 122 of the Law of Property Act, 1925, In
addition, a voluntary disposition of 1800, made with intent to defraud a sudbse~
quent purchaser is voidable at the instance of that purchaser ; this was provided
in England, by an Act of 15857 5

‘Again, under the Bankruptcy law,’ a voluntary settlement may, “in certain
cases, be avoided on the subsequent bankruptcy of the settler, even if it is not
fraudulent.*

Section 6 was intended to avoid all these complications. Before discus-
sing it in detail, it will be convenient to note the English Statutory provision
on the subject. है :

‘IV. ENGLISH LAW

&7. In England, under section 11 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1882 Section 11, | Mar-
{Eng.), a policy of assurance effected by any. man on his own life and expressed iy ao Fro-
to be “for the benefit of” his wife and children or any of them (and similarly

by a woman for her husband and children), creates a trust in favour of the

“objects”. Certain propositions emerge from the case law relating to this

section. ह

{a) So long as any “object of the trust” remains unpentormed. the policy
moneys do not form part of the estate of the insured.” They are not
subject to his (or her) debts, except where the policy was effected
and premiums paid with intent to defraud creditors,.in which case
the creditors will be entitled to a sum out of the policy moneys equal
to the premiums so paid.

(b) ‘The section has been liberally construed, so as to include (i) endow-
ment® policies, and (ii) accident insurance policies*

५३ छा, 1, Ch. 5 (1571).
nell, Equity (1966), page 141.
"27 Eliz 1, Chapter 4, later replaced by 173(1}, Law of Property Act, 1925,
‘Now section 42, Bankruptcy Act, 1914 (Eng.}.

SRe Macadam, (1950) 1 All Eng. Reports 303.

"See Appendix 3 for the text.

Re Clay's Policy af Assurance, (1937) 2 All E.R. 548,

"a) Re Loakimidis’s Folicy Trusts, (1925) Ch. 403;

(फ Re Pleetwoad's Policy, (1926) Ch, 48,

*Re Gladitz, (1937) Ch. 588,
6—1 LAD/76


38

Section 5, Married
‘Women's’ Property
Act, 1874 and sec-
tion 11, Married
Women's Property
Act, 1382 (English
Act,

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

The vagueness of ihe phrase “for the benefit of” in section 11 of the
English Act of 1882 has created certain questions which have, in course of time,
received judicial construction.

(@ Thus, a policy effected under the section by a man for the benefit

of his wife (unnamed)! and children, enures for the benefit of a -

second wife and the children of a second marriage? and, unless
the policy provides otherwise, the beneficiaries will take jointly.*

Gi) But, subject to any contrary intention, a named wife forthwith takes

* an absolute vested interest in the policy, so that if she predeceased
hee husband, it forms part of her estate ;* her husband, however, has
a lien for any premiums which he pays after her death, as being pay-
ments made by a trustee to preserve the trust property."

(c) Even if the person for whose sole benefit the insurance was effected
is guilty of the murder or manslaughter of the insured, the policy moneys will
nevertheless be payable by the insurance company. However, as it would be
against public policy to allow the beneficiary to take the moneys, they will form
part of the insured’s estate"

88. The important differences betweep the English and the Indian Act’ could
be summarised as follows—

(1) The Indian Act is confined to a policy taken out by the Ausband.
The English Act covers policies taken out by either spouse.

(2) The Indian Act provides that the benefit for the wife and children”
in the policy has to be expressed “on the face of it”. These words “on the
face of it”, which were present in section 10 of the Married Women's Property
Act, 1870 (English), were dropped. in section 11 of the English Act of 1882.

(3) The words “shall enure and be deemed to be a trust” appear in sec-

_tion 6 of the Indian Act* (which are the same as what appeared in section 10

of the English Act of 1870). The words in section 11 of the English Act of
1882 are different. The English Act. now contains the words “shall create a’
trust in favour of the objects therein named.” The English Act of 1882 would,
therefore, make the trust more definite than merely “deeming” it to be a trust
as in section 6 of the Indian Act. .

(4) Section 6 of the Indian Act makes the sum payable to special trustees
or to the Official Trustee of the State (in cases where there are no special
trustees}, who shall hold the amount upon trusts expressed in the policy. Under
section 11 of the English Act of 1882, there are no such special trustees or Offi-
cial Trustees for these purposes.’ In England, the husband holds the sum in
trust in the absence of appointment of trustees.

1868, generally, (1952) 96 S.J: 720. :

मर Brawne's Policy, (1903) 1 Ch. 188. See also Re Parker, (1906) 1 Ch, 526 and ०णा-
trast Re Griffith's Policy, (1903) 1 Ch. 739.

®Re Daview's Policy, (1892) Ch. 90. वि

sCousing v. Sun Life Assurance Society, (1933) Ch. 126; and see Rei Kilpatrick's Poli-
cies Trusts, (1966) 2 WLR. 1346.

5Re Smith's Estate (1937) Ch. 636.
की Cleaver v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association, (1892) 1 0.8. 147, See para 8.19,
fra. नि
ection 11, Married Women’s Property Act, 1882 (Eng) (Appendix 33.
SSection 6 (Para 8.4, supra). L
"Ealichambal y, Guardian of indian insurance Co, ALR. 1937 Mad. 645.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

(5) Is india, the creditors have, in cases of fraud a right against the
fentire) proceeds of amy such policy—though the word “entire” is not used.
Under the English Act, the creditors are entitled to receive, out of the moneys
payable under the policy, 2 sum equal to the premium so paid. Therefore, the
creditors would be eptifled to a lesser amount under the English Act than they
would get in India.

(6) Under the Indian Act, the beneficiaries of the trust are io be the
wife, or the wife and children or any of ihem, The English Act uses the words
“for the benefit of his wife. or of is children, or his wife and children, or any
of them.” Therefore, under the English Act, the trust can be made solely for
the benefit of the children without adding the mother.

(7) It is specifically mentioned in the Indian Act that so long as the
” trost remains, it ig not subject to the control of the husband. These words are

absent in the English Act of 1882.

9. ACTIONABLE CLAIMS

8&5. We shall have a number of points! of detail to consider with referenee
to section 6. But, at the outset, certain fundamental matters may be dealt with,
as the section deals with the transfer of am actionable claim, broadly correspond-
ing to the chose in action 43 xDown to English Jaw.

“B10. There ere four chnceivable reasons for which the assignment of a chose
in action may bind the assignor ; (3) it transfers his whole interesy 10 tie assignez ;
(0) it transfers his equitable interest to the assignee and chereby colverts
the assignor into a trustee ; (cj it effectively constitutes other persons trustees
of the chose in ection; cr (@) the casignar is Sound by contiact io the ass'gned
yo aid him te recoves the ‘chose’? Wat is known in England as chose in
action is, broadly speaking, known to Indian lawyers as an actionable claim.
This difference in terminology makes no difference to the legal position. The
operation of a device adopted to effectuate assignment of an actionable claim
- will, therefore, depend on which of the above reasons applies to the device

adopted. ;

8.11. In India, the general subject of the transfer of an actionable claim is
governed’ by section "130 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. However, the
Exception to that section pzovides, inter alia, that “Nothing in this section......
waecvee.Affzcts the provisions of section 38 of the Insurance Act, 1938." Hence
the assignment of the benefit of an insurance policy, is govemed now by the
Insurance Act* The second illustration to sectién 130 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act shows that, but for the provisions of the Insurance Act, section 130
of the Transfer of Progerty Act would have governed assignments of life policies

also.

At commen law, a chese in action was not assignable. But, in equity, it
was assignable, subject to certain requirements of notice. As Rankin J. ob-
served,' thé legislature has, in section 130 of the ‘[ransfer of Property Act, com-
posed a new scheme, which has some of the features of both the systems.

See para 8.20, dfra.

sSee (1932) 46 LGR. 550.

For section 130 see para 8.13, infra,

‘Sudasook ¥, Hoare Miller, ALR, 1523 Cal. 719, 722 (Renkin 3).

39

Section 6 and ac-
tionable elaims.

Modes of assign-
ment, .

‘Transfer of action-
able claims.


Assignment of po-
licy essentially as-
signment of an ac-
tionable claim be-
ing of contract.

Section 130—
Transfer of pro-
perty Act.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 8.—insurance by Wives and Husbands.)
VI. SIGNIFICANCE OF SECTION 6

8.12. In order to understand the significance of section 6 of the Act of 1874,
it is desirable to examine the law which would be otherwise applicable. Apart
from statutory provisions of a special character, the right to claim moneys under
a life insurance policy could, before 1938, be assigned by complying with the
formalities required' by section 130'-a of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The
assignment may be direct or by way of trust, but, in either case, so far a8 the
formalities are concerned, compliance with section 130 of the Transfer of Pro- -
perty Act was required. This is because, in its essence, such assignment is an
assignment of the benefit of a contract which is a species of ‘actionable claim’
within the meaning of the Transfer of Property Act. It was therefore well-settled
that before the enactment of section 38 of the Insurance Act, 1938, the transfer
of a life insurance of Property Act* which deals with the assignment of actionable
claim. The assignment created an immediate vested interest in the assignee; it
was not revocable and operate completely to divest the assignor’ of all rights
under it, 1-69

The assigament could be conditional or unconditional. Difficulty was ex-
perienced only in relation ta Muslim policy holders, because, under the rules of
the Muslim law, conditions attached to gifts were generally void, except where |
the assignment of the policy is made to the wife by way of dower. The gift was
valid, bul the condition was void.’

8.13, Section 130 of the transfer of Property Act is as fgllows—

“130. (1) The transfer of an actionable claim whether with or without
coasideration shall be effected only by the execution of an instrument in
writing signed by the transferor ‘or his duly authorised agent shall be com-
plete and effectual upon the-execution of such instrument, and thereupon
all the rights and remedies of the transferor, whether by way of damages
or otherwise, shall vest in the transferee, whether such notice of the trans-
fer is hereinafter provided be given or not: वि

Provided that every dealing with the debt or other actionable claim
by the debtor or other person from or against whom the transferor would,
but for such instrument of transfer as aforesaid, have been entitled to
recover or enforce such debt or other actionable claim, shall (save where
the debtor or other person is a party to the transfer or has received express
notice thereof ag hereinafter provided) be valid as against such transfer.

(2) The transferee of an actionable claim may, upon the execution
of such instrument of transfer as aforesaid, sue or institute proceedings
for the same in his own name without obtaining the transferor’s consent to
such suit-or proceedings, and without making him a party thereto

Para 89 and 8.11, supra
wa, Para 8.13, infra.

%a) Mool Raj v. Vishwanath, (1913) LR. 37 Bombay 198; 24 MLJ, 60 0.0);
(0) Balamba ¥. Krishnayya, LLR. 37 Mad. 483; ALR. 1914 Mad. 595 (PB),
"Cf, Ravuer v. Proston, (1881) 18 Ch. Div. 1

‘Mool Raj v. Vishwanath, (1913) LL.R, 37 Bombay 198; 24 Mad. LJ, 60 (PC)
“Laxmi Kutty v. Vishnu Nambison, ALR. 1939 Mad, 411

कक Laxmi v. Jaswanilal, ALR. 1947 Bom. 369.

'Seo—

(a) Shain Das v. Savitri Bal, A.LR. 1937 Sind 181

0) Sadig AN v. Zahida Begum, A.LR, 1939 All. 744.



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

“Exception —Nothing in this section applies to the transfer of a
marine or fite policy of iasurance or affects the provisions of section 38
of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938).

Hlustrations .

@ A owes money to B, who transfers the debt to C. B then demands

«the debt from A, who, not having received notice of the transfer, as
prescribed in section 131, pays B. The payment is valid, and C can-
not suc A for the debt.

(i) A effects a policy on his own life with an Insurance Company and
assigns it to a Bank for securing the payment of an existing or future
debt. .If A dies, the Bank is entitled to receive the amourit of the
policy and to gue on it without the concurrence of A’s executor, sub-
ject to the proviso in sub-section (1) af section 130 and to the pro-
visions of section 132.” पु

8.14. The effect of section 38 of the Insurance Act, 1938, which is referred to
in section 130, Exception,’ was to amend the law as to assignment of life insur-
ance policies for persons of all communities? After the enactment of that section,
assignment of life insurance policies is governed by that section, so far as the
formalities are concerned, instead of section 130 of the Transter of Property Act.
We are not: primarily concerned with the details of these formalities.

&15. If the assignment is in the form of a trust, it would be necessary to comply
also with sections 5 and 6 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882. It is not necessary to
set out in detail the formalities required by these provisions. *

The question of creation of a trust, however, requires some discussion. In
“its essence, an insurance policy represents the benefit of a contract.’ Now, a trust
can certainly be created in respect of the benefit of a contract. The position in
this respect is briefly as under:— ~

First of all, it may be useful to see what is the principle which is involved
in a claim by a wife that her husband is a trustce for her, and this has been well
expressed by Sir George Jossel, M. R., in Richards v. Deibridge,' as follews: —

“The principle is a very simple one. A man may transfer his property,

without valuable consideration, in one of two ways:_he may either do such

acts as amount in law fo a conveyance or assignment of the property, and
thus completely divest himself of the legal ownership, in which case the
person who by those acts acguires the property takes it beneficially, or on
trust, as the case may be ; or the legal owner of the property may by one
or other of the modes recognised as amounting to a valid declaration of
trust, constitute himself a trustee, and, without an actual transfer of the
legal title, may so deal with the property as to deprive himself of its bene-
ficial ownership, and declare that he will hold it from that time forward

on trust for the other person. It is true he need not use the words, “T

declare myself a trustee,” but he must do something which is equivalent to

it, and use expressions which have that meaning: for, however anxious

the court may be 10 carry out a man’s intention, it is not at liberty to con-

strue words otherwise than according to their proper meanings.”

'Para 8.13, supra.

For section 38, Insutance Act, see pata 5.5, supra.
See para 8.12, supra.

‘Richards ¥. Delbridge, L-R, 18 Eq. 11.

“al

Effect of section
38, Insurance Act,
1938.

Question of trust
considered.


42:

Difficulties in de-
termining existence
of trust,

Significance of sec-
tion 6—Statutory
trust,

Section 6 to be re-

arded as  pro-
Madi ing ‘simpler
mode of assign-
ment.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

The position may be thus elaborated: हा

(a) A person entitled to the benefit of a contract may create a trust of that
benefit for thitd parties', either by declaring himself a trustee of it
or by assigning it to trustees for them.

{b) In addition, a persop may initially contract as trustee for a third party,
so that in equity the third party is entitled to the benefit of the con-
tract ab initio.

if the contract is not preferred, the trustee can take proceedings in his
own name? to enforce it for the benefit of the third party, and if the trustee
refuses to do so, the third party can sue, joining the trustee as a defendant’.
8.16. The main difficulty in these cases, however, is to discover what test the
courts will apply in deciding whether or not the party intended to contract as
trustee. The inquiry plainly involves the ‘construction of the contract dnd the
special circumstances in which it is entered into. This will be evident from.
thé cases where the court found a trust’, in coustrast with the cases where it did
not’.

‘The courts do not readily find that a party intends to constitute himself
a trustee. है हु

817, It is obvious that section 6 avoids these difficulties to a large extent by
bringing into existence what is conveniently described as a ‘statutory trust’. The
significance of section 6 lies in the fact that it renders unnecessary a compliance
with formalities required—

) for an assignment, by*section 38 of the Insurince Act’, or
(9) for the creation of a trust, by the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

8.18. Dispensing with the various formalities required for the assignment of a :
policy under section 38 of the Insurance Act, section 6 provides, what was
considered to be a simpler mode of assignment. The “assignment” need not be
as elaborate and express as under the Insurance Act. The essence of the section
lies in the words “expressed for the benefit of” (the wife or children). If an
intention to benefit the wife’ or children is apparent that benefit is secured on
the mere basis of the expression of the intention in the policy, and without the
need for other formalities. That’ is the governing principle and object of the
section. To carry into effect this object, the section provides a machinery

Corbin “Contracts for the benefit of third persons”, (1930) 46 L.Q.R. 12 and JG.
Starke, (1948) 21 Australian LJ, 382, 422, 455; 22 Aust, LJ. 67; and Samuel Williston,
“Contracts for the benefit etc." (1901) 15 Harv. LR. 767. .

2a) Gregery and Parker v, Williams, (1817) 3 Mor, 582; .

(0) Lloyd's v, Harper, (1880) 16 Ch. 0. 290;

(co) Les Affreteurs Reunis Societé Anonyme v. Leepold Walford (London) Lid, (19199

AC, 801 . .

Xa) Vandepite v. Preferred Accident Insurance, Corporation of New York, (1933) A.C,

70, 79. :

(b) Harmer ¥. Armstrong, (1934) Ch. 65.
Na) Re Webb (1941) Ch. 225;
(th) Re Forster's Policy (1966) 1 W.LR. 222. R 1 099 2 OB. 2०४; ३.
ren y. Russel e
cont i cr Son bad! हलके के Beswick (560) 3 All. ;
"Para 8.14, supra,
iPara 8.15, supra.


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives anit Husbands.)

whereunder either the trustee appointed in this regard by the husband, or failing
such appointment, the official trustee, is to receive the money on the pdlicy from
the insurance- company. No formal trust is required, In this respect, the sec-
tion dispenses with compliance with sections 5-6, Indian Trusts Act, 1882,

’ « Thus, the section not only overrides the provisions of section 38 of the
Insurance Act, 1938, relating to the assignment of life policies, but also modifies
the provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 in their application to the policies
to which the section applies. By virtue of this section, what can be conveniently
described a a “statutory trust” comes into being as we have already stated’,

* हें
8.19. In the absence of any provisions contained in that behalf in the Married
Women's Property Act, a term contained in the policy itself that the money
shall be payable to the wife of the assured if she survives him, is, as between
the executors and administrators of the estate of the assured and the wife, of no
effect. This point is dealt with by Esher, M. R. in Cleaver v: Mutual Reserve
Fund Life Association; thus: पर
है “Apart from the statute, what would be the effect of making the money

payables to the wife ? It seems to me that as between the executors and the
defendants, it would have no effect. She is no party to the contract ; and
T do not think that the defendants could have any right to follow the money
they were bound to pay and consider how the executors might apply it.
Tt does not seem to me that, apart from the statute, such a policy would
create any trust in favour of the wife : James Maybrick might have altered
the destination of the money at any timie, and might have dealt with it
by will or enactment, If he had done so, the defendants could not have
interfered. I think that, apart from ‘the statute, no interest would have
passed to the wife by reason merely of her being named in the policy ;
and, if the husband wishes any such interest to pass to her, he must have
left the money to her by will or settled in upon her during his life, other-
wise it would have passed to his executors or administrators.”

It was held in a Madras case’ that where the assured does not, in his life-
time, create a trust for the benefit of any person, such money, in cases where the
provisions of the Married Women’s Property Act do not apply. forms part of
his estate and is recoverable by his legal representatives. A contract between the
company and the assured gives no right of action to the beneficiary named.
Where the company refuses payment to the beneficiary on the death of the assur-
ed, the legal representatives, and not the beneficiary, will be entitled to enforce
the contract.

In England, before 1870, the difficulty was sometimes overcome by getting
the insurance company to declare themselves trustees for the wife.' In India,
before the passing of the Insurance Act, 1938, the assured could divest himself of
his beneficial interest under the policy only by assignment in writing under sec-
tion 130 of the Transfer of Property Act, or by signing a declaration of trust
under section 5 of the Trusts Act. Where neither course is adopted, the policy,
on his death, forms part of his estate, and no trust arises in favour of his wife as
against his executors or other representatives.*”

Section 6 provides an alternative course, and that shows its significance.

"*Para 6.17, supra.
Cleaver v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association, (1892) 0.8. 147.
'Oriental Government Security Life Assurance Limited v. Ammiraju, (1911) LLB. 35
Mad. 162. . :
‘Shankar v, Umabal, (1913) LLR. 37 Bom. 171, 479, citing Bunyan oa Insurance,
page 463. : .
"Para 8.18, supra.

43

Effect of term in
Policy without sta-
tutory provision,


Points of detail.

VIL

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.) '
POINTS FOR CONSIDERATION CONCERNING SECTION 6

8.20. After this discussion of the significance of section 6, we shall proceed to
examine certain matters concerning the section which require consideration. It
should be pointed out, that the section has led to numerous points of controversy.
Certain other points also arise out of the section. It will be convenient to enume-
rate important points which require consideration, either because of these con-
troversies or otherwise :—

fa)
{b)

{c}

@

(e)

(3)
th)
ti}

Does the section apply to endowment policies ?!

What is the meaning of the words “expressed on the face of it” in the
section ?*

(i) What formula should be used in the policy to attract the section?®

(9) ‘What is the meaning of the words “for the benefit of his wife pr
of his wife and children or any of them”, which occur in the sec-
tion ; can there be a policy for the benefit of children only ?*

What is the effect of a nomination made under section 39, Insurance
Act, 1938 १६

If a nomination under section 39, Insurance Act, brings a case within
this section, can the nomination be cancelled 7९

Can there be a contingent provision under this section 27
Can the statutory trust under this section be cancelled 7९
Who can sue under this section ?*

Can the widow for whose benefit the policy is expressed to be made,
sue in her own name, without resorting to the official trustee ?”

(9 Relationship of this section with section 39(7), Insurance Act—What

(1d
a)

happens if there is a trust and also a nomination, in respect of “the
same policy ?”

Can a trust be created under the section after the policy is issued 7”

Verbal change. needed in respect of the “deeming” provision” as to
creation of trust.

(m) Rights of creditors" when a trust is created.

(n)

Interpretation of the words referring to “object”.*

wPara 8.21 and 8.22

*Para 8.23 to 8.28, -

*Para 8.29 and 8.30,

‘Para 8.31 to 8.33.

‘Para 8.34 to 8.42

“Para 8.43.

"Para 8.44 to 8.46.

"Para 8.47 and 8.48:

"Para 8.49 and 8.50.

‘Para 8.51 and 8.52. _

. 4Para 8.53 and 8.54

- "Para 8.55.

“Para 8.56.

MPard 8.57.

“Para 8.58.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
{Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

We shall deal with these points sereatim.

8.21. The first question that has arisen is whether ihe word “policy” in section
6 includes an endowment pohzy, To some extent, this question is connected with
the other question whether a contingent provisien is* permissible under section 6 :
but the question has also an importance of its own. In a Calcutta case? reported
in 1979, there are dicta to the effect thal the seclion does not apply to cadow-
ment pt whereunder the amount was not payable on death. On the other
hand, there is a Bombay ruling’ of 1967, taking a different view, and there are
judgm-nts of other High Courts alsot which place a wide construction on the
section.

Tt should be noted that endowment insurance is also an insurance of life.
Ja Gould v. Curtis it was stated—

5 “What then is the true meaning of the words ‘insurance on his life ?°
There would, fo my mind, be a significant diffzrence if the proposition were
‘of and nol ‘on’. I can agrze thal the phrase ‘insurance of the life’
may, as a mutter of English mean a guatantee of a sum to be paid if the
life drops. Lnsurance ‘on’ it 18, to my mind, a different thing, Tt means
the insurance of a sum dependent upon it. The life is mentioned as a
contingency upon which the insurance is to be paid. The contingency is
death or no dzath—déath or life. [Insurance ‘on’ life is an insurance of
a sum payable or not payable according as the contingency of life or death
is answered one way or the other. Regarded thus, it is plain that an insur-
ance ‘on’ life includes as much an obligation to pay a sum of money if
life continuts at a date, as an obligation to pay a sum of money if life
ceases. An insurance ‘on’ life expresses an obligation to pay a sum of
money on an event dependent upon the contingency of human life. If
that be sound, it follows that the wholz of this premium is deductible,
because this is allogether an insurance ‘on’ life.”

$22. We are of the view that having regard to the beneficial object of section 6,
the matter should be placed beyond doubt, by expressly providing that the sec-
tion applics to an endowment policy. Adding an Explanation is one possible
device for achieving this object. We recommend accordingly.

$23, A general matter calling for comment arises from the words “on the face
of it”, which appear in section 6 and in the earlier English Acts prior to 1882,
though not in section 11 of the English Act® of 1882. In a Calcutta case’, it was
observed by Ameer Ali J. with reference to these words: —

“TJ think ihey were omitted from the later English Acts as beg  super-

fluous, Mr. Ghose interprets them as meaning ‘unconditionally’, absolu-’

tely, or something of that kind. To my mind, they mean nothing more
than. ‘expressly expressed’, the antithesis being to intpled trust or a secret
trust.” .

“See discussion in Para 8.44, difra.
1») कट, ५. United Bank, ALR. 1979 Cal. $13, 516 (B.C. Mita & 5. K, Mukherjea,

कह, A. Rodrigues v. BR. Baliga, AR. 1967 Bom, 455. 7

*See-discussion under point (fy, infra, para 8.44 to 8.46.

"Gould v. Curtis, (1913) 3 KR. 84, 94,

*For section ft of the English Act, see Appendix 3.

fin re Ashalaia, AAR. 1940 Cal. 217, 218 (Ameer Ali, 1.

TH LADITG

45

Paint (a)—endow-
ment policies,

Recommendation
as to endowment
policies.

Point (b}--Mean-
ing of the words
“os the face of

itt. -


46

Intention should
be expressed in the
policy.

Madras cases,

_ Other cases.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chanter 8.—Insurauce by Wives and Husbands.)

8.22. Tt wauld appear that the intention to benefit the wife and children must
be espresesd in the policy, and not in the proposal. In one Madras case’, in the
insurance policy, aginst the columa “to whem payable”, appzared the words
“to the person or persons legally entitled thereto”. IL was contended by the de-
fendsonts that a trust arose under seclion 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act.
It was. however, held by the High Court that the requirements of section 6 hed
not been "Wifiled. There was no mention in th: policy of the wife and children,
but thee was a slatement # the proposad form that the object of the policy was
“for ihe maintenauce of che family”. Tt was held:

“Although, where the ttention clearly appears thal a trust is to be created,
the law dozs not tequire that the words used should be identical with
those occurring in the statute, it is impossible to bold in the present case
that the requirements af the section have been fulfilled S$. 6 enacts
that the trust should appear “expressed on the face” of the document, that
is to say, that the words used should be plain and unambiguous. For
whatever purpose the policy may be governed by the terms of the applica
tion that preceded it, for the purpose of the Married Women’s Property
Act the only document that can be looked at is ike policy”.

No trust was, therefore, held to have been created in favour of the wife.

8.25. Following the Madcas case’ referred to above, it was again held in £938"
by the sane High Court that although for ceriain purposes, in cases of dispute
between the insures and the insured, it may be necessary to look into the pro-
posal or prospectus er even fo construe the prospectus as thongh it were a pert
of the policy, the terms of section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act were
clear and unambiguous. Tie expression “policy of insurance” in that section is
to be taken in the ordinary meaning of those words, and docs not mean the pro-
posal es well as the company’s prospectus. In this case, on the face of the policies
themselves, there was no expression of intention that they were for the benefit of
the wife or children. In the column in the policy headed “to whoo payable’,
the words used were, “The propaser's assigns or his proving executors or admi-
nistrators of other legal représentatives.........". It was held that there was 10
trust created ustder section 6 in favour of the wife of the assured.

826, In a Nagpur case‘, there was in the policy no statement that it was in-
intended for the benefit of his wife or children, However, it was stated in the
policy that the proposat and declaration of insurance should be the basis of
the assurance, and, in the proposal form, where there was 8 question “What is
the object of the proposed assurance”, the assured wrote, “family provision”.
The Nagpur High Court held that the words used,—“family provision” —were
very vague, and there was no indication that the assured intended that his wife
and children should get the whole interest in the policy. In the circumstances,
the Court held that even assuming that the statement in the proposal form could
he sa'd to be a statement expressed on the face of the policy,—which it doubted
_-this statement was no sufficient to bring the policy within the ambit of section

6 of the Act, as it was vague. |

IKvishnamerthy v. Aujorra, ALR. 1936 Mad, 635.

tkriskuanarthy के. Anjayya, ALR, 1936 Mad, 635, supra.

Hreckataswbramania v. United Planiers’ Association, ALR, 1938 Mad. 234, 236,

'Rebibaé v. Ratantal. ALR. 1938 Nag. 321,



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

8.27, In one sind case’, it was held that before section 61) of the Married
Women’s Property Act can apply, the insurance policy must be “expressed on
the face of it to be for the benefit of his wife”. In this case, it was an admitted
Position that the policy of insurance was not produced before the trial court.
But the appellant widow had received the sum due under the policy from the
Insurance Company, and the Court assumed that the policy had been surrender-
ed by her ta the Company. The question arose whether the insutance money
would have to be deducted fram the appellant's share in partition. It was held
sthat:

“Jf the appellant then wished to rely upon s. 6(1}, Married Women’s Pro-
perty Act, she should have called for the surrendered policy to satisfy the
Court that it was capressed on the face of it to be for her benefit. A mere
assigament of a policy in favour of the wife does not bring the policy
within the terms of section 6(1), Married Women’s Property Act.”

From the evidence of the appellant, the Court said that the policy hed
been assigned to her by her husband 2 years before his death, and later, that he
had taken out policy in her name. In these circumstances, the Court held that
the policy did not comic within section 6(L). Therefore, it was held that the insur-
ance money would have to be deducted from the appellani’s share in the parti-
tion.

8.28. These cases would show that on this point, the courts have taken a narrow
view of the wording. We have considered the question whether any provision
should be made to the effect that the intention to benefit the wife or children can
be expressed in the proposal also. However, such a provision may create pro-
blems, and it would be inconvenient to expect the parties concerned to ga through
the proposal that may have been deposited long ago in the records of the insures.
,

#29. We now proceed to the next question pertaining to the formula to be
used for conferring the benefit contemplated by section 6. From the decided
cases, to which we have referred above, a few salient points arise—

(3) The mere usz in the proposal of the words “for family provision” does
not? bring the poficy within section 6(1).

(b) Mere assignment in favour of the wife does not also bring’ the policy
within section 6(1).

(c) At the same time, the policy need not copy the phraseology used in
the section, In one Madras case‘, the High Court has held, (wich
refereace to scction 6):

“That section states that the policy shall, on the face of it, express
that it is to be for the benefit of the wife and if it is so expressed, then
it says the policy shail be deemed to be a trust for the benetit of the
wife. There is nothing in the language of the section to show that
the words “Jor the benefit of his wife” or others corresponding to
these should appear in the policy to enable us to infer a statutory
trust in favour of the wife within the meaning of the section. If..on

IManibai v. Bhimji Lalaji, ALR. 1946 Sind 171, following Shamdas v. Saviribai, ALR.
1937 Sind 181.
2Rabibai v. Retanial, ALR. 1938 Nag. 321, para: 8.26, supra.
*Manibat ¥. Bhimji, ALR, 1946 Sind 171, 175, para 8.27 supra,
‘Abhiramavalli v. Official Trustee, ALR. 1932 Mad, 220, 222.

at

Whether amend:
ment feasible.

*

Point—(c){i}—Qu-
éstion as to for
mula to be used,


48

Whether = amend-
ment feasible in
Tegard to the for-
ula to be used.

Point, () (ii}—Po-
licy for benefit of
children.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

reading the words in the policy, it appears that the assured has in-
tended in the event of his death, that the policy should enure to the
benefit of his wife, then 1 think the policy may be deemed to be a
trust for her benefit.”

In this case, in the schedule to the insurance policy taken by the  peti-
tioner’s husband, it was provided that the sum was payable to “the assured or
his wife Abhiramayalli if he predeceases her’. Tt was held that this was a policy
of assurance expressed “to be for the benefit of his wife”, though the express
words “for the benefit of his wife” did not appear in the terms of the policy. In
this case, it was held that a statutory trust in favour of the wife had been created,

The High Court, however, pointed out that in order to avoid difficulties,
the insurance companies should, in drawing up the terms of the policy in cases
where the assured intended to create a trust in favour of his wife in the event of
his death, adopt the words used in the statute’.

8.0. We have given deep thought to the case-law réferred to above. It appears
to us that an amendment of the section would not be of much use in avoiding
controversies of the nature discussed above. The assured has to be his own
conyeyancer. At the same time, we are of the view that the Life Insurance
Corporation should consider the suggestion made by the High Court of Madras*
in the judgement to which we have already referred.

8.31. Another equally important question also arises from the words——“for the
benefit of his wife or of his wife and children or any of them”. Does a policy
for the benefit only of children fall within the section? This situation arose in
a Bombay case’, and we may quote the facts and the point decided, from the
judgement of the High Court.

“J have already quoted section 6 to the extent relevant for the purposes
of this appeal. A policy of insurance, in order that section 6 should apply, should
be effected by any married man on his own life. The other requirement is that
the policy, on the face of it, must be for the benefit of his wife, or of his wife
and children, or any of them‘. The present policy is on the life of respondent
No. 3. That it is not for the benefit of his wife, or of his wife and children is
apparent. It is for the benefit of his children, ie., the appellant and her sister.
Yt was contended by Mr. Abhyankar, appearing for the respondents, that a policy
which is for the benctit only of a child or children is not contemplated by sec-
tion 6 of Act TIT of 1874. According to “bis contention, the expression for the
benefit of his wife or of bis wife and children, or any of them” means that the
policy is either for the benefit of the wife or for the benefit of the wife and
children or for the benefit of the wife and any one of the children. It cannot
be, he says, for the benefit only of the children without the wife’. This conten-
tion raised on behalf of the defendants found favour with the learned Judge. _
The contention is that “any of them” has reference to any of the children along.

'Emphasis added.

See Abiramavalit v. Official Trustee, ALR. 1932 Mad. 222.

See para, 8.29, supra

‘See also para. 8.42, tifra,

पूछ, A. Rodrigues ¥. B. R. Baliga, ATR, 1967 Bom. 465, 467, paragraph 6 (Gokhale,
J).

4M. A. Rodrigues v, B. R, Baliga, ALR, 1967 Bom. 465, 467, para. 5.

"Emphasis added.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands)

with the wife and not any of the children without the wife. Ona plain inter-
pretation of the section, 1 do not find it possible to accept this construction
suggtsted by Mr. Abhyankar. The expression “of his wife and children” reler-
ted to more than one child because the word “children” would include one child.

According to the construction suggested by Mr. Abhyankar, the expression ‘of his -

wife and children’ must refer to a policy for the benefit of the wife and more
than one child and not the benefit of the wife and only one child. The reason-
able construction would be that when the word ‘children’ is used, it includes one
child also. Only, if it were not so, then the further expression ‘any of them’
would have been necessary to provide for the case of a policy for the benefit of
the wife and child. Looking to the language employed, it does not seem to me
that a policy, which was not for the “benefit of the wife but was for the benefit
only of children, was not contemplated by section 6".

8.32. Tt sould be noted that on this, point, section 11, (which contains the
analogous provision) in the English Act-—the Matried Women’s Property Act,

1882,—is more clear. The material part of the section is as follow 4

“A policy of assurance effected by any man on his own life, and expressed
‘to be for the benefit of his wife, or his children or of his wife and children, or
any of them, or by any woman or her own life, and expressed to be for the benefit
of her husband or of her children, or of her husband and children, or any of
them, shall create a trust in favour of the objects therein named”?

The wording in the English section is, thus, more specific on this point.

$33. We recommend that the section in the Act of 1874 should be clarified
and widened so as to permit the benefit being conferred on children, (as in the
English Act), that is to say even if the wife is nol a beneficiary. No doubt, the
objection could be raised that in legislation dealing with married women, a
Provision meant only for children is out of place, However, we are of the view
that practical convenience justifies such an amendnient. To frame a separate
law to deal with policies for children will mean duplication of provisions.

$34. The next question pertains to the effect of a nomination under section
39 of the Insurance Act, 1938... Some difficulty in this regard is created ‘ by
the words in seclion 6—“for the benefit of #............ ”, Do these words mean
that a nomination under section 39 of the Insurance Act would satisfy the for-
mula? The High Courts have taken the yiew that a nomination under section
39 of the Insurance Act, 1938, does not satisfy the requirements of section 6.
This is the Allahabad‘, Andhra Pradesh®, Calcutta" and Madras’ view. We shall
tefer to some of the reported decisions.

Jn one Allahabad? case it was held that section 6(1) clearly shows that
the policy has to be effected for the benefit of the wife. The language was not
that a policy effected for the benefit of another person may be considered to have

‘Section 11, Married Women's Properly Act, 1882 (Eng) (See Appendix 3),
’Para 8.32, supra.

SPara 5.5, supra.

ALR. 1958 All. 569, 572 (see infra), para 8.34.

5A.LR. 1957 Andhra Pradesh 757, 758 (see infra), para 8.35. -
"ALR. 1956 Cal, 275, 276 (see infra}, para 8.36.

TALR. 1957 Mad. 105 (see infra), para 8.38.

‘Shantt Devi v. Shri Ram Lal, ALR, 1958 All, 569,

49.

Section 11 of the
English Act of
1882.

Recommendation
to amend section
6 in relation to
children,

Point (d}—Nomi-
nation made under
section 39, Insur-
ance Act, 1938.


Iilustrative
from Andhra.

cases

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

been effected for the benefit of the wife by a subsequent nomination. The mak-
ing of a subsequent nomination in favour of the wife is merely authorising her
to receive the money and is not the “effecting” of a policy for her benefit. A
policy cannot be effected twice. Where, therefore, the wife was not made bene- _
ficiary ab initio, the policy was not effected by the husband “for the benefit of
his wife’ within section 6(1), and the mere fact that he had made a subsequent
nomination such as he was empowered to make under section 39 of the
Insurance Act, does not make the policy a policy to which section 6(1) applies
because of such nomination.

The court held that the equitable and beneficial interest, whether im-
mediate or contingent, must be created at the very inception of the policy. It
was held: “It must be created ab initio in the wife or the children or any of
them if it is to attract section 6(1) of the Married Women’s Property Act.
Otherwise if a trust is to be created later in favour of any person after the
policy has been effected, thea it cannot be created under section 6(1) of the
Married Women’s Property Act, but must be created as any other trust is
created ......... It seems to us clear that section 39 of the Insurance Act and
section 6(f) of the Married Women’s Property Act are nol complementary, and
that the right of nomination which is bestowed on a policy-holder under sec-
tion 39 of the Insurance Act cannot be read into section 61) of the Married
Women’s Property Act so as to vary the clear intention of the latter Act.”

The wife’s appeal was dismissed on the above ground.

8.35. The facts in one Andhra case’ were as follows :—

A debtor, executed a promisory note in favour of the appellant in 1950,
A decree was obtained by the appellant in 1952 against the widow and son of
the debtor, who had died during the pendency of the suit. In execution of the
decree, the appzHant sought io attach a life policy taken by the debtor on his
own life. The widow raised an objection that having been nominated under
section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938, she was entitled to the proceeds thereof
and her busband’s creditor had no right. This objection was accepted by the
courts below. The decree-holder appealed to the High Court.

The High Court held that under section 39 of the Insurance Act, 1938,
the holder of the policy continues to have an interest in the policy notwith-
standing the nomination made by him. The nomination does not divest him
of the rights in the policy, and he retains disposing power over it. The title
docs not pass to the nominee by reason of the nomination. Consequently, the
nominee gels the property in the policy subjects to all the liabilities of the policy-
holder, It was also held that under section 392) and 39(4) “it is competent for
the holder of the policy to bequeath to somebody or make an assignment of it,
and this automatically cancels the nomination, which implics that a nominee
has no vested right in the document,.

“Tt ig not necessary for me to consider whether section 6 of the Married
Women’s Property Act could apply to a nomination under section 39
of the Insurance Act, in view af the proviso to sub-section (7. It is

manifest that it does not apply to a nomination............ .

Therefore, section 6 did not apply in this case, and the nominee's right
was subject to the discharge of any liability of her husband.

\Brahmamma v. Venkatramana Rao, ALR. 1957 A.P. 75.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8—fnsurance by Wives and Husbands.)

8.36 In one Calculia case’, the nomination in the endowment insurance policy
of the deceased was as follows. “f nor‘nate my wife and my son-in-law, the

survivor or survivors, as the persons to rzeeive the moneys under the above
policy in the event of my prior death.”

Tt was argued by the widuw that moneys payable to her under the terms
of the above nomination did not form part of the estate of the deceased judg-
ment-debtor. The Calculta High Court held that section 39, Insuratice Act,
conferred on the naminec the right fo receive the insusrauce money as between
such cominee and the Insurance Company. but it did not provide for the title
of ownership of that monty in general. It was held:

“40. Such insurance moncys really belonged to the estate of the assured

and continued to do so. It only provided, in the event of the death occur-

ring befare the period of endowment was over, who should receive the

‘money in place of the assured. The title to receive the money does not

necessarily create a title iz rem to that money which can be said to be good

as against the whole world.”

Jt was also held that the terms of somination in this case did not show
that the policy was expressed on the face of it to be for the benefit of the wife
within the meaning of section 6, Married Women’s Property Act. The terms of
nomination here were held to be nomination simpliciter, which comes under sec-
tion 39, Insurance Act. Here the nomination was not for wife and/or children,
bui joint nominee, one being the wife and the other the son-in-law.

The court explained why ‘section 39, Insurance Act, did not apply to
trusts created under section & Married Women’s Property Act. ,Such trusts are
expressly said to he beyond the control of the policy-holder, and are expressly
said not to form part of the estate of the policy-Holder. But the - palicy-
holder cannot have the best of both the worlds, namefy—on the one hand, the
policy-holder to have full right of disposition in spite of the “nomination” and.
at the same time, the nominee to have title to the money. The court, therefore,
dismissed the application of the widow, who was a mere nominee.

$37, A nomination under section 39, Insurance Act, like a testamentary dis-
position, speaks only affer death ; but the analogy ends there. Wo title to the
policy moneys passes,—in praesenti or in future,—by the nomination. If the
title passed to the nominee on the death of the policy-holder, his legal status
would have been indistinguishable from that of an assignee, or a legatee, the
assigmtient or legacy taking effect on the death of the policy-holder? In the con-
templation of the statute, the right of a nominee is a mere right to collect the
proceeds of the poticy, and the right has been given only to obviate the inconveni-
ence of obtaining representation 10 the estate of the deceased policy-holder cr a
succession certificate?
ee
LRembsllev ¥. Gangadkar, ALR. 1956, Calcutta 275.
11) SLC. ४. Uuited Bank, ALR. 1970 Cal. SI, 516 (BC, Mitra & 3. K, Mukherjea,
SLC. Limited v. United Bank, AYR. 1970 Cal. $13, 316.

st

“Calcutta case,

Effect of nomina+
ton.


52

Madras case.
Another Calcutta
case.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

8.38. A Divisiod Bench of the Madras High Court in Mohanavelu Mudaliar v.
The Indian Insurance and Banking Corporation Lrd.2 while noticing that dispo-
silion of lile insurance can he classed as (1) assignment, (2) nomination and (3)
creation of a trust by reasoa of the provisions of the Married Women's Property
Act, 1874, observed us follows: —

“Tf, by nomination, a trust is created, then the nominee becomes the bene- .
ficiary, but the difficulty is to find out, from the exact words used. what
the intent'on was, because the terms ‘nomination’ and ‘nominee’ are not,
strictly speaking, terms of art. ‘Nominate’ means only to name and it is
in every instance a question of mixed law and fact as to what the inten-
tion is. Thus, by the expressions used it has to be found out whether the
nomination merely creates & payee or a beneficiary for whose protection
a@ trust is thereby created* Tf the
construction placed upon the declaration is that a trust has been created
under th2 provisions of the Married Women’s Property Act, the beneficiary
would take ihe assured amount free of all the liabilities of the insured
and if it is construed as a mere nomination. the nominee would have no
more right than to receive the amount subject to all the liabilities as if
the disposition was by means of a testamentary instrument.”

“We may add that it is not every nomination that will have the effect of
creating a trust and it is necessary to make a distinction, as has been made
in Macgiilivrays’ Insurance Law, between the creation of a trust and a
simple contract between two persons for the benefit of a third. Such a
simple contract cannot, by itself, be interpreted as creating a trust.”

“Though the dividing ne between the two classes of cases is thin. it is
nevertheless real.”

The facts of the case are of interest. The deceased M had taken out two
life insurance policies of Rs. 5000 each. He had also become indebted to the
LL &B. Corporation. The deceased had nominated his wife as the person en-
titled to receive the moneys due under the policies. The Corporation had, in a
suit against M, attached the policies. The wife had also died, and the daughters
of the couple had filed a petition that the policy moneys had become the assets
of their mother, and were not liable for the decree debt against M. It was held
by the Madras High Court that the nomination could only be construed as a testa-
ment which would be subject to all the liabilities which the assured had to dis-
charge and the claim of the daughter was dismissed.

8.39. In a Calcutta case’, the nomination made by assured in an insurance
policy, was in these terms, “The wife, the nominee, if she be alive on the death

af the assured and this nomination shall be still in force which failing to the
assured or his executors, administrators, assignees or other nominees.” The
High ‘Court held that the “only reasonable interpretation is that the husband:
intended to preserve his right to cancel the nomination. In these circumstances,
section 6, Married Women’s Property Act, can have no application.

IMohanavelu Mudaliar vy. The indian Insurance and Banking Corporation Ltd, (1956)
QM.LJ. 476; LER. (1957) Mad. 326; AIR. 1957 Mad. 115.

®ugidaliar v. LI. & के, Corporation, AR. 1957 Mad, 115, 118,
‘Surojan Bewa v. Hem Chandra, ALR. 1946 Cal. 44


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—-Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

8.40, So much as regards 2 nomination in a policy. The result of this discus-
sion is that a nomination confers on the nomince only a right to collect the

amount, and confers no title.

An assignment of a policy, on the other hand, stands on a different foot-
ing. Under section 38(5) of the Insurance Act, 1938, the effect of an assignment
is that the assignee is the only person entitled to benefit under the policy, and
such a person shall also be subject to all liabilities and cquities to which the

+ assignor was subject at the date of assignment. But a “nomination”, as already

stated’ and as appears from section 39(1) of the Insurance Act, merely means that
the person nominated is the one 10 whom moneys payable under the policy shall
be paid in the event of the death of the assured. Unlike an assignment—which
is irrevocable-—~a nomination may, at any time before the policy matures for
payment, be cancelled or changed. In the event of the policy maluring during
the lifetime of the assured, the nomination will have no effect and the policy
money will, in that event, be payable to the assured. Tt follows that while ‘an
assignee is not merely entitled to receive but has a right to the policy-money-
itself, a nominee is no more than a person who is competent to receive the money
if the assured did not survive the maturity of the policy. He has no title to the
money due under the policy.

841. The meaning of the word “object” of the trust in section 6 is interesting.
In a Madras case,’ the effect of a family arrangement and the consequent cxecu-
tion of a release deed by the defendants who executed it, was considered. Tt was
contended that such a release is invatid and inoperative, having regard to the fact
that the express language of section 6 provides that so long as the object of the
trust remains, it can never become the property of the plaintiff. A query was
raised if the expression “object” in the section means the beneficiary or the pur-

pose. The query was not answered, as there was revocation of the arrangement

by the beneficiaries.

42. On a careful consideration of all aspects of the matter, we have come to
the conclusion that while the present statutory scheme as contained in the various

ptovisions mentioned above, may be complex, the complexity is primarily due _

to legislative anxiety to provide for the variety of results which, in actual life,
persons taking out a life insurance may desire to achieve. The insured may wish
merely to avoid a controversy as between his heirs and the insurer, without more.
For him, nomination is a suitable device.” He may desire to go further, and
decide to transfer all rights under the policy.- He can then resort to assignment.
Or, he may prefer the less elaborate machinery of section 6. if he wishes to
create a trust governed by that section.

The statutory provisions are, thus as varied as the intentions of the insured.
Hence the apparent complexity. Essentially, then, this complexity is unayoid-
able, for the reasons mentioned above. However, it is possible to make one im-

* provement whereby it will be easier than at present to decide, -in a particular

case, whether the arrangement falls or does not fall under section 6. We have in
mind the suggestion made in a judgment of the Madras High Court, to which we
have already-made a reference. We reiterate our recommendation’ to carry out

that suggestion.

{Para 8.37, supra.
*Rnayatullah v. Jeelunee, ALR, 1942 Mad. 136, 138, 139.
*Abhiramavalli ¥. Oficial Trustee, A.LR. 1932 Mad. 222 (Pata 8.29, supra.).

3869 discussion as to point (0) (i), Para 8.29 and 8.30, supra.
8—1 LAD76

53-

Assignment sat
ing on different
footing,

Meaning of “ob-
‘ect” of inst

Recommendation
to amend the In-
surance Act,


Point (¢}—Revoca-
tion of nomination
and, surrender of
policy.

Point ()}—Whether
contingent provi-
sion permissible,

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

To give statutory effect to the suggestion which we have referred. to above,
it would be convenient if a suitable provision is added in the Insurance Act, 1938,
so that the number of controversies as to whether section 6 applies or does not
apply, will be reduced’ to the minimum. We are recommending insertion’ of a
new section* in the Insurance Act. .

8.43. Reverting to section 6 of the Act of 1874, we may state that the next
question relates to the effect of revocation of nomination of a policy. It has been
held in Calcutta that a nomination by the husband on the insurance policy pre-
serving the husband’s right to cancel the nomination, takes the case out of sec-
tion 6. There is also a Calcutta’ ruling to the effect that the policy cannot be
surrendered after a trust is created under section 6.

These rulings do not seem to necessitate any amendment of section 6.

844. Another question that has arisen is whether there can be a confingent
provision for the benefit of the wife and children under section 6.

On this question there is a conflict of views. A Nagpur case’ and an
earlier Bombay case® take a narrow view on the question, namely, that section 6
does not apply if the benefit is. contingent.

The contrary view has been taken by the Calcutta’ and Madras* High
Courts, and also in 8 later Bombay case? namely, that section 6 applies even
if the benefit is made contingent—as, for instance, upon the death of the
husband before the wife. The earlier Bombay case was not cited before the
High Court in the later case.

8.45. In the Calcutta case, it was observed that all life policies, by their very
nature, operate upon a contingency. In endowment policies, two contingencies |
are involved, life of the assured at a certain point of time, or death before that
time, “An endowment. policy is wholly a contract of life insurance; a double
contract of life insurance, the event in one case being death and the event in
the other case being life.” An English! case was relied on, for this conclusion, :
The policy was held to be “on the life of the husband”, and for the benefit of
the wife, it being regarded as immaterial that it was an endowment policy,

गत another point concerning the Insurance Act, see para 8.53, infra.
%See Para 15.7, infra,
§Sarejan v. Kemchander, ALR. 1946 Cal. 44. हि _
4shani Dass ¥. Gopal Chand, A.LR. 1915 Cal. 9, 10,

~ 3Rabibai y. Ratatlal, AR, 1938 Nagpur 321. ।
"Dinbai v. Bamanshu, A.LR. 1934 Bom, 296, 299.

Un re Ashalata Dasi, A.LR. 1940 Cal, 217, para 8.45, infra, :

tq) Abhiram Valli v, Oficial Trusted, A.LR. 1932 Mad, 220, see para 8.30.

(0) Bengal Insurance Ca. |, Velayamwal, AIR. 1937 Mad. $71, 574 (Follows Flees ‘
wood's Policy—[1926], 1 Ch. 48); .

(© Krishnan Chettiar v. Velayee Ammal, A.LR. 1938 Mad. 604, 607.

गे, A, Rodrigues v. B. R. Baliga, ALR. 1967 Bom. 465.
in re Ashglata Dassi, A.LR. 1940 Cal. 217, 218. (Para 8.44, supra).

UGeuld v. Gurtis, (1913) 3 K.B. 84, 95, 97.



Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—iInsurance by Wives and Husbands.)

A Madras case,! takes an intermediate view, holding that until the event
happens, the husband can assign the policy, This interpretation, with respect,
may defeat the section in many cases. On this particular point, we preter the
view taken in a later Madras case,’ namely, that a trust is impressed from the
very beginning.

846. Having considered all aspects of the matter, we have come to the con-

clusion that the wider view should be codified, by an express amendment of *

‘fhe section. We recommend that the section should be so amended as to
cover contingent trusts.

847. The next question arising out of section 6 is this. Can the statutory trust
arising under Section 6 be revoked ?

In a Sind case? it has been observed that the trust under section 6 can-
not be revoked. The case’ was, however, one of assignment. The Court
observed :

“This section is borrowed from the provisions of the English Act (Sec-
tion 10, Married Women's Property Act, 1870), and there is a conflict
im English law as to what the expression ‘object’ means. According to
one view, the expression ‘object means beneficiary; according to another
view, if means purpose vide-(1930) 2 Ch. 37 and (1933) Ch. 1265 ”

“Tt seems to us that it is not necessary to deal with this conflict in the
view [am taking of the effect of the deed of release. Section 6,
Married Women’s Property Act, provides. that the policy money should
not form part of the estate of the insured only so long as the object of
the trust remains. But if the performance of -the trust. becomes im-
possible or the trust fails or otherwise is satisfied or comes to an end,
the policy mouey will form part of the estate of the insured. In (1933)
Ch. 126° Romer L. J., in construing section 11, Married Women’s
Property Act, 1882,—corresponding to section 6 of the Indian Act—
observed that the proviso meant that the policy money's shall not form
part.of the estate of the insured or be subject to his or her debts until
+ the trusts have come to an end.”

* “Therefore, the trust can come fo an end by revocation of it. Section
78(a), Trusts Act, provides that a trust can be revoked where all the
beneficiaries are competent to contract’ by their consent. It was, there-
fore, perfectly competent to the several defendants to revoke the trust
created by the policies in their favour. Under section 58, Trusts Act.
it is also clear that it is competent for a benefici&ry to transfer his
interest. The interest taken by the several defendants under the policies,
though contingent, can be transferred, because the right created under
the policies is not in the nature of a mere right to sue: vide 8 Range 8".
If the beneficiary is capable of transferring his interest, he can also

release it.”

1Lalithambal v. Guardian Ins. Co. ALR. 1937 Mad, 645, 647.

*Kannavalal v. Subbarayya, ALR. 1938, Mad. 413.

'Shamdas ¥. Savitribai, A.LR. 1937 Sind 181, 188,

In re Collier, (1930) 2 Ch. 37:39 LJ. Ch, 241, 143 LT, 329.

* For this point, see para 8.58.

"Cousins v. Sun Life Assurance Society, (1933) Ch. 126: 102 LJ. Ch. 114.
‘Cousins v. Sun Life Asmwance Society, (1933) Ch. 126. पु
'Mayait v. Official Assignee, ALR. 1930 P.C. 17: 8 Range 8: 57 IA 10 (०.0).

35

Recommendation,

(g) Cancellation of
statutory trust,


56

Recommendation
No change.

(ht) Person who
can sue,

Recommendation
to make the po-
licy-boWer क tru-
ste,

Point (i), suit by
widow without re
=Wo of) ० osINGD
tial trustee.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 8—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

_ 8.48. We do not think unat there is any need for amendment of the law as

laid down in the rulings cited above.

849. Then, there is some difficulty as to the person who can sue when the
policy falling within section 6 matures, and there are no specific trustees ;—

@ One view on the subject is that only the Official Trustee can sue,”
Unless the Official. Trustee disclaims the trust, the widow cannot
suc, according to this view.

(1) The second view is that to enforce the provisions of this section, the
teustee must be appointed either by the deed by the husband in his
life-time or by the court under the Indian Trusts Act, and the court
is nol bound to appoint the Official Trustee. This view seems to be
based on the principle that the Official Trustees Act, 1913, which
was passed later than the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874,
overrides section 6. हु

(iii) The third view is represented by a Madras judgment’ and a Cak
cutla case', which hold that the trustee referred to in section 6 ig
not the corporation sole created by the Official Trustees Act, 1913,

8.50. Jt seems to us that this is a yital matter, on which uncertainty should
be avoided. Apart fromthe question of uncertainty, there is a matter of
substance which should be considered. Is it necessary io bring in the Official
Trusles at all? At the time when the Act was enacted (1874), the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 had noi been passed, and the rights and liabilities of the
trustees and beneficiaries had “not beén codified.

The position is different now, and it will be more convenient to make
the policy-holder or his heirs a trustee, in cascs where the policy-holder does
mot appoint a person as a trustee. Such a provision exists in England,' and this
part of the English provision does not appear to have created any serious
difficulty. We, therefore, recommend that the section should be amended on
the lines indicated above. _

851, We notice that the question has arisen whether the widow can sue with-
out recourse to the Official Trustee. In Hari Dassi’s case.’ Lord Willigms J.

of the Calcutta High Court observed :—

“At first sight I was under the impression that the Official Trustee
could not refuse a trust apparently imposed by section 6 upon him, bm,
after further consideration, it seems to me obvious that there are ineon-
sistencies between the provisions of section 6, Married. Women’s
Property Act and the Official Trustees Act of 1913. Under section 7 of
the latter Act, the consent of the official Trustee is required before any
trust can be imposed upon him. He may act as a trustee only if he
thinks fit, and under sub-section (iii) he may decline any trust either
absolutely or accept on such conditions as he may impose. Sub-section हि

अकायाएं v. Sun Life Ass, Co. Ltd., ALR. 1934 Madras 264, 265.

SHari Dassi v. Canadian insurance Co., A..R, 1937 Cal. 379, 380 Gnfra),
ALR. 1955 N.U.C. (Madras) 3895.

‘in रह Ashalaia, ALR, 1940 Cal. 169, 170.

'Section 11, Married. Women’s Property Act, 1882 (78) (Appendix 3),
‘Hari Dass रू, Canadion Insurence Co. ALR, 1937 Cal. 380.


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapier 8&—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

(il) provides that he shall be the sole trustee. These provisions obvious-

ly are: inconsistent with the provisions of section 6, Married Women’s
Property Act, because those provisions are mandatory, and with refer-
ence tw any such sum as is the subject of the present suit, it is prow
vided that he shall stand in the same.position as if he had been duly
appointed trustee thereto by the High Court unden Act 17 of 1864,
section 10 ; that is to say, his consent is to be assumed, because it is
to be assumed that he has been 909 appointed trustee.”

He also said that the Official Trustee Act referred ‘fo in section 6 was
the Act of 1864, whereunder the position of the Official Trustee was different
from the position under the 1913 Act. Hence, the reference to the Aot of
1864 could not be read as a reference to the Official Trustees Act of 1913.

G32. We have already made a recommendation’ to revise that portion of
section 6 which refers to the Official Trustee. In view of this recommenda.
tion, the controversy just now referred to will not survive.

8537 We many now’ refer to section 39(7}, Insurance Act, which reads :

“(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply io any policy of life
insurance to which section 6 of the Married Women's Property Act,
” 4874, applies or has at any time applied:

Provided that where a nomination made whether before or after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946, in favour ‘of
the wife of the person who has insured his life or of his wife and
children or any of them is expressed, whether or not जा the face of
the policy, as being made under this section the said section shall be
deemed not to apply or not ta baye applied to the policy,”

654, The proviso to section 397), Insurance Act, quoted above’ may

ae hardship in certain cases.‘ Where, by mistake, a person creates both
a trust under section 6 of the Act of 1874, aud « nomination under section 39
of th Insurance Act, the question may arise, which of the two should prevail.
Obviosly, as a matter of policy, the trust should prevail, being more benefi-
cial aruil effective so far as the wife and the children are concemed. In regard
fo such-a situation, the rule enacted in the present proviso to section 397
shovld not apply, and we are recommending the addition of a suitable Proviso
to section 39(7), in a later chapter’ of this Report. ~

BSS. We now take up the next point concerning section 6. Where the insur-
ed has not created a tcust in favour of his wife or children, it should be open
to him to create it at any time subsequently during the subsistence of the
policy. At present, section 6 does not seem to allow such a cowsse, but we are
of the opinion एड it should be allowed, haviag regard to the fact that by re-
ason of a change of circumstances since the issue of the policy, it may be meces-
sary for the insured to think about the matter again. .

See discussion under point {h), para 8.50, supra.

"See also pata 5.5. supra, .
"Para 8.53, supra.

“This point is in addition to the point in paragraph 8.42, supra.
Paragraph 15.6, infra.

37

Recommendation

as fo official true”

Bleo,

Point @ Section -
39(7+—Insucance
Act.

Recommendation
to add another
Proviso 4० 5. 3X7},
surance Act.

Recommendation
1२ amend section
6 to. authorise
creation of trust
subsequently.


38

Point (1)—Section
6—Creation of
trust—Recommen-
dation for verbal
change in place of
deeming provision,

Point (m)—Right
of creditors—Am-
endment recom-
mended.

Point {n)-—Section
6(1}—Words refer-
ting to “object"—
Amendments — re-
commended.

Section 6(2)}—Va-
rious periods.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

Such necessity may arise not only where the insured was a bachelor at the time
of the policy, but also where, though married, he did not avail himselt af the
beneficial provisions of the section.

We recommend that this should be provided.

$56. We have already moted' that the English Act contains the words “shall
create a trust in favour of the objects therein named.” These words make the

triist more definite than merely “deeming” it to be a trust as in section 6 of”
the Act of 1874. We are of the view that this wording should be adopted, and
we recommend accordingly. ©

8.57. The next point concerns the rights of creditors. We have noted? that
under section 6, creditors would be entitled, in case of fraud, to a right against
the (entire) proceeds of any such policy, though the word “entire” is not used.
Under the English Act. the creditors are entitled to receive, out of the moneys
payable under the Policy, a sum equal to the premiums so paid. Therefore, in
England the creditors would be entitled to a lesser amount than they would
get in India. ' We think that the English provision should be followed, being
fair to both the creditors and the beneficiaries, and we recommend accor@ingly.

8.58. 11 would appear that in section 6(1), the words “so long as any object
of the trust remains” are ambiguous. The corresponding words in the English
Act® have also been commented upon, as was noticed in a sind case.* We think
that opportunity should be taken of stating the position more definitely, in
this regard. The re-draft which we are recommending in section 6(1) will, it~
is hoped, solve the problem.‘

One result of the amendment which we are proposing will be that, sub-
ject to any contrary intention, a named wife takes an absolute yested interest

_in the policy so that, if she dies before her husband, i{ forms part of her

estate’ This position was established in England after some controversy.”

However, the husband of the woman would have a lien on premiums
paid by him after her death, being payments made by a itustee to preserve tiv
trust. property.*

8.59, This concludes our discussion of section 6(1) Section 6, sub-section (2).
may appear to be complicated in view of the various periods mentioned in that;
sub-section; but.it should be remembered that this has a history. The question
whether section 6 applied or did not apply to Hindus, Muslims, etc., came up,;
in 1913, before a Full Bench of the Madras High Court; and, by its judgment,
dated Ist April, 1913, it answered the question in the affirmative. It appears:
that in 1923, the legislature took a decision as a matter of policy to extend: the;

etc. and while taking. that decision, the legislature}

section to Hindus Muslims, : ० हि हल
recognised the fact that in the Presidency of Madras (as it then existed), this:
- 3

wPara 8.12, point (2), supra.

"Para 8.12, supra. ; हि
‘Section 1), Married Women's Property Act, 1882, (Appendix 3).
‘Shatidas, Bava 847.

SSee para 8.61, infra. हि ह
“Cousins ४. Sun, Life Assurance Society, (1933) Chancery 126.

‘Re Kipatrick's Policy Trust (1966) 2 W.LR. $346.

sRe Smith's dstate, (1997) Chancery 636. .
SAnlamba ¥. Krishnayyd, LR. 37 Mad, 483; ALR, 1914 Madtas 595 (Full: Beneh)


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.-—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

had already been the position since 1913, ie. after the Full Bench decision.
Accordingly, when section 6(2) was amended in 1923, it was provided that the
provisions of sub-section ({}—that is, the substantive provision—shall apply,
in the case of a policy of insurance such as is referred to therein which is
effected by any Hindu, Mahommedan, etc. alter the specified date. The period
specified was, in relation to Madras, “after the 319 day of December. 1913"
and in relation to other areas, “after the first day of April, 1923°. In 1959,
the Married Women’s Property (Extension) Act, 1959, effective as from 1st
March, 1960, was enacted to extend the Act to the whole of India except the
State of Jammu and Kashmir. Consequently, it became necessary to amend
seclion 6(2) again, by specifying a period for the operatiag of section 6 in
regard to the territories to which the Act previously did not extend. Accord-
ingly, the section was amended in 1959, not by mentioning any specific date
as.such in this context, bur by using a formula referring to the commencement
of the Extension Act of 1959. Thus, with reference o the application of the
provisions of section 6 in various areas, three periods are now material. as
follows:

(i) Period after the 31st day of December, 1913—-in relation to Madras;

Gi) period after the Ist day of April, 1923-—in relation to other parts

of British India; -
Gi?) period on or after the Jst March. 1960—in relation to the rest of
India except the State of Jummmu and Kashmir.

VII. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS IN THIS CHAPTER

860. We may summarise the recommendations made in this Chapter as fol-
lows: —
+ G) Endowment policies should be brought within section 6 by a clari-
ficatory amendment! -
(ii) The insurers should adopt, in the policy of life insurance, the
formula used in section 6, where the assured intends that* section
6 should be attracted. Further, the insurance Act should be amend-
. ed for the purpose.‘a
(4) Children’ should be brought withia the benefit of section 6.

fav) Section 6 should be extended so as to allow contingent. trusts.‘

(vy), The policy-holder or his heir should bé the trustee where no one
is appointed ‘as a trustee. °

(vi) Where, jn respect of the moneys payable under the policy of insu-
tance, the insured has created a trust under section 6 of the Married
Women’s Property Act, 1874, and also made a nomination, then, the
nomination, whether or not it refers’ to section 39, shall be disregard-
cd. The Insurance Act should be amended for the purpose by ad-
ding a second proviso to section 39(7) thereof.

tPara §.22, supra.
*Para, 8.30, supra.
2Para 8.42, supra,
"Para 8.33, supra.
‘Para 8.46, supra
‘Para 8.50, supra.
"Para 8.54, supra.

Summary of re-
commendations in
this chapter,


Re-draft of section
6).

of, s. 11 English
Act of 1882.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands.)

(vii) Where the policy effected by a person is not, at the time when it is
effected, expressed on the face of it to be for the benefit of any of
the persons mentioned in sub-section (1), the insured should have a
tight too at any time subsequently during the subsistence of the
policy, to create the trust.

(viii) The English Act contains the words “shall create a trust in favour of,
the objects thereiri named.” These words make the trust “more
definite than merely “deeming” it to be a trust as in section 6. This
wording should be adopted*

(ix) Under section 6, creditors would be entitled, in case of fraud, to a
right against the (entire) proceeds of any such policy, though the
word “entire” is not used. Instead, the creditors’ should be entitled
to receive, out of the moneys payable under the Policy, a sum equal
to the premiums so paid.*

(x) In section 6(1), the words “so long as any object of the trust remains”
are ambiguous. Opportunity should be taken of stating the position
more definitely, in this regard. A re-draft is recommended.‘

One result of the amendment recommended will be that, subject to any

contrary intention, a named wife will take an absolute vested interest in the
policy so that, if she dics before her husband, it will form part of her estate.*

8.61. [n the light of the above discussion, we recommend’ that in place of sec-_
tion 6(1), the following sub-sections should be substituted:
“(1) A policy of insurance effected by any married man on his own life, -

and expressed to be on the face of it for the benefit of his wife, or of his -

children, or of his wife and children, or any of them, shall create a trust

for the benefit of his wife, or of his children or of his wife and children, ©

or any of them, according to the interest so expressed, and the moneys

payable thereunder shall not, so long as any object of the trust can be.

performed .and remain§ unperformed, form part of the estate of the in-
sured or be subject to his debts:

Provided that if it is proved that the policy was effected and the premiums

paid with intent to defraud the creditors of the insured, they shall be entitled to

receive, out of the moneys payable under the Policy, a sum equal to the pre-
miums so paid. पर निया

(LA) Where the policy effected by a person is not, at the timp “when it is-
‘effected, expressed on the. face of it to be for the benefit of any. f the persons .
mentioned in sub-section (1), the insured may, at any time during the subsistence
of the policy’, intimate to the insurer_in writing his decision that the policy should
be for the benefit of his wife or of his chitdren or of his wife and. children or
pny of them: and, on receipt of such intimation by ‘the insurer, the ‘provisions of
this section shall, as far as may be, apply. as they apply to a policy to which
sub-section (1) applies. .

ara 8.55, supra.
"Para 8.56, supra!
"Para 8.57, supra,
‘Para 8.58, supra.
48६ to Insurance Act, see Chapter 15, infra.

‘Some altcrmative wording to be borrowed from the Insurance Act can be employed

instead of the word “subsistence”, if found to bo more appropriate.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 8.—Insurance by Wives and Husbands. Chapter 9.—-Legal Proceedings.)

(IB) The insured may, by the policy or by any memorandum under his
hand, appoint a trustee or trustees of the moneys payable under the policy, and
from time to time appoint a new trustee or new trustees thereof, and may make
provisions for the appointment of a mew trustee or new trustees thereof and for
the investment of the moneys payable wader any such policy.

(९) in defautt of any such appointment of a trustee, such policy, imme-
diately on its being effected, shall vest in the insured and his legat representative,
in trust for the persons aforesaid. .

(ID) Jf, at the time of the death of: the insured, or at any time after-
words, there shall be no trustee, or it shall be expedient to appoint a new trustee
or ब new. trustees, a new trustee or new trustees may be appointed by any court
having jurisdiction under the provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

(LE) The receipt of a trustee or trustees duly appointed, or in defauli of
any such appointment, or in defatlt of natice to the insurer, the receipt of the
legal representatives of the insured, shall be a discharge to the insurer for the
sum secured by the policy, or for the value thereof, in whole or in part, as the
case may be.

(Explanations to be added),

Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, an endowment policy is
@ policy of insurance on life.

Explanation 2.—The provisions of this section shalt apply whether or not
the benefit conferred in the manner specified in sub-section (1) 18 contingent,

Explanation 3.

[This should ensure that policies under the present Act also get the
benefit of the new section].

CHAPTER 9
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

9.1. Legal proceedings by and against married women are dealt with in section
7, which reads: —

“7, A married woman may maintain a suit in her own name for the
recovery of property of any description which, by force of the said Indian
Succession Act, 1865, or of this Act, is her separate property; and she
shall have, in her own name, the same remedies, both civil and criminal

against all persons, for the protection and security of such property as if
she were unmarried, and she shall be Hable to such suits, processes and
orders it respect of such property as she would be liable to if she were
unmarried.”

This section follows section 11 of the Married Women’s Property Act.
1870 (33 & 34 Vict., c. 93), that section was repealed by the Married Women's
Property Act, 1882 (44 and 46 Vic. Chapter 75),
9--1 LADITG

Section 7,


52

Verbal changes re-
commended.

Section 7, latter
half.

Recommendation
to make section 7
comprehensive a6
to liability.

Recommeriation
to extend section
7 to Hindu and
Muslim women,

9.2.

in this report.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 9.—Legal Proceedings.)

It would be convenient to indicate, at the outset, certain verbal changes
that are required in the section. In the first place, the reference in the section

to the Succession Act, 1885, should be replaced by a reference to the Indian
Succession Act, 1925. Secondly, the mentioning of “separate” (property) should
be deleted, haying regard to the changed scheme which we are recommending

These changes will be required even if the present structure of

sections 7 to 10 is maintained. However, we may mention that we are separately
recommending! complete redrafts of sections 7 to 10 and if those redrafts are
accepted, the section will appear in a different form altogether—without, of -
course, affecting the substance except as indicated below.

93.

married”.

9.4.

that the section should be revised for the purpose.

A difficult problem is presented by ‘the latter half of section 7 which
begins with the words “and she shall be liable to such ‘suits, processes and
orders in respect of such property as she would be liable to if she were un-

This part of the section raises a problem of construction.

Does it limit the property liable? Or does it limit the suit. order or
process to which the married woman is to be subject? Presumably, the first
construction was intended, but the wording could, in that case, be made more
clear by avoiding repetition of the word “such”.

Such case law as is available under section 7 has been examined’-", but it
does not discuss this aspect at length, since the point was not material.

Whatever be the true construction of the section as it is now worded, we
are of the view that a married woman should, in respect of the matters dealt
with in the section, be placed on the same footing as an unmarried woman, and

It is true that no woman

has ever been debarred from suing or being sued. but it is desirable to make the

statement of the law comprehensive. The obsolete theory of unity of the spouses”
should be put an end to, by an express provision. A married woman should, in

all respects, be placed on the same footing as an unmarried woman.

In coming to this conclusion, we have been impressed by the considera-
tion that the common law concept of merger, on which the requirement about
the joinder of the husband to litigation against the wife is based, is out of date.
The principle of unity of the spouses has been modified by the Act, but what
remains of that principle, should be put an end to.
recommending a change as above,

That is cur main reason for -

95. We now come to another point concerning section 7. It is obvious that
section 7 and also sections 4 and 5—provide for exceptions to the concept- of
the common law that the personality of the married woman merges with that of
her husband on her marriage and that, as such, she cannog sue or be sued with-
out impleading her husband even in respect of her separate property. The latter,

Part of section 2 of the Act, however, provides that these provisions (sections 4,

5 and 7) do not apply to certain married women specified in section 2—e.¢.,
Hindu and Muslim women.

Chapter 14, infra,
Chapter 9.1, swpra.
Harris v. Harris, (1875) LL.R, 1 Cal. 285.
‘Allamuddt v, Brahan, (1877) LL.R. 4 Cal, 140.
$n re : Mantel, (1895) LR, 18 Mad, 15.

Mrs, Goudoin v. Venkatesan, (1907) LL-R. 30 Mad, 378.


. Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 9.—Legal Proceedings. Chapter 10.—Wife’s Liahibity jor Post-Nuptial हि

Debts.)

We are of the view that a statutory provision to the effect that the dis-

ability docs not apply to any married woman in India should, in suitable
language, be inserted in the Act.
95.4. No doubt, section 2 of the Act of 1874 shows that Hindus and Mustims
are, taken as governed by their personal law, which does not recognise the legal
unity of the spouses. But, in our view, the principle incorporated in section 7
should be expressly extended to Hindus, Muslims etc. in order to avoid any
arguments that women belonging to these communities are subject to the doctrine
of unity.

We think that opportunity should be taken of making the section com-
prehensive in this regard.

In short—

(a) so far as women other than Hindu and Muslim women are concern-
ed, the amendments recommended by us will make the provisions
more comprehensive than at present;

(b) so far as Hindu and Muslim women are concerned, the amendment
recommended will re-state the position which is now accepted, not by
virtue of the Act of 1874, but by general law.

The new provisions will, thus, avoid doubts in all respects as to the
correct legal position in regard to the liability of married women in matters that
could be raised in civil litigation.

CHAPTER 10.
WIFE'S LIABILITY FOR POST-NUPTIAL DEBTS

10.1. The liability of a wife for post-nuptial debts is dealt with in section है;
which reads—

“8. Wife's liability for post-nuptial debts—It a married woman (whether
married before or after the first day of January, 1866) possesses separate
property, and if any person enters into a contract with her with reference
to such property, or on the faith that her obligation arising out of such
contract wifl be satisfied out of her separate property, such person shall’
be entitled to sue her, and, to the extent of her separate property, to
recover against her whatever he might have recovered in such suit had
she been unmarried at the date of the contract and continued unmartied
at the execution of the decree:

“Provided that nothing herein contained shall :—

(a) entitle such person to recover anything by attachment and sale or
otherwise out of any property which has been transferred to a woman
or for her benefit on condition that she shall have no power during
her marriage to transfer or charge the same of her beneficial interest
therein or

(0) affect the liability of a husband for dedts contracted by his wife's
agency expressed or implied.”

63

Extension of prin-
ciple of section 7
to Hindus, Mus-
dims ete,

Section 8


64

Recommendation.

Section 8, proviso
2 law.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 10.—Wife’s Liability for Post-Nuptial Debts.)

10.2. In this section, the following changes are required :—

(i) removal of the word “separate” occurring before the word “pro-

on

perty”.
(ii). deletion of proviso (a), which relates to restraint on anticipation?

We recommend accordingly.

10.3, The proviso to section 8 was revised in 1929, and its history is interest-
ing. While section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act recognised the validity
of a restraint on alienation in respect of married women belonging to certain
communities, there was, previously, no statutory provision laying down the law
as to whether property in respect of which such a restraint on alienation had
been imposed could be attached in execution of a decree in satisfaction of
liabilities of the married women. In England, it has been held* that the pro-
perty could not be attached. In India, because of the absence of a specific
provision on this point, some High Courts—namely, Caicuttat aod Bombay'—
held that a creditor of the married woman could enforce his claim against pro-
perty which a married woman had been restrained from alienating. In doing so,
these High Courts mainly relied on sections 7 and 8 of the Married Women’s
Property Act as they then stood. Under section 7, a married woman may sue
or be sued in her own name in respect of her separate property, and under
section 8 (as it then stood) a person entering into a contract with a married
woman, with reference to her separate property may sue and recover against her
to the extent of that property. The- Madras: High Court, on the other hand,
held that these two sections of the Married Women’s Property Act did not come
in the way of the restraint on alienation being enforced to the extent of prevent-
ing attachment also. Accordingly to the Madras High Court, the legislature
had not shown any intention to ignore such conditions. This view was taken
by the Madras High Court in two cases‘-'. In taking this view, the Madras High
Court relied also on the fact that after the Married Women’s Property .Act,
1874, the legislature had, in section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882,
given statutory effect to the doctrine of restraint on anticipation. According tz
the Madras High Court, the restraint on anticipation is recognised and enforce-
able in India and its operation is not affected by section 8 of the Maurried
Women’s Property Act. Decrees passed in accordance with section 8 against a
separate properly, if any, of a married woman in respect of her contracts could
not be operative against property which she was restrained from alienating
because to hold otherwise would render the restraint upon anticipation absolute-
ly inoperative. Procedural rules authorising altachments could not also be read
as authorising the attachment of property which, by a rule of substantive law,—
now embodied in section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act,—is incapable of
being transferred or charged by the beneficiary. The second Madras case"
cites a number of English cases; but it is unnecessary to discuss them here. The
principal consideration which weighed with the Madras High Court was that
any other view would render the restraint inoperative.

1568 also Chapter 14, infra.

See discussion as to “Restraint on anticipation”, Chapter 15, infra.
*Chapman v. Biggs, (1883) 11 Q.B.D. 27.

‘Hippolite ¥. Stuart, (1885) LL.R. 12 Caleutta 522.

*Curselji ¥. Rustomji, (1887) LL.R. 11 Bombay 348.

मूत्र re Manial and Mantal (1895) I.L.R. 18 Madras 199.

'Goudoin v. Venkatasa Afudally, (1907) LL.R. 30 Madras 377, 378.
*Goudoin v. Venkatasa Mudally, (1907) LL.R. 30 Madras 377, 380.


Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 10.—Wife’s Liability for Post-Nuptial Debts. Chapter 11.—Ante-
Nuptial Debts. Chapter 12.—Husband’s Liability for Wife’s Breach of Trust
or Devastation.)

10.4. In view of this confilict of decisions, kegislative action became necessary.
In 1929, the Legislature, while amending the Transfer of Property Act, also
amended section 8 of the Married Women’s Property Act, by expressly providing
that decrees passed against a married woman under section 8 could not be
executed by attachment or sale of the property which she was restrained from

alienating during marriage.

We have discussed this history to show the connection between section 8
of the Act of 1874 and section 10 of the Transfer of Property Act. We may
state here that we are recommending deleting of the proviso to section 10 of
the Transfer of Property Act.’

CHAPTER 11

ANTE-NUPTIAL DEBTS

V1.1. Section 9 provides that the husband is not liable for the ante-nuptial
debts of the wife. It reads: ' हु
“9, Husband not liable jor wife's ante-nuptial debts.—A husband mat-
ried after the thirty-first day of December, 1865 shall not, by reason only
of such marriage, be liable to the debts of his wife contracted before
marriage, but the wife shall be liable to be- sued for, and shall, to the
extent of her separate property, be Jjable to satisfy such debts as if she
had continued unmarried:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall invalidate any con-
tract into which a husband may, before the passing of this Act, have
entered in consideration of his wife’s ante-nuptial debts.”
In this: section, the expression “separate” should be deleted, and we re-
शाला accordingly? We are also recommending restructuring of Sections
0. :
CHAPTER 12

HUSBAND'S LIABILITY FOR, WIFE'S BREACH
OF TRUST OR DEVASTATION

12.1, The fiction of the unity of the husband and wife Jed to several rules,
and one of the rules pertained to the field of liability of the husband for the
wrongs committed by the wife. A species of such (civil) wrongs, is breach of
trust or devastation, It was considered necessary to deal specifically with such
liability, in section 10. The section reads—
“40, Where a woman is a trustee, executrix or administratrix, either
before or after marriage, her husband shall not, unless he acts or inter-
meddles in the trust or administration, be liable for any breach of trust
committed by her, or for any miapplication, loss or damage to the estate
of the deceased caused or made by her, or for any 1085 to such estate
arising from her neglect to get in any part of the property of the deceas-
ed.”
Tn a sense,
jg liable for the wife's wrongs.

the section constitutes a negation’ of the rule that the husband

iChapter 15, infra.
%See also Chapter 14, infra.

Amendment
1929.

Section 9.

Section 10.

65

of


66 Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapser 12.—#Husband's Liability for Wife's Breach of Trust or Devastation.
Chapter 13.—Other Matters.)

12.2. The principle of the section needs no change. However, we are recom-
mending a restructuring of sections 7 to 10 of the Act’, which will sender
retention of section in the present form unnecessary.

Recommendation.

CHAPTER 13
OTHER MATTERS

Suits between spo. 13.1, Apart from questions arising out of the provisions of the Act of 1874,
we पं eae there are certain other matters which indirectly relate to the proprietary aspect
tics and liability of marriage. We propose to mention here three of them, in order to make our
of husband for his Giscussion comprehensive, though it may not be feasible in this Report to

wife's torts.
recommend amendment of the law on all of them.

(1) Suits between spouses.

In England, statute now provides that each of the parties to marriage
has the same right of action in tort against the other as if ‘the parties were not
married? There is one restriction in this regard, namely, when an action in
tort is brought by one party to the marriage against the other during marriage,
the Court may stay the action if—

(a) it appears that no substantial benefit? would accrue to either party

from continuance of the proceedings, or

(b) the question could be more conveniently disposed of under section

17, Married Women’s Property Act, 1882.

We do not propose to make any recommendation on the subject, as it

js not concerned with the property of.a married woman as such.

(2) Liability of a wife to third persons.

In England, under the Law Reform Act of 1935*, a married woman may
be sued for her torts, and is subject to the law relating ‘to bankruptcy and to
the enforcement of judgments and orders in all respects as if she were a feme
sole. Before that Act,—

0) any damages recovered against her would be levied only out of her

separate property not restrained from anticipation, and

(ii) she could aot be made bankrupt unless she was carrying on a

separate trade.

We are recommending the adoption of this section’ in another Chapter
since we find the provision to be in harmony with modern notions.

(3) Liability of a husband for his wife’s torts.

Another change made by the Law Reform Act of 1935°, may be noted.
At common law, 8 husband was liable to be joined with his wife in ail actions
for torts committed by the wife during the subsistence of the marriage.

iChapter 14, infra
agection 1, Law Reform (Husband and Wife} Act, 1962. (Appendix 6).

see 241 HL. Debates, 5th Series, Col, 1104, for the meaning of “substantial”.
‘Section 1, Law Reform (Married Women's and Tort feasors) Act, 1935, (Appendix 4).

‘Chapter 14, infra,
‘Section 3, Law Reform (Married Women and Tort feasors) Act, 1935, (Appendix 4),


Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 13.-~Other Matters. Chapter 14—Recommended Amendments in
the Act of 1874 by way of Simplification in a few Sections.)

The House of Lords decided that this liability had not been taken away
by the Act of 1882. Now, the 1882 Act had taken away the husband’s interest
in the wife’s property, but he still remained liable for the wife’s torts. This
was unjust. In Newton v. Hardy, for example, a woman plaintiff recovered
damages from the defendant for the enticement of the plaintiffs husband by
the defendant's wife. The Act of 1935 remedied this injustice?

We arc separately recommending’ ‘the adoption of this provision, in
another Chapter since we find it rational and in tune with modern notions.

CHAPTER 14
RECOMMENDED AMENDMENTS IN THE ACT OF 1874
BY WAY OF SIMPLIFICATION IN A FEW SECTIONS
14.1. We have, in the preceding Chapters, made certain specific recommenda-
tions for amendment of the Act. Besides the specific amendments recom-

mended in each Chapter, we may mention here that the drafting of some
séctions of the Act. in respect of which we have suggested removal of the word

‘separate’, is capable of improvement and simplification, and opportunity should
be taken of simplifying them. We recommend that the following new sections
should be substituted in place of existing sections 7 to 10. In consequence,
sections 4 and 3 can be deleted.
Hence, our recommendations are as follows:
Existing sections 4 and 5
Existing sections 4 and 5 should be deleted, in view of the revised sections
7 to 10 recommended below.
Revised sections 7 to 10
7. Subject to the provisions of section 10, a married woman shall—

{a) be capable of acquiring, holding and disposing of, any property:

(b) be capable of rendering herself, and being rendered. Jiable in respect
of any tort, contract, debt or obligation:

(c) be capable of suing and being sued, either in fort or in contract or
otherwise. and

(0) be subject to the law relating to bankruptcy and to the enforcement
of judgments and orders:

in all respects as if she were a feme sofe.

8. Subject to the provisions of section 10, all property which—

(6) iramediately before the passing of this Act was the separate property
of a masried woman or held for her separate use in equity: or

(b) belongs at the time of her marriage to a woman married after the
passing of this Act: or

(९) after the passing of this Act is acquired by or devolves upon a married
woman, shall blong to her in all respects as if she were a feme sole

° and may be disposed of accordingly.

‘Newton v. Hardy, (1933) 149 L.T. 165.
Section 3, Law Reform etc. Act, 1935,
*Chapter 14, infra.

6?

Recommendations
as to section 4
and 7 to 10.

Capacity of mat-
tied women (Cf.
section 1, English
Act of 1935),

Property of mar-
tied women {Cf.
section 2, English
Act of 1935).


68°

Abolition of hus-
band’s liability for
wife's torts and
aotenuptial — con-
tracts, debts, and
obligations, (Cf.
section Eng!
Act of 1935).

Savings.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 14.—Recommended Amendments in the Act of 1874 by way of Simptifi-

cation in a Few Sections.)

9. Subject to the provisions of section 10, the husband of a married
woman shall not, by reason only of his being her husband, be liable—

(a)

(0)

10.
@

)

(०)

in respect of any tort committed by her whether before or after the
marriage, or in respect of any contract entered into, or debt or obliga-
fion incurred, by her before the marriage; or

to be sued, or made a party to any legal proceeding brought, in res-
pect of any such tort, contract, debt or obligation.

(1) Nothing in sections 7 to 9 shall—

during coverture which began before the . day of
affect any property to which the title (whether vested or contingent
and whether in possession, reversion or remainder) of a married
woman accrued before that date, except property held for her sepa-
rate use in equity:

affect any legal proceeding in respect of any tort if proceedings had
been instituted in respect thereof before the passing of this Act; ~

enable any judgement or order against a married woman in respect
of a contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred. before the
passing of this Act, to be enforced in bankruptcy or to be enforced
otherwise than against her property.

2. For the avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing in sec-
tions 7 to 9—

@

<b)

©)

@

shall render the husband of a married woman liable in respect of am 9,
contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred, by her after the
marriage in respect of which he would not have been liable if this

Act had not been passed;

shall exempt the husband of a married woman from liability in res-
pect of any contract entered into, or debt or obligation (not being a
debt or obligation arising out of the commission of a tort) incurred,
by her after the marriage in respect of which he would have been
liable if this Act had not been passed ;

shall prevent a husband and wife from acquiring, holding, and dispos-
ing of, any property jointly or as tenants in common, or from render-
ing themselves, or being rendered jointly in respect of any tort, con-
tract, debt or obligation, and of suing and being sued either in tort
or in contract or otherwise, in like manner as if they were not
married ;

shall prevent the exercise of any joint power given to a husband wand
wife.

Date of commencement of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
CHAPTER 15
AMENDMENTS IN OTHER ACTS
I. INTRODUCTORY.

ISA, In this Chapter, we shall discuss briefly the amendments that are requir-
ed in Acts other than the Act of 1874, in consequence of cur recommendations
in this Report. The Acts to be considered are :

@ the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
Gi) the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;

Gii) the Insurance Act, 1938:

Gy) the Indian Succession Act, 1925.

In the last mentioned Act, we are not recommending any amendment,
* but we shall briefly consider the question whether any changes are needed.

If, TRANSFER GF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.

45.2. We have carlisr’ referred to the proviso to section 10‘of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882, under which property can be transferred to a married
woman who is not a Hindu or a Muslim, with a condition restraining her abso~
Iutely from alienating it during marriage. This provision is in derogation of the
general rule enacted by scotion 10 in its main paragraph,.prohibiting the impo-
sition of an absolute restraint on alienation. In our view, the proviso is not
justified, in view of the growing social consciousness in the country, Christians
and Parsis~-to whom the proviso primarily applies,—are not less educated than
others. There is no such restriction for other communities. The proviso is
linked up with section 8, Married Women’s Property Act. In our new scheme,
its deletion is unavaidable.

15.3. Having taken into account the social conditions of the preseat day and
the considerations mentioned above,’ we are of the view that in section 10 of the
Transfer of Property Act, the proviso relating to restraint on alienation should
now be removed, and we recommend accordingly.

वा. INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.

15.4. Provisions concerning restraint on alienation occur also in the Trusts Act.
ip an earlier Chapter, we have recommended amendment of sections 56 and 58
of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

We recommend that in section 56 of the Trusts Act, the last paragraph
should be deleted, and in section 58 of that Act, the proviso should be deleted.
The revised sections will then read as under:
Revised sedtions 56 and 58, Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

“36. The beneficiary is entitled to bave the intention of the author of the
trust specifically executed to the extent of the beneficiary’s interest:

*Para 5.7, supra,
’Para 15.2, supra,

"See para 5.12, supra,
30-35 LAD/76

69

Introductory.

Section 10, Trans-
fer of — Property
Act, 1882.

Recommendation

to amend section
10, Transfer of
Property Act.

Provisions in the
‘Trust Act—Ra-

Right 10 specific
execution.


710

Right to transfer
of possession.

Right to _ transfer
of, beneficial inter-
- est.

Section 390), In-
surance Act, 1938,

‘Nomination and
trust.

Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Chapter 15.—Amendments in Other Acts.)

and, where there is only one beneficiary and he is competent to contract,
or where there are several beneficiaries and they are competent to cont
tract and all of one mind, he or they may require the trustee to transfer
the trust-property to him or them, or to such person as he or they may
direct.

(Last paragraph of section 56 to be deleted)
(ustrations as at present).

“58. The beneficiary, if competent to contract, may transfer his interest,
but subject to the law for the time being in force as to the circumstances
and extent in and to which he may dispose of such interest.

{Proviso to be deleted).
IV. INSURANCE ACT, 1938.

15.5. In view of certain points discussed in this Report’ in connection with
section 6, a few changes are required in the Insurance Act, 1938.- The first

point concems section 39(7) of that Act, which reads

“(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any policy of life
insurance to which section 6 of the Married: Women’s Property Act, 1874,
applies, or has, at any time, applied:

Provided that where a nomination made, whether before or after the com-
mencement of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1946, in favour of the wife
of the person who has insured his life or of his wife and children or any
of them is expressed, whether or not,-on the face of the policy, as being

. made under this section the said section 6 shall be deemed not to apply
or not to have applied to the policy.”

15.6. The point which arises out of the proviso to section 397) of the Insurance
Act, quoted above." may be thus stated. A person who decides to create a trust
under section 6 may, by misunderstanding of the law or through slip or igncrance,
entér also a nomination-in the policy. In such a case, what should prevail is
the trust under section 6, and not the nomination. However, as the proviso to
section 39(7) now stands, it is possible to take the view that the nomination
overrides the trust. In our opinion, it is desirable to prevent such 2 situation
from arising, and an amendment to section 39(7), proviso, Insurance Act, on this
point is, in our opinion, desirable.*

~ We are also of the view that it is desitable to insert, in the policy, a
specific note, impressing it upon the insured that if he creates in trust under
section 6, he shall not make a nomination under section 39 of the Insurance Act.
We are proposing a suitable provision on this point in the new section 39A,-
Insurance Act* which we are recommending.

Besides the points stated just now, section 397) of the Insurance Act.
will require another change so as to add a mention of ‘children’. This change is:
consequential on our recommendation to expand the stope of section 6 of the
Act of 1874 so aa to authorise a trust for children.

3Chapter 8, supra.

"Pera 15.5, supra.

3566 also para 8.54, aupra,
‘See para 15.7, Infra.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 15.—A mendments in Other Acts.)

To give effect to the above propositions, we recommend that sub-section
(7) of section 39 of the Insurance Act should now be revised as follows:

““7) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any policy of life
insurance to which section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874,
applies or has at any time applied:

Provided that where-a nomination made whether before or after the
commencement of the Insurance (Amendment) ‘Act, 1946, in favour of
the wife of the person who has insured his life or of his wife and children
or his children or any of them is expressed, whether or not on the face of
the policy, as being made under this section, the said section 6 shall be
deemed not to apply or not to have applied to the policy.” -

Provided. however, that where, in respect of the moneys payable under
any policy of insurance. the insured has created a trust under section 6
of the Married Women's Property Act, 1874, and also made a nomina-

* dion, then the nomination, whether or not it refers to this section, shall
Prevail be disregarded.”

15.7, So much as regards section 3907) cf tbe Insurance Act. There is another
amendment needed in that Act. We have,' while dealing with section 6 of the
Act of 1874, pointed out the need for inserting a specific provision in the
Insurance Act as to jife policies, in regard to the statement to be made as to
whether the assured wishes to avail bimself of section 6 of the Act of 1874.
Accordingly, we recommend that a provision should be added in the Insurance
Act, 1938,—say, as section 39A,—as.follows:— .

Section 39A, Insurance Act, 1938
tto be added)
“394. (1) Every policy of life insurance shall—

@ contain a column or, paragraph wherein a statement could be made
as to whether the person insured has decided to avail himself of the
provisions of section 6 of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874,
and

{b) if the person insured has communicated to the insurer his decision to
that effect. contain the following statement—
‘This policy is for the bemefit of ,,....... ..---०--००-- and the following
-persons are the trustees for the purposes of section 6 of the Married
Women’s Property Act, 1874’, and

<c) if the person insured has not communicated to the insurer his
decision to avail himself of the said section.6, contain a statement to
that effect. °

(2) To the column or paragraph referted to in clause (a) of sub-section
(1), there shall be attached a foot-note indicating that where the insured fills up
that column, by making the statement referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1),
he shall not make a nomination under section 39”

TPara 8.42, aupra,

Section 39A, Insu-

1938

(New section to
incerted)

vance Act,
te 4

b.

2


72

Succession Act.

,

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874
(Chapter 18.—Amendments in Other Acts.)

V. INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925.

15.8. We now deal with the question whether any changes are needed in the
Indian Succession Act, 1925, Our recommendations in regard to the Act of
1874 raise certain questions relating to sections 20, 21 and 22 of the Succession
Act. (AIL these sections are confined, practically, to non-Hindu and non-Mus-
Jims). The following points may be made in this connection.

(a) In theory, section 20 could be repealed, in view of the proposed com-
prehensive provisions relating to property of the married women; but the subject
dtalt with in section 20 is also dealt with in section 21 (see below).

(0) Repeal or transfer of section 21 creates some difficulties, because—

G) it is itself referred to in section 22,—-which deals with marriage settle: _

ments—of different topic ; and

(ii) section 21 contains a rule of private international law, more appro-

priate in the Succession Act. .

(©) Section 22 deals with marriage setilements—which is a topic outside
the scope of the present Report. - .

In view of the above considerations, we do not propose to disturb these
sections of the Succession Act, and we have come to the conclusion’ that they

need not be repealed or amended. The over-lapping, if any, between section 20,
Succession Act and new section 2 of the proposed Act (replacing the 1874 Act),

is a very minor one.


Married Women's Property Act, 1874

We would like to-place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable assistance
we have received from Shri Bakshi, Member-Sectetary of the Commission in the preparation

of this Report,

see ooChairman

P. B. Gajendragadkar
...Member

P. K. Tripathi

van sitter Member

8. 8, Dhar.
sv: Member
P, Sea-Varma
’ _..Member
B.C. Mitra हे ~
M. Bakshi ऐप cessssissseeus fein ber-Secretary.
P. M. Bakshi

Dated the 12th May, 1976
New Delhi

73


Short title and ex-
tent.

Capacity of mar-
ried women. (Cf.
wection 1, English
Act of 1935),

“Property of | mar-
tied women, (Cf.
section 2. English
Act of 1935).

Abolition of hus-
band’s liab:lity for
wife’s torts and
antenup‘ial  con-
tracts, debts and
obligations. (Cf.
section 3. Englist
Act of 1935).

Savings. (Cf. En-
gtish ‘Ret of 1935).

APPENDIX 1
THE MARRIED WOMEN (PROPERTY ane MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL,
7

ee

A Bill to declare and amend the law relating to married women 2946: Sher pure
pases. —

Wheress it is desirable to amend the law relating 4 the property, tichts and liable

lites ef married women who do not profess the. गद्य Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or
Jaina teligion 3 ¢ हु हु

__ And whereas it is desirable to deciare the law relating to suits and other Tegal pi
ceedings in tespect of married women who profess the Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist,
Sikh or Jaina religion ;

And whereas it is desirabie-to re-state the law relating to policies of life insurance in
relation to married women, i

Be it enacted by Parliament in the +? year ‘of the Republic of India,

as follows:

1. (1) This Act may be called the Mar.ied Women (Property and Miscellaneous Pro-
visions) Act, 1976. 5

(2) Tt extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir,

2 Subject to the provisions of section 5, & married woman shall
(a) be capable of acquiring, holding and disposing of, any property ;

10) be capable of rendering herself, and being rendered, liable in respect of any tort,
contract, debt or obligation ;

{c) be capable of suing and being sued, either in tort or in contract or otherwise;
an

(व) be subiect to the law relating to insulvency and to the enforcement of judgements
and orders;

Tn all respects as if she were unmarried.

3. Subject to the provisions of section 5, all property which—
immediately before the _* was the separate
property of a married we in equity; or .
{b} at the time of her marriage belongs to 3 woman married after the said date;
or
tc) after the said date is acquired by or devolves upon a married women,
shall belong to her in all respects as if she were unmarried and may be disposed of
accordingly.

fa)

4. Subject to the provisions of section 5, the husband of a married woman shall not,
by reason only of his being her husband, be liable—

fa) in respect of any tort committed by her whether before or after the mar-
riage, or in respect of any contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred, by
her before the marriage; or

(b) to be sued, or made a party to any legal proceeding brought, in respect
of any such tort, contract, debt or obligation.

For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sections 2 to

19) shall render the husband of a married woman liable in respect of any con-
tract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred, by her after the marriage in res-
pect of which he would not have been liable if this Act had not been passed ;

"As to the word “Jaina”, see Constitution, article 25, Explanation 2. हु Lo
ace
‘Usual enacting formula to be used.
3As to the past the existing Act of 1874 will take care; see soction 6, Central Clauses
Act. 1897, -

‘Date of commencement of the new Act of 1976.
74


\

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(Appendix 1.—The Married Women (Property and Miscellaneous Provistons) Bill, 1976.)

(0) shalt exempt the husband of a married woman from liability in respect
of any contract entered into, or debt or obligation (not being a debt or obligation
arising out of the commission of a tort) incurred, by her after the marriage in
fespect of which he would have been liable if this Act had not been passed;

: (©) shall prevent a husband and wife from acquiring, holding, and disposing
of, any property jointly or as tenants in common, or from rendering themselves,
~ being rendered liable jointly in respect of any tort, contract, deb: or obligation,
“rg and being sutd either in tort or in contract or otherwise. in like

‘were not married ;

“he exercise of any joint power given to a husband and

& ow ‘o any married woman who at the time of her

martiage pro... <1, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion or whose

husband at the un * any of those religions.

by declared that a married woman who
Muhammadan, Buddhis:, Sikh or Jaina

atriage professed any of those religions—

(2} For the avon
at ihe time ए ber marriay.
Teligion or whose husband at «
always to have been, capable of suing and

fa) shall be, and shail h
. न or otherwise ; and

being sued, either in वा. or

(b} shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, subject to the law relat-
ing to insolvency and to the enforcem.nt of juigments and orders,

as if she were unmarried.

(3) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby also declared that the husband of
any such married woman shall not, by reason only of his being hee husband, be lable,
or deemed ever to have been liable,—

(a) in respect of any tort committed by her whether before or after the mar-
riage; or

(b) in respect of any contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred,
by her before the marriage; or

(०) to be sued, or made a party to any legal proceeding brought, in respect
of any such tor, contrac, debi or obligalion.

7. (1) A policy of insurance effected by any married man on his own life, and ex-
pressed 10 be on the face of it for the benefit of his wife, or of Ais children, or of his
wife and children, or any of them, shall cveare a trust for the benefit of his wile, or of Ais
children, 07 of his wie and children, or any of them, according to the interes; so expres-
sed, and the moncys payable thereunder shall not, so long as any object of the trust can
be performed and remains uaperformed, form part of the estate of the insured or be sub-
ject to his debts:

Provided that if it is proved that the policy was effected and the premiums paid
‘th intent to defraud the creditors of the insured, they shall be entitled to receive, out
# the moneys payable under the policy, a sum equal to the premium so pad.

(2) Where the policy effccted by a person is not, at the time when it is effected,
spressed on the face of ii to be for the benefit of and of the persons mentioned in sub-
ction (1), the insured may, at any time during the subsistence of the puticy', intimate
. the insurer in writing his’ decision that the poticy should be for the benefit of his wife

of his children or of his wije and children or any of them; and, on receipt of such
‘mation by the insurer, the provisions of this seciion shail, as far as may be, apply as
“apply to a policy 10 which sub-section (4) applies.

(3) The insured may, by the policy or by any memorandum under his hand,
voint a trustee or irusters of the moneys puyuble under the policy, and from time to
4 appoint a new trustee or new trustees thereof, and may make provisions for the ap-
intment of a new trustee or new srustees thereof, and for the investment of the moncys
yable under any such policy.

(4 dam Jojailt of any such appointment of a trustee, such policy, immediately on

dele? efectad,
persons afaresuid. ६

(5) #f, ae बजकर of tke death of the insured, or at any time afterwards, there
shall be no trustee or tywstecs, a new trustee or new trustees may be appointed by any
court having jurisdiction under ihe provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.

1Some alternative wording to be borrowed from the Insurance Act can be employed
inatead of the word ‘subsistence’, if found to be more appropriate.

pall vest in the insured and his legal representatives, in trust for the ५

3

Application of sec
tions 2 to 5,

Policies of insur-
ance. (Existing sec-
ton 6).

Cf. section 11, En-
gush Act of 1882,


76

Power to exempt.

Interests and
powers Mot ac-
quired nor lost
by raarciage.

Effect of marriage

between person

domiciled and one

pot domictled ia
ia,

Settlement of mi
nots’ properiy in
contemplation of
marriage.

Married Women’s Property Act, 1874

(tppendix 1—-The Married Women (Property and Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1978,
Appendix 2—Existing sections 20 ro 22, Indian Succession Act, 1928. Appendix 3.—~Section

13, Married’ Women’s Property Act, 1882 (Eng.) ५

16) The receipt uf @ trustee or trustees duly appointed, or in default of any डाटा

appointnent ov in dejaulé of notice to the insurer, the receipt of the legal represeniative

of the insured, shall He a discharge to the insurer jor the sum insured by ihe policy, ot
for the value thereof, in whole or in part, as the case may be.

. Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this suction, aa endowme'
of insurance an life.

Explanation 2.—The provisions of this section shalt
fit conferred in the manner specified in sub-section (1) *

Explanation 3.—In relation to any polte- ement of
shia Act to which this section would haved apo yore, this sec
von shail apply in substitution of section है croperty Act, 1874.
के (1) The State Government may, order, either retrospectively
from the passing of this Act or prospec n the operation of all or any
of ihe provisions of this Act the membe. sect or tribe, ar part of a race,

sect or Inbe, to whom it may cousider® it.
provisions,

{2} The State Government may alse revase aay such order, but not so that the revo~
cation shall have any retrospective efgcr, . -

6 (3) All orders and teyocations under this section shall be published in the Official
jazette,

9. Repeal of the Act of 1874—~4Section not drafted).
10. Amendment of other Acts*—{Amending section not drafted).

inexpedient (o apply such

APPENDIX 2
EXISYING SECTIONS 20 TO 22, INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925

2). (1) No person shall, by marriage, acquire any interest in the Property of the per-
son whom he or she marries or become incapable of doing any act in respect of his or
her awn property which he or she could Bave done if uamarried,

(2) This section—

fa) shell not apply to any marriage contracted before the first day of January,

(>) shall not apply, and shall be deemed never to have applied, to any marriage
one or both of the parties to which professed at the time of the martiage the
Hindu, Mubammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain religion. =

21, If a person whose domicile is nat in India marries in India a person whose don
cile is in India, neither party acquires by the marriage any cighis in ‘respect of any
perty of the other party not comprised in a setilement made Previous to the martin,
which be or she would not acquire thereby if both were domiciled in India, at the tr
of the marriage.

22, 1 (ll The property of a minor may be settled in. contemplation of marriage, £
vided the settlement is made by the minor with the approbation of the minor's father,
if the father is dead or absent from India, with the approbation of the High Court,

(2) Nothing in this section 0. in section 21 shall apply to any will made or
tacy occurring before the first day of January, 1866, or to intestate or testamentary st
sion io the propetiy of any Hindu, Mahammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jains.

t APPENDIX 3
SECTION tf, MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1882 (ENG)

“i. Moneys payable under policy of assurance net to form part fess aimee
insured. A married woman may . effect policy upon her one life or
the fife of her husband for her (ow the same and all, benefit thereof shall
ensure accordingly. io पु

। व्व विड word ‘impossible’ is considered unnecessary, and has, therefore, been
ueleted.

“Amendments to the Insurance Act, the Transfer of Property Act, Trusta Act etc. havt
been indicated separately, (Chapter 15 of the Report,


Married Women's Property Act, 1874

{Appendix 3,—Section 11, Marricd Women's Property Act, 1882 (Eng). Appendix 4—Law
Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935 (Eng.

___ A policy of assurance effected by any man on-his own life, and expressed to be
for the benefit of his wife, or of bis chudren, or of his wife and children, or any of them,
or by any woman on her own life, and expressed to be for the benefit of her husband, or
of her children, or of her husband and children, or any of them, shall create a trust in
favour of the objects therein named, and the moneys payable under any such policy
shall not so long as any object of the trust remuins unperformed, from part of the estate
of the insured or be subject to his 01 her debts ; Provided, that if it shall be proved that
the policy was effected and the premiums paid with intent to defraud the creditors of
the insured, they shall be entitled to receive, out ofthe moneys payable under the policy,
a sum equal to the premiums so paid, The insured may by the policy, or by any memo-
‘andum under his or her hand, appoint a trustee or trustees of the montys payable under
the policy,.and from time to time appoint a new trustee or new trustees thereof, and may
make provision, for the appointment of a new trustee or new trustees thereof, and for
the investment of the moneys payable under any such policy. In default of any such
=ppointment of a trustee, such policy. immediately on its being effected, shall vest in the
wured and his or her legal persona] representatives, in trust for the purposes aforesaid.
at the time of the death of the insured, or at any time afterwards, there shall be no
stee, or it shall be expedient to appoinf a new (rustce or new trustees, a trustee or
sees or a new trustee छा new frustces may be appointed by any court having jurisdi
under the provisions of the Trustce Act, 1850, or the Acts. amending and extending
same. - The receipt of a trustee or trustees duly appointed, ot in default of any such
appoiniment, or in default of notice to the imsurance office, the receipt of the legal per-
sonal representatives of the insured shali te a discharce to the office for the sum secured
by the policy, or for the value thereof, in whate or in part.”

APPENDIX 4

LAW REFORM (MARRIED WOMEN AND TORTFEASORS) ACT, 1935 (ENG)
Capacity of married women

, @ married

Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act [....
yan ehall~

fa) be capable of acquiring, holding and disposing of, any property; and

(9) be capable of rendering herseif, and being rendered, liable in respect of
any tort, contract, debt, or obligation ; and

(©) be capable of suing and being sued, either in tort or in contract or other-
prise ; and

(व) be subject to the luw relating to bankruptcy and to the enforcement of
judgments and orders, in all respects as if she were a feme sole.

Property of married women
2. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act all property which—

(a) immediately before the passing of this Act was the separate property of a-

married woman or held for her separate use in equily; or

(b) belongs at the time of her marriage to a woman married after the passing
. of this Act; or
(©) after the passing of this Act is acquired by or devolves upon a married
woman,
shall belong to her in all respects as if she were a feme sole and may be disposed of
cordingly ;
{Proviso and sub-sections (2) and (3) repealed by Married Women (Restraint upon
aticipation) Act, 1949 (०. 78), $. 1, Sched. 2]. 7

ition of husband's tiabilizy for wife in torts and ante-nuptial contracts, debts and
obligations

Subject to the provisions of this Part of this Act, the husband of a married woman
sot, by reason only of his being her husband, be liable—

rt rereet_of any tort committed by her whether before or after the mar-
riage, or in respeci “of 2AY contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred, by
| her before the marriage ; of
(0) to be sued, or made a party to any legal proceeding brought, in respect
of any such tort, contract, debt, or obligation.

awords repealed by Law Reform: (Husband and Wife) Act, 1962 (0. 48), s. 3(2), Sched,

“a


Married Women's Property Act, 1874

(Appendix 4.—~Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935 (Eng). Appendix
5.—Married Women (Restraint upon Anticipation Act, 1949 (Eng.

Savings
4 (1) Nothing in this Part of this Act shall—

fa) during covertuce which began before ihe first day of January eighteen
hondred and eighty three, alfect any property to which the title (whether vested or
contingent, and whether in possession, reversion, or remainder) of a married woman
accrued before that date, except property held for her separate use in equity;

(b) affect any legal proceeding in respect of any tort if proceedings bad been
instituted in respect thereof before the passing of this Act;

{c) enable any judgment or order against a married woman in respect of 8
contract entered into, or debt or obligation incurred, before the passing of this Act,
to be enforced in bankruplcy or to be enforced otherwise than against her property.

th ag For the avoidance of daubt it is hereby declared that nothing in this Part of
is Act— पु

(a) tenders the husband of a married woman liable in respect of any contract
entered into, or debt or Gbligation incurred, by her aller the marriage in respect
of which he wauld not have been liable if this Act had not been passed;

(b) exempts the husband of a married woman from Jiability in respect of any
contract entered into, or debt or obligation (not being a debt or obligation arisin
out of the commission of a tort) incurred, by ber afier the marriage in respect 0]
which he would have been liable if this Act had not been passed ;

(०) prevents a husband and wife from -acquiring, holding, disposing of, any
property jointly or as tenants in common, or frum rendering themselves, or being
rendered, jointly liable in respect of any tort, contract, debt, or obligation and of
suing and being sued eilher in tort or im contract or otherwise, in like manner as
if they were not married ;

(९) prevents the exercise of any joint power given to a husband and wife,

Consequential amendments and repeals

5. (1) The enactments mentioned in the first column of the first Schedule to this Ac
shall have eflect subject 19 the amendments specificd in the second column of thr
Schedule,

[Sub-sectian (2) repealed by S.LLR. 1950]

,

APPENDIX 5
MARRIED WOMEN (RESTRAINT UPON ANTICIPATION ACT, 1949 (ENG).
(12, 13 & 14 Geo. 6, ०. 78)

An Act to render inoperative any restriction upon anticipation or alienation attach-
ed to the enjoyment of property by a woman. .
(16th December 1949).

Abotition of restraint upon anticipation, and consequential amendments and repeals

1. (1) No restriction upon anticipation or alienation attached, or purported to be
attached, to the enjoyment of any property by a woman which could not have been
attached to the enjoyment of that property by a man shall be of any effect after the pass-
ing of this Act,

(2) The preceding sub-section shall have effect whatever is the date of the passing,
execution or coming into operation of the Act or instrument containing the provision by
virtue of which the restriction was attached or purported to be attached, and accordingly
in section two of the Law Reform (Married) Women and Tortfeasors) Act 1935, the pro-
viso to sub-section (1) and sub-sections (2) and (3) (which make provision differentiating
as to the operation of such a restriction between an Act passed before the passing of
that Act or an instrument executed before the date mentioned in the said proviso on th
one hand and an instrument executed on or after that date on the other hang) are here!

repealed.
(3) The enactments mentioned in the first column of the First Schedule to this
shall have effect subject to the amendments specified in the second column not that 36; that ed.

{Sub-section (7) i(géaled by SLR. 1953]

Short title and extent

2. _ (1) This Act may be cited as the Marcied Women (Restraint upon Anticipation) |
Act, 1949, : हि
(0) This Act shall not extend to Scotland or to Northern Ireland.


unestraint upon Aaticipation Act, 1949 (kings. “eg

} 6—Law Reform (Husband aad Wife) Act, 1962 (Eng)

a SCHEDULES
. FIRST SCHEDULE
Consequential Amendments

he Married Women's Properly Act, 1882 In section nineteen, the words from “or
(45 & 46 Vict. 0. 75). shall interfere” to “before marriage” shall
be repealed. and the word “but” shall be
substicuted for the word “and” where it
aceus immediately after the said repealed

words,

(Paragraph repealed by Matrimonial Causes Act 1950 (6. 25), 8. 34, Sched.)
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Repealed by SLR. 1953]

APPENDIX 6
LAW REFORM (Husband ard Wife} ACT, 1962 (ENG.)
(10 & 11 ELIZ, 2, C. 48)

An Act to amend the law with respect to civil proceedings between husband and

(1st August 1962)
Actions in tort between husband and wife

a  fubiees, to the provisions of this section, each of the parties to a marriage shall
«ve the like right of action in tort against the other as if they were not married.

(2) Where an action in tort is brought by one of the parties to a marriage against
te other during the subsistence of the marriage, the court may slay the action if it appears—

{a) that no substantial benefit would accrue to cither party from the continuation of
the proceedings ; or

(b) that the question or questions in issue contd more conveniently be disposed of
‘on an application made under section seventeen of the Married Women’s Pro-
perty Act, 1882 (determination of questions between husband and wife as to the
title to or possession of property) ;

and without prejudice to paragraph (b} of this sub-section the court may, such an action,
either exercise any power which could be exercised on an application under the said sec:
tion seventeen, of give such directions as it thinks fit for the disposal under that section
of any question arising in the procesdings.
(3) Provision shall be made by rules of court for requiring the court to consider at
. an early stage of the proceedings whether the power to stay an action under sub-section (2)
of this section should or should not be exercised; and rules under the County Courts Act,
-,1959 may confer on the registrar any jurisdiction of the court under that sub-section.

- (4) This section does not extend to Scotland.
Proceedings between husband and wife in respect of delict

2 (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, each of the parties to a marriage shall
have the like right to bring proceedings against the other in respect of a wrongful or negli-
gent act or omission. or for the prevention of a wrongful act, as if they were not married.

(2) Where any such proceedings are brought by one of the parties to a marriage
against the other during the subsistence of the marriage, the court may dismiss the pro-
ceedings if it appears that no substantial benefit would accrue to cither party from the
continuation thereof; and it shall be the duty of the court to consider at an early stage
of the proceedings whether the power to dismiss the proceedings under this sub-section
should or should not be exercised. .

(3) This section extends to Scotland only.
Short title, repeat, interpretaion, saving and extent

(1) This 4t-smay be cited as the Law Reform (Husband and Wife} Act, 1962.
+ The enactinents described in the Schedule to this Act are hereby repealed to the
. specified in the third column of that Schedule,
(3) The reference in sub-section (1) of section ane and sub-section (1) of section two
ihis Act to the parties to a marriage include references to the persons who were parties
_ a marriage which has been dissolved.

(व) This Act does not apply to any cause of action which arose, or would but for

३8 subsistence of a marriage have arisen, before the commencement of this

, This Act does not eatend te Northern Ireland.


(vg. o-—La~ Reform (Husband and Wife) Act, 1962 (Eng.
SCHEDULE
ENACTMENTS REPEALED

Session ang Chapter Short Tide i Extent of Repeal

AS & 46 Vict. ९. 75 The Married Womens’s pro- | Scetion tw:
perty Act, 1882 | u

'2, except so far as
[41०5 (0 crimiaai proceedings
1iOn twenty-three,

| The Law Reform (Married | In section one, the words “and

५. Womea af tordzasors Act, | subj-ct, as respects actions in

1935. | tort between husband and wife to

- 1 the provi ts Of SCiion iwelve

7 } Of the Macti:d Womens's property
Act, 182.7%

25 & 26 Geo, ए. 30

GIPN—S2--1 LAD (ND) /7$—6-8--7 Ton? 000,