LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SIXTY- SEVENTH REPORT
ON

THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899

February, 1977


P. 8. Gajendragadkar
CHAIRMAN —
LAW COMMISSION |
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
12, TUGHLAK ROAD,
NEW DELHI-11
. March 1, 1977

: रे Vehave great pleasure in forwarding herewith the sixty-seventh Report of the Commission
on did’lindian Stamp Act, 1899.

fas the first Chapter indicates, the Law Commission, spon after its initial constitution, hed
1१5५७! हुं that it would revise the Stamp Act, However, since the Commission was thet
with other subjects of an urgent nature, it could aot take up the work of revising
1p Act, as announced. Thereafter, that announced plan has remained unimplemented

sia Son After the present Commission submitted its Reports on topics, which it thought were
i: ‘hitgent, it felt that the carlier announcement made by the first Commission should be
‘ { ‘out and a thorough study of the Stamp Act maiie with 8 view to make suitable recam-

tmepilations for amendment in regard to its provisions.

: dpgepedingly, the whole Act was carefully examined qnd fhe question pertaining to its amend-
Lo aah’ material particulars wns considered and the pros nd cons of every recommenciation
thpaomghhy discussed. :

' Jt ‘urder 10 facilitate the formulation. of its final recommendations, the Commission sent
& Qhibstfonnaire to persons and institutions interdsted im the problem, ond the replins rectived
by it in response to its Questionnaire have been carefully ésamined. Besides, some suggestions
fot making umendments in the Act had already been received ; these also have received careful

‘cobalileration ‘by the Commission,

‘Miter discussion of the entire problem in its broad perspective, examining its provisions
ba Pr ‘ane, the Commission has decided to make the recommendations indicated in the Report.
I hope, will speak for itself. But, I would Hikd te mention some important amend-
poddep Which the Conumission has recammentied in esder ए०- simplify and rationalise the. law

wit Wl ie to improving its working. _

Tiiaip cxaminstion of the Act, the caer re] found fhat the definitions of “bills of exchange’,
‘peoetiwsery notes’ and ‘policies of insurance’ presen certain problems and the Commissida
inet pihitapted ०० solve them by suitable redrafting of the said: definitions. :

®


(छ)

It is obvious, that in an Act, lixe the Stamp Act, provisions relating to the mode of denoting
payable duty ate of considerable relevance in theit proper collection. Bearing this principle in
mind, the Commission bas made suitable recommendations to provide for consolidation of duties
on certain instruments not covered at present and also for the use of the franking’ machines.
These amendments, it-is hoped, will simplify the machinery of collection and pave the wey
for its modernisation. >>

का regard to the meaning of the expression ‘bond’, the Commission found consideratt..
uncertainty which appeared to cause inconvenience not only to the tax-payers, but also, in”
some cases loss to the revenue and in many cases unnecessary waste of valuable judicial time.
The Commission believes that the recommendations, which it has made for the amendment of
this part of the Act, will, to a large extent, rationalise the position in that behalf.

It is plain that in the Stump Act where the important and indeed vital matter pertains. to
the person who is liable to bear burden of duty vis-a-vis Government. The present provisions.
in.sections 3, 29, 40 and 48 are somewhat sketchy and incomplete and the diversity: of: jadicial
opinion in respect of the import of thesé provisions appeared to the Commission to weakrm the |
very foundation of the authority of the State to recover the deficiency in stamp duties because
the person, on whom the liability is imposed, remains substantially undefined and therefore
‘unidentified. After careful study of the ‘tue juristic position in this matter and the views expressed
by several judicial decisions, the Commistion has recommended a solution which attempts ‘to state
the position in a clear, compact dad easily intelligible manner.

It is clear that if the proper duty prescribed by the Act is not paid, the Act must providé
for a suitable penalty, To some extent, however, the penalty provision prescribed by setting |
35 has, by reason of its drastic character, proved to be unrealistic.in its working. The; Com- —
..mission’s recommendation for amending this. provision, in one sense, liberalises the section to
some: extent but woukd. according to .the Commission, ultimately facilitate better enfercemgat of
the Act. ‘

The Commission noticed that, by virtue of the power conferred on the appropriate Gevern- ©
iments to grant concessions and reductlons € stamp duty, a virtual plethora of hag,
emérged.’ Some of these notifications ‘are of gteat importance.’ In an area of such fmpeetiiect, °
according to the Commission, the Act itself should incorporate exemptions ‘rather (गा “aie
it to the rules and orders which, as is well-known, are not easily available to the public. The
Commission has recommended a few amendments which proceed on this’ assumgtion., The
Tecommendations relating to the: remission :gnanted in regard to bills of exchange. and;promiggory ..
notes can be cited as instances in point... ¢

I have deliberately mentioned some of the significant recommendations. magq cs
mission in the hope that Government will appreciate the magnitude and urgency off
- and will soon undertake Ivgislation on the Times recommended by the Commission in

Report.
Let me add that in making these! recommendations we have avoided.to affest..shg. rates

id any sybstantial manner because! we thonght that the question about the ey po, of EO ad
tutes a question of policy on which the Comatission would not like to make any

_. Having regard io the many problems which we faced in revising the present
surprising that the Report extends over pages in type and comprises fifty whe

Before concluding, 1 would like to add that'after the Comimission Was constthithd 7६ SephenRMe
1971, it has forwarded twenty-three reports: (numbering forty-five to sixty-seven) including the
present one ; aad after the present Commission was re-constituted in September 1974 it has
forwarded seven Reports including the present one.


ii)

In the end, let me repeat the suggestion which I have already made on two or three
previous occasions that, after the Report of the Commission is printed, copies of the report
should be circulated to the relevant academic and professional institutions so that it may stimulate
8 debate on the questions considered by the Commission and that, in turn, may assist Govern-
ment in coming to its own conclusions on the relevant recommendations made by the Commission.

With warm personal regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR)

.Hon’ble Shri H. R. Gokhale,

Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Govecnment of India,

Shasti Bhavan,

New Delhi-110001.


REPORT ON THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899

CHAPTER I
GENESIS OF THE REPORT

1.1, This Report relates to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 which is a fiscal enactment of daily
importance to the citizens. A proposal for taking up the Act for revision was announced by
the Law Commission soon after its initial constitution'; but, somehow, this work was not taken
up because the Commission was busy with other subjects. When the Commission was reconstituted
in 1971, its terms of reference were widened, and revision of laws in the light of directive
principles was included within those terms.

Having dealt with several Jaws which were of importance from the point of view of directive
principlts, the Commission took up the Stamp Act. Meanwhile, on several occasions, sugges-
‘tlotis have been received by the Commission from varicus sources, for considering amendments
im specific sections of the Act. Those suggestions have been duly taken into account, as also
the replies received to cur Questionnaire, in making the recommendations contained in the

siecteding Chapters,
1.2. Of the corresponding English Act, it has been stated by one reviewer?—

: ae “Of all the branches of revenue law, none, in the experience of your reviewer, is
ri

Prod

;

} one-half so dull as stamp duties ; and there is none on which it is more diificule
to express an opinion with any degree of certainty. The reason in each case is
that this subject has no underlying principles ; it springs basically from the Sche-
dule to the Stamp Act, 1891, which was accurately described by Lord Reid in

~ Inland Revenue Commissioners ¥. Henry Ansbacher and Co., (1963) A.C. 191,
204, as ‘a mere conglomeration of anco-ordinated provisions.’ ”

1 ३००६ shows the difficulty of revising the Act.

1.3. Before we proceed to mention the broad lines on which revision of the Act could

‘be jasefully considered, we think it necessary to deal with certain preliminary questions, not

Fh Ad of introduction but also in order to draw attention to the constitutional position
legislation in respect of stamp duties, and othér aspects of importance’,

413A. Stamp duties, as is evident from the Act, are paid by affixing a stamp, either
tmptessed, or, in some cases, adhesive, to the instrument required to be stamped. Under section
3, it ts the instrument which is chargeable with duty. It follows, therefore, that if a legal
ode tun can be effected orally, no stamp is required, because there is nothing to which the
fan be affixed, and because the charging section levies a duty on an instrament only.
therefore, it would be correct to say that “the thing which is made liable to duty is
ent”,—as was observed with deference to the ‘English law by Lord EsherMISR‘
= view was expressed by Rowlatt, J—a distinguished authority in taxation nw
\hgs been reiterated in the House of Lord®

4. WE H/S5L.C. वा (Notes) (Note dated 14th May,1957); है. S7/L.C. IL, 5. No. i.

2. Book review of Farrand, Stamp duties for the Conveyancer (1963),107 Solicitors’ Journal, 849.

3. See discussion 85 to ‘lines of revision’, infra.

4, Emernal Revenue Cotmissioner v. Angus, (1889) 23 Q. B. Div. 379, $89.

5. Allene Led., ५. 2.R.C., (1933) 1 KB, 173, 179; 148 L.T. 164, 166.

6, Quphtrad ५. I.R.C. (1960) A.C. 206, 227, 231, 238; 1959 3 W.L.R898, 899, 904, 90; affirming (1953) 2 All
BR. 443.

Importance of

aspects,


Interpretation of.

ae

i

onda ~ iia
juce.

Trdeepretation.

2
This is what Rowlatt J. observed :—

“The Stamp Act deals not with the commercial effect of the transaction, but deals
with the vehicles ; and you look at the vehicle to see what it does.” _

In the House of Lords, it was stated :—

“Yet the law with regard to liability to stamp duty is cleaz enough. The duty is
charged vpon instruments, if they exist and come within any of the categories
prescribed by the Act.”

“Jt is not charged upon transactions. Thus, property such as chattels, which by
jaw pass on delivery, can be transferred from one owner to another seithout
attracting duty. Again, though an agreement for sale may be chargeible ad.
valorem, since the Act has so required, an oral agreement for the sale: of, aed 21
involves no charge to duty because no instrament is brought into pristqabe to
effect or to record 1६7, i 1

1.4, It is also well-established that if the charging provision does not, on 8, ef, rt
truction, apply to the particular instrument, thea duty is not leviable*. At the sume teeth ‘
charging provision applies, then duty is. leviable unless, of course, the citizen can bring hirneelf
within a specific-exception. About hundred and forty years ago, Taunton J., pointed जार
that “the law upon the subject of Stamp is altogether a matter positivi juris. It invalves ‘nothing
of principle or reason, but depends altogether upon the language of the Legiclaturd,” “ .

LAA. One of the major sanctions for ensuring that instruments are duly starped, is the
provision that an unstamped document is not to be admissible except in certain: “Sccay- *
well established also the if a document is not admitied for want of stamp duty.
evidence of its contents—even where otherwise permissible under the law of evidence—camivat_
be given, and this shows the importance of the Stamp Act, not only as a measure of fiscal
legislation but also in relation to judicial proceedings.

1.5. Usually, legislation relating to stamp duties has to provide for several matters of.
detail as well us of substance. it is not necessary at this stage to enumerate all कप 21 ke mpatters,.
or evén to analyse them. But it would be useful to point out here that such Jaghstichipys
indeed, any taxing statite—usually comprises two broad categories of provisions, tamely,
charging provisions and machinety provisions. The charging provisions lay ee 3 the
of tax, while the machinery provisions, create the machinery and Tay down the ps 10
the assessment, collection and refand of the tax. This distinction has not merely
interest, because, under the Constitution’, the legislative power is demarcated oh ithe
(a) rates of stamp duty, and (b) stamp duties, In the ensuing discussion, provisiéns sebevant
to stamp duties other than the rates of stamp duty will be referred to as machinery pindvisions,
for the sake of convenience. हु wont

1.6. Principles for the interpretation of stamp laws are broadly the same ul
the interpretation of other taxing statutes, namely, an ambiguity in a charging provifion E
natily resolved in favour of the citizens, but where the citizen claims the benefit of ६४]
tion, he has to bring himself whhin it, The major difficulty which the courts Faperk
construing the Stamp Act-—apazt from those: attributable to defective drafti = ५
arise out of the fact thet often there is, no rational principle forming the’ batis of
duty on 8 particular document of the Idvy:6f a higher tate of duty on 9 particalan.gge
contrast with smaller duties levied on othet analogous documents.

1. (1957) 3 W.L.R. 898, 901 (H.L.) ver Lord Raxtolife.

2. Gurr v. Seuddy, 11 Bx 190, 191 (Lord Chief Baron Polloch).
3. Morley v. Hail, (1834)2 Dowl. 494, 499, 497.

4, Section 35. .

5. See infra.



‘ पु 3

1.7. The idea of raising revenue for the State from the transactions. of its citizens originated
in Holland?. The first stamp Jaw was passed in Holland in 1624. In England, it was first
adopted under Charles I but, under the reign of William and Mary, it essumed a definite shape
and thereafter various statutes were passed requiring stamps on various instruments among the
English people?.

1.8. In Indie, the first stamp law was Regulation 6 of 1797, which was limited in its
extent to Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and Benaras. Various stamp Regulations were subsequently
introduced in the sister provinces of Bombay and Madras.

By sections 16 and 21 of the Bengal Regulation 6 of 1797, all written obligations, except

Bills of Bxchange above Rs, 50 in value, were made chargeable with ad valorem duty, ranging

Weom four annas to one rupec. With a few exceptions, all other instruments as well as all

copies were made chargeable acco.ding to the quantity of matter engrossed on the stamp paper

(the stamp paper varied in size and value, from two annas to one rupee). The immediate

occasion for this Regulation was the abolition of the tax for the maintenance of police estab-
lishments, Jeviable on “Indian Merchants and Traders.”

1,9. Although the stamp duties under this Regulation were primarily intended to compensate.

for the deficiency in the public revenue occasioned by the abolition of the tax on merchants
etc., this Regulation paved the way for a series of later enactments relating to stamp duties.
Regulation 7 of 1800 introduced a fresh set of provisions as to stamp duties, and it may be of
interest to note, that for the first time, a specific provision was introduced for stamping an
acknowledgement for the receipt of money at the same rate as the rale prescribed for an
instrw creating an obligation. The stamp duty on many other deeds was doubled, and
a pro was also introduced to enable the holder of an unstamped document (o get the

History of
stamp duties.

Stamp Detics
in Inga--The
ogulations.

ourtidiecs to stamp rectified, by presenting it to the Collector. To check the practice of forging ©

of stamps, Regulation 13 of 1806, Regulation 7 of 1809 and Regulation 12 of 1810 made

additions or modifications regarding the sale and authentication of stamp papers.
Certain changes were made by Regulation 12 of 1812, Regulation 16 of 1813 and various
other Regulations, passed from 1814 to 1829.

In Madras, Regulation 8 of 1818 (sections 9, 10 and 11), mainly modelled on Bengai
Regulation 7 of 1800, contained the principal provisions as to stamp duties, followed by Regu-
lation. 2 of 1813 and Regulation 13 of 1816 as modified by Regulation 2 of 1825.

In Bombay, the first enactment relating to stamp duty was Regulation 14 of 1815, foflowed
by Regulations passed in 1827 and 1831.

1.10. So much as regards the Regulations. In 1860, the first Act relating to stamp duties
(Act 10 of 1860) was enacted in India. It repealed all the existing Regulations. Prior to this
Ast, there had been some amending Acts, adding to the law contained in the Regulations. The
Stamp Act of 1860 was amended the same year, and repealed and replaced by Act i0 of
1862, The Stamp Act of 1862 was amended in 1865 and 1867, and was finally repealed (as
regatds stamp duties) by Act {8 of 1869. The last mantioned Act was replaced by the Stamp
Act of 1879 (Act I of 1879); which was the immediate predecessor of the present Stamp Act.

Tho Stamp Act of 1879, during its short life, underwemt numerous alterations (it was
arsended 9 times),*, and was ultimately repealed by the Stamp Act, 1899, which contains the
present Inw on the subject

1.11. During the. period that has elapsed since 1899, ‘the Stamp Act has been amended
seyerdl. times. The most important amendments were made in 1904, 1906, 1910, 1923, 1927

£955. The last mentioned amendment is the most important from the point of view of
the territorial application of the Act.

1, MLN, Basu, Indian Stamp Act (1954), page (vii). :

2. Posidon in England in detail is dealt with, infra हु 1

3. Act 14 of 1840; Act 9 of 1842; Act 15 of 1859.

4. Act 9 of 1881; Act 1 of 1888; Act 5 of 1888; Act 18 of 1889; Act 6 of 1889; Act 20 of 1890; Act 12 of 1891; Act
‘of 184; Act'13 of 1897,

«

Stanip Acts
in India,

के कआब्कर,


4

The introduction of decimal coinage in 1958 necessitated extensive amendments in the
Actt,
No comprehensive revision of the Act has, however, been attempted so far.

1.12. In England, stamp duties were first imposed at the end of the 17th century?; they Stamp Duties
are now governed primarily by two Acts of Parliament, one imposing the duties’, and the .
other making mumerous administrative provisions‘. But it should be noticed that the Stamp
Acts in England have been repeatedly amended by subsequent Finance Acts and Revenue
Acts, and some of these amending Acts expressly direct that the relevant sections shall be
read “together with” or as, “one with” the Stamp Act, 18917,

The fundamental principle on which the English Acts are based is the same as in India,
namely, “the ihing which is made Hable to duty is an instrument*.” Exemptions from duty in
England are not given by notification, but are contained in the relevant Act. And, of course,
it need not be stated that if a document does not fall under any of the enumerated categories,
it is not liable to stamp duty. Examples of such documents in England are—affidavits, awards,
bills of lading, coupons for interest, proxy for one meeting only, receipt for an amount less
than two pounds, share certificates and statutory declarations’.

1.13. It is well-known that one of the causes of the American revolution was the Stamp
Act ‘of 1765, introduced by George Grenville. The Act levied a duty on every “skin or piece
of vellum or parchment or sheet or paper”, used for kegal documents, commercial transactions,
ete." Opposition to this legislative measure in the American colonies was so strong, that the
expenses of collection of the duty exceeded the revenue realised.

1,14. We may now turn to the constitutional position in India. At the time when the yy, of
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (a Central enactment) was enacted, the duties levied under each of ber irae 8

‘the several articles in its Schedule became part of central revenues, no part of it being speci- row stisationat

fically allocated to the provinces. A change was, however, introduced into this system by the .
Montlord Reforms of 1919. Section 45-A of the Government of India Act, 1919, enacted :

“45-A. (I). Provision may be made by rules under.this Act ;

(b) for the devolution of authority in cespect of provincial subjects to local
Governments and for the allocation of revenues or other moneys to those
Governmenis.”

Devolution Rules were framed under this provision and rule 14(1) read:

“14(1). The following sources of revenue shall, in the case of Governors’ provinces,
be allocated to the local Government as sources of provincial revenue, namely :-—

(f) the proceeds of any taxes which may be lawfully imposed for provincial

purposes.”
Schedule 1 to these rules classified subjects of Legislative power into two heads, Central
and Provincial-—Part 1 and Part गा respectively. Item 20 ‘of Part II—List of Provincial subjects—

ran in these terms :
3. "20, Non-judicial stamps, subject to Legislation by the Indian legislature. ...... ”

1 fiw indian Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1958 (19 of 1958).

2 14.

3, Stamp Act, 1891 (England).

4 Samp Duties Management Act, 1891 (England).

५ काका Revense Commissioners v. Angus, 23 Queens Bench
& C.F. wetion 1, Stamp Act, 1891 (England).

7. The list is not exhaustive.

8, Bnoyclopeedia Britannica, Vol. 21, page 306.

Division 579, 589 (Lord Esher, M.R.).


5

Section 80-43) laid down the formal requirements with which the Provincial Legislatures
should comply before enacting these laws :

“80-A(3). The local Legislature of any province may not, without the previous
sanction of the Governor-General, make cr take into consideration any law (a)
imposing or authorising the imposition of any tax unless the tax is a tax sche-
duled as exempted from this provision by rules made under this Act ; or........ "

In pursuance thereof, the Scheduled Taxes Rules were framed which specified the taxes
which might be imposed by the provinces either for their purposes or for the purposes of local
authorities within them without the previous sanction of the Governor-General. In regard to
stamp duties, item & of Schedule I to these rules enabled provincial legislation without previous
sanction only in regard to— .

“8. A stamp duty other than duties of which the amovnt is fixed by Indian
legislature.”

The result of this Scheme was that by virtue of the main provisions in section 80-A(3) (9),
tim 10000 legislature could legislatc for the levy of stamp duties on the instruments included in
the Stamp Act, 1899, only after obtaining the previous sanction of the Governor-General.
Sevéral Provinces took advantage of these provisions and enacted legislation on the subject
of stamps after obtaining the previous sanction of the Governor-General under section 80-A(3),
washing the proceeds part of Provincial revenues and amending the rates of duties imposed by
Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899

cet "PAS. The Government of India Act, 1935, effected a substantial change in the law in act of 1935.
telation to stamp duties, carrying to its logical result the provision of the Devolution Rules and
Re-peyetice thar prevailed thereunder. It also introduced a dichortomy, so far as the provinces

4were concerned, between the substantive Jaw relating to the levy and collection of the duties
inchudiag the machinery therefor on the one hand, and the rate of levy on the other hand, The
White Paper proposals started this cleavage by listing “Stamp duties which are the subject
of kegislation by the Indian Legislature at the date of the Federation” in the exclusively Federal
List 1, and “stamp duties cther than those provided for in List I’ as a source of Provincial
Revenue, ‘Chis rather vague form received clarification in the report of the Joint Parliamentary
Committee. In their revised lists, “Fixation of, rates of, stamp duty in respect of bills of
exchange, bills of lading, cheques, letters of credit, promissory notes, policies of insurance,
Proxies and receipts”, was made exclusively Federal (Item 53 of List 1), while “fixing of
tates of stamp duty in respect of instruments other than those mentioned in item 53 of 118 I”
was put in as item 32 ja List II--the exclusively Provincial List. The legislative power. ta
enact Stamp Laws in general, as distinguished from the “fixation of rates of duty”, was assigned
to the Concurrent List (Item 10), which read “Law of non-judicial stamps, but not inctuding
the fixation of rates of duty.” These recommendations of the Joint Parliamentary Committes
were adopted by the framers of the Government of India Act, 1935. The instruments men-
tioned in item 53 of List I, set out above, were allocated to the exclusively Federal List 1
(item 57)---but instead of the words “fixing of rates of stamp duty”, the expression “rates. of
stamp duty” was used.

1.16, The Constitution of India followed, in this respect, the pattern of the Government Legialative
of India Act, 1935. Entry 91 of the Union List reads; “rates of stamp duty in reapect af Entries,
bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of inding, letters of credit, Policies of.
insurance, transfer of shares, dehentures, proxies and receipts”, while Entry 63 of the State
List provides for legislation in regard to “rates of stamp duty in respect ‘of documents other
than those specified in the provisions of List 1 with regard to rates of stamp duty”. Entry 44
of the Concurrent List deals with the power to make a law in relation to stamp. duties as
distinguished from the rates cf stamp duty in these terms. “Stamp duties other than duties
07 feea collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.”

24 M of Law/77--2


6

Present at canal 1.17. ‘The Constitution has a number of other provisions relevant to stamp duties. of

position, these, article 246 and the Seventh Schedule are relevant in regard to the legislative power to
levy stamp duties. Articles 265, 268 and 269(e) are relevant mainly as regards the distribution
of the revenues. ‘The former is more important, for the purposes of 8 consideration of the
Stamp Act.

1.18. Briefly, the scheme provided for in the Constitution is as follows :

(a) Under article 246, such stamp duties as are mentioned in the Union List? are
levied by the Union, but, under article 268, each State in which they are levied,
collects and retains the proceeds (except in the case of Union Territories).

The documents are specified in Entry 91, Union List : ह

“91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes,
pills of leading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, deben-
tures, proxies and receipts.”

(b) Other Stamp duties are levied and collected by the States, by virtue of the legis-
lative entry in the State List, already quoted below? :—

“63. Rates of stamp duly in respect of documents other than those specified ia the
provisions of List 1 with regard to rates of stamp duty.”

(०) And the Concurrent List® contains the following entry :-—

“44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stampe,
but not including rates of stamp duty.” हु

~

पु This entry deals with the general subject of stamps. Provisions other than* those relating
to rates of duty are, thus, within the legislative power of bath the Union and the States. oe
(०) Broadly speaking, therefore, except as regards Union Territories, Parlinteent’s,
legislative power extends to :— 7
(i) rates of stamp duty on the specified documents ;
(ii) machinery provisions, in respect of all documents.
1,19. The position can be stated in the form of a Chart as follows :

THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
CONCERNING STAMP DUTIES

Bay ot. कक क. fey a
Rates of Stamp duty in Rates of Stamp Siamp duties
respect of biD of daty in respect other than duties
exchange, cheques, of document of fees collected

. promissory nates, bills other than those by means of
of lading, letters of spccified in the judicial stamps,
credit, policies of provisions of fist but not including
insurance, transfer 1 with regard to rates of stamp
of shases, debentures, rates of stanip duty.

duty.

proxies and receipts.

3. Schedule 7, List 1, entry 91.
2. Schedule 7, List 2, entry 63°

3, Schedule 7, List 3, entry 44. हा
4. For convenience, provisions not yelating to rates may be referred to as “machinery provisions”.


7

1.20. Thus, the power of the Union extends to the whole field of stamp duties, except
that as regards rates cf stanip duty in the States, it is confined to the specified documents. It
is plenary as regards machinery provisions.

Full use, however, has not so far beea made of Parliament's legislative power in relation
to machinery provisions.

1.21, Having dealt with the important preliminary aspects, we now proceed to state briefly Lines of
the lines on which revision of the Act would be desirable. .

1.22. The defects which were described in the Act of 1879 at the time of introduction of
the Bill in Council, and the improvements which were suggested to remedy those defects, can
be said to provide the justification fox revising the present Act also. First, there are cases in which,
for want of clarity, the law has failed in its intention. The Stamp Act is left very largely to a sort
of “automatic operation”, inasmuch as it is applied to citizens themselves to their own transactions
as evidenced by the instruments; and the burden of its interpretation rests, not only upon the
lawyer, but also upon the layman. It is all the more necessary, therefore, that the Act should,
in its expression, be as clear as possible, so that people who desire to pay proper duty on their
documents and who have no intention of evading the duty in any way, may clearly understand
the obligations which rest upon them.

When, there are cases where the provisicns of the law, though clear, can be, and have been,

"1 evaded by carrying out the transactions in a fraudulent manner.

Thirdly, there are cases where greater facility could be given to the public to avoid petty
ships, without making any serious inroads on the revenue.

Fourthly, there is need to introduce uniformity where divergence has arisen owing te conflict
of gegisions.

Finally, notice has 10 be taken of statutory and other developments which have a bearing
os-stamip duties.

1.23. The Stamp Act is 2 taxing statute. It is not purely a “lawyer’s law”; and a revision of Scope for
the tax structure raises important matters of policy. Moreover, even if revision of the rates of a laa”
duty were to be embarked upon, constitutional competence of the Union in that respect is limited

to the documents mentioned in entry 91 of the Union List, (except as regards Union territories). -
There is, however, (as slready stated), considerable scope for revision of the Act in other
Tespeets, Without materially affecting the rates of tax. Without claiming to be exhaustive, it may be
said that even after keeping the abave limitation in mind, revision is possible in respect of —
(a). the structure and arrangement of the Act;
(0) the legal Jabels employed in the Act, to denote the various kinds of documents;
{c) rectification of the unsatisfactory position, arising from conflicting decisions of
otherwise, in regard to the charging section and connected provisions;
. हि - : आक्ान
(d) improvement of the machinery provisions;
(e) reducing the multifarious variety of rates of stamp duty—of course to the
minimum extent, so as not to affect the States’ revenues; and 7
(f) incorporating. in the Act itself, many of the remissions granted by notifications?
under section 9.
We are satisfied that revision on the above lines would considerably simplify the Act, aad
being, it, up-to-date from the legal point of view, and would also contribute to the removal of
actical difficulties felt by reason of some of the drastic provisions of the Act? हि
1,24. At this stage, therefore, it would be proper to mention that in our consideration of Comsiderations
tlie Act, we have kept before ourselves certain broad guidelines which it may be convenient to kept in mind.
set out.

1. Bug, eee discussion as to section 2(4}—bill of lading and article 14.
2. है. g., section 35.


Yo the first place, we have considered it legitimate to recommend such changes as were
necessary to rationalise the Jaw or to simplify its working, and generally to avoid difficulties in
its implementation,

Our general approach in this regard is based on our firm belief that the smoother the
working of the law, the better will it be for all concerned. We do not, in this context, postulate
a conflict, between thc interests of the revenue and the convenicace of tax payers.

Secondly, in the interests of easy accessibility of the law, we have, where the circumstances
so justified, suggested amendments to incorporate in the scction cxemptions of long standing,

Thirdly, where we found that the provisions of the Act—in particular, what can be con-
veniently described as the machinery provisions—have led to serious inconveniences or to
unnecessary controversies in the courts or official circles or to avoidable delay, we have not
shreok from recommending suitable amendments. We belicve that even though it may, at thé
first sight, appear that a particular amendment proposed by us with this object liberalises thé
Jaw in favour of the citizens, yet, ultimately, the revenue will also benefit, inasmuch as igdotaice
or misunderstanding of the law as wel] as the temptation to evade the law will be oinistiod.
Moreover, it is legitimgte to point out that ordinarily speaking, a taxation Jaw ought not to be so
formulated as to encourage the raising of dishonest defences by litigants, particularly where the

interests of the revenue can be safeguarded by other provisions. Le

We are making this observation particularly with reference to the changes which we are
recommending in the law relating to instruments not duly stamped and in the provisions as to
the levy of penalty. Sections 13 to 15 and section 35 are instances in point. These amendments 10
doubt make the law more liberal than at present; but they are not, in our view. likely to lead
to a serious increase in the evasion of stamp duties—if at all they are likely to lead to any increase
in the scope for evasion.

Fourthly, apart from the convenience of citizens, there are situations where wider consi- "
derations of public interest may have to override a very rigid enforcement of the revenne law.
For example, the importance of detection of crime in an efficient manner and without delay
juatifies the legislature in making a relaxation of the ordinary rufe that an unstamped Gocurmest
shall not be acted upon by a public officer. Acting on this principle, we have considered it proper
10 recommend certain amendments to section 33(1). The section imposes an obligation to impound
documents not duly stamped but there is an exception. Our amendment seeks to widen the exgep-
tion to this obligation—an exception which is, at present, confined to police officers!

Fifthly, we have not undertaken a review, as such, of the rates of stamp duty. Incidentally,
we note that as regards most of the documents to which the Act applies, the rates of stamps duty
are within the State Legislative List. But even as regards other documents, our amendments are
not based on any need for increase or decrease in the rates. This general approach is, of course,
subject to what we have stated above.

Finally, it & our view that, as far as possible, the provisions of & statuye ebowhd be so framed
as to maintain logic and consistency with basic juristic principles. It may not always be easy to
discover or to maintain a logical structure in every provision of the revenue laws, But that
certainly should be the ideal,—at feast in regard to machinery provisious; these provisions do
not affect the rate of tax, and are intended to deal with details of its implementation. Lest this
should sound to be too abstract a statement, let us illustrate it by stating that whore Ute Bbbility
to pey stamp duty rests with a particular person whe thus carries the primary duty, ऋ० 08 काका,
consider it proper that the law should, overlooking this primary duty, impose w
sanction on some other person?. We have borne this consideration in mind in dealing with the
vexed question of the person on whom stamp duty can be compulsorily levied under section 48
read with section 40.

1, See section 33(2), ire.
2. Section 40, infra.


CHAPTER 2
SECTION 1 : TERRITORIAL APPLICATION

2.1. We propose iu deal in this chapter with the territorial application of the Aci—first,
the intra-territorial application, and next, the extra-territorial application.

By virtue of the proviso to section 1(2), the Act: as it stands at present, does not apply to
areas which were previously comprised in Part B Stutes, except in respect of rates of stamp duties
on documents mentioned in the Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Union List, entry 91. This is
‘the position emerging by reason of the narrow lines on which the Amendment Act of 1955, which
extended the Act to areas of the erstwhile Part B States, was drawn. In this connection history of
the Act is of interest.

2,2, Section 1, sub-section (2), as originally enacted, ran thus :

“It extends to the whole of British India, inclusive of British Baluchistan, the Santhal
Parganas and the Pargana of Spiti. The term “British India” was held to include
the Agency Tracts included in the Scheduled Distcicts.!”

Certain later amendments extended the Act to Scheduled districts and scheduled arens ;
‘but they are not material for the present purpose.

2.24. By the India (Adaptation of Existing Indien Laws) Order, 1947, the expression “the
whole of British India” in section 1(2) was replaced by the expression “all the Provinces of India”.
‘Expressions like “Briush Baluchistan” etc. were dropped by the Indian Independence (Adapta-
tion. of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948.

. By the Adaptation Order, 1948, the words “all the Provinces” were substituted for the
words “British India”. The Adaptation Order of 1950 aiso made certain verbal changes in this
part of section 1(2). The clause as substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, read
a8 follows : “It extends to the whole of India except Part B States.” Paragraph 8 of the Adapta-
tion of Laws Order, 1950 enacted that notwithstanding the amendment about the extent of
dew, the law should not be deemed to have been extended to any area to which it did not
extend immediately before the appointed day (26th January, 1950).

By the Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 (59 of 1949), the Act was extended to certain
snerget areas; but that extension is not material for the present purpose. By the Part C States
{Laws) Act, 1950, the Act was extended to Manipur, Tripura and Vindhya Pradesh. To the
serstwhide territory of Cooch-Bihar, the Act was extended by the Cooch-Bihar (Assimilation
tf Lense) “Act, 1950.

2.28. The Amendment Act of 1955 extended the Act to Part B States to the very limited
extent indicated by the vection as it now stands.

2.3 In 1956, on the reorganisation of States, the proviso was adapted. The expression
“Pest 8 Staics” in that proviso was replaced by the words “the territories which immediately
hefoae'the Ist November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States”, by the Adaptation of Indian
Laws No, (2) Order, 1956.

The proviso now reads as follows :

“Provided that it shall not apply to the terzitorins which, immetiately before the
Ist November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States excluding the State of
Jaminu and Kashmir except to the extent to which the provisions of this Act
relate to rates of stamp duty in respect of the documents specified in entry 91 of
List I in the Seventh Schedule to ihe Constitution.”

1, Collector of Visagupamnant v. KCK. Patmaik, LR. $2 Mad. 1, AIR. 1928 Mad. 11815). OCS 3B).

9

Introductory.

Section 1— |
Intra-territorial
application

History of
section 1(2)

Adaptations

Amendment of
1955--
Part 8 States.


Pact B States

Statewine
position
analysed

10

The territories which were comprised in Patt के States before the Ist November, 1956
were -—

(1) Hyderabad, now forming parts of Andhra Pradesh State, Mysore State and Maha-
rashtra State ;

(2) Madhya Bharat, now forming parts of the Madhya Pradesh State and the Rajas-
than $tate ;

(3) Mysore, forming part of the bigger State of Mysore as reorganised now re-designated
as Karnataka ;

(4) Patiala and 1788 Punjab States Union, now forming part of the Punjab State ;

6) Rajasthan, now forming part of the Rajasthan State as reorgauised and. Madhya
Pradesh State ;

(6) Saurashtra, now forming part of the Gujarat State ;

(7) Travancore-Cochin, now forming parts of the Tamil Nadu State and the Kerala
State ;

2.4. Thus, to areas formerly comprised in Part B States, the Act applies only to the extent:
to which its provisions relate to rates of stamp-daty on documents specified in the Union List,
entry 91, ie., promissory notes, bills of exchange, proxies etc. The Part B States’ areas are,
३0 far as Machinery provisions of the Act are concerned, left to be dealt by the laws for the
time being in force in the particular areas. 1 is assumed by the Legislature that some law or
other will always be in, force containing the machinery provisions to govern stamps: () on docu-
ments mentioned in the Union List, as well as (ii) on other documents.

2.5. Now, it sbould be stated here, that under the Constitution’, Parliament, when it dealt
with the territorial extent of the Act in 1955, (i.e. when the Act was extended to Part B States),
could have extended the machinery provisions of the Act to stamps on— - ™

(i) documents menticned in the Union List ; and
Gi) other documents,
Bot this has not been done.

The present position as to the application of the Act to various 1028] areas, as deductible
trom section 1(2) of the Act, is, therefore, as follows :— .

(1) In the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Act extends
so far us it deals with rates of stamp duties on documents in. the Unien List,

entry 91. : 1
(2) In the whole of India except the Slate of Jammu & Kashmir and excapt the

areas in former Part B States, the Act, subject to what is stated below, extomds so

far as it deals with—

(a) rates of stamp duty on other documents ; and

(b) machinery provisions in respect of all documents.

(3) But proposition (2) above is subject to important qualifications! spt «
(a) In some States, there have been extensive local amendments ‘it respeet.”
the rates of stamp duty on ther documents, the usual proc betitg “to

insert a separate Schedule in lieu of the entries’ in the existing Schedule’,
or to increase the duties in the existing Schedule*; and gst

See discussion under “Constitutional Sunde “Coaitutional palion” Para wa 1.17 supra.

, (a) Andhra Pradesh; 4
(b) Bihar; Pun पु
(०) Haryana and jab;

(6) Madhya Pradesh;
9 Orissa:
(f) Rajasthan;
(8) U.P.; and
(63 West Bengal
3. (a) Assam: and
(9) Tamil Nadu.

no


11

(9) Some Stales have enacted a self-contained Stamp Act of their owa, to deal
with the rates of stamp-duty on documents in the State List and also with
the machinery provisions as to documents in the State List’.

(c) Some States have, while enacting a self-contained law of their own govern-
ing the rates and machinery provisions for documents in the State List,
applicd the Indian Stamp Act as regards machinery provisions in respect
of documents in the Union List. Thus, Kerala, which comprises mostly
areas of the former Part B State of Travancore, Cochin and the Malabar
district of the former Madras State, has, enacted a Stamp Act? of its own,
put as regards documents in the Union List, the machinery provisions of
the Indian Stamp Act are made applicable. The gap has, thus, been closed.

2.6. The Amendment Act of 1955 could have gone further, and extended the provisions

of the Act cven to the areas previously comprised in Part B States, in so far as the provisions |

relate to matters mentioned in the Constitution, seventh Schedule, Concurrent List, entry 44
(stamp dutics other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including
rates of stamp duty), that is to say, machinery provisions. However, that bas not been done,
so that “rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills
of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares, debentures, proxies and
receipts*.” constitute the only subject in respect of which the Indian Stamp Act applies by virtue
cf its own force to the areas of what were previously Past B States*.

At pegards the areas of former Part A States, the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, applies to those
areas, excépt where, by separate laws ot amendments introduced by a particular State, its appli-
nee been modified or abrogated. At this stage*, it is not proposed to enter into details of

"State 1875.

F.

Ayr
- 2.7. In the Union territories, of course; there is no restriction on the competence of
Parliament.

It is not necessary for the purposes of the present discussion to notice the position in
detail. ig regard to Union territories. To areas in Union territories which were part of British
India, the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 extended of its awn force and this position continued except
wher. it, was altered by legislative developments after independence relevant to the particular
Union territory.

To the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, the. Act was extended by Regulation 11
af 1963, and farther amended in 1968,

As rogards Pondicherry, section 3 read with Part II of Schedule of the Pondicherry (Ex-
tensipn of Laws) Act, 1968 (XXVI of 1968) extended the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as in force

Union
Territories,

in the etatwhile State of Madras to the Union Territory of Ponticherry, subject to certain modi- _

ficatipad, The Act came into force’ in the Union Territory of Pondicherry on Sth January, 1969.

Ia relation to Manipur and Tripura, which were previously Union territories (now States),
the Uaion Territories Stamp & Court Fees Laws Act, 1961 (33 of 1961), section 5, dealt with
the matter. Lo a

1, E.G. (a) Bombay Stamp Act,1953—-sections 74 and 75 and Schedule 2 (for Maharashtra and Gujarat);
- {b) Mysore Stamp Act, 1957—section 72.

2. Kerala Stamp Act, 1959—sections 72 and 73.

3. Ser alea discussion as to section 1(2), कैएीय-

4. Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Union List, entry 91.

5. Section 1.

6. See infra.

7. Notification of the Administrator, Pondicherry published in Pondicherry Gazette Extraordinary No. 4, dated 9th
January, 1969.



12

है Parliamentary legislation relevant to Stamp duties in some Union territories was passed?
in 1971, It introduced what is known as the surcharge for “Refugee relief”. It was repealed? in,
1973, in so far as it applied to the Union territories of—

(i) Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
(60 Chandigarh :
Gii) Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
Gv) Delhi.
(v) Goa, Daman and Diu.
(vi) Laccadive Minicoy and Amindivi Islands.
(vii) Pondicherry.

feeding 2.8. To revert to section 1(2), the prevision in section 1(2) regarding the extent of the

intra- Sal Act.creates a somewhat confusing picture. The matter may be re-stated as follows®:

torr!

application (a) In some cases*, the Cental Act is the governing Act, not only for rates of
stamp duties for documents in the Union List, but also for rates: of duty’ for the
documents mentioned in the State List (there having been no locai varitions in
the stamp duties), as well as for machinery provisions for all documents.

(9) In some cases, the Central Act applies for the purposes of determining the rates
of stamp duty in respect of documents mentioned in the Union List, entry 91,
and as regards the machinery provisions in respect of all documents. But it does
not apply for rates for documents in the State List, these having been dealt with
by a separate Schedule—usually, Schedule 1A inserted locally. oe

{c) In some States which have enacted their own separate Stamp Acts’=",. the. ulifity:
of the Central Act is more limited, and is confined to the rates of duty
machinery provisions for the documents mentioned in the Union List. entry *
The self-contained Stamp Acts of the States concerned apply in regard to decy-
ments mentioned in the State List, both for determing the rate of stamp duty and
for ascertaining the machinery provisions applicable ta those documents.’

It should be mentioned that in States which comprise Part B areas (1:86, arcas pre-
viously comprised in Part B States), the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. bas been om
tended, for matters excluded by section 1(2), by State amendment ix relatioe
to those areas. ‘

(0) Thecratically, States could even apply their own machinery provisions: ¢wR to
documents in the Union List.

85 to intra- 2.9, In our opinion, this position is very unsatisfactory. We are unable to. see any juptifi-
cation for continuing the present state of the law under which the machinery provisions

एम:
104०० from. document to doecument® (withia 8 State) and from. State to State’, In respect. of gn Act
10) Proviso Jikg the present, unjformity of machinery provisions is, in our opinion, of considerable. me
tance. Since we attach importance to the introduction of uniform procedure in regard to peal

nery provisions, we have thought it appropriate to deal with the problem.

Accordingly, we recommend to the Union Government: that it should take oerly : mops.
towards achieving uniformity in regard to machinery provisions. Of course, this implirs.

1, Act 73 of 1771

2, Act 14 of 1973.

3. Also see para. 2.5, supra.

4- This discussion is confined to “States” proper.

5. E.g., Andra Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh.

6, See below, “State Acts”.

7, Eg., the erstwhile State of Bombay. Also Kerala and Mysore.
8. Category (c), supra.

9. Categories (a) to (d), supra.


13

() repeal of State Stamp Acts, ie. portions of those Acts which relate to machinery provisions, and
Gi) Parliamentary action adopting uniform machinery provisions applicable to the whole of
India. In making this recommendation, we do not wish to dispute the fact that State laws can
and should properly deal with the rates of duties.

As is evident, States are at liberty to pass their own Stamp Act, by exercising the power
cumulatively conferred by State List, Entry 63, and Concurrent List, entry 44. This has afready
been done in some States’. (Of Course, those Acts cannot desl with the rate of Stamp duty for
documents mentioned in the Union List). But uniformity in respect of machinery provisions
would be a better course, and there does not appear to be any constitutional hindrance in that
regard.

We may mention that the point was raised in our Questionnaire, and by and Jarge opinion
is favourable to what we have recommended above?.

2.10. So much as regards the intra-territorial application of the Act. Extra-territorial appli- Extra-territorisl
cation of the Act is a matter on which the position now seems to be fairly certain, in view of SEPA ‘Stamp Act,
the precise wording ofthe charging section’. The scheme of the Act is that, subject to certain
special provisions {to be presently noticed), only an instrument executed in India* is chargeable
with. duty. The special provisions relate to {i) bills of exchange® payable otherwise than on de-
mand or promissory notes which, though drawn or made cut of India, are accepted or paid or
presented or endorsed or negotiated in India®, and (ii) other instruments? execnted out of India
which relate to any property situate or to any matter or thing done or to be done in India and
which are received in India, for various matters, arising out of or conceming these special pro-
visionh (e.g., the time of stamping etc.), the Act has provided a detailed scheme’.

402.11. Tt would appear that in this respect, the position is not so clear in England, and it in Bogland
is nowhere stated in the (English) Stamp Act, 1891, in the charging provision that foreign docu-
ment de nat require to be stamped. It is only when one comes to the section providing ‘the
sanction? that the English Act speaks of an instrument executed in the United Kingdom etc.
Of course judicial decisions in England do take the view that the Act is so confined. This view
has been taken in deference to the “comity of nations”, In the case of Nestle & Co,1° Danckwerts
1. observed :—
“The comity of nations requires that a government must tax only those people who are
under the control of its own laws.”

Hence, an agreement entered into between persons living abroad with regard to property
abroad doe not require an English stamp if it does not relate to a matter or thing to be done

in the United Kingdom",

Ie would also appear that, in England, a contract for the sale of immovable property situate
outside the U. K. is not chargeable with duty?

1; (9) Tie Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 {in force in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, subject to amendments
subsequently made in those Stat
{b) The Kerela Stamp Act, 1958.
> {Gp The Myscre Stamp Act, 1957.
+ C¥ibpidiat is not necessarily exhaustive).
2, 1 of the Questionnaire.
4. Section 3, clauses (a), (b) and (©).
4, Gestion 3(a).
5, ffir 3b). See also sectlon 32(3}(b) and section 11(b).
Js the rough gist of the provision.
7, Section eo).
8. Section 17 to 20.
9. Section 14(4), Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng.).
10, Nari & 00. Lid. v. Internal Revenue Cammissioners, (1952) 1 All BR. 1388, 1392 (Danckwerts J), on appeal
11. Gilchrist v. Herbert, (1872) 26 Law Times 381, cited in Halsbury, 3rd od., Vol. 33, page 269, footnote (०)
12, Sectlon 5961), Stamp Act, 1891 {Eng,).
24M of Law/77—3


Section 2(4
Sane

CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS—SECTION 2(1) to 2(4)

3.1. Section 2 of the Act contains, im all, 28 definitions. of which the definitions in sub-
sections (13A), (164) and (194) were inserted by later amendments. The expressions defined
in the section——which need not be enumerated at the present stage—fall into the following broad
categories.

In the first place, there are definitions which define particular kinds of instruments for
the purposes of the Act in a self-contained manner. The definitions of “bond”, “conveyance”,
“instrument of partition”, “lease”, “mortgage d ”, “policy of insurance”, “power of attoracy”,
“receipt” and “settlement” fall in this category.

Secondly, there are definitions which, while also relating to certain kinds of instrumeat,
adopt, with or without additions, the defmitions given in other Acts. They are, thus, not self-
contained, The definitions of “bill of exchange”, and “bill of exchange payable on demand”
and “cheque” fall in this category, because the basic concept of bill of exchange relies heavily
on the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, though some of the definitions do include certain
other documents also.

Thirdly, there are definitions of expressions which do not relate to classes of dnstruemenis,
but are, at the same time, of importance for the purposes of the Act, since the expressions
defined occur frequently in the Act; (that is to say, in the body of the Act as distinguished
from the Schedule). ‘The definitions of the expressions “chargeable”, “duly stamped”, 1७७७.
“execution”, “impressed stamp” and “instrument” fall in this category. .

Finally, there are other definitions which are of a minor importance.

The definitions in the first category are of the highest importance, and are those which
have 160 to the largest voluma of case-law. With these introductory observations, we proceed
to deal with each definition.

3.2. Section 2(1) defines “banker”, as including a bank end any person acting as a banker.
‘The expression “banker” is used in the following sections’ of the Act ते 1 पु
(9) Section 2, clause (7), “cheque” ;
(b) Section 51, allowance in case of printed forms no longer used by a banker.

The importance of the definition of “banker” has diminished, in view of the Gecrease in
the importance of the definition of “cheque”*. The fatter has lost its importance after the
removal of the stamp duty on cheques in 1927.

It should be pointed out that the definition of ‘banker’ tells us nothing about the atte
of a banker.

In England, bankers are given special exemption from stamp duty when giving ‘drafts
or ordera for payment from one banker to another. The definition given of 2 “banker” in
the English Stamp Act, says that it means “any person carrying on the business, ot tajtking
in the United Kingdom*”. a ae

3.3. Strictly speaking, the mention of bank as including a “banker” would not + nage "
pecause a bank is really a place where money is deposited for certain purposes. defen

treet

ये. See article 13, as amended in 1927.
2. Section 27).
©. Section 29, und Schedule 1—Exemption 2, “Bill of Exchange”, Stamp Act, 1891 (Bng.).

14


1s

of the present definiton, it could be said that it is useful as covering cases where an impersonal
banker is involved (such as, a corporation). On this reasoning, a distinction could be made
between a bank and a banker, so that the former is confined to impersonal bankers and the
latter to individual bankers. A bank could then be regarded as an establishment for the
custody of money received from or on behalf of its customers, a banker as a person who is
in charge of an establishment. Whether any such subtle distinction forms the basis of the
present definition is, however, extremely doubtful. Apart from this, however, the major defect
in the present definition is that it begs the question, as it does not tell us what the concept
of “banking” implies. Not much help can be derived in this respect from the Negotiable
Instruments Act?. A banker, as defined in that Act, includes also persons or a corporation
or company acting as bankers. Under the General Clauses Act*, the expression “person”
includes any company or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not.
Obviously, these definitions are aot helpful for the present purpose.

3.4. There are several characteristics usually found in bankers today*: (i) They accept
money from, and collect cheques for, their customers and place them to their credit; (ii)
They honour cheques or orders drawn on them by their customers accordingly. These two
characteristics carry with them also a third, namely : (iii) They keep current accounts or
something of that nature, in their books in which the credits and debits are entered.

These three characteristics are much the same as those stated in Paget’s Law of Banking* :

“No. one and nobody, corporate or otherwise, can be a ‘banker’ who docs not
(i) take current accounts; (ii) pay cheques drawn on himself; (ii) collect
cheques for his customers.”

73.5. It bas been stated* that it is notoriously difficult to define the business of banking, Definition of
‘ wind 90 statute has attempted it. Perhaps, a very good definition is that stated in by the Privy .
Couneil in Bank of Chattinad Ltd. of Colomba v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Colombo.
‘The definition is as follows :

“A company which carries on as its principal business the accepting of deposits of
money जा current account or otherwise, subject to withdrawal by cheque, draft
or order.”

It may also be stated that the concept of banking has changed’ in the course of history.
Tp the eighteenth century, before cheques came into common use, the principal characteristics
were that the banker accepted the money of others on the terms that the persons who deposited
it could have it back again from the banker when they asked for it, sometimes on demand,
& other times on notice, according to the stipulation made at the time of deposit ; and mean-
while the banker was at liberty to make use of the money by lending it out at interest or Investing
है Ob mortgage or otherwise. Thus, Dr. Johnson* in 1795 in his dictionary defined a “bank”
as a “place where money is laid up to be called for occasionally” aad a “banker” as “one
that traffics in moncy, one that keeps or manages a bank.”

3.6. Some controversy seems to have arisen with reference to the question whether the CaseLan
word “bank” in the Negotiable Instruments Act connotes the business of utilising moncy for
purgeses of profit, and whether the business 1 have a commercial side to it. The Madras
High Court answered this question in the affirmative’, and held that the mere fact that the
Government Treasury received money from the District Board and respected orders issued tc

i. Sectian 3, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.

2, 69000 3(39), General Clauses Act, 1897.

3. See U.D. Trust Ltd, v. Kirkwood, (1966) 2 W.L.R, 108.

4. Paget, (HLL.) Law of Banking (1961), page 8.

3. UD. Trust Led, v. Kirkwood, (1966) 2 W.L.R, 1083, 1090,

6. Bank of Chettinad Lid. of Colombo v. Comunissianers of iacome Tax, Colombo, (1948) A.C. 378, 383 (P.C.).
7. United Dominion Trust Lid, v. Kirkwood, (1966) 2 W.L.R. 1083, 1090.

8. United Dominion Trust Lid, v. Kirkwood, (1966) 2 W.L.R. 1083.

9. Renpaswami ५. Sankaralingam, A.LR. 1920 Madras 1014.


16

it for payment would not constitute the Treasury into a bank. This controversy, however,
has not much practical importance now, because the stamp duty on cheques! was abolished
in 1927.

Beggeumecsietion 3.7. The above discussion shows that the definition of ‘banker’ in the Stamp Act is not

definition of very expressive in itself, and serves ne useful purpose, as it affords no guidance whatever.
हि

We may note that under the Banking Regulation Act?, “banking” means the accepting
for the purposes of lending or investment of deposits of money from the public repayable’ on
demand or othenvise, aud withdrawable by cheques. draft or order or otherwise.

We are of the view that for the purposes of the Stamp Act, it would be convenient to
adopt the definition in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. We may add that on this point"
@ specific question was included in our Questionnaire, and opinion generally supports this course.
Recommendation 3.8. Accordingly, we recommend that section 2(1) should be revised as follows ;

“banker” means a person who accepts, for the purposes of lending cr investment,
deposits of money from the public repayable on demand or otherwise, and
withdrawable by cheque, draft or order or otherwise.

Section 2), 3.9. The second definition relates to “Bill of Exchange” defined as follows* :—

Exchange “Bill of Exchange” means a bill of exchange as defined by the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act, 1881, and includes also a हवा, and (i) any other document,
(ii) entitling or purporting to entitle, (ii) any person, whether named therein or
not, to payment by (iv) any other person of, or to be drawn upon any other:
person for, (v) any sum of money.

The definition of “Bill of Exchange” in the Negotiable Instruments Act® is as follows!

“5. A ‘bill of exchange’ is an instrumen in writing containing (i) an unconditional
order, (ii) signed by the maker, directing (iii) a certain person to pay (iv) a
certain sum of money only to, or to the order of, {v) a certain person or to the
bearer of the instrument.”

“A promise of order to pay is not ‘conditional’ within the meaning of this section and
section 4, by reason of the time for payment of the amount ot any instalment thereof being
-expressed to be on the lapse of a certain period after the occurrence of a specified ‘event
which, according to the ordinary expectation of mankind, is certain to happen although the
time of its happening may be uncertain.

“The sum payable may be ‘certain’ within the meaning of this section and section 4,
although it includes future interest or is payable at an indicated rate of exchange, or is
according to the course of exchange, and although the instrument provides that, on default
of payment of an instalment, the balance unpaid shall become due.

“The person to whom it is clear that the direction is given or that payment is tobe
made may be a ‘certain person’, within the meaning of this section and section 4, although’.
he is misnamed or designated by description only”.

In the Law Commission’s Report’ on the Negotiable [Instruments Act, the following
revised definition of ‘bill of exchange’ has been suggested :-— :

“A ‘bill of exchange’ is an instrument in writing containing an unconditional onder,

signed by the drawer, directing a certain person to pay on demand ot at a

WanieD ि)िएिीएओिशिशथीएओ) 0 रोडरिशशाशणश।
Section 5{b), Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
Question 2 of the Questionnaire,
Numbers indicating items have been added.
. Section 5, Negotiable Instruments Act.
Numbers indicating items have been added.
}. 11th Report (Negotiable Instruments Act), page 75, Clause 4(7)Gi).

739 4७ # ३७ RS


7
fixed for determinable future time a certain sum of money only to, or to the
order of, a certain person or to the bearer of the instrument.”

3.10. The definition in the English Stamp Act’ is in similar, though not identical, terms.
It is quoted below :

“32, For the purposes of this Act the expression ‘bill of exchange’ includes draft,
order, cheque, and letter of credit, and any document or writing (except a bank
note) entitling or purporting to entitle any person, whether named therein or
not, to payment by any other person of, or to draw upon any other person
for, any sum of moncy ; and [ ] includes—

{a) an order for the payment of any sum of money by a bill of exchange or
Promissory note, or for the delivery of any bill of exchange or promissory
note in satisfaction of any sum of money, or for the payment of any sum of
money out of any particular fund which may or may not be available, or
upon any condition or contingency which may or may not be performed or

* happen ; and

(0७ an order for the payment of any sum of money weekiy, monthly, or at any

other stated periods, and also an order for the payment by apy person at

any time after the date thereof any sum of money, [.

3.11. The judgment in a Calcutta case* does point out that the words “., wee
wntitling ot purporting to catitle any person, whether named therein or not, to payment by
any जल person of any sum of money” (in the extended portion of the definition in the Stamp
‘Aét), tdanot be taken literally, because the language is so wide that it might include all sorts

Sf;isttoruments not capable of being classed as a bill of exchange. Even a mortgage or lease
‘May be a document “‘catitling any person to payment.”

3.12, It may be stated that the wide and vague language of the English and Indian provision ‘Secti
in tho inclusive part of the definition of “Bill of Exchange”, has created considerable difficulty. Blot 7

It has been held in some cases that even for the purposes of the extended definition, the Tnslusive portion.
document should possess the essential characteristics of a bill of exchange, and it must, in Drop—
elect, be ia the nature of an order or direction for the payment of money?,,6 which is the Introductory
characteristic of a bill of exchange. But this amounts to adding to the section.

3.13 In England, it has also been held®,’ that the document need not contain any CXPTCES एड 7०5५ order
order for the payment of money. But, on this point, the Indian case law is to the contrary, if required
Tt was held by the Punjab Chief Court® that whatever may be the private understanding
between the banker and the customer, the court must be Buided by what is expressly stated
da the document, हे

3.14. It would appear, that sometimes, on one and the same document, conflicting views Conficting views

have ‘béen taken in the same court on the question whether the document did or did not fall on ome and the
witli’ the extended part of the definition. + same document.

3.15. It is sometimes stated that the limitations to be read should be in the nature of Limitations—
confining the definition to documents analogous to bills of exchange and hundis. If so, it would Vagwenees of.
be. better to confine the section by suitably changing the wording in that manner. _

1. Section 32, Stamp Duties etc, Act, 1891.

2. Sn the matter of the Stamp Act, ALR, 1928 Cal. 566 (FB).

3, Back v. Robson, (1878) 3 Queens Bench Divn. 686, 691,

4. Fisher ¥. Calvert, (1879) 27 W.R. 804 (Eng).

5. Meadv. Young, (1790) 100 English Reports 876, 878.

6. Midland Bonk Ltd. v, Inland Reverse Commissioners, (1927) 2 King’s Bench, 465, 474.
7. Also soe Rothschild ४. CLT. (1894) 2 Q.B, 142.

8, In Re Stamp Act, (1912) 13 Indian Cases 330 (Pull Bench) (Chief Court of Punjab).


ete a onde
3 jundis
as ilfastrative of
‘vagueness.

Jeasel M R's
view as to section

48,
Act of 1870.

Criticism of,
definition of

note".

18

3.16. By way of illustrating the vagueness of the present definition, it may be uoted
that the question whether attested hundis known as Shahajog hundis fall within the definition
of “promissory note” or “bill of exchange”, raised considerable controversy in the Caleutta
tligh Court. In Ashe Ram’s case,' Fletcher }., held such a document to be an attested ‘pro-
missory note. In a later case? Mookerjee, J., held it to be a bond, and held that | did mot
fall within the wider definition of bill of exchange in the Stamp Act. However, in a later
case,’ Rankin, C.J., while criticising the language of the definition of “bill of exchange”, pointed
out that, taken literally the definition in the Stamp Act might cover the document in question.

3.17. In England, in reviewing the provisions of section 48 of the English Stamp Act of
1870, which were almost identical, Jessel, M.R., expressed the opinion’ that the section coukl
never have been intended to include every document coming literally within the meaning of
the words used. If that were so, almost every kind of written document could be included
as a bill of exchange, and great injustice and confusion would arise, as they could not be
stamped subsequently and would be altogether void. {t was quite plain, therefore, that the
draftsman must have intended that the words used should be read with some limitation. The
nature of the instrament must be looked at in each case, and its precise nature ascertained.

3.17A, We may, however, point out that the precise nature of the limitations to be read
has always caused difficulty. In this connection, we may refer to the criticism of the alteration
introduced by the English Act of 1870, section 49, in the difnition of “Promissory note”, by
Pollock B. (This criticism applies to “Bill of Exchange” also) :—

“It is unfortunate, 1 think, thet in a statute dealing with revenue matters natural: terms,
have been enlarged so as to create a sort of legislative document, other and
different to the document which is commonly known by the term used . pate
section we have to construe, here the legislature have taken a term of well-
known meaning, and have then said it is to mean something ९5०४१,

It has been suggested, with reference to the corresponding provision in the earlier Bnglist
Stamp Act of 1870, namely, section 48, that it will not apply to documents otherwise specifi-
cally provided for by the Act®. But, with respect, this does not remove the vageeness.

3.18. A few English cases may be noted.

In Rotischild and Sons vy. Commissioners of Inland Revenue’ the Hungarian Govere-
ment had issued certain bonds, in regard to certain loan transactions. Along with each bond
were issued coupons for the payment of interest. These coupons were payable io bearer at
the various places therein specified. It was held that the coupons were bills of exchange.
It was pointed out that in considering the effect of a document, the Court need not confine
itself to the words actually used in the document, but may go behind it and consider the
purpose for which the document has been issued, so that actual words of an order or rhandate
to pay are not indispensable. Hence, thou; ugh the interest coupons merely stated that isterest
would be paid at a certain time and place and were not bills of exchange wichin the legal definition i
of that phcase, nevertheless they came within the more general language of the Stamp Act.
may incidentally be noted thet such coupons were exemp'ed by later amendment.

In Committee of London Clearing Bankers v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue,’ it was
held that an order to a bank to transfer a sum of money from the customer's acoburtt-ite the
account of another customer of -the bank was Dill of exchange. Such a document आशिक...

1. Asha Ram प. Kesri Chand, (1912) 33 Indian cases, 24? (Cal). :
Kesri Chand ५. Asha Rart, (1915) 19 C.W.N. 1326. uo
Re. Imperial Bank of India, (1928) 32 C.W.N. 1015.
|. Fisher |. Calvert, 27 W.R. 301 (Eng).
Mortgage Insurance Corporation v, Carpnissioners L.R., 20 Q.B.D. page 651.
Adams ४. Morgan, (1883) 14 LAR. Ir. 140.
Rothschild & Sons v. Conwntssioners of tnlomd Reverse, (1894) 2 Q.B. 142, 146, 147; 70 L.T. 667,
५ Connie of Landon Clearing Baniers v. Commissioners of inland Revemve, (1895) 65 Lal .B. 76;
1QB 58,9407 209. रे (1895) 65 एन. ९७, 372, 376; (169%)

फु जे क एज # ४० ७


19

a person to “draw on” the bank. It was held in this case that the document was a bill of
exchangs payable on demand.

‘These cases do not furnish any detailed guidance as to the exact scope of the extended part.

3.19. To make matters clearer, one alternative would be to amend the section by express Possible
wards limiting the extended part to orders for the payment of money which are regarded us nego- ie

tiable otherwise than under the Negotiable Instruments Act. limitation of the
extended part,

Any instrument containing a contract to pay money,” or any other negotiable security repre-
senting money which is in a form which renders it capable of being sued on by the holder
of it pro-tempore in his own name and which is transferable, by custom of trade, by delivery like
cash,? is a negotiable instrument.*

3.20. Thus, in England, dividend warrants,‘ and share warrants® have been held to be negoti-
able instruments. as they involve the characteristics of a negotiable instrument,

The following are the characteristics of negotiable instruments :—
{1) Property passes by mere delivery ;
(2) The transferee can sue in his own name :
(3) The transferee, if a holder in due course. is not affected by the defect in Gtle of
his transferor or bis previous holder ; and
(4) The transfere is not affected by defences that may be available against previous
holders*.

3.21. Since a promissory note is an “undertaking”, while a bill of exchange is an “order”,
documents which merely amount to an undertaking should be excluded even from the extended
part of the definition of Bill of Exchange. There should be a tripartite transaction, namely, the
“person who signs the document, the person to whom it is addressed and the person in whose
fayowr -it is written. A bilateral ducument cannot be a bill of exchange under the Negotiable
ts Act®, and should not be a bill of exchange for the purposes of the Stamp Act. This
is because the theory on which an order is based is that the person to whom it is addressed
has in his hands moneys of the person who draws it, on terms of ‘paying’ such money according
to the direction of the drawer’.

- 9.22. The other alternative would be to delete the extended part of the definition. Its vague-
Aess may be iflustrated : Second
altornative—
In an English case!°, a firm of bankers, having an account at the Bank of England deletion of the
for the purpose of enabling a customer to pay customs duties on goods otherwise extended part
than in cash, issued a document addressed to the cashiers of the Bank of England,
directing them to transfer from the accouat of the bankers to the account of the
Commissioners of Customs a sum named therein. When such a document was
issued, the practice was to deal with it in one of the following two ways :

(1) It was handed by the bankers to their customer. in exchange for his cheque
for the same amount, and given by him to the Commissioners of Custom, whe
handed it to the Bank of England ; or

1, See Dixon ४, Boyil, (1856) 3 Maco. 1
Rowe v, Credit Fancier, (1873) L.R. 8 0.8. 374, 381. Miller v. Race, (1758) 1 Smith L.C. (13th Ed.) 534;

'v, Satish Chandra, 46 Cal, 331, 33
3, कला and County Banking Co. v. The London River Plate Bank Led, afftemed in (1888) 21 Q.B.D. 5367{(1887)

4. (४) Goodwin v. Roberts, (1875) L.R. 10 Ex, 337.

12 Partridge ९. England, (1845) 9 (9.8. 396 Stage २. westannster Bak, (1931) 1 K.B. 173.
5. Wpbh Bale & eee water Co., (1905) 93 L.T. 339. See also 8. 114 of the Companies Ac, 1956,
6. Compare section 114.

1, Stramons v. London Jt. Stack Bank, (1891) 1 Ch. 270, 284. Om appeal (1892) A.C. 201, 215,
8. As to the Negotiable Instruments Act, see Hafiz Umaradas v. Akbar Khan, ALR. 1934 Peshawar 1
BSopboe (० in Buck v, Robson, (1878) 3 QB.D. 686, cited in Moxisdwi v. Gaor, (1903) LL.R. 27 Boni

10. The Committee of London Clearing Bankers १. Commissioners of inland Revemae, (1896) 1 Q.B. $42,


20

(2) It was handed direct by the bankers to a Custom Officer in exchange for that
customer’s cheque, and subsequently handed by the Commissioners of Customs
to the Bank of England. It was held that the document was ६ bill of exchange
payable on demand within the meaning of section 32 of the Stamp Act, 1891,
and that it was not exempt from duty as being a “bill drawn in the United
Kingdom for the sole purpose of remitting money to be placed to any account
of public revenue” within the meaning of the 10th Exemption under the head
“Bill of Exchange” in the First Schedule to the Act. The Courts were, more-
over, of the opinion that, having regard to the history of the exemption clause,
the word “remit” only applied to the placing to its proper account money which
was already public money.

Whesbor drawer 3.22A. The wide scope is illustrated by the uncertainty as to whether the drawer ‘and the
shoukl be same —-trawee to a bill must be different persons in order that the bill may be a “bill of exchange” within
person. ime definition in the Stamp Act. In a Calcutta case,? it was held that a demand draft by one branch

of a Bank on another branch of the same Bank payable on demand to a third party, is a ‘bill of
:achange within the Stamp Act. In this case, Rankio, C.J. expressed the view that ,cven under
the definition of a bill of exchange in section 5, Negotiable Instruments Act, different persons are
not required. But, in any case, such a demand draft fell within the inclusive portion of the defi-
nition of bill of exchange in the Stamp Act. पु

As it was held to be a bill of exchange payable on demand, no duty was leviable under arti-
cle 13, Stamp Act (as amended in 1927).

3.23. In a Patna case,® it was held that the drawer and the drawee need not necessarily
be different persons. न

‘This specific aspect will be dealt with later. But the more important defect is the uncertainty”
discussed in the judgment of Rankin, C.J.+. The present definition, if taken literally, is unduly wide.
it was, therefore, suggested to us that the definition should be confined to a Bill of Exchange as
defined in the Negotiable Instruments Act, as there is no great consideration of revenue necessi-
ating a charge of tax on other documents. ‘The law, it was stated, will gain in simplicity of form _
vy the suggested amendment. Mention of “Hundi? should, no doubt, be retained. It was’ also
suggested that it would be convenient if, as regards each of the ingredients of a bill of exchange,
as defined in the Negotiable Instruments Act, a decision is taken as to which of them should be

dispensed with in the Stamp, Act.

3.24. While we have carefully considered the suggestion, we have come to the conclusion
tnat instead of amending the defitition, it is better to niitigate the consequences of its vagueness
uy amending section 35. By narrowing down the definition, जाल might exclude documents intended
५७ be covered by the extended part,

While we do not recommend ary amendment in the definition of ‘bill of exchange’, we do

recommend that in section 35, Proviso (a), the exception should be confined to bill of exchange oF |.
promissory note as defiried in the Negotiable Instruments Act or “bundi’*—even. if the exemption

Is retained at all.
Ambiguous 2.25, There is another question to be considered in connection with bills of Soot A
ts. document can fall both under bill of exchange. and under a promissory note, a8 defined, in ‘the

Negotiable Instruments Act.*,

Seo also Buck v, Robson, (1878) 3. (2.8. 686; Brive v. Banninster. (1878) 3 an be Bove, कम QED 569. :+ जि
Te the matter of the Stamp Act, ALR. 1928 Cal. $66, (3.8.) (Reference under section 57, Stamg Act). Rankin
C3). ee
Bay Komi Begun ¥. Lachman Lal Sao and Others, AIR, 1930 Pat, 239.
In the matter of the Stamp Act, ALR. 1928 Cal, 566, supra.

For action under section 35, proviso(e). न
Section 17, Negatiable Instruments Act,

PvP NO


21

Where an instroment may be construed, either as a promissory note or bill of exchange,
the holder may at his election treat it as either, and the instrument shall be thence-forward treated

accordingly.
The relevant section in the Negotiable Act reads—

“17. Where an instrument may be construed either as a promissory note or bill of
exchange, the holder may at his election treat it as cither, and the instrument shall
be thence-forward treated accordingly.”

3.26. This privilege is not taken away by section 6 of the Stamp Act; and if the holder
treats the documents as a bill of exchange, then that election governs the position for the
purposes of the Stamp Act also. This should be made clear, and we recommend accordingly.

3.27. We may now discuss the question of demand drafts. It appears that with reference
to the Negotiable Instruments Act {which defines the expression “cheque”), there is some con-
trovetsy as to whether a demand draft drawn by a banker on his own branch is or is not a bill
of exchange and a cheque. This controversy has arisen because, while sections 85A and 1315 of
that Act make limited provisions in regard to demand drafts for the protection of bankers, the
ct does not contain any comprehensive provision as to drafts.

This has led to a controversy, The High Court of Bombay? has, for example, taken the view
that a demand draft issued by a bank on its branch or vice versa is not a cheque or a bill of
sachange. Some other High Courts? have, however, held that it is a bill of exchange, and is very
aseatly allied to a cheque.

»"3.28. It would appear that, in England, the House of Lords* held, in 1903, that ‘since the
ik is both drawer and drawee, the draft drawn by a country branch of the Bank on the head
office cannot be treated as a bill of exchange, as defined in section 3 of the Bills of Exchange
Act, 1882, as it then stood. This judgment of the House of Lords dealt with other points also, and
Jed to the enactment of the Bills of Exchange (Crossed Cheques) Act, 1906.4 It is because of
this aspect of the case that the Bombay High Court made a distinction between x bank draft
on another bank and a bank draft on another branch of the same bank.

In this connection, it would be of interest to note that in the English Stamp Act,® a bill of
exchange is defined as including a draft, order, cheque and letter of credit and certain other
documents. This suggests a useful improvement in the definition of “bill of exchange” in the
stamp Act, namely, that it should include a draft. We recommend that the definition should include
drafts. .

3.29. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the definition of “bill of
exchange” should be revised—

(i) by including drafts, and
(ii) by adding the following Explanation.
“Explanation :

The provisions of section 17 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, apply for the
purposes of this Act as they apply for the purposes of that Act,”

1, (a) Sanyasalingam v.The Exchange Bank of India, ATR 1948 Bom. 1 (Coyajee J.).
(०) Aasanco v. Notesa Mudaliar, AR, 1949 Bom, 257 (Mudhofhar, J.).

2, (@) Suiganchand v. Arahmayye, AIR. 1951 Mad. 910 {D.B.).
(0). Stttte Nath v. Punjab Nationat Bank, ATR. 1960 All, 238.
(0) State Bank of India v. Mazumdar, ALR. 1970 Cal, 503,

3. Capital and Counties Bank ५. Gordon, (1900) AU ELR. (Reprints) 1017, 1024 (HL).

4. Soe Underwood Limized ¥, Bank of Liverpool, (1904) All. E.R. (Reprints) 203, 241; 131 Law. Times 271; 68 Solich
tors Journal 716, हु

Section 32, Stamp Act, 1891
24M of Law/77—4,

Enngliah ‘pase.

Recommendation
to.inchede drafe,



Recommendation,

22

We may add that these two changes have been mostly favoured? in the. replies to
the relevant question in dur Questionnaire. °

2.30. We are further of the view, for reasons already stated,? that in section 35, proviso (8),
the exception should be confined to bill of exchange or promissory note as defined in the Nego-
table Instruments Act or a hundi?—if at all the exception is retained.

‘This recommendation also bears the support of the majority of the replics to our Question-
naire.*

3.31. While section 2(2) defines a bill of exchange, section 2(3) defines ‘a bill of exchange
pavable on demand”. The first is gencric; the second is specific. The distinction between a bill
of exchange payable on demand and a bill of exchange not so payable is material for the
purposes of stamp duty.’ As from ist July, 1927, bills of exchange payable on demand are
not chargeable with any stamp duty, the relevant portion of article 15 having been deleted
in 1927. Bit! of exchange payable otherwise than on demand are chargeable with the duty
specified in article 13.

4.32. The definition of “bill of exchange” in section 2(2) refers to the Negotiable Inetra-
ments Act. But section 2(3) does not refer to that Act. Under the Negotiable Instruments Act,
a bill of exchange payable on demand is one® which is expressed to be so payable, or in which
no time is fixed for payment. This is not provided in the definition section, but in section 19
of that Act. Further, the expressions “at sight” and “on presentment” in a bill of exchange mean
“on demand”.

43,33. It is to be borne in mind that section 2(3) does not expressly provide in what ‘cases
a bill of exchange, as defined in sub-section (2), becomes payable on demand. Apparently, in
seeking the answer to this question, one has to draw up the concept of “on demand” in the Mego-
tinble Instruments Act, mentioned above. This is because the definition in the Stamp Act,;, “~~
tion 2(3), is merely intended to include certain other documents which may or may not Tait
under the generic concept of “Dill of exchange” as defined in sub-section (2).

In a sense, this is a defect in the Stemp Act, inasmuch as one 19 driven to consulting the
Negotiable Instruments Act without any express direction to that effect. This defect should be
removed by suitably referring to section 19 ‘of the Negotiable Instruments Act.

3,332. Tt may be stated that in England, the definition of bill of exchange* in the
Stamp Act is a self-contained definition which, whatever its other peculiarities, does not suffer
from the anomalous situation of the generic definition in the Stamp Act referring to the Nego-
tinble Instruments Act and the specific definition in the Stamp Act not referring to the Negotiable
instruments Act.

2.34, Section 2, sub-section (3), provides that “bill of exchange payable on demand” in-
cludes the documents specified in clauses (a), (8) and (c) of that sub-section. This does not,
of course, mean that the cnumerated documents fall within the general defizition of bill of ex-
change. All hat sub-section (3) achieves fs the Yimited result of bringing them within the definition
of “bill of exchange payable on demand”.

3.35. As tegards the documents specifically mentioned in the section, it is to be noted that
clanse (a) extends the concept of “bill of exchange” “payable on demand” in respect of & docu
ment for the payment of a sum of money ont of a particular fund which may or may not be

available or upon an uncertain condition or वा OS or upon an uncertain condition or contingency, The definition of “Di of .exchange” u
-

1. Question 3 of the Questionnaire.

2, Ses supra.

3, For action under section 35, proviso {a).

4, Question 3 of the Questionnaire.

5S. See article 13. :

6. Section 19, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.

7, Section 21, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.

8. Section 32, Stamp Act, 1891, as amended by the Finance Act, 1961.


23

in the Nogotiable Instruments Act? is, on the other hand, confined to documents which are pay-
ale in all events,—see the words “unconditional order" used in that definition. This shows the
contrast between section 2(3), clause (a), on the one hand, and the Negotiable Instruments
Act on the other hand,

3.36. Then, section 2(3), clause (0) , includes an order for the payment of 3 sum of money
at weekly, monthly or any other stated period. The expression “bill of exchange”, as defined in
the Negotiable Instruments Act, may not cover such documents,—though that Act has been in-
corporated to cover an order for payment in instalments.*

3.37, Lastly, clause (c) of sub-section (3) includes a letter of credit,—‘that is to say,
any instrument by which one person authorises another to give credit to the person in whose
favour it is drawn”. As regards stamp duty on letters of credit of credit, the matter is governed.
not by the article prescribing the duty for a bill of exchange,’ but by a separate and specific
pravision’-*,

According to Story,’ a letter of credit, “is a letter of request, whereby one person (usually
a banker) requests some other person to advance moneys or give credit to a third person, named
therein, for a certain amount and promises that he will repay such sum to the person advancing
the same or accept bills drawn upon himself for the like amount. It is called a ‘general (or open)
letter of credit’, when it is addressed to all merchants or other persons in general ; and it is
called ‘a ‘special letter of credit’ when addressed to a particular person, requesting him to make
such advance to a third person”. |

337A. For the purposes of stamp duty, letters of credit were, prior ta Act 5 of 1927,
qmretned by Article 13(0) which specified a charge of one anna on them. But there is now a
weplitate arid specific provision in Article 37, under which! the duty payable on a letter of credit
is ge rupee? The inclusion of such letters in the definition of “Bill of Exchange payable on
का ” is, thus, of no effect as regards the rate of stamp duty. The higher duty under Article 37

is payable on such letters. In this connection, section 6 is quite clear.

3,38, But & letter of credit has to be treated as a bill of exchange for the purposes of
section 35, with the result that it is rendered inadmissible in evidence even on payment of penalty,
‘Decause of the bar under that section. Thus, the result of its being included in the definition of
ill-of exchange payable on demand—section 2, sub-sectian (3)—is that it attracts the prohibi-
०७, contained elsewhere in the Act, under which an imstrument which is a bill of exchange
cannot be admitted even on payment of penalty, if it is originally unstamped.

3.39, The present position as regards letters of credit is not satisfactory. It is likely to .

shidead, as it creates the impression that the duty thereon, is the same as on a bill of exchange,
unless-one bears in mind a number of provisions referred to above. If at all the definition of
“pill of exchange payable on demand” is to be retained, then—
(i) “letter of credit” should be excludéd from that definition ; and
Gd in section 35, Proviso (a), “letter of credit” should be expressly mentioned.”
This will simplify the law. The replics to our Questiononire also generally favour it.1°

It should be pointed ont that our recommendation 10 relation to letters of credit ia confined
to the Stamp Act, and we do not express any opinion on the question whether, for the purpotts
ot the Law of Negotiable Instruments or for the purpases of any other branch of the law,
Setters of credit should or should nor be regarded as bills of exchange.

i. Section 5, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881,

2. Latahmt Dass ¥. Lekha Ram, A.T.R. 1935 All 410.
3, Aaticty 13.

4. Atticl 37.

$. Heo dyra,

6. Btory on Bills of Exchange, section 479.

7, Article 37 as amended by Act 36 of 1976.

$, Section 35, Proviso (a).

9 To be carried ont under section 35, Proviso (a).
10. Question 4,

Effect of section
35, proviso (a),


4

‘Recommends- 3.39A. To sum up our recommendations conceraing matters arising out of the definition
ons. ot “bill of exchange payable on demand”—

(a) the definition? should refer to section 19. Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, as to
the meaning of “on demand” ;

(0) letters of credit? should be excluded from the definition, and should be included
in section 35, proviso (a), Exception, if the Exception is to be retained.

Section 2(4)-- 3.40. Section 3(4) defines a “bill of lading” as including a through bill of lading, but as
not including a mate's receipt. A bill of lading is a document acknowledging the shipment of goods,
signed by or on behalf of the carrier.® It serves three functions‘—
(9) it is a receipt for goods delivered to the carrier ;
Gi) it normally embolies the terms of the contract of carriage ;
(iii) it acts as a document of title to the goods. .

A through bill of lading denotes a bill of lading issued in cases where goods are to be
cartied for a portion of the journey by land, upon conveyance belonging to some person other
than the ship-owner.

Subject to certain exceptions, a bill of lading is conclusive evidence of the shipment of
goods as against the master.

A mate’s receipt is a less formal document than a bill of lading. When the goads are
shipped, the acknowledgement first® given is a less formal receipt, known as the, mates Topnlgt.
Jt is afterwards exchanged for a bill of lading. 10 is not a document of titk, while a bi of
lading is & document of title.* ot

3.41. In England, there is no stamp duty on ॥ bill of lading."

In India, under article 14, a bill of lading, including a through bill of lading, is charged
, with a'duty of 2507, There is, however, a remission granted by notification made under ‘section 9,

in respect of inland bills of lading,* and there are also two exemptions under artcle 14 itself.

. है A bill of lading need not be necessarily in respect of carriage by a sea-going vessel, It
can be in respect of inland navigation also* But, as already stated, the duty on an fland ball. of
Jading bas been remitted,!° by a notificatian” issued under section 9.

sik ag’ 3.42. In view of the likely increase in inland water transport in the future, this ‘remission
Tittiiate article sted by notification should be incorporated in article 14 of the Schedule (relating 16 the
amount of duty on the bill of Inding). The replies to our Questionnaire also favour ३७७

But the wording of the notification™*. granting the remission is not accurate in one regpéct.
The notification remits the duty in respect of “a receipt or bill of lading issued by a railway
company or administration or an Inland Steamer Company tor the fare for the conveyance of
passengers of goods or both, or animals, or for any charges incidental to the, conveyanes thereot
or given to such Company or Administration or Inland Steamer Company for the refund ot
un overcharge made in respect of such fare or charges.” :

Stamp 4७0:

1 1. Pasa. 3.33, supra.
2 Para 3,39, agra.
3. Gladwell ५. Vall, (1786) LT.L. 216, cited in Stevens, Mexcansile Law (1969), page 340,
}. Smith & Keenan, Mercantile Law ६1: page 284,

5 Stevens, Mercaniile Law (1969), Mage oat.
6, Stevens, Mercantile Law (1969), page 344.
7, Monroe, Stamp Dutles (1954), page 196.
8. See Below, for discussion about the notification granting remission.
9. Reference under the Stamp Act, (1903) LL.R. 30 Cal, 363.

10. Governmeat of India, Notificatian No. 6, dated 14-84937.

11. The relevant portion of the notification 1s quoted late,

12, Question 5 of the Questionnaire.

43. Government of ‘India, Notification No. 6, dated 14-8-1937.


25

The emphasis on fares is not required, in relation to 8 bill of lading. A bill of iading is
not concerned primarily with the fare. It records the contract of shipment, evidences the
receipt of goods and is a document of title. Fare is-merely an incident of the contract. Hence,
while incorporating the substance of the notification as an exemption under article 14, the defect
In the language should be attended to.

3.43, In the result, no changes are needed in the definition of “bill of lading”, But a Recomiéedation.
change is recommended in Acticle 14, as stated above. ह

‘7. To be carried out ander खॉलिवाव,..... | ख्ज्नल्ग्ाू॒]ू]/]जू]ू]चजक्णशा््जाण


I

Sention 2520०.

CHAPTER 4
DEFINITIONS IN SECTION 2(5) TO 2(10)
4.1. The definition of “bond” in section 2(5) is as follows :
“(5) “bond” includes—

(8) any instrument whereby a person obliges himself to pay money to another,
on condition that the obligation shall be void if a specified act is performed,
of is not performed, as the case may be ;

(0) any instrument attested by 2 witness and not payable to order or bearer,
whereby a person obliges himself to pay money to another; and

(०) any instrument so attested, whereby a person obliges himself to deliver grain or
other agricultural produce to another.”

4.2, This definition consists of three parts, which may appear somewhat heterogeneous.
The common element in the three clauses of the definition appears 10 be that of an “obligation”,
because the word “obliges” appears in each of the clauses. It can also be said that the obligation
should be eithec to pay moncy cr to deliver grain ot othee agricultural produce. Clauses (0)
and (०) also require attestation, which is not required in clause (a). At this stage, we are
mentioning these salient features in order to bring out the gencral ides of the definition and such
characteristics as can be usefully emphasised.

4.3. 1६ can be stated that a bond is a kind of agreement, and but for the specific provision
charging duty on a bond,? such instruments would have been chargeable under the generic ‘article
relating to agreements” It is only because of the specific provision charging a higher duty
on bonds that a bond has to be distinguished from an agreement, and it is from that point of
wew that the definition of “bond” assumes considerable practical importance.

It may be convenient to mention here that clause (a) of the definition refers to what
are known in England as double or conditional bonds.

Clause (b) of the definition refers to simple money bonds. Clause (c) refers to simple
sorumodity bouds.

So much by way of introduction, We shall now proceed to deal with specific points com
cerning each of the clauses.

4.4. As regards clause (2) of the definition, questions arise a8 to in what circumstances
agteements with penalty clause can be regarded as “bonds”, particularly because of ihe provi-
sions of section 74, Contract Act, which give relief against penalty. Some decisions* take the
new that a covenant with a penal clause cannot be 3 “bond” under clause (a).

Against this view, it can be argued that Jilusirations (d) and (g) to section 74 of tie
Indian Contract Act do use the word “bond”, thus indicating that a “bond” in the general scnne
can have a penal clause, The true test under the Stamp Act, however, is, whether the obligation
to pay money is the primary and immediate aim, or whether that is only a sanction to enforve
another obligation which does not relate to the payment of money. Apart from casep- which
turn on their special facts,‘ this seems to be the general position. In any case, the practical i

4, Article 15,

2, Acticie 5.
3. (a) Guborne & Co, १. Subal Bowrl, (1882) LL.R. 8 Cal. 284, 236.

(७) Collector of Rangoon v. Hanng Aung Ba, ALN. 1916 LB, 100, 101.
4 Dc Nand Lalv. Karam Chand, ALB. 1920 Lab, 481.

6



27

portance of clause (a) is small, -having regard to the comparatively infrequent use of such
zotm of bonds in Indian conveyancing practice. है

4.5. Tt has been suggested to us that in clause (a) also, attestation should be required
as in clauses (b) and (c). The common elements of a bond, it was stated, would be (i) aa obli-
gation, and (ii) a formal clement of attestation, -and it was stated that there was no teason why,
1m clause.(a) also, the formal element should not appear.

In this connection, reference was also made to a Lahore judgment! and the observations
made therein while considering the question whether a certain document was a “bond” within
the Limitation Act. The Limitation Act? defines a “tond” as follows :

“(d) “bond’ includes anv instrument whereby a person obliges himself to pay money
to another, on condition that the obligation shall be void ff a specified act is
performed, or is not performed, as the case may be.”

Stai Lal, C.J., examined the definition in the Stamp Act also, and made the following
comments :-

“From the foregoing, it is clear that the definition of the term “bond” even in the
present Stamp Act is not exhaustive, and that the term in the course of vears. has
been extended 50 as to include instroments which might not have fallen under

पु the earlier definition. Indeed, it is difficedt to understand why in the instruments
an described in clauses (b) and (c). attestation shouid he regarded as essential and
art not so in the instruments described in clause (a)."*

4.6. We have carefully considered the suggestion. But. as no practical difficulty has been
_causéd by the present position, we do not think it necessary to accept the suggestion.

4.7. This takes us to clause (b) of the definition of “bond”. That claute includes “any
fnvtrtmaent attested by a witness and not payable to order or bearer. whereby a-person obliges
hibtedif to pay money to another.” This clause requires two. positive conditions, and. one
negative condition. The positive conditions are that the instrument—

(1) must be one whereby a person obliges himself to pay money to another; and हि
(i) must be attested. :

The negative condition is that 1९ must not be payable to order or bearer. We shall first
@iseuss the positive conditions.

4,8. The crucial word in clause (b) of the definition. is the word “obliges”. and. therefore.
no document can be a “bond” unless it is one which, by itself, creates the obligation. to ‘pay
the money.

Tt obligation, it is generally held. should not, therefore, be a pre-existing one. Where
the already exists, a subseqnent document merely reproducing the nature of the obtiga
tion Gdes not itself create a fresh obligation and therefore, for the purposes of the law of starixp,
it remngigs an “agreement”; and does not come within the definition of “bond™*

45, On the same principle, that is to say. in the ‘absence of words expressly ;cteafing.an
ide, courts generally take the view that ani-cntry in the books of account of the plainvalf.
be acknowledges a debt and is signed by the debtor, is not necessarily a bond. If
a mere belance struck, it is an acknowledgment; if i is foffowed by. words like “baki 0७१8९, 1६

1. Hidhawe Mat v, Karim Baksh, AR. 1925 Lahore 415 (Shadi Lal, C11.
2, Seation 2(0), Limitation Act, 1963. .
3. Emphasis added.
4, Bivalal v. Quaen Empress, (1895) 1.L.R. Calcutta 757.
5. (a) Mat Dhan Gupta y. Board of Revenue, (1969) Allababad Law Journal 333;
(b) West Coarr Electroplating Campony Lid. ५. Sreedharan, (1971) Kerala Law Times 383.

‘Whether
al

i

in

Sectit |.
४४७


Cotton 1५० with
promisory-note.

28

amounts to an agreement; and if it embodies a promise to pay, it is chargeable as a जाप
if the other formalities required by the definition of bond are present. The other positive
condition is of attestation—e solemn formality.

4.10. So much as regards the two positive conditions in clause (b). The negative condition
requires that the instrument should not be payable to order or bearer, the object of this require-
ment being that if the instrument is payable to order or bearer, it could fall under the definition.
of “promissory note”, which is governed by special charging provisions and other special pro-
visions.

A comparison with the definition of “promissory note” would be useful at this stage. Under
the Stamp Act, a promissory note means a promissory note as defined by the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, The definition also contains an inclusive portion, but that portion ix
not relevant for the present purpose. Under the Negotiable Instruments Act,* a promissory
note is an instrument In writing, containing an unconditional undertaking to pay a certain sum
of money only to, or to the order of, a certain person or to the bearer of the instrumacat. No
doubt, there are some instruments which do not amount to bonds within the Stamp Act, because
they are not attested as required by clause (४). There are, on the other hand, some dochments
which do not amount to ‘promissory notes’ under the Negotiable Instruments Act, because the
sum is not certain or the undertaking not unconditional.

4.11, There are differences as well as similarities between monds and promlssory-noies.
In the first place, a promissory-note, in its proper and legal form, could not well be confounded
with a bond under clause (2), i¢., a bond with a condition, for such a promissory note must.
be “an unconditional undertaking”; nor could it be mistaken for 3 bond under clause (c) to
deliver grain, as-the subject of a promissory-note can be “money only”. ~

As to simple bonds for money falling under clause (b), such bonds could not be mistaken
for promissory-notes executed in the ordinary form, 1.6., payable to ‘order’ or to ‘bearer’, which
Constitutes their negotiability, because instruments so worded are expressly excluded by clause (b).

4.12. A fusther distinction between 8 ‘bond’ as described in clause (b) and a promissory-
note which 8 not expressed so as to indicate negotiability is sometimes thus stated. ‘The language
of g bond indicates an “obligation”, while that of a note constitutes a “promise” or undertaking
to pay. But this distinction, though easy to formulate in theory, proves difficult in practice.
The distinction between these instruments ‘when losely worded, is often difficult to teace. There
are situations where a document can fall under boh. If there is, im an instrument, an uncendt-
tional undertaking to pay money to a specified person, and the instrument is attested, it will,
prima facie, fait under both the definitions, i.c. the definitions of ‘promissory note’ and ‘bon’.

4,13, An objection could be raised that since the instrument is not expressed to be payable
to order or bearer, it falls within the defition of ‘bond’, because the <n ae omen n
that definition is not fulfilled. But, as to this objection, attention must be invited | आप 4
Ce fang one cee pee eo .
1919) provides (in effect), that 2 Dill of Exchange, promote or cheque payable to 4 spectta
person is to be regarded as payable to this order, unless there are provisions tte i
transferability. It is this provision which has caused some controversy. Is this provision in
section 13 of the Negotiable Instruments Act to be read for the purposes of intespretipg. snc-
tion 2(5) (0), Stamp Act, (ie. the partion referring to ‘not payable to order of pease’), ;
is it to be airegnred for the purposes ot te जाए AE? क्न्‍खए i ae

4 , 35 Pr jab Records 1903 (Full Bench).

> Gulab Gand mes Male (1972) Madhya Pradesh Law Tournal 63.
3. Dulabh ४. Rahman, LL.R. 14 Bombay 511.

५ पूरक Instruments Act, 1561
§. Section 4, Negotiable In: | हे
& section 13, Negotiable Testruments Act {as amended in 1915).



oy

29

Thus, a pronote payable to X is, under the amendment, to be regarded 88 payable to ‘X
or order’ (by virtue of the Explanation), if there are, in the instrument, no words prohibiting
transfer or indicating an intention that ir shall not be transferable.' A promissory not ‘payable
10 A’ was not negotiable before the amendment. But, after the amendment, by virtue of the
Explanation, the words ‘payable to A’ mean ‘payable to A’, or order, and such a note is thus
fendered negotinbie, unless it is expressly made ‘payable to A only’, thereby prohibiting its
transfer.

4,14, The history of section 13 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, referred to above, is of
interest. To be negotiable, a promissory-note, a bill of exchange or a cheque must be made payable
to order or bearer under the section. Even if it was not made expressly payable ५0 order or
bearer’, the custom and usage of merchants in Bombay recognised a cheque from which the word
‘bearer’ was stuck out, and the word ‘order’ was not substituted therefor, as an ‘order’ cheque
and, ax such, negotiable. In a Bombay case,? however, the High Court refused to recognise
this custom as, if recognised, 1६ would have the effect of overriding the express provisions of
law‘in section 13 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, (as it then stood). This decision caused
@ great deal of hardship to the mercantile community, and to remove the hardship, an Explana-
tion was added to section 13 of that Act, by an amending Act (Act 8 of 1919) to the following
effect :--

“Explanation 1.—A promissory-note, bill of exchange or cheque is payable to order
which is expressed to be payable to a particular person, and does not contain
words prohibiting transfer or indicating an intention that it shall not be transfer-
able.”

4.15, The question whether this provision (ie., the amendment in section 13 of the

_ Negotiable Instruments Act) is to be read for the purposes of the Stamp Act also, has caused

2 aaterence of opinion amongst the High Courts,* as also amongst the Judges in the same High

The documents involved in the cases before the various High Courts did not contain
the words ‘or order’. The question arose whether the provision (that the instrument must not
‘be payable to order or bearer), was satisfied. Answer to the question depended on whether
the ‘above provision of the Negotiable Instruments Act, as amended, was, cr was not, to be
taken‘lirita account for the purposes of the Stamp Act also.

Several shades of view seem to be current on the subject—

(1) Section 13, Negotiable Instruments Act (as amended in 1919), is to be read for
the purposes of the Stamp Act also. and, therefore, an instrument containing an unconditional
undertaking ta pay to a specified person, if there is no express restriction on transfer, is to be
excloded from the definition of ‘bond’, as it is to be treated as payable to order, though not so
expressed.*

(2) Section 13, Negotiable Instruments Act is not to be so read, as the section is intended
to define what is a ‘negotiable instrument’, and is nor relevant to the definition of ‘bond’ for
the purposes of the Stamp Act.®

1. (a) Bibt Kazm! Begum v. Lachman Lal Sao, A.LR. 1930 Pat. 239. 240.
(0) Gulabelr v, Nathmal, ATR. 1932 Nag. 23, 25.
(०) Bankidas y. Tanabai, ALR. 1929 Nag. 274, 275.
(&) Forbes, Forbes, Campbell and Co. v. Official Assignee, Bombay, ALR. 1925 Bom 173,
2. Desabhai ५. Virchand, ALR. 1919 Bom. 73.
3. 869 the caselaw reviewed in—
(8) Kadorilal v. Sukital, AJ.R. 1968 M.P. 4, 8, 9, paragraphs 10 to 12 (Gohwalkar and Bhave 3J.).
(ए) 2, Sohab v. M.H. Gandly, A.LR. 1773 Bom, 27.
4. BG. Raja Rajeshwari Debt, ALR. 1959 &1. 583 (FB).
5, Kadorilal v. Sukhial, A.LLR. 1968 MP. 4 (D.B.).
6. @@) Khetra Mohan v, Janiini Kanta Devan, 1.1... 54 Cal. 445; ALR. 1937 Cal. 472;
(0) Ram Narayan, AR. 1962 Pat, 325, 329 (Ramaswami, C.J. and Chaudhary, J.).
© ALR. 1973 Bam. 27.
24M of Law!17—5

Section 13,
Negotial

‘astrument
Act—Histary.


Recommendation
regarding section
25)).

Recommendation

‘Site की.

Socthay 2(5)(0)--
Stipulation for
debvery in
pursuance of an
agreement,

30

(3) The matter must be determined on a consideration of the intention of the parties.
id the parties intend the instrument to have the commercial character of 8 pronote, or was
it the intention only to record the obligation by che party undertaking to pay ? In a case which
went up to the Privy Council,’ this test was applied, and, in his usual forceful way, Lord Atkin
described the anomaly that would arise if the net of negotiability were cast wide.”

(4) Negotiability is not a pre-requisite of the document being regarded as a pronote, for
the purposes of the Stamp Act Section 13 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (as amended)
should be taken into account, for the purposes of the Stamp Act also.

From the discussion in a Gujarat case,* and in a Bombay case,® it would appear that this
controversy is still subsisting. A clarification is, therefore, desirable.

4.16, In order to clarify the position, we recommend that the words “expressed to be”,
should be added in clause (9), before the words “payable to order or bearer”. Though it could be
argued that to treat such a document as a bond. would create disharmony between the Stamp
Act and the Negotiable Instruments Act, we are deliberately making this recommendation, im
view of the fact that if the document is regarded as a promissory note, 1101९ the document
cannot be admitced in evidence under the existing law, even on payment of the deficiency and
penalty, We do not see any strong reason why the category of documents not admissible on

payment of penalty should be enlarged.
4.17 We, therefore, recommend that clause (b) of the definition of “bond” should be

revised so as to read as follows :—
“(b) any instrument attested by a witness and not expressed to be payable to order
or bearer, whereby a person obliges himself to pay money to another.”

4.18, Clause (c) of the definition of “bond” includes any instrument attested by a witgess
“whereby a person obliges himself to deliver grain or other agricultural produce to angther”:
There is a contlict of decisions on the question whether an attested instrument centaining -@
stipulation for the delivery of grain or other agricultural produce in pursuance of an agreement
for the sale of such article is a “bond” within this clause. The majority view is that such ap
instrument will be a “bond”, and chargeable as such.” Thus, in a Bombay case,* it was held,
following an earlier decision,’ that an ordinary agreement for a sale of a crop or mortgage of
a crop becomes a bond if it is attested by witnesses. The attestation is a necessary characteristic
of the boud, but it is not an essential characteristic of a document incorporating mortgage ot
crop or sale of crop, as the validity of these transactions does not depend upon the attestation
of the document, and they can be carried out by documents which are not attested. Aind the
bond is the basis of transaction over which is superimposed a transaction of mortgage or sate and
in such a case, the document shares and retains the character of a bond along with the thendeterts-

tics of mortgage or sale respectively.

The other view is that the obligation to pay money and the obligation to deliver crops is
incidental to and is a necessary part of the mortgage of crop or of the sale of crop respectively,
and, in a transaction of mortgage of crop or of sale of crop, the element of bond, if there be any,

ar Khan v. Attar Sigh, ALR. 1936 P.C. 171 (Lord Atkin).

1941 Nag. 1. |
fai, AJR, 1968 Guj. 1, 5, 6. patagraph 5 (Bhagwati and Shah, JJ.).
Bhai, AVR. 1971 Gujarat 252 (A.D. Desai and D.P. Desai, 71.)-

1. Mokd. Akbi

2. See also Gaxpaldes, A.
4, Jagiivandas ¥. Geman!
4. Parshottam v. fshwar
5.
6,
7.

A.LR. 1973,Bom. 27.
Section 35, Proviso (a)
(a) Inve Balti Bros, (1906) 8 Bom. L.R. 234, 238 (S.B.).
(० Rupehand v. Burkue, (1884) Bom. 2.7. 257:
एस Fn re Gajraj Sigh, (1387) LER. 9 AML. 585, 589:
(वे £.H. Sugar Factory, Pilibhit v. Mori, A.LR. 1941 All. 243, 247,
JJ. contra);

fe) Collector Nimar v. Laksiinichandra, AUR. 1927 Nag. 32, 73, 74.
|. Inve मेंबर Brothers, (1906) है Bor. LR. 234.
9. Rupchand ¥. Barks, (1884) Bom. PJ. 257 (5.8.).

257, 258 (Majority view—Bajnai and Verm

cy



31

is entirely submerged in the transaction of sale or mortgage. and it is unnatural language to
describe a transaction of a sale or mortgage of a crop as a bond, simply because there happens
to be an attestation of the document, and in such a case attestation may well be regarded as
surplusage. The obligation to pay money and to deliver crops are exclusively referable to sale
and mortgage transactions, and they should not be treated as independent covenants furnishing
the basis of a bond. ‘There is high judicial authority in support of either of these contentions,
In a Full Bench case of the Bombay High Court,’ after expressing a doubt whether the real
intention of the Legislature was being carried out by interpreting the transaction in the manner
in which it did, 1 has been held that a document recording a sale of goods if attested becomes
a bond, and ceases to be exempt from duty and becomes liable to pay duty as on a bond.

; ‘The judgment of the Court (which was delivercd by Sir Lawrence Jankins) contains no
discussion of Taw, and is based upon a previous authority of the Bombay High Court, to which
the Court held, itself bound.

‘The Full Benches of the Madras High Court? and Bombay High Court’ have held that a
document resembling a promissory note, if attested, becomes a bond. -

4.19, It showld, however, be noted that the Bombay High Court has, 10 a later decision,
held that the agreement in order to come within the definition of bond, must constitute a debt,
and must be capable of specific performance, That case related to an agreement to fend money
> a partnership. It was held that such an agreement does not create an obligation to pay money
within clause (b). The reasoning was that an agreement to lend moncy is not capable of
specific performance, and it creates no debt though its breach may give rise to a claim for

damages.

‘The matter has come up more than once before the Allahabad High Court. In a case®
decided in 1936, the executant, who had received money from the other party, had mortgaged his
sugarcanc. There was another stipulation that the cxecutant would supply the sugarcane
exclusively to the sugar works of the mortgagee. The latter stipulation was regarded as a bond,
being wholly apart and scparate from the mortgage. In the same case, however, 8 stipulation
to deliver in pursuance of sale, contained in another document—which was the third document
in the case—was excluded from the definition of “pond”.

4,20. In a case, decided by the Allahabad High Court in 1941, the document in issue (being
attested) was, on the facts, held by a mojority of the judges’ te be a bond. The minority® dis-
sented, on the ground that the obligation to deliver grain was only incidental. According
to the majority, however, this test was isrelevant.®

‘The same view (holding such document to be 3 bond) has been taken in a later Full

Bench case of the Allababad High Court*°

In many of the cases cited above, the question whether the document would .be exempt
under article 5 by virtue of the exemption under that article in respect of an agreement for
the sale of goods, has also becn debated. That controversy was (no doubt, of importance
for the actual decision in cach case; but that controversy should be kept apart for the present
purpose, because. even jf the document is exempt under article 5, the main question to be

first determined is about the scope of section 2(5)(c)—“bond”.

| Inve Balti Bros., (1906) ४ Bom. LR. 234.
हि ५19 Mad. 158 (F.B.),

* ven ference का ear a 908) LLR. 29 Bom, 82; 6 Bom. Le sat ०१. ५3
Hitawardhak Cotton Milis ४५ ‘Sorahji, 1909 TLR. 33 Bom. 426 (Scott. ch Baer and | noite nt 2
1 2 जाए of Revenye, AIR. 1936 All, 481, 492 (5-8. of 3 dudaes) portion
LEE आपका Factory v. Moti, ALR. 1041 All. 243, 247, 358, 267, 272, 277.
abel Abmad, Ag. CJ.. Mulla aad Dat, 35- .

and Bajpai, 35.
के vont, Taba! ताकत, Ag. Cs judgments page 247. 8.3
Rewemie Board «. P.B. Sitgh, ALR. 1957 TAIL, 391, 393, pata 22(F.B.

SY AN AAR PT


Recommendation
relating to clause
©.

Recommendation,

Section 25) and
attestation.

32

4.21. Here, one does find oneself in a dilemma. If an obligation to deliver grain etc,
arising under an agreement on sale is excluded, then there is very little scope left for clause (c).
An agreement to detiver grain under a hypothecation bond would, of course, still fall within
clause (c) (if the decument is attested), but an instrument coniaining such an obligation
would be chargeable av a “mortgage of a crop”,’ and would not raise controversy in practice.

It is desirable that the legislative policy on the subject should be indicated more clearly.
One alternative would be 10 modify clause (c) so as to exclude cases where the obligation is
in pursuance of an agreement to sell the grain or produce. The opposite alternative would
be to include such cases. Attestation will, of course, be required, as at present. Which-
ever alternative is preferred, the position regarding chargeability of the document would not be
governed entirely by the definition of bond. Reference will also have to be made to article 15,
and to the case aw on article 5. The object in suggesting an amendment of section 265) (०)
is only to clarify the position with reference to the definition of “bond”.

4,22. We are of the view that the first alternative should be preferred, since it is unrealistic
to inchide such agrecments within “bonds”. An Explanation should, therefore, be added to
clause (०), to the effect? that an agreement containing a stipulation for delivery of grain or
other agricultural produce in pursuance of an agreement for the sale of such article does not
amount to a bond wehin the definition in the Stamp Act.

4,23. Section 2(5)(b) and 2(5)(c) use the expression “attested”, but there is a0 defini-
tion of that expression in the Stamp Act. There is a definition of “attestation” in section 63(c),
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925). This is a reproduction of the definition of the term
as given in the earlier Succession Act.*-*

The definition of “attested” in the Indian Succession Act is as follows® :—

“(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen
the testator siga or affix his mark to the will or has seen some other person
sign the will in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received
from the testator a personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or of
the signature of such ather person; and each of the witnesses shall sign the
will in the presence of the testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than -
‘one witness be present at the same time, and no particular form of attestation

shail be necessary.”

4,24, In the Transfer of Property Act, there is a definition of “attestation”. The definition
in the Transfer of Property Act* is quoted below :—

“attested”, mm relation to an instrument, means and shall be deemed always to have
meant attested by two er more witnesses cach of whom has seen the executant
sign or aifx his mark to the insirument, or has seen some other person sign
the instrument in the presence and by the direction of the executant, or hus
received from the executant a personal acknowledgement of his signature or
mark, or of the signature of such other person, and each of whom has signed the
instrument in the presence of. the executant; but it shall not be necessary that
more than one of such witnesses shall have been present at the same time, and:
no particular form of attestation shall be necessary.”

Article 41.
This is not a draft.
Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1365)—section 50(3).
| See—{a) D. Fernandez v. R. Alives, (1878) LL.R. 3 Bom. 382:

(b) Nita Gopal v. Nagendra Nack, (1885) LL.R. 11 Cal. 429.
5. Section 63(¢), Indian Succession Act, 1925.
, Section 3, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

# ००४८

an


33

4.25, It may be desirable to have definition adopting one of the two precedents referred Recommendation.
to above. We prefer that contained in the Transfer of Property Act—ol course, with the
modification that one witness should do. We may add thet the change recommended by us
have generally found favour with most of the replies to our Questionnaire,’ wherein we had
included specific queries as to the points which we have discussed above concerning s. 2(b)
and 5. 2(०2.

4.26. The following tough draft is recommended—

“Explanation.—in this clause, “attested”, in relation to an instrument, means attested
by at least one witness who has secn the executant sign or affix his mark to the
instrument, or has seen some other person sign the instrument in the presence
and by the direction of the executant, or has received from the executamt a
personal acknowledgement of bis signature or mark, or of the signature of such
other person, and has signed the instrument in the presence of the executant;
but no particular form cf attestation shall be necessary.”
Section X6}—~

4.27. Section 2(6) defines the expression “chargeable”, and necds no change. “char a
geal ig reeable’

4.28. Section 2(7) defines “cheque” 23 meaning a bill of exchange drawn on a specified . 4, अ7--
banker and not expressed to be payable otherwise than on demand. The definilion of “cheque” “Cheque”.
in the Negotiable Instruments Act is identical. In England,® the Bilis of Exchange Act defines
“cheque” as a bill of exchange drawn on a banker payable on demand. The English Stamp
Act does not define a “cheque”. The word ‘specified” occurring in our Negotiable Instruments
Act, is not to be found in the Bills of Exchange Act, and the requirement of demand is expressed
in positive terms. It may be noted that the definition in the (English) Bills of Exchange Act,
is itself based on a judicial decision.*
We are not, however, concerned with these minute differences between the Negotiable
“Instruments Act and the Bills of Exchange Act as regards the definition of “cheque”. If, in
faite, the Negotiable Instruments Act is revised, the definition in the Stamp Act could be
reconsidered if that is regarded as appropriate.
4.29. In England, cheques are subject to Stamp Duty ;* bur the person to whom the Stamp Duly on
cheque is presented may, if it is unstamped.® affix thereto an adhesive stamp of the requisite pera”
amonnt.?

I¢ may be noted that stamp duty is not leviable in India on cheques now, because article 13
which levies a duty on a bill of exchange was so amended in 1927 as to remove the duty.
What, then, is the significance of the definition of “cheque” in the Indian Stamp Act ? So far
as could be ascertained, and apart from the articles, there is one section of the Stamp Act®—
séetion 30--—-which now uses the expression “cheque”.—That section provides that any person
receiving any money exceeding twenty rupees in amount, er_any bill of exchange, cheque or
promissory note for an amount exceeding twenty rupees—shall, on demand, give a duly stamped
receipt for the same. The expression “cheque” appears in a few articles also. Thus, the
definition has very limiled utility. However, no changes appear to be necessary in this
4.30. Section 2(9) defines the expression “Collector”, and needs no change. Section 29)}—
4.31. Section 2(10) defines a “conveyance” as follows :— "Collector".
“(10) ‘Conveyance’ includes a conveyance an sale and every instrument by which Section 2(10)-~
property whether movable or immovable is transferred inter vives, and which
is not otherwise specifically provided for by Schedule 1.”

‘Question 6.

Section 6, Negotiable Instrument Act, 1882

Section 73, Bills of Exchange Act, 1882 (Eng.}.

Hopkinson vs. Fostor (1874) L. R. Eq. 74.

The Stamp Duty is a fixed one of 2 peave.

Section 38(2), Stamp Act, 1891.

Aa to drafts, see discussion relating to section 44}--“bill of exchange”.
Section 30.

SAY eee


34

The broad divisions of this inclusive definition are two :—
(a} Conveyance on sale; and
(b) Other instruments.

A “conveyance on sale” is not defined in the Act.

A conveyance on sale is defined’ in England as including? “(1) every instrument, and
every decree or order of any court or of any commissioners, (2) whereby any property, or
any estate or interest in any property (3) on the sale thereof (4) is transferred to or vested
in a purchaser er any other person on his behalf or by bis direction.”

Requirement. 4.32. Conveyances on sale present no problems. As regards “other instruments”, three points
must be noted :
(i) There must be transfer (inter vivos) 5
(7) Ail property is covered—movable or immovable ;
(iii) Bue an mstrument otherwise specifically provided for, is not a conveyance.

As regards the first requirement, it is to be noted that it is immaterial whether the transfer
is for or without consideration except that gifts are specifically covered separately. Nor are the
circumstances of transfer of any conscquence. For example, @ transfer on amalgamation of
companies, would be covered".

4.33. As regards the second requirement, what is to be noted is that transfer of any
“property” is covered. The property may be—
(8) a dett*,

(b) good-will5, which has been described by Lord Mecnaghten as the benefit and good ~~
advantage of the name, reputation and connection of a business, and “the attrac-
tive force which brings in custom® ;

(c) trade mark’ ;

(9) patent® ;

(e) benefit of a contract? ;

(7) a share in a company?® ;

(g) goods.
(Goods can be transferred by delivery. But, if the transfer takes the form of an.
instrument, duty is payable.).

‘Thus, under the present Act, all transfers of property movable or immovable on sale or
otherwise and not otherwise specially provided for by the schedule, are chargeable as “conve-
yarces”. The transfers otherwise provided for in the Schedule are —

Agreement relating to deposit of title deeds ete. (Art. No. 6).
Composition Deed (No. 22);
Equitable Mortgage (No. 30) 5

_ Stamp Act, 1891, section 54, ह
The जाकर in brackets are not fouad in the English Act, but are added here for convenience,
‘There is, however, executive remission for transfor of assets on amalgamation etc.
‘As to assignment of debts, see—Doraiswami Mudaliar, ALR. 1925 Mad. 753 (Ramesam J.)
Reference under the Stamp Act, (1896) LL.B, 23 Cal. 283,
LRG. ५ Muller, (1901) A.C, 217; (1900-1903) AU E.R, Rep, 413.
Benjamin Brooke & Co. २. ER.C., (1896) 2 0.8. 356, 359 (CA).
"Smelting Co. of Australia, (1897) 1 QB. 175, 180, 181 (C.A).

Nathu ¥. Hanwraj, (1907) 9 Bom, LR. 119, 121 (Russelld.).
| Coats ५. LLR.C., (1397) 2 0.8. 423.

Seeravapye


35

Exchange ot property (No. 31) ;
Gift (No. 33) ;

Lease (No. 35) ;

Mortgage deed (No. 40) ;
Mortgage of Crop (Art, 41) ;
Partition’ (Article 45) ;
Reconveyance (No. 54} ;
Release (४०. 55) ;

Settlement (No. 58) ;

Transfer of share etc. (No. 62),
Transfer of lease (No. 63) ;
(Declaration of} Trust (No. 64).

4.34. Duty on a conveyance is subject to the exemption under article 23. In determining Duty.
the stamp duty, the substance of the transaction, as disclosed by the whole of the instrument, has
to be looked to, and not merely the operative part of the instrument? *, The use of any particular
words like “release*”, “relinquish”, “assign” or “transfer” in amy instrument does not conclusively
determine the nature of the instrument.

4.35. The question whether 2 document is a conveyance or a release often proves a difficult Conveyance or
one 10 decide, This is so when the transferee has already a share, or a semblance of a share, in "2°
the property in which a share is transferred. The duty on a decd of release is lower than that
On a conveyance for the same amount®. A few cases will illustrate the difficulty.

‘An a Bombay case°, the executant of the dcecument, purporting to be entitled to a share in
going pressing factory, transferred absolutely the whole of that share to the other person
interestéd in the factory, in consideration of a certain sum. It was held that the document was a
conveyance on sale of property.

Ja a Mysore case’, by mutual agreement, one partner retired from business. and he executed
a document whereby he gave up his share in favour of the other partner, in consideration of a
certain sum of money. Jt was held that the deed could be classified as a conveyance, and hence it
was unnecessary to consider whether the deed might also be regarded as a release. This Mysore
case dissented from an earlier Madras Full Bench case*, which itself had sought to distinguish
the Bombay case*. The Madras case held that a document by which one co-owne: purports to
abenslen or relinquish his claim to the share to which he would be entitled, is in the nature of
g@aakease. The (0७0 had remarked that a document under which one Hindu co-parcener purported
to give up right in the family property in favour of the remaining co-perceners would not be a
deed of conveyance, but a deed of release. On this point, the Mysore High Court observed! ;

“T am unable to see any material distinction between the share of a co-owner in a
particular immovable property and a co-owner’s rights and interests in the assets
of the partnership, for the purpose of determining whether the instrument is a
conveyance or release. Nor have their Lordships (ie. the Madras High Court)
stated why the extinguishment of the interest of the releasing co-owner and the

1. On one view, partition is a transfer; on another view, it is not: See cases under section 10, 53 etc. Transfer of
Property Act. ’

2. Ballerishna Bihari v. Board of Revenue, HP, ALR. 1970 M.P."74 (FB).

Veukatachalapathi v. State of Mysore, A.T.R. 1966 Mys. 323 (F.B.).

As to release, see infra.

Acticle 55.

का the matter of Hivalal Navuiram, (1908) LLL.R. 32 Bom. $05 (F.B.).

Venkatachalapathi ९, State of Mysore, A.I.R. 1966 Mys, 323 (FB).
Board af Revenne v. Murugesa Mudatiar, A. 1955 Mad. 641,
In she matter of Hiralal Navatram, (1908) L .. 30 Bom. 505.

99:१७ ७ #

Venkatachalpathi +. State of Mysore, ATR. 1966 Mys. 323, 330,

जि


Conflict.

36

enlargement of the interest of the release co-owner, cannot amcunt to a conveyance
of the undivided interest of the former to the latter.”

Tn a Mysore case of 19701, it was observed :

sso... Whatever may be the name given to a document by the parties, the docu-
iment will have to be examined in the light of the language employed in it and
the objects sought to be achieved before any decision in regard to its effect can
be arrived at. It is no doubt true that in ordinary circumstances or in a mojority of
cases, a release deed is executed by one or more co-shares of a property in favour
of the remaining co-sharer or co-sharers whereby the fitst-named release their
interest of the second-named?. But, as pointed out by the Supreme Court’, although
a deed described as a release deed can be usefully employed as a form of conve-
yanece by a person having some right or interest to another having a limited estate
e.g. by a temainderman to a tenant for life, and the release then operates as an
enlargement of a limited estate, it can also be made by using words of sufficient
amplitude to transfer title to one having ne title before the transfer.”

In the Mysore case, the brothers who were members of a joint Hindu family transferred
their interest in the joint family property to their father, but without consideration. This was
interpreted by their Lordships as a gift, as the intention of the parties was to effect a transfer
of title (and not a release).

4.36. A recent Madras case’ shows that this conflict between the two High Courts still
secms to persist. The facts were as follows ; By a deed dated 15th June, 1959, the mother gave
up her life interest in property in favour of her son and grandson, and in lieu thereof it was
provided that she would te paid a monthly amount which was charged on some other pro- |
perty. The deed was described as a “partition~deed”, and was stamped as such. On a ceference
to the High Court by the Revenue authority raising the question whether it was not a conveyance,
it was held that the document, in so far as the mother gave up her Iife-interest, was
not a conveyance, hut operated only as a “release deed”.

The fact that such a release was for consideration made no difference in its character
as such. The Court reviewed its earlier cases, and observed :--

“The essential difference between a conveyance and a release lies in the fact that
in the fatter, there is no transfer of an interest or right to another who had no
pre-existing right 10 it to any extent. A release of a right or of a claim can onby
be in favour of a person who had a pre-existing right or claim and by reason of
the release the latter's right ot claim is enlarged’ or is made fuller in its content.”

4.37 This view of the Madras High Court is in’ direct conflict with that of the Mysore
High Court in the case already referred to®, where it was held that where the release is by a
co-owner of his share in the common property which is legally capable of being transferred |
in favour of another cc-owner, in a consideration of a sum of money coming from outside the
common property, the transaction amounts to a sale of the undivided share.

It may also be painted out that the decision of the Supreme Court® itself does net support
the statement made ty the Madras High Court in the 1970 case referred to abovei The

| Rajama v, Dhondusa, AX.R. 1970 Mys. 270, 276 (Pai, J.). t
. Naniunda Setty v. State of Mysore, ALR. 1964 Mys. 124: Board of Revenue y.Muragesa Mudaliar, ALR. 1955
Mad. 641.

po

Kuppuswanl v. Arumugam, A.1.R. 1967 S.C, 1395, 1397, paragraph 6.

Board of Revenite v. Lakshmanan, A.LLR. 1970 Mad.348, 349, Para. 3 (A.B).
|. Kenkatachalapatht v. The State, A.1.R. 1965 Mys, 323, 327, supra.
६. Kuppuswamt v. Ananogam, ALR. 1967 5.0. 1395, 1397; (1967) 1 S.C.R. 275.

wew


37

Supreme Court refused to hold “that a decd styled a deed of release cannot in Jaw, transfer
to one who before ihe transfer had uo interest ia the property”. On the facts of the case, there-
fore, it was held that though the deed was called a release deed, the words used were sufficiently
clear to transfer utle to one having no title before the transfer. There was no question of stamp
duty in the Supreme Court case.

4.38. The Madras casc? of 1955 was a case of one of the co-owners releasing his right Madras case of
in favour of the rest of the co-owners. The High Court held that the document relating to it 1958.
was a release, and not a conveyance. In expressing that view, Rajamannar, C.J., who spoke for
the Court, ebserved -—

“In such a case there need be no conveyance as such by one of the co-owners in favour
of the other co-owners. Each co-owner in theory is entitled to enjoy the entire
property in part and in whole. It is not, therefore, necessary for one of the
co-owners to convey his interest to the other co-owner. It is sufficient if he
releases his interest. The result of such release would be the enlargement of
the share of the other-co-owner. There can be no release by one person in
favour of another, who is not already entitled to the property as a co-owner.”

Fhe Madras casc* of 1968 took a similar view. Both these cases related to release of a co-
owner’s right in favour of the rest of the co-owners.

4.39. So much as to release. Some difficulty is created also by the words “and which is 5०७5७ of the
not otherwise specifically provided for by Schedule I.” Do these words qualify also the first words “and which
category indicated by the words “conveyance on sale”, or are they confined to the second cate- apecificall
gory indicated by the words “every instrument by which property is transferred” etc.? fhe

Va the Mysore case, the latter view was taken. As a matter of interpretation, it is possible
to‘take a different view and to regard the words “conveyance on sale” as unqualified by the
wortls “and which is not otherwise specifically provided for”. In fact, none of the other articles
which tax a transfer of property would. in ordinary parlance, be described as a “conveyance
on 6”, So this question should be academic. But it is better to make it clear that only the
tattee half of the clause is qualified by the words “and not otherwise specifically provided for
ete". हा

4.40 History of the words does not throw much light on this point.

In 28 Calcutta case*, where the Maharajah of Darbhanga, by a deed of family arrange-
meat, conveyed a Pargana and a sum of two and a half lakhs of rupees to his younger borther
on coniition that the latter should release certain family properties on which he had claims,
theHigh Court held that the deed was neither a conveyance ner a settlement nor an instru-
mest of partition within the meaning of the Stamp Act of 1879. The deed, not having been
made ‘bry way of sale, was in its nature a deed of arrangement, by which a sum of money was
paid absolutely and a maintenance grant made by the Maharajah of Darbhanga to his younger
brother, by way of discharge and satisfaction of all claims by way of maintenance or other-
wite. It was considered that such documents should not thus escape the duty altogether, and
hence the definition in the present Act has been altered so as to make it include all transfers
intey vives which were not specifically provided for in the Schedule’. The Select Committee
on' the Bump Bill, 1898, observed thus : -

“We have altered this definition so as to make it include all conveyance inter vivar
which are not specifically provided for in Schedule I and thus to meet the diffi-
culty in LL.R. 7 Cal. 21, where it was held that the instryment in questien

है. Board of Revere v, Marngasa Mudaliar, ALR. 1955 Mad. 641 कर.)

2, Chief Controtling Authority v. Patel, AR. 1968 Mad. 159.

3. deve Maharajah of Darbhango, (1880) LL.R. 7 Cal. 21,

4. In England, also prior to the passing of the Finance Act, 1910, ssctioa 71 snaking chargea transfers
vow, Mc wns held n Detn Sony EMO 7 Diane, OBS ee ee thls conveyance ty fader
10 son in consideration of natural love and affection, and the bond-of री: 808 to augment his sister's portions
1,300, was a deed of family arrangement and not a conveyance on sale; © alse Mastey v. Nanney, 3 Bing. Ni,

ists

24 M of Law/77—6 पु


38

was neither 8 ‘conveyance’ nor a ‘settlement, not an ‘instrument of partition’
but aa ‘arrangement’ for the transfer of property.”

Recommends- 4.41. It is desirable that the conflict of opmions between the Madras and Mysore High
Courts on the question of release, as also the obscurity as to the words “what is not otherwise
specifically provided for”, should be clarified.

In particular, the fact situations of a co-owner transferring his share in the common pro-
perty for a consideration to another co-owner, needs specific consideration.
Three classes of transactions may be considered in connection with release—
(1) Sales which de not involve a release—For example, a sale between two persons
who had ao prior common interest in a property sold, does not involve a
release, as a release pre-supposes the existence of common interest of the parties
to the transaction.

Q

Red

Sale involving release-—For example, if the seller and the purchaser have a
prior common interest in the property, there is, in a sense, a release by the
seller of his interest in the property. But the transaction is also 8 sale.

(3) Restease not-resulting in sale—For example—
(a) a release relating to a settlement of a doubtful claim ;

(b) a release of a right which is not capable of being transferred in law, like
the right to maintenance, or the mere right to sue ;

(०) a release of a debt by the creditor (here the debt is not transferred from
the creditor to the debtor). हु

(0) & double or multiple release accompanied by the acquisition of the full
right by each co-owner in the portion of the property allotted to ‘him,
which may amount to a partition between the co-owners.

As against this, where “release” is by a co-owner of his share in the common property
which is legally capable of being transferred in favour of another co-owner, for a consideration
in the shape of a sum of money coming from outside the conunon property, the transection
amounts to a sale of the undivided share.

Amendment. 4.42. In our view, it would be useful to add an Explanation in the definition of: “con-
veyance”, to cover an instrument whereby a co-owner transfers a share to another co-owner.
The intention is that this should apply whether or not the transfer is for consideration,.Many
of the replies to our Questionnaire have expressed agreement with such a view..The charging
article on “Release” also lends some support to such an approach®. Some have raised tbe
objection that this amounts to levying a tax for the first time. but we would polat. out that
it is not so, as will be apparent from. some of the reported cases referred to above. !.

Sectiga 207 4,43. While on the subject of ‘conveyance’, we may also discuss the .question .of, family
cammreyance and arrangements. “
arrangement”. There appear to be two senses in which the expression “family arrangement” is sett A

family arrangement in the narrower sense is the bona fide settlement of a Claim 07 dispute Git.,
a claim or dispute which has arisen or may arise), by the members of a family®, fos the benefit,
peace or security of the family generally or for preserving its property or hononr*. In the wider
sense, it means any arrangement between members of the same family’ for the benefit of tie
fami ._. :-:[ -_-८

i

1. Question 7 in the Questionnaize.

2. Article $5.

3, fa) Bakhar Singh v. Dulart, TLR. 52 All. 756: ">

(b) Anieer Hasan v. Md. Bloz Khan, ALR. 1929 Oud 134;
(यो Sttal Singh ¥. Kalka Singh, AR. 1937 0998 433, 434.

4. Basant Kamar v. Lala Ram Sankar, LLR. 59 Cal. 859.

5. See infra.


39
As Cheshire and Fifoot observe! :

“The expression ‘family arrangement’ covers a multitude of agreements made between re-
Jatives and designed to preserve the harmony, to protect the property or to save the honour of
the family’, It comprises such diverse transactions as the following : a resettlement of land made
between the father as ienant for life and the son as tenant in tail in remainder; an agreement
to abide by the terns of a will that has not been properly executed, or to vary the. terms of a
valid will the release of devised property from a condition subsequently imposed by the testator ;
ण an agreement by a younger legitimate son to transfer family property to an illegitimate elder
son.”

_. 4.44. Family arrangements are specially favoured by the substantive law, in certain res-
pects—e.g., no separate consideration is required? :

The courts view any such arrangement with favour and will uphold it unless there are strong
reasons for doing otherwise’.

Again, the Specific Relief Act, 19635, section 15(¢), corresponding to section 23(0) of the
Specific Relief Act, 1877, allows, in the case of a family arrangement, a suit by beneficiaries who
are not parties to the arrangement,

We have referred to these rules relating to family acrangement by way of illustration. It is
mot necessary, for the present purpose, to coumerate al) the rules of the substantive law applica-
able to family arrangements.

4.45. We now revert to the two senses of the expression “family arrangement” mentioned
above, It is stated that a deed in the nature of family settlement may be “based on the assump-
tion that there was an antecdent title of some kind in the parties, aod the agreement acknowledges
gnd defines what that title is”*. Here, the narrower sense of the expression is intended.

In Mt. Hiren Bibi v. Mt. Sohan Bib?, the Privy Cuncil, approving its earlier decision in
Khkuni Lal v. Gobind Krishna Narain®, held that a compromise by way of family settlement is
in, no sense, an “alienacion” by a limited owner of property. Here again, the narrower sense is
intended. 10 would appear that this is so because no new title is created, and the antecedent title
is clarified by such compromise. Hence, where a family arrangement is based upon an assump-
tion that there was an antecedent title of some kind’, it is mot a transfer. In other words, if a
family arrangement is for the settlement of disputes—existing or future?®,—it is not a “transfer”,

4.46. In the wider sense, a family arrangement, as already stated, is a transaction between
gxembers of the family which is for the benefit of the family generally4. So viewed, it goes beyond
a mere compromise.

It follows that a family arrangement in the wider sense can amount to a conveyance. Thus,
where a document was executed in favour of a widow, whereby the executant, in pursuance of

1. Cheshire and Fifoot, Law of Contract, 18th Ed. (1973) page 277.
2, Cheshire and Fifoot, Law of Contract, (8th Ed.) (1973) page 277.
4. (a) Muhammad Raza v. Abbas Bandi, (1932) 59 LA. 236, 246 (P.C.);
(0) Chaudhry Alunad Azim v. Chaudhry Safi Jan, LL. (1926) 2 Luc, 335.
&) Latif Jahan v. Mohammad Nabi, (1932) 30 All, LI. 9;
GQ Ghulam Mohammad v. Ghalam Hussalz, (1931) 59 1.2. 74, 87, 88 (P.C.).
4. Williams y, Williams, (1867) L.R. 2 Ch. 304.
5. Section 15(c), Specific Relief Act, 1963.
6 e Réni Mewa Kunwar x. Rani Hules Kunwar, (1874) 1 LA, 157, Ms er LC).
कि) Khu Lat ४. Gobind Krishan, (1911) 38 LA. 87, 103; LR. 33 All. 356 (0.2).
7. Mt. Hiren Bibl v. Sohan Bibi, ALR. 1914 7.0. 44.
8, अंक Lal ५. Gobind Krishna, (1911) LL.R. 33 AIL 356 (0.23.
9. Bahadur v. Debi Sinha, A.1.R, 1966 S.C. 292, 295.
10, Ram Charan v. Girja Nandint, ALR, 1966 5.0. 323, 329.

11. (@) Madho Das v. Mukand Ram, ALR. 1955 §.C. 431,1490, 1491; CR. 22;
कफ) Kuppuswart v. Arunngan, ALR. 1967 S.C. 1395. 490. 1491; G85) 28.CR. 22,

Multitude of
arrangements
covered.

Special rules of
substantive:

Assumption of
antecedent title

transfer.

Fail
ment in


40

a rajinama filed in 2 suit for maintenance brought by the widow, transferred to the widow a
piece of land valued at a certain sum in satisfaction of her claim, it was held’, to be a conveyance’.

Deemer 4.47, On the question whether a family arrangement does or does not amount to a “con-
‘the question » * <
‘whether family  Veyance” for the purposes of the Stamp Act, the answer must, therefore, be sought in the nature
acrangpment of the instrument. What is called by the parties a family arrangement, may be a conveyance, or
8 jamp- ae हि 4
edasa a partition, or a release*-*, or some other category of instrument. If an instrument operates as
conveyance. a conveyance, it does not matter whether it is described as a memorandum or a release. It is
in this context that one must distinguish between 2 family arrangement in the narrower sense

{a compromise), and a family arrangement in the wider sensc.

Aupendment not 4,48. Broadly speaking, if a family arrangement merely renounces a claim or declares or con-
firms rights, it is not 2 conveyance. If it transfers rights, it is a conveyance®.

We have discussed these aspects concerning family arrangements in order to bring out cers
tain important elements. We do not, however, consider any amendment on the subject to be
necessary.

Recommens dation 4.49. In the light of the above, we recommend the following re-draft of sub-section (10):

210). *(10) ‘Conveyance’ includes—
(a) a conveyance on sale ;
(0) every instrument by which property whethcr movable cr immovable, is trans-

ferred inter vivos and which is not otherwise specifically provided for by
Schedule [ :

Fixplanation.—An instrument whereby a co-owner of a property transfers his interest to
another co-owner of the property, is, for the purposes of this clause, ci instrument by which
property is transferred.”

1 Reference under the Stamp Act (1898) 1.L.R. 21 Mad. 422, 425.
2, See also Bhola Ram v. Emp., ALR. 1934 Lab, 530, 532.
3, In Re Hira Lal, (1908) LL.R. 32 Bom. 505, $32.
4. Khudmat Hubrajt v. Deputy Commissioner, ALR. 1943 Oudh 169, 172.
5. See, especially —
(@) Marquess of Bristol (1901) 2 K.B. 336;
(0) ALR, 1955 8.0. 481;
1966 S.C. 2920;
1966 S.C, 323.
967 S.C. 1395.



CHAPTER 5
DEFINITIONS IN SECTION 2(1i) to 2(18)

5.1, Sectiun 2(i 1) defines the expression “duly stamped”, as applied to an instrument. There gection 2(11--
are three broad requirements under the definition, First, the instrument must bear a stamp of “duly stamped”.
not 1658 than the proper amount; sccondly, the stamp must be an adhesive or impressed stamp;
and, thirdly, such stamp must have been affixed or used in accordance with “the law for the
time being in force in India.”

Though no change in this definition is needed, two observations are in order. First, the de-
finition, like any other definition, should be taken as subject to the context, and construed, in
harmony with other provisicns. For example, where duty has been remitted by notification under
section 9 or a specific exerapticn is provided for under the relevant article, stamp need not be
affixed. This aspect becomes material for the purposes, for example, of section 30, under which
2 parson receiving money exceeding twenty rupees in amount ete. is bound to give a “duly stamped
Tecaipt” for the same. Obviously. where an exemption has been granted by or under the Act
for a particular class of rcecipts, there can be no ubligation to affix a stamp on the receipt, and
the giving of an unsiamped receipt should be regarded as sufficient compliance with section 30.
Secondly, the definition of ‘duly stamped’ speaks of adhesive or impressed stamps" only, This
is in conformity with sections 10 and 11; but it will be worthwhile considering the use of frank-
ing machines, This point will be considered at the appropriate place’.

5.2. In England, it has been observed in one case* that an instrument—in that case, @ Position in
security——is duly stamped “either if it has actually borne the correct amount of stamp duty that Enslaad.
it atfracts or if it is exempt for stamp duty.”

The expression “duly stamped” would seem to mean not oaly bearing a stamp of the pro-
per value’, but also stamped at the right time’, in the proper manner®, with the proper descrip-
tion of stamp’ under the Stamp Rules, and duly cancelled’.

Thus, in the definition of the expression “duly stamped”, a number of ingredients are im-
plied, such as, provisions of the Act relating to description of the stamp, mode of affixing stamp
and the like. A difficulty may arise where the amount of the stamp satisfies the law, but, 11
other respects, the instrument is not “duly stamped” as explained above. Under section 35,
proviso, a deficiency in the amount of the duty can be rectified. But the situation where there
is no deficiency in duty is not specifically covered by the proviso, though it would appear that
‘the: language of the proviso to section 35 is wide enough to cover such cases. Having regard to
the fact that this is a recurring situation, it appears to be desirable to amend section 35, proviso
(a), by a specific provision in this regard. This pojut will require consideration when section 35
it rewised®.

5.3 As regards the case of use of a stamp of improper description, it is covered separately?”
ueiter section 37, which allows the defect to be rectified by applying to the Collector.

"1. Foe definition of ‘impressed starap’, see section 2(13).
"2, Sem t commendation as to section 10A (proposed). हि
73; LBC. v. Henry Enabacher & Co., (1963) A.C. 191, 209, 210 (1962) 3 W.L.R. 1292; (1962) 3 All E.R. 843, 848
{per Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest),

4. Section 3, et. seq.

है. Section 3, 17, 48 and 19.

6.-Gqc#ions 13 and 14,

7. Sections 10 and 11.

B, Sections 12 and 13.

9. To be considered under section 35.
10, Section 37.

41


Section 2(12)--
“Bxecuted” and
“Execution”.

Section 2(13)}—
“Impressed
stamp”.
Section X13A}—

Section 2(13A)
“India”,

: of “India”, is “intended 11० apply only: to the territories . now.

42

5.4. Section 2(12) defines the expression “executed” and “execution”, used with reference
tc instruments, as meaning ‘signed’ and ‘signature’. The meaning of ‘sign’ is explained in the
the General clauses Act’.

Under section 3 of the Stamp Act, an instrament is chargeable with duty only if it is
“executed”. But, an acknowledgement is, under atticle 1, chargeable with duty, if it is “written”
or “signed” by or on behalf of the debtor. A discrepancy, thus, arises between the definition
of “execution” (read with section-3) on the one hand, and. article 1 on the other hand. This
vill require* consideration, when we consider article 1.

5.5, The definition of “impressed stamp” in section 2(13) needs no comments.

5.6. The expression “India” is defined in section 2(13A) as meaning “the territory of
India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmie”. The cbject of the definition is to- indicate
that the sections concerned refer only to the territories to which the Act extends. To carry. out
this, it was suggested® that it should be revised as under : .

“(13A) “India” means the territory of India to which this Act extends”.

We, however, prefer an alternative course—deletion of the definition of “India”. ‘Though
that would involve extensive consequential changes in mumerous sections where the expesstion
India” occurs,’ we are of the view that it is a preferable course. We shall presently indicate
‘our reasons for this.

5.7, The word ‘India’ appears in the following sections :—

Section 2(6),

Section 2(11),

Section 2(13),

Section 2(16A),
Section 3(b), 3(c),
Section 17,

Section 18,

Section 19,

Section 20,

Section 32(3), proviso,
Section 33(2),

Section 50, proviso. है

5.8. We are of the view that the definition of “India” should be dekted, ence. it, isnot
apptopriate that such an artificial definition should ‘continue on the statute book. :At present,
the definition has been inserted 38 a technical device because several sections use the exgnganion
“jndia”. We are recommending the substitution, in the substantive: sections, of ¢he expression
nds” in all cases where the substantive provision, when speaking
attificially. defined. as “India”.
We may mention that most ‘of the replies’ received to our Questionnaire. have. also, agreed
with the view that the defiaition should be deleted. :

Jn section 2(6)—"chasgeable? —apd s0c-

७ to the consequential changes. ;
ttl uly st pe should be modified: by. svbatiticting “terre

tion 2(11)—“duly stamped”-—the expression “India”
tories to which this Act extends.”

Im section 2(16A), the expression “India” may be im
“qqayketable security” sold in any stock market in the State of Jammy: at ही State of Jammu: Ki

a?
e retained. The effect will be.te over
patina. :

हि

1. Section 3(56), General Clauses Act, 1897.

2, For consideration under article 1.

3. Minutes of 20th Decembe, 1974.

4. Sections 2(6), 2(11), 203A), 24163), 30), He), 19, 18,
5. Question 8 of the Questionnaire.

17 , 20, 3243) Proviso.33(2), and 50 Proviso.


43

With reference to section 3(b) and section 3(c), which relate to certain negotiable in-
struments and certain other instruments executed outside “India” and brought into “India”, the
deletion of the definition in s. 2(13A) of “India” will mean that instruments executed outside
india will not be required to be stamped, and “India” will, of course incfude the State of
Sammu & Kashmir. This consequence is intended. Hence, “India” occurring for the first time
in section 3(b} and 3{c) should be retained. But the word “India”, where it eccurs for the
secoml time in sections 3(b) and 3{c), should be modified by substituting the expression
“territories to which this Act extends”, since that portion refers to things to be done within
thé territories to which the Act extends.

In sectioa 17, in the phrase “instruments executed in India”, the expression “India”
may be modified by substituting “territories to which this Act extends".

Ta section 18(1) (time of stamping), the word “India” may be retained where it occurs
forthe first time. But it may be modified where it occurs for the second time. This section is
the converse of section 17.

, . In section 19, (bills cte. made out of India), the expression “India” may he modified
where it occurs for the first time, third time and fourth time, and retained where it occurs for
the second time—“drawn or made out of India”.

In section 20, the word “India” may be retained. The section relates to money expressed
in any currency other than that of India.

In section 32(3), proviso (a), the word “India” may be modified, since it refers to
instruments executed in the territories to which the Act extends, Documents executed in
Jammu & Kashmir should fall outside section 32(3), proviso (a).

In section 32(3), proviso, clausc (9), where the word “India” where it occurs for the
seeend time, it may be modified. Where it occurs for the first time, it may be retained,

In section 33(2), the expression “India” may be modified.
23 Ins, 50, proviso (a), it may be modified at both the places.

“ 5.9. Section 2(14) gives a definition of “instrument” as including every document by
which, any right or liability is or purports to be created, transferred, limited, extended, ex-
thiguished or recorded.

73.10, Attention should be drawn to the Iast word “recorded”, which does not usually

‘occur in provisions relating to instruments in other enactments.' The words “records” is obvi-
dusly needed, in the Stamp Act, as otherwise the duty on “acknowledgement” and the duty
ou: “Smemorendum of agreement”—to take only two exemples—would not be a duty on an
‘Gnstrument”. And, since it is well-known that “the thing which is made liable to duty is the
wmatraneent”,? this amplification in the definition is welcome.
* On the other hand, however, it is not to be overlooked that every document “recording”
i adsaction is not taxable. Apart from cases where an; express provision exists,—as in the
two examples of acknowledgement and memorandum of agreement referred to above—a docu-
toemt which does not itself deal with the right in the partidular manner, but merely records
(3. past ‘Mdealing with the right”, would not, merely because it records such dealing, be regatded
“tse as an insurument containing a transaction of that type This aspect becomes material in
respect ‘of a few instruments—e.g., an instrument of partition?

5.11. “Instrument of pattition” is defined in section 2(15), as meaning any instrument,
whereby co-owners of any property divide or agreé to divide such property in severalty and as

1, See, eg. section 17, Registration Act.
2. 1.8.0. v. Angis, (1889) 23 Q.B.D. $79, 589 (ord Esher, M.R.).
2. Section 2(15)—“Instrument of partition”.

Section 2(14)—
‘Insteument”.

Saction 2(15)—
“¢strunant of
partkios”,


44

including also a final order for effecting 8 partition passed by any revenue-authority or any
Civil Court, and.an award by an arbitrator directing a partition.

There arc, thus, four types of instruments with which the definition concerns itself--

(a) any instrument whereby co-owners of any property divide such propesty in
severalty ;

{b) any instrument whereby co-owners agree fo divide the properly in severalty ;

(०) a final order for effecting a partition, passed by any revenue authority or any
civil court ; and

(9) an award by an arbitrator directing a partition.

हनन 5.12. Instruments between co-owners dividing property in severalty, present few problems—

perty in severaity.

Memorandum, 5,128. The familiar question whether a particular document memely records a partition

of partition. already orally effected, or itself divides the property,—so often arising under the Registration
Act,—has arisen under the Stamp Act aiso, The question is one of construction of a parti-
cular document. The abstract rule is clear, namely, that a document recording a past parti-

tion is not chargeable with duty.*

The Legislature, no doubt, can levy duty on such documents also, and it appears that
by 8 State amendment, Rajasthan? has added 8 provision’ whereunder “instrument of partition”
wncludes—

“(iii) when any pastition is effected without executing any such instrument, any
instrument of instruments signed by the co-owners and recording, whether by
way of declaration of such partition or otherwise, the terms of such pattition 0
amongst the co-owners.” °

There seems, however, some possibility of harshness resulting from such a wide amend-
ment which might take in even incidental reference to past partitions. 5

(७) Agreement to 5.13, It should be noted that under the general law, to constitute a “partition”, there
divide, need not be an actual partition by metes and bonnds. An agreement to divide in equal share
is sufficient to constitute partition.s In fact, even an intimation is enough, if unequivocal. Whe-
ther the same principles apply for the Stamp Act, is not very clear. The words “agree to
divide” in the clause seem to refer to an agreement to divide on some future date which docs
not operate to create any right in the property. Thus, it has been held® thet a partition fist,
which does not itself effect division but is neerely an agreement for effecting a future partition
on terms agreed, is not an instrument of partition, and is liable to stamp duty only as an

agreement.

© Higa] order 5.14. The third category of instruments of partition comprises orders effecting 4 partiten
partitgn passed passed by a revenue authority or civil court. Some controversy seems to exist as 10116 tanse~
byarevenue quences of non-stamping of a decree of a civit court for partition. The mane however,” pee~
authority yorcivil tins more appropriately to section 35, which deals with the consequences of failure to stamp.
(8 Ava Awards by 5.15. Awards by arbitrators directing partition, constitute the fourth category of “instru-
direst ‘tent of partition”. No changes are needed in this part of the definition.

liresting parti- 7 wine

“on 5.16. In the definition, the words used in connection with an award of ‘tors are—

“directing a partition”, and not “effecting a partition”, —which is the wording ed 5 ae the हु
éefnition in connection with ¢ foal oder गत सकल jm connection with a final order of a Revenue authority ot Civil Court.

“T. कह Tirathraj, ALR. 1942 All. 220 (5.8.).
2. Rajasthan Stamp Amendment Act, 1966 (16 of 1966).

3. Only the relevant portion is a |.
4, Anantha Bhattacharya ४५ ‘Damodar Mukund, LL-R. 13 Bom. 25.

5, Gangaiya v. Chinna Lingalyys, ALR, 1933 Mad, 162.


45

is, that arbitrators have ne power to do more than to direct a partition. Therefore, even if
the atbitrators go. further and. define the manner in which the partition should be made, it -has
RO more binding force, and for the purposés of Stamp, it remains an instrument of partition.”

5.17. Section 2(16) provides that “lease” means a lease of immovable property and Section 2(16—
inchides also— Messe”. ह

(a) a patta;

(b) a kabuliyat, or other undertaking in writing, not being a counterpart of a lease
to cultivate, occupy or pay or deliver rent for, immovable property ;

(०) any instrument by which tolls of any description are let ;

(d) any writing on an application for a lease intended to signify that the application
is granted.

छ the Transfer of Property Act, a lease of immovable property is defined as a transfer
of a right to enjoy such property, made for a certain time expressed or implied, or in perpe-
tuity, in consideration of a price paid or promised or of money, a share of crops, service or
any other thing of value to be rendered periodically or on specified occasions to the transferor
by the transferee, who accepts the transfer on such terms,

The English Act does not contain any definition of a “lease”, and it is to be assumed
that it-has the same meaning as under the general law.* .

३.18, The definition in the Indian Stamp Act can be divided into two parts. First, it says Two parts.
that “lease” means a Tease of immovable property. While confining the scope of the expression
“7 0७ “Immovable property”, this part of the definition does not indicate what is intended by
“Jeaxe”. Secondly, certain instruments are, by the second part of the definition which is inclu-
sive, brought within its scope.

5.19, As regards the first part, it is pertinent to. point out that courts have, in deciding 21:78 ae
cases, referred to the definition of “lease” in the Transfer of Property Act. A ques- ofthe
tion: to. be considered is, whether we should now provide that “lease” means a lease as. defined est
in. the Transfer of Property Act. While that Act does not apply to the whole of India, and the
provisions as to Jeases do not, in their entirety, apply to agricuttural leases, it seems nseful
to adopt the definition in that Act by reference, so 88 to have precision, We recommend that
it should be adopted. The replies to our Questionnaire® have also, in general, agreed with this.

5.20. Both under the Stamp Act. and ‘under the Transfer of Property Act, the term. ‘flease” mee «
is: restricted to lease of immovable property; but nowhere in either of these Acts is the ex- a

pression “immovable property” defined. Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act simply ‘says
that “immovable property does not include standing timber, growing crops, or grass. As. the
Stang Act is silent about the expression “immovable property”, the definition of that expression
inthe General Clauses Act can be used. That definition’ includes “land, benefits to arise out of
tant ‘ahd things attached to the earth, or pertbanently fastened to anything attached, “to. the
carth”—“a definition large enough to include growing gtass.”*

nn Re

1. Kadides v. Tribkuwandas, (1907) LL.R. 31 Bom. 68, 71.
2. Sex also Emperor v. Butta Lal, 73 1.0. 336 (Oudh).

3. Section 105, Transfer of Proprty Act, 1882. .
4. See Jones v.LR.C.; Sweetmeat Automatic Delivery Co. ४. LR.C., (1995)1-Q.B, 484, where an agreement licensing
= installation of automatic machiners on railway platforms was hel@ not to ‘be ॥ dedse for stamp duty purposed.

«Eu Ae. Secy., Board of Railway v. Souk India Railway, ALR. 1995 Mad. 434, 438 (F-B.), (Kelshnan; . 1).
6, Question 9 of the Questionnaire. re
1. Section 2(26), General Clauses Act, 1897.
है, Ix re Hormusji rant, (1886) LL.R. 13 Bom. 87, 89.
2AM of Law/?7—7


46

The more restrictive provision in the Transfer of Property Act and the Registration Act,
rhould not, it has been observed, be imported into the Stamp Act.! We are of the view that
the definition of “immovable property” in the General Clauses Act should be adopted, by
repeating it in the Stamp Act.

Second nert of 3.21. The second part of the definition of “lease” in the Stamp Act has four clauses.

considered, These deal with particular classes of instruments. The main object of these is—(i)" to check
avoidance of duty by not executing a lease, and (1) to extend the definition to the letting out
of “tolls”, which are not “immovable property” in the stricter sense.

Tolls, 5.22. The sub-clauses do not seem to have raised such controversy. But sub-clause (c),
which relates to a toll, could be explained in some detail. A toll is an imposition for the pri-
vilege of using a bridge, road, ferry, or market, or for catching fish, cutting and appropriating
trees for fuel etc? A tax paid for some liberty, particularly for the privilege of passing over a
bridge or on highway, the tax paid for the use of a ferry,® or the tax paid for seling in a market
or fair,* or the tax paid for the right of fishing in a river, is a toll.®

Sub-clause (c)- has, thus, extended the meaning of the term “lease”; for, the right to
levy tolls, though concerning the user of land or water, js not regarded in law as an interest
in immovable property. An ijardar of tolls does not acquire any interest in the lund or water
concerned.® Toll is distinguished from octroi which is a duty levied on good entering a certain
area, town or territory.

‘There are several Central Acts relating to tolls—

(a) The Indian Tolls Act, 1851 (an Act for enabling Government to levy tol
on public roads and bridges) i

(b) The Indian Tolls Act, 1864 ; .

(c) The Indian Tolls Act, 1888 ; and .

(d) The Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act, 1901. हि

5.23, it should, lastly, be noted that the entry in the Schedule to the Stamp Act* charges
duty on an agreement of lease also. We shall deal with this at the appropriate place.

5.24, We may, at this stage, refer to the distinction between “ease” and “ticened”. “A
person may lawfully enter on land either in‘exercise of right as owner of an interest in land,
‘or because the owner has given him permission. The owner might have granted him’ a Meto—
an interest conferring the right of exclusive possession,—-or he might merely have ‘giten a
ficence,® permitting him to enter the land Gr ‘use it for specified purposes. विनम्र i

ला (तह aE
finition of @ ‘licence’ was propounded by Vaughan, C. J. in the
Sorrell. He said “a dispensation or Ticence properly passeth
in any thing, but only makes an actién’ ‘Tevtel,

5.25, The classic de!
seventeenth century in Thomas v.
no interest nor alters or transfers property
which without it had been unlawful”

ar NT EET . aa

1. In re Hormusit Irani, (1886) LL.R. 13 Boon. 87, $9. ‘Yer Nanabbai Hisyzidas , 1. (The majority view inna srt
however, it ion, which agreed to certain pasture a for
Bumbet ee aloes i brie aby हिल माई das not a id fo Ieee ame posseasion gd 7०७ ‘been parted

2, (8) Goodrick v. Fenkanna, (1878-81) LLR. 2 Mad. 104: gy
(0) Financlal Commissioner of the Punfab's Circular No. 35, dated 13th August, 1883; (1934) Punjab Stamp किक:

nual, Part I-B, Chap. 3, para. 2. हु

(0 Ram Pritam ¥. Shoobulchunder, (1884) LL.R. 15 Cpl. 259.

3. Deputy Collector. कार ¥. Denial, (1883) Bom. PJ. 11, Madras Stamp Manual, (1958) 107-15.

4. President of the Taluk Board v. Lakstnjparayenp, (1908) 13.12. 31 Mad. 54.

5. Midnapore Zamindary Co. v. Traitoky, A.LR. 1924 Cal. 562.

6. Standard Coal Co. v. C.CRA. Bengal, (1948) LLR. 2 Cal. 323.

7. Article 35, Stamp Act.
8. For history of licences, see Holdsworth H.E.C. Vol. 7, page 327, 328.

9, Thomas v, Sorrell, (1673) Vaughan 351.



47

The expression “licence” is not defined in the Stamp Act, or in the Transfer of Property
Act, The Easements Act, defines it as follows ;?

°§2. Where one person grants to another, or to a definite number of other persons,
a fight to do, or continue to do, in or upon the immovable property of the
grantor, something which would, in the absence of such right, be unlawfel,
and such right does not amount to an easement or an intefest in the property,
the right is called a licence.”

5.26. In the law of property, lease and licence are distinguished by stating that a lease

transfers an interest in land, which a licence does not. Where exclusive occupation is mot पाई.

given, the right is only of licence. A licence is merely a personal right, and does not amount
+ ta an interest in property.*

5.27, As Denning, L.J. (as he then was) observed,’ the difference between a tenancy

and a licence is, therefore, that in a tenancy, an interest passes in the land, whereas, in 8 |

Hence, it does not. He, however, added, “In distinguishing between them, a crucial test has
sometimes been supposed 10 be whether the occupier has exclusive possession or not”. “If he
wrs [et into exclusive possession, he was said to be a tenant, albeit only a tenant at will,
whentas if he had not exclusive possession he was only a licencee. This test has, however,
often given rise to misgivings because it may not correspond to realities..... The test of
exclusive possession is by no means decisive.”

"In the context of the definition of ‘lease’ in’ the Stamp Act, the distinction between lease
and licence becomes material, because, if the document is not a lease, the charge for leases
under the first part of the definition of lease would not be attracted. At the same time, it
shoeki be noted that the inclusive part of the definition of ‘lease’ is not confined to leases
Pept, and may cover documents which are not leases ag defined in the Transfer of Property
In particular, clause (b), which relates to “kabuliyat or other undertaking in writing,
Ro. heing a counterpart of a lease, to cultivate, occupy or pay or deliver rent for immovable
ptoperty” is somewhat widely worded. No doubt, a licence docs not become a lease merely
jean a “rental” is reserved, the licences like exploring and prospecting licences (in
reagitct of minerals) are not regarded as leases for the purposes of the definition in the Stamp
Act. Here, the general test of transfer of interest as indicated by sole and exclusive occupa-
tion? could be utilised.
1 5.28. But it is to be noted that io clause (b), the words used are not sole and. exclusive
occupation, but an undertaking to occupy immovable. property." A case could, therefore arise
where, even though the document specifically says that it should not be construed to create
a tenancy, the rights conferred by the document on the party by the owners are of such 8
nature that it would fall under clause (b).
5.29. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the definition of lease
should be revised as follows :—
“(16) ‘lease’ means a lease of immovable property as defined in section 105 of the
Transfer of Property Act. 1882, and inckudes also—
{a) a patta ;
(8) a kabuliyat, or other undertakiog in writing, not being a countespart of a
“Jease”, to cultivate, occupy or pay or deliver rent, for, immovable property.
(०) any instrument by which tolls of any description are let ;
(9) any writing on an application for # lease intended to signify that the appl-
cation is granted. हु

_..... ३ 2... --_जजप-5ः

1. Section 52, Indian Easements Act, 1882.

2. ALR. 1959 8.0. 1262, 1269.

3. ALB. 1968 ६.0. 175; (1968) 1 5.0.8, 23
4. Exringion v. Errington, (1952) 1 K.B. 290. हि
$. Board of Ravenue ५५ South Indian Railway Co., LL.R. 48 Mad. 366; ALR. 1925 Mad. 434.
6. Berman Oi Co., LL.B. 55 All. 874; ALR. 1933 All. 735 (PB) = .


Section 2(164)—
Marketable
Security,

Recommenda-
tion, >

Section 2017} —
“Mortgage deed”

Section 2(18)--
“Paper”.

48

Explanation—in this section, “immovable property” includes jand,. benefits to arise
out of land and things attached to the earth, or permanently fastened fo any-
thing attached to the earth.»

5.30, Under section 2(16A), “marketable security” means a security of such a descrip-
tion as to be capable of being sold in any stock market in India or in the United Kingdom,
The definition was added in 1904, when this definition and section 23A were added and arti-
cle 6 (agreement relating to deposit of title deeg) etc, was amended. The object of the amend-
inent was to save instruments of deposit of marketable securities from the ad valorem duty
under article 6.

There are no Indian cases on this definition, though there are a number of English cases
on the corresponding provision in the English Act.?

5.31, We recommended that the mention of ‘United Kingdom’ in this definition should
be omitted, having regard to changed political conditions. There have been suggestions’ 00
omit “in India” also, but we do not think that the clause need be so widened. _

5.32, Section 2(17) defines a “mortgage deed”. as including every instrument whereby,
for the purpose of securing money advanced, or to be advanced, by way of loan, of ‘an
existing or future debt, or the performance of an engagement, one person transfers, or creates,
to or in favour of another, a right over or in respect of specified property. It may be noted
that a mortgage of movable property is also covered by the definition! Another point to be
noted is that this definition includes charges also,® as the words “over or in respect” of property
are wide. पु wes. "को पड

The body of the Stamp Act makes no distinction between legal and equitable mortgages.
But the charging provision® makes a distinction. The duty is different, if the mortgage is in
the shape of an agreement by way of deposit of title deeds.7 -

A deed which contains all the provisions which one would normally find in 8 mortgage
deed, would, however, be chargeable as a legal mortgage. The mere fect that the document
also contains the bargain with regard io deposit of title deeds, will not make it an agree-
ment for the deposit of title deeds,? within the meaning of article 6. ते

‘The above points do not indicate a need to change the definition. .
5.33. In section 2(18), “paper” is defined as including vellum, parchment or any other
material on which an instrument may be written. हि .

It needs no change.

This is necessary in order to avoid any argument that the definition in HLS nSIGwy bn cade Old Say guatot Una the केक कप to the Trataler of Property Act be attracted.

Section 122, Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng,). हु
In reply to the Questionnaire issued by us—Queation 10.

‘Miran Baksh y. Emperor, A.LR. 1945 Lah. 69, 72 FB).

As to charges, see section 100, Transfer of Property Act.

Article 6, a3 contrasted with article 40(b).

As to the position under the Registration Act, ३०६ A.LR. 1939 P.C. 167.
dn re Indian Stamp Act, ALR. 1954 Bors. 462, 463, paragraph 2 (F.B.).

Sa awa


CHAPTER 6
DEFINITIONS IN SECTION 2(19) AND 2(20)

6.1, Section 2(19) defines “policy cf insurance” as including—

“Ca) any instcument by which one person, in consideration of a premium, engages
to indemnify another agatust loss. damage or liability arising from an unknown
or contingent event ;

(b) a life-policy and policy insuring any person against accident or sickness, and
0 5 पा 3799 other personal insurance.”

> 6.2. It may be pointed out that clause (a) of the definition is not confined to ‘policies’,
and includes any instrument by which one person engages to indemnify another. Jf there is
‘in indemnity undertaken in the document. then it is a policy for this purpose,-even though, in
‘busitiess world, the document may be distinguished from a “policy

6.3; In relation to one class of documents, namely, letters of cover. or engagement to
jamma a policy of insurance, the position requires detailed examination. The need for discussion
arises out of the charging arlicle,—article 47.

6.4, The principal paragraph of article 47 levies duty on various policies. Considerable
confusion is created by the “general exemption” under the article, quoted below? :—
_ “General Exemption”.
“Letter of cover or engagement to issue a policy of insurance.”

“Provided that, wuless such letter or engagement bears the stamp prescribed by this
Act jor such policy, nothing shall be claimable thereunder, nor shall it be. avail-
able for any purpose, except to compel the delivery of the policy therein men-
tioned,”

This exemption is anomalous, because, as will be shown presently, there is considerable
dierence between a letter of cover etc. and a policy. In fact, the very language of the exemp-
tion makes a distinction between an ‘engagement’ and a ‘policy’.

6.5. The exemption for letters of cover etc, would suggest that a letter of cover etc. would
otherwise fall under the expression “policy of insurance”. But, as stated by the Supreme Court
io R. Ratilai and Co.*, while a letter of cover contains a contract of insurance, it is not a “policy
of insurance” in the common understanding of that word in the trade*.

6.6. In the Supreme Court case (which related to fire insurance); the letter of cover -was
net stamped, but’ the plaintiff was prepared to pay the penalty under‘section 35, and: had
actually i done so. The question to be decided was whether, evenon payment of penaity, the
Ketter eguld be admitted ia evidence. This question arose because the contention of the-in-
vebed "sompany was ihat since the exemption under article’47 uses the words “bears the stamp
this Act for such policy”, the stamp should have been: affixed -ar the time of the
and the provision in section 35 for subsequent payment of malty could not be involved
ह of the. special language of the exemption. This argument negatived by the Supreme

pie a a majority judgement. According to the minority however, in view of the express
of the exemption to article 47, the letter~conld hot- be subsequently stamped tinder
41. This discussion applies 10 all policies, and fs not confined to sea insurance policies.

2. RB Ratilal & (7.0 National Security Assurance Cv. Ltd., A.LR. 1964 §.C. 1396, 1.
fies insurance) 1-20 13

3, Emphasis supplied.
4. Sarkar and Sbah JJ.; Raghbar Dayal, J. dissented.

Section X19}—
“Policy of
Insurance’—
Tatroductory..

Article 47 of the
Act—Contro-
versy created by
the exemption.


50

section 35. If the letter is intended by a person to be used for making a claim thereunder, and,
therefore, to be treated as a policy, then. according to the minority view, it is incumbent on
the person so intending to have the letter properly stamped for that policy from the very
beginning. If it is not so stamped, it can only be used to compel the delivery of the policy, and
not as a basis of the claim. If subsequent stamping of the document to convert the letter into
a policy is allowed at the sweet-will of the party standing to gain, then, according to Raghbar
Dayal, J. (who was in the minority), the law would lead to anomalies.

6.7. We are not so much concemed with the meaning of the expression “bews stamp”,
as with the question whether it is proper to equate a cover note with a policy. On this point,
the majority as weil es the minority took the same view.

The following is from the majority judgements:

“(16 The learned trial Judge held that the instrument was 2५ a letter of cover bur
iz was in reality a policy of insurance, because it contained a contyact aft in-
surance. It is not in dispute that if this view is correct, then on payment of
the duty and the penalty the instrument would be admissible in evidence, under
section 35. The Appellate Bench of the High Court, however, was unghie 19
accept the view of the learned irial Judge and, we think, in this the Appellate
Bench was right. The fact that a letter of cover contains a contract of tnsurance
cannot make it a policy of insurance®. As the learned Jndge of the Appeltate
Bench rightly pointed out, the letter of cover was granted a general exemption
from the liability to the duty specified in Article 47, that is to say, it was exempted
from duty which would, but for such exemption, have been payable on it under
that article.” .

“Now, under article 47, duty was payable on various policies of insurance, It would follow
that a letter of cover would have been Hable to duty as a policy of insurance if the exemption
had not been granted®, The letter of cover had, therefore, to contain a contract of insurance, for
it would not otherwise have been liable to duty under article 47. But it did not thereby become
a policy of insurance only jor then the exemption and the article would have been in confilct with «.
each other... We may also mention that the word ‘cover’ itself indicates that property is held
insured or covered by it against cectain risks. हर

+ (7) What then is a letter of cover ? How is it to be distinguished from a. policy of insuremed?
The Act contains no definition of it or of an ‘engagement to issue a policy of insurance’, but, te
terms are well kaown in trade. The Act is dealing with businessmen and with mercantile docu-
ments well knows to them.

“Tt may be shortly stated that a letter of cover no doubt contains a contract of insucénes,
but it is nor a policy of insurance in the common understanding of thar word in the drede. Tt &
well known that in order to obtain an insurance against the risk of fire the neo frit to
send a proposal to the insurer and then the insurer takes a litle time in making, ities a to
whether it would accept the proposal aad undertake the obilgation of covering ie oe ४९१ . tb
issues a policy only after he is satisfied that it would be a prudent business. propasitiog to a
Experience of trades people has, however, shown that some kind of 200 © क |

period when the insuret is making the enquiries is necessary. This protection i iu
called a letter of cover. i is expressly @ contract granting insurance for the periog bet a
date and until a policy is prepared and delivered if one is eventually ixtued or otharwhsé

date mentioned in i, just a8 a peciod of thirty days is mentioned in the Interim ite tig ite
issued in bis case; see Citizens Insurance Co. of Canada v. William Parson. "We bik

present Interim Protection Note satisfied the conditions which would make it'a letter. ॥

this sense sense. :
1. हू, Ratilal & ८9, ALR. 1964 5.0. 1396, 1398, 1399; Para. 6~10 (ranjority view). : .
2. Emphasis supplied.

3. This observation, with respect, is obscure.

4. Emphasis is supplied. «
हू. Citizens Insurance Co, of Canada ¥. William Parsons, (891) 7 A.C. 96.



51

‘lt gives protection for a period of thirty days or the period upte the date of the issue of the
policy. An engagement to issue a policy means, it seems to us, more or less the same thing as #
letter of cover. A letter of cover, therefore, cannot be admitted in evidence under section 35 os 4
policy of insurance.”

The above passage shows that the Supreme Court made a clear distinction between the two
concepts (cover note and policy). Some confusion was, no doubt, created by the general exemption,
because the exemption itself is anomalous, We shail revert to this aspect later.

The minority agreed with the view. Raghbar Dayal, J., expressly stated in his dissenting judg-
ment that it was agreed that a cover note was not a policy.

It may be mentioned that in the case before the Supreme Court, duty and penalty had already
been paid in the court below, pending determination of the legal questions. The legal objection raised
by the insurance company was that since the letter of cover did not “beat stamp”, it could not be
subsequently validated. The Supreme Court observed on this point :--

“(8) The next question is whether a letter of cover is itself an instrumerit chargeable with
duty under the Act, It is not disputed that if it is not so chargeable, it cannot be admitted in evidence
under section 35 by subsequent payment of duty and penalty. Now, section 3 specifies instruments
which are chargeable with duty under the Act. It says, “subject to the provisions of this Act and the
exemptions contained in Schedule I, the following instruments shall be chargeable with duty of the
amount indicated in that Schedule as the proper duty therefor respectively, that is to say,—{a)
every instrament mentioned in that Schedule which. . . . . is executed in India on or after the firat
day of July 1899." July 1, 1899 is the date on which the Act came into force. .

(9) Now the contention of the respondent is that a letter of cover is not an jastroment
chargeable, with duty, because the General Exemption in Article 47 of the Schedule exempts it
from such duty. This contention was accepted by the learned Judges of the Appellate Bench of
the High Court who pointed out, “It is significant that the words used are not that such letter is
chargeable with duty. The words used are “bears the stamp prescribed by the Act for such policy”.
On a proper interpretation this means that such letter of cover is not chargeable with duty as
such under the Act but if it bears the stamp prescribed by the Act for a policy of insurance, thea
it will shed its inability and will become a competent document on which a claim for loss could
be made.” They further observed, “as no stamp is fixed for such & letter of cover being not a
document chargeable with duty, the statute uses the significant words ‘or bearing the stamp’ and
indicates the rate by saying that the stamp must be the same fot such a letter of cover which is
prescribed for a policy of insurance under the Act.” .

“In this Court Mr. Chatterjee for the respondent also advanced the same argument.

(10) We are unable to accept the view which found favour with the Appellate Bench of
the High Court, The matter was put in ‘two ways. The first was that था instrument which is
exempted from duty by Schedule Lis riot chargeable with daty ‘under: s,-3-and-a letter of cover
is so expressly exempted. No doubt, if.an_ instrament is exempted by the Schedule frem duty,
then it cannot be chargeable. But we do not think that a letter, of cover is for. all purpeses ex-
empted from duty by the General Exemptipa. We think the proper construction of the General
Exemption clause is that the exemption is to apply only if the letter of cover is used for com-
pelling the delivery of the poticy mentioned in if}, If it ig used for. any other purpose, then Jt
is not exempted. That is why a proviso has been employed in the provision and the effect of
that is to take the letter of cover out of the exemption in all other cases. If it is taken out of the
exemption, then, of course, the present argument fails. We are unable to sce how a letter of
cover can be said to have been exempted for all purposes, if certain things cannot be cletwerd

under it for the sole reason that it does not bear a stamp. Tf it were exempted for all parpowa,

it would be fully enforceable even without a stamp. When “a letter of cover is got ‘=
thea nothing is claimable under it except the delivery of a policy. 18 however, It Dears the stam
prescribed for the appropriate policy, a claim can be made under it. It seems to os that if an

1. Emphasis supplisd.


Other policies.

Anomaly.

conta,

52

instrument bears a stamp it has incurred the liability for the stamp duty, 1. has not then been

- exempted. Therefore, it cannot be said that a letter-of cover is exempted from duty in all cases.

When it is not exempted, it is an-instrument-chargeable to duty.”

6.8. This indgement is confined to Gre surance. Before this judgement. generally on the
question whether a “slip” for marine insurance is a policy for the purposes of the Stamp Law
judicial decisions' did not help in creating certainty.

The importance of the above point docs not survive? as regards marine insurance policies,
because of specific statutory provisions governing them’. But, the point is of importance in re-
gard to other insuraace policies.

6.9. In view of the above position, it was suggested to us that the present scheme of the
Act is anomalous and the ancmaly should be remedied. Really speaking, a letter of cover is not
to be regarded as a “policy”, though it may be evidence of a contract of insurance. This is clear
from the relevant passage quoted from. the judgement of the Supreme Court’, This being the
basic nature of a cover 1101९, a cover note, it was suggested, should not be regarded as a policy,
and the definition of “policy of insurance” should be amended so as to exclude cover-notes.
This would not fead to any loss of revenue, because, after the nationalisation of the general in-
surance business, the possibility of insurers not executing a formal policy in order to avoid
stamp is almost nil.

6.10. to 6,14. In concrete terms and in detail, the suggestion made to us was as follows:—

(a) A letter of cover ete. should be excluded from the definition of “policy of in-
surance”, by an express provision amending that definition. The reasons have
been given already in the above discussion. In bricf, a policy and a letter of
cover are different from each other. है ~

(७) The general exemption to article 47, as at present worded, then becomes
and can be omitted.

(०) A provision to the effect that if, at the time of its execution, a letter ae
engagement to issue a policy of insurance bears the stamp required by the Act
for such policy, then, it shall not be necessary to stamp the policy again, should
be inserted. The reasonableness of such a provision is obvious.

(0) Under article 5 (agreement). an exemption in respect of letter-of cover etc. should
be inserted. The intention is that such letters should be totaly exempt from stamp
duty under any article of the Act.

(e) These amendments would lead to no 10% of tevenue in the present circumstances.

~

We have, however, after carefully considering the suggestion, come to the conclusion that
the matter may be left as it is, the provisions having stood for a long time.

6.15. to 6.18. The above ‘discussion was concemed with a suggestion made during our
discussions. We have not received any suggestion from the public for amendment” of the defini
tion in response to our Questionnaire.

1. {a) Surajmal v. Triton Tarurance Co., ALR. 1925 P.C. 83, 84. -
(को. कि re Marine Assurance Certificate, (1895) LL-R. 19 Bom. 130, 132 (Document which does not contemplate

another formal document). .
(c) Tricamji v. Birfi, A.LR. 1923 Bom, 142, 143; 24 Bom. LR. 820. (istinction between cover note and policy)
(d) Afimed Shah v. Grindlay & Co. ALR. 1944 ‘Sind 98, 103. (Certificate of Insurance}.
(e) Reference (1903) LL.B. 30 Cal. 565, 575. > (Maclean, C.J.)—"A contract for sea insurance is one thing and
a policy of sea insurance another.” : हु : .
See discussion as to section 2(20)—-"Sea policies”, infra.
Sections 24, 27(2) and 28, Marine Insutance Act, 1963,
Para. 6.7 supra. -
3. 0. 11 of the Questionnaire.

sek


53

6.19. “Policy ul group insurance” is defined in section 419A) as meuning any iostrument
covering nol less than fifty or such smaller number as the Central Government may approve,
either generally or with reterenes to any particulay case: by which वा insurer. in consideration of
a premium paid by an cmployer or by an employer and his employee jointly, engages [0 cover.
with or without medical examination and for the sufe benefit of persons other than the employcr,
the fives of all the employees or of any class of them, determined by conditions pertaining to the
employment. fer amounts of insurance based upon a plan which precludes individual selection.

It needs no change.
6.20. Under sectivn 2(20). a policy of sea insurance or sea policy—

(a) means any insurance made upon any ship ar vessel (whether for marine or inland
navigation), or upon the macl y. tackle or furniture of any ship or vessel,
or upon any goods, merchandise or property of any description whatever on
board of any ship or vessel, or upon the freight of, or any other interest which
may be lawfully insured in. or relating to, any ship or vessel, and

(0) includes any insurance of goads, merchandise or property for any transit: which
includes. nat only a sea risk within the meaning of clause (a), but also any other
tisk incidental to the trunsit insured from the commencement of the transit to
the ultimate destination covered by the insurance ;

“Where any person, in consideration of any sum of money to be paid for additional freight
or otherwise, agrees to luke upon himself any risk attending goods, merchandise, or property of
any description whaicver while on board of any ship or vessel, or engages to indemnify the
owner of any such goods, merchandise or property from any risk, loss or damage, such agree-
ment or engagement shall be deemed to be a contract for sea-insurance.

6.21. The stamp duty on such policies is chargeable under article 47. Questions exclusively
concerning the rates of stamp duly will be dealt with under that article’, But, at this stage, it
should be noted that the subject of marine insurance has been dealt with by legislation—The
Marine Insurance Act, 1963. Its important provisions will be noticed in due course

6.21A. In Englind, from 1605, legislative measures were passed from time to time relat-
ing to particular aspects af marine insurance. We need not mention all of them here, but it
shoud be noted that since 1795, it has been obligatory in England to record the contract of
marine insurance in a policy which is duly stamped. The effect of non-compliance with such a
provision has becn diflerently expressed from time to time, but, in substance, the position—so
far as the statute flaw since 1795 is concerned,—has always been that if therc is no wriften
policy duly stamped, the contract cannot be admitted in evidence, and until 1959, the contract
was not valid also.

6.22. It was maily due to the efforts of s Birmingham County Court Judge. (Sir) M. D.
Chalmers, in collaboration with practising underwriter, (Sir) Douglas Owen, that in 1894, a
Bill ‘entitled the “Marine Insurance Codification Bill” was introduced by Lord Herschell in the
House of Lords, Judge Chalmers had for a considerable time given his attention to marine
cases in the Courts, and hed interpreted the law, as it then was, in a careful and lucid manner.
He drafted the Bill. He tack the view that no code could provide for every case that might
arise or always use absolutely accurate language. He accepted that the cases coming before
lawyers were those in which a code was defective. Eventually, the measure was placed on the
Matnte Book in 1906. The Act of 1906 does not set out to remodel the Jaw relating to marine
jnsurance, but merely to codify previous decisions and customary practice.

6.23. The concept of protection against loss by ‘maritime perils has been traced back to
215 B.C,, when the Roman Government was required, by the suppliers of military stores, to
accept “all the risk of loss, arising from the attacks of enemies or from storms.” to the supplies

eee
1, See article 47, लिए.
2, Dover, A Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 2.
24 M of Law/T7—8

Section 2(19-%)--
“Policy of group
insurance”

Policy of sea
insurance.

Stamp duty under
article 47.

Marine insurance

in England.

History of
Protection against
marine perils.


Rhodian Jaw and
Codex

Justinian.

Lloyds in
England, and

1906 Act.

d
38
=

Position before
1963.

Sections 3 & 24,
87110 Tnsurance
963.

५ 1

Section 4 of the
1963 Act—Form
of policy.

54

which the supplier placed ia the ships. Round about $0 AD. Emperor Ciaudius issued guatan-
tees to importers in respect of losses arising from storms. The practice of issuing bottomry bonds
(on the security of a vessel) is supposed to have commenced even much carlier. Professor
Trenerry* has traced its origin as carly as 2250 B.C.

6.24, The “Rhodian” law has a lucid statement of the principle of “general average”,
which is one of the most important principles of marine insurance. In fact, the earliest enuncia-
tion of the principle of general average is itself known as the Rhodian Law, and is so designated
{in the Sententise of Paulus, 200 A.D. the salient points of which state* :

“Let that which has been jettisoned on behalf of all, be restored by the contribution
of all.”
“A collection of the contributions for jettison shall be made when the ship is saved.”

The principle of “general average” received further sanction in the Codex Justinian, The
first relevant principle of this Codex is as follows:

“The Rhodian Law decrees that, if goods are thrown overboard to lighten the ship,
all shall make good by contribution. that which has been given for all.”

6.25. Marine insurance was well known to traders in Venice, Genoa and Florence, and the
history of marine insurance in Lombardy has become familiar to all those who have to deat
with the subject in the West. The House of Lloyds in London, which, for about two centuries,
has been associated with marine insurance, has contributed greatly to the development of the
Yaw on the subject. In England, the Marine Insurance Act, 1906, is the principal statute on the
subject, but the principles were laid down long before that Act was passed. Continental codifice-
tions—official and othets—are much earlier.

6.26. The word ‘policy’ is, 10 modem times, used to indicate the formal instrument incorpo-
rating a contract of insurance. The word is derived? from Latin “pellicitatio”, (a promise), through
Italian “polizza” or French “police”. Oddly enough, in an English policy of insurance, the promise
to pay in case of loss is implied. not expressed. Continental policies, however, contain an express
promise to pay, within so mapy days after notice of 1055. हे

6.27. Marine insurance is, in its essence, a protection against the risks of marine adventure,
though the concept can be extended to certain non-marine adventures also.

6.28. The contract of marine insurance is a contract of indemnity; and this brings in the
doctrine of subrogation described as a doctrine in which lies the romance of maring insurance.

6.29. Before 1963, Indian courts usually followed principles of the English law as laid down
in judicial decisions on the subject.

6.30. In 1963, the Marine Insurance Act was passed in India. Section 3 of the Act* reads—

“3. A contract of marine insurance is an agreement whereby the insurer undertakes,
indemnify the assured, in the manner and to the extent thereby agteed, against
marine losses, that is to say, the losses incidental to marine adventure,”

Section 24 of the Act® provides as follows : :

“A contract of marine insurance shall not be admitted in evidence unless it ie sabe bodied
in a marme policy in acaordance with this Act. This policy may be qx‘ d andl
issued cither at the time when the contract is concluded, or afterwards.” *"

6.31. The Act contains, in a schedule, the standard form of policy which may he used.
This is based on the Lloyd's policy. Section 4 of the Act provides— हि

“(1) A contract of marine insurance may, by its express terms, OF by usgge of trade;
be extended so as to protect ‘the assured against losses on intand raters “or! ont aa
__and in which may te incidental to anY $8 प्र बम ewan risk which may be incidental to any sea voyage. “4

1. CE Trenery, Researches into the Origins of Marine Insurance, cited by Dover, A Handbook to Marina Esurance: :
1957), page 3. wo. §

2 oeeue A Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 4.

3. Chalmers, “Maine Insurance Act (1966), page 1.

4, Section 3, Marine Insurance Act, 1963.

5, Section 24, Marine Insurance Act, 1963.



55

(2) Where a ship in course of building, or the Jaunch of a ship, or any edventure
analogous to a marine adventure is covered by a policy in the form of a marine
policy, the provisions of this Act, in so far as applicable, shali apply thereto, but,
except as by this section provided, nothing in this Act shall alter or affect any
rule of iaw applicable to any contract of insurance other than a contract of marine
insurance as by this Act defined.

Explanation.-an adventure analogous to a marine adventure, includes an adventure
where any ship, goods or other movables are exposed to perils incidental to local
or inland transit.”

6.32 Some of the other important provision of the Act are in sections 25-26.
Section 25 enacts what a marine policy must specify.

Section 26(1) provides that a marine policy must be signed by or on behalf of the insurer.

6.33, So much as regards the important provisions contained in tne body of the Marine
Insurance Act. The Schedule to the Act contains the form of the policy. Its use is permissible, not
mandatory.

6,34, It may be of interest to refer to history of the policy of marine insurance. The form
of policy usually employed in marine insurance is generally known as the $.G. Form.* The words
“§.G.” mean “ship-goods” indicating that the policy is adapted for the insurance of any interest
which is not itself a tangible physical object, as long as such interest 1s pecuniary."

Sir Douglas Owan. an authority on marine insurance in the nineteenth century, said of the
Lloyd's policy—‘almost every clause is consccrated by centuries of usage’. Though the policy
is clumsily expressed, its meaning is clear, because it has ‘generations of legal interpretation hanging
almost to every word, and almost certainly to every sentence’. As the Marryat Committee of 1811
Teported, the ‘doubiful points have been so repeatedly discussed and decided upon in Courts of

_lww that their true legal import is ascertained.”

6.35, Jt may be stated that Lloyd’s policy was settled in its prcsent form in 1779, and
some of the provisitns are even of much older date.* Though, in the beginning, the English Judges
deactibed it as strange instrument, the mercantile community has clung to it, and, in fact, all
English insurance law has been developed through cases arising on the policy. This policy appears
aa a schedule to our Marine Insurance Act also, as already stated.

6.36. Besides, the standard form of policy, certain clauses are added, where required by
the ‘titcumstances of the case, in a marine insurance policy. Even in such cases, standard forms
evolved by Institutes are in force, such as, the Institute of London Underwriters Clauses, the
American Institute Cargo Clauses, and what have come to be known as the “York-Antwerp
Rules”, which represent a code for voluntary adoption in contracts of affreightment to govern
grneral average loss and contribution. .

6.37. These clauses are also of great practical importance, and many of them have come
up for construction before English Courts during the last 150 years. Reference may be made, in
thls connection, to a lecture to the Insurance Institute of London, delivered by Lord Chorley in
WNoveenber, 1957.5 Lord Chorley said,—

“Te the Yustitute Clauses are the core of modern insurance, their construction is the
wrapping, round the core, and without dealing with the wrapping, that is, without
construction, we cannot get at the core.”

1. Sections 25-26, Marine Insurance Act, 1963.

2. Ship and Goods Form. ~

3, Dover, Analysis of Marine Insurance Ciauses (1961), page 4.

4, Raynes, History of British Insurance (1964), page 159.

5, Lord Chorley, Lecture on “The Construction of the Matine Policy”.

Sections 25-26,
ine Tnsurence
Act.

Usual Poliey—
8, 9. Form...

Lloyd's poi.

‘Other standard
clauses.


Various types of
policies—Time
Voyage, Mixed
Floating Valued
and unvalued,

Definition in the
Stamp Act,
section 2(2).

Insurance Act~~
Informal notes in

56

6.38. The classic exposition of this important matter is contained in a lecture delivered by
Sir Patrick Devlin,! (when he was a Judge of the High Cour: of Justice} 10 the Norwegian Mari-

time Law Association on 4th July, 1952. नि

6.39 It may be stated that marine policies are of many kinds*—

(1) for a voyage, ie. where the contract is to issue the subject-matter “at and from”
or “From one place te another or others”.

(2) For time, z¢., where the contract is to insme the subject-matter for a definite
period of time,

(3) For Voyage and for time (Mixed). In this case the loss is covered only on a parti-
cular voyage and the loss must also occur within that time specified.

(4

A fiociing policy. Vhis describes the insurance in general terms, but leaves the
name of the ship or ships and other particulars to be specified later.

(5) A valued policy. This specifies the agreed value of the subject-matter, and the
value so fixed is, as between the insurer and the assured, conclusive of the valuc
of the subject-matter insured.

(6) An «ivalued or open policy. This docs not specily the value of the subject-matter,
but, subject to the limit of the sum assured, leaves it to be subsequently determined.

6.40 Revertiny, now, to the Stamp Act, we may note that the definition of “policy of
insurance” in the Act is based on section 92, Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng.) as it then stood. It may,
however, be stated that since 1959,° there is, in England, no separate stamp duty on policies of
marine insurance and these policies share the fixed duty of 6 pence in common with all policies
of insarance except life insurance.

In fact section 92 of the English Act of 1891 and succeeding provisions were repealed in
1959.

6.41, It was suggested to us, that, in view of the fact that marine insurance is now the |
subject matter of legislation in India, it is appropriate that the definition in the Stamp Act
sould make a reference to that Act.

6.42. This suggestion raises the question whether, by referring to the substance of the

business. F 4
insurance business definition in the Marine Insurance Act, any documents which are liable to stamp duty under

Position as to
ip.

the present definition in the Stamp Act, will escape duty. The question can be discussed in
two aspects.

6.43, In the first place, there are informal documents, such as, slips, and cover notes,
usually handed over ॥ marine insurance business pending the execution of a formal policy.
The informal note or memorandum which is drawn when the contract is entered into, is called

the slip or covering note.*

It would appear that while such a slip is clearly a “contract for marine insurance”, it is
equally clearly not a ‘policy’ for the purposes of the marine insurance law. 16 the policy is duly
stamped, then reference may be made to the cover note for certain evidentiary purposes.*

6.44 Tt was pointed out that though on the question whether a slip is a policy for the
purposes of the Stamp 1.99. there is a controversy,” this controversy is not important in the
context of marine insurance. Sections 24 to 26 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1963, now lay

1. Devlin ; “The Principles of Constructions of Charter Parties, Bills of Landing and Marine Policies". Address
to the Norwegian Maritime Law Association (952).

Based on Smith. Mercantile Law, and Stevens, Mercantile Law.

Section 30, Tinance Act, 1959 (Eng.).

See Maignen & Co. v. National ‘Benefit Assurance Co.. (1922) 38 Times Law Reports 257.

५. Tonides v. Pacific Insuvance Co., (1871) Law Report 6Q. t page 685 (Lord Biachburn).

| Section 88, Marine Insurance Act, 1963.

See discussion as to policy of insurance.

3 9 > की (० [७


57

down detailed provisions governing the form of the policy of marine insurance, and if these
provisions are not complied with, the policy is unenforceable. ‘Therefore, there is not much
likelihood of duty escaping, whecher oc not a slip is regarded as a policy. If the assured docs
not care to obtain a formal policy, then the specific provisions in the Marine Insurance Act
will render the slip inadm'ssible.

6.45 It is now well established in England that no action can be maintained in the United Position in
Kingdom upon ihe implied promise to grant a policy when the slip is initiated.’ If the insurers, #!2nd-
go into liquidation, the liquidator cannot issue policies on outstanding slips.*. Ib is otherwise
in countries where revenuc or other Jaws do not interpost.* Bur the statutory provision‘ will
apply to policies issued abroad which arc sued upon in England.*

6.46. This is cften described as a curious and important instance of an imperfect obliga- imperfect
tion, arising out of special conditions imposed on the formation of a complete contract found, Cbleation.
In patctice, the agreement is concluded between the parties by a memorandum culled a slip,
containing the terms of the proposed insurance and iitialled by the underwriters.” It is the
Practice of some insurers always to date the policy as of the date of slip.” Ac common law,
the slip would constitute a Dinding contract. This. however, is not allowed in case of marine
insurance,*

6.47. Moreover, in India, after the nationalisation of general insurance business, it is
ualikely that those who carry on general insurance business will dispense with the practice of
issuing polivics in order to escape stamp duty. Thus, the fact that informal cr temporary docu-
meats do not fall within “policy” in the Marine Insurance Act should not matter.

6.48 The second question to be considered relates to insurance in respect of inlaid Inland transport.
transport, The dctinition in ihe Stamp Act—vide the words that appear in brackets—specifi-
cally cover transport by inlund waters. In this conncction, it is to be pointed out that under
the Marine Insurance Act® also, a contract of marine insurance “may be extended” to cover
transport on inland waters.

648A. On a comprison of the definition of “sea insurance” in the Stamp?’ Act and that of Inland risks.

“Marine insurance” in sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1963, it appears that,
broadly speaking, the only kind of risk which may not conceivably be covered by the provision in
the Marine Insurance Act is a risk arising from an adventure which is carried on purely on
inland waters and not as incidental to a marine voyage. It could, for example, be argued that
the imsurance of a steamer carrying goods only on a particular river and not touching the sea at
all at any point may not fall within the definition in section 4 of Marine Issurance Act, 19637,
though it falls within the definition in the Stamp Act, Even the existence of this point of difference
is doubiful, because it is hardly likely that the draftsman in 1899, when using the expression
“sea insurance”, was concerned with purely inland navigation.

6,488. Moreover, whatevcr be the scope of section 2(20) which defines “policy of sea Taxing eittry-—"
insurance”, it is to be noted that the taxing entry in article 47 speaks only of “sea insurance” sea insurance.
and takes a reference to section 7. The expression “sea insurance” should be given its ordinary
meaning. Section 7(1)—now repealed—provides that no “contract for sca insurance” (other than
such insurance as is reterred to in section 506 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894), shall be

1. Fisher v. Liverpool Mar. Ins, Co, (1874) LR, 9 0.8. 418, Ex. Ch. (0) Genforsikrings & Co. v. Da Costa, (1911)
17.8. 137 (open covers of re-insurance),

2, Re Clyde Mar. Ins. Co. (1924), 17 Li, L.R, 287; 1924 5.0 113; Re City Epwitabie Fire Ins. Co., (1930) 2 Ch. 293,

3, Bhugwandass v. Netherlands Sea ins. Co., (1888), 14 App. Cas. 83, P.C. (Rangoon Forcign Policy)

4. Section 22, Marine Ins. Act, 1906 (Eng).

5, Royal Exchange Asece. Corp. v. Vega, (1901) 2 K.R, 557; (1902) 2 K.B. 384, CA.

6. For the form of this, see L.R. 8 QB. 471; 1.8, 9 QB.

7, See LR. § Ex, 199.

8. Asto fire insurance, 4 policy is uot compulsory. Thompson १. Adan, (1899) 23 q.B.D. 361.

9, Section-4, Marine Insurance Act, 1961 (supra).

10, Para. 6.30, snpra,

11. Para. 6.30 supra



rout

Ing
rh a

pp Act,

58

yalid unless the same is expressed in a “sea policy”. The taxing entry in article 47 refers to section
7, and since neither section 7 nor article 47 defines “sea insurance”, as such recourse should be
had only to its ordinary meaning.

Now, the expression “sea insurance”, according (0 ordinary parlance, would not cover #
tisk purely of river nevigation. Since there is no definition of “sea insurance”, it can be taken in
its ordinary meaning. On that approach, it would not include purely inland navigation” The
result is that though the definition of “policy of sea insurance” in section 2(20) of the Stamp Act
is wide in regard to inland navigation (as explained above), the charging provision in article 47
does not appear to be so wide.

6.48C. Therefore, the fact that the definition in the Marine Insurance Act does not include
pure inland adventures, is of mo consequence. Of course, as a matter of commercial practice,
policies of insurance of vessels on inland navigation are sometimes executed in the form
normally used for marine policies. But even that fact would not attract section 71) of the
Stamp Act or Article 47. Thus, the adoption of the definition in the Marine Jasurance Act
and the deletion of the present definition will make no radical change in the tax.

6.48D. Even if the above exposition of the position is not correct, the practical aspect should
not be over-lcoked.

6.49. Thus, there should be no serious objection if the Marine Insurance Act is referred
to in the defintion in the Stamp Act. It may be emphasised that that Act is the principal enact-
ment of relevance to marine policies.

6.50. The following rough draft indicates the main lines on which the definition should
be revised,’ if the above approach is accepted—

(20) ‘Policy of marine insurance which satisfies the cequirements of the Marine Insu-
rance Act, 1963.”

6.51. As regards section 24, Marine Insurance Act, 1963, it may be noted that the inter
part of the section does not allow a suit, It merely recognises the fact that there may be
an interval between the conclusion of the contract and the issue of a policy of marine insurance.

6.52. The statutory provisions could be analysed into— a

(i) those regulating stamp duties, and
(i) others.
Section 24, Marine Insurance Act is in the second category.

The proviso to the General Exemption below article 47, Stamp Act, also does not confer
substantive right to suc for a policy. If such a right exists by the substantive. law, then
the want of full stamp duty should not come in the way. That in all that the proviso parmits.

6.53. We have already referred to the relevant provisions of the Marine Insyrance Act,
1963.2 The insurance Act, 1938, which regulates the business of Insurance, provides that* “Marine ,
Insurance business"-—mieans “the business of effecting contracts of Insurance प्र] vespele of
apy description, including cargoes, freights ,and other interests which may be I pal ly अंकों;
in or in relation to such vessels, cargoes, and freights, goods, wares, merchandise apd property.
of whatever description insured for any transit by land or water, or both, and whether ‘oc not
including warchouse risks or similar risks in addition or as incidental to such transit, and ifetudes
any other risks custoniarily included among the risks insured against in Mariné Indurence
policies*.” ; दि

6.54. The last paragraph cf the definition in the Stamp Act may now be considered,
Normally, under the law relating to the carriage of goods by sea, the person issuing a:bill of
lading docs not undertake liability in respect of loss of goods by maritime parils. But he

1. Some consequential changes may be necessary in section 7(4), article 47 etc.

2, Para. 6.30, supra.

3. Section 2(13-A), Insurance Act. 1938. 2
4, See Alifance Assurance Co. Ltd., v. The Unton of India, (1957-58) 62 C.W.N. 539; ALR. 1959 Cal. 190.


59

may undertake this Tability if he is paid additional freight [his is one of the situations to
which section 2420), last paragraph of the Stamp Act, 15 addressed. In the Indian Carriage
of goods hy Sea Act. 1925, the Schedule, Article 1५, paragraph 2, constitutes the relevant provi-
sion on the subject, and the matcrial portion is quoted below—
*. Neither the carrier nor the ship shall be responsible for loss or damage arising
or resulting from—
(a) Act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot, or the servants of the
carrier in the navigation or in the management of the ship ;
(b) Fire, unless caused by the actual fault or privity of the carrier ;
(c) Perils, dangers and accidents of the sea or other navigable waters ;
(d) Act of God;
(e) Act of war;
(7) Act of public enemies ; ‘
(g) Arrest of restraint of princes, rules or people, or seizure under legal process.?”
The payment of “additional freight” (or other sum) referred to in section 2(20), Stamp
Act, last paragraph, constitutes the consideration for the ship owner undertaking this liability
specifically.
6.55. The present wording of the last para of section 2(20), has lost its utility, because the
expression ‘contract for sea insurance’ has now lost its importance after repeal of section 7.
6.56. On a consideration of the various points made above, we recommend that the defini-
tion of policy of sea insurance should be revised as indicated above.”

APPENDIX 1
Section 2(20)-—Revised definition of “Policy of Sea Insurance” as already decided.

20(1). ‘Policy of Sea Insurance’ or ‘Sea Policy’

(a) mean any instrument of insurance against loss, damage or liability arising from 2.
sea risk, made upon—
Gi) any ship or vesse! (whether for marine or inland navigation), or
(ii) machinery, tackle or furniture of any ship or vessel, or
(iii) any goods, merchandise or property of any description whatever on board of any |
ship or vessel, or
(iv) the freight of, or any other interest which may be Yawfully insured in, or relating.
to, any ship or vessel, and
(b) inclides any instrument, of insurance of. goods, merchandise or property for any
transit which includes not only a sea risk within the meaning of clause: (a) bet
also any other risk incidental to the transit insured from the commencement of
the transit to the vitimate destination covered by the insurance.

(2) Where any person, in consideration of any sum of money paid or to be paid for -
additional freight or otherwise.-—
(4) agrees to take upon himself any risk attending goods, merchandise or property
of any description whatever while on board of any ship or vessel, or
(ii) engages to indemnify the owner of any such goods, merchandise or property
against any risk, loss or damage,
such agreement or engagement shalt be deemed to be a contract for sea insurance.

+4. The remaining clauses are not material.
2. Para 6.50, supra.


60

APPENDIX 2
EXTRACTS FROM THE FINANCE. ACT. 1959 (ENG.)
(7 and 8 Eliz. 2, ०. 58).
“30. Stamp daty on policies of insurance.—
(1) In the first Schedule to the Stamp Act, 1891, before the head of charge “Policy of
Life Insurance® there shall be inserted the following—

“Policy of Insurance other than Life Insurance O£ Os 6d”, and the head of charge
“Policy of Sea Insurance” and the head of charge beginning “Policy of Insurance
against Accident” shall be omitted.

(2) The following shall be cxempt from all stamp duties :

(a) cover notes, slips aud other instruments usually made in anticipation of the issue
of a formal policy, not being iastruments relating to lite insurance ;

(b) instruments embodying alterations of the terms of conditions of any policy of
insurance other than life insurance ;

(c) policies of insurance on baggage or personal and household effects only, if made
or executed out of Great Britain.

and an instrument exempicd by virtue of paragraph (a) of this sub-section shall not be taken
for the purposes of the Stamp Act, 1891, to be a policy of insurance.”

APPENDIX 3
SPECIMEN SLIP? OF MARINE INSURANCE
Insurance Brokers, Ltd.
Maria 5.5.
No.,
12 months
Noon, March 30, 19——.
Ship
Machinery... .

£40,000
+++ £10,000

Inst. Clauses.
Inst. Warranties.

Average payable on each valuation separately or on any two valuations together on the
whole.

£3,500 IS. 30s. per cent
THz
(Subscription of JS. for £3,500 dated December 7, 19..... The other subscriptions follow

and are written on the back of the slip).
५००००००००० वि 19. . . .

Chorley, Shipping Law, (1960) page 356.


CHAPTER 7
DEFINITIONS IN SECTION .2(21) TO 2(25)

7.1. Section 2(21) defines the expression “power of attorney” as follows :—

“21. ‘Power of aitorney’ includes any instrument (not chargeable with a fee under
the law relating to court-fees for the time being in force) empowering a specified
person to act for and in the name of the person executing it”;

The duty on a power of attorney is chargeable under article 48.

The definition of “power of attorney” in section 3(16) of the Stamp Act of 1879, read as
follows :—

“Power of Attorney means any instrument (not chargesble with a fee under the Jaw
relating te court fees for the time being in force) empowering a specified person
to act in the stead of the person executing it.”

The definition in section 324) of the Act of 1869 ran as follows :—

“Power of Attorney” includes every instrament except a proxy empowering a person
to act in the stead of the person executing it”.

The material change in the definition in the present Act is the addition of the words as
to the specified person being employed to act in the name of the person executing the instru-
ment. In the remarks about this clause in the Statement of Objects and Reasons, it has been
sald that the amendment has been made in order to make it clear that the definition “relates only
to powers-of-attorney and does not include all contracts creating the relationship of principal and
agent”,

7.2, There is a Central Act entitled, “The Powers of Attorney 5677, but that Act does
not. contain a definition of “power of attorney”. In fact, that Act does not purport to deal
comprehensively with the subject of powers of attorney, but deals with certain aspects thereof,
which are not material for the present purpose."

7.3. Briefly speaking, a power of attorney is the formal appointment of an agent by a
deed. {It usually runs thus :—

“Know all men that I, AB, have appointed CD my true and lawful attorney, in mv
name or otherwise and on my behalf to do and execute the following acts and
deeds .... in witness टॉ2, , . ... ,. .. 2... ”

7.4. The authority created by the power of attorney may be general, or it may be special.
For this reason, a power of attorney is usually classified as general or special. This distinction
is reflected in article 48. Jt is also indirectly recognised in the Indian Contract Act, section
188, which reads*-—

“188. An agent having an authority to do an act has authority to do every lawful
thing which is necessarily in ordet to do such act.

An agent having an authority to carry on a business has authority to do every lawful
thing necessary for the purpose, or usually done in the course of conducting such
business.”

1, The Powers of Attorney Act,"1882,
2, That Act will be examined separately,
3, Section 188, Indian Contract Act, 1872.

41
24 M of Law/77—9.

Section 221)—
“Power of
attorney”.

Powers of
Attorory Act,
1882.

Definition.

General and
special power,


Story quoted.

Formalities when
required in
England.

Formalities when
required in India.

62

7.5, Story, in his work on Agency, section 17, says :—

“A special agency properly exists, when there is a delegation of authority to do a
single act; a general agency properly exists where there is a delegation to do all
acts connected with a particular trade, business or employment. Thus, a person,
who is authorised by his principal to execute a particular deed, or to sign a particular
contract, or to purchase 8 particular parcel or merchandise, is a special agent.
But a person, whe is authorised by his principal to execute all deeds, sign all
contracts, or purchase all goods, required in a particular trade, business, or em-
ployment, 1s a general agent.”*

In persons on Contracts, volume 1, page 39, a special agent is defined as one authorised “to
do one or two particular things” and a gencral agent as one authorised “to transact all his
principal's business er his business of a particular kind.”

in Bouvier's Law Dictionary,? Volume 2, page 714, the statement is---“a general power
authorises an agent to act generally in behalf of the principal: a special power is one limited
to a particular act”.

Wharton* defines a power of attorney as “a writing given and made by one person
authorising another, who, in such case, is called the attorney of the person (or donce of the
power), appointing him to do any Jawful act in the stead of that person, as to receive rents,
debts, to make appearance and application in court, before an officer of registration and the like.
ft may be either general or special, i.e., to do all acts or to do some particular Act.” Stroud‘
defines it us an authority whereby one is “set in turn, stead or place” of another to act for
him

In an English case,* Coltman J. observed as follows :—

“Where one is authorised, in writing, on behalf ef another and in his name to do an
act, that is an appointment of an attorney within the meaning of the Stamp
Act.”

7.6. The definition in our Act also lays emphasis on the use of name. Thus, if x person
writes a letter to his brother, authorising him to sell their joint property, the letter is sufficient
authority for the sale, but is not @ power of attorney for the purposes of the Stamp Act.” The
reason is that the use of the acme of the sender of the letter is not expressly authorised in the
letter,

7.7. Apart from statute, an agency can be created orally, but statute may require writing,
and there may be special rules apart from statute. Thus: for example, in England, an appointment
under seal is necessary to enable an agent to execute a deed on behalf of his principle. One
person cannot authorise, another to execute 3 deed for him except by deed.”

7.8. Under the Indian Contract Act,® an agent is a person employed to do any act for
another, or ta represent another in dealings with third person.* As a rule, an agent may be
appointed without any special formality. in India also.

7.9. Indian statute, law. excepting for a few scatlered provisions,” docs not provide in
what cases 4 written power of attorney is required

dyer v. Narasimha Reo, 1.L.R. 38 Mad. 134, 136.
in 17, ver v. Narasimha Rao, 1.L.R. 38 Mad. 134, 136.

1. Story,
2. Bouvier,
£3. Wharton, Law Lexicon (1953), page 784.
4. Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1953), page 2257.
4. Walker v. Remmert, (1896) 135 E.R. 1181.
6
2
a.
9.

Kala Khan v. Nathu Khan, है] "पर. 1926 Lahore 229.
Berkeley v. Hardy, (1826) 5 8&0 355,
Section 182, Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Section 182.
10, Order 3, rule 4, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; sections 32, 33 and 34, Indian Registration Act, 1908.


63

7.10, Under the Evidence Act?, the Court shall presume that every document purporting to
be a power of attorney, aud to have been executed, before, and auihenticated by, a Notary
Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the
Central Government, was so executed and authenticated. The Registration Act also requires
certain powers of atloracy ta be authenticated? Registration of a power of attorney may become
eompuisory in certain cases.3

7.11. So much as regards the concept of power of attorney and the formalities, if any,
requisite for such powers, Reverting to the definition in the Stamp Act, we may note that an
instrument chargeable with court-fees is outside the definition—vide the words in brackets. Docu-
ments chargeable with court-fees have been eacluded, for the reason that otherwise they would
be subject to double liability.t Since an advocate appearing or acting for his clicnt does ali
his work in the name of his client,5 the usual Vakalatnama would, but for the excluding words,
be regarded as a power of attorney.

7,12, The principal enactment relating to court-fees is the Court Fees Act. Schedule If,
Article 10, of that Act is material for the present purpose. It relates to Mukhtearnama or
Vakalatnama for the conduct of a case.

7.13. There is a difference of opinion on the question whether a mukhtearnama or vakalat-
mama executed in favour of a person who is not a certificated mukhtear or pleader should be
stamped under the Stamp Act or under the Court Fees Act.

According to the Allahabad High Court, the documents referred to in Schedule LI, Article
10, of the Court Fees Act, are restricted to documents given to and presented by duly certified
anukhtears or pleaders under the Legal Practitioners Act, and therefore, a mukhtearnama in favour
of & person who is not a certificated mukhtear falls within the definition in the Stamp Act and
is chargeable with a stamp duty under this Act. A contrary view has, however, been taken
in « Full Bench decision ० the Punjab High Court.?

7.14. Thus, there appears to be difference of judicial opinion on this point. In our view,
if a person who is not a legally qualified practitioner conducts a case on behalf of a party, the
power of altorney should be chargeable under the Stamp Act.

We recommend that the Act should be amended for the purpose. We may note that
the suggested amendment has been generally favoured in the replies to the questionnaire issued

‘by ४७.5
7.15. The next definition is of ‘promissory note’ defined in section 2(22) as under :-—
“(22) ‘Promissory note’ means a promissory note as defined by the Negotiable Instru-
ments Act, 1881 ;
it also includes a note promising the payment of any sum of money out of any

particular fund which may or may not be available or upon any condition or
contingency which may or may not be performed or happen,”

7,46, The definition is more elaborate than the one in an earlier Stamp Act. In section
3(25) of the Stamp Act of 1869, “promissory note” was defined as including every instrument
whereby the maker engages absolutely to pay a specified sum of money to another at a ume
therein specified or on demand or at sight. The definition was omitted in the Stamp Act of
1879,

1, Section 85, Indian Evidence Act, 1872

2, Sections 32(c), 33(1), 33(4), Indian Registration Act, 1908.

3. See ALR, 1954 T.C. 10.

4, Ramdev v, Lalu Nath, A1.R. 1937 Nag. 65.

5. Hormusji v. Nana Babu, A.1:R: 1934 Bom. 299, 302.

6. Permanand v. Sat Persad, (1911) LE.R. 33 All. 487, 489 (६. 8.).

7. Ganpat v. Prem Singh (1922) 15 Ind. Cas. 122, 124 (F.B.) (Lah.) dissenting from L.L.R. 33 All. 487.
8. Question 13, section 2(21)—Court Fees.

Question of
instruments liatle
to court fees.

Recommendation,

Section 2(22)—
“Promissory
7006",

History,


‘Negotiable
Tnsteuments Act,

Two parts of the
Aciinition.

Second half.

64

7.17. Under the Negotiable Instruments Act,1—

“A promissory note is an instrument in writing (not being a bank note or a currency
note} containing an unconditional undertaking signed by the maker, to pay a
certain sum of money only fo, or to the order of, a certain person or to the
bearer of the instrument.”

7.18. The present definition in the Stamp Act consists of two parts, The earlier half simply
refers to the definition in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. The latter half includes notes
Promising the payment of any sum of money out of a particular fund which may or may not be
available, or upon a condition or contingency which may or may not be performed or happen?

7.19. It may be noted that the definition in the English Stamp Act, section 33(1), is rather
wide.? It has been pointed out‘ that the Indian Stamp Act, unlike the English Stamp Act,
does not ignore the definition in the Act relating tc negotiable instruments. In the earlier
half, it adopts the definition of ‘promissory note’ in the Negotiable Instruments Act.

7,20. So far, there is no difficulty. But the second half of the definition in our Act, which
is similar to English sub-section (2), raises problems. It includes many documents not covered
by the Negotiable Instruments Act. Should the legislature go beyond the definition in the
Negotiable Instruments Act, for the purposes of the Stamp Act? Is there any compelling
consideration that would justify the extended part of the definition? This is the question that
we have to consider.

7.21. A brief analysis based on comparison with the Negotiable [ustruments Act® will
be helptul—

(i) According to the definition in the Negotiable Instruments Act, the note must be
signed by the maker. This requirement does not expressly appear in the latter
half ot the definition in the Stamp Act. However one can disregard this difference
as @ very minor one.

(ii) Secondly, according to the Negotiable Instruments Act, the note mist be ia
favour of a ceriain person or bearer; this requirement does not expressly appear
in the latter half of the definition in the Stamp Act.

(iii) Thirdly, both the Acts require a promise to pay in substance, though the Negotiable
Instruments Act uses the expression “undertaking”, while the exteaded part of
the definition in the Stamp Act uses the expression “promise”.

(iv) Fourthly, under the Negotiable Instruments Act, the sum of money must be
certain, while in the extended part of the definition in the Stamp Act, “any sum
of money” will do.

(v) Fifthly, under the Negotiable Instruments Act, the undertaking to pay must be
unconditional,® while, under the extended part of the definition in the Stamp Act,
it need not be so, and it also provides that the particular fund out of which money
is to be paid may or may not be available.

The fourth and fifth points are of importance.

7.22. Thus, uader the definition in the Stamp Aci, latter half, it is not necessary that the
document must be a promissory note within the Negotiable Instruments Act. Even then, it

. has been held that it is an essential characteristic of the definition in the Stamp Act that there

should be व prumise to pay to some person or persons or to order or to the bearer of the
note. A promise io pay the amount in 008 event, with a provision in another event to deposit
it in court, does not make the document a promissory note."

1. Section 4, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (lustration net quoted).
2. Compare the definition of ‘bill of exchange on demand’ in section 2(3), supra.

3, Section 33, Stamp Act, 1891 (English).

4, Mohammad Akbar Khan v, Aiar Singh (1936) LL.R. 17 Lab, $57, 566; ALR. 1936 P.C. 171, 173.
4

6.

7

|. Pata 7.17., supra.
|. Sankaran Namboodiripad v. Abraham, A.1.R. 1973 Ker. 22.
', Kuta Mada Venketaratam v. Pali Chatty, ALR. 1933 Madras 306, 308.


65

7.23. It hes been held in a Madras case, that the question must be decided by adopting
the test whether ther. was an unconditional undertaking to pay a sum cf money. In that case,
it was held to be an uncenditional undertaking. Ou the other hand, the Allahabad High Court
has held? that a document containing a promise to pay on @ contingency can fall within the
Stamp Act. Thus, a promise by A to pay B Rs. 500 “seven days after my marriage with C”
ig mot a promissory note under the Negotiable Instruments Act,> but may be so under the
Stamp Act. पु

7.24, These points, it was slated, show the difficulty caused by the extended part of the
definition.*

7,25. In order 10 improve the position in this regard, two alternatives were put forth before
us. One alternative would be to confine the extended part of the definition to documents
analogous to promissory notes.

The other aJternative would be to omit the extended part altogether.

We appreciate the difficulty caused by the present vague definition. We have, after some
discussion, come to the conclusion that the definition, wide as it is, should not be disturbed,
since it has stood for a long time and revenue is involved and no compelling reason exists. But®
we are recommending an amendment of section 35 (the principal sanction), for mitigating the
hardship.

7.26. We now deal with anoiker question—the question of charging duty on attested
promissory notes, Here, one has to determine whether the document is a bond or a promissory
note.

7.27, As already stated‘, the definition of ‘promissery note’ consists cf two parts, namely,
the portion referring to the Negotiable Instruments Act and the portion not so referring but
added by the Stamp Act. For the moment, we are concerned with a point arising out of the
earlier half of the definition of promissory note, which refers to the Negotiable Instruments Act.
A controversy has arisen as to attested documents. In order to appreciate the controversy,
it will be convenient if the relevant part of the definition of “bond” in the Stamp Act is quoted.
It reads thus :—

"(5) ‘bond’ includes, ... .. ७०००-०० (0) any instrument attested by a witness and
not payable to order or bearer whereby a person obliges himself to pay moncy
to another.”.

It is now proposed to add, in this part of the definition of bond,* the words “expressed 10 be”,
$o that the revised definition of this part will read as follows :—

# ‘bond’ includes—

(0) any instrument attested by 8 witness and not expressed to be payable to order or
bearer whereby a person obliges himself to pay money to another.

7.28. This amendment, however, will not solve the following question, which arises out
of the requirement of attestation. The question is this. If a document is not attested, but
creates an obligation to pay money, is it chargeable as a promissory note or as a bond? It is
assumed that the document contains an undertaking to pay money to a certain person etc.

1, Karuchappa Rowthen v. Bava Moideen, (1913) L.L.R. 36 Madras 370, 372 Gundara Ayyar and Phillips, JJ.).
2, Sushif Chandra v. Valiyulta, ALR, 1941 All. 155, 158, 160.

3. Section 4, illustration (1), Negotiable Instruments Act.

4, Of. Ses discussion relating to section 2—Bill of Exchangs (Supra).

5, See recommendation as to 5, 35, Proviso (a), infra.

6, Section 2(5)—“bond”.

7. See recommendation relating to section 2(5(b)—“bond”.

जाओ al

required.

Two alternatives,

Attested
promissory notes,

Question of
attestation,

Requirement of
attestation.


Controversy.

66

.and is, in all respects; a docunient which satisfies the fequirements of a promissory note as

defined in section 4 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, which is as follows :—
“4. Promissory note—A ‘promissory note’ is an instrument in writing (aot being a
tank note or a currency note) containing an unconditional undertaking signed
by the maker, to pay a certain sum of money only to, or to the order of, a
certain persen, or to the bearer of the instrument.”

7.29, This controversy arizes because the definition of ‘bond’ is inclusive. In a Patra case,?
it has been held that <n unattested document promising repayment of loan on demand after
a stipulated date is व bend only, and is chacgeable as a bond under article 15. The document
in the Patna case was not altesied, and was not expressed to be payable to order or bearer, and
stated that the two debtors who had affixed their thumb impressions and signatmes in the margin
had taken the money mentioned in the letter and written letter on demand. The Patna High Court
held, in the first place, that since the payment could not be caforced within a stipulated period,
and the expiry of the stipulated perind had to be followed by a demand, the document was aot a
promissory note. A demand was a condition precedent to payment, and therefore, there was
no “anconditional” undertaking. It was not a promissory note. On this point, it followed an
earlier Madras case? But it may be noted that that case has been overruled by the Madras
High Court in a recent judgment.* हु

Secondly, the Patna High Court pointed out that the definition of “bond” in the Stamp Act
is not exhaustive, and does not exclude an vnattested document if it is not covered by the two
clauses of article 49 (promissory note).

7.30. In a Mysore case, Malimath, J. observed—

“It was next urged by Shri Joshi that as the document is attested, the same is not a
promissory note. ft is no doubt te that a promissory note does
not require attestation. At the same time, it is necessary to note
that there is nothing in the Negotiabe Instruments Act to indicate that
an attestation of a “document like the promissory note is prohibited. Attestation
of a document is usually got done for the sake of abundant caution even though .
attestation is not the requirement of law. Merely because the document in
question which is otherwise a promissory note, bas been attested, it does not lose
its character as a promissory note. 1 bave, therefore, no hesitation in holding that
the document in question is a promissory note.” हु

7.31, In the later Madras case,> it was held that a document in the following terms was
not conditional :-— .

“L have already received Rs. 15,000 from your Colombo 8.5, shop for doing business
of my own. 1 shull pay it after two years on demand by you with interest at
two 8135 per month per Rs, 100 to you or to your order and ieceive back this
promissory note.”

731A. The Court pointed out that, in the earlier case*, section 5, second paragraph, of
the Negotiable Instruments Act had not been discussed. .

The fact thar the payment was postponed did not make any difference, because of section
5, Hence, a document in this case was held to be a promissory note under article 49(b) of:
the Stamp Act, and inadmissible, since it was not sufficiently stamped. The question of attestation

‘was not in issue.

Radia Devi v. Dhanik Lol, A.LR. 1971 Patna 378, 380, paragraph 6.
Muthu Gounder प- Peruntayarwnal, ALR. 1961 Madras 347 (Ramachandra Iyer, J.).
Thennappa Chettiar v. Andiappa Chettiar, (1971) 1 M.L.J. 214 (D.B.). ’
Raghmatk ५. Bihari Lal, ALR. 1972 Mys. 153-161, para 4, disséating from Ram Narayan v. Ram Chand, ADDR. -
1962 Pat. 325. : :
५ Thenappa Chettiar, Andivappe Chettiar. (1971) 1 ML. 214,

|. Muthe Gounder ¥. Perwnayanmal, ALR. 1961 Mad. 347.

1.
2.
i
4.

au


67

7.32. It was suggested to us thar an amendment should be made in the definition of “promis-
sory note” to exclude attested documents from the scope of that definition, for the purposes of
the Stamp Act. ‘This would clarify the position, and avoid needless controversies. We have,
afte: caceful consideration, accepted the suggestion. We may note that the suggestion had been
included in our Questionnaire,’ and has received substantial support.

7.33. Accordingly, we recommend that attested documents should be excluded from the
definition of “promissory note” in the Stamp Act, so as to avoid controversy. The controversy
ig ilustrated by the case Iaw cited above. Without such an amendment;. the citizen's difficulty
would continue, since ic is not easy to determine whether a particular document is a bond or
pronote, हु

7.34. We shall now deal with one expression not defined in the Act—“public officer”.
It would, in our view, be desirable to define the expression “public officer” as having the same
meéaning as in the Code of Civil Procedure. The want of a definition of this expression in the
Stamp Act renders section 73 of the Act incomplete. It also rendérs’ section 35 incomplete.

7,35, We, therefore, recommend that a new sub-section (22A) should be inserted in section
2, on the following lines :—
“(22A) ‘public officer? means a public officer as defined in sub-section (17) of
section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.”

We may note that the suggested amendment has been generally favoured i: the replies to the
Questionnaire issued by us.*

7.36. Section 2(23) may now he considered. It says—
“(23) ‘Receipt’ includes any note, memorandum or writing :--

(a) whereby any money, or any bill of exchange, cheque or promis ory nate is

acknowledged to have been received, of

(b) whereby any other movable property is acknowledged to have been received in
satisfaction of a debt, or

(०) whereby any debt or demand, or any part of a debt or demand, is acknowledged
to have been satisfied or discharged, or

(०) which signifies or imports any such acknowledgement,
and whether the same is or is not signed with the name of any person.”

7.37, The principal question to be considered relates to cash memos. tt has been
held* that ordinary cash memo, issued by a shop-keeper to a purchaser of goods is not a
ceceipt unless it contains an acknowledgement of receipt of the money. Such 2 memo does
not become chargeable by virtuc of initials of the seller subscribed to a warranty written
at the foot of it, Even if the initials are taken ac amounting to -“execuden”, the memo. would
not be a “receipt” within section 2(23), as it is not addressed te civ particular person and
the name of the customer to wham it is given is not mentioned in it-

7.38. In an Australian case,‘ the court ruled against liability on a cash memo. where the
‘ménio, contained no statement that the purchase price had been pai:!, though the practice was
to give such a document cnly against payment.

The sare view prevails officially in Great Britain.”
1. Question 14(b} of the Questionnaire.
2. Question 15—Public Officer,
4, Financtal Commissioner v. Indo Burma Watch Co., 1.1.R. 12 Rang. 174: A.LR. 1934 Rang. 49.
4. Commissioner of Stamn Duties (N.S.W.) v. Swan & Co. Pty. (1960) S.R.N.S.W, 141 and 182 [su5. nom. Woods

पं Sinall & Co. Pty. (1960) Austratian Law Reports 333) referred to in Monroe, Stamp Duties, (1954), page 38,
in, 18.

5. See the statement of the Chancellor of the Exchequer (made in 1949), H. C. Debates, Vol. 466 (Written Answers)
cols, 136-137.

Recommendation
toexcludeattested
instruments,

Definition of
“public officer”
(New),

Section 2(22-A)—

Recommendation.

Section 2(23}—
Roceipt.

Cash Memo,


Nawre of
Cash Memo.

Reconunendation.

ssa

Exemption under
article $3—~
History of.

68

In 1949, Mr, A. Evans asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer whether his regulations stlll
prescribed stamp duty on receipts of £ 2 and upwards and how far it is applicable to retajl cash
sales.

Sic S. Gripps replied : “The stamp duty of two pence upon receipts for sums of £2 or
more is still in force. ‘The form of voucher commonly given by retail shops in cash transactions
where the whole of the goods purchased ere taken away by the customer on payment of the
price, being primarily 9 document used for internal book-keeping purposes, docs net constitute
a receipt, and is not liable to stamp duty even though it relates to a payment of £ 2 cr more,
provided that it contains xo words stating or implying receipt or payment of money. Th
customer is, however, entitled to demand a receipt, and the Stamp Act imposes a penalty for
issuing a receipt liable to duty but not duly stamped, or for refusing to give a duly stamped
receipt.”

7.39. Generally speaking, buying and selling is not complete with the cash memo, ‘but
with the payment. Payment is usually subsequent to the cash meme ; but, even if it is antecedent,
what a “cash memo” indicates is that the goods had not been delivered on credit.

7.40. ft may be useful to codify the position laid down judicially, by inserting a suitable
Explanation, say, on the following lines :—

“Explanaiion—A cath memorandum, that is to say, a memorandum which records
particulars of goods sold or services rendered is not a receipt, if it does not
acknowledge that any money or any bill of exchange, cheque or promissory note
has been received, notwithstanding that it mentions the consideration for the sale
or for rendering the services.”

We recommend the above amendment.

We may note that the suggested amendment has been generally favoured in the replies
to the Questionnaire issued by us.t

7.41, The next clause deals with “settlement’. We shall consider at length the definition of
“settlement” and the charging provision in article 64 relating to declaration of trust’.

7.42. Section 225) defines a “soldier” as including any person below the rank of not-
commissioned officer who is enrolled under the Indian Army Act, 1911. The definition was
inserted by the Repealing und Amending Act, 1928 (18 of 1928). That Act, by amending
article 53, gave statutory effect® to exemptions from stamp duty which had previously been
granted by notifications, and also introduced this definition. As we shall see later’, while the
scope of the definition of “soldier” has remained unchanged, the scope of the exemption in arti-
cle 53 wag widened.

7.43, There does not appear to be any section in the Act using the expression ‘soldier’, But
it seems to have been employed in some notifications, granting remission,—for example, in respect
of documents chargeable as a ‘power of attorney’. Tt also occurs in one article’, as atready
stated.

7.44. Under article 53, clauses (d), (e) and (0, certain documents executed by soldiers etc,
are exempt from the stamp duty on receipts. The reasons for granting this exemption from stamp
duty is not very easy to discover; but it can be presumed that the decision to exempt such receipts
was taken as a matter of public policy. It would be of interest to note in this connection that
concessions to soldiers in the matter of taxes have been known since the period of Roman law.
For example, soldiers were exempt from inheritance taxes under Emperor Augustus.

1. 0. 16—Receipt—Cash Memo.

2. Article 64.

9, Article $3(d), (०) and (f) (Receipt).
4. See infra.

5. Article $3(4), (2) 01 (Receipd).


69

Clause (d) of article 53 corresponds to, and is a modification of, Notification No. 1101
dated the 13th February, 1874, and clauses (e) and (f) contain exemptions which were first
announced by the same Notification of 13th February, 1874. It would appear that this Notification
was extended, by Notification No. 10 dated the 30th July, 1927, so as to cover persons who
are not technically “soldiers” but are, nevertheless, below the rank of non-commissioned officers
and are enrolled under the Indian Army Act, 1911.

7.45. It should be noted that the definition of “soldier” in the Stamp Act refers only to

man in the army,-—and thal too only to non-commissioned officers. When enactments relating to of

navy. and air force were passed subsequent to the passing of the Stamp Act, the definition of
soldier was left untouched, but changes were made in Article 53(d), (०) and (2) by adding
‘soldiers’ and ‘airmen’, so as to cover persons appointed under those enactments, Certain verbal
changes were also made by the Adaptation Order of 1950.

4.46, Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the Indian Army Act, 1911, has been repealed
and re-enacted in the Army Act, 1950. There were substantial additions when the Act was re-
enacted ; but these additions are not material for the present purpose. It is obviously desirable that
the definition in the Stamp Act should now refer to the Act of 1950. 5

7.47. ‘The definitions of “officer” in the Army, Air Force and Navy Acts are only inclusive,
dnd are not relevant fer the present purpose. In the army, the junior-most officer among the nori-
cotitinissioned officera is a Lance Naik. Below Lance-Naik, there are persons who are called
‘sepoys’. Thus, sepoys appear to be the only persons covered by the definition of the word
‘soldier’, as contained in section 2(25) of the Stamp Act. The words ‘sailor’ and ‘airman’ are
words of common use. The technical terms, however, seem to be ‘aircraft hand, and ‘seaman’,
According to the Navy Act,!, for example, a seaman is a ‘person in the naval service other than
20 officer’.

9.48. So much as regards the present definition. In view of the passing of later ¢nactments
relating to armed forces, i is, in our view, desirable to revise the definition of ‘soldier’ as
under :—

#98) ‘Soldier’ includes 2 member of the armed forces of the Union other than an
officer.”.

. 449. This would not only enable the shortening and simplification of articles 53(d), (०)
and (0, but also cover armed forces? of the Union other than military, naval and air forces. At
present, only members of the three forces are covered,—the military by the definition of ‘soldier’,
and the naval and air forces, by specific mention in article 53. For the purposes of the Stamp Act,
other armed forces also stand on the same footing, and should be similarly tréated. We
rédoitimend accordingly.

We may note that the suggested amendment has been generally favoured in the replies to the
questionnaire issued by us? है

1. Section 32); Navy Act, 1957. -
2. To be considered under article $8(d), (७) and 6).
3, Q, 18 —"'Soldier".

2AM of Law/77—10

Army Act, 1950,


CHAPTER 8
THE CHARGE OF TAX : SECTIONS 3 TO 7

Section 3-० 8.1. We have concluded our consideration of the definitions, and now proceed to a consi-
te deration of the charging section and connected provisions. The principal section levying the
charge is section 3. As already stated’, in the scheme of the Act, the duty is levied on the
instrument, and not on the transaction. However, where the transaction is effected by more
than one instrument or where the instrument relates to several distinct matters or falls within
more than one category, the principle that duty is levied on the instrument must need certain
refinements. For these special situations, special provisions are needed. In the scheme of the
Act, the general proposition for the charge of tax is to be found in section 3, while sections 4, 5
and 6 are devoted to the special situations referred to above. Section 7 contains a provision
intended to ensure paynient of duty on certain policies.
हारा 8.2. Section 3 is the charging section, The section is a fong one, and deals with various
Spaditions ter matters, Its provisions are fundamental in the scheme of the Act. Before we proceed to consider
in detail the various parts of the section, it would be convenient to emphasise certain general
conditions for the charge of duty which are incorporated in the section. In general,. there is
ao charge of Stamp duty under the section unless the following conditions are satisfied -~—
Gi) Thete must be an instroment.
(0) The instrument must be one mentioned in the Schedule to the Act.
ii) The instrument must be “executed”.

a (iv) The instrument must be executed in Incia—clause (a)—or must be recelved in
India in the manner specified in clause (b} or clause {c).

(7) If the instrament is not executed in India and is not a bill of exchange or promitory
note, efc., it must relate to any. property situated in 10018 or to any matter of thing
done or to be done in India. This is provided in clause (९) of section 3.

‘Byccwptions;- 8.3. Even where the general conditions of chargeability, as mentioned above, afe satisted,
the instrument may be exempt from duty, Such exemption may arise by reason of —
(a) the proviso to section 3, or
(0) some other section of the Act, or
(०) A specific provision below the charging entry in the Schedule, under “Byemption”,
or
(9) a notification issued under section 9 of the Act, or

(०) A special Iaw—for example, section 115, Presidency Towns Insolvency. Act,
1909, section 51, Land Acquisition Act, 1894, section 28, Co-operative Societics
Act, 1912, or section 29, Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

‘The principal provision—i.e., the chargo—is to be found in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of the
section, The provisos grant exemption for two cases.
8.4, The first proviso to the section relates to instruments executed by the Government, ete,

The scope of the exemption has been marrowed down by successive Stamp Acts. Thus, under the
Act of 1860, all instroments in which the Government was 8 party, were exempt? Under the: Act a

pier 1, supra.
2. The Hist is not exhaus
3, Ramaswamy v. P. Appa Reddy, 0870) 1 Mad. High Court Reports, 190,

70


val

of 1862, instruments executed by or on behalf of the Government were exempt from stamp
duty. Under the Act of 1879, the exemption was practically in the same words as the present
praviso.

The second proviso, relating to registered ships, was inserted at the Select Committee stage
in the present Bill, in order to bring the Indian law in line with the English Iawt: Act 19
‘of 1838, mentioned in the second proviso, is the Bombay Coasting Vessels Act, 1838, which
provides for the registration of vessels which are trading coastwise and also fishing vessels and a
harbour draft. Act 10 of 1841 also mentioned in the proviso, is the Registration of Ships Act,
1841, We shall deal 1.:ter? with the effect of repeal of these Acts on section 3.

8.5, The place of execution of an instrument is of importance with reference to the charge
of duty as well 2s with reference to the time of stamping. The provisions applicable to the
following three broad categories of instruments (assuming, in each case, that the instrument is
chargeable to duty under the Schedule), are as follows :—

(a) Instruments executed totally in India are governed by section 3{a) and section £7.

They are charged uader section 3. The general rule’ is that they must be stamped at the time of
sxecution.
(b) Instruments executed totally outside India are governed by section 3(b) oF section
३६०), as the case may be, and section 18. They are chargeable under section 3(b) or 3(c). The
gederal rule‘, except in the case of promissory notes, etc. is that they must be stamped, within
the prescribed time limit, after they are received in India, But it must be remembered that this
Yolo applics only where the instrument (besides being chargeable under a specific article in the
Settetule) relates to property within India or to some act or thing done or to be done in India.
Otherwise, there is no obligation to stamp the instrument, even if the instrument is received
in India, if it is not subsequently “executed” in India®.

©) Instrumenis executed partly outside India and partly in India are governed by section ©

ae and section 17. They are chargeable under section 3(a). It is to be noted that they fall
9 » section 18, because section 18 applies only where the instrument is executed totally
Je India’, Such instruments must be stamped at the time of their (first) execution in India’.

- \ Phere are, thus, three principal points of time,—cxecution, bringing into India, or first
execution in India—which may become relevant to the charge of duty and the time of stamp-
ing eee |

Fiom this charge of duty, there is an exclusion, contained in the first proviso to section 3.
"8.6. Under the first proviso, no duty shall be chargeable in respect of —
, “@ any insteument executed by or on behalf or in favour of the Government in

Section 3, first

cases where, but for this exemption, the Government would be liable to pay

the duty chargeable in respect of soch instrument”.

‘A’ question of practical importance arising out of this proviso is this. What are the cases
चर; “but for this exemption the Government, would be Hable to pay the duty, chargeable”,
Teettepect of an instrument ? The answer may appear to be simple, but it is not really so. This
it Setmnse there is no specific section in the Act dealing with the question—who is liable to
poy 05५? .

Under section 29%, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary, “the expenses of pro:
अंक 80० proper stamp shall be borne” by the specified persons. This section, as the words

1. Séetien 721, Merchant जाप्रप Ack छा aad the (Eaglihy Stank) Act, 1691, First Sobedale, Seo Act, 1894 and the (English) Act, 1891, First Schedule, Second general

2. See tara (Pare 8.9).

3. fettion 17. *

4. Section 18. an

4. BfAt le Later executed in India, category {c) in ovr analysis becomes relevant.
6, Category (0), spre. .

7, Section 17.

है, Section 29.



Soe
as to 3,
‘first 0.

Section 3, second
proviso,

Section A
Groncend)—

of
Exemption.

72

quoted above show, does aot state that the specified persons “shall pay the duty”,— though the
mnarginal note to the section reads—“Duties by whom payable”.

8.7. The question then arises—Can section 29 be utilised for the purposes of the first
proviso to section 3, when the Government, as a party to an instrument, undertakes to bear
the expenses of the stamp duty, aod is the case to be regarded as falling within the first proviso
to section 3 so as to have the effect provided therein, namely, that “no duty shall be charge-
able” on the document concerned 7

The position in this respect cannot be said to be beyond doubt. One view on the subject?
is that the exemption under the first proviso will not apply in such a case. Apparently, how-
ever, the contrary paractice seems to be followed in the Government of India.

8.8, It is desicable that the position on this point, which is of a frequently recurring
nature, should be indicated more clearly. हे

We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the following words at the end of the first
proviso

“or where the Government has undertaken to bear the expenses oj the siamp duty”.

Such an amendment will avoid controversies arising from the fact that the language of
section 29 is not identical? with that of section 3.

The proviso speaks only of the “Government”, but the view has been taken’ that whaxe a
local body acts as a Government agency for the wansaction-of duties devoloving upom Govers-
ment as part of its ordinary administration, such as making roads, erecting Government build-
ings, etc., then this proviso would apply. We do not consider it necessary to suggest any amend-
ment on this point.

8.9. Section 3, second proviso, is as follows :-—

“Provided that no duty shall be chargeable in respect of—

(2) Any instrument for the sale, transfer or other disposition, cither absolutely
or by way of mortage or otherwise, of any ship or vessel, or any part,
interest, share or property of or in any ship or vessel registered under the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, or under Act XIX of 1838, or the Indian
Registration of Ships Act, 1841, as amended by subsequent Act.”

‘OF the three enactments, referred to in the proviso, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894
(Bng,) has been replealed by the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The Coasting Vesecls, Amt (19
of 1838) has been repealed, in so far as it applies to sea-going ships fitted with mechanical
means of propulsion and to sailing vessels, by the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. The Indian
Registration of Ships Act, 1841, kas also 00९0 repealed by the same- Act.

8.9A, It is now appropriate if seferenge to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, is sub-
stituted in place of the first and the third af the enactments referred to in the proviso. _

8.10. This disposes of section 3. We would, at this stage, refer to a new point relewsmt te
the effect of exemption. A doubt sometimes arises as to whether the cxemption given by cach
article in the First Schedule is to be regarded as valid only for the purposes of that stich, of
whether the exemption is to be treated as a general one. In most cases, the latter is the tateas
tion, and a specific provision to that effect could be usefully. added.

“Lge (ibis) Madias Stamp Manoal, page 18 (Giting Board Precedents) 36, Mis. 20c February, 20+ an 186;
+ Te Su Apel, 1904, cited in Chitaley, Stamp Act (1951), page 223.
| toon, roan Part LB, Ch. 3, paragraph 3, (Citing Ficancial Commissioner's letteb Me. 0073,
4), Punjab Stamp Mi a ners —
3 ed Slee cee a ‘Chitaley’s covmentery on the Stamp Act 1350, pags aan sthatioves :
itroversy as to section (५1035 in the content of consisting of an obligation tordaliver
‘ See, fon exare कट पु to the ‘cremption article $, exemption (a}—Agreament for sale ete .
(@) Raghubar Dayal ॥. Emp.. ALR. 1934 All 201;
{b) ALR. 1936 All. 488; Reference—Coltector of Nimar v. Lakekent Chand;
७) ALR. 1927 Nag. 72, 73; Collector of Mwar ¥. Leksimd Chand;
(@ Mira Begum, ALR. 1935 Lab, 122



73

Whare the exemption is intended to be applicable only in respect of the chargeability of an
instrument under the particular acticle, a specific provision to that effect could be inserted ia that

exemption.

Such a provisiva would be in harmony with the opening words of section 3 slo.
8.11. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of a new section on the following lines :--- Recommendation.

“3A. Where, by virtue of an exemption Provided for under an article in Schedule 1, ermopten under

an instrument is exempted from duty, the instrument shall, in the absence of an an artide in the
Xpiess provision to the contrary; be exempt from duty under every other article .
also.”

8.12. A document executed outside india 1s, at present, liable to stamp duty, even if it i8 Section 1B~
already stamped with the duty chargeable under the law of the foreign country where it was Jestraments outside
executed, provided the document is received in Indis!. There are special provisions for bills of India.
exchange payable otherwise than on demand, and for promissory notes, drawa or made out of
India, and accepted or paid or presented or endorsed, transferred or otherwise negotiated in India?

But, m general, the document has to be stamped within the prescribed time after being xeceived
in India, if the other conditions of chargeability are satisfied. .

8.13. We are of the view that some provision is needed for relief in respect of documents Reliey against
which have alceady been stamped vader the law of a foreign country where the document was double taxation.
executed. With the growth of international commerce, such occasions are likely to increase, and,
while it may not be necessary to grant an exemption for ail cases, a limited exemption as to
transactions with or between Indian citizens in respect of documents executed outside India and
Propexty stamped under the {aw of the foreign country, could be inserted.

8.14. The Indian legal system has several laws containing provisions Telating to relief against Precedents,
double taxation. A precedent, for example, is furnished by the Income-tax 20६, Ja that Act, .
+ there are two provisions dealing with double taxation,—one is confined 00 cases of agreement
With foreign countries, while the other is not s0 confined. The former—section 90—is as
follews*:-— :
: “90. Agreement with foreign countries —Thc Central Government may enter into an
agreament—
(9) with the Government of any country outside India for the granting of relief in
respect of income on which have been paid both income-tax under this Act. and
income-tax in that country, or
(b) with the Government of any country outside India for the avoidance of double
taxation of income under this Act and under the corresponding law in force in
that country; - पु
and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may be
necessary for implementing the agreement”. ~

In the Estate Duty Act also, there is a provision for avoidance or relief of double taxation,
‘wile yespoct to estate duty, as follows :— ,

“30, The Central Government may enter imo an. agreement with the Government of
any reciprocating country for the avoidance or relief of double taxation with res-
pect to estate duty leviable under this Act and under the corresponding law im
force in the reciprocating country and may, by notification 10 the Official Gazette,
iuake such provision es may be necessary for implementing the agreement,

६: feodon 3(ए) (See supra).
3, Section 3b).

3, Sections 90 end 91, Income-tax Act, 1961.
4, Section 30, Estate Duty Act, 1953.



Need for relief.

cy. ४. 131, Trade
Marie Act, 195

tf

“writer says* t—— pete Wi ae

74

Explanation.—The expression “reciprocating country” for the purposes of this Act means
apy country which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare
to be a reciprocating country. :

There is another precedent in section 131 of the Trade Marks Act’.

8.15. In the jight of these precedents, and also on principle, we have carefully considered.
the suggestion, and we are in broad agreement with it. We do not, however, think that the pro-
posed provision shuuld be confined to transactions with or between Indian citizens. It could
extend to all documents. At the same time, we are of the view that the grant of such relief should
be on the basis of reciprocity only, and in pursuance of an agreement,—as in the Trade Marka
Act,

We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the following section in the Act :—

“3B. (1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any
country outside India which affords to instruments executed in India the same
concessions as can be granted under this section in respect of instruments drecuted
outside India, the Central Government may, by notification in the one
Gazette, declare such country to be convention a country for the purposes of
Act, :

(2) Where an instrument is executed in a convention covntry and is brought into the
territories to which this Act extends, the instrument shall, if duly stamped in. the
convention country under the law of that country, be deemed, for the purposes
of this Act, also to be duly stamped”. 7

v

8.16. The simple case of one instrument effectuating a transaction is dealt with by the
general provision in section 3; but there might be cases where there are several instruments
effectuating 8 tcansaction. The ordinary rule is that stamp duty is levied on an instrumpat, aot
on a transaction. Bat, if this rule is applied literally and without exception, then there pate :
practical hardship and unnecessary inconvenience. To deal with such a situation, re
provisions are usually considered desirable in the Stamp laws of all countries, In our Ast,
Situation of several instruments used to effectuate a single transaction is dealt with in seetion 4,
The section is, however, confined to transactions of sale, mortgage or settlement. Tht bedad rals
is chargeable with the duty prescribed in the First Schedule, and each of the other instemacgat
is chargeable with a duty of one rupee, instead of the duty, if any, prescribed for it in the
First-Schedule, .

Under sub-section. (2), the parties may determine for themselves which of the instruments #9
employed shall, for the pucposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be the principal instrument. But
there is a proviso tc the effect that the duty chargeable on the instrument so determined dhall be
the highest duty which would be chargeable in respect of any of the said instruments 66 employed,

8.17. In England, the principle is the same, but is not confined to conveyances. Retegzing ty
the situation where a single transaction is effected by more than one instrument, an

“The generai cule in these cases (which is sometimes stated expressly in ths हैं 0- 6
that ad valorem duty is not paid more than once, and that fixed duty ts only.
paid more than once whére each instrument taken by itself attracts a stamp, ०.३५.
because it is a 06८07. ,

1, Section 131, Trade Marks Act, £958.

2. Section 131, Trade Marks Act, 1956. . —_

3. The opening portion speaks of “gale”. The latter portion spsaks of “conveyance”, bacause-the Schpuleg eres
duty under that same.

4, Monsoe, Stamp Duties, (1964), page 31.


75

Thus, in England, in a case of a contract comprising an offer and acceptance’-? under hand,
one 64. samp is sufficient, “which logically should be affixed to the acceptance”*

8.18, Having considered all aspects of the matter, we see no reason why the principle Recommendation.
enacted in section 4 should not be extended 16 alt transactions. Such cases may not be many ;
but the example of a gift or partition should be cited.‘ The section should, in our opinion, be
extend to all cases where several instruments are employed for completing any transaction.
This view has been generally favoured in the replies to our Questionnaire.

Also, in our view, there is no need to charge duty on the supplementary instrument. On
this point, we accept a suggestion made to us® by the Gujarat Bar Council. If this approach
is accepted, it will be necessary to make other consequential changes also.

We, therefore, recommend that section 4 should be revised as follows :—
Revised Section 4

4. (1), Where, in the case of any transaction, several instruments are employed for com-
pleting the transaction, only the principal instrument should be chargeable with the duty
prescribed for it in Schedule J, and each of the other instruments shall, instead of being charge-
able with the duty prescribed for it in that Schedule, be exempt from duty.

(2) The parties may determine for themselves which of the insteuments so employed shall,
for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be the principal instrument :

Provided that the duty chargeable on the instrument so determined shall be the highest duty
which would be chargeable in respect of any of the said instruments employed.

. ,%19. So much as regards section 4, Its converse is to be found in the next section. Section 5.
Under pection 5, any instrument comprising or relating to several distinct matters shall be
his with the aggregate amount of the duties with which separate instruments, each com:
oa or relating to one of such matters, would be chargeable under this Act. This section
is the converse of section 4, and deals with casea where one instrument comprises or relates
to several distinct matters. Here again, the general role that stamp duty is levied on an
instrument and not on a transaction has had to be explained—this time, in the interests of
e—py providing that such instrument will be chargeable with the aggregate amount of
fhe du ties with which separate instruments, each comprising or relating to one of such mutters,
would be chargeable under the Act.

It is,,again, in the interests of revenue that it overrides the next section’, which deals
‘with jostruments coming within several descriptions in the First Schedule.

» 8.20. No doubt, the apparently simple provision in section 5 is not devoid of difficulties Critickm noted.
in itu application. A writer on the law of Stamps® says : “Scarcely any subject, within thr
a ms of the Stamp Laws, is of so embarrassing a nature, in practice, as that which falls under
हि on of ‘Tostruments’ relating to several distinct parties or. matters’.”

1, Hipwever, such difficulties cannot be solved by_an amtendment of the law, and it is difficult
to devibg: 9. better and more precise formula

1. MGS This takes us to section 6. In order to appreciate the significance of that section, Section 6,
it #1 iiwedenry to examine the scheme of the Act. The scheme of thé Act as regards documents
tally tinder different heads is as follows :—
nd कमाए के by Sands Tague TO esp वा क्रय _____—{ a een
offer accepted orally or by conduct requires no stamp; ४. Carbotic Smokeball Co., (18992) 20.8
Sgr yppeal (1893) 1 0.8. 256. ,
discussion, see Appendix. 1
3. Mbkitoe, Starap Duties, (1964) page 31.
4. Cf Bewming y. Perry, (1828) 2 Moo page 375, cited in Halsbury, 3rd Ed..Vol. 33, pege 296, pare 518, 4.0. (2);
5, Qnentlon 22.
6, 3. No. 74 (Gujarat Bar Council) under Q. 22 of the Questionnaire issued by the Commisgion, ~
7, See the opening words of section 6—“Subject 10 the provisions of the ‘lest preceding section.”
8. The fate Mr, Tilsley, quoted by Donogh, Stamp Act, (1955), page 188.



Gist of Section 6.

Position in
Bngiand.

76

‘The First Schedule to the Act specifies the duties which are chargeable upoa cortain
descriptions of instruments. There may be instruments falling within more than Ssé ईशा:
They have to be specifically deal with, since the general rule in sections 4-5 would not
yield a fully adequate test. Section 6 provides that in such a case the higher or highest duty
is chargeable.

8.22. Section 6,—to put the matter very broadly,—provides that an instrument so framed
as to come within two or more of the descriptions in Schedule I, shall, where the dutics chargé-
able thereunder are diffcrent, be chargeable only with the highest of such duties. This rule
is, however, subject to an important qualification, which is expressed in the section by the
words “subject to the provisions of the last preceding section"—ie., section 5. Section 5,
it will be recalled, provides that an instrument comprising or relating to several “distinct matters”
shall be chargeable with the aggregate amount of the duties with which separate instruments
each comprising or relating to one of such matters would be chargeable, under the Act. The
qualification in section 6 dependent on section 5, is of importance. In fact, it may be noted
that in the previous Stamp Act 18791, sections 5 and 6 were combined together. If a document
is, in reality, one instrument, though different names are given to it, section 6 will apply. But
if, in fact, it comprises several instruments, then section 5 will apply. In order to bring &
document within the terms of section 6, it has to be read as a whole."

8.22A. It may be convenient to analyse the relevant provisions.*
Group A.

(4) A document which really contains more than one instrument? must be stamped separately
in respect of each. (This follows from section 3).

(2) Am instrument which relates to several distinct matters must, except Wheré Xpress
provision to the contrary is made, be separately and distinctly charged in respect of eath itatter,
and, for this purpse, distinct provisions constituting together the consideration for an. inéttd-
ment liable in respect of one of them to ad valorem duty are treated as separate and distittt
matters (section 5). But two other cases may arise. j

Group B.

(3) An instrument may relate to several matters which, nevertheless, cannot be regitiita
as distinct ; (section 6), and

(4) An instrument, though relating substantially to one matter, may fall into ०16 category,
of another, according to the view adopted of its legal operation (Section 6). fhe Act bas
distinct rules for Group A trom Group B.

The line of division between classes (2) and (3) may sometimes be difficult to draw.
But it is not possible to improve the position by any verbal amendments.

8.23. It is well established in England thet where a document comes within. each of
two categories chargeable witb duty under the (English) Stamp Act, 1891, the Crown is
entitled to only one of the duties, but it may choose the higher. A case that Watt @B to the
House of Lords may be cited.* The United States of Mexico had issued (gold कराए Htactly
notes’ with a promise to pay pritcipal and interest to the bearer at fixed dates either abroad
‘or, at the option of the holder, in London, There was evidence that the notes werg, saleable
on the London and other Stock Exchanges. It was held; the notes being, in fact, both pro-
missory notes and marketable securities within the Stamp Act, 1891, they were liable to the
higher duty imposed by that Act upon marketable securities. Collins, MR, 16 thé tovmbe ‘of
bis judgment in the Court of Appeal, observed that the cases established thail है Godt baw
not only the right to treat, but is bound to treat, an instrument as assessable under that head
which involves the higher stamp duty.

1. Section 7, Indian Stamp Act, 1879.

2. (1916) 37 Indian Cases 984 (Madras).

3. Analysis adapted from Donogh, Stamp Ant, (135), page 189.

4 Speyer Brothers v. Coms., (1908) A.C. 92 affirming (1907) 1 K.B, 246, 253,



TT

Lord Loreburn, in the course of his judgment in the House of Lords, affirming this
view, observed :—

“In my view, the document falis within both descriptions, and where a document is
by its description chargeable under ihe Stamp Act as a promissory note, avd
is also chargeable under the statute as a marketable security, the Crown has
a choice whether 10 charge under the onc or under the other description. IE
the Crown does claim that the docament shall be stamped at the higher rate
within one part of the Act, it is 90 answer to say that there is another part of
the Act under which the same document ought to be charged of a lower rate.
Tt can only be charged once.”

These observations of Lord Loreburn lucidly explain the significance and rationale umier-
Tying the statutory provision in section 6. Briefly, the gist is this :—
(1) Duty may be charged only once.
(ii) But it must be the higher, and not the lower, of the two.

8.24, This, in fact, is the substance of section 6. An instrument so framed as to come
within two or more of the descriptions in the First Schedule, is to be chargeable with the
highest of the duties. The proviso to the section deals with the special situation of a counter-
part or duplicate of any instrument chargeable with duty, where duty has been paid in respect
of the (principal) instrument.

There is not much scope for improvement in section 6. What remains to be noted is
only the special provision, contained not in this Act, but elsewhere.

8.244, We have in mind section 17 of the Negotiable Instruments Act?, which gives
a right to the holder of an “ambiguous document” to treat it as a promissory note, or as a
Bill of exchange. By “ambigucus document” is meant a document which can fall wider
either. According to judicial interpretation, this privilege cannot be taken away by anything
contained in the Stamp Act, and in this sense, section 17 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
roust be read as overriding the Stamp Act.?

8,25. In our view, it is desirable to codify this interpretation by adding a saving to section
6, to the effect that nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 17 of the Nego-
liable Instruments Act, 1881. We recommend that an Explanation should be added accordingly.
Such an amendment has been generally favoured in the replies to the Questionnaire? issued

by us.
8.26. We now come io section 7. Before 1963, section 7 was as follows :—

“प्‌, (1) No contract for sea-insurance (other than such insurance as is referred to
in section 506 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894) shall be valid unless the
same is expressed in the sea-policy.

(2) No sea-policy made for time shall be made for any time exceeding twelve
months.

(3) No sea-policy shall be valid unless it specifies the particular risk or adventure,
or the time, for which it is made, the names of the subscribers or underwriters,
and the amount or amounts insured.

(4) Where any sea-insurance is made for or upon a voyage and also for time, or
to extend to or cover any time beyond thirty days after the ship shall have arrived
at her destination and been there moored at anchor, the policy shall be charged
with duty as a policy for or upon a voyage, and also with duty as a policy
for time.” .

1, Section 17, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
2. Alagappa Cheth v. Narayan, (1932) 63 Madras Law Journal 548; A.IR, 1932 Mad. 765, 766.
3. ९३. 23.

24 M of 130७/77--11.

Section 6—
Substance.

Negotiable
(2775 Act

Recommendation
amend

to a
section 6,

37 and 38 Vict,
&. 60.


Case jaw,

78

After the passing of the Marme Insurance Act, 1963, only sub-section (4) survives.

8.27. There are only 19० reported cases on the section. A Bombay case! dealt with
one point as to whether mere initialling of a document was sufficient within the meaning of
sub-section (3) of section 7, which provided that no sea policy shall be valid unless it “specifies”
the names of subscribers or underwriters. The Court held, that initialling was sufficient to
“specify” the names within the meaning of section 7(3).

A Calcutta case? has dealt with the scope of sub-section (1) of section 7 (now repealed),
and held that a cover does not amount to a valid policy of marine insurance. These cases
are no longer of importance for the Stamp Act, since sub-sections (1) to (3) have been
repealed,

So far as sub-section (4) is concerned, we are recommending its deletion, for reasons to
be given® under Article 47. है

APPENDIX I
Section 4—-English law as te 008 instruments used to effectuate one transaction

The general rule in England is that ad valorem duty is not paid more than once, and

that fixed duty is paid more than once only where each instrument taken by itself attracts a

stamp, €.g., because it is a deed. This. in a case of a contract comprising an offer and acccp-
tance under hand one 6d. stamp is sufficient, which logically should be affixed to the acceptance.

As regards conveyance, it is expressly provided by statute, that where there are several
instruments of conveyance, the principle instrument only is to be liable to ad valorem duty,
and the others to such duty as they may be liable, not exceeding the ad valorem duty.

Section 58(3), Stamp Act, 1891, is as follows :—

(3) Where. there, are several. instruments. of. conyeyance.. for completing the
purchaser’s. title .to.. property, ,old, the, principal, instryment of. conveyance only
is 10 be. charged. with “ad,, valorey.duty, and: the ether instruments are ta be
respectively charged with such other duty as they .may.‘be liable to, but suck
Jast-mentioned duty shall not exceed the ad valorent duty payable in respect
of the principal instrument.”

Section 61 is as follows: —
“61. (1) In the cases hereinafter specified the principal instrument is ta he ascer~
tained in the following manner :
(2) (0) [Repealed by Finance Act, 1949. s. 52 and Schedule XT}.
{e) Where in Scotland there is a disposition or assignation executed by the seller,
and any other instrument is executed for completing the title, the disposition
or assignation is to be deemed the principal instrument. .

(2) In any other case the parties may determine for themselves which of several
instruments is to be deemed the principal instrument, and may pay the ad valorem

- daty thereon accordingly.

The position for other instruments is the same,® though there are no statutory provisions.

As the Revenue have in England never insisted on double ad valorem duty in cases where
two instruments are used to effect one transaction, there is very little authority on the poiut,
23 no one cares to contest the matter.®
प्र Tricamji Dambji and Company v. Vieil Kanji AIR 1923 Bom 142 (Shah, C. J. and Crump, J.)
2. Radkakrishan Dage ४. The General Insurance Society Ltd., (1958-69) 73 Cal. W. N. 694, 964, 980, 981, 984 (Bijavesh
Mukerji, 3. [Case governed by section 7(1), Stamp Act]

3, See discussion as to article 47, infra.
4, Sections 58(3) and 61(2), Stamp Act, 1891.
5. Monroe, Stamp Duties (1964), page 31.



79

There appears to be an exception to this general rule where two securities are given for
the same debt. Thus, if a person gives a bill of sale and a promissory note, to secure a
debt, a separate ad valorem duty is payable on each.1-*

This exception has received statutory recogeition, inasmuch as, under the heads of charge
“Bond, Convenant,? etc.”, a separate and lower rate of ad valorem duty is provided for colla-
teral securities. The ad valorem duty on the collateral securities is, in some cases by statute*
ang in others by extra-statutury concession—limited to 10s. But there are, still, cases where
two ad valorem duties are payable.

APPENDIX 2
Points concerwng giits, exchanges, trusts, etc. under section 4
(a) Conditional gifts

Though a gift is usually unconditional, it can be conditional. It is to be noted that a
gift is a species of transfer, and is, therefore, subject to all the provisions of the law of transfer
of property relating to conditional transfers. Like other tansfers, a gift, therefore, may be
subject to a condition prcecedent.* If the condition is not invalid,® the condition will be recog-
nised by law. A gift to two sisters on the condition that they should live apart is valid."
li A gives Rs. 500 to B on condition that B shall marry C, the condition is valid. But, if
the condition is inmoral or illegal, then it is void.*

Similarly, a gift may be subject to a condition subsequent.” In a Madras case,” a gift
was made by a person sentenced to transportation for lite to a relation, on the condition that
the land gifted should be given back if the donor returned to his village.

In fact, section 126 of the Transfer of Properiy Act even provides that the donor and
donee may agree that on the happening of any specified event not depending oa the will of
the donor, a gift shall be suspended or revoked. A condition can, therefore, even go to the
extent of providing for revocation.

Apart trom the Transfer of Property Act, conditions ure recognised in respect of gifts by
Muslim law also"!

Though the Transfer of Property Act, section 123, dealing with the acceptance of a gift,
does not require the acceptance 10 be in writing, and though the acceptance can be inferred or
oral, there can be व written acceptance by the donee, and, in case of conditional gifts, it is pru-
dent to have a written acceptance.

A gift to which a condition is attached is not a “sale”, because, as defined in the Transfer
of Property Act,%, a “sale” must be only for a price, and “price” here means money only."
It has been specifically held'? that a tansaction which is in consideration of the transferor’s
regard for the transferee, who agreed to maintain the transferor, is not a “sale”.

५ Monetary Advance Co. ४. Cater, (1888) 20 Q.B.D. 785, 788.
- Promissory notes are no longer able to ad valorem duty in England.
५ Stamp Act, 1891, Schedule 1.
Revenue Act, 1903, section 7, limiting the duty on collateral securities to 105.
Section 21, Transfer of Property Act.
” Section 25, Transfer of Property Act. See particularly illustration (b).
Rodgmary v. Woodhouse, (1844) 7 Beav. 437, 49 E.R. 1134, cited in Mulla, Transfer of Property Act (1966),
page 782, footnote (Z).

8. Ran Swarup v. Bela, (1884) LR. 6 Allahabad 313.

9. Section 31, Transfer of Property Act.
10. Fenkutaraman v. Ayyaswanty, A.LR. 1973 Madras 67 43 Madras Law Journal 340. ;
11. Tyabji, Muslim Law (1968), page 305, page 366, illustration (1), and page 406, illustration (1) and cases there cited.
algo the leading case of Nawab Umjad Ally Khan, 11 MLA. 517, $43, 547, as explained in A.LR. 1922 PC. 281.
13, Section 54, Transfer of Property Act,
14. Madan Pillai x. Bhadsakali, AIR. 1922 Madras 311.
15, Rati Ram v. Mam Chand, ALR. 1959 Punjab 117. (Case relating to right of pre-emption).

are rere


80

Even if conditional gifts are not regarded as gifts, they are certainly not “sales”. So they
do not, at present, get the beuefil of section 4, Stamp Act, which is confined to sales, mortgages
and settlements.

(b) Two documents constituting a gift.

If there are two documents relating to a transaciion of gift, the case does not, at present
fall under section‘, unless the document is a “settlement”. In an Allahabad case,’ T- in
consideration of love and aficction and the promise to be maintained by his brother M, executed
a deed of gift of all his property in favour of M, and M executed another deed whereby M
promised that during the life time of T he would pay T’s expenses. The High Court held that
the second deed executed by M was one which came within section 4, because the transaction
may fairly be said 10 come within “settlement”. As to the unity of the transaction, the Court
observed thar the two instrument were intended by the parties to be employed in completing
one transaction. In that casc, the Court held the transaction to be one of settlement (no detailed
reasons are given discussing this aspect of the matter), If, however, the parties had not been
brothers, the document would not be regarded as a settlement, and the transaction would be
substantially one of gift,-but not covered by section 4. The case is referred to here to show
how section 4 could be usefully extended to gifts.

Tn a Bombay case,? the document marked A was a document on a three rupees stamp
paper, and was one of conveyance of immovable property absolutely for Rs. 275, On the
same deed of sale, the individual nephew of the executant endorsed his consent to the sale,
It was held that the endorsement of consent and the conveyance were several instruments
employed to complete a transaction within section 6 of the Act of 1879 (present section 4),
and the consent ought to have been written on a separate stamp paper of the value of one
tupee. This case is cited here to show how, in reality, the situation could arise in relation to gifts
also, namely, where A executes a gift and B, who is his undivided nephew, indicates his
consent. At present, the case could be outside section 4, but the transaction of gift is but one,
and it is fair that there should be only one duty.

(९) Trusts.

Then, there is the case of trusts, the machinery of trust can be employed to effect a
transfer for the benefit of certain persons who are not related to the author of the trust,
The Trust Act does not require that there should be only one physical instrument of trust.
The case would be outside present section 4, but ought to be covered by it, there being 00
reason why double duty should be charged on two deeds of trust and not on two deeds, of
settlement.

(d) Exchange.

There is ulso the case of exchange. When two persons mutually transfer the ownership
of one thing for the ownership of another, neither thing or both things being money only, the
transaction is called an exchange.* A transfer of property in completion of an exchange can be
made only in the manner provided for the transfer of such property by sale.* This is what the
Transfer of Property Act provides. But this provision does not necessarily attract the beneficial
provisions of section 4 of the Stamp Act. It merely deals with the rules es to registration etc.

(e) Partnership.

Then, there are also cases of partnership, where the stamp duty is higher than in case
of an ordinary agreement.

1. Stamp reference, (1915) LL, 37 Allababad 264 (Full Bench).
2, Hanumappa, (1888), ILL-R. 13 Bombay 281.

3. Section 118, Transfer of Property Act.

4 Section 118, Transfer of Property Act


CHAPTER 9
MODE OF PAYMENT-—-SECTIONS 8 TO 103

9.1 The mode of payment of duty is the subject matter of the next sections with which
we shall now be concerned. In general, of course, the stamp duty is indicated by ‘stamp’,
as is. obvious from the scheme of the Act and its very little. But certain special situations
require special provisions; and to meet those special siwations, special provisions are enacted
in section है and the succeeding sections,

9.2. Section 8 is a special provision applicable to bonds, debentures or other securities
issued on Joans under the Local Anthorities Loans Act, 1879. The provision was originally
introduced, it seems, in 1897, to give facilities to local authorities for issuing debentures upon
payment of composition duty. Section 8 (English), Finance Act, 1899, is in similar terms.

The Local Authorities Act, 1879, referred to in the section, has since been replaced by
the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914; and the section should, therefore, be amended to sub-
Stitute a reference to the latter Act. We cecommend accordingly. We may add that the replies
received to our Questionnaire’ have favoured such an amendment.

9.3. Section 9 deals with the power of the Goverament to reduce, remit or compound stamp
duties. It is one of the most important sections of the Act, and certainly one of the most
frequently used sections, Whether duty should be remitted or reduced in a particutar case,
depends on a variety of factors, which are too numerous and fluctuating to permit codifi-
cation. That is the principal justification for the section,

9.4. While the conferment of such a power can hardly be objected to in modern times, it
becomes necessary to point out that the power is very wide in its ambit.

Under the section, the Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette,
grant reduction or remission. Such reduction or remission can be granted (i) prospectively,
or (ii) retrospectively. The reductions and remissions can apply in (i) the whole or (ii) any
part of the territories under the ‘administration’ of the Government. They can apply to the duties
with which (i) any instrument, or (ii) any particular class of instruments, or (iti) any of the
instruments belonging to such class, or (iv) any instruments when executed by or in favour
of any particular class of persons, or by or in favour of any membrs of such class, are charge-
able,

Government can, by similar rule or order, also provide for the composition or consolida-
tion of duties in the case of issues by any incorporated company or other body corporate of
debentures, bonds or other marketable securities.

‘The expression “the Government” in the section means,—

(a) in relation to stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, promissory
notes, bills of iading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares,
debentures, proxies and receipts, and in relation to any other stamp duty charge-
able under this Act and falling within entry 96 in List I in the Seventh Sche-
dule to the Constitution, the Central Government ;

{b) save as aforesaid, the State Government.

9.4A. As to this expression, it may be noted that before 1937, the Governor Genetal-in-
Council was the only authority empowered to remit or reduce or compound duty under the
section. The Adaptation Order of 1937 substituted the words “the collecting government” for

1, The Indian Stamp Act (1879), Amendment Act, 1897 (13 of 1897).
2. Question 24. P (६ >

al

Introductory.

Section 8—
‘Recommendation.

Section 9—
Width of the
power.

History


Delegation, — Vali-
dity रण.

Recommendation
to add the

criterion of pub-
Tic interest,

Section 9A (New,)

Recomnenda-
tion.
Section — 10.

82

the words “Governor General-in-Council’—and also inserted a definition of “collecting Gov-
emment™. The Adaptation Order of 1950 substituted the words “the Government” in sechon
9, and also added sub-section (2), defining the expression “Government”. It also removed
the definition of “collecting Government”.

9,435. Reverting lo the present section, we are of the view that since the power deie-
gated by the jon in very wide. some sale-guards are needed. In one case decided by the
Supreme Court,’ which is very relevant to the point of delegation, the Court, while declaring
sections 4 and 7 of the Travancore-Cochin Land Tax Act, 1955 (15 of 1955) to be uncon-
stitutional, observed—

...Further, section 7 of the Act quoted above, particularly the latter part, which
vests the Government with the power wholly or partially to exempt any bond
jrom the provisions of the Act? is clearly discriminatory in its effect; and,
therefore, infringes Article 14 of the Constitution. The Act does not lay down
any principle “or policy for the guidance of the exercise of discretion by the
Government in respect of the selection contemplated by section 7.”

The Supreme Court in this connection also referred to the Dalm‘a case", and quoted from
the judgement in that case.

9.5. While the validity of section 9 has not been contested so far, it appears to us desir-
able that in order to preserve its validity, same criterion regulating the exercise of the power
delegated thereby should he added. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the criterion
of “public interest” in relation to the. grant of a reduction or remission by notification under
section 9, This could be achieved by adding the words “if satisfied that it is necessary im the
public interest” after the words “the Government”, in section 9(1}. We recognise that this
is not a very precise test, but even then, it will give some indication of the legislative policy
and lessen the possibility of a successful attack on the validity of section 9(1).

We may mention that such an amendment bas been supported by most of the replies to
our Questionaire.‘ .

Case Jaw on the section reveals no conflict of views, obscurities or other difficulties in the
working of section 9. Hence no other change is necessary.

9.6. At this stage, we would also like to deal with ihe question of consolidation of duties
in respect.of receipts. In the State of Maharashtra,® the following new section has been in-
serted, conferring power on the State Government to consolidate duties in respect of receipts,

“9A, The State Govergment may, by order published in the Official Gazette, provide for
consolidation of duties in respect of any receipts or class of receipts given by any person (i-
cluding any Government) subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.”

9.6A. It would, in our opinion, be useful to have a similar provision in the Act Such
a change has been approved by most of the replies," to our Questionnaire. We recommend
accordingly.

9.7. Section 10 deals with the mode of payment of duty. Duty is ordinarily paid in
stamps ; but in exceptional cases, it can be received in cash under certain special provisions
of the Act.

We have received a suggestion to provide for payment in cash in certain’ other cases.
Tts genesis is as follows :

Kinmathat Thithunnt Mooptt, Nair Vs, State of Kerala, ALR. 1961 5.0, 552 ; (1961) 3 S.C.R.77, :
. Emphasis Supplied.

.. Ram Krishna Daluia V. Justice $.R. Tandotkar, ALR. 1958 S.C, 538, 548-49.

. Question 26

५ Maharashtra Act t of 1971.

५ Question 25 of our Questionnaire.

PUPS


83

9.8. A proposal! had originated in the Ministry of Finance to the effect that there is need Paymentofstamp
tor an enabling provision in the Stamp Act and the Court Kees Act for permitting levy of the हिट 8nd court
stamp duty or Court fee in cash, iu the event of a shortage in the availability of non-judicial the event of
stamps and court fees stamps respectively. This suggestion was sent to various State Guvern- She lability
tients by the Ministry of Finance for their comments in the matter. The State Governments, of — non-judicial
including the Union Territory Administrations, mostly expressed themselves in favour ef the stamps and youre

suggestion,

9.9. [t may also be siated in this connection that in Gujarat, the State Government, some
time ago, had prepared a Bill? to amend scction 10. It was stated in the Statement of Objects and
Reasons that owing to inadequate supply of noa-judicial stamps from the Controller of Stamps,
Nasik, acute shortage of stamps was felt frequently in different parts of the State. To meet
this situation, it had been found necessary to amend section 10 of the Act so as to enable the
State Government and the Collector to direct payment of stamp duties in cash in such con-
tingencies. (The Bill dces not seem to have become law).

9.10. We have given cateful consideration to the matter, and are of the view that as the Recommendation
problem is of frequently recurring nature. it should be solved by adding the following new {3 amend section

sub-sections, to section 10, which we recommend ;

Section 10(3) and (4)-—(to be added)
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where—
(1) the State Government, in relation to any area in the State, or

(7) the Collector, in relation to any area in the district under his charge,

is satisfied that on account of temporary shortage of stamps in any area, duty cannot be paid,
and payment of duty cannot be indicated on instruments, by means of stamps. the State Gov-
emment, or, a3 the case may be, the Collector, may, hy Notification in the Official Gazette,

_ direct that, in such area, the duty may be paid in cash in any Government treasury or sub-
treasury, and certify by endorsememt on the instrument in respect of which the <tanmm duty is
paid, that the duty has been paid, and siate in the said endorsement the गाता, ef the duty
so paid

(4) An endorsement made on any instrument under sub-section (3) shall have the same
effect as if the duty of an «mount equal to the amount stated in the endorsement had been
paid in respect of, and such payment had been indicated on such instrument by means of
‘stamps, under sub-section (1).”

9.11, This disposes of section 10. At this stage, we may discuss 4 new point concerning Fe 10A
the mode of payment. At present. the usual mode of payment of duty on documents is by affix- ening
ing stamps." In our view, an innovation worth considering is the usc of franking machines. It machines.

is well-known that such machines are allowed for postal stamps.*

It appears® that the laws in Malaya and Singapore provide for issuing licences, authoris-
ing persons to pay the required duty on cheques, bills of exchange {not including promissory
notes) and receipts, by postal franking machines. Apart from that, however, the utility of such
a provision is obvious.

9.12. Practical experience of a similar provision in the Post Office Act shows that such postage stamps
deemed

4 provision would not lead to serious evasion. The provision in the Post Office Act as to Postal be eo ned
franking (Section 17, Post Office Act), is quoted below :* the तल पा

1..8.N, 132 in Law Commission File-Extract ftom File No. 471/61/71-Cus.VH, Min. of Finance (Revenue &
Insurance Department.)

2. 5.3. 132 in law Commission file.

3, 5: s [and 11, Stamp Act.

| 17, Indian Post Office Act, 1298.

5, Sbetidan, “Malaya and Sigapore—The Development of Lass and Constitution" (1961) Page 232.

6, Section 17, Post Office Act.



45 of 1860

45 of 1860.

Recommendation

84

“17. (1) Postage Stamps provided under section 16 shall be deemed to be stamps issued
by Government for the purpose of revenue within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code, and,
subject to the other provisions of this Act, shall be used for the payment of postage or other
sums chargeable under this Act in respect of postal articles, except where the Central Govern-
ment directs that pre-payment shall be made in some other way.

(2) Where the Central Government has directed that prepayment of postage or other
sums chargeable under this Act in respect of postal articles may be made by prepaying the
value denoted by the impressions of stamping machines issued under its authority, the impies-
sion of any such machine shall likewise be deemed to be a stamp issued by Government for the
purpose of revenue, within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.”

9.13. We recommend that some such provision should be inserted in the Stamp Act.
Some of the replies to our Questionnaire’ favour it. Some have taised queries about the likeli-
hood of misuse. We have dealt with that aspect already. The new section could be numbered as
section 10A.

1, Questions 27.


CHAPTER 10
STAMPS AND THE MODE OF USING THEM:

SECTIONS 11—16

10.1, The instruments vhich “may be stamped” with adhesive stamps are enumerated in
section 11. These are—

“{a) instcuments chargeable with a duty not exceeding ten naya paise, except parts
of bills of exchange payable otherwise than on demand and drawn in sets ;

“(b) bill of exchange drawn or made our of India, and promissory notes so drawn

(c) entry as an advocate, vakit or attorney on the roll of a High Court ;

(d) notarial acts ; and

(९) transfers by endorsement of shares in any incorporated company or other body
corporate.”

10.2, We begin with opening line of the section, which says—“the following instruments
may be stamped with adhesive stamps”. It has been held? that the use of adhesive stamtps under
this section is permissive and not obligatory, so that if an impressed stamp is available and
Suitable, it can be used instead of an adhesive stamp. In our opinion, it is desirable that this
interpretation should be codified, so that the section is made self-contained. This could be
achieved by inserting an Explanation to the above effect.

10.3. In clause (a), the amount ten naya paise should now be increased to twenty (see
Article 53). As to clause (0), it has been held? that the words “drawn or made out of India”
govern the entire clause and are not confined to promissory notes. This is not, at first sight,
apparent from the section, und it would, therefore, be useful to re-frame clause (b) as follows,
SO 88 to bring out its true scope :

“(b) bills of exchange drawn or made out of India, and promissory notes so drawn
or made.”

10.4, Section 11(c) provides that entry as an advocate vakil or attorney on the roll of a
High Court may be stamped with an adhesive stamp. We are going to recommend deletion
of the charging article on such instrrments.* We, therefore, recommend that section 11(c)
should be deleted.

The remaining clauses need no change.
10.44. In the light of the above discussion, our recommendaton is to revise section 11
as under :
“11. The following instruments may be stamped with adhesive stamps, namely—
(६) instruments chargeable with a duly not exceeding twenty paise, except parts of
hills of exchange payable otherwise than on demand and drawn in sets ;
(b) bills of exchange drawn or made out of India, and promissory notes so drawn
or made ;
Ce) is omitted.7
(d) notarial acts ; and
(६) transfers by endorsements of shares in any incorporated company or other body
corporate.”

1, (a) Kalyan Singh v. Bhawar Singh LL.R. (1965) 15 Raj. 231.

(b) Som Durty. Abdu! Rashid, ALR. 1868 Raj 45.
2. Devafi v. Romakrishiriah, (1880) LL.R. 2 Madras 173, 174 (case om section 10 (hb), 1879 Act).
3. Artick: 30, Infra.

85
246M of Law/7?—12

Seetion 11.

jection 11
the use of
the word"may””

Section 11(a) and
11 (०)


Section 12,

Principle.

Section 12(3).

Modes of Cance-

86

Explasation—To be added as recommended,
10.5. Section 12 deals with the important topic of cancellation of adhesive stamps. Under

spib-section (1), clause (a, whoever affixes any adhesive stamp to any instrument chargeable
~rith duty which has been executed by any person shall, when affixing such stamp, “cancel the

snme so that it cannot be used again ;”

Clause (8) of the sub-section enacts that whoever executcs any instrument on any paper
bearing an adhesive stamp shall, at the time of execution, unless such stamp has been already
cancelled in the manner aforesaid, cancel the same so that it cannot be used again.

"Under sub-section (2), any instrument bearing an adhesive stamp which has not been
cancelled so that it cannot be used again, shall, so far as such stamp is concerned, be deemed
६3 be unstamped.

The mode of cancellation is indicated in greater detail by sub-section (3). It provides that
the person required by sub-section (1) to cancel an adhesive stamp may cance] it by writing
on or across the stamp his name or initials or the name or initials of his firm with the true
date of his so writing, “or in any other effectual manner”,

10.6, The principle underlying the section is fairly clear. As was observed in a Bombay
case*—

“The Stamp Act of 1899. (clause 3 of section 12) points out as a guide how the cancella-
tion may be effected...... the law being that a used stamp cannot be used again—the object
vf the legislature in making cancellation obligatory is that the used stamp should bear on it
yome effective mark to show that it has been used.” .

The principle was further explained in a Lahore case? in these words :

“The principle underlying section 12 is that the possibility of a stamp affixed to an instra-
ment being used again sbould be precluded.”

10.7. The application of sub-section (3), however, is not totally free from difficulty, The first,
part of the sub-section (3) indicates one mode of cancellation as sufficient, namely, the writing
‘on the stamp of the executant’s name or initial and the true date. But the sub-section docs not
Jay down? any special manner which must be rigidly followed in every case.

(10.8. Where the cancellation is by inseribing on the stamp the executant’s name or initial.
and true date, 88 provided in the section, there is no difficulty. हु

‘As to the other methods of cancellation of stamp, indicated in sub-section Q) by. the
words “or in any other effectual manner”, the question often arises whether the method . em-
ployed is sufficient to prevent the stamp from being used again.

Thus, the Allahabad High Court has held‘ that the degree of cancellation required is
not such as to make it absolutely impossible for a fraud to be committed ; and, it hap, accord-
ingly, held that the stamp was effectually cancelled when a single horizontal line was drawn
across it. - eh 4
Similarly, where signature without date was wrilten across, it was held as effeggive’ can-
cellation. In another case®, the signature of the executant made by the scribe oa the adhesive
stamp under direction of the illiterate executor, was regarded as effective cancellatign. Draw-
ing lines in different directions and extended on the paper, were held to be an effective can-
cellation in an Allahabad case.’ ;

1. Virabhadapa bin Adharshapa v. कु Balt Sara (1904) 6 Bom. LR. alan 7 कम मा Sora (SU) 6 Bom LR HS GILR SBan की

(Chandevarhar & Aston JJ).
|. Sohan Lal Nihal Chand # Raghunath Singt, ALR. 1934 Lah 606, 607 (Shadi Lal C.J. & Rangi Lal J}.

2
3. 0.4. Heven v. Suttan Khan, ALR. 1936 Oudh 176 (Srivastava and Nanavutty JJ.)

4. Mahadeo Kori v. Sheorj Ram: Teli, (1919) LL.R. 41 All, 169. 180, 181, 182 (Piggott and Walsh, 77.)
5. ‘
6,

7,

——

we
Bom, 432

. Kirpa Ram र. Barts Mai, 3 All. LJ. 326.
. Thakari Mollah ए. Ram Tahed Tewer?, ALR. 1931 ALL 570) (Niamutullah, J.)
. Ifohammad Antir Mirza Beg v. Baba Kedar Nath, 15 1.0. 202 (All)


87

10.9. In, this context, paralict lines create problems. The Bombay High Court, in as ear- Pamillll . lines
lier case, held that two parallel lines drawn across a stamp means no effective cancellation
in another Bombay case?, a small part of the first letter of the executant’s signature, consist-
ing of a slightly curved line, appearcd on a stamp, and this was held not to effect such a can-
cellation of the stamp as was provided by section 11, of the Stamp Act, 1879. Bur the carlier
- View has been crilicised in a later Bombay case.”

The Lahore High Court has held that drawing diagonal lines across the face of the adhe-
sive stamp was cffeclive cancellation.’ In another Lahore case," drawing a line across the stamp
was treated as effectual cancellation, since the intention to cancel was clear from what had
been done. But, Grawing a line across the stamp in a manner which leaves the stamp capable
of being used a second time was not regarded as an effective cancellation.

The Oudh view was that signatures of the executant, if run across the whole stamp, was
effective? cancellation. But if there are several adhesive stamps which make up the required
stamp, all such stamps should te cancelled, and on failure to do so, the instrument should be
deemec* unstamped under section 12(2), as regards the uncancelled stamps.

According to the Andhra Pradesh High Court, the drawing of two long perallel lines is
sufficient to effectively cancel three stamps.

These decisions reveal a good deal of controversy.

10.10. Under the English Stamp Act, 1891 (54 and 55 Vict. c. 39), section 8 of which Enlgish Law.
ts in simular terms,’ i? has been held that the writing of the name or the date alone or other
marks such as lines er cross-mark on the stamp, is sufficient cancelletion!t

10.11. Though cancellation is a question of fact, it appears to be desirable to make some

pecific provision in the section about a particular mode of it—cancellation by drawing a line
across the stamp, so as to avoid such controversies as have teen referred to above.1?

Recommendation

We, therefore, recommend that in section 12(3), before the words “or in any other cflect
wal manner”, the words “or by drawing 2 line across the stamp or”, should be added, for this
Purpose er |
We may state that the suggested amendment has been generally favoured by the replies
seoeived to our Questionnaire.*?

10.12. So far we were concerned with adhesive stamps. As to impressed stamps, section ection
13 provides that every instrument written upen paper stamped with an impressed stamp shall Section 13
be_ written in such manner that the stamp may appear on the face of the instrament and can- staaiwed — with
not be used for or applicd to any other instrument. The principal object of the section is to impressed 8
protect the revenue, and to avoid the frauds which may be facilitated if the instrument is tien.
written in such mannec that the stamp can be used for purposes of andther instrument when
30 desired. This general rule is sound enough. But, in applying what is enacted in the section,

* eértain problems have arisen in parctice

1. Wirobbadra Din Advashapa v. Bhinajt Balajt Sara, (1904) LER. 28 Bom. 432
2. fee Inve Tata Iron & Steel Co. (1926) A.LR. 1928 Bom. 50; 30 Bom. L-R. 197, 216 (Crimp 13
3. See also Puran Ditec (1908) 108 PR. 1908.
4. Mela Ram v. Brij Lal, ALR. 1920 Lab, 374 (Broadway J.), Following Molid Amir, (1912) 15 LC. 202,
3. Kishori Lal Banarsi Das v. Ram Lal Tek Chand, ALR. 1921 Lab. 120 (D.B.)
6. Hafiz Allah Boksh vy. Dost Mohammed, ALR. 1935 Lab. 716; (Addison . and Sele JJ).
जे, 6.4. Heven v. Sulton Khan , AVR. 1936 0960 -176 Grivastava and Nanavatty JJ.)
है. Babu Lai v..Durga Prasad, AJR. 1340 Oudh 308 (Radhalrishna 3.).
9. &) Mrs Sundersanant v. Venkatara:o, AJR. 1963 Andb, Pradestt 442, 444, 445, Paras 13 and 19, (Ainanvarayaa
yer, J.).
(b) Narayan v. Savajinl Devi, ALR. 1963 A.R. 378, 379, para 4 (Narasimham, J).
10, Section 8, Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng).
Il, 2४. Millen y. Alfred Hickman Steamship Ltd, (1902) 17 L.J. Ch. 766, 767.
12, Para 10.9, Supra.
13. Question 28—section 12.


Writing on the
reverse.

Rule 7.

Use of Plain

88

10.13. The first question that has arisen relates to the point whether the reverse of the stamp
paper could be used. The section itself does not say that only one side may be written upon ;
and the sombay High Court’ has held that the reverse of the stamp paper can 2150 be used.
In the Bombay case, the document commenced on the reverse of the side on which the stamp
was impressed, and terminated on the side impressed with the stamp. It was observed that the
stamp was not, in any way. defaced, nor was the paper so written as to admit of the stamp
being used again. On these facts, the High Court held the document was properly stamped.*
A Government notification prohibiting writing on the reverse of an impressed stamp paper was
noted, but it had been issued after the bond in question, and it was not, therefore, material.

This prohibition (imposed by the notification) referred to above, was withdrawn in 1881, but in
1882 a rule was made which provided that when a single sheet is found insufficient te admit of the
entire instrument being written on the side of the paper which bears the stamp, so much plain
paper may be sub-joined as may be necessary for the complete writing of the instcument, pro-
vided that in every such case the side which bears the stamp must be covered by a substantial
part of this instrument before any part of the instrument can be written on the plain paper joined
to such sheet. With reference to this rule also, the Madras High Court held,* that it was an enabl-
ing rule, authorising the usc of plain paper ; but, it did not prohibit writing on the reverse side.

10.14. One would think that since the controversy as to writing on the reverse of the
paper had arisen more than once, the tule on the subject would have been revised to make the
position more liberal. However, when the rules were revised in 1925, no such clarification.
was made, and the rule now in force! is silent on the subject of writing on the reverse. Indirectly
tule 7(2) disallows it. We are of the view that it is desirable to make the section specific on
the subject, and to allow writing on the reverse by an express provision.

10.15, The following rule of the Stamp Rules, to which we have already made a reference,
raises a few other questions.

7, Provision where single sheer of paper is insufficient—(1) Where two or more sheets
of paper on which stamps are engraved or embossed are used 10 make up the amount of duty
chargeable in respect of any instrument, a portion of such instrument shall be written on each
sheet so used.

(2) Where a single sheet of paper, not being paper bearing an impressed hundi-stamp,
4s insufficient to admit of the entire instrument being written on the side of the paper which bears
thé stamp, so much plain paper may be subjoined thereto as may be necessary for the comt-
plete writing of such instrument.

“Provided that in every such case a substantial part of the instrument shall be writ-
fen on the sheet which bears the stamp before any part is written on the plain
paper subjoined.”

10.16. We have already referred 10 the question of writing on the reverse of the stamp
paper. Then, there is another matter which requires attention. Section 13 itself does not give
any guidance as to the use of plain paper, but the rule’ provides that where the single sheet
is insufficient, a plain paper may be subjoined, but in every such case a substantial part of the
instrument shall be written on the sheet which bears the stamp before any part is written on
the plain paper subjoined. It may be noted that rule 5(6) of the Rules made under the Stamp
Act of 1879 contained a further proviso, namely, “that the part of the instrument written on
the plain paper must be attested by the signatures or marks of ail persons executing the decu-
ment and witnesses to the same.” This part of the rule was, however, held to be wltra vires,

1. Dowiat Ram y. Vitho Radhojt, (1879) LLR. 5 Bom. 188, 195, 197.
2. At that time, section 12 of the Stamp Act of 1879, was the zelevant provision.
3. Reference regarding Stamp Act, (1880) LL.R, 7 Mad. 176 (Full Beach).
4. Rule 7, Indian Stamp Rules, 1925 (infra)
5. Para 10.15, Supra.

52, Rule 7(2), indian Stamp Rules 1925 (Supra).


89

4s going beyond the parent Act,! as it imposed a more stringent requirement than the Act, and,
ultimately, it was rescinded by notification in 1891.

Here again, it appears to be desirable to provide specifically that it is not necessary that
the plaia paper should be signed by the parties. This will make the position explicit on the
subject,

10.17. We now come to the situation of use of more than one stamp papers. The section
1s, again, silent as to this, but the matter ig dealt with by the same rule, that is to say, mule
7 of the Indian Stamp Rules? In substance, the rule provides that a part of the instrument
must be written on each sheet so used, the idea being that the stamp paper should not be
used for writing any other instrument. An instrument offending against the rule would net be
duly stamped.

Now, this may be a good rule im general, but, in practice, some difficulties arise because
one single stamped sheet denoting the entire duty is often not available, so that, although the
text of the insirumene is a short one, it has to be spread out over a number of stamp papers
in order to comply with the section, as tead with the rule, The requirement that the instrument
must appear on each of thé attached stamp papers, if taken literally, is not convenient, in the
case to which we have referred above.

10.18. No doubt, the public has found a way cut by adopting the practice of maxing a
suitable endorsement on the atlached paper, but the attached paper does not contain any
“substantial matter” relating to the tramsactiun and, therefore, its validity is in doubi. In
general, in the case of instruments stamped with impressed stamps, the nunaber of stamps which
may be usec can be regulated by rule.? But it appears to be desirable to provide that the
text need not appear on each stamped sheet, and that an endorsement stating that the stamped
paper is attached to another stamped paper containing the text, will do.

10.19. It would be convenient if the section is made self-contained, as far as possible, on
the points discussed above, so that the citizen may clearly know from the Act the position in
this respect. It is for this reason that we recommend an amendment of the section, to be
presently mentioned.

We may state that principle of suggested scheme has been favoured by many of the replies
received to cur Questionnaire.*

10.20. Our recommendation in the light of what we have stated aliove is that section 13
should be revised as follows :—

“13, Every instrument weitten upon paper stamped with an impressed stamp shall
be written in such manner that the stamp may appear on the face or reverse of
the instrument and cannot be used for or applied to any other instrument.

Explanation 1.—-Where two or more sheets of paper stamped with impressed stamps
are used io make up the amount of duty chargeabie in respect of any instrument,
euher a portion of such instrament shall be written on eock sheet so used, or
the sheet on which na such portion is written shall be signed by the executant
or oe of the executants, with an endorsement indicating that the sheer is
attached 10 another sheet on which the instrument is written.

Explanation 2,—Where a single sheet of paper, not being paper bearing an impressed
fundi-stamp, is insufficient to admit of the entire instrument being written on
the stamped puper, 59 much plain paper may be sub-joined thereto as may be
necessary jor compidiing the writing of such instrument, provided a substantial
part of the instrument is written on the sheet which bears the stamp before any
part is written on the plain paper sub-joined, but the fact that the plain paper
1s not signed by the executants shall not render the instrument not duly stamped.”.

1, Reference on the Stamp Act, (1884) LL.R. 8 Mad. 532, $40.
2. Para 10.15 supra.

3, Section 102).

4. 0. 29--cection 13.

Mose than onc.
stamp paper.

‘Need for Change

Recommendation
10 revise sechon
13.


90

Introductory 10.21. It is a general rule that only one instrument can be written on the same stamp

4 and peper. Section 14 expresses the rule thus :—

“14, No second instrument chargeable with duty shall be written upon a piece of
stamped paper upow which an instrument chargeable with duty has already been
written :

Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent any endorsement? which is duly
stamped or is not chargeable with duty being made upon any instrument for
the purpose of transferring any right created or evidenced thereby, or of acknow-
ledging the receipt? of any money or goods the payment or delivery of which
js secured thereby”.

The main paragraph of the section raises no difficulty. It does not apply unless both
the first and the second instrument are chargeable with duty. But the proviso to the section
appears to deal with only one situation, while there are also other situations that require
consideration.

Effect of altera- 10.22, In this connection, it may be pointed out that on the general. question whether

Gon. in an instru- 5 है ion is. sil
ment on stamp am alteration in an insurument already written affects the stamp, the section is silent.

duties,

Position
England,

Consent
Patties

teclal
iw

of stamp

On a study of the decided cases, both Indian? and English', it would appear that the
principle is that where, by reason of an alteration made in an instrument, the instrument
becomes a new one, a fresh stamp is required. The words “second instrument” have been so

construed.
‘The reason is that the original stamp is spent* The principle applicable is of a simple
nature, though there may be difficulty in the application.
Mm 10.23. In England, it is well established that no further stamp is required if the alteration
48 :--
(8) immaterial’, or
(b) merely declaratory,” or
(c) intended to render certain a point which was left open,’ or

(d) made to correct a mistake,° or
(९) made by a stranger.1°
But, in the case of a bill of exchange’? executed in the country, the party suing on the bill
inust prove that the alteration does not vitiate the stamp.**
Tt has become necessary to discuss these points because
no guidance in the matter.

the proviso to the section gives

f . .
imma- 10.24. For the present purpose, 2 material alteration may be described as one which
for OM तक the legal effect of the instrument. A material alteration made without the consent of

1. See article 62, as to endorsement.
2, See article 53, as to acknowledging receipt.
3. (a) Reference under Stamp ‘Act, (1888) LL.R. 11 Mad. 40.

(b) Cox & Co. ४. Restonii, ALR. 1927 Bom. 1315.

(© Pestonji & Co. ९. Cox & Co, ALR. 1928 P.C, 231.
4, For English cases, see para 10.23, infra.
5, (a) Bowman v. Nichot, (1794) 5 Term Reports 537. c

(0) London and Brighton ‘Ratlway Co., v. Falrclough, (1844) 2 M & C674.
Hartley ¥. Manson, (1842) 4 Man & 6. 172.
Deo Waters v. Houghton (1827) 1 Man & Rr. K.B. 208.
Sadgrove V Bryden, 1907) 1 Ch. 318.

9. Cole ४, Purking, (1810) 12 East 471.
10. Monfree ५. Bromley, (1805) 6 Est, 309.
11. Knight v. Clements (1838) 8 Ad & EL 215.
12. Haisbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 3, Page 283, para 502 ; and Vol. 3, Page 233.

6.
7.
a


91

the parties may, of course, render the instrument void under the Jaw of contract. The
principle’ is chat ‘no man shall be permitted to take the chance of committing a fraud without
running any risk of losing by the event when the fraud is detected.” The Negotiable Instru-
ments Aci?’ has a specific provision on the subject. The low on the subject has been fully
discussed by the Supreme Court.! Considerable discussion has also taken place as to the
effect of alteration by accident, in the general law. But we are not concerned with the effect

of alterations in general law.

10,25. Having regard to the obscurity on the subject, in the Stamp Act, it is desirable that practical gi
the position in this respect should be stated in the proviso. The matter is not of mere academic culty.
importance, because, in the case of a contract, the result of a rule requiring fresh stamp for
a new agreement is that the old agreement cannot be sued upon as it has been superseded,®
and the new agreement is inadmissible if not stamped afresh. Thus, a practical difficulty can

arise,

10.26. In view of ihe importance of the principles mentioned above, and the practical Recommendation
difficulty likely to be caused as indicated above, it is desirable to make the law self-contained, i pet section
by adding a provision to ensure that immaterial alterations, as enumerated above,’ do not

bear duty but material alterations bear duty a fresh.

We my state that the suggested amendment has been generally favoured by the replies
received to our Questionnaire.®

We recommend that the provision be inserted as section 14A. The following is a rough
draft :—

“144, Where there are material alterations made in an instrument by a party with
or without the cousent of other parties, the instrument shall require a fresh
stamp according to its altered character.”

10,27. Section 15 provides that every instrument written in contravention of section 13 Section 15,
or section i4 shall be deemed to be unstamped. It may be recalled that section 13 deals हि
with the magner in which the instrument stamped with an impressed stamp shail be written,
and section 14 provides that only one instrument should be written on the same stamp.

The effect of section 15, as read with section 13, was illustrated in a Lahote case,”
where a security bond taken on an order for stay of execution, was written on plain paper
bearing  couri-fee stamp of 7 395, instead of on impressed stamped paper, thus contra-
vening section 13. The bond was held not to be properly stamped in view of section 15,

As to the effect of section 15, read with section 14, a few reported cases will be referred
to in due course.1°

10.28. There is no controversy about the substance of seicion 15 ; but, the wording appears Verbel i
to be capable of improvement. The use of the expression.“deemed to be unstamped” raises का noeled
a doubt as to whether an instrument governed by the section—that is to say, wnitten in

violation of sections 13-14-—can be admitted in evidence on paymeny of penalty under section

35: of validated by endorsement of the Collector under section 41.

1, Master ¥. Milter, (1791) 4 Term Reports 320, 329, 145 E.R. 855 (Lord Kenyon, 0.0.)
2, Section 87, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. ©
3, As to this see Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 11, 367; as t terial Hi in bil
i eps कफ Sod page as to material alternations in bills of exchange,
4, Amivudhan १. Thonn Co. ALR. 1963 8.0. 746,
5 Fonskone and Shanghai Banking Corpn,, v. Loki Shi, (1928), A.C. 181. For comments, see (1928) L.Q.R. at Page

6. Royal Exchange Assurance v. Hope, (1928) Chancery 179 (Court of Appeal).

7. Se “Immaterial alterations”, supra.”

8. 0, 30—section 14.

9. Gurandita Mal v, Firm Gurandittamal Ram Chand, ALR. 1925 Lah. 552, 554 (Martinequ, J.)
10, See “Case of two instruments", ffrz.


92

In onc of the carly Bombay cases,’ it was held that the Collector ought to refuse to
make an endorsement in such cases. But this view was over-culed in a later decision.? A
Madras case agrees* with the later Bombay view.

Recommendation 10.29. [t is, in our opinion, desirable to avoid the recurrence of such controversies, and

10. subsititute this could be achieved by substituting the words “net duly stamped” for the word “unstamped”,

ay words uot in scetion 15. The expression “duly stamped” is defined in the Act, and is used at many
places in the Act. We recommend that the section should be amended as above. It is in
harmony, for cxample, with the language used in the section dealing with the Collector's power
to stamp instruments which are impounded.* This clarification can usefully cover section
14A (new) also.

Case of two 10.30 We shall now deal with another question arising out of section 15. it is to be

instruments, noted that where two instruments are written on one paper, it is the second instrument which
is to be treated as “unstamped” within the meaning of section 15, and not the first one.
Thus, in a Madras ease,“ a deed of release was endorsed on a deed of conveyance for Rs. 100.
The conveyance bore an impressed stamp for one rupez, but the endorsement of release was
‘anstamped. Tt was held that the conveyance was valid, and the release could be validated
on payment of the deficient stamp duty and the penalty under section 39 of the old Act I of
1879 (section 40 of the present Act).

10.31. A similar view (regarding the admission of a document in evidence on payment
of deficient siamp and penalty), was taken in another Bombay case,” where an endorsement
of transfer written on a duiy stamped simple money bond, was in issue. The question to
be considered was whether the case fell under that part of section 14 (old section 13) which
forbids a second instrument being written upon a paper on which an instrument ‘has already
been written. [t was held, that the endorsement was chargeable with duty, but could be
stamped under old section 34-—present scction 35.

Recommendation 10.32. In our opinion, it is desirable to codify the proposition emerging from the above

to make it cleat cases, In so far as they hold that it is the second instrument which is t6 be deemed. ta be
instrument is not duly stamped. The clarification will be confined to instruments falling under existing sec

it
intended. tion 14 and will not extend to new section 14-A.
We may state that the suggested amendments have been generally favoured by the replies
received to our Questionnaire.? :
Recommendation 10.33. Accordingly, we recommend that section 15 should be revised as under :—
Kevised section 15
“15, Every instrument written in contravention of section 13 or section 14 or section
14A shall b> deemed to be unstamped”.
Explanation.—In the case ta whictt section 14 applies, it shall be the second tnstru-
ment which shall be deemed to be unstamped.
Section 16. 10.34, Section 16 is as follows :-—

“16, Where the duty with which an instrument is chargeable, or its exemption from

Denotia duty,
me , duty, depends in uny manner upon the duty actually paid in respect of another

1. in the matter of Hammappa, (1888) I.L.R. 13 Bom. 281.
2. Prahlad v. Vitku, LL.R. (1892) 17 Bom. 687 (F.B.}
4, In the matter of Reference etc., (1888) 1.L.R. 11 Mad. 40.
4, See section 2(11), “duly stamped.”
5, Section 40 (1) (8) and (b). .
for of St amps, Mad Madras. (1888), LL.R. 11 Med. 40; (Co liins, C.J., Kernan, M 41
6 nt hye, pana’ BTS (case i हम गे section 14, corresponding to pr esent acco वा

15).
7. Prahlad Laksmanran Nikane v. Vithu, (1893)I-L.R. 17 Bom. 687 (Parsons, Telang and Candy, JJ.)

8. (9) Q.31—section 5.
(७) Q.32section 15 and second instrument.


93

instrument, the payment of such last-mentioned duty shall, if application is
made in writing to the Collector for that purpose, asd on production of both
the instruments, be denoted upon such first-mentioned instrument, by endorse-
ment under the hand of the Collector or in such other manner (if any) as
the State Government may by rule prescribe.”

Sometimes, the duty payable on some instruments depends upon the duty paid on other
instruments that have already been executed and stamped. Examples of such instruments are—
subsidiary instruments, as opposed to the principal ones under section 4, the counter-parts or
duplicates of instruments under Arlicle 25, leases under the proviso to Article 35, instruments
of partition under proviso (a) or (०) to Article 45, and instruments of settlement under the
proviso to Article 58. Similarly, at times, the exemption from duty in favour of some
instruments, (for example, the entry of an advocate or attorney on the roll of a High Couwt
when he bas previously been enrolled in a High Court) depends on the duty paid on another
instrument.

40.35. In order to render these instruments as either partially stamped or totally exempt
from stamp duty, because of the principal documents having been fully stamped, section
16 lays down that on productioa of both the instruments and on an application to the Collector,
an endorsement would be made by the Collector on the Subsidiary instruments, dencting the
payment of the duty actually paid in respect of the principal instrument.4

10.36. The necessary endorsement will be made by the Collector, only if an application
haa been made in writing to him, for the purpose. If the party interested does not apply
for the necessary endorsement and, therefore, dees not obtain it, then he has to produce,
when required, both the instruments, in order to render the partially stamped of exemptea
instrument admissible in evidence.

No change is needed in this section.

4, Compare section 11, Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng.)
24M of Law/77—13.


Seetion 17,

time of stamping.

CHAPTER 11
TIME OF PAYMENT—SECTIONS 17—19

11.1. The time of payment of duty is dealt with in sections 17 to 19 of the Act. Briefly
speaking, the time of stamping is linked up with the time of exccution, but special situations,
such as an instrument executed out of India, may arise and have to be dealt with, The
general proposition is to be found in section 17. Al instruments chargeable with duty and
executed by any person ia India shall be stamped before or at the time of execution under
the section.

The expression “shall be stamped” means that the instrument should be duly stamped, that
is to say, @ stamp of the proper description and amount should have been used at the time
and in the manner prescribed by law.2 “Executed”, as defined in the Act, means signed.? So,
stamping must precede or be simultaneous with signing.

11.2. There has been a confiict of views with respect to the phrase “at the time of
execution” in section 17. In a Bombay case’, a promissory note was executed by A and B,
a stamp was affixed afterwards and cancelled by A, by again signing it. The High Court held
that the stamping must be held to have taken place subsequent to the execution, aud therefore,
it could not be said that the promissory note was stamped “before or at the time of execution”,
within the meaning of section 17.

In that case, the evidence clearly showed that defendant 1 wrote out the promissory not
in suit, and defendants 1 and 2 put their signatures on it in the presence of the plaintiff's hus-
band. It was then stamped. This, according to the Bombay High Court, was a clearly evidence
to establish that the stamping of the promissory note took place after the execution was already
complete. According to that High Court, section 17 requires that the stamping should be done
sometime before the document is executed, or that a stamped paper must be placed before the
executant who must execute it, or, he must first stamp it and then execute the document. But,
if the executant has already finished the “execution” of the document (in the eye of the law)
then any subsequent stamping, jewever close in time, could not be said to be stamping a
the time of execution.

The High Court criticised an earlier decision of the Madras High (०01५, holding to the
contrary. In the Madras case, there was only one executant, and the promissory note was
signed by him, and subsequently, it was stamped. The Madras High Court held, that the
uncontradicted evidence of the piaintiff showed that the acts were “practically simultaneous”,
and the stamping was, therefore, done “at the time of execution” within the meaning of section
16 of the Stamp Act, 1879, corresponding to section 17 of the present Act. The Madras
High Court, further, expressed the view that, even under the present Act, where execution
is defined as meaning “siguature”,® it would not make any difference if the stamp was affixed
and cancelled immediately after the signature on the document, the signing and stamping being
continuous acts in the same transection, The Bombay High Court, however, observed that,
jt was difficult to understand the significance of the expression “practically simultaneous”. Either
the stamping is after execution, or before or at the time of the execution.

1, (a) Mott Lal v, Jogmohandas, (1904) 6 Bom. L.R. 699.
(b) Jethibai v. Rama Chnadra, (1899) 1.L.R. 13 Bom, 464.7

2. Section 2(12), Indian Stamp Act, 1899.

3. Mrs. Rohini Chandrakant Vilaykar v. 4.1. Fernander, ALR. 1956 Bom, 421, 423, para 4 (D.B.) (Chagla,
C1. and Dixit, J

4, 50८४ Muil ५. Hudson, (1900) LL.R, 24 Mad. 259. 261 (DB)

5, Section X12), Stamp Act, 1899.

94


95

11.3, In & Kerala case,’ the Bombay view? was dissented from, and the Madras view
was followed.* in that case, a promissory note was affixed with additional stamps efter the
second attesting witness pointed out that the note was insufficiently stamped. The High Court
held that the execution of ihe promissory note was complete when additional stamps were aftixed
and defaced and delivery of the promissory note was effected. According to the Kerala High
Court, the expression, “shali be stamped at the time of execution” must be interpreted in a
reasonable manner, and it is sullicient if signing and affixing of the stamp are “practically
simultaneous”,

11.4. From the above discussion, it appears that the existing phrase, “before or at the
time of execution” in saction 17, lands the courts in difficulty. It would, in our view, be better
if the words “at the time of execution or immediately thercafier’ are substituted, in place
of that phrase, and we recommend accordingly. We may note that such an amendment has
‘been generally favoured in the replies to the Questionnaire issued by us.*

11.5. Instruments executed outside India are dealt with in sections 18 and 19. Under
section 18(1), every instrument chargeable with duty executed only out of India and not being
8 bill of exchange or promissory note, may be stamped within three months after it has
been first received in India. Under section 18(2), where any such instrument cannot,
with reference to the description of a siamp prescribed therefor, be duly stamped by 3 private
person, it may be taken within the said period of three months to the Collector, who shail
stamp the same in such manuer as the State Government may, by rule, prescribe, with a
stamp of such value as the person so tuking such instrument may require and pay for.

Thus, the instruments which are exccuted out of India and chargeable with duty,° (not
being bills of exchange or promissory noics) may be stamped within three months after they
have been first received in India. If stamps of the required description are not available, the
party should take the instrument to be stamped within the said period of three months to the
Collector who will starap tke same with the stamp of proper description. It is, however,
necessary to make an application to the Collector in this regard.®

11.6. Section 18 must be read with section 3(c). Section 3(c) makes it clear, that
instruments executed out of India (other than bills of exchange or promissory notes) will sot
be liable to stamp duty unless they relate to property situate or to any matter or thing done
or to be done in India and are received in India: Thus, a simple money bond executed out of
India will not be liable to duty even when received in-India, because it does not relate to any

"property situate, or to any matter or thing done or to be done, in India. If, however, the instru-
ment in question related to some property situate in India, it would be governed? by section 18.
Deeds of partition, executed abroad, of property partly situate in India are also so governed as
would appear from the decision in a Madras case.*

The same is the case with acknowledgements of debts.®

11.7. Lf the inswument in question is not stamped within the prescribed period of three
months as under section 18, but is stamped afterwards, it would be deemed to be unstamped,
and ‘vould be governed by section 35 as regards the consequences of non-stamping. For
example, instruments chargeable with the duty of one anna (now 10 paise) e.g—an acknow-
ledgement of a debt, -if not stamped within the period of three months of their receipt in
India, cannot be admitted in evidence even on the payment of duty and penalty, because
section 35 does not provide for the admissibility on payment of duty and penalty.1°

1. Kartvila Markose ५. Varkey Varkey, ALR. 1966 Ker. 315 (T. C. Raghwan).
2 Mis. Rohini Chandeakanta v. A. Fernandes, ALR. 1956 Bom. 421 (pata 11, supre.)

3. Susfit Mull v. Hadson, (1920) LL.R. 24 Mad. 259, (D.B.), para 11.2, supra.

AQ. 33,

3. Herbert Francis v. Md. Akbar, ALR. 1928, Patna 134.

6, Section 31.

7. Herbert Franais y. Mohd. Akbar ALR 1928 Pataa 134.

& Rajongam v. Rojamangamer, ALR. 1920 Mad. 149. (Document executed at Trivandrum}.
9. Ali Mohamed v. Jagannath, ALR. 1928 AU. 666.
10 Ali Mohamed ¥. Jegan nath ALR, 1928 All 666.

Recommendation
to amends. 17.

Section. 18.

Fills of exchange
Pearly of non-
stamping.


i

Rovomenandation
to adopt the
Eaglish provision.

96

.

11.8. Again, section 18 does not make the copy of a document admissible by stamping
it with the stamp required on its original, If the original instrument executed onteide India
requires to be stamped when brought in India, and is not stamped, then a copy of that instro-
ment brought in India mmst be rejected as inadmissible, and cannot be placed on record, as
the law now stands, for the reason that it cannot be stamped and no penalty can be realised on
it under section 35. Section 18 applies only to original documents which, although executed
out of India, attract duty in India and are brought in India?

31,9. Tbe above brief discussion would serve to illustrate the implications of the section.
There being no conflict of decisions or obscurity in language or other difficulty in the working
of the section, we have no further comments on it.

11.10, Under section 19, the first holder in India of any bill of exchange, (payable other-
wise than cn demand) or promissory note drawn or made out of India shall, before he presents
the same for acceptance or payntent, or endorses, transfers or otherwise negotiates the same
in India, affix thereto the proper stamp ead cancel the same.

‘There are two provisos to the scction, which read us fellows :—

“(a) if, at the time any such bill of exchange, or note comes into the hands of any
holder thereof in India, the proper adhesive stamp is affixed thereto and can-
celled in manner prescribed by section 12 and such holder has no reason to
believe that such stamp was affixed or cancelled otherwise than by the person
and at the time required by this Act, such stamp shall, so far as relates to such
holder, be deemed to have been duly affixed and cancelled ;

(b) nothing contained in the proviso shall relieve any person from any penalty in-
curred by him for omitting to affix or cancel a stamp.”

11.11. A number of points arise on this section. We shall take them up one by one.
The first point relates to the proper time of cancellation. The section makes it’ obligatory
on the first holder to afix a stamp on the foreign bill or note and to cancel the game
before he does any of the acts set out in the section. If the stamp is not cancelled at the
proper time, it cannot be cancelled afterwards. Thus, where a stamp was affixed to a hundi
which was drawn at Indore before it was presented for payment in British Indis, but was
not cancelled before presentation, it was, in 8 suit on the basis of the bondi, held that in
the face of the imperative words of this section, it was impossible to accede 10 the suggestion
that the stamp could be cancelled in the court? हि

11.12. On this point, the English law® is, however, different. The (English) Stamp Act
of 1891, section 35, Proviso (b), enables a bona fide holder to cancel the stamp itself, if it
was not cancelled when the foreign bill came into his hands; and upon tis so doing; such
pill is deemed to be duly stamped and as valid and available es if the stamp had beeq daly
cancelled by the person by whom it was affixed. Under the English law, therefore, = foreign
bill, in order to be admissible in evidence, requises only that the Proper stamp should bar ee besa
afixed.t Construing this proviso, Blackburn, J. expressed an opinion that the i
may be made in open Court at any time before the verdict?

41.13. It would, in our view, be aa improvement, if the position which ‘prevails in.
England is adopted. The primary object of the requirement of cancellation is to pasutc that
the stamp is not used aguin. This object is achieved as much by the English provision: as by
the Indian section. The present holder shopld not be penalised for the faults of the paevious
holder. We recommend thet the section should be sufably Smet ---+-- We recommend that the section should be suitably amended.

fo i [.. Eid, Amritsar ¥. Lachman Singh Bhagat, AAR. 1951 Pepsa 24.

2 Romprosnd ar oe ce belmadcand, (1925) 27 Bote. LR. 1122, 1126

3, Section 35. Proviso (b) Stamp Act, 189] (Eng.)
4. Mare, v, Rovy, (1874) 31 L.T. 372, 374 ; 23 WR. Engl.) 89.

5, Vaile y. Michael, (1874) 30 Lew ‘Times 463, 464.



97

11.14. The second point relates to the important opening words in section 19, viz,
“rst holder in India“?. The Act is not concerned with the possession of the bill or promissory
note before then. On this point ne clarification is required.

11.15. The third point is important. According te the Madras High Court, the Legis-

lature does not appear to be interested in whether a promissory note has or has not been
stamped outside India with the resil: that a note stamped outside India will have to be stamped
again before endorsement.2 Thus. when a bill of exchange not payable on demand drawn
out of India or a pronote made ont of India has been duly stamped abroad wish Indian stamps
of the proper amount und description, and the stamgs have been cancelled, the question of its
being stamped in India arises, because section 19 compels the first “holder” thereof to stamp
it before he does any of the acts mentioned therein.

The same view was iuken in another case’ of the Madras High Court,—“In the interests
of judicial comity”-~aed quite apart from any consideration of the correctness of the decision
therein. The facts of the casc appear, however, to have been reported meagerly. It is also
not clear whether the “first holder of the pronote in India” in this case was the promisee himself
or his transferee.

The Punjab Hign Court has, however, taken a contrary view.t According to that High
- Court, if an Indian Stamp is already affixed on the promissory note, then, a fresh stamp will
not be needed, because, to do so would be to charge double duty.

11.16. Whatever be the correct interpretation of the existing language of section 3(b)
read with section 19, it appears to us thal there is no reason why an instrument bearing an
Indian stamp should again be stamped with an Indian stamp when it is presented for acceptances
or payment or endorsement etc. as contemplated by section 19. Indian revenue law has
already been complied with, by affixing the Indian stamp,

4f this approach is correct, it would be desirable 10 add an Explanation to section 19 to
the effect that where the promissory note already bears an Indian stamp, it shall not be
necessary to stamp it again. Such an amendment has been favoured by almost all the replies
- to our Questionnaire also.*

11.17. The last proposition to which ettention should be drawn while discussing section
19 is that where a promissory note is executed outside India, it is admissible here if the हाँ is
brought to enforce the lability created by the promissory note. The requirement of stamp under
section 19 arises only when a first holdex in India does oue of the specified acts, namely, pre-
seniution for acceptance, presentation for payment, endorsement, transfer or otherwise negotia~
tion in India. In an early Madras.7 Ji was clearly stated, that the provisions of section 19,
Indian Stamp Act, are applicable to a helder only where there is one of those acts set out in the
section and that an instrument need not be stamped in the manner provided when it was not
dealt With in any of the ways set out.

‘Thus,* even if a pronote executed out of India is not stamped, a suit can be brought on
the proncte as between the promiser and promisee.

No amendment is required on this point.
1. Siva Subramania. v. Kalantarayan, ALR. 1941 Mad. 868.
2, Siva Subramania v. Kalankarayan,, AIR. 1941 Mad. 868, 869, 870 (Mochett, J.)
3, LD. Lobe v. Marajal Doge, ATR, 1953 Mad. 424,
4, Rartan Chand Bircoram ¥. L. Khairatiram Naval, ATR. 1955 Ponj
$e iratiram Nandiai LR. 195: 88, 90, pare 5-6.
6. 5-35.
7. Mad. Rawihan १. Md. Hussain Rawthan, (1899) LL.B. 22 Mad. 337.
8. Siva Subramanic ९. Kalankatayan, ALR. 1941 Mad 868 (case law reviewed).

Meaning of “frst
bolder’’.

instruments stamped
with Indian
amp

outside.

Recommendation
for amend-
ment,

Suit 10 eeffeees
the liability.


Totroductory.

Section 20,

Section 22,
Bifect of 30राए
ment of rate of
exchange.

CHAPTER 12
COMPUTATION OF AD VALOREM DUTY—SECTIONS 20 TO 26

12.1. Duty under the Act is of two kinds—fixed and ad valorem. The computation ot
duty where it is fixed presents no difficult problems, once it is determined that the instrument
belongs to that particular category. But the computation of duiy ad valorem sometimes presents
problems, either because the amount? or consideration is contingent? or unascettained or is
expressed in kind,’ or because it is expressed in other currency,* or because of other special cir-
cumstances,—e.g., incumbrances® and periodical payments.

12.2. Under section 20, where an instrument is chargeable with ad valorem duty in respect
of any money expressed in any currency other than that of India, such duty shall be calculated
ou the value of such money in the currency of India according to the current rate of exchange

on the day of the date of the instrument.

For this purpose, the Central Goverament may, from time to time, by notification in the
Ollicial Gazette, prescribe a rate of exchange for the conversion of British or any foreign currency
into the currency of India for the purposes of calculating stamp-duty. The section needs no
change. .

12.3, Section 21 provides that where an instrument is chargeable with ad valorem duty
im respect of any stock or any marketable or otber security, suck duty shall be calculated on
the value of such stock or security according to the average price or the value thereof on the
day of the date of the instrument.

It needs no change.

12.4, Under section 22, where an instrument contains a statement of current rate of
exchange or average price, as the case may require, and is stamped in accordance with such
statement, it shall, so far as regards the subject-matter of such statement, be presumed, until
the contrary is proved, to be duly stamped.

It needs no change.

12.5. Section 23 deals with interest expressly made payable by the terms of an instrument.
It provides that such instrument shall not be chargeable with duty higher than that which it
would have been chargeable had no mention of interest been made therein.

The section is not confined to simple interest, it applies to compound interest also. Theres
fore, a stipulation in an instrument to pay compound interest need not be separately stamped
as a separate instroment.®

Under the English law also, stamp duty is calculated on the principal sum secured by an
instrument, irrespective of any sum which may become due ag interest under the terms of the
instrument.*

1, E.G, Royalty (section 26).
2, Interest (section 23.)
3. Big. stock (section 21 and section 23A).
4, ForeignCurrency (section 20 and section 22).
5. Sections 24-25
6, (a) Bairsal Rindan Samiti v. Sital Chandra, A.LR. 1930 Ca’. 630, 631 (F.B.)
(0) Also, Gomez v. Young, (1869) 2 Beng. L.R. (0.0. 165.)
7. (a) Pruessingfv. Ing. , (1829) 106 E.R. 912.
(b) Doe d Scruton v. Sneith, (1832) 131 BR. 356, 359.
(©) Prudential Mutual Assurance Investment & Loan etc, Association ¥. Curzon, (1852) 155 E.R. 1275.

98


99

12.6. The judgment in Pruessing v. Ing.) the leading English case, may be quoted २--

“Abbott C. J.: The Stamp Act imposes upon every promissory note for the pay- Eagish Law.
ment at any time exceeding two months after date, of any sum of money .
exceeding 20s., and not exceeding 30s, a duty of 2s.6d. and other duties upon
other notes in proportion to the sums thereby secured. The cbject ज the Legisla-
ture was to impose a pro rata stamp duty upen the sum actually due at the time
of taking the security, and not upon whet might become due in future for the use
of the money. The question, therefore, in this case, is, what was the sum due
at the time when the note was taken? For, that is the sum secured. I am quite
satisfied that the words “sums of money” in the Act, mean the principal sum men-
tioned in the note, and not a sum compounded of principal and interest. A con-
trary decision would be most mischievous, and have the effect of avoiding many
securities ; for it has been the constant practice, under similar provisions appli-
cable to bonds in this and former Stamp Acts, to measure the stamp duty by the
principal sum secured, although interest is always made payable from the date of
the bond. 1 think, therefore, that this rule ought to be refused. Rule refused.”

12.7. Where, however, the consideration of the instrument is @ lump sum made up of two
constituents, namely, the principal and the interest that might accumulate during a given period,
@ question may arise whether the instrument will be chargeable for the principal, or whether the
instrument will be chargeable for the lump sum. In a Calcutta case,? a bond for a loan of Rs. 100
stipulated that the obliger should “pay twice the amount, including Rs. 100 for interest, total
Rs. 200 in eight years from 1301 B.S. to 1308 B.S. according to ‘kists’ (instalments) given in the
Schedule.” It was held, that the amount secured by the bond was Rs. 200 and the bond must
be stamped accordingly. The High Court added that an earlier Full Bench ruling* of the Allaha-
bad High Court cited in the reference had no bearing on the matter.

12.8. In a Bombay case,‘ the material portion of the Bond was as follows :—

“T have taken from you in cash a loan of Rs, 9-4-0 to which 12 annas have been added
for ‘Kasar’, total Rs. 10; interest on this sum amounts to Rs. 2-8-0; total
Rs, 12-8-0. This debt will be repaid by 25 monthly instalments of cight annas
each. Instalments in default will carry future interest at the rate of two rupees
per mensem,”

The question arose whether stamp duty was leviable on Rs. 10 or on Rs. 12-8-0. It was
held that the bond should be Hable as to stamp as one for Rs. 10 only, and that the provision
about interest should be left out of consideration under section 23.

The Calcutta High Court’s views was dissented from by the Bombay High Court. The
judgment does not indicate the reasons for dissent. According to the Bombay High Court, if the
interest is expressly made payable by the terms of the instrument, then the mere mention of
the interest as a lump sum will not render the instrument liable to stamp duty for the total
sum of the principal and the interest payable.

12.9. One can distinguish between the Calcutta and the Bombay cases on the ground that
in the Calcutta case, the sum of Rs. 100, though described as (derived from) “interest”, was
merged with the principal, so as to bring into being a new principal amount of Rs. 200. In the
Bombay case, the amount of Rs. 2-8-0 retained its character as interest. If this explanation is
correct, no clarification on the point is needed,

Tt is also to be remembered, that, where a provision for interest changes the category of
the instrument itself, section 23 would have no application. Thus, an acconnt written on a sheet
of paper signed by the debtor and addressed to the creditor and also containing a stipulation to

$< —2 $e

1, Preessing v. Ing. (1829) 106 E.R 912, 23 R.P. 253.

2, Shambhu Chandra Bepart v, Kristma Charan Bepart,{1899)LL.R 26 Cal. 179 FB)
3. Inthe matter of Gojra} Singh, (1884), LL.R. 9 All 585 (F.B.)

4, Vitha v. Nothw, (1901) 3 Bom. L.R, 133, 134.

5, Shambiu Chandra Bepari ५, Krishna Charan Bepart, (1899) LL.R. 26 Cal. 179 {above).



100

pay interest, is not a mere “acknowledgement of a debt”, within article 1, but is an agceement,
under article 5 (8).

Section 234 12.10. According to section 23.5,

(1) Where an instrument (not being a promissory note or bill of exchange) ~-

(a) is given upon the occasion of the deposit of any marketable security by way of
security for money advanced or to be advanced by way of Joan, or for an
existing or future debt, or

fb) makes redeemable or qualifies a duty stamped transfer, intended as a security, or
any marketable security,

it shali be chargeable with duty as if it were an agreement or memorandum of
an agreement chargeable with duty under Article No. 5(0) of Schedule 1.

(2) A release or discharge of any such instrument shall not be chargeable with the
like duty.

The section was introduced by Act 15 of 1904, and is a reproduction of section 23 of the
(English) Stamp Act, 1891, The object of the innovation in sub-scction (1) appears ta have
been to make provision fer equitable mortagages, where the advance is made on the deposit of
marketable securities? The section prevents the levy of a higher duty otherwise chargeable
under article 6 (or in certain circumstances, of a still higher duty under Article 40).

12.11, A promissory note would be chargeable under Article 6(2), and a Bill of
Exchange would be exempt under Article 40, Exemption 2. That, apparently, is the reason why
those two documents are excluded from the scope of the section.

12.12. Sub-section (2) spplies to instruments which seek to extinguish the rights created
by the instruments given under sub-section (1) and makes a release or discharge of any such
instruments given under sub-section (1) also taxable as an agreement, ic. with the like duty.

There seems to be no reported case law on the present section, The section needs no

change.
‘Section. 24 12.13, We now proceed to section 24. It will facilitate an understanding of the section,
naive a, © it vefore we go into details, the broad scheme of the section is dealt with. The section could

be divided into four parts, namely, the main paragraph, the proviso to the main paragraph, the
Explanation, and the proviso to the Explanation.

12.14, Under the main paragraph, stamp duty on the transfer of property, where it ix
charged ad valorem, is ordinarily calculated on the consideration, subject to certain special
provisions which are not material for the present purpose. In determining the amount of consi-
deration, the normal case where the consideration is paid at the time of the transfer in the form
ot cash or cheque—that is, in the direct manner—presents no difficulty, But, where the considera-
tion is paid indirectly, the question may arise how it is to be calculated. There are two iniportsxt
simations which may require to be considered, namely, (i) the transfer may be in ¢onsideration
of a debt, or (ii) secondly, the transfer may be subject to the payment or transfer of .ang
money or stock. The main paragraph of section 24, which focusses attention on these two
situations, provides that in such cases, such debt, money or stock is to be deemed the whole
or part of the consideration. Of course, this rule becomes of importance only where the traasfgr
is chargeable with ad valorem duty.

i

रु 2h 12.15. The proviso to the main paragraph enacts that nothing in the section shal apply.
rroviss. " to any such certificate or sale as is mentioned in article 18 of the first Schedule. That attics, में

1, Mulchand Lala ५, Kashi Bullar Biswas, (1907) LL.R 35 Cal. 111. following Luan! Bat v. Ganesh. (1900361, B,
25 Bom. 373.

2. The expression “marketable security” is defined in section 2 (168). .

3, The decision in LL-R 15 Mad . 134 was provounced befare the introduction of the section in 1904.


101

will be noted, relates to a certificate of sale granted to the purchaser of any property sold by
public auction by a civil or revenue court ef Collector or other revenue officer.

A special case where property is sald subject to mortgage or other encumbrances, requires
be dealt with, and that is what the Explanation to section 24 seeks to do. We
shall discuss later certain points of interpretation relating to some of the words used
in the Explanation. Bet, for the present it will suffice to say that the principal
object of the Explanation is to ensnre that the consideration which passes indirectly by the
vendor being relieved of his obligation in respect of unpaid mortgage money or unpaid money
charged on encumbrances, should be taken into account

The proviso to the Explanation to section 24 makes a limited provision whereunder, where
property subject to mortgage is transferred to the mortgagee, he shall be entitled to deduct, from
the duty payable on the transfer, the amount of duty to be paid in respect of the mortgage. This
is understandable, because what the mortgagee acquires afresh is merely the difference between
the value of the property and the value of the mortgage money. He is, therefore, now required
to pay stamp duty only on the difference—provided, of course, the duty has already been paid
in respect of the mortgage.

We may now deal with each of these in detail.

12.16. The principle underlying the main paragraph of the section is fairly intelligible. The
debt in consideration whereof (or subject to payment whereof) the transfer takes place, is, by
fiction of 189, to be added to the cash consideration. This fiction is understandable, because
the amount was indirectly paid to the vendor in the past, or will be paid in the future.

The proviso to the main paragraph also creates no problems.

we ri = जन ee aan AO
12.17. The Explanation may sound curious at the first sight. The object of the correspond-
ing English provision was thus described :*

“The scope and object of the enactment is clear, namely, that upon every purchase
ad vatorem duty shall be paid on the entire consideration which either directly
or indirectly represents the value of the free and unencumbered corpus of the
subject-matter of the sale.”

The Supreme Court? has quoted with approval the following observations in a Scottish
case? :--

“Tf any other rele was adopted, it is quite plain that the fair incidence of this tax
would be altogether frustrated and defeated. A proprietor has an estate worth
£ 20,000. There is bond ‘upon it for £ 10,000. He sells that estate; and the
purchaser pays to him a difference between the amount of the bond and the value
of the estate, so that the bond being for £ 10,000 he pays £ 10,000. The day
after he obtains instrument, he pays off the bond. Weil, he practical result: of
that is that he has paid £ 20,000 as the parchase money of this estate, and he
has obtained a conveyance with an ad valorem stamp of the value of £ 10,000.
That is a simple defeating of the purpose ‘and intention of the Legislature as
expressed in this clause, and, therefore, I think, upon the plain meaning of this
section, that there was no intention whatever to go back upon the enactment of
the 16 and 17 Vict., and to restore the enactment of the 55 Geo. III, which is
what the liquidators are contending for. On the contrary, it seems to me-that
the 73rd section is plainly intended to continue the provisions of the statute 16
and 17 Vict.”

1, Marttmore ५४. 4..70,८. (1864) 2 H & C833 : 38 LJ, Bx. 263, referred toin ALR. 1931 Cal. 193, 197.

2. Board of Revenue ¥. Sldinath, ATR. 1965 S.C. 1092, at 1094-1095, paragraph 7.

3. Sapimissioner of Intand Revense v. Liquidators af City of Glasgow Bank (1881) 8 Ct. of Sessions cases 4th
3

24 M of Law/77—14.


102

History OF 12.18. In England, the corresponding provision in the English Stamp Act of 1815 (55 Geo.
English provisos yt, Ch. 184} rans as follows :

“Where any lands or other property shall be sold or conveyed in consideration, whoily
or in part, of any sum of money charged thereon by way of mortgage, wadset or
otherwise, and then due owing to the purchaser or shall be scold and conveyed
subject to any mortgage, wadset, bond or other debt, छा to any gross or entire
sum of moncy to be afterwards paid by the purchaser, such sum of money or
debt shali be deemed the purchase or consideration money, or part of the purchase
or consideration money, as the case may be, in respect whereof the said ad valorem
duty is to be paid.”

Interpretation of
words “money 12.19. The words “money to be afterwards paid by the purchaser” in the above provision

egy MEMES in SS Geo. ता, Ch. 184, were explained in Marquis of Chandos v. Commissioner of Inland
purchaser.” Revenel-as follows :—

“In the clause which is to define what is the consideration or purchase-money, the
term ‘to be paid by the purchaser’ mean where it is stipulated that he is to pay it ;
1 and the provision applics only to those cases, where, in consideration of the con-
veyance of the estate the vendee agrees to pay a certain sum to the mortgagee
or incumbrancer. Where the purchaser does not bind himself to pay it, but is left’

to pay it or not as he pleases, it cannot be a part of the consideration money.”

12.20. In consequence of this decision, an amendment was made in 1853. The amended
section ran as follows :-—

“Where any Iands or other property shall be sold and conveyed subject to any mort-
gage, wadset cr bend, or जीरा debt, or to any gross or entire sum of money,
such sum of money or debt shall be deemed the purchase or consideration money
or part of the purchase or consideration money, as the case may be, in respect
whereof the said ed valorem duty shall be paid, notwithstanding that the perchaser
shall not be or become personally liable, or shall not undertake or agree to pay
the same, anything in anv Act or otherwise to the contrary notwithstanding”.

Baoglish = Act of
1853,

12.21. The words underlined above do not occur in later English Acts; but, it has been
held that there was no intention to make a change.*

History of 12.22. The history of the section in our Act was discussed in_a Calcutta case." Under section
section 24. 34(b) of the Stamp Act, 1869 (18 of 1869), where any property was sold and cosveyed sub-
ject 10 any mortgage or bond or other debt or to any gross or entire sum of money, such debt
or sum was deemed the consideration money or part of the consideration money as the case
may be, in respect whereof duty should be paid, notwithstanding that the purchaser was not
or did not become personally liable for such debt or sum, or did not agree to pay the same
the seller against the same, Tathe Stamp Act of 1879, in re-enacting this section,
fhe last portion (above referred to) was ontitted. This resulted in a conflict of decisions. Whee :
property subject to a mortgage ar debt was sold, the High Courts of Calcutta,t Madras" and
Allahabad? held that ad valorem duty was. payable in respéct of such sum or debt in addition,
only when the purchaser bound himself personally to pay the same or indemnify the vendor

_ Maretds of Chandos v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue, (1851) 6 Bx. 464 (481); 155 ER, 624 (632) 2.0. 1.1,
Ex. 269 : 171,1. (1S) 128 (Quoted in ALR, 1931 Cal. 193 :$8Cal... 33 (FB). ड़
Eiguidators साल, र.. CER. (1881) 18 Scott. L. 8, 240:
tb) Payne v. CLR. (1900) 1 0.8. 172.
3. एड Janardan Rao v. Secretary of State, ALR. 1931 Cal. 193 (Rankin, C1)
कै, In the matter of reference from the Boprd of Revemie, (1884) TLR. 10 Cal. 92,
bar under section 49, General Stamp Act in case No. 11881 (1882) LLB. 5

fr D.J. South Malal ०
5. Reference fom Durance from Board of Revenue in case No, 3/ 1884 under section 46, Indlan Stone Act

1879 884) LL.R. 7 Mad. 421 (FB).
6. Jwala Prasad v. Ran Narain (1882) LL.R. 15 All. 107.

Later English
Act. हु

or indenmify

2.



103

against the same. But the Bombay High Court held,’ that i aff cases stamp duty was payable
ou the total of the purchase money and the mortgage debt, We shail revert io this controversy
later?

12.23. Another difficulty arose from the language of section 23. According to some Bombay
decisions, a transferee of a properly subject 10 mortgage need not pay duty on the interest due
on the mortgage, through he would have to pay such interest before redeeming the property.

But now the express language of the Explanation to section 24, makes the mortgage debt
of money charged, together with the interest due upon it, as past of the consideration for sale.

12.24. As to sale subject to encumbrances and sale not so subject, the question may be
raised whether chis distinction, even if relevant for the purpose of the law of transter of property,’
has any relevance in regard to the charge of duty under section 24, Explanation. The answer is
that the distinction is relevant, because the Explanation is intended to apply only where the
seller purports to sell the equity of redemption. It is only where such a sale is made—a sale
subject to encumbrances—that the need for adding the amount due to the mortgages can arise.
la other cases, the purchaser would have calculated the price on the unincumbered value.

In Hortimore v. Inland Revenue Commissioners Baron Martin, explaining the provision
ihen in force in England, put the matter thus :

“The scope and subject of the enactment’ is clear, namely, thet upon every purchase,
ad valorem duty shall be paid on the entire consideration which either directly
or indirectly represents the value of the free and unincumbered corpus of the
subject-maticr of the sale.” .

In the case where the sale is not subject to incumbraices, the purchaser would already have
paid the full value, and the need for applying the enactment does not remain.

12.25. 16 the Explanation to section 24 is regarded as applicable even where the sale is free
of.ineumbrances, there will be double charge of duty. A sells to B certain property, without
Stating the incumbrances. Since B was not told of any incumbrances, he would, one may assume,
have paid to A the normal price as for property not encumbered. In such cases, the “property”
is subject to morigage, though the sale is not. Should the Explanation apply 7 Should it be rea-
sonable to apply it?

The mortgage money is added (for stamp duty), because, indirectly, the seller is benefitted
by the fact that discharge of the incumbrance is now at the cost of the purchaser.

12.26, In construing the proviso to the Explanation, Mclood C.J.° observed in the Bombay
case: हु

“The provisa belongs to and must be read with the Explanation which is to the <fféct
that if a mortgagor sclls the equity of redemption, the amount due by him to the
mortgagee for principal and interest shall be'deemed to be part of the considera~
tion for the sale.”? है

&s Rankin C.J. observed in a Calcutta case :

“The first question which can be put is whether the phrase “subject to a mortgage “or
other incumbrance”, qualifies the word: “property” or qualifies the word “sale”.

1. (a) Shah Nogindand Jayachand v. Natkara Nathwa Chegaia, (1881) 1L.R. 5Bom. 470.
fb) Meer Kuisur Khan र. Ebratim Khar (1891) 1. 1... R. 15 Bom. 532.
2, See “Comment on the Explanation”, infra.
3. Section 55 (1) (g), Transfer of Property Act.
4, Mortimore ए. L.R.C. (1864) 33 LI. Bx. 263, 266; 133 RR. 815 : 159 E.R. 347.
5, Stamp Act, 1815 (Eng.) -
6, he re Frank Portolock (1926) LL.R. 50 Bom. 640, ALR. 1926 Bom. 342 Mclood 2.9.
__ 7, In the judgment, by slip the word “mortgage” is used in place of “sale”. ~
है, Janardhan Rao १. Secretary of State, AUR. 1931 Cal. 193, 195.

Question of in-
terest not of im-
portance.

Relevance ot
distinction —_bet-
wean sale subject
to | encumbrance
and other sale.

Possibility
double charge.


Ceiticiam by
Fawont J.

Agreement relicv-

104

Tf the former is the cormect meaning, then property which is, in fact, subject 10 a
mortgage will, if it is sold, attract the consequences set forth in the Explanation,
whether or not the property is sold on the terms that the veador is to clear off
the mortgage and give to the purchaser a clean tide. In Waman Martand v. Com-
missioner, Central Division? this question was raised and it was held that the
ciause “subject to a mortgage or other incumbrance” governs “sale of property”
and not “property”, that property may be subject to a charge and yet the sale
may not be subject to it and that where a bargain between the vendor and the
purchaser is that the vendor “will make a 8००० title free from all incumbrances,
the Explanation does not apply. I am clearly of opinion that this is the correct
view. To begin with, an instrument is to be stamped according to the nature of the
bargain. That is the general principle in the light of which a question of this
character must be approached. The language of the main clause shows that the
question is whether the property is tfansferced subject to the payment of money.
The Explanation is in my judgment enticely consistent with the language of the
main clause, If property is subject to a mortgage but the vendor, in return Jor the
purchase price, is to give a clear title free jrom ali incumbrances, the Explanation
does not apply.? Nor does Illustration 2 apply, for, the case there put is clearly
not a sale free from the incumbrance. It is dangerous to rest one’s view uf a clause
in the Stamp Act upon reasons of justice or fairplay. Still, it would require very
elear words to induce one to think that where the purchase price is given as the

full value of the property and ihe vendor as part of the considerations therefor-

undertakes to clear off all incumbrances the amount of the incumbrance was in-
tended to be added to the whole value of the property and stamp, duty assessed
upon the same thing twice over.”

12.27. Faweett J. observed? i nthe Bombay case -—

“The Explanation and Uiustration (2) to section 24 of the Iidian Stamp Act have
been rather icosely drafted. But I am satisfied that the intention is that the
Explanation should only: cover cases where the purchuser undertakes to pay the
imortgage debt,”

We shall refer to the view of Marten J. Imter*

12.28. Opinions can vary as to the rafie decidendi of the above Bombay case. The deci-
sion could be construed as cesting solely on the ground that though the property was subject
to the charge, the vendor undertock to clear off the incumbrance and to perfect the title of the
vende free-from all encumbrances.© The opinion expressed by Marten 1., however goes beyond
that." According to him, the Explanation must be confined to cases where, as part of the consi-
deration which the vendor gets for the transfer, the Vendor is to be relieved, expressly or impliedly
from the burden of the mortgage as between himself and the purchaser.

12.28A. If the latter proposition is to be regarded as the basis of the judgment in the
Bombay case, then it must be noted that it has not been accepted by the Calcutta High Court,"
where Rankin C.J. observed, (with reference to the Bombay case)—“No such qualification is

to be found in the Explanation itself or in the illustration which is given by the legislature to _

throw light upon its meaning.” In the Caleutta case, the vendor had purchased the property
in a conrt auction, and sold it to the vendee for Rs. 1,000. There was a mortgage ‘on the

1. Warman Mortand v. Commissioner, Central Division, 4.R. 1924 Bom. 324.

Emphasis supplied.

Waman Marrand Haslerae v. Commissioner, Central Da.. ALR 1924 Bom. 524, 526, 527 (Fawcett J).
Para 12.33, infra.

See Shah Ag. C.J.s, Judgment.

See Para 12, 33, infra.

1 UK. Janardan Rav १. Secretary of State, ALR 1931 Cal. 193-201 (Rankin CJ.)



105

property, on which a suit bad been instituted by the mortgagee against the mortgagor. A sutn
of Rs. 25,636 was outsianding on that mortgage. The fact of the mortgage suit haviug been
instituted was mentioned in the saie deed. The instrument was stamped as a conveyance for
Rs, 1,000 जाए. It was held, that as the property was sold subject to the encumbrance, the
soaveyance was liable io stamp duty on Rs. 1,000 plus the encumbrance. Examining the
meaning of the phrase “subject to a mortgage or other incumbrance”, the cuuct held that the
phrase governs the words “sale of property”, and not the word “property”. Where the sale
is not subject to a mortgage (though the property concerned may be so subject), the Explana-
tion has no upplication. ‘Thus, if the property is subject to a mortgage, but the vendor, in
return for the purchase-money, is to give a clear title free from all encumbrances, then the
Explanation does not apply. The unpaid mortgage money in the case of a sale subject to a
mortgage, is to be deemed to be pari of the consideration for the sale, not because it is part
of such consideration, but because the legistature is determined tv tax it, Consequently, an
enquiry into the question whether the mortgage amount, in fact, proved part of the considera-
tion, is wholly irrelevant. है

12.29. In an Allahabad case,’ the High Court maintained that where an immovable
property, which is encumbered by a charge or a mortgage, is sold but not subject to the
incumbrance, then the amount of money constituting the charge or mortgage need not be
added to the consideration mentioned in the conveyance as the waluc of the property sold.
The words of section 24 beginning with “subject either” and ending with “property or not”,
apply to the word “transferred”, and not to the word “property”,

12.30. The Supreme Court,” in an appeal from the Allahabad case, held the view that
the phrasc “subject to a morgage or other encumbrance” qualifies the word “sale”, and not
the word “property”. Jf the mortgaged property is sold subject to a mortgage, then and then
only the Explanation applies; the phrase does not mean that whenever mortgaged property is
sold, then Explanation is to apply. It is plain from the Explanation that it is only the unpaid
mortgage money that is deemed to be part of the consideration.*

12.31. While the judgment of the Supreme Court settles, in general, the meaning of the
words “subject to”, it does not concern itself with the major controversy, namely, is it necessary
that the vendor should have been relieved of his obligation ?

12.32. It appears that the difficulty on the above point seems lo survive even now, and
the Explanation to section 24 should be made more specific than at present. The question
that remains unsettled is--Is the Explanation applicable only where the purchaser undertakes
to pay the incumbrance, or is it wide enough to cover other cases where the iocumbrance is
outstanding? We do not think that the applicability of the Explanation should be limited to
cases where the purchaser underiakes to redeem the incumbrance expressly or by implication.
Once it is proved that the incumbrance is outstanding, its value ought to be added to the
consideration paid, because the vendor has benefited by the sale being subject to incumbrance,

12.33. In the Bombay case,4 Marten J. observed :—

“This Explanation must be read along with the main portion of section 24, which
refers, in my opinion, to the consideration payable to or moving towards the”
vendor® and not to that payable by or moving from him...... I think, therefore,
that the Explanation on its true construction must be confined to cases where,
as part of the consideration which the vendor gets for his transfer, he is to be.
relieved express! cr impliedly from the burden of a mortgage as between himecif
and the purchaser.” .

The question to be considered is whether this is the correct view. दि

प्‌ Sidinath Mehrotra v. Board of Revenue, ALR. 1959 All 655, affirmed in Board of Revenue v. Stdhnarh,
ALR, 1965 S.C, 1092.

2. The Board uf Revenue U.P. v, Sidhnath Mehrotra, ALR. 1965 S.C, 1092.

3. See also Collector Abestrution v. Deepak Textile Industries, AIR, 1966 Gujarat 227 (F.B.)

4. Waman Martand v. Commissioner, Ceniral Division, ALR. 1924 Bom, 524, 526,

5, Emphasis supplied.



106

Fapltsation, 0, 12.34. It is settled by Supreme Court, that the Explanation would apply where the
where sake sub sale. of property is subject to a mortgage, 1.९... where the vendor docs not purport to give a
ject te incum- good title free from the incumbrance. But, on the question whether the test is to see whether

the purchaser is or is not saddled with the burden, the Supreme Court did not express a view.

Clariowtion sugar 12.35. Hence a claritication is needed, and it should be by way of widening the scction.

Lines on which 12.36. In our view, it wouki be convenient if the correct position discussed above is

amendment needed incorporated into the section. What is needed is—(i) to indicate that it is the sale which
is subject to mortgage; (ii) to also indicate that there need not be an undertaking by the pur-
chaser to pay the amount, in order that the section may apply; and (ili) to revise illustration
2, in view of the criticism thereof in the Bombay case,* by Fawcett.

We may add that such un amendment has been generally favoured by the replies to our
Questronnaire.*

Agcommendation 12.37. We recommend the following re-drait of section 24, in the light of the above
fon ५ 3० discussion. .

Revised section 24
“24. Where any property is translerred to any person ;-—~
(a) io consideration, wholly or in part, of any debt due to him, or

(0) subject either certainly or contingently to the payment or transfer to him or
ony other person of any money or stock, whether the money consiltutes a charge
er incumbrance upon the properly or not,

such debt, money or stock is to be deemed the whole or part, as the case may be, of the
consideration in respect whereof the transfer is chargeable with ad valorem duty :

Provided that nothing in this section sball apply to any such certificate of sale as is men-
tioned in Article No. 18 of Schedule 1. \

Explanation—Where property is sold: and the sale is subject to a mortgage or other
incumbrance, any unpaid mortgage money or monty charged together with the interest (it
any). due on the same, shall be deemed to be part of the consideration, for the sale, whether
or not the purchaser expressly undertakes with the seller io pay the same or 10 indemnify
the seller if the seller has to pay the same :

Provided that where any property subject to a mortgage is transferred to the mertgages,
he shalt be entitled to deduct from the duty payable on the transfer the amount of any duty
already paid in respect of the mortgage.

Tflustrations

(1) A owes B Rs. 1,000. A sells a property to B, the consideration being Rs. 500 dnd
the release of the previous debt of Rs. 1,000. Stamp duty is payable on Rs. 1,500.
y is subject to a mortgage to Cc

(2) A sells a properly to B for Rs. 500. The propert,
bject to the mortgage. Stamp

for Rs. 1,000 and unpaid interest for Rs. 200. The sale is sw
duty is payable on Rs. 1,700.
of the value of Rs. 10,000 to B for Rs. 5,000 8 afterwards —

(3) A mortgages 8 house
duty is payable on Res. 10,000 less the amount of stamp duty
~

‘ boys the house from A. Stamp
already paid for the mortgage.

1, Board of Reveme ४५ Sidinath ALR. 1965 5.0. 1092.

2. Waman Mertand v. Commissioner. Central Division,
ment).

3. Question 36

ALR. 1924 Bom. 524 528 (See Paweett, J's Judge-


107

12.38, Section 25 deals with stipulations for payment of annuities or other periodical
payments. Such payments, since they are spread over a number of years, raise questions of
the basis for calculation of stamp duty. The section makes detailed provisions in that regard.
It deals with two situations :-— ‘

{i) where an instrument ic cxecuted to secure the payitent of an annuity or other
sum payable periodically. or

Ci} where the consideration for a conveyance ig an annuity or other sum payable
periodically.

The section provides that the amount secured by such instrument or the consideration

for such conveyance, as the case may be, shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed :—

(a) where the sum is payable for a definite period so that the total amount paid
can be previously ascertained—such total amount ;

(0) where the sum is payable in perpetuity or for an indefinite period not terminable
with any life in being at the date of such instrument or conveyance,—the total
amount which, according to the terms of such instrument or conveyance, will
oc may be payable during the period of twenty years calculated from the date
on which the first payment becomes due ;

(०) where the sum is payable for an indefinite time terminable with any life in being
at the date of such instrument or conveyance,—the maximum amount which
will cr may be payable as aforesaid during the period of twelve years calculated
from the date on which the first payment becomes due.

12,39. As regards situation (३17, it is to be noted that the sum total (of the periodical
phytents) will be treated as the consideration for the purposes of valuation for stamp, even
if, by a stipulation, the parties are entitled to terminate the periodical payments. Where,
therefore, 4 lease of mines was given for a definite period (99 years), but the lessee was given
an option to terminate the lease at any time during the fixed period or in the: event of the
miings getting exhausted before expiry of the period, it was held? that the lease fell under
section 25(a). The Court referred to the definition of ‘lease’? in rhe Transfer of Property
Act, under which the right to enjoy the property is to be given for a certain period, express
or implied or in perpetuity and emphasised that the mere fact that the interest is terminable
before the expiry of the time fixed or after expiry of the time fixed, does not make the transac-
tion any less a lease.

12.40, Clause (b) of scction 25 applies when the payment is in perpetuity or for an
indefinite period. Here, the total amount payable for a period of twenty years is the valuation,

12,41. We may refer to an Indian ruling‘ relevant to clause (b).. By a document, a person
bound: himself and his posterity, on the security of some immovable property, for the anoval
payment to a temple of Rs. 21-4-0 and 3 ‘hadus’ of oil; the Madras Board held, applying
section 25(b), that it was a mortgage deed chargeable ‘with duty calculated on 20 years’
Baymont of oil at Rs. 15 and Rs. 21-4-0 in cash per annum. .

12.42. Clause (c) of section 25 applies to cases where the sum is payable for an indefinite
titie: grminable with any life in being at the date of the instrument. The maximum amount
which: will or may be payable during the period, of twelve years will be treated as the amount
of consideration for the instrument in question, Thus, an award by which a certain sum was
made payable to a certain person, without any mention as to whether the sum was secured or
inteniied to be secured to the heirs or representatives of the person, was held to be chargeable
under this clause, as document securing an annuity.> Similarly, where, on retiring from a

1. Para 12.38. °
2. Devarkhand Cement Co, Lid. ५. The Secretary of State ALR. 1938 Bom. 215 (Rangaekar, J.) 214-222, 192.

3. Section 105, Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
4, Madras Board Petition 21 (R); Misc., dated 30-1-1908 Madras Stamp Manual (1933), Page 122,

5. Reference under the Stamp Act (1896) 16 A-W.N. 199,

Section 35.


Section 26—~
Introductory.

Rationale of
the section

Duty on bonds—
Article 15.

108

firm, one of the two partners assigned his interest in the firm to his partner in consideration of
Rs. 6,000 plus an allowance of Rs. 35 pet month, it was held that for the purposes of stamp
valuation, the conveyance must te treated ag for a consideration for Rs. 6,000 plus Rs. 5,040,
total Rs. 11,040.1

We may conciude our discussion of section 25 by stating that the cases illustrating the
working of the section, mentioned above, do not suggest any need for amendment.

12.43. The computation of stamp with ad valorem duty presents also problems where the
amount or value of the subject-matter is indeterminate. According to section 26, where the
amount or value of the subject-matier of any instrument chargeable with ad valorem duty,
cannot be, (or in the case of aa instrument cxecuted before the commencement of this Act
could mot have been}, ascertained at the date of its cxecution or first execution, nothing shall
be “claimable” under such instrument more than the highest amount or value for which, if
Stated 10 an instrument of the same description, the stamp actually used would, at the date
of such execution, have been sufficient.

‘Under the proviso to the section, in the case of the lease of a mine in which royalty or
a share of the produce is received as the rent or part of the rent it shall be sufficient to have
estimated such royalty or the value of such share for the purpose of stamp duty,—

(a) when the lease has been granted by or on behalf of the Government, at such
amount or value as the Collector may, having regard to all the circumstances
of the case, have estimated as likely to be payable by way of royalty or share
to the Government under the lease, or

{b) when the Iease has been granted by any other person, at twenty thousand rupees
a year; and the whole amount of such royalty or share, wherever it may be,
shall be claimable under such tease. -

Under another proviso, where proceedings have been taken in respect of an instrument
under section 31 of section 41, the amount certified by the Collector shall be deamed to be

the stamp actually ased at the date of execution.

12.44. As has been observed,? “unlike the evidence Act, the Stamp Act docs not base
jts rules on the theories of relevancy or public policy. It is purely fiscal, and insists that
certain documents shail pay a contribution. to the State according to the purpose for which
they were executed. In regard to certain documents which create a right to money, it prescribes.
that unless the stamp is proportionate to the valuation of the claim, the document शा be in-
admissible in evidence, and where the intention of the parties is that the valuation, should be
unlimited, it enacts, by section 26, that the claimant will be entitled to realise a sum prepor-
tionate to the stamp fee paid, subject to certain exceptions in the case of royalties, It fallowe
that wherever the claim exceeds the amount propertionate to the stamp, the document is.not ,
duly stamped for the purpose for which it was executed within the meaning of sectiow 35,
and the provisions of this section have to apply thereto.

A typical instance of instruments where ‘the value is indeterminate is a lease of mings. This
case is expressly mentioned in the section. In such leases, the amount which will be realised

is altogether uncertain.
Jn regard to other instruments, a few cases have arisen under the section. Thest may ‘now

be referred to.
12.44A. Article 15 relating 10 bonds provides that ad valorem duty should “be paid on
the amount or value secured by the bond. An instance of a bond for an indeterminate. value

Tie. Boara’s order in File No, 173/25, U-P, Stamp Manual (1945) Page $3. ,
2, Kumar Brajmohan Singh v. Lachminerain Agarwal, A.LR. 1920 Pat. 50.



109

is 10 be tound in an Allahabad case," relating to a bond by a grower of sugarcane to deliver
some quantity of rab (unrefined sugar), at a price to be fixed at the meeting of growers,

12.45. The Calcutta High Court has held that for bonds for delivery of grain, if proper
stamp duty is paid on the value ot the grain secured as fixed in the instrament, the document
is properly stamped under Article 15, and scction 26 would not operate 10 prevent the recovery
of a higher amount as the value cf such grain on account of subsequcn: rise ia prices.?

12.46. In Uhe case of mortgag
account, or containing otherwise a stipulation of the maximum amount of liability under the
document, stamp duty would be payable on the amount fixed as the maximum limit of liability,
though the amount might not have been actually advanced. If such stamp duty bas teen paid,
then an amount upto thet limit mentioned in the deed can be recovered in a court of law,
notwithstanding that more than that limit was privately realised by the mortgagee on different
occasions.

जब another Calentia case," a mortgage-bond, intended to secure future advances upto the
sum of Rs. 10,000 at a time, was executed on a stamp paper of Rs. 50, and, under it, altogether
more than Rs. 10,000 had been privately realised by the mortgagee on diffcrent occasions. It
was held that there was nothing in section 26 to prevent the mortgagee from suing to recover
the balance of the debt due on the mortgage. Even if the stamp is deficient, section 26 has
DO application to the case, and the full amount due on it can be claimed on payment of deficient
stamp duty and penalty under section 35.

12.47. If such maximum is not mentioned, and if the document purports to secure an
amount without limit, then it appears that section 26 would operate to restrict the amount
clatmable under it to the maximum amount covered by the stamp.*

12.48. There are decisions pointing out,® that section 26 applies only where the amount
or value of the subject-matter of any instrument chargeable with ad valorem duty cannot be
ascertained at the date of its execution. Thus, if in an instrument, the value of the subject-
matter is determinable on a reasonable basis, then, section 26 has no application.®

The circumstances governing the applicability of the section were examined in a Madras
case, in which a certain land was leased out for ten years, for being planted with a certain
Tainimym number of casuarina trees, on the condition that at the end of the time, the trees
planted should be cut and sold, and the profir of sale proceeds of the trees so reared divided
equally, deducting the expenses of cuiting etc. It was held that clearly, the subject-matter
‘wes an ascertainable item at the date of comtract, it being a certain number of casuarina trees
og their equivalent value. The contention, that the value of the treés at the end of 8 or 10
years. was not ascertainable at the time of the contract was rejected.

12.48A. We now proceed to consider the question whether section 26 is subject to, and
governed by, section 35, Section 35 prohibits the admission in evidence of any unstamped
document, but, under the proviso to that section, an instrument not sufficiently stamped. can
be edmiteed on payment of penalty.
. Under section 26, “nothing shall be claimabie” under the instrument in question beyond
the amount or valuc for which the stamp is sufficient. The section is silent as to whether this
prohibition can be relaxed where the claimant is prepared to supply the deficiency in stamp.

1. In the Matter of Gajraf Singh (1887) LL.R. 9 All.585 (7.8.).

2. Bhairab Chandra Chowdhari v, Alak Jon (1886}i1.LR. 13 Cal. 268.

3. Havendera Lal Roy Chowdhary ¥. Tavini Charan Chakrabarty, (1904) LL.R. 31 Cel. £07.

4. ALMA L., Gein Mame Wek AUR 1919 rr Burma 37.

5. In the matter of 6:

4 ees Chace ie et हि ‘Alak Jon (1886) 11 Cal. 268 ; and also Soodemumi Patter v. Soma Sundara,
(1894) 4- ML.
‘Rondapi Shesayya ¥. Venkat Sabbayya A.LR. 1918 Mad. 1066, 1068.

AM of Law/77-15

ge-teeds executed to secure future: advance on 4 running Dutyon mortgage

Totes-relation be-
tween section 26
and section 35.


Case law.

Need for clari.

‘fication.

No justification
for

levying

penalty.

110

12.49, However, notwithstanding the stringent phraseology of the section, it has been held”
that there is nothing in section 35 which necessarily excludes its operation from cases covered
by section 26. As a matter of fact, it would be a strange result if an instrument bearing no
stamp and, therefore, not admissible in evidence for wan: of stamp. could be validated by
payment of penalty under the proviso to that section (section 35), whereas a similar instrument
‘bearing a deficient stamp and, therefore, admissible and enforceable to a limited extent, could.
in no case, be fully enforced even by paying the penalty. h is, therefore, reasonable to read
section 26 as subject to section 35.

12.50. Thus, where a mining lease bears a stamp? of a certain value, the lessor's right to
recover royalty under the jease is not confined to the amount covered by the stamp. If it is
found that he is entitled to a greater amount, he can be given a decree for the sum to which he
is entitled on compliance with the provisions of section 35. This is the position even where
the second proviso to the section is not applicable.

12.51. In our opinion, it is desirable to clarify the position as to the inter-relationship of
sections 26 and 35, particularly because in section 26, the words “nothing shall be clainsable”
do not reflect the true intention of the judicial construction. It is desirable to replace the
words “nothing shall be claimable* by words which will ensure that the deficiency in stamp can
be supplied. The mejor source of the present trouble is the disharmony in wording between
the two sections. Section 26 uses the words “Nothing shall be claimable” but section 35, main
paragraph and proviso (a), use the words “admitted in evidence”. This disharmony ought to
be rectified.

The amendment of section 26 as to applying section 35, has, in principle, been approved by
the replies to our Questionnaire

12.52. Besides this clarification. we would also like to recommend a change of substance.
The precise question 10 which we have addressed curselves is this. Is there any justification
for the levy of a penalty in the case to which section 26 relates? As the position is now
understood, this cannot be avoided, because a relaxation of the stringency of section 26 can be
sought only from section 35, and that section contemplates payment of duty as well as of
penalty, The question is whether this is just and equitable.

Though this point was not put in our Questionnaire, it came up for elaborate discussion.
We are satisfied that the point is important enough to require examination.

In this connection, we cannot fail to notice that the situation dealt with in section 26
is in a class by itself. In the normal case for which section 35 is intended, the duty chargeable
either was known, or at least could have been known with reasonable diligence, at the time of
execution. tm the very special situation to which section 26 applies. however, the duty could
not have been known with any eamoutt of reasonable diligence, at the time of ;execution.
Prima facie therefore, it would appear to be legitimate to make a distinction: between the ttormal
case to which section 35 applies and the exceptional case for which section 26 is- intended.
We do not think that if such a distinction is made, there is possibilily of any serious abuse.

To repeat in a different form, what we have stated above, the levy of penalty is inequitable
ia such cases, since there has been no default. The interests of the revenue are siffioiently
protected by the levy of the deficient amount of duty. In our opimon, there is no justification
for levying penalty in addition. The situation in section 26 can hardly be regarded as an
analogous to the normal situation under section 35, which assumes that :--

(i} that instrument is chargeable, and
(ii) that it is chargeable ‘with duty’—sehich seems to postulate a definite amomnt.
T@ Kevar var Boo Mohan Singh v. Laxmi Narain Agarwal, ALR. 1920 Pat, $0, 35 (Dawason Miller C.J. and जाकर
(b) Lacie ‘Nerian . Rajeshwar, ALR 1924 P.C- 221
fokan Singh v. Lachmi Narain, ALR. 1920 Patna 50,55, affirmed in Lacim? Narain y. Rejadwor

2, Bray
ADR, 1924 P.C. 221
‘Question 37,



ili

It is on this logic that we consider it proper to recommend that in relation to section 26,
while 50 much of section 35 as relates to payment of the deficit may be adopted, it ts not
necessary that the penalty should also be levied. For the purposes cf. section 26, therefore,
the penalty portion in section 35 should not be adopted. We may state that in so far as
the amount claimed under the instrument can be ascertained only when the claim is inade,
the case is more analogous to court fees, where the penalty is levied than to the normal situa-
tion under section 35. In the Court Fees Act, in suits for accounts, deficiency can be made up.

12.53. We, therefore, reconimend that section 26 should be revised as follows :
“26. Where—

(a) the amount or value of the subject-matter of any instrument chargeable with
ad volorem doty cannot be, or (in the case of an instrument executed before
the commencement of this Act) could not have been, ascertained at the date
of its execution or first execution, and

(9) what is claimed under such instrument exceeds the highest amount or value
for which, if state] in an instrument of the same description, the stamp actually
used would, at the date of such execution, have been sufficient.

the instrument shall be decmed to be insufficiently stamped as regards the excess and the pre-
visions of section 35 shail accordingly apply in relation to the admission in evidence of the
instrument :

Provided that for the purposes of such application of section 35, io such an inssrumernt,
it shall be sufficient if the deficiency in the duty is paid, and no penalty shall be levied.

Provided further that, in the case of the lease of a mine in which royalty or a share of
the produce is received as the rent or part of the rent, it shall be sufficient to have estimated
इण्णा royalty or the value of such share, for the purpose of stamp-duty,—

(a) when the lease has been granted by or on behalf of the Goverument, at sucit
amount cr value as the Collector may, having regard to all the circumstances
of the case, have estimated as likely to be payable by way of royalty or share
to the Government under the lease, ot -

(0) when the lease has been granted by any other petson, at twenty thousand rupees.
8 year; and the lease shall be deemed to be sufficiently stamped as regards the
whole amount of such royalty or share whatever it may be,

Provided also that, where proceedings have been taken in respect of an instrument
under section 31 or 41, the amount certified by the Collector shall be deemed to
be the stamp actually used at the date of execution.

Recommendation.


Section = 27—
Introductory.

CHAPTER 13
FACTS TO BE STATED IN INSTRUMENTS—SECTIONS 27-28

13.1. Section 27 provides that the consideration (if any) and all other facts and circums-
tances affecting the chargeability of any instrument with duty, or affecting the amount of the
duty with which it is chargeable, shall be fully and truly set forth therein. Failure to do so
is punishable, under another provision—section 642

What facts anc circumstances affect the chargeability of the instrument or the amount of
the duty, depends on the scheme as to the charge of duty and, in particular, on the article
applicable to the instrument in relation to which the question arises. Confining ourselves to
instruments dealing with property, we may state that there are four possible alternatives which
could be thought of, for arriving at the amount of the duty chargeable, namely :—

{a) amount or value of the property as set forth in the instrument,? or its equivalent:*

{b) value of the property, but not confined to the value as set forth in the
instrument ;*

(८) consideration as set forth in the instrument १०
(d) consideration fer which the transfer is made, e.g., rent®

13.2. Thus, the manner in which section 27 operates in relation to a particnfar instrument

asticle. largely depends on how the charging article is worded, that is to say, which of the various

alternatives enumerated abdve is taken as the governing criterion in the charging article. For
this reason, amendments made in section 27 by some of the States cannot be commented upon
unless the criterion adopted in the charging article is sought to be revised. In fact, it is the
charging article which wili be the principal subject for consideration, and an amendment of
section 27 would really be consequential on the change to be made in the charging article,
In regard to section 27, therefore, the discussion will be confined to those amendments which
can be considered independently of the charging articles.

13,3. In some States, an amendment has been made empowering the Registrar to hold
an inquiry. The Orissa’ amendment is an example. Section 47A (Orissa) reads—

“47-A. (1) If the registering officer appointed uader the Indian Registration Act, 1908,
while registering any document relating to transfer of property, has reasons to believe that
the value of the property or the consideration, as the case may be, has not been truly set
forth in the instrament, he may, after registering such instrument, refer the same to the Collector
for determination of the value or consideration, as the case may be, and the proper duty

payable thereon.

(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the Collector shall, after giving
the partics a ceasonable opportunity of being heard and after holding an enquiry in such
manter as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, determine the value or cansidsration
and the duty as aforesaid and the deficient amouat of duty, if any, shall be payable ‘by the
person liable to pay the duty.

1. Section 64 (1) {a}.

2. EG. Articles 12a}, 23, 31, 55, 58 and 64,
3, Article 33 (gift).

4, This is hypothetical.

§. Article 23 (Conveyance),

6, E.G. Articles 33 and 63. है
7. Section 47A inserted in Orissa by Orissa State Act, 1962 (35 of 1962), as amended by Orissa Act, 195 (11 of

1965).

113


113

““(2-A) The Collector may suo motu, within two years from the date of registrarion of
any instrument net alveady referred to him under sub-section (1), call for and cxamine the
instrument for the purpose of satistying himself as to the correciness of its value or consideration,
as the case may be, and the duty payable thereon end if after such examination, he has reasons
to believe that the value or consideration has not been truly sci-forth in the instrument, he may
determine the value or cousideration and the duty as aforesaid in accordance with the procedure
provided for in sub-section (2); and the deficient amount of duty, if any, shall be payable by
the person liable to pay the duty.

(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Collector unde: sub-section (2) o1 sub-
section (2-A) may, within thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal before the
District Judge and all such appeals shall te heard and disposed of in such manner as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act.”

13.4, In order to facilitate consideration of the question whether such an amendment
should be recommended, it is desirable to examine the scope of section 27. The scope would
be betier understood if the following propositions are borne in mind :

_ (1) The revenue of the Government is protected by requiring the parties to make a
true and ful? disclosure of all facts and circumstances having any bearing on the duty payable,
falling which they must suffer the consequences of their false and defective statements.

(2) If it be found that the omission to state the value of the property or the under valua-
tion was intended to defraud the Government, then a prosecution would protect the Govern-
tent against the attempted fraud.?

(3) In determining whether a document is sufficiently stamped, the document itself as it
Stands, and not any collateral circumsatnces which may be shown in evidence, must be looked
into? 3

(4) For the purpose of stamp duty, the valuation given in the instrument (where the
value as set-forth is the test) would have to be accepted. Hf there was an. intentional under
valuation, the fear of prosecution would protect the Government against the attempted fraud.
There is no provision in the law? authorising the Collector to ascertain the value of the property
with a view to causing the instrament to be stamped with reference to the valve thus ascer-
mined If a document—e.g., 2 mortgage-deed—is silent regarding the consideration, or
if ॥ does not set-forth the circumstances from which it could be gathered that how much stamp
dyty is to be paid, then the Collector has no power to take any evidence to find cut the considera*
tion, The. only thing left for him is to prosecute the exscutant for not complying with the
provisions of secticn 27."

13.5. In Himalaya House (०५ case,* the Supreme Court held :-—

“Tt is true that in view of section 27 (of the Indian Stamp Act), the parties to a
document are required to set forth in the document fully and truly the considera
tion (if any) and “all other facts and citcumstances affecting the chargeability of
that document with the duty or the amount of the duty with which it is charge-
able. But a failure to comply with the requirements of that section is merely
punishable under section 64 of the Stamp Act. No provision in the Stamp Act
empowers the Revenue to make an independent inquiry of the value of the
property conveyed for determining the duty chargeable.

1. (@) Board of Revenues, Madras v. K.R. Venkatarama Ayyar ALR. 1950 Madras 738.
(8) In re Fenkarswaml, ALR, 1953 Mad. 941

. Raman Chetty x. Makamed Chause and another, (1899}1LR. 16 Cal. 435.

2
3, Except for focal amendments—e.z. Orissa amendment.

4. In the matter of Muhammed Muzafer At; ALR, 1922 All. 82 (2) (E31
5, Miran Baksh & others ५ Contp; ALR, 1945 Lah. 69.

& Himalya Howse Co,,v CCBA, ALR. 1972 5.2. 899, 904, 905.

Scope of present
sec fon.

Olwervations Ca
Supreme


Allahabad case.

Madras view.”

114

After reviewing the High Court decisions. the Supreme Court observed :-—

“The legislature may have had good reasons for not empowering the Revenue to
make an independent inquiry as regards the valuation of the right sought to be
assigned.”

In this case, it was held that there was no basis for holding that the consideration for the
impounded assigament deed, which had declared that there was no consideration, was the
total amount received by the assignor under the agreemenis entered into between him end the
persons to whom he had assigned certain rights in the flats, offices and shops in the building.
Tt was held that those persons had an independent right of their own, and that their rights
did not flow from the impounded assignment deed. 1६ was, therefore, held that the considera-
thon to be taken into account under atticle 23 {conveyancc} was nil, as the assignment deed
itself mentioned that there was ro consideration, and there was no intention to incorporate
the other agreements into this deed which, therefore, could not be taken into account for the
purpose of calculating the duty on the impounded document.

13.6. In one Allahabad case,? the Godavari Sugar Mills, being the owner of property
consisting of land, buildings and machinery, purported to sell these to the Somaiya Organics
for a certain consideration. The sale-deed recited that the land and buildings were conveyed
for a certain amount X, while the balance represented the price of machinery, vehicles, stores
and other goods which were treated as movable items and the transfer of which had been
completed by manual delivery. The Advocate General, on behalf of the State, argued that
the intention of the sale-deed was to transfer the entire properties of the Godavari Sugar Mills
and that the machinery, vehicles etc. were also iransferred by the deed, and the value of these
properties too should be taken into account. The High Court did not accept this contention.
Tt held that the deed was intended to transfer only the property mentioned in Schedule A and
the buildings situated therein, and not the movable properties. The High Court observed “The
authorities constituted under the Act have to adindge the duty chargeable on a deed as pre-
sented by the executants. It is not permissible for them to embark upon an enquiry as (0
what the intention of the parties was when executing the decd, and then to fix a duty oa such
items of property which in their opinion the parties contemplated to transfer. The fact that
the sale-deed comains recitals in respect of other transactions between the parties would not
affect the duty, in case the deed which is sought to be registered does not affect transfer of
these properties.”

Therefore, the addition of the balance amount representing the price of the machinery,
vehicles efc. for purpose of calculating the duty, was uncalled for. :

13.7. In earlier Madras decisions,’ it had been held th atthe value of an instrument creat-
ing a settlement of properties was the value set forth in the instrument, and not the market
value of the property. In a Jater decision,> the Madras High Court reviewed its earlier caves,
and said that ‘value’, unless the term in any enactment suggests the contrary, must of course;
mean the real value, the real value of property of the nature of land and houses boing ordinasily हु
and not suitably estimated by determining what the property would fetch, if sold in the open
market. In other words, value ordinarily meant ‘market value’.

However, the High Court held that no machinery was set up in the Stamp Act for ascer,
taining the धार value of the property or the consideration, as the case may be, and ir world
be clearly impracticable to cast the burden on the Registrar in each case to. ascertain what the
true market value is. Sioce the Registrar is not empowered to conduct an enquiry himself as
to the market value, the value must be set out in the document itself.

1, Somaiva Organics ¥. C.C.R. Authority, AJR, 1972 AML 252
2. (गे) Reference LLR. ? Mad. 350. .

(b) Rerence LL.R. 8 Mad. 453 (FB)

dc) Reference LL.R. 20 Mad. 27.
३, The Joint Secresary Board of Revanue, Matirasy. VR Venkatarama, Ayyar, ALR. 1950 Mad: 738 (F-B.}.


115

13.8. Although the Registrar cannot embark on an independent enquiry regarding the value Courses open to
of property, yet he has power, under section 36 of the Stamp Act, to refuse registration if the the Registrar.
document is not duly stamped, frem which it would follow that he can require the person seeking
registration to furnish the particulars required for the calculation of the duty payable.

In other words, as the law stands,1 two courses are open when a document is sought
to be registered on an under-valuation. First of all, if the Registrar, either from his own informa-
tion or otherwise, suspects that the valuation given is an under-valuation with intent to cheat
the Government of the legitimate duty, he can ask for particulars from the party and if satisfied
with its under-valuatioa, can tefuse to register the document unless proper duty was paid.
Secondly, in cases where the document gets registered and the information is subsequently
received that the valuation shown is an uncder-valuation and that the legitimate stamp duty has
been intentionally evaded to defraud the State, it will be open to the Registrar to move for a
prosecution under section 27, read with section 64, Stamp Act.?

13.9. The question that arises is whether it is necessary to introduce any amendment in the Change not
[६-४ to empower the registering officer to hold a formal inquiry on the Hines on which some "ommended.
States have done. On the one hand, it can be argued that the scope for evasion of stamp duty
should be checked by giving such a power. On the cther hand, it should be remembered that
such an inquiry will prolong the proceedings for registration, and, while, in some cases, there
may be fruitful result, there might be many cases where the inquiry may result in nothing useful.

Haying regard tc the fact that there may be complications resulting from a provision for
elaborate inquiries on the lines of the Orissa amendment, we are nat inclined to suggest such

amendment of the Stamp Act.

13.10. We may note that in एच Questionnaire’ a qnestion was included on the subject. Section 2
The question was put in these terms— Facts om aod cir
“The question has been raised whether the law should be amended to empower the register- in हि 7 काना
ing officer to hold ar ingniry “on the question whether the consideration stated in the instru- thei fet forth in
ment was the true value? Have you any suggestion in this regard ?”
‘Fhe replies reveal a sharp difference of view. The important replies may be thus summarised.

(a) One State Government’ was of the view that the registering officer should be so
empowered. and that the stamp duty should be charged not on the considera-
tion but on the value of the property. One High Court® suggested that an inquiry
of the nature contemplated may be authorised.

(9) Some of the replies did net go so far. For example, one High Court Judge’ was
of the view that the decision of the registerig officer in the propesed inquiry
should not be final.

One State Government? was opposed to giving any power to the registering officer to hold
an inquiry. That Government would merely like section 27. te be amended to incorporate “in-
cludisg, where relevant the market value of the subject-matter”.

"जि Union Territory Administration® saggested that in section 27, the words “as set forth
in the instrument” should be deleted. Duty should be made chargeable on the market value, and

1, See In re- Venkatswami, ALR. 1953 Mad, at P. 942.

2, On this point see Mahabrami, A.I.R. 1960 Pat. 470 end Sitaram, ALR, 1960 Pat. 210.
}. Para 13.3., Supra.

५ (0.38.

. BIN. 88.

3. S.No. 108.

. S.No, 90.

}» S.No, 122.

. S.No. 100.

POI Away


116

not on the value set forth in the instrument. For determining the value of the property, however,
it would prefer rules to be made.

One Administration? would limit the powers of the registering officer to hold an inquiry
regarding the consideration, but it suggested that the preperty should be subject to valuation
by persons to be authorised by Government.

(c) Two District Judges?-* were opposed ta giving the Registrar the power. They were of
the view that if necessary the Registrar should report to the Collector if he feels that the true
valuation has not been stated. They expressed an apprehension that an inquiry by the Registrar
would give chance to unhealthy practices and would delay the transaction and would, therefore,
be undesirable. Registration should be made immediately, an inquiry may follow in due course
where necessary.

One State Government* was opposed to any inquiry by the Registrar.

' Two Bar Councils*-* were strongly opposed to the suggested change, and so also is one
Incorporated Law Society.’ The Incorporated Law Society stated that a procedure of the nature
contemplated in the question would complicate, and thereby delay, the registration of the docu~
ment. One of the Bar Councils* pointed out that if undet-valuation is discovered which affects ..
the amount of stamp, section 64 can always be invoked. However, it has suggested that a section
such as section 47A of the Andhra Pradesh Stamp Act could be incorporated.

We may state that we find considerable weight in some of the objections put forth
and are not inclined to recommend any amendment.

13.11, So much as regards section 27. According to section 28(1), where a property has
been contracted to be sold or purchased for one consideration (ic. a consideration for the
whole of the transaction), nod is conveyed to the purchaser in separate parts by different instru-
ments, then the consideration for each part as decided by thc parties hag to be set forth in the
instruments concerned respectively, and each of the said deeds is chargeable with ad valorem
duty in respect of the distinct considerations mentioned therein.®

For example, A contracts to sell to B his property consisting of a house and certain lands
adjoining to the house for Rs. 10,000 and, in terms of the contract, transfers it by two sepa~
rate sale deeds in respect of the house aud lands for Rs. 7,000 and Rs. 3,000 respectively.
A is lawfully permitted to convey his property by two distinct deeds, provided the stamp duty
ig paid on the deeds separately in proportion to the considerations which are distinctly set
forth.

In a sense, this is a qualification to the general rule in section 4 that, where several instru-
ments are employed for carrying on a transaction, then only the principal is chargeable.

13.12. Further, according to section 28(2), where property contracted to be purchased
for one consideration by two or more persons jointly, or by any person for himself and others,
or wholly for others, is conveyed in parts by separate instruments to the persons by, of for, whom
the same was purchased, then the conveyance of each part of the property is chargeatle with: ad’
valorem duty in respect of the distinct pert of the ocnsideration to be set forth in each instrament
in respect of the portion of property conveyed. This also secms to constitute a qualification to.

the general rule in section 4.

1. S.No, 119.

23. S.No. 90,

4. S.No. 66.

5-6, S.No. 74. S.No. 61,



117

13.13. Then also, under sub-section (3) of section 28, where a person, having contracted
for the purchase of any property but not having obtained a conveyance thereof, contracts to
sell the same to any other person, and the property is, in consequence, conveyed to the sub-
purchaser (by the original owner}, then the conveyance has to be charged with an ad valorem
duty. in respect of the consideration which the middleman has received irom the sub-purchasex '
In a Bombay case? under this sub-section, it was held that a purchaser from an official assignee in
insolvency, who has not taken an actual conveyance, can also insist that the official assignee
sould execute the conveyance in favour of his sub-purchaser. There is no reason why the pur-
chaser from the official assignee should be deprived of the benefit of section 28(3) of the Stamp -
Act.

13.14, Then, under section 28(4), where an intermediary contracts to sell property or any
part of it to any other person or persons, and the property is, in consequence, conveyed by the
orignal owner to the ultimate purchaser or purchasers, by means of different instruments, then
each of the said deeds of conveyance will be chargeable with ad valorem duty on the basis of
the consideration received by the intermediary in respect of the particular part of the property
conveyed. The azaount cr value of the original consideration, as agreed between the original
owner and. the intermediary, would be relevant only in respect of the conveyance of the residue,
if any, in favour of the intermediary 2s a purchaser ; and such deed would be chargeable with
ad valorem duty on the basis of the excess, if any, of the original consideration over the aggregate
of the considerations paid by the said sub-purchasers. But the duty on such last mentioned con-
‘veyance shall in no case be less than one rupec.

13.15, Finally, under sub-section (5), if a sub-purchaser takes an actual conveyance of the
interest of the’ intermediary, and the conveyance has been duly stamped with ad-valorem duly
in respect of the consideration paid by the sub-purchaser, then any conveyance in his favour of
the same property will be chargeable with a duty on the basis of the consideration obtained by
the original seller. Where the duty payable on this last mentioned conveyance exceeds five rupecs,
then the maxinrum duty chargeable thereon will be ouly five mpees.

13.16, There is no conflict of decisions with regard to the section. The language may appear
to be involved. But the section bears very little practical importance. and may be left as it is,

L Rahimtulla Lowji Damari v. Official Assignee, ALR, 1935 Bom. 340 (Besumont C.J. and Rangiekar J.)

24 M of Law/7?--16 -


APPENDIX

STATE AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 27

In the U.P.,1 sub-section (2) has been added in section 27, the original section being num-
bered as sub-section (1). ‘ihe new. sub-section is as follows :—

“€2) In the case of instrumenis relating to immovable property chargeable wih an ad
valorem duty on the value of the property, and not on the value set forth, the instruments shall
fully and truly set forth the annual land revenue in the case of revenue-paying land, the annual
rental or gross asseis, if any, in the case of other immovable property, the local rates, munici-
pal or other taxes, if any, to which such property may be subject, and any other particulars
which may be prescribed by reles made under this Act.”*

The Orissa amendment has been already referred to.*

Then, there is a Madras amendment which adds market value in section 27, and substitutes
that test in article 33. है हु

The validity of the Madras amendment was challenged before the Madras High Court,
under articles 14 aud 19(1)(f} of the Constitution. on the ground that this becanfe a tax on pro-
perty The challenge failed.

The Act at issue was the Indian Stamp (Madras Amendment) Act, 1967, sections 8 and
10, which required the mention of the “market value” in an instrument and provided for its
determination where 1 is suspected to be understood. The attack was based on the ground
that the duty under the amendment would faJ] not on the instrument, but on the market value
and market value was uncertain. It would, therefore, be unreasonable.

The High Court, however, held that the stamp duty even under the amended Act, was a
duty on an “instrument” as defined in the Stamp Act. The charge was on the instrument, and
not on the amount or consideration indicated in the document, which was but a measure of, or
the basis for the computation of the extent of, liability to stamp duty and not on the market
value any more than on the consideration mentioned therein. The Court held that.*

“eee the object of the amending Act being to avoid large-scale evasion of stamp duty,
it is not meant to be applied in a matter of fact fashion and in a haphazard way. Market value
itself, as we already mentioned. is a changing factor and will depend on various circumstances
and matters relevant to the consideration. No exactitude. is. in the nature of things, possible. In
working the Act, great caution should be taken in order that it may not work as an engine of
oppression. Having regard to the object of the Act, we are inclined to think that normally the
consideration stated a3 the market value in a given instrument brought for registration should
be taken to be correct unless circumstances exist which suggest fraudulent evasion. Even ia such
a case, we trust that dispotes will not be taised in petty sums. Unless the difference is consider~
able or sizable and it appears patent that the amount mentioned in the document is a gross:
under-value no disputation as to value is expected to be started.”

The Court held that the amendment had not shifted the chargeable event from an instru-
ment to market value and the duty after the amending Act was still on the instrument, and that
the amending Act was within the competence of the State Legislature.

1. UP, Act. 18 of 1938.
2, See also Ru past an Act 16 of 1966.

3. Para 13.3
१. Chandrasekharam, (1973) 2. M.L.J. 89 (D.B.) (M.L.J. issue 26th July, 1973).

4 The State of
5. The State of TN. v. Chandrasetcharam, (1973) 2 MALI. 89 at 91 , 92.

118


CHAPTER 14

LIABILITY AS REGARDS STAMP DUTY :

SECTIONS 29-30 AND SECTION 30A (NEW)

14.1, We now come to an important question—who is liable to pay the duty ? The matter is

dealt with in the Act very indirectly or in a fragmentary manner. We shail first dispose of such
provisions as now exist, and then discuss the need for adding to them.

14,1A. Section 29 lays down that the onus of bearing the expenses of providing the proper
stamp in the matter of particular instruments will, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary,
‘lie on the particular party or parties as specified therein.

The parties inter se may, of course, enter into an agreement to the effect that the expenses
of stamp duty will be borne by a particular party, Thus, where a deed contemplated that the
defendant should bear the costs incidental to the preparation of the deed of trust, the plaintiffs
were held to be entitled to claim the stamp duty paid by them. But disputes regarding payment of
stamp duty on deeds of transfer which were not an essential part of the contract, cannot affect
the completed agreement already arrived at?.

14.2. Section 29 is applicable only where the document is not produced before the court. Sestion

Once the document has been produced before the court and tendered in evidence, the right of
recovery of duty is only by virtue® of section 44, and not lunder section 29. In order to entitle
the pidintiff to recover under that section (section 44), the amount of the duty must have been
inclitded in the costs at the time of passing the decree; otherwise, he has no right to institute any
«proceedings in regard theretot.

14.3. One point concerning instruments of partition may be noted. Section 29(g) provides
that in ‘the absence of any agreement to the contrary. the expense of providing the proper stamp
is to be borne by the parties thereto. in proportion to their respective shares in the property com-
prised therein, or, when the partition is made in execution of an order passed by a Revenue autho-
, Or’ Civil Court or arbitrator, then in such proportios as.such authority court, or arbitratogs
directs. In the ald Act also, section 29(e) declared that the expenses of providing proper stamp, {in
case of an instrument of partition) would be borne by the parties thereto in proportion to their res-
pective’ shares in the property comprised in the instrument of partition. By the expression “parties
thereto”, used in the section, must be understood not merely the party or parties applying for parti-
tion, but the whole co-sharers who must necessarily be parties in the partition proceedings and
equally bear the prope: stamp duty; because the effect of partition proceedings is that the property
thereby: loses its identity as 2 previously undivided property, and there is nothing unreasonable in
nvakivig: any instrument of partition chargeable with stagip duty pertaining to the value of the
whdia.eten though the division is limited. This was the decision in an Allahabad case®.

N
4. In,the same ९8४०, Pearson J. observed: that in bis opinion. the entire property was
the snbject, matter of partition, and the stamp duty should be calculated upon its value and not
merely on the value of the portion assigned to the applicant'for partition: The portion assigned
to the applicant could only be separated and allotted to him in severally by @ process which
dealt with the entire property and separated and ullotted the remainder of it to another party.

1. Dobson and Barlaw Ltd.v. Bengal Spinning and Weaving Co., 1897) 1L.R. 21 Bom. 126, 136.
2, Jatnarain Ram Lundia ५, Surajmull Sagarmull, AIR. 1949 PC. 211, 215, 216

3, Panakala Rao V. Pemugande Numaraswami, A.1.R. 1937 Mad 763, 764.

4, Panakala Rav, Perugonda Kumars wami, A.1.R. 1937 Mad. 763.

5. Reference by Board of Revenve (1880) LL.R. 2 All, 654, 664, 666 (per Sturart, CJ.)

119

Introductory

Section 29—In-
troductory.

i
applicable after
production. पु

Instruments रण
partition,


Agromment = by
Goverement

Section 30—Obli-
gation to give
Teceipt in certain
cases,

Penal. pibvisions

Geli tion Con.
to movable
property

120

The opinion, he further said, appeared to be supported by the terms of clause (८) of section 29—
now section 29{g)—which provided that the stamp duty shall be payable, in the case of an
instrument of partition, not by the applicant for partition but by the parties thereto, and the other
co-sharers in the entire undivided property must be parties to the partition of it equally with the
applicant for partition,—in proportion to their respective shares in the property comprised therein,
and it cannot be denied that the partition comprises the entire undivided property.'-?

14,5. The position regarding cases where the Government agrees to pay the duty and the effect
of that agreement on section 3, has been already considered.*

The above resume does not show any need for change in section 29, As regards instruments
not mentioned in section 29, agreement usually governs the liability to bear expenses of stamps.
In the absence of matezial regarding commercial usage, we recommend no change in the
section. .

14.6. A very special case of liability to pay duty is dealt with in the next section—section”
30. Under that section, any person receiving any money exceeding twenty rupees in‘ amount, or
any bill of exchange, cheque or promissory note for an amount exceeding twenty rupees. or
receiving in satisfaction or part satisfaction of a debt any movable property exceeding twenty
rupees in value, shali, on demand by the person paying or delivering such money, bill, cheque
note or porperty, give a duly stamped receipt for the same.

‘Under the same section, any person receiving or taking credit for any premium or conside-
ration for any renewal of any contract of fire-insurance, shall, within one month after receiving or
taking credit for such premium or consideration, give a duly stmped receipt for the same.

14.7. The penal provisions relevant to section 30 may be noted. Under section 65, if the
person concerned retuscs or neglects to give the receipt when a demand has been made, a3
provided by section 30, he is punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees,
But the obligation to give a receipt arises under section 30 only when a demand is made.

Under section 62, whether 8 demand has been made or not, if a receipt has been given, it
must be a duly stamped one®. An unstamped receipt renders the giver punishable with a fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees.

The offence under section 65 consists in not giving a properly stamped receipt: 'The office
under section 62(1Xb} consists in- passing a receipt unstamped, whether one is demanded by the
payer or 100.

Tf a person required under section 30 to give a duly stamped receipt gives an unstamped
receipt, (or a receipt not duly stamped), then he would be guilty of both the offences. ic. under
section 65 and under section 62.7

14.8, It should be noted that under section 30, it is only when a movable property exceeding’
Rs. 20/- in value has been received in satisfaction of a debt (and a demand for receipt hes been
made), that the question of granting a duly stamped receipt arises. The section has no application
wwhere an dmmovable property exceeding Rs, 20/- in value is made over by a debtar. 40 a
creditor, in satisfaction of a pre-existing liability".

14.9. Several kincs of receipts have, by the exemption in the Schedule or by’ notification

of. under section 9, been exempted from the obligation to stamp. A question which would arise is

whether, even in such cases, the obligation to give a receipt imposed by section 30 survives. A

Reference by Board of Reverwe, (1880) 1.L.R: 2 All 654,664, 667 {per Pearson PA)
Also see Reference under Stamp Act, Section 46 (1892}LL.R. 15 Mad. 164 (F.B.).
See discussion as to section 3.
}. Section 65{a), Stamp Act.
. Section 62(1), Stamp Act.
Giedhardas ¥. Emp., A.I.R. 1933 Bom. 462.
. (a) Girdhardas v. Emperor A. 1. R. (1933), Bom. 462.
(8) Queen-Enmpress v. Khettur Mehan, (1900). LLR. 27 Cal. 324
8. Emperor v. Sukhdas, ALR. 1932 Nag. 172.

NP veep


121

similar question can arise where a receipt has been given, but is unstamped because the situation
is one where the exemption applies.

Tn an Allahabad case?, the document at issue was a receipt signed by the payee in duplicate,
on the Post Office form, for money remitted by money order. No stamp was put on it, as the
necessity for stamp was obviated by a notification. The person who remitted the money thereafter
demanded from the payee @ duly stamped receipt which should mention that the payment wus re-
ceived on account of a certain specified debt. The payee refused to do so, and was presecuted. and
convicted under section 65. The High Court set aside the conviction, and held that since a proper
receipt had been given to the Post Office which was an agent of the remitter, the remitter could not
demand a second reccipt. Further, section 30 did not require the person receiving to specify the
particular purpose tor which money was paid

14.10, To avoid the recurrence of such controvetsies,—which could arise from the present

wide provision-—it is desirable that the position should be clarified. The object of the law of a

stamps is to ensure that duty is paid where payable. The obligation requiring receipt is intended
merely for such cases. We, therefore, recommend the addition of the following exception to
section 30,

“Exception.—Nothing in this Section shall apply to cases—
{a) where the receipt, if given, would not require stamp, or

(b) where @ receipt has been given but does not require stamp”.

14,103, We also recommend that the amount should be increased? to one hundred rupees,
for reasons which we shall indicate under Article 53

14.11. At this stage, it becomes necessary to deal with one maticr which is not adequately
dealt with in the Act. The question whether a person from whose possession a docuiient
somes before a public officer—section 33—and who does not pay the duty and penalty—section
35—can be compulsorily ordered to pay it by the Collector—section 40(1)(b) and section
48—has 1९१ to a difference of views as to the scope and ambit of sections 40 and 48. We shall
Tevert to the matter when we consider section 48, but a few important points may be referred
to. .

Section 48 provides that “all duties, penalties and other sums required to be paid under this
Chapter may be recovered by the Collector by distress anc sale of the movable property af the
“person from whom the same are due”, or by any other process for the time being in force for
the recovery of the arrears of land-revenue.

As to the “person from whom the duty is due” within the meaning of section 48, the sec-
tion itself is silent, and the answer has to be sought from other provisions.

Unfortunately, the other provisions are also sketchy. As a result, there is considerable
Obscurity in this respect, and the obscurity arises primarily from the fact that, excepting in a
very limited number of cases,? the Act does not give any specific and comprehensive guidance
as 10 the person who is to be regarded as the one liable to pay stamp duty.

14,12. The very bmited number of cases specifically dealt with in this regard are contained
in—(i) section 19, which relates to bills and notes drawn out of India, (ii) section 29, which
in the case of certain instruments, provides as to who shail bear the burden of preper stamp,
and (iii) section 30, dealing with receipts:

1. Emap. v. Baim kund. (1907) LLR. 34 All. 192.
2. See discussion as to Article 53, infra,
3. Sections 19, 29 and 30,

Recommendation
% amend section

Recommendation
amount.

Section 30 A
(New)


Recommendation.

‘Section
(New)

30 A.

122

Section 29 is a somewhat general provision—though not exhaustive. And even that section
does not very clearly indicate whether it is to operate as between the parties, or whether it is to
operate also between the State on the one hand, and the private party on the other hand, so as
ta be available for interpreting section 48.

In view of the obscurity and uncertainty as to the inter-relationship of section 29 and similar
sections on the one hand, and section 48 on the other hand, we are of the view that the matter
should be put beyond doubt, as it is neither in the interests of the State nor in the interests of
the citizen that liability to bear the tax should be left in doubt.

14.13. Our recommendation, in concrete terms,’ is that the provisions of section 48 should
be enforceable—

(a) against persons who are liable by virtue cf section 19, agreement or section 29
or section 30, as the case may be; and

(b) where none of the above-mentioned sections applies, then against the person
executing the <locumenxt in question,

It may be mentioned that most replies to our Question? have agreed with the need for an
amendment on the above lines.

14.14. In the light of the above discussion, we recommeud the insertion of a new section

on the following lines : — .
“30A, For the purposes of this Act, the person from whom duty on an instrument is

due is—

(a) the person liable under sections 19, 29 or 30, or ‘under an agreement, or
(b) where clause (a) does not apply, the exccutant of the instrument”,

1. See discussion relating to section 48, infra.
2. 0. 56, (concerning sections 40 and 48).


CHAPTER 15
ADJUDICATION AS TO STAMPS—SECTIONS 31-32

15.1. The Act recognises that it is not always easy for the citizen to determine the precise Introductory.
category in which a particular instrument falls To enable the citizen to seek official advice
in the matter, it has considered it proper to make suitabie provisions.

15.2. The principal provision---section 31—enables a person to seck the determination of section 31.
the Collector as ta the proper stamp with which an instrument is chargeable. We need not go
into its details, since there is no serious controversy on the section.

There was, for some time, some uncertainty as to whether the Collector can impound an
instrament under section 33 when it is produced before him under section 31. The Supreme
Court? has now held, that when an executed instrament is submitted to the Collector under
section 31 for adjudication as to the proper duty payable on the instrument, the Collector be-
comes “functus officio” as soon as he determines the duty payable on the instrument, and has
no anthority to impound the instrument under section 33 if the duty so determined. is not
paid. पु

After careful consideration, we recommend that it should be accepted. The scheme of
the section, including its provision for taking evidence, makes it desirable that the party present-
ing be heard. . It is only fair that the party preseuting be heard, so that the Collector may be
able to decide with a full knowledge of the facts. The principal object of the law ought to be
to encourage correct orders. Whether or not there is a lic, this would appear® to be a wise
cdoree,

15.3. In a Madras Case,® it was held that the Collector’s determination (under section 31)
98,to stamp duty payable ou an instrument would be final and conclusive only in cases where
the Collector followed up his order under section 31 by a relative endorsement on the instru-
ment itself under section 32 to the effect that proper duty had been fully paid, or in cases where
he had expressed the opinion that no duty was payable and made an endorsement to that effect .
om the. instrument itself. Where, however, the Collector had not certified by endorsement on
the ‘instrument either in terms of section 32(1) or in terms of section 32(2), his adjudication as
to stamp duty on the instrument brought before him under section 31 could not be a bar to an
examination by the other Authorities competent under the Act of the question of proper stamp
duty.
#77. 1९,4, Under scction 32, the Collector may make any endorsement of stamp duty on an

instrument brought before him under section 31. The general view is that an endorsement made
9a. an instrument by the Collector under section 32 is final, and cannot be questioned by a
“chil court,—even if it was erroneous or was made out of time.t

15.5. We have received a suggestion® that the Collector should specify she article of the Suggestion _ for
$éligifile under which he calculates the duty, it having been said that this will facilitate registra- 5० हु /.
Gish! of the document. We accept the suggestion. Though the Collector's decision will not be eo
कफ as to the nature of the instrument on the registering authority, it wifi be convenient if
it ihdfeites what the Collector decides .
co _--_-++
> 1, Government of UP. B.A. Khan, AR. 1961 S.C. 787; (1962) 1 8.0.8. 97.

2. Suggestion of Incorporated Law Society, Calcutta, nooepied.
3. Chief Controlling Revenie Authority, Board of Revenue Madras ¥. Dr. कै, Manjunatha Rai, (1976) 2 M.LJ.279,
ज. 189) Murgsyya V. Bajgopal ALR. 1942 Mad. 381;
tb) Firm Parasram Hiri V. Firm Parasram, A.LR. 1926 Sind 211... |
(0) Tukaram ४, Sonaji, 10 Ind. Cases 702,
3. Suggestion of the Incorporated Law Society of Calcutta (in reply to our Questionnaire).

123



Section 33.

Examination and
Impourding
of instruments.

Whetttr “dosu-
ment
valid in law.

CHAPTER 16
INSTRUMENTS NOT DULY STAMPED—IMPOUNDING BY PUBLIC OFFICERS
SECTIONS 33-34

16.1, Section 33 requires persons in charge of public offices to impound unstamped docu-
ments produced before them, or coming before them in the performance of public functions.
The object of the section is 10 prevent the parties from withdrawing instruments produced by
them, when h >> iound that stamp duty and penalty have to be paid on the instruments.

The section reads—

“33. (1) Every person haying by law or consent of parties authority to receive evi-
dence, and every person in charge of a public office, except an officer of police,
before whom any instrument, chargeable, in his opinion, with duty, is produced
or comes in the performance of his functions, shall, if it appears to him that such
instrument is not duiy stamped, impound the same.

(2) For that purpose every such person shall examine every instrument so charge-
able and so produced or coming before him, im order to ascertain whether it is
stamped with a stamp of the value and description required by the law in
force in India when such instrument was executed or first executed :

Provided that—

(a) nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require any Magistrate or Judge ot
Criminal Court to examine or impound, if he does not think fit so to do, aay
instrument coming before him: in the course of any proceeding other than 8 pro-
ceeding under Chapter XII or Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Prove-
dure, 1898 ;

{b) in the case of a Judge of a High Court, the duty of examining and impounding
any instrument under this section may be delegated to such officer as the Court
appoints in this behalf.

(3) For the purposes of this section, in cases of doubt—

(a) the State Government may determine what offices shall be deemed to be public
offices ; and

(b) the State Government may determine who shali be deemed to be persons
in charge of public offices. ‘

16.2. Several questions have arisen जा the section. The first question is this : Is it neogasary
that the document of transfer which can be impounded under this section is valid in law ?. There
bas been a difference of opinion between the Madras High Court! and the Andbra Pradesh; High
Court,’ in regard to the question whether the document should be valid in law. A fall Bench of
the Madras High Court® was dealing with an unattested and unregistered document dated
22-3-1948, one of the clauses of which was construed as creating a mortgage over the borréwer's
floating assets etc.

1. Crompton Engineering Co. V.C.C. Rev Authority, ALR. 1953 Mad. 764, 7 21 (Rajamandar, CI.
Rajgopalan and Venkateraman Aiyer 13.9. td. 764,766, paca 21 + CI.
2. Hazrami Congaram V. Kamlobai 4.72, 1968 A.P, २1३ (F.B.} (5 Judges), énfra.

3. Cromton Engineering Co. ¥ C.C. Rev. Authorlty. ALR. 1953 Mad. 764,766, para 11 (F.B.).

1a


125

In deciding the question whether this document was a mortgege deed. the full Beach held
that the transfer provided in section 2017) of the Stamp Act is a ‘transfer’ which is valid in law,
and there can be no transfer by way mortgage unless the requirements of section 59 of the
Transfer of Property Act are satisfied. Where the specified immovable property is worth Rs. 100
or upwards, a document purporting to be a mortgage deed of such property requires at:estation
and tegistration. Where it is neither attested nor registered, it is not liable to stamp duty. The
Court pointed out that the documen: was neither attested nor registered, and the impounding
authority covld not have enforced registration, and that, in any case, it could not cure the
failure to attest, which by itself was ecough to invalidate the document as an instrument of
mortgage. Tt further held, that the document might be an “instrument”. but it was not an
instrument chargeable with duty as a “mortgage-deed” as defined in section 2(17) of the Stamp
Act. The very difference between the definition of “instrament” in section 2(14) and the
definition of “mortgage deed” in section 2(17) showed thet the transfer must be valid in law.
To make a document liable to stamp duty as a morigage, it is not enough if the document
burports 10 effect a transfer. It must “transfer”.

16.3. The Andhra Pradesh High Court? has, however, disagreed with the view of the Madras
High Court, and held that there is no warrant for the importation of the requirements of either
the Transfer of Property Act or the Registration Act, in construing documents or instruments
under the Stamp Act, as the Stamp Act itself specifically defines the terms used therein. Further,
to ‘hold that an instrument must be 2 valid one under law before it is liable to stamp duty, will
‘be $0 ignore the requirements of the definition and to make them otiose. In that case, the docu-
tment wes an unregistered mortgage deed. The High Court held that it was chargeable to duty. If
the document was to require registration for its legal validity before it can be considered whether
it is liable to stamp duty or not, then the Registrar cannot impound it before registration though
bw is stethorised to impound it under section 33 reac with section 35 of the Stamp Act. If an
Toswaument is not duly stamped, then it cannot be registered or received in evidence. The
deftaitions in the Act and the terms of every section of the Act indicate clearly that an instrument
nea not be valid in law or meet the requirements of law as 8 valid document, before it fs
chargeable fo stamp duty under the Act.

16.4. In our view, it is desirable to settle this conflict. The Acdhra view is, in our Recommendation
opinion, more persuasive, and should be adopted. There is no reason why Tiability to stamp
daty should depend on the validity of a document. That is an extraneous and irrelevant consi-
Geration, A suitable Explanation incorporating the Andhra Pradesh view should be inserted, 1
and we recommend accordingly.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the teplies
t6 our Questionnaire.?

16.5. There is another matter pertaining to section 33, which has proved to be controversial, पु बढ
Ip a Full Bench decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court,’ the majority were of the opiniog reaetering
that after the registration of a document, the registering guthority has np power to holg an 4, 7 Pusition
enquiry regarding the value of the property covered by the fleed and to call upon the executant tader Section 35,
40 pay the deficit stamp duty. The minority, however, took a contrary view. According to
the majority, the power 10 impound an instrument ugder gection 33(1) can be exercised only
wher the instrument is produced before the registering authorities in the performance of thelr ~
furigtions—-tha* is, only so long as the function is got perfermied or cpmpleied aqd not afterwards.
As eoga as the registering officer registers a document presented to him fer registration, the
function in the performance of which the document was Ptoiluced before him is over; and he
becomés ‘functus officic’, and has no power under section 33 to impound the instrument.

it

peer

1, Hazramt Gangaram vy. Kamiabat ALR. 1968 AP. 213 (PB) 6 Judges).
2. Question 40. . '

3. Kamal Chand ९. State of M.P., ALR. 1966 MP. 20 (FB) 2, 23, Para 3, 11, 12, (EB)
24 M of Law/T7—17


(ii) Section 3301)

॥) tee
garding officers
_ of police whe-
ther to be
extended:

जा,

126

16.6. This was the majority view. But Golwalker J. dissented from the majority opinion.
He observed! that the expression ‘functus officio’ means having fulfilled the function, having
discharged the duty, having discharged the office, or accomplished the purpose and, therefore,
ef no further force or authority. The sole function of the registering authority is to receive an
instrument when duly presented as requited by the Registration Aci, and to proceed to register
the same in the manner provided therein. It is true that after presentation of the instrument
before the registering authority, it can examine the same and see whether it is duly stamped
or not, and, if it is not duly’stamped, defer its registration till it is impounded and either validated
in that respect or certified as duly stamped by the authority concerned. This examination of
the instrument, however, would not have been & part of its sfaturory functions under the Regis-
tration Act. Moreover, the insufficiency of stamp duty paid on an instrument is not one of the
bars to registration provided in the Registration Act. An instrument not duly stamped can
be validly registered under the Registration Act. ‘The registration of the instrument is not
affected by the infirmity in the matter of stamp duty, cr by any other infirmity not ousting
the jurisdiction of the registering authority. Thus, since the invalidity cr unsufficiency in the
matter of stamp duiy on any instrument has no bearing one way or the other ow the function
of the registering authority, it cannot be said that the registering authority, becomes “functus
officio’ as soon as it registers the instrument, It is true that under rule 4 of the Rules framed
under section 69 of the Registration Act, the registering authority shall examine the instrument
with a view to sceing if it is-duly stamped or not, bu: the very fact that the Act itsclf lays
down no such provision, and does not debar the registering authority from registering the
instrument not duly stamped, rather supports the view that it is not by way of any function”
or part of function which the registering authority as such performs under the Registration Act:
Moreover, there was no question of any authority being ‘functus officio’.

16.7: It is, with due respect to the minority view in the Madhya Pradesh case, suggested that
this view is wrong. If it is not part of the registcring officers’ legal duty to see that the document
is duly stamped, then it would not be proper for him to- impound the document in any case.
The minority view is not, therefore, logical. The point is that once the registering officer has
tegistered the instrument, his function (of registration) is over, and that is all that the majority
view emphasises. Practical considerations, also support the majority view. We think that the
section should be amended to clarify the position.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies to
our Questionnaire.”

16.8. Another point concerns the exception in sub-section (1) for officers of police. The
question may be considered whether this exception should not be extended also to other officers
connected with the investigation of offences. Such extension appears to be desirable, because
‘under the present provision, impounding of the document is obligatory on the persons mentioned
in the section, and the section leaves no option in this respect? The result is that a law enforce-
ment officer—-e.g., 1 Customs Inspector—is also burdened with this duty, with the consequence
that his ordinary work of investigation might suffer. There is no reason why such officers shonld
nut be treated on the same footing as police officers, in this context. We recommend such.
amendment, which is favoured by. the replies also.* हु

16.9, The word “produced” in the section has also come up for consideration. Tt has been
emphasised that it is net sufficient for the purposes of the section that the document should some.
how be produced’ or come before a pubfic officer. In order that this section may apply, it is
essential that it should be produced or come before the public officer i... the
performance of his functions; and a mere production in compliance with an iffegal demand will

1, Kamal Chand v. State of M.P., ALR. 1966 MP, 20 10 23.
2, Question 41.

4, Pyarelal v, Sukandram, ALR. 1926 Allahabad 478.

4. Question, 49.


127

not confer authority on him to take action under the section.’ A registrar requiring the
production of a document un the ground that it is not duly stamped, after it has been registered
and delivered to the party concerned, cannot be said to be acting “in the performance of his
functions.” A Full Bench of the Lahore High Court* has held that a document ordered to be
returned because it is not proved, can no longer be considered to be part of the judicial record,
and cannot, thercfore, properly come beforc the court again in the performance of its functions,
and cannot be impounded.

16.10 The word ‘produced’ has a technical meaning, and means either produced in response
to a summons, or produced voluntarily for some judicial purpose* A document which falls acci-
dentally or incidentally into a judge's hand, cannot be said to be “produced”. In a Madras case,*
it was reiterated that a mere handing over of a document, even if it is as a result of a summons.
fram the court, cannot be said to be ‘production’. There must be volition on the part of the
person bringing it ta the court, to use it for some purpose.

These points of detail, however, do not call for an amendment of ihe section, as the
position with reference to the meaning of ‘produced’ is fairly clean.

16.11, A verbal point may uow be mentioned. There is, in section 33(2), proviso (a),
a reference to proceedings under Chapter 12 or Chapter 36 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898,

Chapter 12 of that Code related to dispnies as to immovable property, and Chapter 36
related to maintenance of wives and children. The Code of 1898 has wow been repealed and
seenacted in the Code of 1974. It is, therefore, necessary to substitute reference to the
corresponding chapters of the Code of 1974 in section 33(2), Proviso (a) accerdingly we
‘Fecommend that section 33(2), Proviso (a) should be amended so as to refer to Chapter
9 and sections 145 10 148 of the Code of 1974, which now deal with the two matters mentioned

above.

-:2 46.12, ‘There is an important question pertaining to section 33(3). Under that sub-
section, the State Government has the power to determine, in case“of doubt, (a) what are public
Offices, and (b) who are deemed to be persons in charge of public offices. The power given
to the State Government is not limited to State Government offices, and includes even Central
Government offices. The question is whether this is proper. .

The point will be appreciated if the history of the sub-sectidn is considered. As originally
enacted in 1899, section 33(3) read as follows : हु

“(3) For the purposes of this section, in cases of doubt,—
(a) the Governor-General-in-Council may determine what offices shall be deemed to
be public offices; and _

(¥) Section 33 (2)

Proviso (a)—
(References 10
Chapters of
the Code of
cr PC)

(४) Section 33(3)
Pawer to declare
public office...

(b) the loca’ government may determine who shall be deemed to be persons का charge ~

of public offices.”

By the Adaptation Order of 1937, in clause (a), the words “the collecting . government”
wert eubstituted, and in clause-(b) also.the words “the collecting government” were substituted.
‘A definition ‘of “collecting government” was inserted by the same Adaptation Order, as section
2(12A). By the Adaptation Order of 1950, the words “the State Government” were substituted
in place of the words “collective. government” in both the clauses and the definition of “collecting
government” omitted. The power is now vested in the State Government in both cases.

+ 1. '() Thakar Das y. Emperor, ALR. 1932 Lah. 495 (S.B.)
(0) Collector Ahmedabad भ. Rambhan, A.LR. 1930 Bom. 392 (FB)
(©) Ottam Chand v. Paramand, AR. 1942 Lab. 265. १
2. Puran Chand ए. Emperor, #ै.1.र. 1942 Lah. 257.
3. Inve Narapandas Nathuram, A.R 1943 Nag. 97,
4. S. Rangaraju y. D.S. Rameshani ALR. 1953 Mad. 698.


128

16.13. The question to be considered ig whether the power to determine what officts shall
be deemed to be public offices should be left to the State Government even in casea where the
public office is connected with, or under the control of, the Central Government. Jt would
appear that in 1937 ail fumetions of the Central Government under or in relation to section 33
were entrusted to provincial governments by the Government of India’. Apparently, in view
of this delegation already made in 1937, it was, in 1950, considered proper to substitute ‘State
Government” in both the clauses.

However, it must be stated that the provision as it now stands cannot escape criticism,
because, in the case of an office having an apparent connection with the Central Government, it
is anomalous that the State Government should determine whether it is or it is not.a “petdic
office”. If, for example, a question arises whether a person holding an election under a Central
Act is or is not holding a public offices the question should be decided by the Central Govensment
and net by the State Government. In this connection, it may be noted that in 1920, when clewse
(a) gave the power to.the Governor-General-in-Council, the question whether the office of a
returning officer appointed for the purposes of an election to a Icgislative body constitated under
the Government of India Act atose, the cnling that it was not a public office within s¢ction 83(3)
was given by the Government of India.* If a similar question arises today, the decision will have _
to be given by the Slate Government,—which is not a very satisfactory position. Moreover,
conflicting decisions may be given by different State Governments in respect of the same office.

16.14 In view of what is stated above, we are of the view that Lhe provision in clauses (a)
and (0) should be reviséd so ag to substitute the expression “appropriate govermwem for *
“§tate Government”. ‘The expression “appropriate government” could, for this purpose, Se 80
defined that it means the Central Government in rélation to offices whose expenses are’ paid from
the Consolidated Fund of India, and the State Government im other cases.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the ceplies
to our Questionnaire.* .

16.15. There has been 2 suggestion io amend the section to confer powers‘ on Stamp
Auditors for impounding documents of local authcrities. We have considered it carefully, but
afe unable to accept it. Stamp Auditors of Corporations should exercise their functions defere
execution. If the Stamp Auditor is an officer of the Adminisiration, and if the document is
“produced”, the case is covered by seotio 33, After impounding, he caw then take action under
section 38(2), The Corporation (if an executant), can also be prosecuted, in case there is
found to be a deficiency and if the other conditions for penal liability are satisfied.

On the other hand, if the Stamp Auditor is a Corporation Officer, then the suggestion cannot
be accepted, since the Corporatio’ is itself छ party. It may also be stated that in doubtful
cases, Section 31 can be resorted to.

16.16, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 33 should be revised
as follows :—

“33. (L) Every person having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence,
and every person in charge of a public offict, except an Officer of police or aim other ‘ifficer
empowered by law to investigate offences, before whom any instrument, chargeable, in his ‘option,
with duty, is produced of comes in the performance of ‘his fonctions, shall, if it-;ikupiige ito
him that such insttument is not duly stamped, imponnd the same, whether or not tha instédphert
és valid in law.

(2) For that purpose every such person shall examine every instrument so éhargedbie
and so produced or coming before him, in order to ascertain whether it is stamped whh a

1. Government of India, Finance Department (Central Revenues) Notification No. 9 desed 13th Noverpher, 1937
2. Government of India, Finance Department Notification No. 2962 F dated 19th November, 1920.

3. Question 43.
4. Suggestion of the Delhi Administration.



129

stamp cf the value and description required by the law in force when such instrument was
executed or first executed :
Provided that-— -

(a) nothing herein contained shall be deemed to require any Magistrate or Judge of
a Criminal Court to examine or impound, if he does not think fit so to do, any
instrument consing before him in the course of any proceeding other than 2
proceeding under Chapter IX or sections 145 to 148 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 ; .

(b) in the case of a Judge of a High Court, the duty of examining and impounding:
any -instrament under this secfion may be delegated to such officer as the Court
appoints in this behalf ;

(०) netting herein contained shall apply to any registering officer after registration.

(3) For the purposes of this section, in cases of doubt, the appropriate Government may
determine—

{a) what offices shall be deemed to be public offices ; and

(b) who shall be deemed to be persons in charge of public offices.

Explanation —Jn this section, “appropriate Government” means——

G) in relation to offices the expenses whereof are paid out of the Consolidated
Fund of India, the Central Government, and
(ii) in relation io other offices, the State Government.”
16.17. Section 34 contains a special provision as to uastamped receipts in the following
terms :

. “Where any receipt chargeable with a duty not exceeding ten naya paise is tendered to or
pro@aded before any officer unstamped in the course of the audit of any public account such
रिहा may in his discretion, instead of impounding the instrument, require a duly stamped receipt
to be substituted therefor”,

The section provides an alternative to impounding.
The statement of objects and reasons said :

“This section fas been added, because under the present law (Act L of 1879} an audit
officer of public accounts, before whom an unstamped receipt is produced, must impound the
instrament, and has no power to require the substitution of a duly stamped receipt”.

‘Thus, teceipts? chargeable with duty’ are governed by this section.
‘Tie section needs no change. There is hardly any case-law on the section.

---...+......०--.....ट On NS PS
1. Pheweevent of Objects and Reasons to the 1879 Bil
2. Settion 2(6) section 2 (23) and article 53,

Section


Introductory.

Section = 35,

Proviso (a.

CHAPTER 17
ACTION UPON INSTRUMENTS NOT DULY STAMPED—SECTIONS 35 TO 37

17.1. With reference io “Justruments not duly stamped” we have discussed one set of
provisions. With section 35 begins another important group of provisions also concerned with
such isistcuments. They regulate the use of such instruments in evidence or “acting upon”
them by public officers.

17.2. The princinpal provision is contained in section 35, prohibiting the admission in
evidence of an unstamped locument. as also “acting” on such document or its aothentication
or registration, where the document is required by law to be stamped and is not stamped or
is not sufficiently stamped. This rigid provision is subject to certain exceptions, contained in
the proviso to the section,

17.2A. The proviso has several clauses but the most important is clause (a), which
reads—

“(a) any such instrument not being an instrument chargeable with a duty not exceed-
ing ten naya paise only, or a bill of exchange or promissory note, shall, subject
to all just exceptions, be admitted in evidence on payment “of the duty with
which the same is chargeable, or, in the case of an instrument — insufliciently
stamped, of the amount required to make up such duty, together with a penalty
of tive rupees, or, when ten times the amount of the proper duty or deficient
portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of a sum equal to ‘ten times such duty
or portion.” :

17.3. Thus, while the payment of penalty under the proviso relieves a decument from the
prohibition imposed by the main paragraph, the relaxation under the proviso is aot applicable
to certain instruments. The basic question to be considered is whether. in the case of those
instruments, there is need to continue the present rigid provision. The instruments, in question
ate— :

(i) any instrument chargeable with a duty not exceeding ten naya paise only (but
net including a receipt); है
(ii) bill of exchange or promissory note.

17.4. Taking up, first, the instruments chargeable with duty not exceeding 10 paise, the ©
possible reason for the rigid attitude adopted by the legislature in respect of these instruments
could be that the duty is so negligible that an infraction of the law is considered’ as deserving
of no sympathy. While there may be some force in this reasoning, we must .also note that

“in practice the rigid provision leads to hardship. It excludes from evidence documents télevant

to the case, or even material 20 the case, merely on considerations of revenue: The: executant
of the document might have failed to affix the stamp because of ignorance of law, tnisconstruc-
tion of the relevant provision of the Stamp Act, difficulty in purchasing stamp, and so on-—~
all factors which do not show an intent to evade the law. Moreover, it is one thing to: levy &
penalty, and another to exclude a document from evidence by a categorical provision admitting.

of no relaxation.

17.5. It should also be pointed out that the legislature has already recognised the hardship
in the case of receipts, and allowed them to be admitted in evidence,? in certain limited cirdams-
tances, even though they were chargeabk® with a duty of ten paise.

1. As to receipts, sce section 35, proviso (0).

2. Section 35, Proviso (b).
3, Article 53 (before amendment of 1976).

130


131

17.6. In our view, it is desirable that the exception in regard to documents chargeable
with a duty not exceeding 10 naya paise shauld be rcmoved from section 35, proviso, clause (a).
We had included a specific question on the subject, and we may add that most replics to our
Questionnaire favour such an amendment.’

17.7. In fact, Jong before we issued our Questionaire, several suggestions were made for
reducing the stringency of section 35. It was, for example, stated in one suggestion that the
yrohibition as regards instruments chargeable with a duty of one anna cr half an anna only
or a bill of exchange or a promissory note had resulted in great hardship to people in India,
who are totally unacquainted with the technicalities of the Law Merchant in England. 1 was
stated that the stamp duty payable on other documents, which are made admissible on payment
of penalty under this Act, is many times greater than the stamp duty on the promissory notes
and other documents referred to in section 35. Also, the aumber of documents of the former
class is on a par with, if not greater than, that of pronotes. Yet, when the former class of
documents is made admissible on payment of penalty, the latter are totally prohibited from
admission in evidence even on payment of any amount as penalty. The argument that it is an
effective check on evasion of stamp duty equally applies to the latter class of documents as
well. Thus, this distinction does not appear to be fair. Whatever might be the state of
circumstances in the commercial world at the time of passing of the Act, it can confidently be
said -ihat, with the advent of banking - facilities, proxotes, as means -cf negotiation,
have become otiose and scarce in the commercial circles while they have become
the common instrument of transaction amongst ignorant. villagers. It was, therefore, suggested
that proviso (a) to section 35 should be amended by deleting the words “not being an instru-
ment chargeable with a duty of one anna or half an anna only, or -a bill of exchange or
‘promissory note.”*

It was stated in another suggestion® that the provise (a) to section 35 should be suitably
amended for admitting promissory notes in evidence on payment of the proper stamp duty
and penalty, since experience had shewn that in several genuine cases in which there was not
the least intention to evade duty, the unstamped promissory notes had been excluded from
evidence much to the hardship of the party.

There was yet another suggestion to the effect that the exception for bills and pronotes
should be deleted’. A similar suggestion’ was made by a judicial officer that section 35, which
afieeis negotiable instruments, should be amended in such a way that a suit on an unstamped
promissory note can also lic on payment of due penalty.

17.8. In view of what is stated above, we recommend that the exception regarding instru-
ments chargeable upto 10 paise should be deleted from section 35, proviso (a).

17.83. We now discuss that part of proviso (8) to section 35 which excludes promissory
notes and bills of exchange. This had a counterpart in section 34 of the Stamp Act, 1879
(but not in the earlier laws relating to stamp duties). The provision seems to have been bor-
rowed from the English Act. In England,* a promissory-note or bill of exchange cannot be
dued ‘upon, if unstamped. In 1961, the Stamp duty on these instrements was simplified in
Engtamd,? but the above position remains unaltered

17.9. English text books do not give any guidance as to why promissory-notes and bills
of exchange have been selected for this harsh treatment. One can think of a possible reason,

1.4. भ.

20 Pile No. F. K4)/ST-L.CA (regarding Revision of Stamp ,Act), Pages No. 78-79. (Law Department, Govt,
of Anhra Pradesh) *

3, File No. F. 2(4) /57-L.C.I( Vol, [, §.No. 37, (Law Department, Government of Orissa).

4, Sub-Registrar, P.O. Sikand:a Road, Aligarh District (File No. F. 3(4)/57-L.C. 1, Vol. I, Page 22).

5. Shri H.B. Vaishoav, Asstt, Judge, Porbandar (File No. F. 34) /57 L.C. 1., Vol. I, Page 45).

6. Section 33 (1), Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng.}, Which overrides, section 14(4) of the same Act.

7. See discussion relating to articles 13 and 49.

views expressed
on Questionngire

Earlier — sugges-
ions.

Recommendation

Geroment char-

=
10 p.
Section ” 35 and

and ble of
exchange.


132

namely, that these instruments are negotiable and pass quickly from hand to hand, thereby
facilitating a successively large number of transactions. Assuming that this argument is sound,
should the law go to the extent of fo‘aily barring the reception in evidence of the instruments ?
Aher all, the law relating to stamp duties is concerned with revenue. The object of section 35
is to ensure effective realisation of the duty. The sanction need not be made drastic than
is necessary. The object of realising the duty can be equally effectively achieved by levying a
penalty. The hardship caused to the citizen by non-reception of the instrument is entirely
unnecessary.

‘Recommendation. 17.10, There is sufficient justification for modifying this part of section 35 also. There
have been suggestions also to modify the regour of section 35, in relation to bills and pro-notes,
and the matter requires to be considered.

17.11. Even if pro-notes and bills can be justifiably picked out for a specially rigid
provision, one should also weigh the inconvenience caused to small traders as well: as to
nationalised banks who advance money against pro-notes.

Another aspect of the matter, which may be relevant in this connection, is that total exeiu-
sion from evidence encourages dishonest defences. With the main security for the debt rendered
useless, the debtor is induced to deny the debt itself.

17.12, We may add that most replies? to or Questionnaire fayour a change: on the lines
discussed above.

: 17.13. A few reported cases ilfustrating the practical working of this pact of the seqtion
101 तक show, that (i) the present provision has been criticised as causing undue hardship, and (ii) to
tinder section 35 avoid undue hardship, courts are sometimes driven to construing the document as not falling

within the category of “pronote”, and (iii) in many cases it is always a matter of difficulty to
decide whether 8 document is or is not a pronote,

17.14, In a Madras case,? for example, Schwabe C.J. and Ramesam J, held: “The
question is whether or not (a particular, dagument) is an acknowledgement within the definition
of ‘acknowledgement’ in the Stamp Act, for. it is, it has to be stamped, and if it is not stamped,
it cannot be admitted in evidence and in such a case the legislature bas thought fit to impene
what to my mind is aa appailing penalty of the plaintiff losing his claim altogether, because
there is no penalty provided by the paymeat of which to Government, the document can be
admitted. Perhaps, in view of this provision, the draftsman of the Schedule has so worded it
that it has left many loopholes, and given rise to a conflict of judicial opinion witen it comes 10
interpretation. ‘The- words are ‘acknowledgement of a debt, exceeding Rs. 20 in amount or value,
written ot signed by or on behalf of a debtor in order to supply evidence of such debt’, The
first question that arises is whether amy: particular document is given to supply evidence of the
debt.

17.15. In another Madras oase,? the question was whether a person who had;leet saan
on a promissory note can sue 40 recover! the debt aparr from the mote, when jee pote के
inadmissible in evidence, owing to a defect in the stamping.. Counsel for tha Creditors atguas
that the principle which applied in England—that the credit is a different cause of actiggy from
the promissory note—should be held applicable in Indie, and that section 91 of the Ryidente
‘Act was no bar ta the action on the loan. As to this, the Chief Justice observed,t’ “Phere
is no statutory provision in England. as section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act here. In Rnglaad,
they strain the common law rule of evidertce to get over the stamp law in cases of temtehip.
You cannot do that in India”. a

1. Q 44a, fog
2. Suvajmat Marrlidhar ४. Anema Lal ALR. 1924 Mad. 352, 353. पु

3. Perumal Chettiar ¥, Kamaksii Ammei, LL,R. (1938) Mad 933; AAR. 1938 Mad 785 (F.B.)

4. Perumal Chettiar v. Kama kshi Ammal, UL-R. (1938) Mad 933, 937; ALR. 1938 Mad. 785 (F.B.).


133

ig the judgment, he also obssrved :?
" The English rules of evidence are not statutory, but. Judge-made, and in

the second place, the tendescy in England has always been to ignore, as far
as possible, stamp objections, as is pointed out in Taylor on Evidence’. In
india, the Jaw is statutory and the courts are given no letitude in matters of this

nature”.

Stodard 3. ic his dissenting judgment, said -——*

“To me, it appears that when a man gives another a promissory note in satisfaction of
a debt or for some other consideration, he gives at the same time a warranty
that the note is a goud and enforceable insttumeut. ff the note is bed for want
of a proper stamp, it is difficult [0 see how it can operate as a discharge of
the debt any more than the giving of a counterfict currency note could so
operate... ....... I am not able to subscribe to the view that becanse
the consideration is recited ia the instrument, no evidence can be given of it
except the instrument itself. The consideration. that is to say, the loas for
which the promissory aote is given, is the sabject maiter of the contract and
not term of the contract within the meaning of section 91 of the Indian Evidence
Act. 9 the matier of the Joan the Jender consents to it only on condition chat
the borrawer gives him a negotiable instrument in the shape of a promissory dote
containing or recording more, though of course they may state the cousidecation.
Reveipts and agreements generally are ot intended 10 be negotiable, and scrious
embarrassment would be caused in commerce if the negotiable net were cast ico
wide. This document plainty is a receipt for money containing the terme on
which it is to be repaid .... Being primarily a receipt even if coupled with a

promise to pay it i mot a promissory note”.
17.17, There is another Privy Council ease‘ relevant 10 the point. In a suit. baged on a
sitta ox an agreement of sale, the meaning of which was obscure, the claim was supported by

copies of two documents, which were as follows :-—

“Received from you this day.-.--..--.---- a cheque for Rs... 6... ee ‘The
amount would be repaid with interest thereon at the rate of ...-..-- per cent.
Time ten manths........-.-- ‘The principal. amount will be paid with interest

after ten montbs from this date”.

‘Yhe defendants pleaded that the documents were promissory notes, and, not being stamped,
they wert inadmissible in evidence. Ih was held, following an earlier Privy Council case,*
that these documents were “clearly never intended to be negotichle instruments’* and were
not promissory notes and were not, therefore, inadmissible in evidence for want of a stamp.

TLLITA 1६ appears that the Prive Council, when referring to the ‘intention’ that the doca-
ments were not meant to be promissory notes, seams to be doing so in order to avoid the ban

imposed by section 35. .

17.48. In a Bombay case,7 Beaman J. said that “effect should be given to the maxin xt
magis veleat quam. pereat {it is better for 8. thing to have effect than to be made void),? in
any difficulty under the Stamp Act, so that where there is 4 reasonable doubt whether paper
is subject to stamp at all, the courls should decide strictly against the Exchequer end benefiiently

|, Persad Cheitier ¥. Kamaksti Amesal. 1.1.2. 0938) Mad $33, 946; AR. 1938 Mad. TEE BS .

2 Taylos on Evidence, Vol. £ Page 276 {12th edn.) -

३. Perumal Chettiar v. Kamakshi Asmmal, 1.L.R. (1938) Mad. 933, 965, 967; A.LR. 1938 Mad. 785.

4, Karam Chand v. Firm Mia Mir Abad, ALR. 1938 PC. 124, 123.

5. Mid. Akbar Khen v. Atta Singh ALR. (9% BL. 171,

6. Emphasis supplied.

3, Sethua v. Mirza Makomed Shraji, {1907} 9 Bom. Law Reporter 1034.

3. peo A Concise Law Dictionary, 4th Bd.. though the word “res” is also used here कील ‘ut’ which meses
mi mm se nab “we 53

24 M of Law{77-—-28



‘Defect of present
law.

Recommendation
as to promotes.

Section 35 and
letters of credit,

Duly samped

134

in favour of the subject. The principle loses force where the question is not so whether a
paper is liable to stamp, as whether it is liable to stamp in one character, or another, and it
has no application at ail, where the words of the statute directly cover the case”.

17.19. In that case, it was held that, under the Stamp Act, 1899, a promissory note,
unless it is payable to order or bearer, is to be deemed to be a bond, if attested.

17.20. The present law, in our view, encourages dishonesty, and causes hardship. More-
over, the proposed amendmeat will help the Government revenue, as- has been pointed out
by one State Government."

17.21. Since the hardship to the lender caused under section 35 of the Stamp Act has
been noted by several persons, it is high time that this section was amended so as to “advance
substantial justice”, which under the present section the courts are unable to do,? however much
they may like. We, therefore, recommend that pronotes and bills also should be included within
proviso (a) to section 35.

If this recommendation is accepted, it will not be necessary to carry out our cecommend-
ation to limit the bar relating to pronotes to pronotes as defined in the Negotiable Instruments
Act.®

17.22. A point relating to “Letters of credit” has been discussed under an earlier section.‘
The recommendation made there was as follows :—

(i) the mention of “letter of credit” should be removed from the definition of “Dill
of exchange payable on demand”, and

(ii) im section 35, “letter of credit” should be expressly mentioned.

The second amendment, whicn concerns section 35, may be carried out, if our recommenda-
tions to delete bills of exchange from section 35, Proviso (a) is not accepted.

17.23. Under section 35, proviso, a deficiency in the amount of the duty can be rectified.
But the situation where there is no deficiency in the amount of the duty is not specificaily covered
by the proviso, though it would appear that the language of the proviso to section 35 is wide
enough to cover such cases.

17.24. In the definition of the expression “duly stamped”, a aumber of ingredients are ©
implied, such as, provisions of the Act relating to description of the stamp, mode of affixing
stamp and the like. As we have pointed out while discussing the definition of that expression,®
a difficulty may arise where the urnount of the stamp satisfies the law, but, in other respects,
the instrument is not “dilly stamped” as explained above. As this is a recurring situation, it
appears to be desirable to add in section 35, proviso (a), an Explanation onthe point.

We recommend that section 35, proviso (9), should be amended for the purpose, by adding
such an explanation. We may note that most replies to our Questionnaire favour it.*

17.25. As regards the case of use of a stamp of improper description, it is covered separately.
under section 37, which allows the defect to be rectified by applying to the Collector.

17.26. Where the full duty has been paid but irregularly stamped, no penalty except
Re. 1. Where part duty is paid but irregularly stamped, then also Re. 1. Though this concerns
rate, to avoid undue hardship, it is necessary. Mere irregularity should aot be visited with a

severe penalty.

_ Government of Maharashtta’s reply to the Law Gommission Questionnaire {8. No. 88).
See Perumal v. Kamaksht Ammat, LL.R, (1938) Mad. 933, 946 (FB) (Varadachariar, J.),
|. See discussion as to section 2—“Promissory note’. . -.

See discussion as to section 2@) “bill of exchangs payable on demand”. (supra).

See discussion as to section 2111) “daly stamped”. .

Q. 45.

epee

ae


135
~E7-27, If the above line of reasoning is accepted, clause (a) af the proviso to section
15 should. be revised on the following lines :—

“(a) any such instrument.........--...0.004 shall, subject to ali just exceptions, be
admitted in evidence, on payment af :—

(i) the duty with which the same is chargeable, or, in the case of an instrument
insufficiently stamped, of the amount required to make up such duty, and

(ii) a penalty of five rupees, or, when ten times the amount of the proper duty or
deficient portion thereof exceeds five rupees, of a sum equal to ten times such
duty or portion

Explanation—Where av instrument bears stamp of @ certain amount but is not other-
wise duly stamped, then for the purposes of this proviso, the instrument shall be
deemed 10 be duly stumped to the amount of the stamp which it bears if a penalty
of one rupee is paid into court.”

17.28. Section 35, Stamp Act, read with section 91 of the Evidence Act, excludes both
thé original instrument and secondary evidence of the contents of the instrument, if it is unstamped
or insufficiently stamped.’

"17:29. Lord Watson stated in Raja of Bobbili v. Inuganti China Sitaramaswami Garu,* that,
under the (terms of section 34 of the Indian Stamp Act of 1879, as the copy could not he
stamped, the original having becn lost, it could not be admitted in evidence. This decision was
followed by the Madras High Court* in a case where the facts were these :—

Before the trial commenced, the plaintiff produced an unstamped document purporting to
support his claim to certain lands. Later on, a mob invaded the Court, and set fire to it in
Which the record of the case was destroyed, among cther things. When the trial commenced,
the’ plaintiff sought to put in a copy of the document and paid the penslty into Court ;

" Tt was held that the copy of the document was not admissible in evidence, even on payment
of’ the’ penaity. The fact that the original document was destroyed by the action of the mob
"put the plaintiff in no better position.

17.30, In another Madras case,* it was held that where a deed of partition is inadmissible
ité evidence for want of registration, the partition cannot be proved apart from the deed, The
lowet 0007 had. held in this casc that the partition could be proved by evidence apart from
the deed which was not registered. On appeal, the Madras High Court (following an earlier
c9@),© held that where a deed of partition is inadmissible by reason of the fact that it had
not been registered, the court can only regard the property as being still belonging to the joint
family

17.31. These cases iustrate the hardship caused by the present position. The benefit of
‘being allowed to prove the document on penalty should be extended to copies also.

1. (a) Thajt Beebi ९, Tiramulaippa LL.R. 30 Mad. 386.

(0) Lachmareddy v. Sham Raw, (1966) 2 An. W.R. 251.

(©) Damodar Jagannath v. Atmaram, LR. 12 Bom, 443.

(6) Ming Po Hioo ५. Ma Ma Gye, ALR. 1927 Rang. 109.

(© Ladha Ram V. Hari Chand, A.LR. 1938 Lah. 90, 92.

() Chanda Singh v. Amritsar Bank Co., A.LR. 1922 Lah. 307.

(®) thanda Singh v. Harnam Singh AR. 1926 Lah, 415, 416.

(h) Nalam Ramayya v. Nelam Achamma, (1942) 2. M.L.J. 164 ; LL.R. (1945) Mad, 160 (F.B.).

() Subbu Naida v, Varadarajidu Naida, (1947) 1 M.L.J. 90.
2. Raga of Bobbiti v. Ineganti Chine Sitaramaswami Garu, (1899) 1.1. 8. 23 Mad 49 (०.८).
3. Chidambaram v. Meyyappon, A.LR. 1946 Mad 298.
4. Ramayya v. Achamma, I.L.R. (1945) Mad. 160 (F.B.) (case iaw reviewed).
5. Vera Raghava Rao v. Gopalarao, (1941) 2 M.LJ. 707 (Pataniali Sastri, J.).

Recommendatio®
toamend section
provisola)


Recommendation
to admit secondary
evidence.

Recommendation
the word “naya”
‘Section 35—
Power to
fequire . security.

Propositions laid
down in case law

136

17.32. The present position ieads to the adoption of various tricks and devices by litigants.

TE the plaintiff can establish his case without proof of a written contract, he succeeds. And that

is what he tries to do.

17.33. The defendant on the other hand, exploits the legal prohibition by suppressing the
document and by stating that it was unstamped.t

17.34, Even an oral admission of the contents of the document by the defendant® is not
admissible,? if the instrument is not stamped, unless* the admission is made for the purposes of
the proceedings.* .

In our view, this lacuna should be rectified.

17.35. While on section 35, we may state that the word “naya” before the word “paisa”
should now be omitted, having regard to current usage.

17.36. It has been suggested* with reference to section 33 that provision should be made
to require deposit. it will, however, increase work, and we are not inclined to accept it.

17.37. Under section 36, where an instrument has been admilted in evidence, such admis-
sion shall not, except as provided in section 61, be called in question at any stage of the same
suit or proceeding on the ground that the instrument has not been duly stamped. so,

17.38, With reference to this section, courts have laid down a few propositions, of which
the following are noteworthy :~-

(1) When a court passes an order that the document does not require any stamp or is duly
stamped, the order should be treated as final.” पु

(2) The section is mandatory. Once a document is admitted in evidence, rightly or wrongly,
whether with or without objection from any party, it is not permissible to the court, whether
it is a Court of appeal, revision or trial court, to reject it on the ground that it has not been
duly stamped.*-!° Stamp matters are no concern of the parties, and if, notwithstanding an
objection, the trial Court admits the document, the matter stops there, and the Court cronot
subsequently order the deficiency to be made up and penalty paid or, on failure to do bo,
reject that document.*+ हु

(3) The section is not limited in its application to cases in which an instrument not duly
stamped has been admitted in evidence by the trial court. The admission in evidence of an
instrument by an appellate court is equally a bar to a subsequent objection to its admissibility.’*

(4) The words “admitted in evidence” refer to the act of letting the document jn a} part
of the evidence, either as a result of judicial determination of the question whether it 18 ’adméaaible
for want éf stamp, or because no objection was taken to its admissibility.1*-**

1, See Sublish Pillai v. Muthathal Acki, A.IR. 1946 Mad, 457.
2, Section 22, Evidence Act,
3. (a) LL.R. 1938 Mas. 933, 954 (Varadachariar, J.).
(b) 14 Bomb. , 102, 111
(०) Theji Bi v. Tiramslappa, LL.R. 30 Mad. 386.
4. LL.R. 1938 Mad, 933, 954 (Varadachariar, J)
5. Section 58, Evidence Act.
6. S.No. 119 (Chandigath Administration).
7
8

" Hiralal v. Jagmohandas, A,J.R. 1957 M.P. 206.
Ma Pwa May v, SR.HLM.A. Chettiar Firm, ALR, 1929 P.C. 279,281.
9. V.EA. Anmamuiai Chettiar v. Veerappa Chettiar, ALR. 1986 SC. 12.
10. Javer Chand v, Pukhroj Surana, ALR. 1961 S.C, 1565, 1656, para 4.
Chand ¥. Dharam Chand, ALR, 1655 MP. I
12 Lacan Bhagwan ano Ram Stankar ALR. 1938 Ait as,
13, (8) Ratan Lal प्र, Jandas, A.LR.1954 Raj. 173;
(०) Lodi v. Zitulhag, ALR. 1939 All 588.
14, 4.2. Sehib ४. Sankaian Mandhavan, ALR. 1957. Ker. 105.


137

Once the Court, rightly or wrongly, decides to admit a document in evidence, then, so
far as the parties are concerned, the matter is closed, and the admission cannot be called in
question at any stage of the suit or proceeding on the ground that the instrument had not
been duly stamped.*

(5) What section 36 prohibits is the calling in question at any stage of the admission of
a document on the ground of its no? being duly stamped.?-*

17.39. In a Rajasthan case,‘ there was a difference of opinion about the interpretation of Controversy as
the words “admitted in evidence". The majority were of the view that a document can be ‘0 ’adm “admitted in
said to be admitted in evidence only when it is formally proved and tendered in evidence. A *
mere finding that the document is admissible does not bring section 36 into operation. The
High Court confirmed the view expressed on this point in an earlier Rajasthan case.*

17.39A. The minority (Bhargava J.), however, took the view that once the duty is paid
and document regarded as admissible section 36 should apply.

17.40, We are of the epinion that the majority view in the Rajasthan case is correct, and
that there is no aeed to amend the section.

17.41, Section 37 empowers the State Government to make rules providing that where section 37—
an instrument bears a stamp of sufficient amount but of improper description, the instrument !€eductory.
may, on payment of the duty with which the same is chargeable, be certified to be duly
stamped; may instrument so certified shall then be deemed to have been duly stamped as
from the date of its execution. The object of the section is to enable instruments bearing stamp
of improper description io be validated without payment of penalty, the assumption being that
the party has not been guilty of an attempt to defraud government reveaue. ‘The validation is
done by the Collector under the Rules. The section does not mention the authority that can
validate the instrument, and leaves it to the rules,

47:42, We are of the view that the concession should be mandatory, and that no duty Dut

wot to be
should be chargeable. We may mention that many replies* to our questionnaire agree with cae le and cone

17.43. Several points require discussion, with reference to the section 37. First, on the of word
question whether the words “stamp of improper description” inctude also stamps appropriate “stantp of — im-
to 8 purpose outside the Stamp Act (such as, a court fee stamp or a postage stamp), there was Propey, descrip
prenioysly some obscurity. The Allahabad High Court, ia a case? in which a postage stamp was
used, held that these words are not to be interpreted as inclading a description of stamip appro-
priate for purposes outside the Stamp Act, and must be ¢onfined to a stamp which is uséd
for ue! purpose of denoting the Stamp duty chargeable on an. instrument. Thus, according to
the ‘AHlahabad High Court, a postage stamp used for an acknowledgement cannot amount to. 8
“stamp of improper description”, but should be regarded as not a stamp at ell within the mean-
ing: ofthe Act and the rules. In the judgment, there were observations that even a court-fee
stamp would not fall within the section.

19.44, But this view, at least as regards court-fee stamps, must be taken as overruled by
the Privy Council," which has held that it is not correct to say that the section has no-reference
to any stamp except a revenue stamp pure and simple. The Privy Council case involved a
revenue stamp surcharged “court fee", and this was held to be a stamp of improper description

1. Ghasi Patra ५. Brahia Tahasi ALR. 1962 Orissa 35.

2. Ettathara Warrier v. Rochunerayan Menon A.LR. 1962, Ker. 265.
३. Shbhadri v. Varalakastimi, ALR, 1962, A.P. 398.

4, Nanga vy. Dhansial, ALR. 1962 Raj. 68-78, para 36 (F.B.)

3. Godhan Singh v. Sewer Lai A.1.R. 1959 Raj 156.
6. 0.48.
1
8

. Reference under the Stamp Act (1901) LL.R. 23 Ail. 213 (Pastage stamp)
|. Ma Pa May v. S.R.M.M.A. Cheitiar Firm, AJR. 1929 P.C. 279, 282.


Amendment nee-
ded 0 cover
another stamp.

Effect of certi-
ficate,

Amendment noed-
ded to override
section 35,
Proviso.

No, need-to.cover

cases of stamps of
lesser amount.

Recommendation
bd revise section

138

within the meaning of the section. Even a postal, forest or telegraph stamp, whidh is totally
outside the purpose of the Stamp Act, has been regarded as covered by the section.? a

17.45. In our opinion it would be useful to amend the section, so as to incorporate the
wider judicial construction of the phrase “stamp of improper description”.

We may note that many replies to our Questionnaire favour such an amendment.”

17.46. The second point concerns the relationship of section 37 with section 35. In
an Andhra Pradesh case,? a promissory note on an impressed stamp, though certified by the
Collector under section 37, was nevertheless held to be outside the scope of section 37. The
reason given was, that the exception to the proviso to section 35 was a bar to the admissibility
of the note, and that the certificate under section 37 could not prevail against the specific
provisions of section 35, proviso. With great respect, section 37 does not necessitate such के
narrow view of the scope of the section. If the certificate cures the defect in stamp, it should be
taken as curing it for all purposes.

17.47. We are of the view that having regard to the beneficial object of section 37, it
should be made clear that it will override the proviso to section 35. Such a course has been
fayoured* by most of the replies to our Questionnaire.

17.48. We note that section 37 is confined to instruments bearing sufficient stamp. Should
it be extended to instruments bearing stamp of wrong description but of lesser amount than

that chargeable ?
We have considered this aspect, but are not inclined to recommend a change.

17.484. In the light of the above discussion we recommend the following re-draft :--

Revised section 37

37, (1) Where ........ an instrument bears a stamp of sufficient amount but of im-
proper description, the instruments shall; without payment again of the duty with which the
same is chargeable be certified to be duly stamped, subject to such rules as the State Geter
ment may make as to the procedure for the gram of such certificates. .

(2) Any instrument so certified shall then be deemed to have been duly stamped as from

+ the date of its execution, notwithstanding anything 10 the contrary contained in section 35 or in

any other section,

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, a stamp used for indicating the conurefes
or postage paid is also a stamp of improper description.

In making this recommendation, we are conscious that the constitutional scheme. for the
distribution of the proceeds of taxes is not! idoatioal in regard to courtfees and noa-judicial
stamps aud postage stamps.

We presume that the Central Government will have no objection to the proposéd validation
ct instruments bearing court-fee stamps. ‘ ‘

1. (913) 101.C. 702 (Nagpur cited in Aanjtr Singh vi Bokramji, A.LR. 1957 Madhye —Goip TOL E702 (Nagpur) ed in Ranjit Stigh vi Botvami, ALR. 1987 Madhya Bharat 181) 182, pita 5,

(Chaturvedi,J.)
2. QaT.
3. Branna v. Madappa, ALR. 1963 A.
4, ९.48.

P. 457 distinguished in Anoop Chard v. Nashmal, A.LR. 1983 Maj, 114.


ह CHAPTER 18
IMPOUNDING AND CONNECTED PROVISIONS— SECTION 38—47

18.1. An imstrument not sufficiently stamped ts impounded under sections 33—35. Aiter Seenon * 38—

this is done, the question arises what further action should be taken. Section 38 is one of
the principal sections providing for what is to be done with an impounded instrument. If the
deficit duty and penalty are paid, the impounding officer is, under section 38(1), required to send
to the Collector an authenticated copy of such instrument, together with a certificate in writing
setting out certain particulars. Further action in regard to the copy of the instrument is
then taken under section 39. .

If a party does not pay the deficit duty and penalty under section 35, the court has to
impound the instrument under section 33, and forward it to the Collector under section 38(2)
It is: then fac the Collector to give his decision under section 40 about the proper duty and
penalty {if any) to be charged

18.2. This, in general, is the scheme of the section, We have gone through the. impertant*
cases under section 38; and find tha’ they do not reveal any serious difficulty in the working of
the section.

However, one verbal point requires to be considered under section 38(1), and with refer-
ence to section 38(2), a suggestion will have to be dealt with,

18.3. The point concerning section 38(1) is this—At present, under section 38(1), when

Introductory.

caselaw.

Section 380

the person impounding an instrument under sectios 33 has by law or consent of partics authority Recommendation

to googive evidence and admits such instrument in evidence upon payment of “a penalty” a
provided. by section 35 or of “duty” as provided by section 37, he shall send to the Ccllector
an authenticated copy of such instrument, together with the ‘prescribed certificate,

. Gyr recommendation is that the words “duty and” should be added where section 38(1)
tefere to section 35

18.4. As to sub-section (2) of section 38, a suggestion for an amendment, received from
3 State Government’ may. now be deal with Section 38(2), as alroady stated, provides, that
in pases not. falling under section 38(1), (that is to say, ia cases other than those where the
pexson impounding au instrument not duly stamped has authority io receive evidence and admits
the ‘instrument in evidence upon payment of a penalty), the person impounding the instrument
shall send it in original to the Collector. Under section 40, the Collector so receiving the, instru-
ment amity either certify by endorsement on the instrument that it is duly stamped or not ‘charge-
able with duty, or, if he is of opision that such instrument is not duly stamped, may require
payment of the proper duty together with the penalty; and. after the Collector has so dealt
with the instcument, he has 10 return it to the impounding officer after an endorsement to that
effect wader section 42(2}, then the instrument shall become admissible in evidence, and shall
be delivered to the person from whose possession it came into the hands of the officer impound-
ing it etc.

1 (a) Peary Lai y. Sukiian Ram, ALR, 1925 All. 478. ee a
(0) In re Stkdo Prasad, A.L.R, 1934 All, 1054,
(©) Manganese Minerals Ltd. ९, State of West Bengal, A.LR. 1960 Cal. 340.
(व) Jai Narain v. Yasin Khan, ALR, 1955 छत, 21.
(को TK. Rantharaj v. Md. Nazeer Khan A.LR. 1959 Mys. 172.
(1 Vasudevan v, Krishan Ramnath, ALR, 1953 T.C. 559.
1 Suggestion af the erstwhile Goveramant of Madras, Flie No. F. 44V37-Pt. 1, L.C. 5, No. 5.

139

is for verbal change.

Section. (2)
suggestion of
state Government


Scheme of
section 382).

Saggeation consi.

140

Jf the instrument so sent in original’ is -lost, destroved or damaged before the Collector
takes action under section 40, then it is not possible (under the Act as it now stands) to collect
the stamp duty and penalty due, with the result that there is a loss of revenue to the Govern-
ment. It has, therefore. been suggested that the person impounding the instrument should,
before sending it to the Collector under section 38(2}, keep an authenticated copy of the
instrument in his custody. {f the original which has to be sent to the Collector, is lost, destroyed
or damaged, then the authenticated copy should, it is suggested, be treated as the original
instrument for the purposes of levying the stamp duty and penalty due, and should be admitted
in evidence on payment of such duty and penalty. An amendment of section 38(2}, to achieve
these two objects, has heen proposed by the State Government.

18.5. Before expressing our view as te the point raised in the suggestion, we should
consider in detail the scope of section 38(2). There are two cases in which impounding of
instruments not duly stamped is provided for by the Act namely, (i) where a person has authority
to receive evidence or (ii) where a person is in charge of a public office, provided (in both
cases}, the instrument chargeable with duty is produced before him or comes before him in
the performance of nis functions. Tn the first case, that, is to say, where a person impounding
has authority to receive evidence, if the party pays the penalty, then the instrument impounded
can be admitted in evidence, and need not be sent to the Collector! In that case the person
impounding stnds only a copy cases a Certificate (that is) to the Collector.” In “other cases”,
he has to send the original to the Collector! Those “other cases” would appear to be the
tollowing.—

(i) Where the person impounding has no authority by law or consent of parties to
receive evidence ;

(ii) Where be has such authority, but the party concerned does not pay the duty
{or the deficiency in duty) and the penalty etc. ; ,

(ili) Where, even if the party concerned is prepared to pay the doty or the penalty,
the instrument cannot, by virtue of the exceptions given in the proviso to the
relevant acction® be admitted in evidence,® under the present law.

In these cases, the person impounding must send the instrument in original. There is a
provision’ for preparing a copy of the instrument, but even when a copy is prepared under that
section, what us sent fo the Collector is the original.

18.6. Now, the suggestion is, that before sending the original, the. person impounding should
keep an authenticated copy. If the original is lost before action is taken under section 40(1)
then (it is suggested) the copy should be treated as the original for the purpose of the Sevy
of the penalty etc. and also for the purpose of the Indian Evidence Act 1872.

This suggestion of the State Goverament was circulated by the Government of India* to
other State Governments. It appears,® that many State Governments were in favour of the
suggested change. One State Government was not, however, in favour of the change suggested.
‘on the ground, first, that the proposal would increase the work in the public offices concerned
and secondly, that the change was not necessary, as cases of original documents being fost or

damaged were very few,
Another State Government suggested that the copy of the document be made at the: cost.

of the person producing it.

Section 38 (2)

|. Section 38 (1)

Section 38 (1).

Section 38 (2)

Section 35(1), proviso (3)

Compare (English) Stamp Act, 1891, (54 & 55 Vic. C 39), Section 14 (1)
Section 46

| Ministry of Finance (Revenue Division)

S. No, 8 File No. F* 3 (4)/57-L.C. Pt. 1


141

The comment of another State Government was, that the impounding officer should keep

the original with himself, and should send only a copy to the Collector for the levy of duty. and -

penalty.

18.7. We have consideced the suggestion, and the points made in the comments expressed Varlons alter-

theeron. While the object of the suggestion is good, we are of the view that certain considera.
tions-~such as increase in oflice work-—cannot be brushed aside, Cases of loss of an instrument
in transit would be rare. ‘To meet ‘those rare cases, we do not think that a copy should be
prepared in every case, And, in our view, there is no case for a change in the present law.

In response to our Questionnaire! also, while many replies have favoured such amendment
as is set out below, some do not think that, to meet rare cases, a change should be made in
the section. है

18.8. However, if the Government does consider some change necessary, then, in our
view, the alternative suggested by another Statc Government, namely, that the original should
be kept by the impounding officer and a copy should be sent to the Collector, is preferable to
other alternatives. If the original is sent to the Collector and lost in transit, and the question
of proof of signature or thumb impression arises, then a copy kept by the impounding officer
would not bs of much utility, and there would be difficulties. Where the party interested or the
person producing is not prepared to pay the cost of preparing the copy, we do not think that
the person impounding ‘he iustrument should be required to prepare an authenticated copy.
No doubt, if the original is lost in transit and the penalty cannot be levied, a loss is thereby
Caused to the revenue. But, against this Joss, should be offset the increase in work and cost
that will arise if an authenticated copy is required to be prepared in every case. It should
be remembered, that the acceptance of the suggestion of the State Government would mean
‘that.in every case an authenticated copy should be prepared even though the cases in which
Joss af the instrument occurs in transit would be only a fraction of the cases in which action
4s taken under section 38(2). We think that the existing provision need not be disturbed where
nobody comes forward to bear the cost of preparing the copy. Even in regard to the few
cases where loss may occur, an option may be left to the party.

_ 18.9. We, therefore, recommend thet if Government consider necessary that the section
shoulil. be amended, the following? proviso may be inserted ‘in section 38(2) :— ms

“Provided that where the person who produced the instrument, or any party interested,
is prepared 10 pay the cost of preparing a copy of the instrument, then—-

(a) an authenticated copy of the instrument shall be got prepared by the person
impounding the instrument ;

{b) only the authenticated copy shail be seit to the Collector ;

(९) the Collector shail take action on tlhe authenticated copy as if # were the
instrument in original ; and

(d) any certificate to be endorsed with reference to the instrument by the Collector
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 40 or under sub-section (1)
of section 42 shall be endorsed on the authenticated copy; and when that copy
us received back by the person impounding the instriament® ihas person shall
copy the certificate on the original instrument and also authenticate such copy
of the certificate.”

1 049.

3, Sach consequential changes as may be necessary in other section, nay be carried out.

1, As to ceturn of the instrument to the person impounding, see seclion 402] and cases cited in Mulla, Stamp Act,
(1963) nage 146, Footnote (x). . .

34 M of Lowf?77—19

Recommendation.


142

Becton eA 18,10, At this stage. it is necessary to depart from the sequence of sections and to refer to
from section 4 46), section 46. That section reads :--
“46. (1) If any instrument sent to the Collector under section 38, sub-section (2),
is lost, destroyed or damaged during uansmission, the person sendiqg the same
shall not be liable for such loss, destruction or damage.

(2) When any instrument is about to be so sent, the person from whase possession
it came into the hands of the person impounding the same, may require a copy
thereof to be made at the expense of such first-mentioned person and authenti:
cated by the person impounding such instrument.”

Recommendation 18.11, In our opinion, section 46 should be transposed after section 38, since its subject
section 46 35 matter is connected with section 38. Accordingly, we recommend that new section 38A should be
section 384. inserted, incorporating the substance of section 46

Certain verbal changes are needed in section 46, if section 38(2) is revised en the lines
discussed above.!

(i) To section 46(1), the words “or authenticated copy”, should be added, if section
38(2) is revised.

(ii) Section 4612) becomes redundant, if section 38(2) is revised.
18.12. Section 39 deals with the power of the Collector to refund the penalty gaid in

Section 39,
ceron respect of an instrument, a copy: whereof is sent to him under section 30(1), that is to say,
an instrument impounded by reason of deficiency in stamp.
It needs no change.
Section 40. 18.13. Section 40 deals with the Collettor’s power to stamp instruments impounded. under

the Act. Usually, the impounding of the instrument is by some other officer, who: senda. it
to the Collector under section 38{2). But‘ it cowld be by the Collector himself, if the: decu-
ment is produced before him in the performence of his ordinary functions, The procedsr: to
be followed by the Collector in both the cases is laid down in section 40.

If the Collector is of opinion that the instrument is duly stamped or is not chargeable
With duty, he certifies. accordingly by. eadorsement. under section 40{1)(2) Under action
40(2), this certificate is conclusive evidence of the matters stated therein, for the purpdses of
the Act. TE the Collector thinks that the instrament is.chargeable, and not properly stamped, he
shall require payment under section 40(1) (b}.

18.14. While section 40, sub-section (1) (७), empowers the Collector to “require” the

Obecority as a stamp duty or deficiency to be paid, it is silemt as to the person or persons who can be
Be regetred to required to pay the same. Therc is no distinct. provision in section. 40, or anywhere else in
Pay. the Act, empowering the Collector to demand the proper stamp duty and penalty from the person
who produces in Coutt. .

According to the High Court of Allahabad,? it is the person who wishes a decument to
be edmitted in evidence in Court, who is primarily the person from whom the requisite duty
and penalty should be recovered in the first instance, and if it is due from ॥ third person, he
can recover it under section 44

The Lahore High Court, has dissented from the above view. According to it, the Coust
or the Collector cannot ccmpel such person {i.e., a person. not origiaalty bound to bear the
expenses of providing the duty), to pay the duty and penalty, If he chooses to pay, section. -
44 enables him to recover the same. But the stamp duty and penalty caa-compulsogily. be
cecovered only from the person liable to pay the proper stamp duty in the first instenew.:: The,

1. See discussion as to section 38(2).
2. Secretary of State v. Bhaskarat Ullah, LL.R. 30 AD. 271



3

persan not so liable is not subject to compulsory recovery under section 48. It was also
observed that if, in a particular case, the Stamp Act did not fix the liability for payment on
any particular person, then the Collector should keep the impounded document in his custody,
and no person interested in the deed would be able to make any use of it unless and until
the necessary duty and penalty were paid.

18.15. The Lahore view appears to us to be more logical, and should be adopted. We Resommengs-
shall deal with the maiter in detail' under section 48. son,

48,16. Intentional omission to stamp an instrument is dealt with strictly by the Act, Section 41

particularly section 40; but there may be cases where the omission to duly stamp on instru-
ment has been occasioned by accident, mistake or urgent necessity. To provide for such
cases, section 41 enacts that a person may produce the instrument within one year from the
date of its execution or first execution, and bring to the notice of the Collector the fact that
it is not duly stamped, and offer to pay the deficiency. If the Collector is satisfied that the
omission to duly stamp such instrument has been occasioned by one of the causes enumerated
above, the Collector may receive such amount (i¢., the amiount offered by the person pro-
ducing the instrument), and proceed as provided in later sections of ihe Act.

No poiats of substance require to be discussad in connectian with section 41. But reading
of the section would be facilitated if it is split up into paragraphs. It is also desirable that
the fact that the omission was due to accident ote. should be brought in the forefront in the
section.”

18.17. Section 42 reads thus—-

“42(1) When the duty and penalty (if any), leviable in respect of any instrument
have been paid under section 35, section 40 or section 41, the person admitting
such instrument in evidence or the Collector, as the case may be, shall certify
by endorsement thereon that the psoper.duty or, as the case may be, the :proper
duty and penalty (stating the amount of ‘sach) have been levied in Tespect
thereof, and the name and residence of the jpersan paying them.

(2) Every instrument so endorsed shall thereupon be admissible in evidence, and
may be cegistered and acted upon and. authenticated as if it had been duly
stamped, and shall be delivered on his. application in this behalf to the person
from whose possession it came inte the hands of the officer impounding it, or
as. Stteh person may direct :

Provided that—

(a) no instrument which has been admitted in evidence upon payment of duty
and a penalty under section 35, shall be’ so delivered before the expiration
ef one month from the date of such impounding, or if the Collector hes
certified that its further detention is necessary and has not cancelled ‘such
certificate ;

(७) nothing in this section shall affect the Code af Civil Proneture, section 144,
clause 3,”

. 18.18. In the proviso, clause (b), there is a reference to section 144, alause 3, Code of.
(Cawit Procedure (1882),-which related to the retum of documents. The.matter is now governed
by onder.13, rule 9, of the Code of Civit Procedure, 1908. Reference thereto should be substituted.

18.19. We are also of the view that section 42 shbultt be ptaced before section 41, since Transposition of
the action taken under section 41 is independent of the preceding sections. The subject matter '

1. To be considered under section 48.
-. For redraft of section 41, see discussion as 10 section 42.


Eadorsement of
instruments = OD
which duty hes
pene i वि
i section
42(1) in part).
(Bxistiig ‘section
42(2) in part].

(Existing section
40).

may Pik a
in ‘certain cases,

144

18.20. Accordingly, we recommend that sections 41-42 should be revised as foliows ‘—=
हु Revised sections 41-42, renumbered and transposed .

41. (i) When the duty and penalty (if any), Jeviable in respect of any instrument
have been paid under section 25, or section 40, the person admitting such instrument in evidence
or the Collector, as the case may be, shall certify by endorsement thereon that the proper duty
or, as the case may be, the proper duty and penalty (stating the amount of each) have been
levied in respect thereof, and the name and residence of the person paying them.

(2) Every instrument so endorsed shall thereupon be admissible in evidence, and may
be registered and acted upon und authenticated as if it had been duly stamped, and shall be’
delivered, on an application in this behalf made by the person from whose possession it came
into the hands of the officer impounding it, to that person or according to his directions :

Provided that—

(a) no instroment which has been admitted in evidence upon payment of duty and
a penalty under section 35, shall be so delivered before the expiratior of one
month from the date of such impounding, or if the Collector has certified that
its further detention is necessary and has not cancelled such certificate ;

{b) nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of rule 9 of Order माय in
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

42. (1)(a) 16 any instrument chargeable with duty and not duly stamped is produced by
any person of his own motion before the Collector within one year from the date of its
execution or first execution,

(b) such person brings to the notice of the Collector the fact thar such instrument is
not, duly stamped and the omission to duty. stamp such instrument was occasioned by actident,
mistake or urgent necessity, and offers to pay to the Collector the amount of the proper duty,
or the amount required to make up the same, and

(०) the Collector is satisfied that the omission to duly stamp such instrument has been
occasioned by accident, mistake or urgent necessity, the Collector may, instead of proceeding
under sections 33 and 40, receive such amount and proceed as next hereinafter prescribed.

(2) When the duty leviable in respect of any instrument has been paid under sub-section
(1), the Collector shall certify Ey endorsement thereon that the proper duty has been levied in
respect thereof, and the name and residence of the person paying theri. .

(3) Every instrument so endorsed: shall .thereupon .be admissible in evidence, .and ‘may
be ‘registered and ected upon and authenticated as if it had been duly stamped, and shall be
delivered on his application in this behalf tp the person. who produced it or according to his
directions.

18.21, No change is needed in section 43.

18.22. Under section 44(1}, when any duty or penalty has been paid under seciion 35,
section 37, section 40 or section 41, by any person in respect of an instrument, and, dy

iy agreement or under the provisions of section 29 or any other enactment in force! at the time
ie such instrument was executed, some other person was bound to bear the expense of providing

the proper stamp for such iastrument, the first-mentioned person shall be entitled ‘to rkeover

from such other person the amount of the duty or penalty so paid.

Sub-section (2) provides that for the. purposes of such recovery, any certificate granted
in respect of such instrument under this Act shall be conclusive evidence of the matters therein
certified.


145

According to sub-section (3), such amount may, if the Court thinks fit, be included in
any order as to costs in any suit or proceeding to which such persons are parties and in which
such instrument has been tendered in evidence. If the Court does not include the amount in
such order, no further proceedings for the recovery of the amount shall be maintainable.

18.23. (a) In view of the proposed renumbering of sections 41 and 42. consequential Section 44
changes should be made? in section 44(1) ; Changes in.

(b) In section 44(3), second sentence, (power to include costs), it is desirable to add
the words “for reasons to be recorded”, before the words “include the amount in such order”.

We recommend that section 44 should be amended as above.

18.24, Section 45 reads— . Section 45—
+ + . . वि Power to Re
“45.(1) Where any penalty is paid under section 35 or section 40, the Chief veme authority :
to refund inal

Controlling Revenne-authority may, upon application in writing made within or ०००३ Baap tn
one year from the date of the payment, refund such penalty wholly or in part. certain cases.

(2) Where, in the opinion of the Chief Controlling Revenuc-authority, stamp-duly
in excess of that which is legally chargeable has been charged and paid under
section 35 or section 40, such authority may, upon application in writing made
within three months of the order charging the same, refund the excess.”

18.25. In section 45(2), we recommend the substitution of “one year” for “three months”. Recommendation,
The period should be uniform under both the sub-sections.

18.26. We have already considcred? section 46. Section 46,

18,27. Under section 47, when any bill of exchange or promissory note chargeable with ६५५० 47—
a duty not exceeding ten naye paise is presented for payment unstamped, the person to whom Power of payor
it Is so presented, may affix thereto the necessary adhesive stamp, and, upon cancelling the 10720,
same. “in manner hereinbefore provided.” may pay the sum payable upon such bill or note, notes received by
aad may charge the duty against the person who ought to have paid the same, or deduct it hist wostamped.
feom the sum payable as aforesaid, and such bill or noté shall, so far as respects the duty,
be:deemed good and valid.

Under the proviso, the section shali not relieve any person from any penalty or proceeding
to which he may be liable in relation to such bill.

4" "We recommend that in section 47, the word “the” should be added before the word
‘manner’.

aie.
4, flee discussion as to sections 41 and 42. (supre)
4, See section 384 Supra,



Tateoduction.

Section 48
Obscurity.

Cases snacidicall
deal, my 12208,
and 30,

19, #

CHAPTER 19
RECOVERY FROM PERSON FROM WHOM DUTY IS DUB

19.1. A very important topic, which comes up again and again before the courts but
which, unforcunately, is not dealt with directly and specifically in the Act, now requires to
be considered.

19.2, Section 48 provides that all duties, penalties and other sums required to ‘be paid’
under this Chapter may be recovered by the Collector by distress and sale of the movable
property of the “person from whom the same are due”, or by any other process for the time
being iu force for the recovery of the arrears of land-revenue.

As to the “person from whom the duty is due” within the meaning of this section, the
section is silent.

While discussing? section 40, we had said that the matter will be considered under section
48, ic. the question as to who is the person liable to pay the duty etc. for the purposes of
recovery under the Act, where the duty ete. is not paid by the party produning: the document.
The difficulty is created by the words “under this Chapter”. Do they include section 40(1),(b) ?

The order under section 40(1)(b) need not be addressed 10 any person. Tt is a ieter-
mination that the instrument is— :

(i) chargeable with a particular.duty, and
(1) not duly staraped. है

The order is an order in the abstract. It determines the payability, ‘but not the फुल
liable to pay. The petson producing the document pays, but the order ‘under seation 40( 1) (७)
does not say that Ae skould pay. The order is an impersonal order. These is:0n siemens
of compulsion, inasmuch as, without payment, the Collector would not rerum the -dovement
under section 40(3). But there is no decision as to the person liable.

19.3. There is considerable obscurity in this respect, and the obscurity arises’ pristrily
from the fact that, excepting in a very limited number of cases,? the Act does aot give; any
specific and comprehensive guidance as to the person who is to be regarded as one Tighe 10
pay stamp duty. There are elaborate provisions in the Act as to the instruments which are
chargeable to duty? and as to the time of stamping,‘ and also a5 to the mode of ubiag stanip.®
However, excepting for a few cases, it is not easy to ascertain from the provisidéms of “the
Act the person who is bound to pay the duty within the meaning of section 48.

19.4. The cases specifically dealt with are contained in—(i) section 19, which relates
10 bills and notes drawn out of India, (ii) section 29, which, in the case of certain instruments,
provides as to who shall bear the burden of proper stamp, and (iii) section 30, dealing with
receipts, Section 29 is a somewhat general provision, though not exhaustive And even~ that
section does not very clearly indicate whether it is to operate as between the parties, or whether
it is to operate also between the State on the one hand, and the private party on the other hand,
50 as to be available for interpreting section 48.

4, See discussion as to section 40, supra.
3, Sections 19, 29, 30 See infra.

+, Section 3

+. Sections 17, 18 and 19,

4, Sections 10 to 16,

146


147

1944. When the question of production of an instrument before a court or public officer Nazigus persans
atises, section 35 steps in, and provides the machinery for the recovery of stamp and penalty. various sections.
But, here again, it is not clear whether the person who is interested in producing the document
in evidence under section 35 is also the person against whom section 48 can be applied, if
he does not deposit in court the duty and penalty.

The executant, who is the person bringing the document into existence, would appear
to Be primarily liable to the State under section 17, which says that all instruments chargeable
with’ duty and executed by any person in India, shall be stamped, before or at the time of
execution, Under section 62 also, in most cases, the executant is liable to be prosecuted. and
punished for executing or signing, otherwise than as a witness, an instrument chargeable with
duty, without the same being duly stamped. .

Thus, even assuuning that they can be pressed into service for the purposes of section
48,—the provisions referred to above do not yield a uniform answer as to the question, who
is the person liable ?

¥9%5. Judicial decisions are also not unanimous. The conflict of views on the question Joter-relationship
whether persons liable to pay the duty under an agreement cr under section 29 are also of section 29 with
te portons to be regarded as liable under section 48 as the persons from whom the. duty is grote Ae

Gee, cad be thus summarised.

{a) One view on the subject is that such. persons are not liable under section 48, and
-tikat.anly the executent of the instrument can be called upon to pay the duty under section 48.1

(0) Another view is that only the persons liable under section 29 or under any agreement
५ arg-fhe persons from whom the duty can be recovered? under section 48. According to this
vidw, 18 cases not covered by section 29, the instrument can merely be impounded, but no
‘ene js liable to be called upon to pay the duty and penalty until it is sought to use the

‘Ta an Orissa case, there was a demand for additional duty om the vendor. No finding हि
that’ there was ‘agreement to the contrary’ was recorded, It was held that’ the demand. was Section 2%)
illegal. The vendee (and not the vendor) was liable, Section 29(c) was relied upon. This
case illustrates the view taking section 29 as the criterion.

(मरे. On the liability of the person producing, there ig a conflict of decisions. One view
eg. the pubject is that the duty can be recovered under section 48 from the person producing
the document also. But this view has been dissented. from.*-"

i. $d}: A fourth view is that both the executant and the parties liable under section 29 or
‘Dy. agement, can be called upon to pay the duty under section 48.. This was the view of
Bifinigpenkaran J., in an Andhra case.®

19.6. 19 view of the obscurity and uncertainty of the position in regard to” the inter:
wplationabip of section 29 and similar sections on the one hand, and section 48 on the other Need for clariBce-
heed, itis desirable that the matter should be pat beyond Houbt. It is neither in the imterests ton.
of the State nor in the interests of the citizen that liability to bear the tax should be left im doptt,

11 Stbvamaniam Chertiar v. Revenue Divisional Officer, ALR. 1956 Mad. 454.
#४॥ कक Secretary कई ‘State, (1939) Nag. L.J. 364, referred to in 26. Romaswan v, State of Travancore,
1957 Travaucore-Cochin 251, 252, :
Rao y. Additional District Magistrate, Koraput, Ag1.R. 1915 Orissa 209,
. law reviewed in Mohamed Hussain ¥. Emperor, ALR. 1940 Lah. 315, See also ALR, 1970 MP, 74,
Si Steretary af State v. Basarstullak, (1903) 1L.R. 30 All 271. -
6: Mohamed Hussain v. Emperor, AIR, 1940 Lab. 315.
7, As to joint and several liability, see ALR. 1962 Mad, 425 and (197) 2 M.L.J. 567 and A.LR. 1970 MLP. 74.
8. Board of Revenue v. Appala Narasimhotn, (1957) Andtua Weekly Reporter 288 (F-B.} (Bhimasankeran J.)



Lines oa which

148

19.7, As to the lines on which the section should be amended, we are in broad agtee-

eee बाद With what Bhide J. said in the Lahore High Court in Muhammad Hussain's case. In
view of Bhide J. the Lahore case, Bhide J. observed :

quoted.

Fin

Basic question,

“Te the intention of the Legislature was that the necessary duty or penalty should be
recovered from the person whe wishes to have the document admitted in Court, one would
have expected to find some provision to that effect in the section itself or at least somewhere
else in the Act. But no such provision has been made. The reason is, 1 think, not far to
seek. When a person wishes to have a document admitted in Court for the purpose of his
case, it may often be to his interest to pay the duty and penalty at once in order 10 get the
document admitted in evidence, as the person who was originally bound to bear the expense
of providing the stamp duty may not be traceable at the time or may not be prepared to pay
the duty or penalty voluntarily.

“If he does so to suit his convenience, the provisions of section 44 enable hin to recover
the same from the person who was originally bound to bear the expense of providing the
duty. But there is nothing in section 35 or section 40 to enable either the Court or the
Collector to compel the person who wishes to have the document admitted in evidence in
Court to pay the duty or penalty. “The only reasonable inference ia the circumstances seema
to be that the payment of such duty or penalty is left to his choice under these sections.
There seems, in fact, no good reason why a person, who merely wishes to have a document *
admitted in evidence, should be compelled to pay the duty or penelty thereon, when he is not
the person who was originally bound to bear the expense of providing the duty. If he does
Tot choose to pay the duty and penalty under section 35 or section 40, he has to take the
Comsequence of not being able to use the document. But it would be obviously hard and
unfair to compel such a person to pay the duty on the document merely because he attempted
10 produce it in evidence. The stamp duty may be heavy and he may not be even in a
position to pay it, or it may not be worth his while to do so, for the purposes of his case. The
Legislature therefore seems to have advisedly left the matter to his choice. It is true that
the Collector may not be able to trace easily the executant or the person bound to pay the
duty on the document in such cases and there may be some inconvenience ag a result in
collecting the stamp duty or penalty. But this can scarcely justify penalizing a person who was
not responsible for paying the stamp duty at the time of the execution of the document,” 5

We find ourselves in broad agreement with this view.

19.8, The objection that if the person producing the document is not made liable, then
there is no other method of recovery, was answered in the Lahore case.? It was pointed out
there that the document can be impounded: हि

19.9, There is also the basic question to be considered, namely, is it logical to compel
the person producing the document to pay the duty and penalty when the primary obligation
was not his? After all, provisions by way of sanctions are secondary, and are inteasled to
enforce an original liability that has been separately created. Since sections 40 and 48 are
silent as to the person from whom the duty is due, it would hardly be appropriate ta apply.
the sanction under section 48 against the person producing the document merely ‘becatwe. he
happens to have produced the document, when the original liability was not created against
him by any other provision. हि

19.10, The point may be raised that section 40 is mentioned in section 44, and this most
have some meaning. The answer is thet this pact of section 44 can come inte ipluy- where
the person producing the document but not peying the duty etc. in court later chobses to pay
the duty in Ais own interest, Exigencies of litigation force him to do so, and, in ghat situation,
he must have a remedy against the person bound to pay the duty. Section 44 ddes not ;

व. Muhamanad Hussain v. Buperor, ALR. 1940 Lab. 315, 317.
2, Mohamed Fassafe. v, Emperor, ALR, 1940 Lahore 315 (sapra).


149

With the right of the State to levy the stamp duly and-penalty under sections 40 and 48:1. The
basic question to be examined is;-on whom is.the duty imposed ?.. Whatever may be the correet
answer to this question, it is certainly not to be answered from sections 40 and +4, which are
themselves ambiguous.

19,41. Thus, apart from (i) the juristic impropriety of enforcing a sanction against a
person not primarily liable, und (ii) the fact that section 44 can be satisfactorily explained
otherwise, there is also the question of hardship. The person from whose possession the docu~
Toeat came cannet be used as an instrument for recovery of the penalty merely by saying
that he himself can recover it under section 44. If A is not Hable to pay a tax, it would not
be equitable to force Avto do ६0 and givé him a remedy to‘recover it from B who is the person
liable to pay the tax.

19.12. Making the person ‘producing the instrament liable has the merit that the Collector
can easily recover (he duty from him. But such a provision has several defects—

{a} It is not in furtherance of the scheme of the Act regarding lability to bear the
daty. है हैं

‘There is no provision in the #0- making a- person. who-merely presents an insufficiently
stamped document for being admitted in evidence, liable for payment of:the requisite stamp
daty or penalty on the document. He cannot, therefore, be considered to be a “person from
whom the stamp duty or penalty is due”, and consequently the same cannot be recovered from
him under 5: 48. Jf the stamp duty or penalty has to be recovered compulsorily, it can be
legally recovered, under 5. 48, only from the person from whom the same is due.

(०) Jt is against the view of majority of the High Courts. Hence such a provision
means a radical change.

(९) 10 is juristically wrong, when the original lability is not of the person producing.
Jt is juristically incorrect to apply a sanction against him.

(0) It is unjust also to do so. He had no hand in the execution of the instrument
and, therefore, could not have avoided the default in duty.

(९) It is poor consolation that he can, recover it in his turn, from the person “bound
to bear the expenses”. Imposition of an obligation without proper grounds is
not excused by providing a remedy for re-imbursement which may consume
expense and time.

(0 Moreover, the person who is bound to bear the expenses may not be traceable.
In that case, the person ordered will not be in a better position than the

Collector.

(छ) ॥६ 18 even dovbtful whether the remedy under section 44 will be available in
cases outside section 29.

(h) Thus, to make him liable is against the scheme of the Act, against general legal
principles, against equity and against convenience.

The alternative is to make the executant liable. Section 17 says :

“An instrument chargeable with the duty and executed by any person in India, shall
be stamped befere or at the time of execution.”

Section 62 says that the execwant of such instrument shall, for every such offence, be
punished with fine which may extend 00 Rs. 560, previded-that-when any penalty hes, -been
paid in respect of any instrument under Ss. 35, 40 or 61, the amount of sich pevialey, shail

1. Subramanta vy. R.D.0., A.L.R. 1956 Mad. 454, 438, para 13.
24M of Law/77—-20

Various ts


Amendment—

lines of.

150

be allowed in reduction of the fine, if any, subsequently imposed under ihis section in respect
of the same instrument upon the person who has paid such penalty.

Thus, these sections read together indicate, that the executant of such document.is the
person against whom the Collector should proceed under Ss. 40 and 48 for collecting the
stamp duty and penalty. It is significant that the proviso to s. 62 makes mention also about
the penalty levied under s. 40, and makes a provision for its deduction from the fine,

19,13. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the provisions of sectién 48 should be
enforceable—

(a) against persons who are liable by virtue of scction 19. agreement, or section 29
or 30, as the case may be, and

(9) where none of the above mentioned sections appiy, then against. the person
executing the decument in question.?-?

19.14. We recommend that the Act should be amended on the above lines. We may
state that most replies 10 our Questionnaire have favoured such an amendment. The appro-
priate place for it appears to be in the Chapter containing sections 29-30. It is for these
Teasons that we have recommended the insertion of a new section.’ That will solve questions
arising under section 48 also.

1. Cf. Section 6269). TE


CHAPTER 20
REFUND—SECTIONS 49 TO 55

20.1, While, the last chapier was concerned with the recovery of stamp duties in regard td
instruments not duiy stamped, occasions for refund may arise in regard to instruments duly
stamped. The Act deals with this topic under the curious title of “Allowances for stamps in
certain cases.” The sections concerned deal with spoiled stamps, printed forms no fonger
required by Corporations, misused stamps, stamps not required for use, stamps in denominations
of annas, and renewal of certain debentures, spread over sections 49 to 55.

20.2, Section 49 is a long section. The marginal note describes its subject as “allowance Section 49—
for spoiled stamps”, but, as a matter of fact, the section does not relate to stamps “spoiled” roductory
in the physical sense, that is to say, a stamp which is covered with ink or the like. It deals
with cases where, although expenditure has been incurred on a stamp, the paper has become
useless by reason of one or more of the several circumstances enumerated in the séction. *-2

Of the four clauses in the section,—clauses (a}, (9), (०) and (d),—clauses {4} ‘and
(8) are primarily meant 10 apply to instruments which are not executed by any person, .while
clauses (0) and (d) are primarily intended for instruments which are wholly or partly executed
by some person but have failed in their object or become redundant because of some special
ciroometances, Clause (c) is confined to bills of exchange and promissory sotes,—in respect
of -which a special provision was needed, having regard. to the aspect of negotiability. Clause
(43, which, in practice, is the clause most often resorted to, provides for stampt used for an in-
strument which is executed by a party but has failed in its object or became redundant. Such
failure or redundancy may be due to a legal flaw rendering the instrument void ab initio—sub-

dlawse (1)—or etror or mistake—sub-clause (2)—or death of a party—sub-clause (3)—or
recaltitrance of a person- -sub-clanses (4) and: {5),~~or other causes—sub-clauses (6), (7) asid (8):

20.3. Under the proviso appearing below clause (9) of section 49, the grant of refund is Proviso and
conditional. ‘It postulates, as a condition, that in the case of an executed instrument, no legal hardship cust
Proeacding has been commenced in which the instrument could or would have been given of under eal
oemd ia evidence, aud that the instrument is given up to be cancelled. The condition that 470
the jnstrament should not have been given in evidence creates some problems, where refind
is: applied for under clause (d) (1), which applies where the instrument “has been afterwards
fod: te be absolutely void iu law from the beginning”. Where an instrument is found by the
Pattie: themselves to be void without an order of the court, this proviso creates no probfenis?”
But, where a document is found by 2 court to be void, the document would have been givett
in evidence, and as the law now stands, the refund of the duty cannot be granted im such #
case; because of the condition. The position is not acckiental, but is a result of a_decision
tekee at the time when the present Act was passed. It was then thought, that, in England,
# 8 docement is found by 3 cowrt w be void, refund is not allowed?

Ths English provision—section 97), Stamp Duties Management -Act, 1891, . rpads—

“9. Subject’ to cuch regulations as the Commissloners may think proper tg. make;-
and to the production of. such etidencd by statutory . declaration “or: otherwige-
as the Commissioners may require, allowanege is to be made. by--the: Commis:
sioners for stamps spoiled in the cases hereinafter mentioned ; (that is to say} |

Introductory.

*(7) The 512७ used for any of the following instraments; that is. to say, a
(a) An instrument cxecnted by any party thereto, but afterwards found to be abso;
lately void from the beginning ;” : . an

1. Section 9 (7), Stamp Duties Management Act, 1699642 55Vi.p 38.222

151



modify

tion to
the proviso.

Polats in cc
to veld insu
ments,

152

20.4. Whatever be the English law, the restriction in s. 49 causes hardship, because
a legal decision is, in most cases, necessary to determine that an instrument is void ad initio.
In such cases, the document has to be. given in evidence, but the claim for reliett or the
defence is based not on the documeni but on extraneous circumstances. The restriction has beea
criticised in England also. Jt stands to réason that in such-cases, the Collector should be
empowered to. grant refund, auc we recommend that the proviso should not apply to such
8 0886, ic., 10 a case falling under section 49(d) (1). ‘

20.5. In support of tlhe above discussion several points could be urged. The first’ pot
to be noted is that the case where thé instrument is declared to be void by the court is not
basically different from ihe case where it is found to be void by the parties themselves. Whether
it is the parties which find that the instrument is void, or the court which holds ir to’ ‘be

- so, the consequence is the same, namely, the instrument does not operate by reason of a

flaw recognised in jaw az haviug that cffect.-

The objection could be raised that where the parties approach the court, the time of the
court is spent on determining the validity of the. instrument. But the answer to this objection
is that, for the time of the court so spent, the fee is dealt with in the Court-fees Act. .

20.6. The second point 19 be made is that, in the case of an instrutient declared to be
void, there is even a greater reason for ‘relief than-in the cases dealt with in séction 494d),
clauses (3) to (8). Jn the other cases, it’can Ge said ‘that it’is the conduct: of some: जाल
person that made the instrument iutile, and the revenue should not suffer for these’-actideatal;
or similar circumstances. In the case of a Void instrument, howéver, there’ is fi such citenwe-
tance, and even if afl the cvents are favourable and all the parties cooperate, the instriment
cannot serve its purpose. गा

20.7. Thirdly, it is to be pointed out that an instrument which is given in evidence for the
purpose of declaring its invalidity, is not “acted upon” in the sense? in which that expregion

. 8 ordinarily used. Relief is given not.in futherance of the instrument, but in apposition to

the instrument.

20.8. Fourthly, thé condition meritionéd if the proviso should not: be insisted‘upon-“whete
thy instrument is declared void by the coutt.” In cases falling under other cltusts' of isction
49, the condition that the ixstrument should not have been admitted ‘in evidence: In a hegat
proceeding, causes ao hardship because, in those other cases, the other’ Zegal prooetdiing:
could have proceeded without any specific’ adjudication about the question whethér- the inewax
ment did, or did not, fall within section 49(4) (3), (4) etc.“ In the case of an instrument WHER
is void and so declared, however, tlie.dondition causes peculiar hardship. ~ ४

” 20.9, Fifthly, the question may be raised why a party shouk’ seek a: judiciak:

reasonable apprehension

injury 4 : हु
20.10. Sixthly, in most of the other cases deait with in section 49(d). the object of the

documest has not been gubstanitaly chrtiety ott, while, in the case रब ड्रॉप inrument, not

only has the object not-been carried ont-but alse it cagnot be.carried ont. .

वर. Mason ¥. Motor Traction Company, (1905) 1 Fallon Company (905) Game ai ee ee

2. As to the eapression “acted upon” ia general, for judicial usage set Parashram ५५ Lakskiibat,

399, 401. oo es hema

3. 5. 31, Specific Relief Act, 1963. : है
4, Samples of situations involving void documents— Appendix.



153

20:11. The following re-draft of the relevant portions of section 49(d)(1) and the
proviso, indicates roughly the amendment which could be made to implement the point made
above :— .

“(1) has been afterwards found by the parties to be absolutely void in law from the
beginning :

(134) has been afterwards found by the court to be absolutely void in law from the
beginning, under section 31 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963.

* . * * * *

“Provided. that-—

Gi) im the case cf an executed instrument other than one failing under sub-clause
(14) ef clause (d), no legal proceeding has been commenced in which the
instrument could or would have been admitted or offered in evidence, and

Gi) the instrument is given up to be cancelled, or has been already given up to
the court to be cancelled.”

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to. our Questionnaire.’ हु

20.12. Section 50 provides that the application for relief under section 49 (refund in
respect of spoiled stamps) shall be made within the period specified in section 50. The periods
‘are two months and 6 months respectively,—two months if refund is claimed on the ground of
refusal of a party to act under an instrument or to advance money thereunder or to accept
any office thereunder, and 6 months in other cases. There is a detailed provision in the
provito for computing the starting point of the period of 6 months, in certain speical: cases.

20.13. It should be painted out that although the section prescribes the time limits men-
tioned above, in practice they were found to cause considerable hardship. In the beginning,
the Central Goveroment, by executive orders, permitted the local governments to grant refuod
within onc year, but even this concession was not found to be adequate, and, in’ 1908, by
a Resolution, Local Governments? were authorised to allow, irrespective of any time limit,
fefunds or renewals of spoilt or useless non-judicial stamps, or the re-purchase of non-judiciat
stamps no longer required in cases in which holders of such stamps bad, without any fraudulent
motive, becn unavcidably prevented from making application within the period prescribed by
law.

20.14. We are of tne opinion that in view of what is stated above, the’ time Timit’ in
section 50 should be made mere liberal, Section 49 already empowers the Statc Government
10 make rules as to the evidence to be required-or the enquiry to be made before refund can
‘pe: claimacd under that section. Dishonest claims. for refuad are thus provided against. _ We,
thetefore, think that section 50 should be made more liberal. We may state a large: aumber
of ‘te: seplies to our Questionnaire agree? We recommend that the period -under . se
50 should be one year from the date of discovery of circumstances giving rise. to the..claua
for refund. This will avoid harcship in many situations and is, in amy case, a rational course.

20.15. Fe sometimes happens that bankers or companies or other corporations get a, aymber
of forms printed in respect of instruments frequently used by them, and such forms.are एप
oh. staanped: papers: because the instrument are chargeable with duty. Later, such forms ce
Yo be-reguired by the banker or company. or corporation, and the money Spent_on stamp. pal
goes. waste. This may particularly happen where business is to be wound up. Section 51
provides for such cases, by empowering the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority to make
allowance for the stamp papers so used, if satisfied that the duty in respect of such stamp

1, Question 57 (ection 49). . enna
2. Resolution of the Government of India in the Finance Department, No. 4738-Exc., dated the 14th August,-1908.
3. Question 58 (section 50) ना ना

Re-draft
recommended.

Hardship caused
by time Ibatte:

Reoommanda-

Section 51.


Section 52.

154

papers has been duly paid. This power can be delegated to the Collector by the Chief
Controlling Revenue Authority.

No changes are required in the section.

20.16. Stamps are sometimes inadvertantly used in situations where, notwithstanding the
expenditure on the stamp, the stamp does not serve the purpose for which it is intended. This
situation arises, for example, where the stamp used is of a description other than that prescribed
for such instrument by the mules made under the Act, cr where a stamp of greater value than
was necessary is used, or where tho instrument is not chargeable with any duty, or where the
stemp has been rendered useless under section 15 by reason of the fact that the instrument
was written in contravention of the provisions of sections 13 and 14, dealing’ with the mode
in which an instrument should be written and prohibiting the use of a stamp paper for more
than one instrument. For stamps so misused, an allowance can be made under section 52 hy
the Collector, on an application mady within the prescribed period.

As regards stamps of an improper description, a party has an alternative remedy, namely,
getting the instrument certified under section 37. If he does so, then the procedure under
section 52 will not apply. We are recommending an amendment of section 37 whereby it
will not be necessary for the applicant to pay the duty again? where he resorts to that section.
The case under section 52, however, stands on a different footing, because, under section 52,
the applicant will act back the money value of his misused stamps of improper description.*
Th is not, therefore, necessary to amend section 52 on this point.

20.17. It is, however, desirable to widen the scope of section 52 in relation to stamps of
improper description, as recommended? under section 37.

We may mention that such an ameodment has been favoured by many af the Teplies to our
Questionnaire.‘

0.18. Although the Act contains elaborate provisions as to refund of stamp duty in
certain cases, un important case—-duty paid by mistake—seems to have been left to Implication.
‘A recent decision reveals this lacuna, which, it seems to us, requires consideration. .

It has been held by the Andhra Pradesh High Court’ (Majority view) that a case of
voluntary or mistaken payment of stamp duty does net fall under the Act. It is not covered by
any provision in the Stamp Act, empowering the Board of Revenue to refund the excess stamp
duty paid, voluntarily or by mistake, by 4. party. The Chief Controlling Revenue Authority,
which is the Board of Revenue, is not, therefore, competent to direct refund of the exces
stamp duty paid voluntarily or under a mistaken impression of law by the party at the time
of the registration of a document. है :

20.19. This ruling was given on a: reference made by the Board. In order to apprectate
the scope of the reference in the Andhra case, it is necessary to state the facts that gaye, rise
to the question. Sri Jasti Venketaratnam ‘and his sons had executed a document styded. es

‘gale deed” on June 12, 1962, in favour of Shri Manganti Suryanardyana (the petitioner) im
respect of a land for a consideration of Rs. 5,980. . een

.. The “purchaser” paid a sum of Rs. 1,000 as advance, and agreed to pay the balance of
the sale consideration with interest on ‘June 11, 1963 and to obtain 80060 deed ‘sofas to
complete the transaction. The “purchiser® ‘was put in possession of the property amb: the
document was registered 85 document No. 2014/62 in the Sub-Registrar’s Office, Kalkpina‘ with
the requisite stamp duty for a sale deed. In accordance with the terms stipulated’ है the-deed

1. See recommendation as to section 37.
“2, See section 53.
3. cf. recommendation as to 5. 37.

4. Question 59 (section 52). . poe
5. Se ही Suryanorayana V. The Board of Revere, Government of Andhra Pradesh, (1975) 2 A.P.LJ. 255463)
ect bine igest for March, 1976, column 533); ALR. 1976 ALP. 150 (189, 1976 part—majocity visw). न


ASS

dated June 12, 1962, another document was executed on September 2, 1963, whereunder the
executant-vendor acknowledged the full consideration (ic., the intended sale amount and the
interest thereon). It also indemnified the claims against a loss to an extent of Rs. 2,700. The
document was executed on a stamp paper worth Rs. 44 only, treating it as a “supplemental
deed” confirming the original sale deed which was registered as document -No. 2014/62.
‘fhe Sub-Registrar, Kaikaiur, before whom the second instrument. was ptesented for registration,
impounded it as deficiently stamped. On a dispute raised by the petitioner with regard to the
nature of the second document, the District Registrar, Krishna adjudicated the document as a
regular deed of sale for a cash consideration of Rupees 6,492 and ordered the collection of
the deficient stamp duty of Rs. 475 together with a penalty of Rs. 5. Aggrieved by the decision
of the District Registrar, the petitioner filed a revision petition under section 56(1) of the Act
before the Board of Revenue which framed the following two issues for its own consideration
and order :

(1) Whether the earlier document executed and. registered as document No. 2014/62
of S.R.O. Kaikalur was a sale deed for a consideration of Rs. 5,980 or an agree-
ment to sell? and

2) Whether the subsequent document executed on 2-9-1963 is a sale deed for
Rupees 6,492 or 2 supplemental deed confirming the earlier sale with an indemnity
for a sum of Rs. 2,700?

20.20. The Board of Revenue, on a consideration of the facts afd circumstances, held
that the first document which was styled as a sale deed, was only an agreement of sale, executed

Primarily to 10०८0 the receipt of a portion of the purchase price in order to safeguard the —

Porchaser against fresh demand as the purchaser was put in possession of the land, and that
the second document was a regular sale deed for a case consideration of Rs. 6,492 and, therefore,
the stamp duty as a sale deed was leviable on it.. In.the result, the Board of Revenuc upheld
the decision of the District Registrar and allowed the revision petition on March 9, 1965, observ-
ing that “since stamp duty leviable on a sale deed was collected on the earlier document, the
party is at liberty to seek refund of the excess duty paid under section 45 of the Stamp Act and
that the party may approach the District Collector, Krishna under section 45 with a retund
 apptioation.”

0,21. The Inspector General of Registration and Stamps, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad
however pointed ont to the Board of Revenue thet stamp duty on the first docoment was paid
voluntarily. It had not been paid either under section 35 or section 40 of the Act,

7 Section 45 of the Act was confined to the refund of stamp duty charged either under
se¢tion 35 or section 46, and so the petitioner was not at all entitled to the refund. The Board
of Rovere, after examining the entire material on record, realised the mistake committed by it
on being apprised by the Inspector General, Registration and Stamps, and rectified its earlier
ordez dated 9-3-1965 iu so far as the observation relhting to the refund of stamp duty on
document No. 2014/62 of S.R.O. Kaikalur was concerned, after affording reasonable opportunity
to 68 petitioner A. Writ Petition filed by the petitioner to quash the aforesaid orders of the

of Revenue was rejected by the High Court oa Mbrch 22,1968. A Divisiod Bench
allowed the Writ Appeal preferred by the petitioner against: the order of dismissal of the ‘writ
petiting. snd directed the 8040 to make a reference to the High Court under section 57 of
tha Agp as, in 15 opinion, a substantial question of Jaw arose. Hence this referénte to the

High Court. है
_. The High Court held by a majority that there was no provision in the Act empowering
the Beard 10 direct refund of duty paid voluotarily or under mistake. है
20.22. One need not examine the correctness of the conclusion reached by the High
Court.on the present Jaw. But the resultant position is hardly satisfactory.

Where tax is not legally leviabie and yet has been paid, it ought to be refunded,—sabject,
of course, २० such safeguards of limitation and deduction for office expenses as, are usual. To

‘Need for change.


Position under the
Income Tax Act:

Es
Ht
BE
5B

Recommendation
tovie

156

adhere to the old doctrine that money paid under mistake of law cannot be recovered, .is
inequitable. There ought to be some provision empowering the Board to grant refund in such
cases. One could even construc the expression “inadvertantly” in section §2(a) as covering the
situation, but, since the judicial construction now docs not permit the citizen to do so, we
recommend that the words “or by mistake of fact or law” should be added after the word
“inadvertantly” in section 52(a) at both the places.

20,23. ॥ may be noted that under the Income-tax Act? if any person satisfies the meame-
tax Officer that the amount of tax paid by him or on his behalf or treated as paid ‘by him
‘or on his behalf for any assessment year exceeds the amount with which he is properly charge-
able under the Act for that year, he shall be entitled to a refund of the excess. In the actual
administration of this sectidn, or in the case law reported thereon, one does not find any limita-
tions to the effect that the overpayment must have been made in particular citcumstances of
for a particular reason. There are, 10 doubt, procedural formalities and also a period of limita:
tion (current period is 2 years). But. there is no substantive restriction on the right to refund.
Tf the Income-tax Officer does not grant the refund within three months from the prescribed
date, there is even a provision [or interest.

According to the Contract Act®, a person to whom money has been paid, or anything
delivered, by mistake or under coercion, must repay or return it. This section is wide enough
to cover mistake of faw.*

20.24. The settled position in law, as regards the liability of the State in regard to sales
tax levied by mistake as laid down by the Supreme Court,‘-*-° is that where tax js levied ‘by mis-

take of law, then ordinarily ir is the duty of the State, subject to any provision of the Jaw relating

to sales tax,.to refund the tax.

In the Andhra Pradesh case, therefore, it could have been argued that even in the absence
of 8 specific statutory provision, the person who paid the duty could have claimed refund
on general. principles. Perhaps, however, counsel may have thought that the general principles,
iMustrated by the judicial decisions referred to above, were confined to a tax collected under
a positive order of a taxing officer-‘and may not be applicable to a tax which a citizen pays on
his own calculations. Section 72, Contract Act (money paid under mistakes was not discussed).

20.25. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 52(a) should be
revised as follows :—
“59. (a) When any person has inadvertantly or by misteke of fact or law—
(i) used for an instrument chargeable with duty, a stamp of a description other
than that prescribed for such instrument by the rules made under this Act,
. or
(ii) used a stamp of greater valne than was necessary, OF
(ii) used any stamp for an instrament not chargeable with. any duty ; Ore aie

20.26. Sections 49 to 52 having proyided for allowance for spoiled stamps, or printed
forms no longer required or misused stamps, section 53 contains a precise provision ४४ to how
this allowance is to be made. The section enacts that in any case in which allowance ip finde
for spoiled or misused stamps, the Collector may give in lieu thereof,—(a) other ‘stanrpe dE
the same description and value ; or (b) if required and (if) he thinks fit, stamps of any ‘otter

‘1; Section 237, Income Tax Act, 1961.

2. Section 72, Indian Contract Act, 1872.

4, Sir Skiba Prasad 72. Maharaha Srish Chandra (1949) 76 LA, 244, 52 Bom. LR. 17, ALR. 1989 FAC. 297;
approving Jagadish Prasad ‘Pannanlal ४. Produce, Exchange Corporation. (1945) 2 Cal. 41, A.LR, 1946 Cal. 245.

4, Siare of Keraia v, Aluminium Industries, (1965) 16 $.T.C. 689 G.C.), referred to in the Yearly Digest (16S KL.

5. Srate of Madhya Pradesh ५. Shailal Bhai, ALR. 1964 5.0. 1000, 1010, pare 14 to 17.
6. Gill & Co. v. Commercial tax Officer, Civil Appeal No 4580-1595 of 1967, dated 9-2-1968 (1969) ३.0. Nunes 80,

1968 22 8.7.C. 524 (8.0.)


157

description to the same amount in value; or (८) at his discretion, the same valuc in money,
deducting 10 naye paise fer cach rupee or fraction of a rupee.

There are several points of detail which require discussion.

(i) It is net very clear whether this section applies also where the allowance is made in
case of printed forms under section St, and we think that that should be brought out, by providing
that the section applies,

(ii) Secondly, so far as clause (c) is concerned, the grant of refund in cash is discretionary
with the Collector, but we are of the view that it should be mandatory, because a party will have
no, use for other stamps if given ‘under clause (a). In fact, a party cannot, in general, sell stamps.”

tii) Thirdly, when refund in cash is granted under clause (०), the present section requires
a deduction of 10 naye paise for each rupec or fraction of a rupee which, we think, is rather
on the high side. The amount was originally one anna per mpee and was, in 1958, on the intro-
duction of decimal coinage, relaced by 10 naye paise as a routine. There is, however, in our
view, scope for a more Icnient provision in so far as refund under section 53(c) is concerned.

(iv) Fourthly, there seems to be some obscurity® as to whether the dednction of 10 paise
per rupee under section 53 is to be applied in respect of the totalled up value of the stamps
of the instruments, or whether it is to be applied in respect of each stamp. This obscurity should
be removed by adopting the first alternative.

-(v) Fifthly, so far as refund in the situation dealt with in section 51 (printed forms no
longer required) is concerned, justice requires that there should be no deduction, because here

it is by reason or circumstances beyond the control of the party that the printed forms have

become useless

. €vi) Sixthly, in other situations, the deduction can be said ta represent office expense, in-
curred on applications for petty amounts which may be filed with some frequency. But, here
again, it is fair that there should be a suitable maximum in respect of the deduction on each
transaction, say, 5 rupees. Office expense on a particular transaction is not, in the generality
of cases, likely to exceed five rupecs

(vii) Having regard to our view® that the action under cianse (०), ie. refund in cash,
should be the rule rather than the exception, that clause should appear before the other clauses.

- (viii) Finally, as to clause (b) which deals with refund in the form of stamps of other
description, we are of the view that the Collector should have no discretion. If the applicant
prefers that form, it should be allowed.

20.27. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 53 should be revised
as follows :

पु Revised section $3
53; (1) In any case in which ailowance is made for spoiled or misused stamps wader section
49 or section $2, or in respect of printed forms no longer required under section 51, the Col-
lector 199 give, in lieu thereof,—
(a) the same value in money, deducting, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),
five paise for each rupee or fraction of a rupee, or

(b) if the applicant so requires, other stamps of the same description and value ;. of.

(c) if the applicant so requires, stamps of aoy other description to the same amount
in value,

1, Section 69.
2, See the differing directions given in the various Stamp Manuals.
3. See discussion, supra point (ii).

24 M of Law/77—78


158

(2) The deduction under clause (a) of sub-section (1)—
(i) shalff be catculated on thé total value of the stamps ;
(ii) shail not exceed five rupees ; and
Gili) shall not be made where the allowance is granted under section 51,

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to our Questionnaire.t

Section $4, 20.28. Section 54 reads—

“54. When any person is possessed of a stamp or stamps which have not been spoiled
or rendered unfit or useless for the purpose intended, but for which he has no
immediate use, the Collector shall repay to such person the value of such stamp
or stamps in money, deducting ten naye paise for each rupee or portion of a
rupee, upon such pérson delivering up the same to be cancelled, and proving to
the Collector's satisfaction—

(a) that such stamp or stamps were purchased by such person with a bona fide
intention to use them ; and .

(७) that he has paid the full price thereof ; and

(०) that they were so purchased within the period of six mdfiths next preceding
the date on which they were so delivered :

Provided that, where the person is a licensed vender of stamps, the Collector may,
if he thinks fit, make the repayment of the sum actually paid by the vendor
without any such deduction es aforesaid.”

In this section also, the provision as to deduction should be amended on ths same lines as*
in section 53, as recommended.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has teen favoured by most of the replies
to our Questionnaire. .

20.29. According to section 54A, notwithstanding anything contained in section 54, when
any person is possessed of a stamp or stamps in any denominations, other than in denominations
of annas four or multiples thereof and such stamp or stamps has of have not been spailed, the
Collector shall repay to such person the value cf such stamp or stamps in money calculated in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 14 of the Indian Coinage Act,
1906, upon such person delivering up, within six months from the commencement of the Indian
Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1958, such stamp of stamps to the Collector.

Section S4A.

The section needs ne change.

20.30. According to section 55, when any duly stamped debenture is renewed by the issue
of a new debenture in the same terms, the Collector shall, upon application made within one
month, repay-fo the person issuing such debenture, the value of the stamp oa the original or
on the new debenture, whichever shall be lest:

The proviso requires that the original debenture should be produced before the Collector
and cancelled by him in such manner as the State Government may direct.

Under the Explanation, a debenture shail be deemed to be renewed in the same terms
within the meaning of this section notwithstanding the following changes :— .

(a) the issue of two or more debéntures in place of one original debenture, the total ”
amount secured being the same ;

Section 55.

1. Question 60 (Section 53).
2. See recommendation as te section 53.
3, Question 6! (Section $4),


159

(b) the issue of one debenture in place of two or more original debentures, the total
amount secured being the same ;

(c) the substitution of the name cf the holder at the time of renewal for the name
of the criginal holger ; and

(9) the alternation of the rate of interest or the dates of payment thereof;
No changes are needed in this section.

APPENDIX Cee tt
Same sample situations where an instrument would be void)

1. Ao agreement by a minor is void.* In general, a transfer by him is also void Ii the
parties knew that one of the parties is a minor, the need for applying section 49(d) (1) would
hardly arise, beoause the agreement is not “found to be void”. But cases can arise where one
of the parties does not know that the other party is a minor, aad a suit is filed to obtain a
declaration that the instrument is void.

2. An agreement which defeats the provisions of any law is void.‘ A transfer defeating a
Jaw ig also void.’ At the time of the formation of the agreement or execution of the instrument,
the parties may not know that the agreement violates some law, For example, it is agreed by a
charter party that a ship then in country X should go with a cargo of bay to coustry"¥.
Before the date of charter party, an order is made and published under legislation relating to
Contagious Diseases of animals, prohibiting the landing of hay from country X to Y. The
parties did not know of this notification, and the master learnt it for the first time on arriving
in country Y. Nevertheless, the charter party would be void. Where a contract is to do a
thing which cannot be performed without a violation of the law, it is void, whether the parties
kuew the law or not."

3, An agreement may be void by reason of a mistake of fact common to both the parties,
There is the familiar situation of an agreement relating to a subject matter contemplated by the
parties as existing, which, in fact, did not exist. There is the illustration given in the Contract
Act,” where A agrees to sell to B a specific cargo of goods supposed to be on way from England
to Bombay. It turns out that before the day of the bargain the ship carrying the goods had
been cost away and the goods lost, Neither party was aware of this fact. The agreement. is void.*

The decision in such cases of mistake, as Lord Wright has said,’ turns on..the. question
whether the mistake was “sufficiently basig”. The case of Bell ¥. Lever Brothers’ derkonatwetes
how it may not always be easy to determine whether the agreement is void by reason of mistake
in such cases,—thereby illustrating why it is often advisable for a party to obtain a judicial
verdict as to nullity.

4. A minor himself may challenge an agreement as void, because. it was entered inte
by a person who was not his guardian,'* or by a guardian but without legal competence to enter
into the particular transaction.’?

1. These cases did not involve stamp duties, but relate to the validity of the transactions.
2. Section 11, Indian Contract Act.
. Section 7, Transfer of Property Act.
|. Section 23, Indian Contract Act.
Section 6 (9), Transfer of Property Act. .
See discussion in Waugh v. Morris, (1873) L.R..8 0.8. 202.
Section 20, Contract Act.
. Compare Couturior v. Hasite. (1856) 5 House of Lorde cases 673, and F.B. Lawson (1936) 52 1.Q.B. 79, article “Error
in Sabstentia’
Lord Wright, Legal Essays , page 214.
. Beli v. Lever Brothers, (1932) A.C. 161.
+ Of. (a) fmambandi v, Haji Matsaddi, ALR. 1918 P.C. 11, 18.
(b) Eannusami v. Rabiath Ammal, ALR. 1933 Mad. 806, 813.
12. Jafar Ali v, Standard Co., AIR. 1928 P.C, 762.

पड़ शतक करे


Introductory,

अक्षय)

CHARTER 21
REFERENCE AND REVISION

SECTIONS 56—61

21.1. From the sections which we have so far considered, it would have been evident
that the Coilector is the most important public officer vested with primary responsibility for the
administration of the stamp laws. The manifold functions exercisable by him render it necessary
that there should be some authority which can control the exercise of his function not only to
cotrect errors of judgment but also to secure improvement in the administration of the Act.
That authority, again, can conceivably commit mistakes on questions of law. It is desirable that
such questions should, so far as the particular State is concerned, be decided by the High Colurt,
since, in the Indian legal system, the High Court is the chief judicial tribunal for questions of
law. The provisions which we proceed to consider—sections 56 et seq—are important from
the point of view just now mentioned, even though they may not interest the ordinary citizens who
has had no occasion to litigate before public officers questions of stamp duties.

21.2. It is for this reason that section 56 makes detailed provisions whereunder the supervision
of the Chief Controlling Revenue Atuthority over the Collector is ensured in all important
cases. Under section 56(1), the powers exercisable by a Collector under Chapter TV and
Chapter V and under clause (a) of the first proviso to section 26 shail in all cases be subject to
the control of the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority. These provisions embrace several im-
portant functions.

Further, section 56(2) provides that if any Collector, acting under section 31, section 40
or section 41, feels doubt as to the amount of duty with which any instrument is chargeable, he
may draw up a statement of the case, and refer it, with his own opinion thereon for the decision
of the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority.

According to. section 56(3), such authority shall consider the case and send a copy of
its decision to the Collector, who shall proceed to assess and charge the duty (if any) in con-
farmity with such decisions.

21.3. On sub-section (2), a Supreme Court! case may be referred to. It was held in that
ease that the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority is a quasi-judicial tribunal ‘when a reference
is made to it under section 56(2). It was, therefore, necessary that the executant of the document
should be heard in such a reference. The Sapreme Court pointed out, that the question to be
decided by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority would be one of law, and may result in the
payment of large amounts by executants of a document. This judgment should be deemed to
have overruled an earlier decision of the Ailaiabad High Court,? which was to effect that there
is no provision in the Stamp Act for sending a notice of hearing to the executart. The clarification

- by the Supreme Court is welcome. It may be stated that the position in this respect was, to say

the least, obscure before the judgment

For example, in a Madras case,* it was held, that there was no right to ay oral hearikg
when the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority was seized of a matter under section 56(1). It
was stated that it is enough if sufficient cpportuaity to state their case is given. The discussion in
another Madras case* seems to consider hearing necessary, under section 56(1). Bu. the question
ef oral hearing was not in issue.

1, Board of Revenue v. Vidyawatt, ALR. 1962 5.९. 1217, 1220, pata 5-6 (Wanchoo, J.)

2, Kasav Prasad v. Chief Coutroiling Revetue Authority, ALR. 1955 N.U.C. 3561 (M.L. Chaturvedi, J.).
3. Inve Shanmugha Mudatiar, (1950) 2 M.L.J. 399 (Rajamennar C.J. and Balakrishna Ayyar J.).

4, Annamalai v. District Registrar, ATR. 1966 Mad. 36, 37, 39 (Paragraphs 3 and 9).

160


161

जा

21.4. In our opinion, it would be useful, if in section 56(3), after the words “such authority”, Recommendation
the words “after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard” are added, in 71

order to codify the position resulting from the judgment of the Supreme Court.*

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to our Questionnairc.? We, therefore, recommend that sectior 56(3) should be amended
as above.

21.5. Section 57 provides that the Chiet Controlling Revenue-authority “may stale any section 57—
case” teferred to it under section 56, sub-section (2), or otherwise coming 10 its notice, and Introduction.
refer such case, with ifs own opinion thereon, to the High Court specified in that section. It
further provides that cvery such case shall be decided by not less than three Judges of the
High Court to which it is referred, and in case of difference the opinion of the majority shall
prevail.

21.6. Though the word used in section 57, sub-section ( 1) is “may”, it has been held Word “may” in
by the Supreme Court that" a reference is mandatory. The sub-section (hus imposes a duty sub-section (1).
on the authority to state the case, if a substantial question of law is raised.

21.7. It has further been acid? by the Supreme Court that this duty to make a reference Section not
is not affected by the question whether the case is pending before the Authority or not. The Eases.
Supreme Court has observed that the Authority is in a similar position as the Income-tax
Appellate Tribunal under the analogous provisions in the Income-tax Act

21.8. In cur view, it is desirable to codify the proposition judicially 10 down* about Recommendation
the duty to make 8 reference. It is also proper to emphasise that the reference can only be as to duty to make
compelled on a substantial question of law. a reference,

21.62. In cases where the reference under section 57 is heard by a High Court consisting Number of
of :Jess than threc Fudges* or by the court of a Judicial Commissioner? having fess than theee Judes.
Indiciat Comumissiorers, the present provision for hearing by 8 minimum number of three Judges
is impossible of compliance Such cases should therefore be excluded from sub-section (2),
for qbvious reasons.

21.9. The question may be raised whether the present provision for three Judges should

_ be retained at all: We are, however, of the view that the. importance, frequency and universality
of questions arising under the Act renders desirable retention of the present scheme. Moreover,
there has been no practical difficulty resulting fram the present scheme. We, therefore, prefer
to retain the present provision,—of course with certain changes to be presently noticed or
already noticed."

21.10. Though the Act does not specifically state that the Chief Controlling Revenue Formulation of
Autherity should formulate the question on which the opinion of the High Court is sought, Oe eth 4 0]
judicial decisions hold that the question should be formulated.? Since the High Court cannot Revenue .
express its opinion on matters cot referred to it, it is advisable that thecc should be a provision Authority.
in the Act for the formulation of questions.7? We recommend an amendment of the suction for
the present purpose.

1 Pare 21.3, Supra.
" Question 62 (section 56).
2 Vanarashi Das v. Chief Contralling Revenue Authority,
Sugar Mills case, ALR. 1950 S.C, 218.
५ Banarast Dos v. Chief Controlting Revenue Authority, Dethi, ALR. 1968 $.C. 497, 502, para 9.
* Para21.6, supra.
. © For example, Sikkim.
1 As to Judicial Commissioners( sec also discussion) infra.
5 Para 21,8A, supra
* Pinay Construction and Development Company v. Inspector General of Stamps, ALR. 1967 Andhra Pradesh 90,

91, para 6.
३० CE. Order 46, rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

2080४, ALR. 1968 5.0. 497, 902, para 9 citing Maharashira


leaning of

‘High Court”.

Present practice
of enumeration
not convenient.

Alternatives for
improving the
Position.

Case .of Union
Territory.

162

We may mention that the, suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
10 our Questionnaire.t

21.11. We next come to the court to which a reference can be made under section 57,
The section contains a Jong list enumerating the various High Courts. There was need for
such an enumeration at a time when British India comprised a few areas where there were
no High Courts but only Courts of Judicial Commissioners; and, apparently, the intention -
was that in relation io ateas where there were only Courts of Judicial Commissioners, the reference
should be made to the specified High Court. For example, in relation to Ajmer and Merwara,
tt was provided that the reference under section 57 should be made to the High Court at
Allahabad. It may be of interest tc know that after a long enumeration, there was a residuary
clause whereunder, in other cases, the reference was to be made to the High Court at Fort
William (Calcutta).

21.12 This general structure of the section has so far been maintained, though the textual
details bave changed from time to time, and the Kegislative practice has been to substitute
the name of the appropriate High Court whenever constitutional changes necessitated such a
substitution. The result of this practice has been that every time when a new High Court is
created or the jurisdiction of a High Court is extended over a Union Territory or a new Union
Territory is created, an amendment of the section becomes necessary. In this process, the
enumeration semetimes becomes incomplete also. For example, the official text of the Act,
as modified upto Ist March, 1970, does not mention anything about Pondicherry, though it
appeurs ihat? as regards Pondicherry the mention of the Madras High Court has been added
separately. The Union Territory. of Goa, Daman and Diu also does not find a place in the
present enumeration. Thus, the present, practice is cumbersome, and if a simpler method could
‘be substituted, the change would be worth considering.

21.13 For improving the position in this regard, two alternatives could be considered.
Either the enumeration ef High Courts may be totally omitted, leaving the matter to be governed
by the general provision in the General Clauses Act®, which provides thtat “High Court”, used
with reference to “civil proceedings”, shall mean the highest civil court of appeai (sot incfuding
the Supreme Court) in the part of India in which the Act or Regulation containing. the
expression operates. Another alternative would be to insert, for the purposes of section 57,
8 suitable definition of the expression “High Court”. Here a precedent is furnished by the
Contempt of Courts Act, which provides that “High Court” means the High Court for a
State or a Union Territory, and incides the Court of the Judicial Commissioner in any Union -
Territory. We prefer the latter alternative, since the first alternative—namely, relying..on the
General Clauses Act—may lead to a controversy whether proceedings by way of reference
ate or are not “civil proceedings”. There is no doubt that they are : but a controversy should

be avoided.

21.13A. The question may be raised whether the adoption of either of the two alternatives®
would not mean a change in substance as regards those Union Territories in regard to which
they are Courts of Judicial Commissioners.

21.14. In reply to this objection, it may be stated that the present section is silent 88
to such Union Territories, so that even now it can be argued that the Court of the Judicial
Commissioner ix by virtue of the General Clauses Act)* to be regarded as the High Coust
for the purposes of section 57. However, even if this view is not correct, we do not seé any
strong reascn why a reference under the Stamp Act should not be made to the Court of the

¥ Question 63 (Section 57). a
3 Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act (26 of 1968), Schedule, Part 2, inserting section 57 (३७), as follows :—

“(ee) if it arises in the Union Territory of Pondicherry, to the High Court of Madras.”
3 Section 3(25), General Clauses Act, 1897,
4 Section 2(0), Contempt of Courts etc. Act, 1971.
5 Para 21-12, supra.
6 Section X13}, General Clauses Act, 1897.


163

Judicial Commissioner. These Courts decide various questions of Jaw under the Code of Civil
Procedure and other laws, and can be safely entrusted with the duty of deciding references
under the Stamp Act. Incidentally, at present, the only such case is the Union Territory of
Goa.

21.15. Accordingly, we have come to the conclusion that in section 57, a suitable definition
of the expression “High Court” should be substituted, on the lines of the definition in the
Contempt of Courts Act.

21.16. In the light of the abeve discussion, we recommend the following re-diaft of
seclion 57.

Re-draft of section 57

(1) The Chicf Controlling Revenwe Authority may state any case referred to it under
sub-section (2) of section 56 or otherwise coming to its notice, and refer sveh case, with its
own opinion thereon, to the High Court, formulating precisely the question on which opinion
of the High Court is requested : .

Provided that where the case involves a substantial question of law, and a party interested
makes an application tv the said authority without unreasonable delay for making such reference,
the said authority shail make such reference*

Explanotion—in this Chapter, “High Court’ means the High Court having jurisdiction

over the State or Union Territory, and, in relation to a Union Territory, includes ihe court

of a judicial commissioner.

(2) Every such case shall, where the High Court consists of three or more Judges, be
decided by not fess than three Judges of the High Court to which it is referred, and in case
of difference, the opinion of the majority shall prevail.* ‘

21.17. Section 58 provides that, if the High Court is not satisfied that the statements
contained in a case forwarded under section 57 are sufficient to enable it to determine the
questions raised thereby, the Court may refer the case back to the Revenue Authority by which
it was stated, to make such additions thereto, or alternations therein, as the Court may direct

ja that behalf.

21.18, Under the scheme proposed* by us in regard to section 57, a reference can also
be made to the Judicial Commissioner's Court. However, the definition of “High Court”
in that section (as proposed) will apply to sectien 58 also, No further comments are needed
with reference to section 58.

21.19. The procedure to be followed in disposing of a case stated under section 57. is
dealt with in section 59, Subsection (1) provides that the High Court, upon the hearing
of any such case, shail decide the questions raised thereby and shall deliver its judgment
thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded.

Under sub-section (2), the Court shall send 10 the Revenue Authority by which the
case was stated a copy of such judgment under the seal of the Court and the signature 0
the Registrar ; and the Revenue Authority shall, “on receiving such copy, dispose of the case
conformably to such judgment”.

24.20. It appears to us

inappropriate in regard to cases where the m
authority. Having regard to the wide scope®

arise.

that in sub-section (2), the words “dispose of the case” are
atter has been already disposed of by the lower
of section 57, such a situation can conceivably

7 Section अल, Cotempt of Courts Act, 1971, Para 21.13, supra.
» Cf, section 259, Income Tax Act, 1961. :
2 Cf. section 96 (2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

4 See recommendation as to section 57.

# Para 21.7 supra.

Recommendation

Re-drait as
recommended.

Section 58.

Section 59
Introductory,

Section 5&2).


Recommendation
to amend section
592),

Section 60—
Introductory.

Pointy for inter-
pretation.

i) Reference
under section
60 not competent
at appeal stage.

164

21.21. Although it can be stated that the reference to the High Court implies that the
matter is at large, it is desirable to amplify section 59(2) 10 make the language appropriate
for a situation where the principal case has been already disposed of by the lower authority.

The direction in sub-section (2) to the effect that the Revenue Authority should “dispose
of a case conformably 10 the judgment of the High Court", becomes inappropriate when
no case is pending before the Revenue Authority, and the case referred by the Board relates
to one already disposed of by a lower authority. The procedure for a reference to the
High Court by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority applies equally when a case is not
pending, as where it is pending’ Hence, it is desirable that section 59, sub-section (2), should
be amended by using language more fitted to the case. Unless the revenue authority has still
resting upon it the duty of disposing of a case, the present words are not appropriate. They
are more appropriate tg an actual and concrete case pending before the revenue authority.

We therefore recommend that these words should be replaced by the words “shall pass
such orders as are necessary for disposal of the case conformably to the judgment”.

In this connection, we may cite the precedent contained in the Income-tax Act,* quoted
below.

“260 (1) The High Court or the Supreme Court upon hearing any such case shall decide
the questions of law raised therein, and shall deliver its judgment thereon containing the
grounds on which such decision is founded, and a copy of the judgment shall be sent under
the seal of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal
which shell pass such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case conformably to such
judgment.

(2) The costs of any reference to the High Court er the Supreme Court which shall
not include the fee for making the reference shall be in the discretion of the Court”.

21.22. This takes us to section 60. In the case of courts other than those mentioned
in section 57, if the Court feels a doubt as to amount of duty to be paid in respect of any
instrument under proviso (a) to section 35, the Judge is, by section 60, empowered to draw
up a statement of the case and refer it, with his own opinion, for the decision of the High
Court to which, if he were the Chief Controlling Revenve Authority, he would refer the same
under section 57. This is the main proposition enacted in sub-section (1) of section 60, while
sub-sections (2) and (3) deal with matters of detail.

21,.22A. There seems to be a certain amount of obscurity as to the precise stage at which
such reference could be made. Some of the points in this comnection have come up for
decision tefore the High Courts and, on those points, the relevant judicial decisions furnish
some guidance. But it must be stated that the position on those points is not very apparent
from the language of the section ; and in order to make the section self-contained, it is desirable
to insert necessary clarification on the various points, which are enumerated below,

21.23. In the first place, the Judge desiring to make the reference must entertain a
doubt as to the amount of duty to be paid before making the reference, It follows that he
cannot do so where he already considers the document sot fully stamped and impounds it.
In such a case, he has to send the instrument? under section 38 to the Collector, and it is
for the Collectoré to certify that the document is duly stamped, if the Collector takes that view,
Therefore, it is not competent for the Judge who impounds a document to resort to dye
procedure for reference under section 60. This should be made clear, :

21.24. In the second place, the Appeltate Court cannot resort to section 60. The. Appellate
Court is bound by section 36, and, therefore, cannct proceed to make a roferqnces: under.
section 60. It can, however, proceed undet sub-section (2) of section 61. i हु

६ Section 57.
2 Section 260, Income Tax Act, 1961.
@ Section 38.
4 Section 40.
5 (a) Reference, (1888) LL.R. 11 Mad, 38,
(b) Somayya v. Anjaneyalu, ALR. 1935 Mad. 382.


165

21,25. Thirdly, after the levy of penalty, a reference will nor be competent under this
Section even at the instance of the trial Judge. ‘Thé case is different where the Judge had
alteady determined, 10 make the referenée beforé the levy of the penalty. though the: actual
reference was framed after such levy.? oe

21.26. In the result, the section should be amended on the three points mentioned
above? .
21.27. We, therefore, recommend that the following sub-scctions should be added in
section 60.

“(4) No court shall take action under this section where the case is one to which
section 36 applies; but nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of
section 61.

(5) No action shall be taken under this section where the instrumens hus already
been impounded or a penalty levied in respect thereof under proviso (a) fo
section 357,

We may add that most replies to our questionnaire* are in favour of such an amendment.

21.28, The provisions so far discussed related to references under the Act. Powers of
appellate courts are dealt with in section 61(1). It is concerned with two situations—(a) where,
in the court of first instance, an order admitting an instrument in evidence is passed because
the instrument is regarded as duly stamped or as not requiring a stamp, and (b) where such
order is passed because there has been payment of duty and penalty under section 35.

“Sectlon 61(2), which is concerned with the powers of the Appellate Court (or Court of
Reference), is also intended to deal with both these situations, namely, (a) where the Appellate
(एम is of opinion that such instcument should not have been admitied in evidence without
the. paymeot of duty aud penalty under section 35, and (b) where the Appellate Court is of
opinion that the instrument should aot have been admitted without the payment of a higher
duty and penalty than the duty and penalty paid in ‘the court of first instance

21.29. Thus, both sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 61 can be divided
into two parts, dealing respectively with the two situations mentioned above, In the presént
Stricture of the two sub-sections, this aspect is not brought out clearly. We are of the opinion
- that 10 would be useful if both the sub-sections are split up into clauses, so as to indicate that
“each” part applies to one or other (but not both) of the two situations. Such re-structuring
has been favoured by most replies to our Questionnaire also.*

21.30. We, therefore, recommend that section 61(1) should be revised as follows :

“61(1). When any court in the exercise of its eivil or revenue jurisdiction or any
Criminal Court in any proceeding under Chapter 117 or sections 145 to 148 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, makes any order admitting any instrument
in evidence—

(a) as duly stamped or as not requiring a stamp, or
(b) wpon payment of duty and a penalty under section 35,
the Court to which appeals lie from, or references are made by, such first-

mentioned Court may, of its own motion ण on the application of the Collector,
take such order into considereation for the purpose specified in sub-section (2).”

(A similar ameadment to be made in sub-section (2) will be indicated at the appro-
priate place) . हि

1B, Majandar v. अर, Sarkar, A.LR. 1922 Caleutta 452, 453.
© Pare 21.23 to 21-25 supra.

> Question 64,

+ Question 65.

24 M of Law/77—22

Gil) Reference
not Competent
after penalty.

Recommendation

Recommendation,

Section 61.


Section 61(2).

Recommendation.

‘Section 61(3),

166

21,31. The above scheme involves certain structural changes in section 61(2) also. Certain
other poinis may be considered, with reference to sub-section (2). It has been’ suggested that
if a party wants to pay penalty, he should be allowed to do so, and not be driven to the
Collector, as at present. The present provision for mandatory impounding should, it was sig-
gested, be medified, to provide as above. As against this, it has been stated that such amendment
would create practical problem. In pursuance of the decision of the appellate Court, the Collector
should be allowed to realise the penalty, as at present. If the above change proposed purely
for convenience of the citizen, is carried out, the apprehension has been expressed that the
judicial function of the appellate Court and the proposed administrative work of realising the
amount, may get jumbled up. It is the stamp revenue in issue, having nothing to do with the
appeal. We have, after careful consideration come to the conclusion that it may be worthwhile
to carry out the suggestion.

Replies to our Questionnaire’ also mostly favour the change, We recommend it.
We also propose 3 slight restructuring of section 61(2), for the reasons already indicated.*

21,32. We, therefore, recommend that section 61(2) should be revised as follows :—
“(2) Jf such Court, after such consideration, is of opinion—
(a) in the case referred to. in clause (a) of sub-section (1), that such instrument
should not have been admitted in evidence without the payment of, duty apd
penalty under section 35, or

(0) in the case referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2), that such instrument
should not have been admitted in evidence without the payment of a higher
duty and penalty than those paid,
if may record a declaration to that effect, and determine the amount of duty with which such
instrument is chargeable, and may require any person in whose possession or power such instru-
ment then is, to produce the same, and may impound the same when produced.

Provided that wiere such person is prepared to pay the duty and penalty, the Court shall

accept ihe same and shall not impound the instrument.”

21.32A. Ip section 61(3), it would be necessary to deal with the situation when, besides
the declaration by the court, the penalty has also been recovered, in cursequence of sub-section
(2) as proposed te be amended. Accordingly, sub-section (3) should be revised, and mew sub-
sections added, as follows :— ;

“(3) When a declaration has been recorded under sub-section (2)—
(a) the court recording the same shall send a copy thereof to the Collector, and

(b) where the instrument to which it relates has been impounded or is otherwise
in the possession of that court, shail also send him the instrument, and

(०) where ihe amount of duty and penalty has been paid under the proviso to
sub-section (2), shail Sénd 10 the Collector an authenticated copy of suck
instrument, together with a certificate in writing, stating the amoynt of duty
and penalty levied in respect thereof, and shall send such amount to the Col-
lector, or to Suth person as he may appoint in this behalf?

(3A) When the duty and penalty leviable in respect of any instrument have been
paid under sub-section (3), the Court shalt aiso certify by endorsement theve-
on tat the proper daty or the proper duty and penalty stating tha amount
of each have been levied in respect thereof, and the namie and residence of
ihe person paying them. हि

+ Question 66.
* Para 21.29, supra.
= Compare section 38. (1).


167

(3B) Every insirument so endorsed shall thereupon be delivered on his application
in this behalf to the person from whose possession it came into the hands of
the Court, er as he may direct a person autohrised by him2”

21.33. Section 61(4), it would be noted, while empowering the Collector to prosecute any
person. in respect of whom an order has been passed by the appellate court by section 61(2),
enacts, in proviso (a), that “no such prosecution shall be instituted where the amouut (including
duty and penalty which according to the determination of the court, court, was payable in respect
of the instrument under section 35, is paid to the Collector, unless he thinks that the offence
was committed with an intention of evading payment of the proper duty”.

This will require modification in order to deal with cases where the duty and penalty have
been already paid in court, under the new provision recommended by us to be inserted by
way of proviso to sub section (2).

21.34, In section 61(4), and in proviso (0), the reference to section 42 will require to
be changed into a reference to section 41, having regard to our recommendation’ to transpose
sections 41-42.

APPENDIX
Provisions for hearing by Judges of a perticular number, occurring in selected enactments
Act Provision for minimum’ number of Definition of “High Court”
Judges

Tncometax Act, 1961, section 259 Not kess than two Judges of the “High Court” is defined in terms
High Court wi Pn exclude Judicial Commis-

of reference made
Ls ie w sioners {Sce section 269).

Indian’ Divorce Act, 1869, section 17 (a) Three Judges where the number. “High Court” is defined in terms
‘and section 3 (Confirmation of di- of Judges is three or upwards fay exclude Judicial Commis-
२00४ granted by district court). Majority to prevail. sioners.

है (0) Two judges where the number
of Judges is two—View of
Senior judge to prevail,

Code. of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Section 96(2) provides that every Section 2(0) defines “High Court”.
ieafion shail, “where the == In मम to a Union territory

cpr 92) _ and _ section 2(¢) gach appli u
10 High Court to set. High rt consits of three or other than the territory of Delhi,
Weclaration of forefeiture of more Judges, be beard and de- it means the highest Court of
Ye termined by a special Beach of Bich - हिट Appeal of that terri

‘ourt composed of threa Judes other uy
nd fian'Goan Court of India. mane

Section 369, Code of Criminal Pro- Confirmation of death sentence, or See above, under Code of Criminal
oodure, iar (Confirmation of death —_ passing भी: dew sentence Procedure, 1973, section 96(2).
setrtenioe). पु

more Judges, be made,' passed

and signed ty at least two of
them.” io

tion as to sections 41-42, supra.

Tike COSC~C“<‘SwSSS ्/-/-/-्््््ः्र््र््ः
2. Séfl HHommendar

Section 61(4)


Introdustory

Meaning of

neaded.

CHAPTER 22
OFFENCES : SECTIONS 62 TO 69
22.1. We now come to the provisions of the Act relating to offences.

The provisicns relating to offencees may appear to be heterogeneous and are, in fact, so.
to some extent. There ure provisione dealing with specific conduct, such as failure. to-.caneel an
adhesive stamp (s. 63), refusal to give a receipt (s. 65), failure to make out a policy (s. 66),
drawing post-dated bills or marine policies (s. 67), and breach of rules relating to “sale of
stamps” (s. 69). Three sections in this Chapter, however, are of a more gencral character:
The first is section 62, which imposes a penalty for executing an instrument not duly siamped
and for certain ether action taken in relation to an instrument not adequately stamped. A
more serious offence is constituted by section 64, which punishes certain acts done. with,
intent to defraud the Government. Those acts may consist in failure to set out the facts and
circumstances in an instrument or—vide clause (c)—“any cther act calculated to deprive’
the Government of any duty or penalty under this Act.”

Then there is section 68, under which not only the post-dating of a bill is punished—
this is a specific act—but any person who, with intent to defraud the Government. ef duty
“practises or is concerned in any act, contrivance or device not specially provided for by this
Act or any other law for the time being in force” is also punished. This stamds snidway.
between sections 62 and 64. It is obvious that the same act may fall under several. sections
‘with varying penalties,—a situation which is by no means satisfactory.

While it is not our intention to suggest a radical re-arrangemient of the stctions, we do
consider it necessary that the overlapping between some of the provisions should be removed.
22.2. To begin with, section 6211) punishes any person—

(a) drawing, making, issuing, endorsing or transferring, or signing otharwise. thati
as a witness, or presenting for acceptance or payment, or accepting, paymg or
receiving payment of, or in any manner negotiating, any bill of exchange, “pay-
able otherwise than on demand or promissory note without the same being duly
Stamped ; or

(6) executing or signing otherwisa than as a witness any other instrument chargeable
with. duty without the same being duly stamped ; or

(c) voting or attempting to vote under. any proxy not duly'stamped:’ *

The punishment is fine which may extend to five-hundzed rupees for every such offence.

Under the proviso, when any penalty has been paid in respect of any instrument under
section 35, section 40 or section 61, the amount of such penalty shall be altowed:im
of the fine (if any) subsequently imposed under this section in respect of the. samte. insiiumaent.
upon the person who paid such penalty. .

We shall deal with sub-section (2) later,

22.3. It has been held’, that in section 62(1)(a), the word ‘accepting’ does not mean
‘receiving’. It means “executing as an acceptor”. Thetefore, a person who merély receives
‘an unstamped promissory note and puts it in a suit, is not guilty of an olfence under section
62. It is desirable to bring out this aspect more clearly, by a suitable amendment. Only
the person who makes the bill of exchange. or promissory note, and not the person i whose
it is made, should be liable? under section 62(1) (a)

1. Queen Empress v. Ghulam Hussain, (1884) LL.R. 7. Mad: 771, 773,
2. Queen Empress v. Nihal Chand, (1898) LL.R. 20. All. 440.

168



169

22.4. The above point deals with questions concerning promissory notes and bills of' ex- Whether person
change in the context of section 62. A controversy in a more general form has also arisen पिया
under this section, namely, whether receiving an unstamped instrument amounts to abetment instrument
of an offence. So far as section 62 is concerned, the question has now been answered by all .
High Courts’ in the negative, except by the Madras High Court.’ This also appears ta be the
English law."

22.5, It is desirable to make suitable clarification on this general point! also, by codifying Desirability
the majocity view. Mere receipt of an unstamped instrument should not be regarded as abet- oF ificati on.
ment, where there is no instigation or other prositive act by the receiver. Of course, where, on
the facts, incitement can be proved, the conduct will amount to abetment. For example, a
creditor procuring the signing of an improper entry in his account book may be guilty of
abetment, by reason ef such procuration.

22.6. We may borrow an example from Oliver Twist.5 In that novel, Fagin, after getting
Sikes to say that. he (Sikes) would murder. any one who should betray him, wakes up Noah
Claypok, Fagin makes him (Slaypole) tell Sikes that the girl Nancy had betrayed him." As
Sikes rushes out in a passion, Fagin says, “You won’t be too violaut, Bill; I mean not
top violent for safety”. Discussing the legal significance of these facts, Stephen’ says, “I think that
the whole conversation taken together would be evidence to go to a jury, that Fagin did ‘counsel’
ar ‘procure’ the inurder committed by Sikes; which would make him an accessory before the
fact; but if he had confined himself to merely telling Sikes what Claypole said he had heard,
it woukd not have been enough.”#

This hypothetical illustration shows the distinction between active instigation (on the one
hand) and passive inaction (on the other hand).

| 22.7, So. much on the question of abetment. Clause (b) of section 62 uses both the gection, 62(b).
dons “execuied” and “sign”. The expression “executed”, with referenc to instruments,
is defined” in the Act, as meaning “‘signed”. The word “excuting”, in section 62, clause (1)(b),
foust mean very much the same as ‘signing”, and it must be held to mean “signing” so as to
complete the document so that it may have full legal effect.

», 32,8.. Where certain parties to an arbitration signed an unstamped award, not as witnesses
but by way of assent, (though this was unnecessary), it was held!) that they were not liable *
under section 62(1)(b). The. High Court observed—

“Tt is impossible to say that every person who. writes his name on a document of
this nature otherwise than as a witness has committed an offence under the Act,
because, if that was so, even a Judge who signed the ‘locument as an exhibit
would be liable to a fine. It is 8 pity. No. definition is: given in the Act as
to the meaning of the expression ‘signing otherwise than as a witness’.”,

This point docs not necessitate an amendment.

22.9. But there is another matter which needs amendment. The Act specifically provides!? Hroot of
th section 43, proviso, that a prosecution cannot be started in the absence of prcof of a. dishonest honest

intention.

1. (a) Bmp. v. Jaki, (1883) LL.R. 7 Bors. 82, 83.

1 (09) Queen Enipress v, Mithulal, (1885) LL.R-8 Al, 18.
2. LLB. 23 Mad. 155, 158 (Case under old section 67—Dbservations as to old section 62).
. LAC. ¥ Mapie, (1907) 77 LJ. KB. 55, 59. :

“See cases listed in Chhanganial v. Emp. A.LR. 1934 Nag. 261, 363.
“Ai Twist, Chapter, 47.

6. Oliver Twist, Readers’ Enrichment Edition (1966) 9. 397.

7, Stephen, Digest of Criminal Law, 3rd Ed, page 152, note.

8, See Howells v. Wynne, 15 CBNS, 3.

9. Section 2(12).
10. Emperor v. Brif Pal Saran, (1910) 1.L.R, 32 All. 198 (per Richards, J.)
11. Emperor ९, Brij Pai Saran (1910) IER 32 Ait 798,
12, See section 43, proviso.



vie
Jjability—
Sub-section (2).

Vicarious liability
‘in general.

Recommendation.

170.

intention to evade the payment of stamp duty,’ where penalty has been paid, This, in our view,
should be expressly stated in section 62 also. In fact, we are of the opinion that intention
to evade payment of duty should be an essential ingredient of the offence, in every case
under section 62, and we recommend the insertion of a proviso to that elfect. If this recom-
mendation is carried out, obviously it will not be necessary to refer to section 43, proviso.

22.10. As regards vicarious liability under the section, one particular casc af vicarious
tiability—companies—is dealt with specifically in sub-section (2), (in relation to the issue of
share warrants). That sub-section is as follows :—

“(2) JE a share warrant is issued without being duly stamped, the company issuing.
the same, aud also every person who, at the time when it is issued, is the
managing director or secretary or other principal officer of the company, shail
be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees’.*

_ 22.11. The position regarding vicarious liability in general, i.e., in cases not dealt with
in sub-section (2), is outside the section. It was held in a Calcutta case, that where a servant,
in the course of kis employment gives an unstamped receipt for an amount exceeding Rs. 20/-,
the master aiso can be held guilty of an offence under this section. Prima facie, it appears to
us that this view may require reconsideration. In fact, we may note that a different view was
taken in a later case of the same High Court, where a sole surviving partner’ of a firm was
held not liable for the clerk’s feilure to give a stamped receipt. We have carefully considered
the matter, and are not inclined to reconimedd any widening of the scope of the present pro-
vision, .

22.12, In the hght of the abeve discussion, we recommend that section 62 should be revised
as follows :—

“62. (1) Any person—

(a) drawing, making, issuing, endorsing or transferring, or signing otherwise than
as a witness, or presenting fer acceptance or payment, or executing as an
cceeptor, paying or receving payment of, or in any manner negotiating, any
bill of exchange (payable otherwise than on demand) or promissory note
without the same being duly stamped ; or हु

(b) executing or signing’ otherwise than as a witness any’ other instrumént charge-
able with duty ‘without the same being duly stamped ; or oN

(०) voting or attempting 10 vote under any proxy not duly stamped ; Se

7 shall, for every such offence,-be ganishable with fine which may extend to five
Inindred rupees.

“Provided that, when any, penalty has been paid in respect of any instrument under
section 35, section 40 or section 61, the amount of such penalty shall be allowed
in reduction of fine {if any) subsequently imposed under this section in respect
of the same instrument upon the person who paid such penalty. .

“trovided. further that nothing. in thi section shall apply unless the act 1s done with*

_ the intention of evading the payment of stamp duty. हे दि

Explanation-—-A_ person who receives an unstamped instrument does not, merely by
reason cf such receipt, become guilty of abetment of an offence under this
section. . ” :

(2) Tf a share-warrant is issued without being duly stamped, the compan Lange ping
the same, and also every person who; at the time when it is issued, is, the.

1, (a) Kanhalya Lal vy. Emperor, (1919) उबर Indian cases 406 (Aluiabad), distingotbed m (120 WALI. ST distingutshed in (1926) 24 A.L.J. $58; °°
(b) Compare (1933) 146 Indian cases 1055 (Lahore). ४०

2, Compare section 35, Companies Act, 1882 (repealed).

3. Queen Empress v. Khetter Mohan, (1900) LL.R. 27 Cal, 324, 332, 333; 4 C.W.N, 440. (Prinsep and Hill 15.)

4

5

|. Golam Hossain ६. Emperor, (1904) 8 C.W.N, 378,380.
. See para 22 (9). . If this wide change is made, a saving for section 43, proviso need not be introduced.


171

director or secretary or other principal officer of the company, shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to 1४९ hundred rupees

22.14. We may mention that the suggested amendment as to section 62(1}(a), and thc
added Explanation, and the added provise saving section 43, proviso, has been favoured by
post of the replies to cur Questionnaire.?

22.15. This disposes of section 62. It will be convenient at this stage to deal with one
new provision which appears 10 be necessary. In our view, where the court of first instance
had. admitted an instrument after a specific decision that the instrument was duly stamped
or that it did not require any stamps, there should be no prosecution. Such a provision should
be inserted in the Act, say, as section 62A. What we have stated in this paragraph represents
what we contemplate as the gist of the new provision. There should, we hope, be no difficulty
in putting it in precise legislative language. Such a provision is necded because the very
fact that one court has decided that the instrument did not require stamp affords very cogent
grounds for assuming not only that the parties did net wish to evade duty, but also that their
egal understanding was prima facic justified. In such circumstances, a prosecution is, in our
opinion not justified.

22.16. Under Section 63, any person required by section 12 to cance! an adhesive stamp.
and failing to cancel such stamp “in manner prescribed by that section”, shall be punishable
with चाल which may extend to one hundred rupees. The only change requircd is addition of
the article “the” before the word “manner”, which we recommend.

22,17, Section 64 is one of the important penal provisions of the Act. Clause (a) of the
section punishes a person who executes an instrument which does not fully and truly set forth
the circumstances which are, by section 27, required to be set forth. Clause (b) punishes
a person who, while cimployed or concerned in the preparation of any instrument, neglects or
अं to set forth those facts and circumstances. Clause (c) punishes a person who, with intent
t defraud the Government, “docs any other act calculated to deprive the Government of any
dyty or penalty under this Act.”

22.18. The ambit of clauses (a) and (b) is obviously limited, being, speaking broadly,
@onfined to a full and truc statement in the instrament of the relevant facts. ut clause (९)
is wide, and the question that has arisen is whether clause (०) is to be construed ejusdem goneris
with the preceding clauses (a) and (b)?, or whether it is not to be so construed.” ‘he actual
controversy has arisen in respect of a person whe receives an unstamped instrument; but it
c@uld arise in many other situations.

22.19, The marginal ucte to the section would scem to support 2 narrower view. No
doubt, the wording of clause ९९) is capable of a wide construction; but, if taken literally, it
would take in almost every case which falls within another sections—-section 62... Of course,
‘Stction’ 62 does not require an intent to d etre id, while section 64 requires such intent. But
‘Witre would’ be overlapping as regards the conduct punishable under the two sections. Again
‘ie’ pbnishment under section 62 (fine up to five handred rupees) is milder than that under
section 64 (fine up to Ove thousand rupees),—apparently because section 62 6008 not require
peng cea at present. It can, therefore, be argued that clause (०) of section 64 should ve given
@ wide construction in order to cover cases where éfentional evasion of duty has taken place.
Even then, it appears reasonable to exclude, from claupe (०), cases not analogous to clauses (a)
ead (b). Under the present wording, section 64, clause (०) overtaps not only section 62,
but also section 68, as is explained below. a

22.20, Section 64, clause (c) overlaps clause (७) of section 68,--which punishes a

Who, with intent to defraud the Government of duty, “practises or is conceryed in any
‘aet,"contrivance or device not specifically provided for by‘ this Act or any law for the time
Petites force.” (Punishment is fine upto dne thousand rupees). The ingredients are po
a अच that most cases which fall under one will also'fall under the other.
३ Question 67.
3. Chhakmal y. Emperor, (1916) LL.R. 44 Cal. 321; ALR. 1967 Cal, 665,
2 (1934) 153 Indian cases 952 (Nagpur).

Section 624
(New),

Section 63—Re-
commendation,

Section 64—
Introductory,

Controversy as
to clause (0).

overlapping

betwoea section
4200) ad sections
GAC).

‘Overlapping
section
lees


Recommendation
to amend section
शा.

Section 65--*

Amendment.

Sectlon's6.

Section 67.

172

In fact, section 64(c) would even cover many acts covered by specific laws. - For example,
the act of manufacturing or selling fictitious stamps would fall under section 640९), thaugh that
act is an offence under the Indian Penal Code. It would not fall under scction 68(c), because
Ube acts specifically covered by the Penal Code are excluded by section 68(c}. In this respect,
section 64(c) creates an anomaly.

22.21. In view of the wide scope of section 64(c) as explained above, and the overlapping
between section 64(c) and section 68{c) as mentioned above, as also the anomaly referred
to above, it appears to be desirable to confine section 64(c) to acts analogous to violations of
section 27, say, false statements (whether made in an instrument or not), calculated to deprive
the Government of duty or penalty.

22.22. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that scction 6410) should be
revised as follows :
Revised section 64(c)

64. Any person who, with intent to defraud the Gevernment,—
* हू * * * «

(९) Makes any jolse statement calculated to deprive the Government of any duty or
penalty under this Act,
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees,

We may mention that the sugyested amendment has been favoured ‘by most of the replies
to our Questionnaire."

22,23. Section 65 punishes any person who,

{a) being required under section 30 to give a receipt, refuses or neglecta to give
the same ; or

(0) with intent to defraud the Government of any duty, upon a payment of money
or delivery of properly exceeding twenty rupees in amount or value, gived a receipt .
for an amount or valuc not exceeding twenty rupees, or separates or divided the
money or prvperty paid or delivered

‘The punishment is fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.

The amount “twenty rupees” should be replaced by “one hundred rupees”? in view of section.
90 as proposed. ,

22.24, According (० section 66, any person who,— है हु

(a) receives, or takes credit for, oy premium or consideration for any. contrast
of insurance and does not, within one month after receiving, or taking कक:
for, such premium .or. copsidgration, make out and exccute 4 stampad
policy of such insutance ; or

(७) makes, exccuies or delivers out any policy which is not duly stamped, or: pays
or allows in account, or agrees to pay or allow in account, any money upon,
or in respect of, any suck policy,

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.
We have no comments on this section.
22.25. Section 67 punivhes any person drawing or executing a pill of exchange.

otherwise than on demand) or a policy of marine insurance purporting to be drawn of ee
if a set of two. or more, and npt at the same time drawing or. executing on PAPE.

Question 68 [Section कट].
3 Cf amendment as to section 30.



173

Stamped the whole number of bills or policies of which such bill or policy purports the set to
consist, The punishment is fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

Though the language is somewhat involved, the substance is clear, and needs no charge.
22.26. Section 68 is important, and may be quoted in full.

“68, Any/person who, —

(a) with intent to defraud the Government of duty, draws, makes or issues any bill
of exchange or promissory note bearing a date subsequent to that on which such
bill or note is actually drawn or made ; or

{b) knowing that such bil or note bas been so post-dated, endorses, transfers,
presents for acceptance or payment, or accepts, pays or receives payment of,
such bill or note, or in any manner negotiates the same; or

(४) with the like intent, practises or is concerned in any act, contrivance or device
not specially provided for by this Act or any other law for the time being in
force ;

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.”
With reference to this section, we have offered our comments under vection 64.1

It may be nated that clause (c) is new, and seems to have been modelled on section
21 of the Stamp Duties Management Act, 1891 (Eng.), which reads as follows.?

“21. Any person who practises or is concerned in any fraudulent act, contrivance
or device not specially provided for by law, with intent to defraud Her Majesty
of any duty, shall incur a fine of 50 pounds.”

No change .s necded in the section.
22,27, Section 69 punishes——

(8) any person appointed to sell stamps who disobeys any rule made under section
74, and

(9) also any person not so appointed who sells or offers for sale any stamp other
than 16 naye paise or 5 naye paisc adhesive stamp.

The punishment is imptisonment upto six months or fiae upto Rs. 500 or both.

In 50 far as the section relates to private persons dealt with in clause (b), the prohibition
against the sale of stamps by a private person is, in our opinion, too widely worded, inasmuch
@s a person having surplus stamps which he purchases bona fide, is prohibited from passing
them on for consideration tc another person who requires them. It is, in our view desirable that
the prohibition m clause (b), should be restricted to persons who sell stamps av business, and
not to persons who have to sell a stamp in an isclated transaction.

22.28. It may be sited that in England, the penalty is not for unauthorised sale of stamps
or private sale of stamps, but only for unauthorised dealing in stamps. The relevant provision?
is quoted below :

“4. (1) If avy person who is not duly appointed to sell and distribute stamps deals
in any manner in stamps, without being licensed so to do, or at any house, shop,
or place not specificd in his licence, he shail for every such offence incur a fine
of twenty pounds.

(2) Tf aay person who is not duly appointed to sell and distribute stamps, or duly
licensed to deal in stamps, has, or puts upen his premises either in the inside

2 See discussion us tos. 64, supra,
* Section 21, Stamp Duties Management Act, 1891 (Eng.).
२ Section 40), Stamp Duties Management Act, 189] (54 & 55 Victoria c. 38).

24 M of Law/?7—~-23

dating bills, and
for other devices
to defrand the
revenue.

Section 69.

Position in
England.


174

or 08 the cutside thereof, or upon any board or any material whatever exposed
to public view, and whether the same be affixed to his premiscs or not, any
Jetters import in or intending to import that he deals in stamps, or is licensed
80 to do, he shall incur a fine of ten pounds.”

Need for 22.29, We ate cl the view that since there can hardly be any serious abuse when fs
amendment, sale is confined to isolated transactions, the English provision is perferable in substance. In ite
present scheme of the Act, a person who has unused stamp has to approach the Collector alnd

obtain refund under section 49 or section 50. This procedure is cumbersome, and it algo
involves a deduction of percentage. Further, section 54(c) imposes a limitation of 5 mouth§
for grant of such refund. This position cavses hardship to a person who happens to 18४8.
in his possession, unused stamps where there is a person ready and willing to purchase them.
‘We do not think that there will be any loss of magnitude to Government if such persons are |
permitted २० jransfer such stamps. Nor do we think that such an amendment will create /
any serious scope for sale of forged stamps. हु

We therefore recommend that section 69(b) should be revised so as to read-~

“(b) any person not so appointed who carries on the business of dealing in stamps
other than 10 naya paise cr 5 nya paisc adhesive stamps”


CHAPTER 23
PROCEDURE IN KEGARD TO OFFENCES—SECTIONS 70--72

23.1. There are three sections dealing with procedure in regard to offences- -sections which
constitute modifications vf, or udditians to, the general provisions of the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1973. They deal with—

{i) the conditions requisite for the initiation and continuance of proceedings.
(ii) the Court compeicat tc try the offence, and
(iii) the venue.

23,2, The conditions requisite tor the initiation and continuance of proceedings are to
‘be found in section 70. A large number of matters are mixed up in that section. Under sub-
section (1), 90 prosccution in respect of any offence punishable under this Act cr any Act
hereby repealed, shal! be instituted without the sanction of the Collector or such other 010०
as the State Government generally, or the Collector specially, authorises in that behalf.

Under sub-section (2), the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority, or any officer generally
or specially uuthorised by it in this behalf, may “stay any such prosecution or compound any
such offence”. [t muy be noled that this sub-section really comprises two (topics: (i) com-
pounding and (ii) stay.

Under sub-section (2), “the amount of any such composition shall be recoverable in the
mianner provided by section 48".

23.3. We Lave no comments ou section 70(1). As regards section 70(2), we think that
the authority competeat to initiate and the authority competent to compound under sub-section
(2) should sot be different?, and, therefore, the Collector should also have power to compound
am offemce under sub-section (2), since he is the person who ordinarily sanctions prosecutions,
He is in the know of facts, and is conversant with the general policy for the initiation of pro-
secutions, He should, logically, be empowered to determine whether or aot the oifence should
be compounded. It is, therelore, desirable that the Collector should be added in sub-seciion
(2), while retaining the preseot atthorities.

23.4, While we see no objection to the power given to the Chief Controlling Revenue
Authority and othors regarding the institution of prosecutions and compounding, we have serious

Introductory,

Section 70.

Section 70(2)
to be mended.

Criticism of
Provision as to
Boy in Section

ubjection to the present provision as to “stay” in sub-section (2). The word “stay” in this sub- 5 2,

section has led us to a consideration of the importamt principle involved. We do not think
that in this coniext, the power of “staying the proceedings” is appropriately vested in an
executive officer. It is for the court to adjourn its proceedings from time to time when the
exigencies of its business or other considerations of justice require. An executive officer should
not be given the power of staying judicial proceedings. Perhaps, what the legislature intended
was withdrawal of the prosecution. If 50, the word “stay” is inappropriate aad in any case,
such withdrawal can be safely [eft to be dealt with by the general provision in the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973.
We may mentioa that the suggestion put in our Questionnaire’ was that the stay under
section 70 should. be by the court, aud not by the Collector, and that section 70(2) should be

amended for the purpose. That has received general approval in the replies to the Questionnaire.
Although what we are recommending is slightly different fram what we put in the Questionnsire,

there is identity of approach between the two.
१279, income Tax Act, 1961.



Recommended
redraft.

Recommendation
to delete
Section 71.

Section 72—
Tatroductory,

Recommendation
to revise
Section 72.

176

23.5. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 70 should be revised
as under :

“70, (1) No prosecution in respect of any offence punishable under this Act*
rs shall be instituted without the sanction of the Collector
or such other officer as the State Government generally, or the Collector spe-
cially, authorises in that behalf.

(2) The Chief Controlling Revenue-autherity, or the Collector or an officer specially
authorised by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority in this behalf, may....
compound any such offence.

(3) The amount of any such composition shall be recoverable in the manner provided
by section 48”.
23.6. It is provided by section 71 that no Magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate
or @ Magistrate whose powers are not less than those of a Magistrate of the second class,
shall try any offence under this Act.

The net effect of this section is. that a Magistrate of the third class cannot try an offence
under the Act. Under the revised Code of Criminal Procedure,? there are no third class Magis-
trates. We therefore recommend that the section should be omitted.

23.7. Under section 72, “every such offence” (offence under the Act) committed in respect
of any instrament may be tried in any district or presidency-town in which such instrument is
found, as well as in any district or presidency-town in which such offence might be tried under
the Code of Criminal Procedure for the time being in force.

The words “such offence” refer to “‘an offence under this Act”,—the words used in section
71. As section 71 is proposed to be omitted’, these words will require a slight verbal change
It is also desirable 10 substitute “metcopolitan area” for “presidency town” in view of the
phraseology adcpted in the new Code of Criminal Procedure.‘

23.8. We, therefore, recommend that section 72 should be revised as follows:

“72, Every offence under this Act committed in respect of any instrument may be
tried in any district or metropolitan area in which such instrument is found, as

well as in any district or metropolitan area in which such offence might be
tried under the Code of Criminal Procedure for the time being in force.”

We may state that the proposed change has been approved by all replies’ received on
this question.

1 Reference to repealed Act is omitted.

1 The Cade of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

3. See discussion as 19 section 71, supra

$ See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 4973.
5 0.71.


CHAPTER 24
RULES : SECTIONS 74 to 76

24.1. Departing slightly irom the sequence of the sections, we would, ai this stage, like
io deal with, the rule-making power as contained in sections 74 10 76. At the outset, we
would like to state that we do not sce any need at the present day for dealing with this topic
in three sections. When the Act was originally enacted, this scheme was considered necessary,
presumably because at one stage section 74 vested ihe power in the local government (later,
the provincial government), subject to the control of the Governor General-in-Council, while
section 75 vested the power in the Governor General-in-Council. This is no longer the case
now. It is, therefore, propcr to combine section 74 (rule relating to the sale of stamps) and
section 75 (rules generally to carry out the Act), As regards section 76 (publication of rules),
it refers to “rules made under this Act’, and it can be argued that it is wider than the subject
matter of section 74 and 75, inasmuch as it may, to cite one example,’ take in rules under
section 9. Even if that is so, there is hardly any strong reason fer retaining it us a separate
section, particularly because, in view of the recommendation which we are going to make
concemiing that section’, its text will be considerably shortened.

24.2 So much as regards the arrangement of the sections. As to the amendment to be
made therein, we have comments to offer only on section 76(2), which provides that rules
made under the Act shall, upon their publication, “have effect as if enacted by this Act.”
According to current doctrine on the subject, the quoted words can add nothing to the validity
of the rules. They are out of tune with current legislative usage. Being unnecessary verbiage,
they should be omitted. In fact, they create confusion. Whatever may have been the earlier
assumptions, today it cannot be asserted that rules not consistent with the parent Act can be

valid.
Accordingly, we recommend the substitution of one section for all the three sections,
as under ;--

“74(1) The State Government may, by nofification in the Official Gazette, make
tules to carry out generally the purposes. of this Act, and may by such rules
prescribe the fines, which shall in no case exceed five hundred rupees, to be
incurred on breach thereof

74(2), Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub-section (1),
and in particular, rules made thereunder may regulate,
(a) the supply and sale of stamps and stamped papers,
(9) the persons by whom alone such sale is to be conducted, and
(c) the duties and remuneration of such persons :
Provided that such rules shall not restrict the sale of ten naye paise or five paise
adhesive stamps.

* See also sections 10, 16 and 18.
See section 76, infra,

177

Desirability of
combining the
sections,

Section 762)
to be deleted.

Existing section
75 and section
T6(1).

Existing section
75(2) oraltted.

Existing
Section 74,


Introductory.

Section 73.

Meaning of
“Public officer”.

Authority by
724
given,

Recommendation
to revise
section 73,

Sections 74-76.

Section 76A.

Section 77.

Seation77A,

CHAPTER 25
MISCELLANEOUS SECTIONS 73 and 77 to 78A

235.1. fhe remaining four sections of the Act are concerned with miscellaneous matters,
such as inspection, delegalion of powers, savings and sale of copies of the Act. These are
mostly administ-ative matters, involving no questions of principle.

25.2, Under section 73, every public officer having in his custody any registers, books,
records, papers. documents or proceedings, the inspection whereof may tend to secure any duty,
cr to prove or lead to the discovery of any fraud or omission in relation to any duty, shall at
all reasonabie times permit any’ person authorised in writing by the Collector to inspect for
such purpuse the registers, books, papers, documents and proceedings and to take such notes
and extracis as he may deem necessary, without fee or charge.

This section was inserted for the first time in 1899, and has been taken from the (English)
Stamp Act,* 1891.

The expression “public officer”, which occurs in this section, has been defined in the
Evidence Act, section 74, and in the Civil Procedure Code, section 2, but not in the Stamp
Act. We are separately* recommending the insertion of a definition of that expression.

25.3. It is not understood why authority to inspect records under section 73 could be
sough: only from ¢ke Collector,? and not from an officer authorised by the State Government,
e.g., from the Inspector-General of Stamps (if so authorised). The section is defective in this
respect,

25.4. We, therefore, recommend that section 73 should be revised as follows :—

3. Every public officer having in his custody any registers, books, records, papers,
documents or proceedings, the inspection whereof may tend to secure any duty,
or to prove or lead to the discovery of any fraud or omission in relation to any
duty, shall at all reasonable times permit any person authorised in writing by
the State Government of by the “Collector to mspect for such purpose the registers
(rest as in present section).”

ndment has been favoured by almost all the replies to our

We may add that the
Questionnaire.

25.5. We have already dealt® with sections 74 to 76 which relate to rules.

25.6. Section 76A, which was inserted by the Decentralisation Act, 1914, empowers the
State Government to delegate certain powers, and ueeds no comments.

25,7. Section 77 provides that nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed to affect
the duties chargeable under any enactment for the time being in force relating to court fees.
‘The section requires no change.

25.8. Under section 77A, all stamps in denominations of annas four cr multiples thereof
shall be deemed to be stamps of the value of twenty-five naye paise or, as the case may be,
multiples thereof and shall, accordingly, be valid for all the purposes of this Act. It requires
no change.

+ ‘Section 16, Stamp Act, 1891 (Eng).
3 See discussion as to section 2(224).
* Section 2(9) defines “Collector”.

* Question 72.

* Chapter 24, supra.

178


179

25,9, Section 78 requires every Slate Government 10 make provision for the sale of Section 78 to be
translations of this Act “in the principal vernacular language of the territories administered by ded,
it? {at a price not exceeding twenty five naye paise per copy).

The only change required in the section is substitution of “languages of the States’! for
the words ‘vernacular languages of the territories administered by it”, and we recommend
accordingly. The present phraseology is inappropriate. Such a change has been favoured by all
the replies“ received on this questionnaire.

25.10. The Act does not contain any provisions for the rounding off of fractiuns of a Section 788
tupee. In this connection attention may be invited to provisions on the subject inserted by ing off of
State amendments.’ The utility of such a provision is obvious, After taking inte consideration fractions,
various State amendments, we had, in our Ques‘ionnaire.? suggested that the follwing rew
section should be inserted :

“In determining the amount of duty payable or of allowances to be made under this
Act, any fraction of five paise shall be rounded off by treating it as equivalent
to five paise.”

We are now of the view that a fraction of five paisa, if less than 2-1/2 paisa, should
be treated as zero, and in other cases, it should be equated to 5 paisa. We recommend the
insertion of a new section on those lines.

1 CY. sections 95.97, Employers State | Insurance Act, 1948.
+ Question 74.
3 Section 778, inscted in Madhya Pradash; Section 78 substituted in Tamil Nadu and in Andhra Pradesh,

+ Question 75.


Introductory.

Grouping.

Economics valuc.

Selction of duty.

CHAPTER 26
SCHEME OF THE ARTICLES

26.1. Having conciuded our consideration of the sections, we proceed to a discussion of
the articles in the First Schedule to the Act.

‘The First Schedule 10 the Stamp Act contains the arithmetic of stamp duties. The Schedule
is to be read with section 3, clauses (a) and (०) of which specifically refer to this Schedule. The
fiutes of duties on various instruments are given in articles arranged alphabetically. These
atticles (65 in number) levy a duty vither of a fixed sum or according to value or, in some
cases, according 10 the duty leviable on some other instrument under another specific entry.
The last mentioned category could raise nice problems, for example, where the duty on the
other instrument. js raised.

26,2. 11 is not easy to trace the rationale underlying the rate of stamp duty prescribed in
each article However, the classification attempted below might throw light on some of the
featires of the scheme of eaxation.

The charging articles can be divided into two principal groups, namely, those charging duty
4d valorem and those charging a fixed duty. In regard to ad valorem duties, again, there are
three principal patterns which may be noticed. There is, first. the group of instruments falling
ander the category of bonds, Secondly, there is the group of instruments falling under the cate-
gory of conveyances, Thirdly, there is the group of instruments which are chargeable ad
valorem in some other manner, for example, bills of exchange, debentures, mortgage deeds in
certain cases and policies of insurance. In fact, the charging entry as to Mortgage Deed—-Entry
40—itself illustrates, in its three clauses (a), (b) and (०), the three different patterns of ad
valorem duty.

26.3. Apart from this possible classification of instruments on the basis of ad valorem duly
and fixed duty, there are other considerations which enter into the picture. As to the division
between ad valorem duty and fixed duty, the selection seems to depend primarily on the ecano-
mice value of the rights created or transferred by the instrument. On this principle, many instru-
ments relating to immovable property or creating a charge thereon are selected for ad valorem
duty. Similarly (even where the instrument does not relate to immovable property), if it is
possible to predicate with reasonable certainty that the right created is of a certain monetary
value, ad valorem duty is adopted. as in the case of mortgage decds of movables. On the
other hand, where the proprietary or monetary aspect is not prominent or easily ascertainable
and the principal obicct of entering into ‘the instrument or executing the instrument is not
directly one of a proprietary or monetary character, then fixed duty is adopted. This is illustra-
tud by the charge on adoption deed, affidavit, agreement, articles of association of a company,
award and the like.

This is not to say that in every case where the monetary or propriclary element is directly
involved. the legislature has necessarily selected the imposition of an ad valorem duty. Conside-
rations of prompt execution of business or other aspects of convenience might have induced a
different choice,—as is illustrated by the articles charging duty o npromissory notes.

26.4. Assuming that the case is one where a fixed duty would be appropriate, the amount
of duty to be selected could vary in theory. In fact, the duty does vary from one anna (now
10 paisa) to Rs. S00. What particular amount should be chosen, must not have been a very
easy matter for the legislature, but here also certain broad principles seem to have been borne
in mind. For example, much depends on the question whether the document merely furnishes
evidence of a transaction, or whether it goes further and creates a right. This consideration

180


181

seems to have regarded as relevant in fixing the duty on acknowledgments and agreements, so
that an acknowledgment is chargeable with a duty only of one anna, while an agreement is
chargeable with a duty of 8 annas. That documents censtituting mere evidence receive a sym-
pathetic treatment is also iflustrated by the charging article relating to certificate (article 19),
share warrant (article 65) and the like.

Again, it is on the principle that a document which really evidences a certain fact need
not be chargeable with ad valorem duty, that a receipt carries only a fixed duty, not fluctuating
with the value of the money or other property the receipt whereof is acknowledged. ~

26.5. Of course, “agreement” is a very wide term, and depending on the nature, value,
extent or duration of the right created or transferred, the legislature naturally decided to impose,
on specific types of agreement, a higher fixed duty. Tt is apparently on this principle that an
apprenticeship deed is made chargeable with a duty of Rs. 5, because the rights created there-
under may be expected to endure for a Jong time and world increase considerably the earning
capacity of the beneficiary. The nature of the right created or potentially created seems to have
been regarded as relevant in charging a duty of Rs. 25 on the articles of association of a com-
pany. Here a number of persons are interested, and a new corporate entity is bronght into
being, representing 2 pooling of resources and talent. The nature of the right created might also
have been one of the considerations for charging a duty of Ra. 500 for entry as an advocate.

26.6. Even within the category of instruments appropriate for fixed duty, considerations
of convenience or the urgency of the matter might have induced the legislature to adopt a liberal
view, as is iflustrated by the comparatively small amount of duty fixed for bills of lading. pro-
teat of Bill or Note, protest by the Master of a ship, and the fike.

Apart from these legal and commercial considerations, and economic aspects, the Tegisla-
ture may also regard, as relevant, certain matters of policy. It is on this basis that an assignment
of copyright is exempted from the duty. Otherwise chargeable as on a conveyance and, again,
it is on this principle that numerous exemptions have been granted by the legislature in respect
of documents otherwise chargeable as receipts.

26.7. From this discussion, it is clear that a host of considerations enter into the legislative
determination of the amount of stamp duty to be properly charged. This discussion may appear
to be academic; but unless one is conscious of these aspects, one is likely to miss the point in
the scheme for charging tax under the Act.

26.8. The articles themselves are numerous, and might appear to have been devised meti-
culously. The alphabetical arrangement is undoubtedly convenient, and there is sufficient cross-
referencing—a feature not often noticed in legislative measures, Notwithstanding this scaffolding
of categories created by the legislature for building up its own scheme of taxation, disputes do
arise in practice as to whether a particular instrument falls in one category or the other. In so
far as such disputes arise from the unavoidable fact that human relationships are of an infinite
variety and people do not always enter into transactions with the articles of the Stamp Act in
mind, such disputes may be difficult to avoid. But, in so far as the disputes arise by reason of
obscurity or ambiguity in the description of an instrument in a particular article or by reason
of avoidable overlapping, with a view to considering whether any improvement could be devised.
so that disputes might be reduced in frequency and complexity, even if they cannot be totallv
eliminated. Such amendment would reduce the occasions for resorting to the provisions in
sections 4 to 6 of the Act—provisions which might be described as designed to operate in the
last resort when the court must decide the dispute one way or the other in order to determine
the proper amount of duty chargeable,

26.9. Since the rates of stamp duty on many of the instruments mentioned in the Schedule
fall within the State Tegistative List, it is not our intention to suggest any substantial changes
regarding the rate structure in respect of those instruments. Apart from this. even in respect
of instruments falling in the Union Legistative List, it is not our intention to suggest anv sub-
stantial changes in the rate structure. This is, however, subject to the qualification that such

24 Ml of Law/77—24.

‘Nature of the
cight.

Convenience.

Number of
considerations

Scope for
Improvement


182

rationalisation as appears to be necessary, and as can be achieved without affecting the rate
structure basically, will be considered in both cases.

The desirability of considering verbal improvements in many of the articles will also be
borne in mind.

When the Act was revised in 1899, several changes were made in the Schedule. First, the
iuiphabetical order was improved. Secondly, the legislature removed exemptions from their
position in a separate “schedule of exemptions”, and placed them in the schedule of duties
under the articles to which they referred. Thirdly, the ascertainment of duty was made more
direct and more easy. For example, the three tables of duty under the heads of bill of exchange,
bond and conveyance were, et that time, drawn up in a very curtailed form. When considera-
ble amounts were involved, it was impossible, without the aid of paper and pencil, to make out
from the different tables, the duty payable on a particular instrument. By expanding the tables,
the legislature made it easy for a person by a reference to the schedule to ascertain directly what
the particular duty was.

Nevertheless, there was no attempt made to go into each article from the point of view of
public convenience or ease of understanding.

It will be our endeavour to suggest improvements wherever practicable, bearing in mind
the limitations to which we have already referred.


CHAPTER 27
ARTICLE 1
27.1. Asticle 1 is as follows :

“Acknowledgement of debt exceeding twenty rupees in amount or value, written or
signed Ly, or on behalf of a debtor to supply evidence of such debt in any book
{other than a banker’s pass book) or on a separate plece of paper when such
book or paper is left in the creditor’s possession : provided that such acknowledge-
ment does not contain any promise to pay the debt or any stipulation to pay interest
of to deliver any goods or other property....... One anna’.

The proviso did not occur in the Act of 1879.
27.2. A brief historical discussion of the article may be useful.

Prior to the Act of 1869, there was no provision for charging stamp duty on an acknowledge-
ment. The Act? of 1869 provided for such stamp duty. The article m that Act read—

“Note or Memorandum written in any book or written on a separate paper whereby any
account, debt or demand therein specified, and amounting to twenty rupees or upwards, is
expressed to have been balanced or is acknowledged to be due.”

27.3. Thus, the article in the Act of 1869 did not contain the requirement as to the instru-
ment having been given for the purpose of supplying evidence of the debt.

27.4. Thus, in order to fall within the scope of this article, it was necessary that document
should either balance an old account or should show that the sum acknowledged was due.

In 1879 the High Court of Calcutta was called upon to determine the applicability of the
above noted article in the case of seven advance entries in a document called a hattachhitra having
two aides : “amount advanced,” and “amount received”. And they rightly held that none of the
entries taken singly denoted that the sum mentioned therein was due and could be hit by the
provisions* of Article 5. It was observed that in order to find whether a particular sum was or
‘was not due at a particular date it was necessary to look to both sides of the document, since the
entries an one side controlled those on the other. To quote the relevant observations :

“Now, if any one of the entries in the hattachhitta had stood alone and had been inten-
ded by the parties to form an isolated entry in the book, it might have been
contended with considerable force that it fell within the description of document
mentioned in Article 5, as requiring a stamp. We think however that the entries
cannct be detached from the account of which they form a part. That account

. has two sides to it, the one headed ‘amount advanced’ and the other ‘amount
received’.”

The amount due varies from time to time and depends upon the relation of the amount advan-
ved to the amovat received. In the present case, no sum is entered under the head of “amount
received,” tnt that is an accident smd makes no difference in considering the question as to
whit is offered in evidence. The intention of the parties in requiring tho signature or seal of
the borrowers to each sum advanced is strictly speaking, ta secure under their hends an acknow-
Tedgment that the sum is advanced, whether or not that sum is due or a larger sum or a less
1. The duty of one anna should now be read as ten naya paise. है

2, Indian Stamp Act (18 of 1869), Schedule का, article 5.
3. Brojendra v. Broimomoyee, (1879) LL.R. 4 Cal. 885.

5 183

Antick 1.

History.


Judge Plowden’s
view.

184

sum, depends upon the state of account, In determining whether a document comes within the
description of a document upon which a stamp is imposed by the Stamp Act, we must look at
the entire document, and see whether it fairly falls within the description.

“The document in this case which is offered as evideace is not a note or memo,
acknowledging a debt or part of a debi to be due mor a series of such entries
and memos, but an account between the parties of the character above men-
tioned and as such did not in oor opinion require a stamp.”

27.5, In 1879, an Act (1 of 1879) was made “to consclidate and amend the law relating
to stamps,” and Article 1 (which corresponded to Article 5 of the previous Act) was recast as
under :

“Acknowledgement of a debt exceeding Rs. 20 in amount or value written or signed
by or on behalf of a debtor in order to supply evidence of such debt in any book
{other than a Banker’s Pass Book) or on a separaie piece of paper when such
book or paper is left in the creditors’ possession.”

This Act, therefore, by omitting the wards “amounting to Rs. 20” and “is expressed to have
been balanved or is acknowledged to be due”, brought about two material changes in the law,
wamely ; (1) That the debt must exceed Rs. 20, and (2) the document need not show that
it is a balance entry or that the sum mentioned therein is really due,

27.6. It appears that the original proposal in the Bill of 1878 was to have an article in
the following form! :—

“46, NOTE OR MEMORANDUM OF entry made in any book, or written on a
Separate paper, whereby any account, debit or demand, or any part of any
account, debt or demand, therein specified and exceeding twenty rupees is ack-
nowledged to have been balanced or to be due.”

Some Members of the Select Committee, however, objected to this article at the preliminary
Stage.* Mr. G. H. P. Evans said that this article nmst be ‘further altered or steuck out altogether’.
Whitley Stokes said, “On consideration 1 agree with Mr. Evans, The clause as it stands
Would apply to the statement of the balance in a banker’s pass book not signed by the con-
stituent”,

27.7. It may also be noted that Mr. Plowden, Judge of the Punjab Chief Court, in his
comment? on the Stamps and Court Fees Bill, 1878, made a suggestion zelevant to acknowledge-
meats, in the following terms :—

“In this connection, I venture to make another suggestion, not without some hesi-
tation and doubt as to whether it is practicable to devise a remedy. The native
custom of taking acknowledgments of debts coupled with a promise to pay by an
entry in a bock of account is of daily or even hourly occurrence, and is eminently
convenient to the persons directly concerned. Cannot any method be devised,
consistent with due regard to fiscal interests, by which such promises, which cannot
invariably be regarded as promissory notes (the term itself when translated is
mere jargon to 99 out of 100 persons in the Punjab who make their written
Promises in account books), might be stamped with adhesive stamps, at least when
the accounts are smail, if not in all cases. The alternatives aa it seems to me flow
are that the debtor must be induced to write a formal remassuk on a seperate
Paper, or the book nmst be taken to be stamped by the Collector and after all #
tay turn out (See Schedule II, 7, note (a), and section 28) that the promissory
Portion of a book entry is void, because it requires an additional one-anna stamp”.

1. Stamp Bill, 1878, Second Schedule, Article 46.
2. Sco Preliminary Report of the Select Commmittes, 28th August, 1878.
3. Proceedings of the Legislative Department, No. 1 to 167 (February, 1879 (National Archives)].



185

In its final Report,’ the Select Committee said :

“We have, with reference to the opinions expressed by many of the authorities consulted
and to the dissents appended to our preliminary report, recast (in article i of the first Schedule
as now settled), the 46th article of the same Schedule in Bili No. II.

The Select Committee did not, however, indicate why the words “in order to supply evidence
Of such deb?’ were added.

27.8. The article in the Act of 1879 (First Schedule, article 1), as utlimately enacted, was
as follows :—-

“Acknowledgment of a debt cxcoeding twenty rupees in amount or value, written
or signed by or on behalf of a debtor im order to supply evidence of such debt
in any book (other than a banker’s pass book) or on a separate piece of
paper when such book or paper is left in the creditor's possession”.

27.9. The proviso was added when the Act was revised in 1899. In the Report of the
Select Committee’, on the 1898 Bill, the following reasons were given for adding the proviso :—

Schedule I—No, 1 Acknowledgement.

We have reverted to the old duty of one anna for ali acknowledgements, and have added
words to make it clear that the provision relates only to mere acknowledgements and does not
include acknewledgements containing in addition any promise or agreement”.

27.10. In addition of the proviso, however, did not prove to be an improvement, as will
be shown later.’

27.11. So much as regards the history of the article—history which shows how certain diffi-
culties were anticipated even at that time. In order to fell within the purview of Article I, a
document must fulfil the following conditions :

(1) The debt must exceed Rs, 20.

(2) The document must be written or signed by or on behaif of the debior.
(3) It must be intended to supply cvidence of the debt.

(4) It must be left with the creditor.

(5) It must not contain any promise to pay the debt or any stipulation to pay interest.

27.12, The English law may be contrasted. Under English law, a bare acknowledgement
of liability is not chargeable with duty. Thus an 1. 0. U. or a bare acknowledgement of a joan
on of indebtedness, containing uo provision as to payment or other evidence of the terms of an
agreement, does not require any stamp* in England.

27,12A, The article in the Indian Stamp Act appears १० be simple enough at fitst sight.
But the words “in order to supply evidence of such debt” and the proviso relating to promise
10 pay, have been found to create difficult problems of application. Since, under proviso (a) to
section. 35, an uustamped acknowledgement cannot be admitted even on payment of penalty
(as section 35 does not apply to documents chargeable with a duty of one anna—now ten
naya paisa), hardship arises in practice.

27.12B. In competition with bonds and agreements, an acknowledgment bears a lower
duty. But agreements and bonds (if unstamped) can be admitted under section 35, on payment

1, Final Report of the Select Committes, 31st December, 1878,
2. Report of the Select Cornmittee on the Indian Stamp Bill, 1898, para 18,
3. See discussion below, relating to promise to pay.
4. (a) Childers v. Boulnois, (1822) 171 B.R. 898 (L0.U.}.
{b) Elsher Gent vy. Lesite, (1795) 170 E.R. 407,
©) israel ९. Israe?, (1808) 170 E.R, 1035
{d) Goodyear ४. Simpson, (1845) 153 E.R. 742, 743; (Statement of account containing admission of a certain

balance being dus from the defendant to the;

English law

Words “in order
to supply evi-


Promise to pay.

Cases illustrating
obscurity,

186

of penalty. An acknowledgement cannot be admitted in evidence if unstamped. This causes
hardship.

27.13. As Schwabe, C.J., observed in a Madras case'\—

“This question is whether or noi that is an acknowledgement within the definition
of acknowledgement in the Stamp Act, for if it is, it has to be stamped, and
if not stamped, it cannot be admitted in evidence, and in such a case the legis- .
lature has thought fit to impose what to my mind is an appalling penalty of
the plaintiff losing his claim altogether, because there is no penalty ptovided,
by the payment of which to Government, the document can be admiited (see
section 35}. Perhaps. in view of the seriousness of this provision, the draltsman
of the Schedule has so worded it that it has Jett many loopholes, and has given
vise [0 a conflict of judicial opinion when it comes to interpretation.”

27.14, There is another point which needs to be considered. Under the proviso to article 1,
tt is necessary that an acknowledgement should not contain any promise to pay the debt or
any stipulation to pay interest or to deliver any goods etc. Difficulty is created by the question
how far an express promise is required in order that the proviso to this article may come into
play. It is generally stated that the question whether an instrament is an acknowledgement
containing a promise to pay the debt is one of construction of the document?

27.15. The question must be decided with reference to the language used in, and not
to the legal obligation arising from, the instrument®. This is, no doubt, a sound test. But, 88 8
study of the decided cases shows,‘ the application of the test is not an easy affair. And, if some
other alternative could be adopted, which would reduce this difficulty, it would be an improve-
ment.

27.16. In illustration of the obscurity as to what is and what is not a promise to pay,
we may refer 10 the Allahabad case of Abdul Rafig,’ in which the Judges were inclined to
take opposite views regarding the unconditional acknowledgement implying a promise to pay.
Eyen if the interpretation that an express promise to pay is required in order to exclude an
astrument from article 1 is adopted, it is not, in practice, easy to come to a conclusion
whether the words used in the particular instrument do or do not amount to an express promise
to pay. Besides the cases already cited, the under-mentioned cases may be referred to in
this conacction." :

27.17. Sometimes, the question also arises whether a memorandum of the rate af interest
to be payable in future, when appended to an acknowledgement, is to be regarded as # stipar
lation to pay interest within the meaning of the proviso to article 1, In general, the. Courts
hold that mere mention of the rate of interest without more is as good as an express stipulation.?-*
Sometimes, nice questions have arisen also by reason of the placing of the signature of the
debtor in relation to the stipulation for interest.*

27.18. In a Patna case!*, Courtney Terrell, C.J. observed that the policy of the article
seems to be 10 provide for cases where the debtor and the creditor came to an agreement between.
themselves, that, in consideration of grant of some time to the debtor, the creditor demands

. Chandick v. Anata Lal Damani, (1923) LL.R. 46 Mad. 948 (per Schwabe, C.J.).

Dawala v. Gounda (1903) Punj. Rec. No. 35, pages 111-113 F.B..

Shiv Ram Pumam Ram v, Faiz, ALR. 1942 Lah. 50, 54, $6 (FB).

See“ Decided cases,” infra.

Abdul Refig v. Bhaja, ALR. 1932 Allahabad 199; 1932 Allahabad Law Journal 77.

(a) Munilat v, Natwarial, AIR 1947 Bom, 337

(8) Jogendra Chandra Banerjee v. Sachindra Kumar 40 Calcutta Weekly Notes 399,

(©) Narayan ५, Marayya, ALR. 1951 Madras 605.

(a) Jeerraj v. Lal Chand, ATR. 1969 Rajasthan 192,

4. Mahadev v. Skivraj LL.R. 41 Allahabad 169 (F.B.).

Lakshmi Bai v. Ganesh, LL.R. 25 Bombay 373.

Contrast Rom Prasad ». Parshottam, A.LR. 1937 Allahabad 256 (Full Bench, with SaidHan v. 040, ALR 1931
ore 4).

10, Habibul Rahaman v. Anwar Dhan, ATR 1934 Pat. 629 630(DB.).

ayer ० ७

soos


187

as a condition that the debtor shall relieve him from the apprehension that the deb: may he
barred by limitation or that the evidence upon which he would be able to rely may not be
available at the time of the suit: and it refers, therefore, to the special bargain where the
debtor agrees to give the creditor evidence upon which he may rely to enforce the debt, as
a condition of a concession by the creditor to the debtor.

27.19. But it may be noted that according te the Nagpur view,’ mere intention to extend
limitation is not enough.

‘Where the acknowledgement relates to the balance of an account, a nice distinction is
often made between an admission of the correctness of an account and an acknowledgement for
the purpose of supplying evidence of a debt. Thus, a Bombay case? holds that a debtor's ad-
mission as to correctness of an account, taken in writing in order that he may not subscquently
dispute its correctness, cannot be regarded as an acknowledgement intended to supply evidence
of debt. हु

An acknowledgement of the correctness of account docs not (for its validity) require
a stamp.® The debtor’s admission of correctness of account taken on a memo, so that he
might not subsequently dispute its correctness cannot, according to a Nagpur case.’ be regarded
ag an acknowledgement under Article 1 executed to “supply evidence of” the debt.

These decisions rest on a distinction which, at least, is a fine one and which is worth
avoiding in a taxing statute.

27.20. To remove the diffidulties referred to above, one or more of the following possible
alternatives could be considered® :

(i) The article may be improved on specific points, so as to reduce the difficulty
caused in its application by the ingredients relating to (i) intention to supply
evidence ; and (it) absence of promise to pity.

ii) The provisions of section 35 may be applied to acknowledgements, so as to
mitigate the hardship caused by the present position.

(ili) The article itself may be deleted, thus, bringing the position in line with English
law."

27,21. Alternative (iit) above may be considered too drastic. But both alternatives (1),
and (i) have much to commend themselves. As regards (i), enough has been said above
to bring out the difficulties caused by the present working, which, though well-intentioned,
causes unnecessary controversies and suffering. The words “in order to supply evidence of
such debt”, as well as the proviso excluding a promise to pay, are intended, perhaps, just
to indicate broadly the description of the instrument. But these have been over-emphasised,
and require to be deleted. Their deletion will create less difficulty than their retention. If the
instrument amounts to a bond or agreement. it will be chargeable accordingly.

27.22. At the same time, alternative (ii) above should also be adopted’, and the provisions
of section 35, main paragraph, should be extended to acknowledgements. If our recommendation
to liberalise section 35, Proviso is accepted, then, of course, no further change is needed. What
we would like to say is that even if article 35, Proviso is not liberalised by accepting our
recommendation in 1010, what we have stated in this Chapter as to article 1 and the application
‘of ecetion 35 should be carried out on its own aferits.

1 Pachkod Gulab v. Krishnafi, AIR. 1947 Nag. 145, 150

3 Mantial प्र, Natwarlal, ALR. 1947 Bom. 337, 338.

3 Ramprabha Ojha v. Bishunath 014, A.LR. 1938 Pat, 139. 140.

4 Madhawao y. Hanmant, AR. 1941 Nag. 707.

© Theso are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

© See under “English law,” supra.

5 This, of course, involves amendment of section 35, roviso @). See recommendation as to that section.

Alternatives
for improvement
considered.

35, proviso (a).

Recommendation
to liberalisc the
law with refe-
tence to section 35.


ression
717 rritten or
signed”.

Recommendation
to substitate the
word “executed,”

amoual,

Recommendation.

188

27.23. We had in our Questionnaire! put a Question whether article should not be
totally deleted, having regard to the practical difficulties caused. While scme replies have
expressed agreement with the suggestion for deletion, some have not. We appreciate that this
would be tav radical a course,

But we do consider it necessary to recommend such modifications as would take the
case outside the stringent provision in section 35, proviso (a).

27.23A. Let us now deal with a verbal point. Article 1 levies duty on an acknowledgement
“‘yritten or signed” by the person acknowledging. There is a small discrepancy between this
article and the charging section. Section 3 is the charging section, and an instrument is chargeable
thereunder with duty if it is “executed”, “Executed” and “execution” are defined in section 2(12)
as “signed” and “signature” respectively. A document, though not executed, may yet be an
instrument®; but is not chargeable with duty. Article 1 refers to acknowledgement as being
“written or signed hy or on behalf of the debtor”. Now, an acknowledgement which is “signed
by or on behalf of the debtor”, is duly “executed”, and, in this respect, the reference to “signed”
does not create any substantial discrepancy,—though there is no reason for not employing the
expression “executed”. But, in so far as mere “writing” attracts duty in respect of an acknow-
Jedgement (article 1), there is a discrepancy between section 3 read with section 2(12) (on
the one hand) and article 1 (on the other hand).

27,24, This discrepancy should be rectified by substituting, in article 1, for the words
“written or signed”, the word “executed”®. An acknowledgement which is only written by or
on behalf of the debtor should not become tiable to stamp duty until it is signed. It may, in
this connection, be noted that the word “executed” is used in some other articles‘, and, for the
sake of uniformity of language, wherever the word “signed” is used, it should be changed
to “executed”®. We may note that such an amendment has been approved by most replies to
our Questionnaire’.

27.244. We also recoramend that the amount “twenty rupees” should be increased to
hundred rupees, having regard to the present purchasing power of the rupee.

27,25. The following re-draft of article 1 is recommended, in the light of the above discussion
and subject to whet we have stated above relating to the points that should not be carried out
if section 35, proviso is tevised according to our recommendation.

Proper Stamp duty

[४ ACKNOWLEDGEMENT of a debt exceeding one hundred eupees Ten maye paise.
inamount or value, executed by, or on behalf of, a debtor. inany

FA book ( than a banker's ‘passbook) or on a separate piece of fad
paper when such book or paper is left in the Creditor’s possession.

1, Question 76(a).

2, In re the Application of Chet Pa (1903), 22 LC. 75, 75 (F.B.) (Lower Burma.)
3. Compare recommendations as to articles 28 and

4. Zand 48.

5, See also recommendation as to articles 28 and 42,

6, 0. 7600).


CHAPTER 28
ARTICLES 2 TO 4

28.1, Article 2 levies a duty on an administration bond. The article does not define the Article 2
expression “Administration Bond” ; Mulla defines! it as “a Bond with one or more sureties Mtroductory.
(unless suretics are dispensed with), which must be given for the due collection, getting in
and administration of the estate of the deceased, by any person to whom letters of administration
are granted”. It should, however, be noted that an administration bond can be demanded even
otherwise than proceedings for the grant of letters of adminiswration. For example, there
may be a suit for administration?-*. Forms of plaints in such suits are given in the Code of Civil

Procedure‘.
There does not appear to be any case law on this article, raising doubts.

28.2. The reference in the Article to section 256 of the Indian Succession Act, 1865, to
fection 78 of the Probate and Administration Act, 1861, and to Sections 9 and 10 of the references to tha
succession Certificate Act, 1889, must now be read as a reference to the Indian Succession Act, Indian Succession
1925, and to sections 291, 375 and 376 of that Act respectively. Act, 1925.

Administration bonds include, therefore, bonds under sections 291, 375 and 376 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925, and section 6 of the Goverument Savings Act, 1873. The article

should be so amended.

28.3, Article 3 levies a duty on an adoption deed, that is to say, an instrument (other Article 3.
than a will) recording an adoption or conferring or purporting to confer an authority to
adopt.

History of the article is of interest. In the previous Stamp Act of 1879%, the relevant
article provided that “an instrument (other than a will) confecring or purporting to confer an
authority to adopt”, was liable to stamp duty. Under the 1879 Act, thus, the record of an
adoption was not chargeable with stamp duty. In two Bombay cases* decided under that Act,
the document declared that the adopted son was to be the heir to the interest of the adoptive
father in the undivided family property, but the court held that no stamp duty was chargeable
on this instrument,

As regards the present Act, the following extract from the proceedings of the Legislature is
of intereat".

“Tt has been pointed ont, that adoption is a religious ceremony, and under these circum-
stances it ought to be free from any duty. We perfectly admit it, but what I desire to point
out is, that we do not in any way levy a duty upon adoption. So far as adoption is a religious
ceremony, it goes free, naturally and inevitably, but if a deed of adoption is drawn up which
is to be used as a document of title to property, it is then, and only then, that the duty is
levied, not upon the adoption but upon the deed which records it, and which is meant to be

effective as an instrument creating a right to property”.

1, Mulla, Indian Stamp Act (6th Edition), 9. 202,
2, Order 20, Rule, 13, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
3. Cf. Shivprased v. Frayag Kumar, A.LR. 1936 Cal. 39.
4, Code of Civil Procedure, 1808, Schedule 1, Appendix A, Forms 41—43.
5, Stamp Act, 1879, Schedule I, Article 38.
6, (a) In the matter of Ambai, (1889) LL.R. 13 Bom. 280;
(b) In the matter of Hanmappa, (1889) 13 Bom. 231.
7. Sir James Westland’s Speech (1898).

189
2A M of Law/77—25


190

Case-L ww. 28.4. There are not many reported cases on the section. The expression “recording”.
as used in this article, means, according to one Lahore case*,—
“committing to writing an authentic evidence of a matter having legal importance,
evidence of which is thus preserved and may be appealed to in case of dispute.
It is not legally necessary that the matter and the record thereof should be con-
temporaneous ; there may be cases in which a fact is reduced to writing as
authentic evidence thereof long after it came imto existence.”

The deed in this case referred to the adopted son as the successor of all the property of
the adoptive father, but mo reference to this part of the deed was made by the court in deciding
whether stamp duty was payable on the deed.

No change. 28.5. Article 3, of course, does not assume that a deed of adoption, or an authority to
adopt, is required by law. In fact, under the Hindu Adoptions Act, a deed is not required—
nor is it sufficient. It is, therefore, in very rate cases that article 3 will be attracted. However, it
is not necessary to disturb the article on this ground.

Article 4— 28.5, Article 4 levies a duty of one rupee on an affidavit, including an affirmation or dec-

vit, Jaration in the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing, It
provides for the following exemptions :

Affidavit or declaration in writing when made—

“(a) a3 a condition of enrolment under the Indian Army Act, 1911, or the Indian
Air Force Act, 1932 ;
(b) for the immediate purpose of being filed or used in any Court or before the
officer of any Court ; or
(०) for the sole purpose of enabling any person to receive any pension or charitable
allowance”.
The Act does not define the expression “affidavit”.
28.7. In the U.P. amended article 4 runs as below? :-—
“Affidavit, including an affirmation or declaration in the case of persons by law
allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing—
(a) for the immediate purpose of being filed or used in any Court or before an
officer of any Court....-..5+5 one Rupee ;
(b) in any other case........-- Four Rupees and fifty paisa.
Exemptions—Affidavit or declaration in writing when made—
(a) as a condition of enrolment under the Army Act, 1950, the Air Force Act,
1950 or the Navy Act, 1957, or
(b) for the sole purpose of enabling any person to receive any pension or charitable
allowance*;
Meaning of 28.8. In this article, the words “including an affirmation or declaration ia case of persons

“affidavit"— दि by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing”, seem to have been modelled on the lines
Froommendation of the present definition of “affidavit” in the General Clauses Act!. We have, in our Re-
port on the General Clauses Act, discussed at length, how the definition in the General Clauses Act
is inaccurate. An ‘affidavit’ really means a written statement made on oath or solemn Affirriatton,
etc. and not the affirmation itself, For this reason, in cur Report on that Act, we have

1, Labh Singh v. Mebr Singh, ALR. (1932) Lak, 118, 120 (5.8.)

2. U.P. Taxation Law Amendment Act (U.P. Act 11 of 1965)

3. Sea Romashanker v, Collector, A.LR. 1971 All 287

4, Section 3(3), General Clauses Act, 1897.

5, 60th Report, General Clauses Act, paragraphs 3.4 to 3.8, relating to section 3(3}—'s Midavit.”


191

recommended a revised definition of “affidavit”, as meaning ‘4 statement in writing purporting
to be a statement of fact, signed by the person making it and confirmed by him on oath’. Similar
phraseology should be used in article 4 of the Stamp Act also, and we recommend accordingly.

28.9, Exemption (a) below the article rcfers to the Indian Army Act, 1911, and the Indian
Air Force Act, 1932, in place of which references to the relevant current Acts should be
substituted, These are—the Army Act, 1950, and the Ait Force Act, 1950. The Navy Act,
1957, should also be mentioned.

28.10. Exemption (b) below article 4 exempts, from stamp duty, affidavits for immediate
use in court. When the affidavit is filed in support of an application, the application has usually
to bear court fees.

With reference to the expression “immediate” it has been held that!, by virtue of exemption
(b), affidavits made with the intention of filing in court are not subject to stamp duty, even
though they are sowrn at a different place (1.6. not in the place where the court is situated),
and are filed in the court on a later date. The word ‘immediate’ refers to the purpose of
the affidavit, and not to time. Thus, in an Allahabad case*, an affidavit tor a pending proceeding
in Meerut, sworn at Bombay and filed in a Meerut Court after three weeks, was held to be
exempt. हि

28,11, In Bihar and Andhra, Pradesh, however, this exemption has been deleted,—in the
former with effect from 31st March, 1958, and in the latter, by Act 26 of 1965, in the

_ULP. the exemption has been removed and duty levied, although the duty is less. In an Andhra
Pradesh case*, the High Court made the deletion of this exemption for affidavits, sworn or
declared for the immediate purpose of filing in court, liable to stamp duty under article 4.
The High Court, however, agreed with counsel's argument that this would make litigation
costly, and would also cause practical difficulues and hardship to the litigant public and lawyers.

We agree with the observations of the Andhra Pradesh High Court. The exemption should
not, therefore, be deleted.

‘We are further of the opinion that in view of the difficulty caused by the word “immediate”
in exemption (b), that word should be replaced by “sole”. When the affidavit is filed in court,
it will usually accompany an application, and the application will be chargeable with court fee.

28.12, In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the article should be te-
vised as under ;

“4, AFFIDAVIT. that is to say, a statement in writing purporting to be a statement
of fact, signed by the person making it and confirmed by him by oath, or, in
the case of person by law allowed to affirm instead of swearing, by affirmation.

“Exemptions
Affidavit or declaration in writing when made—
(a) as a condition of enrolment under the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or
the Air Force Act, 1950;
(b) for the sole purpose of being filed or used in any court or before the officer of
any court ; or
(c) for the sole purpose of enabling aay person to receive any pension of charitable
allowance.”
We may mention that the proposed amendment has been approved by most replies to our
Questionnaire*,
1. In the application of Sheshamme, (1888) LLR. 12 Bom. 276.
2. Siri*Kishan Das v. Mohd. Nazir, AJ.R, 1947 All. 37 (FB)

3, Sambasiya raju v. Chandrayyc, ALR. 1967 A.P. 87
4. (है 77.

Exemption(a)—
recommendation
to substitute
reference to
current Army
Act and to add
Navy Act, 1957.

Exemption (0)
to be defined,

Recommendation,


192

Appendix io Chapter on
Article 4—“ Affidavit”

Regarding exemption {a).

The Army Act, 1950" and the Air Force Act, 1950? provide for the form of oath of
affirmation of allegiance and obedience to be taken by a person who is reported fit for duty
or has completed the prescribed period of probation after enrolment. Under the Army and Air
Force Acts, the oath or affirmation is taken by a person who is to be enlisted, i.e., (a) all persons
enrolled as combatants, (a) all persons of non-commissioned or acting non-commissioned rank
and (c) all other persons prescribed by the Cenual Government.

They Navy Act, 19575 provides for the oath of allegiance and obedience that every officer
and every seaman bas to take before the Commanding Officer of the ship to which he belongs,
६5 soon as may be after appointment or enrolment.

The nature of the oath is the same under all the three Acts, viz., allegiance to the Con-
stitution and obeying orders of the superior officer.

The oath of affirmation to be taken by a person under the Navy Act seems to be for
every officer or seaman who is appointed or enrolled. In this respect, thus the Navy Act would
be wider than that under the Army or Air Force Acts, as under the latter two Acts, oath or |
affirmation has to be taken oniy by those persons who are to be attested after he is reported
fit for duty or after the period of probation.
tion 17(2), Army Act, 1950.

2, Section 17(2), Air Force Act, 1950.
3. Section 13, Navy Act, 1957



CHAPTER 29
ARTICLE 5

29.1. Article 5 levies duty cn an agreement or a memorandum of agecement. There are Introductory
three clauses in the article, and three exemptions. The exemptions are impovtant.

29,2. The expression “agreement”, used in the article could have a wide scope. In a Meaning of
Lahore case!, the Court held that a written promise to pay a limebarred debt coming within विशाल"
section 25(3) of the Contract Act is not a “bond”. The High Court had, however, no occasion
to consider whether it was an “agreement”. In a Calcutta case”, the defendants had executed
a document which stated the amount due, and the rate of interest, and “stipulated time for
payment”. The Court held that though this was not a promissory note, i; was an agrecment
to pay, and therefore, chargeable with duty under article 5. .

29,3. These points may not recur often, and therefore, do not call for any clarification, Exemption (४;

But there are certain points relating to Exemption (a), which should be considered. This exemp~ Mear ing of
tion relates to the “sale” of goods or merchandise. The Sale of Goods Act* defines a “contract

of sale of goods” as a contract whereby the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property

in goods to the buyer for a price. Thus, even where property in the goods is actually transferred

to the buyer, the transaction is called a contract of sale of goods. Apparently, for this reason,

article 5 assumes that an instrument relating to a completed sale is also an agreement,—see
exemption (a). Although such a contract may not be an agreement “for the sale” of goods, it

will clearly be an agreement relating to the sale of goods within exemption (a). Such am instru-

ment is assumed to come under article 5, but it will be covered by Exemption (a) and will,

therefore, be exempt from duty‘. Such an instrument will also be a “conveyance”, as a con-

veyance on sale is expressly included in the definition of a “conveyance”®. But, since it is
otherwise provided for, article 23 relating to “conveyance” will not apply to it,

‘Where the document is a memorandum of a completed saie, it will be a memorandum of
an agreement relating to the sale of goods, and, as such, will be* wichin exemption (a), even
if it is chargeable as “agreement”

29.4. A more important question arises from the words “for or relating to the sale of pitculty
goods or merchandise exclusively’, which occur in the exemption (a). The question to be con. caused by the 3
sidered here is, whether the word “exclusively” governs the entire clause in the exemption, M7d roxginively
or only the words “goods or merchandise’

Difficulty arises when the same instrument combines a sale of goods and a mortgage.
The majority of the full Bench of the Allahabad High Court in one case’ has held, that the
word “exclusively” governs the phrase “goods or merchandise”, and, therefore, an agreement
for the sale of goods or merchandise is exempt from stamp duty, even though the instrument
evidences certain other transactions also pertaining to goods or merchandise (¢.g., a mortgage).
Verma J. in his dissenting judgment however, held that the exemption applied only if the instcu-
ment is 30 framed as to amount to a mere agreement to sell goods and has not got any other

1. Dawid Sutherland Clerk v. Rose Crimshew, ALR. 1923 Lah, 481, 433.

2, Presana Kumar v. Panawlia, ATR. 1923 Cal. 659, 661 (D.B.).

3, Section 4, Sale of Goods Act, 1930.

4, A separate recommendation is being made as regards the effect of specific exemptions in one article on chargeability
urer another article.

5. Section 2(10), Stamp Act.

6. Raghubar Dayal ५, Emperor, AIR, 1934 All. 201.

7. LH, Sugar Factory v. Moti, ALR. 1941 All. 243 (F.B.).

193


Recommendation
to amend
Exemption (a)
80 ag to delete
the word
“exclusively.”

194

characteristics. Agreeing with the minority view in this case, the Patna High Court has held?
that a similar document is not covered by the exemption, and is chargeable as an agreement.
Tn the Patna case, the document combined the characteristics of a sale as well as of a mortgage.
Jt was held that the word “exclusively” governs the entire clause, and not only the words “goods
or merchandise.”

29.5. In the Allahabad case, the facts were somewhat complicated, because, by the same
document, the executant executed a hypothecation of the sugarcane crops and also promised to
sell the sugarcane at a specified sum as advanced on interest by the Sugar Factories Ltd. The price
of the sugarcane supplied was to be set off against the loan, and the surplus of the Joan was to be
paid by the executant, interest free. The majority took the view that the document did not lose
its character of “agreement” or the right to claim exemption under exemption (a) merely because
it also contained the hypothecation, of course, in so far as it contained the hypothecation, it was
chargeable with duty. But the minority (Varma and Mulla JJ.) took the view that the exemption
would apply only if the instrument is so framed as to amount to a mere agreement to sell goods
or merchandise and possesses no other characteristics. The majority peinted out that if the exe-
cutant had executed two agreements separately, he would have to pay the stamp duty only on the
instrument of mortgage. There is no reason why the position should be worse for the executant
when he combines the mortgage and the sale in one instrument. As to this, the answer of the
minority was that the frame of the instrument does matter in stamp law.

29.6 The Patna High Court has agreed* with the minority view of the Allahabad High
Court as already stated.

The Rajasthan High Court has held* that a document which did not exclusively relate
to the sale of goods did not come within this exemption and was chargeable with duty. Here,”
the document relating to the sale of a truck provided for payment of price in instalments, and |
also for interest on the unpaid price. It also entitled the seller to seize the truck, if instalments
were not paid in time, and to sell it thereafter, The document was held not to be exempt, be-
cause the right to seize the truck was not a statutory right of the seller, and such terme were
in addition to the agreement relating to the sale of goods. It was therefore taxable as am agree~

ment.
29.7. Thus, there is a conflict of views, and the need for clarification is obvious.

A decision on the question, what should be the law, requires an examination of the policy
of the exemption. In our opinion, the policy of the legislature appears to be not to tax am agree-
ment which is for the sale of goods or merchandise. Such sales should be capable of being effected
without any formality like stamping, and the loss of revenue that might be entailed by the
exemption is offset by the convenience of speedy transfer of the goods or merchandise.

This reason holds good equality where there is one instrument, as where there are two

ins(ruments.*

Jt will be proper to observe that if the Legislature intended to confine the operation of
the exemption only to agreements simplicifer for the sale of goods or merchandise, the proper
place for the word “exclusively” would not have been at the end. It would have been before
the phrase “argeement or memorandum af agreement” and not words in juxtaposition with
“goods or merchandise”. Further, the phrase “agreement or memorandum of agreement” used
in the opening portion of the “exemptions” in Article 5, control the three clauses (9), (b) and
(०) of the “exemptions”. 1 the other view is well-founded, the word “exclusively” would have
been used not only in one of those clauses, viz. in clause (2), but would have been used in con-
junction with the opening words of the “exemptions” quoted above. To give effect to the other
view would be to hold that the word “exclusively” controls the opening words “agreement of

1_उ जप Masa Sugar Mille Lid. v. Sugand Pandey, ATR. 1961 Pat. 9, 10, paras 4 and 5 (Rai & Sinha, JJ.).
3. Pootamchand v. Bastiram Deoktshan, ALR. 1969 Raj. 323.
4, Para 29.5, supra.


195

txmorandum of agreement” and thus governs ail the three clauses of the exemptions. This is
not permissible, having regard to the phraseology of the “exemptions”. The opposite view fur-
ther leads to an obvious anomaly that is illustrated by the following example. Take a case in
which a person executes an agreement for the sale of crop and, by a separate instrament of even
date, mortgages the same crop. The former instrument will, in that case, admittedly fail within
the “exemptions” and he will have to pay stamp duty only on the latter instrument, But if he
joins the two transactions in one and the same instrument he will, according to the argument,
have to pay the stamp duty provided for not only by Article 41, but also by Article 5(c). This
ebviously could not have been intended by the Legislature.

Having regard to these considerations, we reccommend that Exemption (a) should be amended
by revising the last few words as “sale of only goods or only merchandise”. This will make the
exemption applicable even where the instrament combines as sale and some other transaction,
so long as it does not purport to deal with immoveable or intangible property. Of course, even as
regards tangible moveable property, it will not include & pure transaction of hypothecation, gift,
exchange and the like. But the controversy created by the word “exclusively” will not recur.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has, in substance, been favoured by most
of the replies to our Questionnaire.’

3, 0. 78. ~—



Tatroductory.

Transactions
by way of
sccurity.

Plodge,

CHAPTER 30
ARTICLE 6

30.1 While agreements, in general, are dealt with by article 5, special agreements are dealt
with in the subsequent article. Article 6 levies duty on an agreement relating to (i) deposit of
title-deeds, (ii) pawn; or (ii) pledge. Duty is chargeable on an instrument evidencing an agreement
relating to such deposit, pawn or pledge where the deposit ctc. has been made by way of security
(i) for money, advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, or (ii) for an existing ot future debt.
If it is an agreement relating to deposit of title deeds, the title deeds must relate to property other
than a marketable security’, If it is an instrument of pawn or pledge, the pawn or pledge must be
of movable property.

The article is not confined to loans on security of movable property. But, in practice, most
instruments falling under the article relate to movable property.

30.2, The principal legal transactions as a result of which a person may create a security
in favour of another, so far as movable property is concerned, are mortgage, charge, pledge
and hypothecation, In mortgage, there is a conveyance of an interest? in property as security for
the payment of a debt or for the discharge of some other obligation®. In a charge, there is no
conveyance of interest in ihe property, but the charge simply confers upon the charge-holder
certain rights over the property. Mortgages are separately dealt with by article 40.

30,3, A pledge is a species of bailment, In the leading English case on bailments,—Coggs
v. Bernard'—Holt, C.J., enumerated various types of bailments, of which the fourth was vadium,
that is, delivery of goods by a debtor to his creditor, to be kept by him until the debt ts dis-
charged. A pledge is to be distinguished from a mortgage, inasmuch as there is no transfer of
property in the goods and, accordingly, no incidental right of foreclosure, This distinction was
strikingly illustrated in ove of the English cases, where the pledge of a picture of Madonna and
the child, attributed to a famous painter , was refused 8 foreclosure order, there being no mort-
gage.

‘Under the Indian Contract Act, the bailment of goods as security for payment of a debt or
performance of a promise is called a pledge®. It should be pointed out that that Act uses the
expressions “pawn” and “pledge” as equivalents of each other. In fact, in the definition of
“pledge” in thet Act, the bailor is called the pawnor, and the bailee is called the pawnee. The
element of bailment (transfer of possession) is an essential element of pledge’.

A “pawn” is really another name for a pledge, though it is sometimes taken as indicating
those transactions of pledge where the person taking pledge does so as a matter of business.
In England, legislation relating to pawu-brokers imposes certain restrictions on this kind of
business.

30.4, A mere license to take possession, given to the creditor, is not a pledge*, though it
may amount to hypothecation. The twin clements requisite for a pledge—{i) security, and (1)
delivery of possession—furnish a basis for distinguishing it from other allied transections.

3 As to deposits of marketable securities, see section 23A,

३ Compare the definition of "mortgage deed” in section 2(17).

3 Lord Chorley, Law of Banking (1974), page 289.

© Coggs. ४. Befnord, (1703) 2 Ltd. Rayni, 909.

© Praser v. Byas, (1895) 11 Times Law Reports 481.

© Section 172, Indian Contract Act, 1872,

१ Lalian Prasad v. Refmmat Ali, A.LR, 1967 3.0. 1322; (1967) 2 S.C.R. 233
© Ex parte Persons, 16 Q.B.D. 532,

196


197

30.5. In his judgment in Hailday v. Holgae',jilies, J., described a pledge as a security Pledge
* ४ है ~ + . —.,, Intermediate
intermediate between a lien end a mortgage. By contract, a deposit of goods is made a security between lien
for a debt, but the right te the property vests im the pledge only so jar as is necessary to secure and mortgage.

the debi.

30.6. Mortgage, charge and pledge were well known to common law lawyers, Hypothecation.
Hypothecation on other hand, is a civil Jaw institution. The .word is derived
from “hypotheca”. Tt was introdveed in England through international 1900, ft was treated
as effective in equity, being regarded as the equivalent of a charge. It is a: legal transaction
as a result of which goods are made available as security for a debt wthout transferring either
the property in them cr the possession to the lender*. Jt may, in brief he described as a
security for a debt, which security remains in the possession of a debtor.

The security is granted by means of a letter of hypothecation. There are two principal
situations where hypothecation is convenient. because a pledge is not practicable. The first is
when the goods are temporarily in the custody of third parties*. The second is where the goods
are stored in the customer's own warehouse, which cannot be sealed off in such a way as to
enable the bank to become a pledgec. Where it is practicable to seal off-the godown, the practice
is to hand over the keys tc the bank, in order to give the bank constructive possession of the
goads,—-thereby creating a pledge’.

30.7. A lien, answeting to the sacita hypotheca of the Civil Law is a right conferred by 1०

lay; and not by contract, upon one man to retain possession of, or to have a charge upon,
property real or personal belonging to ancther, until certain demands are satisfied": ‘

" 90.8, We have adverted to the distinction between hypothecation and pledge. This has Distinction
‘heen noted in a few Indian decisions*®, and is of importance for the stamp law, the precise charg- : hypothecation
itty anticle being different in the case of a hypothecation without delivery of possession. -Thus;’ 474 pledge.
in’ aw ‘ANahabad case’, * was contended that the instrument in question’ was a ‘hypothecation of.
movable property, falling within the notification® remiting the duty on aa unattested deed' of.

thecation, and not a pledge falling within Article 6. The contention was, however, negatived
on the ground that the goods were handed over to the Bank in, whose favour the, document. was
executed, and there was; therefore, a pledge and not a mere hypothecation.. . -

40.9. This distinction has figured in the history of the Act also. In ‘the éortesponding
Article 29 of the Stamp Act of 1879, the word “hypothecation” was used. while’in thé ‘present -
attigle the words “puwn or pledge” occur. The article in the 1879 Act could, .on its language,
be, apphigable even where possession. was not delivered. But a Calcutta ९४४०१ took the view that.
the word “hypothecation” was used only in the sense of a, pledge, and hence, in the abseyice, |
of, 3,;ptoyision for delivery of possesion, that article would not. apply. The words “pawn’ of
pledge” were substituted in article 6 when the Act was .revifed in 1899. Thus, & hypothecation
of movable property, where possession is not given to the créditor, does not fall under article”
6 though it may fall under “mortgage' {article 40).

30.10. .An amendment of 1904, relevant to another point under article 6, ‘may also be Security far
noticed, Article 6(2) (as amended in 1904) includes ‘not! only -Idang whith are contemporancows' “Tuare Loans
with the agreement (as held to be the case under’? the original article where the wards “logh-’ 1904,
madé” were used), but applics also to the case where the security is for momey to be advariced ‘in *
future. ‘The effect of the amendment is to place all such instroments on the same footing, whether

History of the

पर Hothiday ¥, Holeate, (1868) Law*Reports 3 Exch, 399.

* Lord Chorley, Law of Banking (1974), page 291

3 See, Re Hamilton Young and Co, (1905) 2 King’s Bench 772. ;
4 Lod Chorley, Law of Banking (1974), pare 322.

ह Fisher, Law of Mortgage (5th Ed,), para 5 cited by Donough, Stamp Act, Commentary on Article 6.
"(@) Nadar Bank Erd. v. Canada Bank Lid, AIR. 1961 Mad. 326,

(b) Sila Banking Co. v. Pritams, ALR. 1960 Punj. 42.

1 Sri Harish Chandra v. Punjah National Bank Lid., ALR, 1958 Atl, 864

5 See para 30,11, infra.

9 Ko Shway Aung v. Strang Stee! & Co., (1894) ILR, 21 Cal, 244,

2 Queen Empress 12, Dehendra Rrishna Mutter, (I89011.L.R. 27 CatsT

34M of Lawi77—26


198

or not their execution is simultaneous with the Ioan advanced. On this point. of course, no modi-
fication of fhe article is required.

Effect of and 30.11. For a complete statement of the position relevant to article 6, the effect of certain

remissions. reductions and remissions should also be taken inte account, though they ostensibly relate, to
article 40, The levy of duty on bypothecation under “mortagage” (article 40) created hardship
and Government had to issue certain remissions and reductions, now consofilated in a notification
of 1931. The following reductions and remissions should, therefore, be noted? :—

“98. Attested instrument evidencing an agreement relating to the hypothecation of
movable property where such hypothecation has been made by way of security
for the repayment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, or of
an existing er future debt—Duty reduced to the amount chargeable on a bill of
exchange under article No. 13(b) of Schedule I of the Stamp Act, 1899, for the
amount secured, if such loan ar debt is repayable on demand or more than three
months from the date of the instrument; and to half that amount if such loan
or debt is repayable not more than three months from the date of the instrument.

99. Unattested instrument evidencing an agreement relating to. the hypothecation of
movable property, where such hypothecation of movable property, has been made
by way of security for the repayment of money advanced or to be advanced by
way of Joan of an existing or future debt.”.?

Effect of the 30.12. The nolification deals with two cases. In the first case, the duty is reduced, while in
notification, the second case, it is remitted. .

The net result of these reductioas and remissions is that an instrument of hypothesation, with-
out delivery of possession, though ostensibly under the article relating to mortgege?-—(i)
if attested, is leviable with the duty on a pledge,—that is the practical effect, since che terma of
article 6 are identical with the terms as in the notification mentioned above ; (ii) if unateested, is,
totally exempt by virtue of the notification.

In other words, 2 person concerned with an attested instrument of hypothecation has first
to read article 40, and then to read the notification referred to above, and then he virtually vores’
back to article 6. Such instcuments are nominally chargeable under article 40, but actually

! ander article 6. This is a somewtiat complicated position. (An unattested instrument of hypethe-
cation withont delivery Js exempt from duty). :

Recommendation 30.13. To simplify thé position, we recommend that (a) an instrument of hypothecatton

to add imatramnent without delivery of possession should be added to article 6, (b) an instrument of hyplthees#lon “!

in anes ts 6, without delivery of possession, if unettested ,should be added in the exemption under arficls 6 TE
attested, it should be chargeable as in the notification. No change of substance. will résutt Fron:
such an amendment, which will merely help the citizen by enabling him to ascertain the law किकेश -
one place. tale *

30.14, We, therefore, recommend that, after the words “pawn or pledge”, the words “or
hypothecation” be added at four places (three places) in the main article, and one in the
tion. Consequential charges will be needed im Article 40. Exemption (2), and it may one हा
~advisable to provide expressly in that article that hypothecation of movables shall not be cht
as a mortgage,
We may meation that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of ,the replies
to our Questionnaire’. y ot

छठ
है
दर

Recomm eadetion

Pr

1 Government of India, Notification of 1931, items 98-99. ye
* Duty remitted.

3 Article 40.

* Article 40 to be amended,

* Question 79


CHAPTER 31

ARTICLES 7—12

31.1 Article 7 deals with two kinds of powers, viz., (i) power to appoint trustees, and (ii) power Article 7.
to appoint property. It provides that an instrument, not being a will, by which such power is
exercised, is chargeable with a duty of fifteen rupecs.

Where ६ person is invested with power to determine the disposition of property of which he
is not the owner, he is said to have power to appoint such property.*

The case !aw on this article reveals no serious difficulty.
‘An Allahabad case? decides what is an “appointment”.

A Bombay case* hoids that where the executors of a will, holding property in trust for a
charity, execute a deed appointing the property to an orphanage, the deed is chargeable under this
Artidic. A Calcutta case‘ decides that where the Panch of a community is given power to remove
3 Shebeit und to appoint new Shebaits, duty is chargeable, when a new Shebait is appointed.

We have no further comments on the article.

91.2 Article 8 levies duty on appraisement or valuation. An appraisement is distinguished Article 8.
from an ward® though the duty is the same on both. An award requires a judicial determination,
whieh ax appraisement does not.

‘Bxemption (a) to the article is based on an easly English decision®, that an appraisement
mode for the information of onc party only and 9०: in any manner binding between the parties
is nol Sable to stamp duty, In thc same case? Lord Eljeabgrough C.J. said :

“An ‘appraiser’ ie a person who values or appraises any estate or property real or personal,
or any interest, in possession or otherwise in any estate or property, or any goods,
merchandise or effects, for or in expectation of any hire, gain, fee or reward (46 Geo.
गा, ०, 43, S. 4). This has been interpreted to mean a person who bears the character _
or follows the calling or occupation of an appraiger.”

| No thanges are required in this section on which there is very 1818 Indian 6189-80:

31:3 Under article 9, an apprenticeship deed is chargeable to duty (5 rupees). It inctudes 410५0 9 का
every. writing relating Yo service or tuition of any apprentice or servant, placed with any master Apprenticeship
to-learn any profession, trade or employment. .

A deed of articles of clerkship by which a person is articles to any allorney, is chargeable
witk-a much higher duty® (Rs. 250). .

The exemption under article 9 refers to the Apprentices Act, 1850, which has been replaced. Recommendation
‘The proper reference should be substituted by the Appeebtices Act, 1961. Magistrates no longer
‘work: as apprentices, and this part of the exemption should be omitted. We recommend that the
article should be so amended. हे

३1.4 Article 10 levies duty on the articles of association of a Company. It has bees heki®, Artide 10.
that » special resolution altering the articles of association of a company is not lisble 40 duty, even
3 Spe saction 69, Explanation, Indian Succession Act, 1925. है
॥ Bape reference under section 57, Stamp Act, A.LR. 1956 All. 25 (5.8.).

3 Inve Abdulla Haji Dawood Bomla Orphanage, (1911) LL.R. 35 Bom. 444,
4 Asmpittal ९. Gassain Ganpat, A.1.R. 1919 Cal, 730, 736, 737.
5 Aaticle 12:
© Atkinson ५. Fell, (1860) $M & 5 240; also see jacksou v. Stopherd, (1834) 3 Law Journal Ex. 95.
+ Atkinson १. Felt, (1860) 5 M & $ 240,
* Article 11.
© in the matter of New Egerton Mills, (1999 LL.R. 12 AB. 131.

199


Recommendation,

Article 11 to
be deleted.

Article 12,

Recommendation,

200

if the special resolution supersedes all the articles, and substitutes another set of articles in their
place.

Another article in the Schedule ievies duty on a memorandum of association', That article ~
prescribes a lower rate of duty when the memorandum of-association is accompanied by articles
of association.

31.5. The exemption below article 10 refers to “Articles of any Association not fotnied for
profit and.registered under section 26 of the Indian Companies Act, 1882”. This should now refer
10 section 25, Companies Act, 1956, which is the provision corresponding to section 26, Conipa-
nies Act, 1882. We recommend that article 10 should be so amended.

31.6. Article 11 levies a duty of 250 rupees on Articles of clerkship or contract whereby any
person first becomes Gound to serve as a clerk in order to his admission as an attorney in any High
Court. Now that the system of atiorneys is being abolished, this article should be ddleted. We
recoramend accordingly*.

31.7, Article 12 levies duty on an “Award”, that is to say, any decision in’ writing by an
arbitrator or umpire, not being an awaed directing a partition, on a reference “made otherwise than
by an order of the Court in the course of a suit”. पु

The article is silent जा the question whether a written agreement of asbitration. is required.
It would be of interest to note that scetion 2(a} of the Arbitration Act, 1940, defines an arbitration
agteement as a written agreement to submit present or future differences to arbitration, whether
an arbitrator is named thereunder or not. Section 2(b) of the Arbitration Act defines an
award” as meaning an srbitrafion award. Thus, under the Arbitration Act, there टिया be
nc award without an agreement io arbitration is writing’. Every decision by an arbitrator is
not an award. 1 must be a decision @ written arbitration agreement.

This aspect of the matter is not brought out very clearly in article 12 and the result is that
controversy arises as to whether an arbitrator’s award in writing, given on an oral agreement for
reference, falls within the article. This question usually arises where there is a family arrangement

- as aresult of an awards. It is proper-that the expression “award” in article 12 should be given

the same meaning as under the Arbitration Act. That in fact, has been the judicial interpretation*
in a recent case. It is also obvicus that in article 12 the words “on a reference made otherwise than
‘by an order of the Court in the course of a suit” govern the whole article, and are nat to be
tead merely with “award directing a partition”. . pos

31.8. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that article 12 stiould’ be tevised
as under : oe
“12. Award, that is to say, any decision in writing by an arbitrator or umpire, oa .a

reference made otherwise than by an order of the Court in the course of a suit, being

an award made as a result of a written agreement to submit present or' future differen-
ccs to arbitration and not being an award directing a pariition.”.

Most replies io our Questionnaire favour such an amendment.* ‘sy

3 Article 39, 7 ry
® Latest amendment to the Advocates Act, 1961. a . : 1 <
3 Mohanlal v. Bishastar Lal, ALR. 1947 Bom. 268.

3 See 0, Chime Kondaiah v. G. Redda Kondaiah, AIR. 1974 AP. 238 (issue).

© 0. 80 of the Questionnaire


CHAPTER 32
ARTICLES 13-14

32.1. Article 13 levies duty on a’ bill of Exchange (other than one payable on demand). The Article 13.
duty varies according to the period within which the Bill is payable (aficr date or sight). It alsa
varies according to the value.

It is not necessary to go into details of the scheme prescribed by the article for caiculation
of duties. But even a cursory reading of the article will show that, in the first place. there is a
difference in the duty depending on whether the bill is payable within 3 months after date or
sight, or whether it is payable within 6 months after date or sight, or whether it is payable within
9 months after date or sight, or whether it is payable within one year atter date or sight, or
whether jit is payable at more than one year after date or sight. After the date of payability is
80 ascertained, the next step is to have a look at the amount of the bill. The amount of the duty
vagies ‘according as the bill is for Rs. 500 or 1९७, Rs, 1000 or less, and mere than rupees one
thousand, In the first two cases (Rs. 500 or less, or one thousand or 1055), the duty is fixed,
while in the last mentioned cases, the duty is ad valoren:.

Prima fucie, this appears to be a complex scheme. A bill of exchange is a commercial docu-
ment and negotiable. If, therefore, a simple provision could be devised which would reduce the
cpjoulations and labour necessitated by the present complexity, the attempt would be worthwhile.
Tt-wes with this object in view that we put a specific question in our Questionnaire?, setting out
the scheme which, we thought, could be considered. Since many of the replies received agree
with, the: scheme which; we thought, could be considered. Since many of the replies reccived
agree with the scheme propoted by us, we think: that it is proper that the suggestion put by
us in. our Questionnaire should be pursucd and carried out.

"92.2. 10 may be noted that in England, now, the duty on do inland dill of exchange or 3 Position in
promissory note has been simplified? as follows? — England,

. “Bill of Exchange or Promissory Note of any kind whatsoever (except a bank note)-—drawn,
of expressed to be payable, or actually paid or endorsed, or in any manner negotiated,
in the United Kingdom.”

s. d. (The duty is 2d)
1 Od

-» 32.3. We, therefore, recommend that in article 13, in clauses’ (9) and (०) respectively, a duty Reoommendation
of 2 rupees 50 paise and 5 rupecs for every one thousand rupees should be substituted (for the (91875 actiole
present duty) A flat duty would be still better, but, will, perhaps, be unacceptable. (The duty
hae already been reduced by a Government notification-to 1/2 of that given in the Act)4,

“4, 823A. 10 would appear that by a very recent notification.’ the remission of stamp duty that
‘was'granted so far in regard to stamp duty on Bills of Exchange and promissory-notes has been
modified. The remission under the previous notification reduced the duty from what is mentioned
in article 13(b)(c) to 1/5th thereof. In modification of this remission, the recent notification adopts
the proportion of 1/2 of the rate given in the Act. "Certain proposals were made in ovr Ques-
pe igg in, regard to these instruments in order to simplify the rate structure so as to avoid elabo-
et calculations. The rates now require revision in yiew of the notification which was issnetl
i the Questionnaire. : oo, 2 on

TQ. a. ~ ~ ° ~

3 Finance Act, 1961, section 33(1) (Eng). हे

+ The duty (expressed in the previous currency), is 2d. :

« See recluction of duty notified under $.0, 199 (8), datad 160 March, 1976.

+ Notification No. S.R.O. 199(B), dated 16th March, 1976.

201


Artlele 33, (b)

Article 13. (©)

202

Hence the rates which should now be recommended for these instruments should be as in the
table below. A fresh cotification for “usance” notes issued by certain institutions (mentioned in
the notification of March 1976) will be necessary.

We may state that principle of suggested scheme has been favoured by many of the replies
to our Questionnaire,”

32,3B, We would have been happy to have the comments of the Ministry of Finance on
this particular point, but as they have not been recovered®, we have considered it proper to make
our recommendations as best as we could. Those comments woukd have esabled us to work ont
the implications in greater detail.

This avoids the elaborate calculations which were required in England under the law before

the 1961 amendment, and which are still required in India under article 136) and 13(¢). We see
every reason for simplifying the scheme of calculating duty on bills of exchange.

The effect of the proposed change can be thus illustrated by a comparative table. (This

is got 8 draft).
Comparative table

Present Act} Proposed 45

(i) If payable within three months.

(के ifthe bill does not exceed Rs.500 Rs, O.6h ORE, 2.50
upto Rs. 1,000... - -+ +» + ROS OR. 2.50
for Rs.200 . . पु . . . Rs, 2.50 Re 5.00
forRs. $000 , - , - +« gy ह5. 6.25 ६. 12.50
GD If payable between 3-6 28०05.
if the bil does not exceed Rs. 510 . : » Rs 1.25 Re 2.50
forRs.1,000 . . , - 1 ws, ए5,. 2.90 ORs. 2.50
for Rs. 2,000. . . . पु : पु - Rs, 5.00 |. 3.08"
forRs. 5000. 6 1 1 ee RS 12.50 R12.
ii) If payable between 6-9 months. eta
ifthe bill does notexeeed Rs.500 © |. -+ २७, 1.87) RB. 2.50
forRs.100 .  , - -+- 1, RSLS OR. 2.50
forRs.2,000 2 6 ww we ROR. 5.00
forRs.5,000 . 2. . «- +- -: - Bs, 38.75 Rs. 12.50
(iv) if payable between 9-12 months.
if the bill does not exceed Rs. - Rs 2.50 Re. 2.50
forks. 100. . + - . Bs. 5.00 Re 2.50
for Rs. 2,000 soe ee Re 10.00 RR 5.90
forRs.5,000 60 2 ., we ew RB 25.0 88. 12
if payable at more than one year. or
if the bill dos’ not exceed Rs. 300 - Rs. 5.00 RA 5.00
forRi 100. . +. « Rs, 10.00 ¥ 5.00
for Rs. 2,000 . : - Rs, 20.00 Rb. 90.00
for Rs, 5,000 . . Rs, 96.00 ५ 2000 कई कक मकर

Notification SRO. 1992). 160 Masch 19716.--10 exercise of the powers conferr pode

(8) of sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Endian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) and in

4 Question 81. .
8 Gur Questionnaire was sent to that Ministry. sty हे हु

* In caloulating the present duty, the notification of 1976 is to ‘be borne in mind. =
4 The proposed rate is Rs. 2.50 for every 1,000 rupees or part ia (b), and Rs. 5 for every 1,000 supers oc iw,
+ A fresh notification for usance notes issued by certain institutions mentioned in the notification of 6

‘will be required.



203

of the notifications of thc Government of India in the Ministry of Finance (Department . of
Revenue) No. 15, dated the 15th May, 1957, and No. 6, dated the 14th July, 1961, the Central
Government hereby dirvcts that with effect from the Ist June. 1976 the proper stamp duty charge-
able on Bills of Exchange specified in items (b) and (०) in article 13 of the First Schedule to the
said Act aod promissory 00९5 specified in item (b) of article 49 of the said Schedule shall be re-
duced to one-half of the rates specified against the said items (0) and (c) in the said article 13 :

Provided that the rates of stamp duty mentioned above shall not apply to usance Bills of
Exchange or promissory notes drawn or made for securing finance from the Reserve Bank of India,
Industrial Finance Corporation of India, Industrial Development Bank of India, State Financial
Corporation, Commercial! banks and co-operative banks for (8) bona-fide commercial or trade
teansactions, (b) seasonal agricultural operations or the marketing of crops, or (c) production or
marketing activities of cottage and small scale industries and such instruments shall continue to
bear the rates of stamp duty at one-fifth of the rates specified against the said items (6) and (c)
in the said article 13. ,

Explanation 1—For the purposes of the proviso—

(9) the expression “agricultural operations” includes anima! husbandry and allied acti-
vities jointly undertaken with agricultural operations;

(0) “crops” include products of agricultural operations;

(७) the expression “marketing of crops” including the processing of crops prior to marketing
by agricultural producers or any organisation of such producers.

Explanation 2.—The duty chargeable shall, wherever necessary, be rounded off to the next
five paize.

[No. 16-F. No. 471/17/76-Cus, VII]
0. P. MEHRA, Dy. Secy.

32.4. Article 14 imposes a duty on a bill of Jading (including a through Bilt of lading),
babject to certain exemptions. A bill of lading in respect of intand navigation also falls within
this articie.’

‘There is an important remission granted by the Government which, as aiready pointed out,*
should be incorporated in article 13, in so far as it relates to a bill of lading. We, therefore, re-
conmaitnd that the following exemption should be added below article 14 :--

“Exemption. —Bill of lading issued by a railway company or administration or-ah Inland
Steamer Company for the conveyance of goods or animals.” है

, 32.5. हम (a) ta article 14 also requires change. At present, it reads—

1. (a) Bill of lading when the goods therein described are received at a place within the. !

limita of any port as defined under the Indian Ports Act,.1889, and are to bé
delivered ut another place within the limits of the same port.”

| बॉ dhoukd be pointed out that the Indian Ports Act, 1889 was replaced in 1908 by the Indian
Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908). Apart from that, certain Acts dealing with major ports, have also
been passed. In view of the above position, we recommend that Exemption (a} should be re-

worded as follows

(a) Bill of lading when the goods therein descsibed are received at a place within the

limits of any port as defined under the Indian Ports: Act, 1908 or any other Act relating
to ports, and are to be delivered at another place within the Jimits of the same port,”
We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to owe Questionnaire’,

व Reference wider the Stamp Act, (1904) T.L.R. 30 Cal. 565.
3 See dlsoutelon relating to section 2(4), definition of “bill of lading”,

१ Question 82,

Actick 14--
fatradtuctory

to add exemption.


CHAPTER 33
ARTICLE 15

is 35:-. 33.1. Article 15 levies duty on a bond. We are not concerned now with the case law as
Conflict sf views to the meaning of this expression- -a matter which we have already dealt with while conside
otherwise के the definitions. Nor do we pause to consider the details of the rate structure as given in
provided for". article. |

Confining curselves to the text of the article, we note that there is ७ difference of opinion
as to the interpretation of the words “not. being otherwise provided for by this Act,” which occur
in this article. According to one view,! these words mean “not being provided for by any
other provision of tis Act dealing with bonds”. According to this view, it is only, where the
other provision of the Act (under which the instrument falls) deais with bonds, that the appli-
cability of this article to the instrument is excluded. 11 may be noted that there are, in’ the
Schedule, articles dealing with bonds of specific types ¢.g., Administration-bond (No. .2), Bot-
tomry bond (No. 16), etc. According to. this view, it is only where the instrument falls under
one of those articles dealing with specific types of bonds that it can be held to be “otherwise
provided for” within the meaning of article 15.

i

The other view takes the words “not otherwise provided for” in an unrestricted sense, and
simply as meaning, “not provided for in any other part of the Act.” According to this view,
article 15 will not apply to an instrument falling within any other article, irrespective of the
question whether such other article deals with bonds or 0०.2 ote

33.2, To illustrate. the. controversy, Jet us take an instrument which amounts to a bond as
defined by section 2(5) and also to a mortgage deed (article 40). According to the first view,

_ such an instrament is not “otherwise provided for by this Act”, and can, therefore, fall «nder
article 15, while, according to:the second view, the instrument must be regarded as “otherwise -
provided for by this Act” and, therefore, as not being within the scope of article 15... woth

33.3, Although the express exemption’ of “debenture” and ‘the Note at the end-of the
article would seem ५० support the first view, we are of the opinion that‘the second view: ig
preferable, becanse if a document is covered: by a specific entry,—in whatevér form-it should .
not be regarded as a bond. Such a construction is more in, consonance with the general scheme
and intendment of the Act. and with the rule of constructian that the specific must’ exclude
. the general. है
1००७० ४०७५४॥००. 33,4 It is, in our opinion, desirable to clarify the position, by giving effect to the stcond.
view. We, therefore, recommend that for the words, “not being otherwise provided. for by this
Act or by the Court Fees Act. 1870", the words “not being otherwise ‘provided: for by any
provision of this Act whether or not relating 10 particular types of bonds or by the Court Fees
Act, 1870, or any enactment corresponding to that Act in force in any part .of ‘India’ ; should
be substituted in article 15. . हे * Lon reg

We may add that the views expressed in response to our Questionnaire? have, in genevat?
favoured such an amendment. ys

ane >> Hep >77-- 7-० पृ
15% H. Sapce Factory, Pilibhtt ~. Moti, ALR. 1941 All, 243, 258, 266 (per Verma and Mulla, वा. 138
2. L. मं, Sugar Factory, Pillohit v. Moti, AIR. 1941 MB. 243, 284, 274 {per Baipai and Dar, 72.). 7५

3. Quéstion 83.

Recommendation,



CHAPTER 34
ARTICLES 16-21

34,1. Article 16 levies duty on “bottomry bonds”, (so named after the “bottom” or keel
of a ship).

A bottomry bond is a contract in the natute of hypothecation of a ship, as a security for
money Ient or expended upon her without reserving any claim against the owner in person,
and usually made by the master-abroad, stipulating that the money advanced, together with
the agreed premium, shall be paid within a stipulated number of days after the safe arrival of
the vessel at a named port of discharge. The master of a ship has, as an agent of necessity,
under certain circumstances, authority! to pledge or hypothecate the ship and its cargo as
security for the money advanced to be expended upon her. The contract is called “bottomry”,
and the bond a “bottomry bond”.

From the language of the article, it appears that it is confined to a bond executed by the
master only, Hypothecation of the cargo is called a “respondentia bond”.

34.2. The money is lent only upon the security of the ship. Hence, where the owner
undertook ० personel liability which was to subsist for a period of about five months from the
date of the bond, it was held, that it was not a bottomry bond.?

34,2A. It should be noted, that there is no such provision as article 16 in the (English)
Stamp Act, 1891. The English Act expressly exempts “instruments for the sale, transfer, or
other disposition, either absolutely ar by way of mortgage, or otherwise, of any ship or vessel,
or any part, interest, share, or property of or in aay ship or vessel”. This would cover botto-
mry-bonds. In India also, a similar exemption has been introduced by section 3(2). Article
16 must, therefore, be read with and subject to section 3(2), the effect of which will be to
exclude, from its purview, bonds on all ships registered in the manner indicated by section
3(2), though not others.

34.3. It may be noted, that bottomry bonds were in vogue before the days of submarine
cables and wireless communications. Authority had to be given to the masters to act on behalf
of the owneis and cargo owners when, in emergency, they could not communicate with them,
Bettomry-bonds and respondentia bonds are now obsolete’. The article however may be left
a8 it is since it may be useful for those exceptional emergencies where wireless fails.

33.4. Article 17 levies a duty of five rupees on instruments of cancellation, (if attested and
if not otherwise provided for), including an instrument by which an instrument previously executed
is cancelled. The inclusive portion is unnecessary, and should be omitted. We recommend
accordingly. ह

We are also of the view that an instrument cancelling a will should be exempted from tax,

34.5. It should be noted, that an instrument cancelling 2 wil! has by notification? been
expressly exempted from the duty under Article 17. This is an important exemption, and should
find place in the Act. As regards the phraseology 10 be used for incorporating the substance of the
notification, the word “cancellation” is used in the notification and could be adopted, though the
Indian Succession Act, in its provisions relating to wills, uses the word “revoked”.5

1. Chorley, Law of Shipping (1960), page 178.
2. Asam Kutha Sahib Mercoyar ¥. Mamanathan Chetri, (1899) LLR. 22 Mad. 26; 8 M.L.J. 159.
3. Chorley, Law of Shipping (1960), page 32.

4, Notification of 1931, item No. 112.

5. Section 62, Indian Succession Act, 1925 (unprivileged wills} and section 72 (privileged wills).

205
24M of Law/77—27.

Bottomry bond.—
section ¥ 6.

No duty in
English law,

Axticle 17


Article 18--
Introductory.

Position

regarding
incumbrances,

Article 19

206

We recommend thet the article should be amended on the above points. We may note that such
an amendment has been favoured by many replies? to our Questionnaire.

34.6. Under article 18, stamp duty is levied on a certificate of sale (in respect of each pro-
perty put up as a separate Jot and scld), granted to the purchaser of any property sold by public
auction by a civil or revenue court or Collector or other revenue officer.

34.7, Before 1894, there were conflicting decisions as to whether incumbrances ‘should be
included in the computation of stamp duty under this article. The majority view was that where
property was scld in execution of a decree subject to an incumbrance, the amount of stamp duty
payable on the sale certificate would be calculated only on the amount of the purchase money,
and not on the amount of the purchase money plus the incumbrance.* But the Bombiy High
Court tock the view that where property was sold at a court sale subject to a charge, the certifi-
cate of sale should bear duty calculated ad valorem for the amount of the purchase moncy, plus
the principal mortgage money charged upon the amount.® A subsequent case* of the same High
Court discusses the question how far mortgages should be entered in the certificate.—the deci-
sion being that they should be entered only if the mortgage is admitted by the party or had been
established by a decree or had heen declared under section 282 of the Code of 1882 and the sale
had been subject to them. The case does not discuss the question of stamp.

To overcome these conflicting views, Act 6 of 1894 added the word “only”, after the words
“purchase money”, in the second column, opposite to clause (०) of the article, and thereby accept-

ed the majority view.

34.8. There is, however, still some difference of opinion in a few Bombay decisions with
respect 10 a second certificate jor sale, issued when the first certificate is found to be-deficient in
stamp. Thus, in one case,* where a certificate of sale was granted on insufficient stamp, and the
insufficient stamp and penalty were ordered to be recovered from the grantee, who wanted a fresh
certificate of sale from the civil court, it was held that the civil court having geanted a certificate
was not bound to grant. a fresh certificate so that the grantee might escape the penalty, But in a
later case® the court said that the earlier case merely decided that the court was not obliged to grant
a second certificate. It did not hold that the court could not do so.

34.9. As to the decision in the earlier Bombay case, it is difficult to see how penalty can,
with any propricty, be recovered from the grantee when the certificate is prepared and signed by
a government officer. The stamp has to be borne by the grantee according to section 29 (7, but,
in practice, the stamp too is purchased according to the advice tendered by some officer of the

court.
As the point is not found in any recent case, an amendment on the point is not required.
34.10. Article 19 levies a duty on certificate or other document evidencing the right or title

of the holder thereof or any other person, either to any shares, sctip or stock in or of any incor-
porated company or other body corporate or to become proprietor of shares, stock or scrip of any

such company or body.

‘Share’ means share in the share capital of a company, and includes stovk except when a
distinction between stock and share is expressed or implied.

1, 0. 84.
2. (a) Jwalaprasad v. Ram Narain, (1893) LL.R. 15 All. 107.

(0) Reference from the Board of Revenue, (1884) LL.R. 10 Cal. 92.

(e) Reference under Stamp Act, s. 49 (1882) IL.R. 5 Mad, 18 (FB).

(&) Reference under Stanp Act, 8. 46 (1884) LL.B, 7 Mad. 421.
3, @) Meer Kaisur Rhan Marad Khan v. Emgrahim Khan Masakhan. (1891) LL.R. 15 Bors, 532,
(0) Ska Nagin das Jey Chand v. Halatkare Nathawa Gheesta (1881) 1L.R. 5 Bom. 471 (F-B.).
4. S.C. Chedambarays पर. Subrao Ram Chandre Yellapur. (1894), 1.L-R, 18 Bom, 1975.
5. Nandram Matiram v. Kacke Bhan, (1885) 1.L.R. 9 Bom. 526.
6. Collector of Ahmedabad ¥. Rambhan, ALR. 1930 Bom. 392, 394.


207

Scrips are also in the nature of certificates. When debentures are allotted to subszribers upon
terms that the same shall be payable by instalments, a provisional scrip is issued to the subscribers,
to be exchanged for a regular debenture after all the instalments are paid up.

34.11. In a Bombay case, a certificate of membership issued by a provident socizty, insuing
the payment of money on the death of the member of the society, was held to be chargeable under
article 47 (Policy of insurance), and not under article 19.

There does not appear to be any conflict of decisions or obscruity of language or other
serious difficulty with respect to this article. .

34,12. Article 20 deals wth a Chartes-party, which is any instrument (except an agreement
for the hire of a Tug-steamer), whereby a vessel or some specified priscipal part therecf is let for
the specified purposes on the charter, whether the instrument include: a penalty clause or not. A
charter party is a contract made between the freighter (i.e. the persoa who charters or hires the
ship or a part for the carriage of his goods) and the owner (ot the masters or their agent) (the
master generally having authotity weitten or implied, from the terms of his employment), contain-
ing the terms for freight, and, in this contract, the owners or masters bind themselves, the ship,
tackle and furniture that the goods freighted shall be delivered (dangers of the sea excepted), at
the place of consignment : and they also covenant to provide seamen, rigging etc. and then equip
the ship completely which they also warrant seaworthy. The freighter, on his part, stipulates to pay
the freight. A charter party is distinguishable from a bill of lading, inasmuch as the charter-party
relates to the entire ship where as the bill of lading only ascertains the contents of the particular
cargo.

34.13, The word “‘charterparty” is derived from the expression “carta partita”, which, in
medieval latin, meant an iastroment written in duplicate, on a single sheet and then divided by
indented edges so that each part fitted? the other.

There are three types of charter party :-—

(a) Voyage charter party ;

(b) time charter party ;

(०) charter party by demise, 1.6.
Tease of the vessel.

A voyage or a time charter party confers simply the right to have the goods carried by a
particular vessel, whilv, in the case of charter by demise, the possession and contrel is also
transferred to the charterer’.

34.14. It may be of interest to note that in England, the duty on charter parties has been
abolished, having been found to be unproductive,‘ we put in the ‘Questionnaire’ a question whether
a similar course would not be useful for facilitating the development of shipping in this country.
‘There has been considerable support for such a course in the replies. We, therefore, recommend,
deletion of Article 20.

Article 21
Article 21 was omitted in 1927.

1, Ja re Winunat Provident Soctety Led., (1901) LL.B. 25 Born. 376.
2. B.C. Mitra, Carriage by Sea (1972), page 8.

3, Payne, Carriage of Goods by Sea (1968), page 3

4 Finanos Act, 1949 (Eng.).

5. Question 85.

Article 20.

Article 20 to be
deleted.


CHAPTER 35
ARTICLE 22

{ticle 22 35.1. Article 22 levies a duty, umder the head of “composition-deed”, on four kinds of
instruments by which a debtor arrives at some agreement with his creditors for the discharging
of his debts, namely :—

(1) an instrument whereby a debtor conveys his property for the benefit of his credi-
tors. This is often referred to as an assignment.?-* 11 covers what is known in
England as a clausio bonorum,* but, in England, it is expected that it should require
the creditors 10 accept less than the full amount ;

(2) an instrument whereby payment of a composition or divident on their debts is
secured te the creditors® ;

(3) an instrament whereby a debtor is allowed to continue his business, under the
supervision of inspectors, for the benefit of his creditors ;

(4) an instrument whereby a debtor is allowed to continue his business, under letters
of licence®, for the benefit of his creditors.

The duty is ten rupees in each case.

Operation 35.2. Ordinarily, the article operates before adjudication, Independently of bankruptcy law,

सिक्का of an insolvent debtor, that is, a debtor who is not able to pay his debts in full or as they become due
and payable, can enter into a valid arrangement with his creditors by which, without paying his
debts in full, he obtains a release from the claims of the arranging creditors, These arrangements
usually take the form either of a composition with creditors, or of an assignment of the arranging
debtor's properly to a trustee for their benefit." The England, there exists legislation prescribing
certain formalities for such deeds of arrangement? There is no such restriction in India.

35.3. A debtor who is unable to pay his debts in full may arrange his affairs with his ccedi-
tors without having recourse to a petition for his own adjudication.* Arrangements between debtors
and creditors are known as composition agreements, A composition agreement may take the form
of an agreement by which the creditors agree to abandon their claims in consideration of receiving
a composition on their debts, that is, a smaller sum bearing an agreed proportion to the amount
of their respective claims.1° Or it may take the form of an assigament by which the debtor assigns
the whole of his property to a trustee for the realisation and rateable distribution of the proceeds
amongst all his creditors, or amongst those who assent to and take the benefit of the sscigament,
and the creditors, in consideration of such assignment, release their original claims and accep the
dividend payable under the agreement in discharge of their debts.' The difference between these.
two methods is that while a simple composition agreement does not, of itself, operate as at act of
insolvency, an assignment amounts to an act of insolvency.1?-14
‘Subbaraya v. Vythilinga, (1893) LL.R. 16 Mad. 85, 89,

Chandrashankar ¥. Bat Magan, (1914) 1.1... 38 Bom. $76; A.LR. 1914 Bor. 55, 56, 57.
Compare section 1(2(a), Deeds of Arrangement Act, 1914.
Reg. v. Cachan, (1886) 18 Q.B.D. 269, referred to in LL.R. 38 Bom. 576.
Chandrashankar v. Bai Magan, (1914) LL.R. 38 Bom. 576, 590.
8०० below, point relating to article 38.
See Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 22, pp. 388-89.
See infra.
‘Mulla, Insolvency Lav (1958), pagt 341.
‘Mulla, Insolvency Law (1958), page 341.
See (2) Malackchond v. Manilal, (1904) LL.R. 28 Bom. 354, 367-368;
{b) Re Haston, (1872) L.R. 7 Ch. App. 723, 726.
12. Section a), Presidency-towns Tosolvency Act;
Section 6(a), Provincial Insolvency Act.
13. Section 1(1Xa), Bankruptcy Act, 1914 “conveyance or sssignment”.

208

FEY 9० ल्‍1 Aware Ne


209

But it is not open to every creditor to base an insolvency petition upon it. Thus, a creditor
who has been a party or privy tw the assignment is estopped from setting it up ag an act of
fasolvency, It should be noted that the assigument must be fer the benefit of all creditors; other-
wise it may, amouat to a fraudulent preference, which is an act of insolvency on which any other
creditor may base a petition.

35.4 Composition agreements of both the classes' are covered by the article in the Stamp
Act. In addition, it covers instruments providing for inspectors and for continuance of business
under letters of licence.

An analogous arlicle? levies a duty of 10 rupees on a “letter of licence,"—i.e. an, agreement
that the creditors shall, for a specified time, suspend their claims and allow the deblor to carry
on business at his own discretion. In Hngland, letters of licence are, by the Deeds of Arrangement
Ast,* required to comply with cextain formalitics prescribed by statute.

35.5. After this preliminary discussion, we shall proceed to consider the various instrumeats
to which article 22 applies.

35.6, Out of the four categories mentioned above, assignments and compositions may be
taken together. In a Madras case, a debtor and the firm of which he was a member had been
adjudicated bankrupts in Mauritius, and a receiver appointed by the court. Subsequently, the
ereditors met, and resolved that if the adjudication was annulled, a composition payable by
instalments be accepted in full satisfaction of their debts, and thar the bankrupt’s estate be
assigned to that firm, and vhe plaintiff be appointed trustee to carry out such agreement. An
instrument was executed to give effect to this resolution, which was also approved by the
insolvency court. The court ordered that the bankrupt’s estate should vest in the plaintiff, who
was appointed trustee to carry out the composition, with full powers of realisation. The plaintif
now sued to recover the moveable anc immovable property of the bankrupt in india. The Court
held that the transaction substantially amounted to a transfer by the debtors of their property
for the benefit of their creditors, and had been duly stamped as a composition deed.

In a Bombay case,® it was beld that the deed in question fell under the first class. In this
ease, the debtor, with the consent of the creditors, executed a deed making over all the specified
asevls to certain named creditors. The creditors coming in by a particular date under the deed
agreed that after all the goods and properties had been made over to the trustess, no other claims
with Yegard to the amounts due to them should remain qutstanding against the debtor. The
deed also provided that the trustees were 10 manage the properties for the benefit of the creditors,
and the money realised from time to time was to be distributed among such creditors in proportion
to their claims. Subsequently, in a suit brought by the trustees to recover possession of a house
comiptised in the deed, the question arose whether the deed was 8 composition deed. The
Appellate Court held thar the deed was a composition deed, as i¢ fell within class (1) of the
definition in article 22 as an instrument executed by a debtor whereby he conveys his property
for the benefit of his creditors.

35.7, The third and fourth categories of instruments mentioned above can be distinguished
thus, In the case of the inspectors mentioned in article 22, though the article is silent as to
who should appoint these inspectors, it is presumed that the inspectors are nominated by the
creditors, In the letter of licence, the claims of the creditors are suspended fer a specified tame,
and the debtor is allowed to carry on his business at his own discretion."

1. Para 35.3 supra.

2. Article 38.

3, Section 1(2)(० and (d), Deeds of Agreement Act, 1914 (Eng.), Williams on Bankrupicy (1958), page 368.
4. Para 35.1. supra.

4. Subbaraya ४. Vythtalinga, (1893) LL.R. 16 Mad. 85.

6. Chandrashankar v. Bai Magen, (1914) LL.R. 38 Bom. 576, A.LR. 1914 Bom. 55, 56.

7. Of. Article 38.

Analogous
Arlicle 38—~

Letter

pana 2)
ert iat

of Licence.

od

compositions.


Article 38.

Position after
adjudication.

Procedure under
Insolvency Acts.

Practical utility
Hmited,

210

45.8. Where it is a deed falling under article 38 as a letter of licence, the business is carried
on at the discretion of the debtor. it is doubtful how far such a deed is of practical importance,
as presumably the debtor has already mis-managed his business earlier, thus incurring the debts,
and one wonders if the creditors would allow him to manage his business further at Ais own
discretion .

35.9. Under the Insolvency Acts; after adjudication, the court appoints the insolvent to
manage the trade or his property in such manner as the court direcis. In such cases, the discretion
of the insolvent is controlled by the court. Therefore, where it is a deed whereby provision is
made for the continuance of the debtor’s business “under the supervision of inspectors”, it can
be assumed that the inspectors would be nominated by the creditors.

35.10. As regards the procedure for inspection, the relevant provisions in the Insolvency
Acts® provide for a committee of inspection for the purpose of superintending the administration
of the insolvent’s property by the official receiver. Under the Insolvency Acis, the committee.
of inspection are the creditors themselves or those who hold general powers of attorney from
the creditors. The court has to authorise the appointment of such a commiltee.

35.11. The questiun whether, under thc Stamp Act, Article 22, ‘inspectors” means those
appointed from among the creditors themselves to supervise the debtor's business, and whether
they have to be approved by the court (as under the Insolvency Act),* is not beyond doubt.
However, one general comment ‘hat can be made with respect to deeds of inspectorship (similar
to the comment already made with regard to letters of licence), is that such deeds do net appear
to be commonly used. No case law on these two types of composition deeds is available.

35,12. With regard to vbe practical use of these deeds, it is interesting to note the history
of section 67A of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920. This section was added by section 5
of the Act of 1926. Before the amendment, there was no such provision in this Act, though
there were, in the Presidency towns Insolvency Act, sections 88 and 89, which provided for
the setting up of a committee of inspection by the creditors for the purpose of superintending
the administration of the insolvent’s property by the receiver. In 1924, the Civil Justice Com-
mittee made a recommendation for the addition of such a section, making the following observa-
tions ;--

“Go Little use is made of these sections in the Presidency Towns Act that one hesitates to
recommend their introduction into the mofussil. In principle, however, it seems hopeless to
expect good administration of a fund which really belongs to the creditors, unless the creditors.
are given a means whereby they may have a proper voice in superintending the administration.”

There does not appear to be any case law under these sections providing for a committee of
inspectors under the Insolvency Act also.

35.13. If these two types of composition deeds are retained in the Stamp Act, then the
following changes are recommended for the improvement of the relevaut parts of the article :—
(1) In the case of insteuments for the continuance of business under inspectors, the
article should make it clear that they are appointed by the creditors.*
{2) Since article 38 denies a letter of licence, reference should be made in article 22
to that article.
We may add that such an amendment has been favoured by most replies to our Question-
uaire.*
1. See also Mulla, The Indian Stamp Act, (6th ed.) page 292. :
2. (a) Section 66 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920; Mulla Lew of Insolvency (1958), papes 699 and 714;
(b) Section 75 of the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909:
(० Compare sections 57-58, Bankruptcy Act, 1914 (Eng.).
4. (@) Section 67-A, Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920,
(0) Sections 88 and 89, Presidency Towns Intolvency Act, 1909.
4, Para 35.10 Supra.
5, Para 35.7 supra.
6. & 86.



21
APPENDIX
Extract of Section 1, Deeds of Arrangements Act, 1914 (Eng).

1. (1) A deed of arrangement (Eng.) to which this Act applies shall include any instru-
ment of the class hereinafter mentioned whether under seal or not—

(a) made by, for or in respect of the affairs of a debtor for the benefit of his creditors
generally ;

(b) made by, for or in respect of the affairs of a debtor who was insolvent at the date
of the execution of the instrument for the benefit of any three or more of his
creditors :

otherwise than in pursuance of the law for the time being in force relating to bankruptcy.

(2) The classes of instrument referred to are—
(a) an assignment of property ;

(b) a deed of or agreement for a composition ;
and in cases where creditors of the debtor obtain any control over his property or bnsiness-—

(९०) a deed of inspectorship entered into for the purpose of carrying on or winding up
a business ;

(d) a letter of licence authorising the debtor or any other person to manage, carry
on, realise or dispose of a business with a view to the payment, of debts; and

(०) any agreement or instrument entered into for the purpose of carrying on or winding
up the debtor’s business, or authorising the debtor or any other person to manage,
carry on, realise or dispose of the debtor’s business with a view to the payment
of his debts.


Artick: 23--
(ntroduction.

Ne
lo change as
to basis of charge.

Exemption
‘copyright.

Amendments 85
to conyright.

CHAPTER 36
ARTICLES 23—25

36.1. Article 23 levies duty on a conveyance. There are many other insiruments analogous
to conveyance, but we need not enumerate them here. As to mstrument of release, we have
already discussed the position.*

36.2. In the discussion relating to section 27,% we have referred to certain State amend-
ments which alter the basis of the charge under article 23 from the amount of the consideration
(which is the present basis), to the value of the property. Such an amendment basically affects
the’ rate of duty. We do not propose to consider the merits cr demerits of such an amendment
having regard to the fact that the question is one of policy, and no difficulties resulting trom
complexity of law arise.

36.3. There is, in this Article, an exemption from duty in respect of assignments of copyright
by entry made under section 5 of the Copyright Act, 1847.

It should be pointed out that the Copyright Act, 1847 was repealed by the Copyright Act,
1914. That Act has, in iis (छात्र, been repealed by the Copyright Act, 1957. Both the Act
of 1914 and the Act of 19575 prohibit assignments of copyright by entry in the register, and
the exemption under article 23, in the form in which it appears, is obsolete.

There can be an assignment of a copyright in a different form, under the Copyright Act,
1957, section 18. However, section 19 of that Act is material, and provides as followst :—

*19. No assignment of the copyright in any work shall be valid unless it is In writing
signed by the assignor, or by his duly authorised agent.”

This section corresponds to the Act of 1914. First Schedule, section 5{2). ‘Thus, the
assignment of a copyright must, under the present Act, be in writing, and signed by the assignor.

36.4. Reverting to the article in the Stamp Act. we may note that State Amendments of
article 23, while taking note of the fact that the Copyright Act of 1847 has been repealed, mm
on divergent lines. Briefly, the position is as follows :—

{a} In Gujarat and Maharashtra, a reference to the Copyright Act of 1957 has been
substituted, in place of the reference to the Act of 1847. But adequate notice
does not seem to have been taken of the details of the scheme in the Act of
1957.

(b) In Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh. Madras (now Tamil Nadu), Mysore and
Puniab, all assignments under section 18 of the 1957 Act have heen exempted.

{c) In Uttar Pradesh, the exemption appears to be limited to assignments of copyright
in musical works by a resident in India or first published in India,

(d) In Bihar, the exemption has been deleted with effect from 318 March, 1958.

36.5. Having taken note of the divergent approaches adopted by State Legislatures, and
after a careful consideration of the merits, we have come to the conclusion that all assignments
of copyright ought to be exempted. The assignment of literary, musical or artistic works should
be treated differently from the trensfer of other property. We need not elaborate the reasons.

1. See discussian relating to section 2(10}—“Conveyance”. _
2, See discussion regarding section 27.

3. Section 18. Copyright Act, 1957.

4. Section 19, Copyright Act. 1987.

212


213

Ht will be enough to say that barring a few exceptions, artists and musicians must assign their
copyright if they are to eke out their living. It is then only that they can put their products
before the public. It is hardly proper to treat the sale of a house and an assignment of a
copyright on an equal footing.

36.54. Deletion of the exemption should, in our view, be regarded as a retrograde step.
Nor is it proper lo restrict the exemption to assignments af musical works. Creative activity,
whatever be the medium, ought to be treated on a special footing. There is no reason why only

musical works should be granted protection, and not paintings or sculptures or literary works
or choreography.

The primaty reason for which the law has, in the field of stamp duties, made a distinction
between material property and what is conveniently described as intellectual property, would
appear to be that the latter represents man’s journey into spheres bordering on the region of
the spirit. To nourish that laudable endeavour ought to be an object of the law. This is not
to say that if profit is made out of the pursuit of such activity, such profits should never be taxed.

The point to be made is that in the context of the stamp law, the assignment should not be
subjected ta tax.

Another aspect also ought not to be overlooked. In the case of international News Service,»
Brandeis J. observed :—
“The general cule is that the noblest of human production, knowledge, truth ascer-

tained, conception and ideas become, after valuntary communication to others,
free as the air to conumon use.”

Freedom from taxation places the work of art at the disposal of many more persons than
would be possible if there were no exemption.

36.6. We, therefore, recommend that the present exemption should be retained, after sub-
stitating a refereace to sections 18-19, Copyright Act, 1957 (which deal with assignments),
in place of the reference to assignment under section $ of the Copyright Act, 1847.

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to our Questionnaire.?

36.6A. Article 24 levies duty on a copy or extract certified to be & true copy or extract by
or by order of “any public officer” and not chargeable with court-fee. The article applies to all
copies certified to be true copies by public officers, whether the original was or was not chargeable
with stamp duty. The duty is eight annas if the original was not chargeable with duty or if the
duty on the original does not exceed one rupee. In other cases, the duty is one rupee. It should be
noted that the article applies also to copies of documents which do not create rights® or liabilities

36.7. There are two exemptions. Their details are not material for the comments that
we are going to make on the article. But we may note that. Exemption (b) under the article
exempts, from duty, copies of registers of births and deaths,—which are all documents which

do mot create a right or liability. This exemption itself shows that in other respects the article
ia wide, as stated above.‘

36.8. We shall first dispose of a minor point. We may point out that with reference to
the expression “public officer”, which is used in the article but not defined in the Act, the
absence of a definition was regretted by Edge C.J.5 who observed—

“.,,.@ fiscal Act, which imposes the payment of duty on the subject, ought to contain
definitions of all terms which have to be considered in apply the Act and which
are not accepted as well recognised terms of universal application.”

1. International News Service v. Associated Press, (1918) 248 U.S. 215, 25. ~
2. Question 87 {Article 23).

3. Sactlon 2(24), definition of “instrument” {inclusive defisition),

4. Para 36.6, supra.

5. Reference, (1897) LL.R. 19 All. 293, 294,

24 M of Law/77—28

tight to be
Copy right ४ |
special footing.


No duty on
copics in England.

Recommendation
to add refersnce
to section 76,
Evidence Act.

original 4

214

He pointed ont (by way of example), that under the Indian Penal (०१०7 apparently, the
Secretary of a Municipal Board would be a “public servant” but he would not be a “public
officer” according to the term as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure.? Referring to sections 74,
76 and 78 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, he held that the record of the proceedings of a
Municipal Board is a “public document” and the officer who is authorised by the ordinary course
of his official duties to give copies of public documents, is, for these purposes, a “public
Officer”. Hence, a copy of an order passed by a Municipal Board on a petition presented to it,
certified as a true copy by the Secrctary to the Board, came within article 24, and required

to be stamped.

This particular difficulty will not survive if our recommendation to insert a definition of
“public officer” is accepted,

36.9. It may, incidentally. he noted that in England, the entries in the Schedule to the Stamp
Act, 1891 relating to copies and extracts were repealed in 1949.4

36.10. Ta one respect. it is stil! desirable to define ihe scape of the article more precisely
than at present. Certified copies of public documents are issued under section 76, Evidence
Act, and that is the principal provision of significance for the putposes of article 24. We.
therefore, recommend that after the words “public officer”, the words and figures “under section 76
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872” should be added in this article; the Stamp Act will then be
brought into harmony with the Evidence Act.

We are separately recommending the insertion* of a definition of “public officer”, but an
amendment is also needed in article 24, as suggested above.

36.11. Another point relevant to this article raises certain issues of substance. At present,
duty is leviable on a certified copy or extract given by a public officer, even if the original was
not chargeable with duty, by virtue of article 24(i). The rationale of charging duty on such
copies is not readily understandable. No doubt, taxing provisions are meant to collect revenue,
and one cannot always find their rationale. But, in this case, the provision obviously causes
hardship and inconvenience. If, for example, a student seeking admission to a college pets
copies of his academic diplomas certified by a public officer, the copies so certified would hecome
chargeable with stamp duty on a literal reading of the article. Again, where copies of miscellane-
ous correspondence in a pending case are certified. each of them becomes chargeable, thus
making their use in a proposed litigation costly. Even copies issued for private use, or for
private record, become chargeable. This causes considerable hardship. We are of the view
that this is a situation where the considerations of revenue should yield to those of convenience,
and there should be no duty on a copy if the original is not chargeable.

36.12. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the charging portion in
article 241i) and (ii) should be revised, so as 10 read as follows :—

(i) if the original was chargeable with a duty not exceeding one rupee,
Fifty
- _Paiise.
(ii) if the original was chargeable with a duty exceeding one rupee.
: . ना One
rupes.
Exemption
(3) if the original was not chargeable with duty.
(Gther Exemptions as at present, after suitable re-lettering).
1. Section 21, Indian Penal Code. ~ oo
2. Section 217}, Code of Civil Procedure, 1882. ,
3. The Finance Act, 1949, sections 35 and 5201), and Bight Schedule, Part 1, ensry 12, and Eleventh Schedule;

Monros, Stamp Duties (1964), page 261, 262.
4, See discussion as to section 2, definition of “public officer’ (new),



215

We may mention that the suggested amendment has been favoured by most of the replies
to our Questionnaire.*

36.13. Article 25 deals with the counterpart or duplicate of an instrument. This is of
particular importance to leases. A lease is generally prepared in two identical forms, called
the lease and the counterpart respectively. The lease is executed by the lessor alone, and the
counterpart is executed by the lessee alone, then, the lease and the counterpart are exchanged.
Sometimes, the lease is in duplicate. The counterpart or duplicate is chargeable with duty if
the original is chargeable with duty. Where the proper duty has not been paid on the original,
the intention of the law is that the counterpart itself should bear duty.

Where article 25 applies, the counterpart which is stamped under the article would not be
admitted in evidence, unless the original is produced to show that it was duly stamped cr
the Collector certifies* the duty paid on the original.

In this article, the exemption relating to the counterpart of a lease granted to a cultivator
which is itself exempt from duty® is, strictly speaking, redundant, because the Article itself
would apply only if the original is chargeable with duty. However, the exemption is harraless,
and need not be disturbed.

1. Question 88 (Article 24).
2. Section 16,
4, Article 35, Bxemption (a). as to leases to cultivators.

Article 25--
‘Counterpart or
Duplicate.


CHAPTER 37
ARTICLES 26—29
37.1. Article 26 levies duty on a customs-bond. It needs no change.
37.2 Article 27 levies duty on debentures. It needs no change.

37.3, Article 28 (Delivery order in respect of goods) refers to the “instrument being signed
by or on behalf of the owner of such goods” ........... Obviously, in this article, the instrament
described as “signed” is one “executed”, for the purpose of section 3. It would be desirable
to substitute the word “executed” for the word “signed”, in this article. We recommend that
the article should be so amended. We may note that such an amendment has been favoured
by almost all the replies to our Questionnaire.*

37.4. Article 29 levies a duty of one rupee on an instrument of divorce, that is to say,
any instrument by which any person effects the dissolution of his marriage. Of course, so far
as the law of domestic relations is concerned, such imstruments can have legal effect only in
cases where extra-judicial divorce is permitted by law and the scope for the application of
the article is, thus, limited. The article needs no change.

1. Question 90.

216


CHAPTER 38 '

ARTICLE 30
38.1. Article 30 levies duty on entry as an Advocate in the following terms : ‘Article 20. ae

Description of Tastrument Proper Stamp-duty

30. ENTRY AS AN ADVOCATE, VAKIL OR ATTORNEY ON THE ROLL
OF ANY HIGH COURT UNDER the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926, or
in exercise of powers conferred by Letters Patent or by the Legal Practitioners

Act, 1884—
(a) inthe case of an advocate or Vakil 5. . Five hundred rupees.

(b) in the case of an attorney . . . पु . . . Two hundred and fifty rupees.
Exemption

Entry of an advocate, vakil or attocney on the 701 of any Righ Court when
be has previously been enrolled in a High Court

38.2. It should, at the outset, be pointed out that the article has become obsolete, with position under
the comting into force of the Advocates Act, 1961, which has practically superseded* the various पाक Act
enactments relating to advocates referred to in the article—that is to say, the Bar Councils
Act, and the Legal Practitioners Act. Even as regards attorneys, recent amendment abolished
the system.

A certificate of enrolment as Advocate is now issued under section 22 of the Advocates
Act,” which reads—

“22. There shail be issued a certificate of enrolment, in the prescribed form—

Gi) by the State Bar Council to every person whose name is entered in the roll
of advocates maintained by it under this Act ; and

Gi) by the Bar Council of India, to every person whose name is entered in the
common roll without his same having already been entered in any State roll.”

Under the same Act,’ an enrolment fee of two hundred and fifty rupees is to be paid to
the State Bar Council, before enrolment as an advocate. Section 20 of the Act provides for
a common roll, and section 46 provides for the payment of a part of the enrolment fees to the
Bar Council of India by all State Bar Councils.

Alter the passing of this Act, the article in the Stamp Act has become practically our of
date,

38.3. Taking note of the passing of the Advocates Act, 1961, many States have dealt State
with the Stamp duty in this respect by specific provisions. Ameodnents.

Below, an attempt has been made to summarise the position with regard to the levy of
Stamp duty for enrolment as an advocate under the various stamp laws vis-a-vis the Advocates
Act, 1961.

(1) ( the following States, the duty under the stamp law has been specifically repealed/
‘omitted. .nd only the fee under the Advocates Act, 1961, is now payable:

fa) Madhya Pradesh—Ariicle 30, relating to entry as advocates etc. on the roll
of any High Court, has been omitted by Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1962.

1, See section 22, Advocates Act, 1961
2, Section 22, Advocates Act, 1961.
3, Section 24(1)(1), Advocates Act, 1961.

217


218

(०) Maharashtra.—Article 31 of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958, relating to entry
as advocates etc., has been deleted by Maharashtra Act 10 of 1965,

(2) In the following States, the duty under the Stamp law continues to be leviable and
the Statap Act has been specifically amended after the passing of the Advocates Act. The fee
under the Advocates Act, 1961, is atso chargeable ;

(a) Andhra Pradesh—Article 26 (substituted by A.P, Act 26 of 1965) levies, for
entry as advocate in conformity with the Advocates Act, 1961, a Stamp
duty of Rs. 250/-.

(४) Mysere.—Article 17 (new) of the Mysore Stamp Act, 1957 as amended by
entry as advocate in conformity with the Advocates Act, 1961, a stamp
Mysore Act 29 of 1962, levies on certificate of enrolment in the roll of advocates
under the Advocates Act, 1961, a duty of Rs, 250/-.

(०) Gtr Pradesh-—Article 30 of Schedule IB, inserted by U.P, Act 28 of 1952,
as substituted by Act 25 of 1962, levies, on entry as an advocate on the State roll
under the Advocates Act, 1961, a stamp duty of Rs. 500/-.

(3) In some States (Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, Punjab and West Bengal)*, the pro-
vision as to duty on entry as advocate ‘under the various Stamp Acts, in the form prior to the
Advocates Act, 1961, bas not been specifically revised or repealed?,

Recommendation 38.4 Having carefully considered the position resulting from the Advocates Act, 1961, and
10 delete after giving due thought to the State Amendments, we have come to the conclusion that the article
in the Stamp Act relating to eatry as advocate should be deleted. Im our view, it is nat proper to
continue the stamp duty after the imposition of the fee mentioned above by the Advocates
Act,

1, The enumeration is not intended to be exhaustive.
2. See Krishnamurthy, Indian Stamps Law (3rd ed.) pages 458, 630, 732.


CHAPTER 39
ARTICLES 31—34

29.1. Articls 31 levies stamp duty on an instrument of exchange of property. No changes
are needed in this article.

39.2. Article 32 levies stamp duty on an instrument of further charge. It needs no change.

39.3. Article 33 levies duty on an instrument of gift, not being a settlement, will or transfer.
We have no comments on this article.

39.4. Article 34 fevies duty on an indemnity bond. The duty is the same as on a security
bond (Article 57). It may be noted that the duty on a security bond is lowcr than that on a bond
in general. Bonds in general are chargeable with duty ad valorem without any maximum (Article
15), while security bonds (and consequentially, indemnity bonds) are subject to 2 maximum.

The article applicable to bonds in general—Article 15—applies only to a “bond” as defined
in section 2(15), not being a dehenture (No. 27) and not being otherwise provided for by
che Stamp Act of by the Courtfee Act. Since, in respect on an indemnity band or a security
bond, provision bas been made in article 34 and 57, the duty on these bonds would be payable
wn accordance with those articles, and not in accordance with article 15.

39.5, Article 34 does not defiue an indemnity bond. The Indian Contract Act defines a
“contract of indemnity”? as follows :—

"124. A contract by which one party promises to save the other from loss caused
to him by the conduct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person,
is called a contract af indemnity.”

In general, this definition is utilised by the Courts in interpreting the Stamp Act also.?

39.6 While article 34 does not require any amendment, a few points arising cut of the case
law may be briefly referred to.

Tt has been emphasised? by the Bombay High Court that the article applies only when the
contract of indemnity is in the form of a bond. An indemnity note passed by a consignee to the
Railway company, in respect of goods for which the railway receipt was lost, was, therefore, held
to be chargeable only as an agreement* and not as an indemnity bond.

Then, there is an Allahabad case® relating to an agreement by a company for compensation
to be paid to the Managing agent. on ithe happening of one of the events specified thercin. This
provision for compensation was a term of the Managing Agency Agreement. It was heli that
the term could not be treated as a separate contract of indemnity, as there was no separate con-
sideration for it. The provision for compensation was not a distinct matter, but was part and
parcel of the agreement as a whole, and it was not, therefore, liable to duty as an indemnity bond.
The agreement was an ordinary service agreement, chargeable with stamp duty as an agreement,
and was not a bond.

39.7. The cases discussed above illustrate the application of the article. They do not, how-
ever, call for an amendment of the article.

1, Section 124, Indian Contract Act.
2. Hindustan Sugar Mitis y. State of U.P, ALR 1972 All. 8(S.B).

3, Reference from the Chief Commissioner of Centra! Provinces, 1L.R. 5 Bom. 478 (FB).
4, Article 5.

5, Inve Dhanpur Sugar Mills, AAR. 1956 All. 25. (Special Bench).

219

Antcle 31,

Article 32.

Article 33,

Article 34—
Indemnity Bond
Introductory.

Indemnity <
Meaning of.

Case law.


Article 35—~
Intreductery.

Sub-lease = and
underlease and
agreement to let.

‘Meaningof “fine”
ition

Explanation,

CHAPTER 40
ARTICLE 35

40.1. Article 35 levies duty on lease, including an under-lease or sub-lease and any agres-
ment to let or sub-let. The duty varies according to the nature of the consideration for the lease,
We shall deal with this aspect later, in detail. The duty also varies according to the duration of
the Jease. The amount of duty is linked up either with the duty on a bond, or with the duty on a
conveyance,

Under the proviso to the article, where an agreement to lease is stamped with a duty as on
a lease, the duty on the subsequent fease is not to exceed eight annas. The exemption to the
article cxempts certain leases executed in the case of a cultivator and for the purpose of cultiva-
tion,

40.2. As already stated, the article alo levies a duty on a sub-lease, and under-lease, and
an agreement to let or sub-fet. Ordinarily, the expression “sub-lease” is understood as denoting
a lease granted by the lessee who remains liable to the lessor, The expression “under-lease” is
usually understood? as indicating 3 lease by a lessee fot a period less than the residue of the
ferm.

As regards agreement to let or sub-et, it should be noted that, with reference to the
Registration Act, it is now well-settled that only an agreement which creates a present demise is
compulsory registrable as a lease, We shall revert to this point later.?

40.3. The word “fine” used in clauses (b) and (c) of the article does not mean any pecu-
niary penalty, but appears to be intended to denote the amount paid by the lessee on entry
or the fee paid for renewal of the lease. This appeats to be the sence in which it is used in
Engtand. Since this word is nol intelligible to the Iayman, we recommend that the word “ne”
should be explained by a suitable Explanation.® We may note that such an amendment has been
approved, iu substance, by most repliest to our Questionnaire. :

We may state that in Fogland,the Law of Property Act provides sha! “Fine” includes pre-
avium or fore-gift, and any payment. consideration or benefit in the nature of a 116, premium or
fore-gift.? Again, under General Rate Act,¢ “fine” means fine, premium, or fore-gift, or other
payment or consideration in the nature thereof.

It has been held? that the “fitness” referred to in Schedule A, No. II, 1. 6, of the Income Tax
Act, 1918 (8 and 9 Geo. 5, 0. 40) are indistinguishable fram premium, and ate money payments
in consideration of a demise.

40.4, The scheme of the article, in one of its aspects, deserves somewhat detailed cxami-
nation. The article is divided into three clanses—-(a), (०), (c)—and the mode of calculation of
the duty varies according to the clauses under which the instrument of lease falls, Clause (a)
applies where, by the lease, “the rent is fixed and no premium is paid or delivered”, Clause (b)
applies where the lease is granted “for a fine or premium or for money advanced and when 10
rent in reserved”. Clause (c) applies where the lease is granted, again, “for a fine or premium
for money advanced in addition the rent reserved”.

1. Mozley and Whiteley, Law Dictionary (1970), page 372.
2. Para 40.11, infra.

3. Explanation to be added.

4.9.92,

5. Lew of Property Act, 1925, section 20507).

6. General Rate Act, 1967, section 36.

7. Utting (B. 6.) and Co. v. Hughes. (1939) 2 K.B. 231.

220



221

40.5, Broadly, the scheme is based on the principle that where the consideration for the
lease is “rent” iz., a sum to be calculated ox the basis of 2 periad—then clause (a) should
apply; where the consideration is woz @ periodical payment as above but 4. lump
sum, clause (0) should apply; and where the lease partakes of the character of both, clause
(०) should apply.

40.6. Some difficulty, howevcr, is created by the discrepancy in wording between the
vatious clauses. While the phrase used in clause (६) is “rent is fixed”, the wording used in
clauses (b) and (2) is “rent . . .reserved”. The two expressions not being identical, an obscurity
atises, It often happens in practice that while the lease provides for a monthly or annual rent,
28 substantial part of the rent is paid by the lessee in advance, in order to comply with the
demand which the lessor might have made at the time of the negotiations for the lease. Now, the
question that falls to be determined is whether such a case comes within (a) of article 35—
“rent” is fixed,—or whether it falls under clause (b) or clause (c)——“advance of mouey”, It
tnay also be noted that clause (9) applies only where “no rent is reserved”.

40,7. The reported cases on the subject reveal a conflict of views between the Bombay High
Court and the Punjab High Court. Although the Punjab case (to be presently referred to)
seeks to distinguish the earlier Bombay judgment, it would, with due respect, appear that the
(wo judgments cannot be really reconciled.

In the Bombay cuse,? a cettain amount was paid to the lessor in respect of a lease before
the execution of the lease. The lease was executed on 9th December, 1949. The lessor demis-
td unto the lessee for a period of five years the salt pans and land known as Hormuzed Salt
Pans near Vadala Station in Dadar Taluka. In respect of this lease, two amounts were paid :
Rs, 33,000 on 2-11-1945, and Rs. 22,000 on 24-6-1948, and the question that arose was
whether this lease fell under Article 35(a) (iii), or whether it fell under Article 35(b). In
order to determine that question, the Court had to decide whether these two amounts paid
constituted “rent reserved”, or whether they constituted a “fine or premium or money advanced”.
If they constituted “rent reserved”, they were outside clause (b}.

There was no covenant to pay the rent, but there was an appropriation of the amount
actually paid towards rent, which was stated as being for certain fixed amounts spread over the
veriad of the tease,

Te was held that there was no “reservation of rent’, but that whatever was paid in advance
was “money advanced” within the meaning of clause (b), and the instrument taxable accordingly.
Ii the lessee pays the amount in respect of the rent prior tc the liability arising under the lense,
she payment is nothing more than an advance paid by the lessee to the lessor. This was the
reasoning of the Bombay High Court, which pointed out that a proper case of “rent reserved”
cowkl only mean rent in respect of which there is a convenant on the part of the lessee to pay
the amount mentioned. If there is no convenant as there could be none because the amount had
already been paid—then there is no “reservation of rent”.

40.8. In the Punjab case? the lease was for a term of five years from the date of occupation,
the monthly rent being Rs. 700.

Clause 1 of the lease deed was as follows :

“Provided always and it is hereby mutually agreed as follows:
{1) A sum of Rs. 25,500 shall be paid to the lessor on the date of occupancy, a3
advance rental for the first 36 months from the date of occupancy at the rate
above mentioned, namely, Rs. 700 per month.”

The question 10 be considered’ was whether the case fell under clause (a) or clause (¢)
of article 35.
1. te ve Chief Controlling Revenwe Authority, ATR. 1952 Bombay 285 (Chagla CJ. and Gajendragadkar, 3.).
2. Union of India ५. Caltex Lid, AT.R. 1966 Punjab 488 (FB).
24M of Law/77-—29,

Period,

Rent paid ia
advance.

Case Jaw एक ibe
subject,


‘Need for change.

Recommendation
to substitute the
word “fixed” for
the word.
“reserved”,

Article 35—
it
to let.

222

Tt was held that the sum cf rupees 25,000 and odd, which was agreed to be paid to the
Jessor on the date of occupuncy as advance rental for 36 months, was rent; and merely because
the rent was paid in advance under a covenant, its character did not change. The Bombay case
was distinguished on two grounds, first, that in that case the payment by the lessee was prior
to the liability for rent arising, and, secondly, that the Bombay High Court was concerned with
clause (b), which does not contain the words “in addition to rent reserved"—words which occur
in clause (c}. In the Punjab case, the lessee was required to pay the amount as rent for 36
months, and the liability was, therefore, to pay rent, and not the money advanced in addition fo
rent reserved. .

40.9. Even assuming thit the situation in the Punjab case can be distinguished from the
Situation in the Bombay case, there is, in our opinion, scope for re-defining the various cate-
gories in a neater form. Essentially, the question is this—where an amount is paid in advance,
not as premium but as the sum total of the periodical payments of rent, attributable to a part
to the period of the lease, should it be treated as a case of rent reserved or as a case of “money
advanced”? On this basic question, the two judgments show a conflict of approach,

40.10. It would appear that on the language of the article, there is much to be said for
the Bombay view, since clauses (b) and (०) use the word “reserved”. However, so far as
the question what cught 70 be the law is concerned, in our view, the law will be simpler if the
tase where the rent is paid in advance is also treated as falling within clause (a), because, essen-
tially, what the lessee pays is “rent”. The lessee, instead of paying the rent during occupation,
pays it at the initial stage. Though the lessor gets it in lump, the case is distinct from “premium”,
because, unlike premium, the rent apportioned period-wise. If this suggestion is accepted, the
object could be achieved by replacing the word “reserved” by the word “fixed”, in clauses
(b) and (०), on the lines of clause (a). This will remove the disharmony between clause (a) on
the one hand and clauses (b) and (c) on the other hand and will eliminate the possibility of
the view being taken that where the amount is paid in advance, though it is apportionable, it
ogases to be rent.

40.11, There is another point requiring consideration with reference to this article. While
‘lease’, as defined in section 2, does not caver an agreement of lease, Article 35 makes an
agreement of lease chargeable as a Jease, by an express inclusive provision. What, thea, is
the precise scope of the article in relation to an “agreement”? Does urticle 35 cover every
such agreement, or is it 10 receive a narow construction ? The question came up recently
before the Delhi High Cdurt.! The premises in dispute were held by the plaintiff in the suit
as a tenant from the defendont. By an agreement entered into between the parties, it was
provided that the defendant (landlord) would set up, in place of the premises, a multi-storeyed
building on the side, and in consideration of the plaintiff delivering vacant possession of the
leased premises to the defendant, the defendant would give to the plaintiff a flat on the ninth
floor (with certain specified dinscnsions), in the multi-storeyed building, on terms and conditions,
set out in the apreement. In case ihe work on the proposed multi-stereyed building was not
commenced before a certain daie, the defendant would hand overt to the plaintiff vacant posses-
sion of the premises on the same terms and conditions on which it had hitherto been held by
the plaintiff. It was further provided that the agreement shall be valid for a period of 10
years from the date on which the flat in the proposed multi-storeyed building was handed over
to the plaintiff. हे

40.12, Pursuant to this agreement, the plaintiff delivered vacant possession of the premises
to the defendant, but the defendant did not pursue the project for constructing the multi-storeyed
building. The plaintiff filed the preeent suit for enforcement of the agecement and return of
the premises. The defendant took the plea that the agreement was inadmissible in evidence
because, being a lease, it was insufficiently stamped. The agreement was on a paper of Rs. 2.
The lower court rejected this contention of the plaintiff, and the filed the present revision before
the High Court. 5

1. Mrs. Birender Amarjit Singh +. General Marketing & Mfg. Co. Lid. Calentte, AL.
(प्र, L. Anand, 7.).

- 1976 Delhi 13, 16, para 5


223

The High Court held that the agreement could net be said to be either a lease or an
agreement ta lease and was not, therefore, liable to be stamped under Article 35. In the
opinion of the High Court, in order to be treated as a lease, an agreement must satisfy the test
of immediate and present demise in respect of the property covered by it, and an agreement
to Tease was 10 exception to this rule. Reference was made on ihis point to ‘he two cases
mentioned in the footnotes.!-?

Further, the right conferred by this document on the respondent was contingent on a
mumber of itupondersbles, and, at best, would be a right to ask for a lease of the fat after
ene comes 170 existence,

In our view, the interpretation placed in this case on the scope of the expression “agree-
ment of lease” is, with respect, sound, and it should be codified in order to indicate the true
scope of the article. We may note that independently of this judgment of the Delhi High
Court, a Bar Council? has suggested to us that the scope of Article 35 should be so confined,
The object could be achieved by inserting an Explanation that an agreement shall not be charge-
able as a lease unless there is an immediate and present demise. We recommend that the
article should be so amended. What we have stated above is the gist of the provision that
we would like to be inserted.

1, Hemania Kumari Devi ए, Midnapur Zamtudari Co. Lid, ALR.1919 PC. 79,8081... Zamindari Co. Lid, AIR. 1919 P.C. 79, 80, 81,
2, Trivent Bat ५. Smit. Lila Bai, ALR. 1959 5.0. 620.
3. Suggestion of the Andhra Pradesh Bar Council (§. No. 51),

Recommendation
regarding
“agreement

to ket’,


Arucle 36—
Allotment of.
shares.

Article 37--
Leteer of credit.

Article 38—
Letter of licence.

Memorandum of
association,

recommended in.
‘Exemption.

Article 41—
Mortgage of crop.

CHAPTER 41
ARTICLES 36—45
41.1, Article 36 levies a duty on a letter of allotment of shares, and needs no change.

41.2. Article 37 levies a duiy on a letter of credit, and needs 10 change. Certain points
relating to letters of credit have been discussed while dealing with the defnition of “bill of
exchange payable on demand”.!

41.3. Article 38 levies a duty on a letter of licence. Certain points relevant to this article
have been discussed earlier under “Composition”? The article itself needs no change.

41.4, Article 39 levies dity on a Memorandum of Association of a Company. The duty
is fifteen rupees if the Meriovandum is accompanied by articles of association under section 37
of the Indian Companies Act, 1882. The duty is forty rupees, if it is not so accompanied.
The exemption exempts a “Memorandum of any association not formed for profit and registered
under section 26 of the Indian Companies Act, 1882.” ‘

We recommend substitution of reference to the relevant sections? of the Companies Act,
1956, in this article.

41,5, Article 40 levies duty on a mortgage-deed, not being an agreement relating to deposit
of title-deeds, pawn or pledge (No. 6), Bottomry Bond (No. 16), Mortgage of a crop (No.
41), Respondentia Bond (No. 56), or Security Bond (No. 57). Under clause (a), the duty
is linked up with the duty on a conveyance where possession of the property or any part of
the property comprised in such a deed is given by the mortgagor or agreed to be given.

When possession is not given or agreed to be given as aforesaid, the duty is linked up
with the duty on a bond. This is provided in clause (b).

However, when the mortgage deed constitutes a collateral or auxiliary or additional or
substituted security, or is executed by way of further assurance for the above-mentioned purpose,
and the principal or primary security is duly stamped, the stamp duty is levied at a much
lesser rate, under clause (०).

Under an Explanation below the article, 2 mortgagor who gives to the mortgagee a power-
of-attorney to collect rents or a lease of the property mortgaged or part thereof, is deemed to
give possession within the meaning of the article.

41.6. There are two exemptious below the article, which exempt from duty—

(1) instruments, executed by persons taking advances under the Land Improvement
Loans Act, 1883, or the Agriculturists’ Loans Act, 1884, ot by their sureties
88 security for the repayment of such advances ;

(2) a letter of hypothecation accompanying a bill of exchange.

The second exemption relating to a letter of hypothecation should now be transferred to
article 6, in view of the amendment proposed in article 6 (pawn or pledge), where we have
recommended that that atticle should be applied to instruments of hypothecation also.

41.7. Axticle 41 levies duty on the mortgage of a crop, including any instrument evidencing
an agreement to secure the repayment of a loan made upon any mortgage of a crop, whether the
crop is or is not in existence at the time of the mortgage. It needs no change.

1. See discussion as to section 2(12Xc)—"bill of exchange payable on Enns sto nsalion MAIN—"bil of exchange payableondemane™. SSS
ion —deed.

2. See discussion as to article 22—compositi
3. Sections 26 and 28, Companies Act, 1956,

224


225

41.8. Article 42 levies duty on certain notarial acts. In doing so, it refers to the “instru- ite ie
ment. ..... Recontmiendation.

We recommend that in this Article, for the words “made or signed”, the word “executed”
should be substituted, in order to maintain harmony with the language of the charging section
(section 3). The legislature perhaps avoided the word “executed” in the present article for
reasons of euphony-- thinking :hat the word “execution” which follows later, would then jar on
the ears. If so, that word could be replaced by the word “performance”. Incidentally, it may be
stated that in India, notaries are appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952.

41.9, Acticle 43 levies doty on a note or memorandum by a broker or agent to his princi- Articte a

intimati 4 incipal— Note ong
pal, ating the purchase or sate on account of the princ Note 07 ed wy
a broker.

(8) of any goods exceeding in value twenty rupees ;
(b) of any gtock or marketable security exceeding in value twenty rupees.

We reconunend that the amount “twenty rupees” should now be increased to one huadred
rupees, having regard to the fall in the purchasing power of the rupee.t

41,10. Article 44 levies duty on a note of protest by the master of a ship. The “protest” Article 44.
made by the master is chargeable separately3—Article 51, Article 44 deals with the note made
of such protest. The “note” is usually made by a notary public, or by a consular officer.

In England, a “protest” is a declaration made by the master when damage has been caused
to a ship or her cargo, made before a notary or British Consul at the first port of call.‘ The
object of the protest is to record promptly, in an authentic form, the circumstances in which
1038 ot damage occurred so as to exonerate the master or his crew from blame.

41.11, In England, a protest is not obligatory, but, in many countries abroad, the swearing Use of protests.
of protest is a condition precedent to the establishment of Iegal rights.© When a claim for
marine insurance is made, the practice is to “exhibit” the protest.¢

Protests are not ceceivable in evidence in English Courts, although they may be used in
cross-examination,7-§-° -

Explaining the importance of protests, Dr. Lushington observed—

“Protests ate important for this purpose, and this only to state the damage which bas
occurred, and that it has taken place, for the sake of supporting a claim against
the ‘under-writers ; not that the owner of the ship would be debarred from claim-
ing against the undec-writers, but, of course, unless it is stated-in the protest,
suspicion arises that the damage did not occur.”!?

41.12. The object of requiring the protest to be “noted” by a notary public is that his No change
office is universally recognised not only in the Courts of this country, but also in those of every "edd.
civilized nation. By the law of nations, he has credit everywhere.

We have no changes to recommend in this article.

1. Compare discussion as to article 53, Receipt, infra.
2 Seo article 51.
3. Dover, Handbook to Mazine Insurance (1957), page 548.
4, Halsbory, 3rd Edn., Vol. 35, page 133.
5. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 548.
6. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 567.
7, (a) R. ¥. Scrivener Co., (1830) 1 8 & C;
(०) Brown ४. Thornton, (1837) 6 Ad & ES 185.
8. Haisbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 35, page 134.
9, Abbot on Shipping, 13th Edn., page 547, cited in Bouvier, ‘Law Dktionary (1914), page 2757,
10, The Santa Anna, (32 L J., P.M.A., page 200) (per Dr. Lushington), ~
11. Hutcheon v. Warrington, (1802) 6 Ves. 823, (per Lord Eldon, 1.0).



226
41.13, Article 45 levies duty on an instrument of partition as defined by section 2(15).

41.14. A Bar Council has made a suggestion? that even an instrument recording the terms of
@ past transaction should be taxed as a partition. We have given due consideration to the
suggestion, but are unable to accept it. Such a provision, if inserted, is bound to cause harassment
in a very large number of cases. Jt may, for example, take in even casual correspondence in
which a partition is referred to. An instrument which falls short of the creation of a separate
status, cught not to be regarded as 8 partition, merely because it “records” a partition that
took place in the past. To do so is to disregard the distinction between a vestitive fact and
@ mere piece of evidence. The legal effect—and therefore the economic value--of the two
differ.

In the result, no change ‘s needed in article 45.

3. Andhra Pradesh Bar Council.


CHAPTER 42
ARTICLE 46
42.1. Article 46 levies duty on an instrument of partnership.

42.2. In the law of partnership a question which is often debated is whether there can
be a partnership between two firms. In the Partnership Act a pactnership is described in
terms of relationship between “persons”. According to the definition of “person” in section
3(42), General Clauses Act, a firm is not regarded as a person for the purposes of that Act.’
Hence, a firm as such is not entitled to enter into partnership with another firm, ता with a
Hindu ‘undivided family or with an individual.’ It has been observed® that “the real partnership
is constituted not between the individual and the firm, but between the individual and the
aggregate of the persons who constitute the firm”.

On this point, no change is considered necessary.

42.3. The Supreme Court has, in Dutichand’s case,’ traced the history of the law of
partnership in India, which is based on the English law and mercantile usages relating to a
firm. Under the English common law, a firm, not being a legal entity, could net sue or be sued
in the firm name, or sue or be sued by its own partner, for one cannot sure oneself. Later on,
this rigid law of procedure, however, gave way to considerations of commercial convenience,
and the law permitted a firm sue or be sued in the firm name, as if it were a corporate
body.® iu the absence of such special provisions, the general mile that a firm is not a legal
entity operates,

42.4. The second gueslion under this article concerns conveyances. Questions sometimes
arise whether an instrument is a conveyance or a partnership deed. In one case,? the Madras
High Court has dealt with the difference between a partnership deed and a conveyance.* In
that case, the partics to a protracted partition suit, in which the assets of a trading joint Hindu
family were invoived, executed an instrument styled as a “partnership deed”. By virtue of the
decree in the suit, one of the parties to the litigation agreed to take over the assets on payment
of a certain amount in court, and [hose assets were declared as properties of the partnership firm.
The court held that this instrument was not a “conveyance”, bet was a deed of partnership,
and, therefore, there was ne presumption that the partner “sold” his property to the partnership
came into cxistenee under the document.

There were no words which capressly or by implication amounted to a traasfer of interest
fs between the partner who threw his property in the partnership and the rest of the partners,
and, therefore, there was no presumption that the partner “sold” his propery to the partnership
firm. The document was hid to be an instrument of partnership.

42.5. 06 course, the case des not call for an amendment of the law, since the question
is one of applying the legal principle, which appears to be this—that a conveyance transfers
assets from one person to another, while a partnership pools them together.

(a) Basanii v. Babu Lal. ALR. 1931, AD
(b) In re Messrs Jai Dayal, ALR. 1933 All.
2. Dulichand v. i. F. Commissioner, ALR. 1956 8.C. 354, 358, para 15.

३. Chhotalal Devichand v. है. T. Commissioner, A.LR. 1959 Bom. 152, 154 (per Chagla C.3.).

4. Dulichand ९. 7. T. Commissioner, (1956) A.LR. 5.0, 354, followed in A.LR. 1967 Mad. 449, 451, para 5 {D.B.).
5. See 880 Bhagwanji v. Alembic Chemical Works. A.1.R. 1948 P.C, 100,

6. Cf order 30, Rule 9, Code af Civil Procedure, 1908,

7. State v. Chidambaram, A.LR. 1970 Mad. 5.

8, Article 23.

227

Question as to
whether a

is a conveyance
or partnership
deed.


Present position
ta a duty.

No change.

228

42.6. It may be noted that at present, under article 46, an instrument of partnership
is chargeable with a duty of two rupces cight annas if the capital of the partnership does not
exceed rupecs five hundred, and with ten rupees in any other case. A partnership between
firms, if it does not fall under article 46 because of the stricter view taken in the law of
partnership. would fall solely under “agreemeat” [article 5, clause (c)], for which the duty
is eight annas. Of course, it is not our direct object to impose a higher duty as such on instru-
ments of partnership. The principal object is to take notc of business reality, for the limited
purpose of the stamp law, and to state the position clearly so as to avoid controversies.

42.7. Article 46 therefore needs no change,


CHAPTER 43
ARTICLE 47—POLICIES OF MARINE INSURANCE

43.1. Article 47 levies duty on policies of insurance. Introductory.

The duty varies according to the nature of the policy, the article having been divided into
different divisions—A.B.C. and so on—for the purpose. We shall discuss only those portions
of the article which require consideration having regard to the need for amendment in the
particular portions or suggestions mad= for amendment of those portions.

43.2. We begin with the question of stamp duties on policies of marine insurance (des-
ctibed in the Act as policies of sea insurance). A suggestion for amendment of the law on insurance
the subject was received from the Insurance Companies Association of India, and the suggestion Suggestion of the
was forwarded by the Ministry of Finance to the Law Commission for its consideration. The Insurance of
Suggestion is to substitute duty for a fixed amount in place of the present duty, which is ad India.
valorem in most cases. The duty suggested by the Association is as follows :—

Policies of marino

(a) if the amount of the policy does not exceed Rs. 5,000 30 Paise.
(b) in other cases. 1 Rupee.

43.3. Although general insurance business hag now been nationalised, we think that that
Would not make any difference as to the points raised and discussed below on the basis of
the above suggestion.

43.4, The present law on the subject of stamp duties on policies of marine insurance 18 present law.
contained in Article 47--Division A, read with section 2(20) and section 7(4) and sections
66-67 of the Act.

43.5. Existing section 2(20)? defines a “sea policy” as follows :—
Section 2(20)
“(20) “Policy of sea-insurance” or “sea-policy”—

(a) means any insurance made upon any ship or vessel (whether for marine or sarpoly.

inland navigation), or upon the machinery, tackle or furniture cf any ship
or vessel, or upon any goods, merchandise or property of any description
whatever on board of any ship or vessel, or upon the freight of, or any other
interest which may be lawiully insured in, or relating to, any ship or vessel,
and

(0) includes any insurance of goods, merchandise or property for any transit which
includes, no, only a sea risk within the meaning of clause (a), but also any
other risk incidental to the transit insured from the commencement of the
transit to the ultimate destination covered by the insurance :

Where any person, in consideration of any sum of money paid or to be paid for
additional freight or otherwise, agrees to take upon himself “any risk attending
goods, merchandise or property of any description whatever while on board of
any ship or vessel, or engages to indemnify the owner of any such goods, mer
chandise or property from any risk, loss or damage, such agreement or engage-
ment shall be deemed to be a contract for sea-insurance ;”*

1, Suggestion of the Insurance Companies Association of India (Regional Councils of Delhi and Calcutta). Law
Commission File No. F. 3(4); 57-L.C. Part I, 5. No. 24; Finance Ministry File No. F. 1/64/63-Cust. VIL, S. No. 1.

2, Certain drafting changes are proposed in the definition in section 2(20). (See Appendix 2).

3. For revised section 2(20), please see Appendix 2.

229
24 M of Law}77—20.


230
43.6. Section 7(4) reads——

“(4) Where any sca-insarance is made for or upon a voyage and also for time, or
10 extend to or cover any time beyond thirty days after the ship shall have
arrived at her destination and been there moored at anchor, the policy shall
be charged with duty as a policy for or upon a voyage, and also with duty as
a policy for time.”

43.7. Article 47, Division A reads—
47. POLICY OF INSURANCE

Tf drawn singly If drawn in duplicate
for each part

A. Sea-insurance (See section 7)— OO —, -
(1) For or upon any voyago—
(0) where the premium or consideration dots not exceed the Ten naye paise Pive naye paise
rate of fifteen naye paise or one-cighth per centum of the
amount insured by the policy:
Gi} in any other case, in respect of every full sum of one Ten naye paise Five naye paise
thousand five hundred rupees and also any fractional part
of one thousand five hundred rupees insured by the policy;
(2 For time—
(iil) im respect of every full sum of one thousand rupees and
also any Fractional part of one thousand rupees insured

by the poticy—

where the insurance shall be made for any time act Fifteen naye paist Ten naye paise
exceeding six months;

where the insurance shall be made for auy time exce- Twenty-five naye Fifteen naye paise
eding six months and not exceeding twelve months. paise :

43.8. Sections 66-67 read—-

“66. Any person who—

ee for (a) receives, or takes credit for, any premium or consideration for any contract
dead of insurance and does not, within one month after receiving, or taking eredit
tot daly dumped. for, such premium or consideration, make out and execute a duly stamped policy
of such insurance ; or
{b) makes, executes or delivers out any policy which is not duly stamped, or pays
or allows in account, or agtees to pay or allows in account, any money upon,
or का respect of, any such policy ;
shall 9६ punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.

“67. Any person drawing or executing a bill of exchange payable otherwise than on

Penalty for not

drawing full bil demand or a policy of marine insurance purporting to be drawn or executed
sumber_ of bills jn a set of two os more, and not at the same time drawing or executing on
poficies paper duly stamped the whole anmber of bills or policies of which such till
arporting ७ or policy purports the set to consist, shall be punishable with fine which may
extend to one thousand rupees.”

Provision in the 43.9, and 43.10. Mention may also be made of sections 25 and 27 of the Marine Insu-
Marine Insurance rance Act,’ which have a bearing on the subject.

‘Main, point — 43.11. The main point of the suggestion? lies in the proposal for reduction of the present

stamp duty which [except in the case covered by Article 47A(1) Gi}] is calculated ad valorem
Sd wore duty on the sum insured. The suggestion is to reduce the duty to 2 fixed amount.

to fixed amount. .
1. The Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 1963).

2. See para 43.2, supra.



231

43.12. The suggestion further says that if the duty is mot reduced to a fixed amount, then
many statutory provisions which were in force in England before 1959 on the subject of stamp
duties on marine insurance should be incorporated. If, on the other hand, the duty is to
be reduced to a fixed amount, then those provisions need not be incorporated.

43,13. Tt may be mentioned that the pre-1959 statutory provisions in England were pyjin-
cipally intended to mitigate hardships {ek in certain cases.

43.14, The Finance Act, 195% (Eng.), made important changes in the English law as
to stamp duties on policies of marine insurance.” The alteration made in 1959 was mainly due
to the reduction of the duty to a fixed amount of six pence. The principal question to be
considered by us is, whether there should be a similar reduction in the duty on marine insurance
policies under our Jaw, as is the suggestion.

43.15. The reasons for the passing of the Finance Act, 1959 (in England) have been thus
stated? :

“Stamp duties were first levied in the reign of Charles I], but for a time were allowed to
lapse, being re-established in the reign of William JII to raise revenue required to carry on the
war with France. As far as marine policies were concerned, the duties were levied. ad valorem
and payment thereof was denoted by a stamp on the policies. In the years which followed, the
scale of duties was vivied from time to time, but throughout successive generations continued
on a basis regurded ६६ oppiessive by the mercantile community. Repeated pressure on govern-
ments one after another for long failed to secure a remission of these duties, although it was
evident that they had deleterious effects upon the operations of British underwriters. A? best,
they represented व tax on exports and on prudence,* Abroad, objection was raised by foreign
nationals to the necessity of contributing substantially to British taxation. At the same time,
British underwriters were at a contpetitive disadvantage as compared with those markets where
taxation requirements in respect of marine insurance were less onerous. The disabilities under
which marine insurances suffered were accentuated by the statutory requirement that, to be
valid iu the Courts, contract of marine insurance needed to be expressed in policies in due
form. In respect of re-insurance business, the stamp duty provisions in effect imposed double
taxation, in thar separate stamp duty had to be paid on policies of re-insurance notwithstanding
that duties already would have been paid on the original business when the policies thereon
were issued to the assured. A considerable volume of re-insurance business is aranged by treaty.
It was impracticable to stamp re-insurance treaties, if only for the reason that it would have
been imporsible at the outset to caldulate the sum insured. Thus, the re-insured under puch
@ contract of re-insurance was unable to sue the original underwriters unless in possession of
a duly stamped policy covering the particular insurance in respect of which the dispute had
arisen, Whereas solvent insurers would not have sought to escape their moral obligations in
such circumstances, and would undoubtedly have insured that a policy in due form was issued
to the re-insurer, a receiver or liquidator would have been impelled to refuse to issue anv
policies after the date of the bankruptcy or liquidation order.

“In very great degree, the disabilities were removed by the Finance Act, 1959. This replaced
the ad valurem scale of marine stamp duties previously applicable with a stamp of six pence
per policy, thus bringing marine policies into line with other indemnity policies. Further,
fhe Act provided that the following shall be exempt from all stamp duties :

(a) cover notes, slips, aad other instruments usually made in anticipation of the issue
of a formal policy, not being instruments relating to life insurance ;

(७) instruments embodying alterations of the terms or conditions of any policy of
insurance other than life insurance ;

1. See Appendix 3 for pre-1959 English | aw.

2. Appendices 4-5.

3. Dover, Analysis of Marine and other Insurance clauses (1963), page 557.
4, Emphasis added.

Alternative एज

in suggestion—
to adopt pre-1959
statutory
provisions.

Position in
England after
1989,

Reasons for the
English Act.


232

(c) policies of insurance on baggage or personal and household effects only, if made
or executed out of Great Britain ;

end an instrument exemipicd by virtue of the provisions of this sub-section shall not be taken
for the purposes of the Stamp Act, 1891, to be a policy of insurance.

“An instrument shall not be charged with duty exceeding six pence by reason only that
it contains or relates to two or more distinct matters each falling within the head of charge.

“At the same time, certain amendments were made in the Marine Insurance Act, 1906.
Thus, no longer is there any statutory provision to the effect that a pulicy of marine insurance
shall not be effective for 2 period of time exceeding twelve months. Although the Continuation
Clause will still be retained in those current clauses in which it was previously incorporated, 10
longer will the inclusion of this clause call for the payment of an additional stamp duty of six
pence as was requisite under the provisions of the Finance Act, 1901, which validated the nse
of this clause. Moreover, all that by statute a policy of marine insurance is now bound 10 specify
ig the name of the assured or of some person effecting the insurance on his behalf, this retained
provision containing the long-standing prescriptiono of issuing policies of marine insurance “in
jolank”. No longer is it necessary, although in practice this will continue to be done, to
specify in the policy the subject-matter insured and the risk insured against, the voyage, or
period of time, or both, as the case may be, covered by the insurance; che sums or sum insured ;
and the name or names of the insurers.

“The relevant provisions of the Finance Act, 1959, became operative as from 1st August,
1959, One consequence was that re-insurance treaties executed after that date have the same
standing as policies of insurance and must be stamped accordingly. They now become legally
binding,

“With regard to marine policies executed outside the United Kingdom but in any manner
enforceable within the jurisdiction thereof, other than policies on personal household effects,
it is to be assumed that these must be duly stamped within ten days of arrival here. In any
case, an unstamped policy may be legally stamped after the execution thereof for the purpose
of its production in evidence by the payment of a fine of £ 100 in addition to the stamp
@uty attracted.”

Similar reasons 43.16, and 43.17. So much as regards the English Act of 1959. It appear to us that,

poplicable io 6 the reaons which led to the passing of the Act of 1959 in England, many apply to India.
In particular, a tax upon insurance policies is a tax upon prudence, and a proposal for reduction
of the stamp duty thereof deserves careful consideration. Moreover, Indian insurets are at a
disadvantage, in that they pay more stamp duty than the insurers of other countries where che
duty has been reduced. These considerations would seem to justify a reduction of the duty
to a fixed one.

43.18. No doubt, aay proposal for alteration in the rate of stamp duties usually raises
questions of policy, but here, in our view, there are strong reasons why we should recommend
a change.

43.19. To the reasons already stated, we may add that heavy penalty (as in England)
for policies unstamped and brought into the country is not needed for India, since the magnitude
is not comparable.

to substitute omen 43.20. After very careful consideration, we have come to the conclusion that the stamp
.., duty on marine insurance policies should be reduced to a small fixed amount, say, one rupee,

fined duty.
regarding fon irrespective of the question whether it is a voyage policy or time policy. We, therefore,
Aaticle का, recommend that in Article 47, Division A, the rate of stamp duty should be reduced to one

एज A. rupee as indicated above.
1, 889 pate 43.15, supra.



233

43.21, If this recommendation! (substitution of fixed duty) is accepted, the following
amendments are required in the Stamp Act and in the Marine Insurance Act :

(1) Section 25(2) 10 25(5), Marine Insurance Act, 1963 [corresponding to repealed
section 23(2) to (5), (English Marine Insurance Act, 1906}} should be repealed [See section
30(5}, Finance Act, 1959 (Eng.)]

(2) Section 27(2), Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 1963) [corresponding to repealed
section 25(2}, (Eng.} Marine Insurance Act] should be repealed. [See section 30(5}, Finance
Act, 1959 (Eng.)].

It may be noted that the corresponding provisions in the (English) Marine Insurance
Act (before 1959) were intended to safeguard revenue. This is evident from the fact that,
since the introduction of stamp duties in 1795 (35 Geo. 3 Ch 63), the requirements as to
writing have been in existence.?

(3) Section 7(4), Indian Stamp Act, 1899 [corresponding 10 repealed section 94 (English),
Stamp Act, 1891] should be repealed. [See section 30(4)(a), Finance Act, 1859]. The
reason is that section 7 (4) becomes useless if the distinction between “voyage” and “time
Policies” is abolished, in relation te stamp duties.

(4) Article 47, Division A, should be amended in order to exclude from liability, slips,
cover notes etc.*+" for marine insurance unconditionally. This would no: affect the provisions in
the Marine Insurance Act.? “The present exemption is conditional, but should be made absciute,
in view of proposed less stringent approach as to duty. (See section 30(2), Finance Act, 1959).

(5) In consequence of (4) above, the general exemption, at the end of Article 47, should
be amended so as ta exclude marine policies from that exemption, as these would be governed
by a specific exemption, under our recommendation.

(6) In view of item (4) above, section 66, of the Stamp Act, should be amended so as to
exclude cases where the policy of insurance is totally exempt. The object of section 66 is to
prevent the loss of revenue that would occur if insurance business were done on slips unstamped.
As the stringent provisions as to policies in section 7 are repealed or proposed to be repealed,
and as the duty is to be reduced, the provision in section 66 is not required for marine insurance
policies.

ICf. section 30(4), second paragraph, Finance Act, 1959, amending section 100 (Hnglish).
Stamp Act, 1891, which corresponds to section 66, Indian Stamp Act}.

(7) Article 47, Division A, Stamp Act should be amended by substituting a fixed duty
of one rupee for every marine insurance policy whatever be the amount.

(8) In consequence of (7) above, section 67, Stamp Act (seis of policies) should 52
suitably amended, as the duty will now be a small and fixed amount. There was no exactly
corresponding provision in the English Act, even before 1959. But there was a somewhat
similar provision in section 97(3), Stamp Act, 1891, now repealed.

[See section 30(4), Finance Act, 1959].

43.22. We give below a rough draft of the amendments that will be required in the Stamp
Act, in order to carry out the changes recommended above. We may add that some of the
changes were put forth in our Questionnaire and such replies as were received to the particular
question have been favourable.?

1. See Supre
2, See Dover, Hand Book to Marine Insurance (1957), pages 31, 129, 333.
3. See para 43. 20, supra.
4, As to existing law, see A.LLR. 1964 5.0. 1396, on appeal from National Security Arsurance Co. v. R. Ratilal & Co.
ALR. 1961 Cal. 48, 50, 51, 53, paragraphs 11, 13, 16 and 26.
3. Also see Mulla Stamp Act (1963), pages 41, 74 and 317.
Sections 24,25(1) ond 88, Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 1963), coreap
6 से Mating पक Ret. 190 « > anating ९० sections 24,22 (1) and 89
7. ६. 97 to 99

Changes needed
to bring stamp
duties on marine
insurance in
India in lins
with the position
in England
resulting from
the Finance Act,
1959.

Re-draft.


234

Section 7 (Stamp Act)
Ia section 7, sub-seciion (4) shall be omitted.
Section 66, Stamp Act
To section 68, the fellowing Exception shall be added, namely :—

“Exception—Nothing in this section applie sin relation to an insurance or a policy
effecting an insurance if the insurance is such that a policy effecting it is exempt
fron. duty under this Act”

Section 67, Stanip Act
Jn section 67, the words “or a policy of marine insurance” the words “or policies” and the
words “or policy” shall be omitted.
Article 47—Division A, Stamp Act
In Article 47, for Division A, the following shall be subtituted, namely,—
‘A. Sea Insurance Qne rupee
Exemption
The following shail be exempt from ail stamp duties :
(a) cover notes, slips and other instruments usually made in anticipation of the issue
of a formal policy of marine insurance ;
(b) instriunents embodying alterations of the terms or conditions of any policy of
marine insurance :
(९) policies of marine insurance on baggage or personal and household effects only,
if made or executed out of India:
and on instrument exempted by virtue of paragraph (a) of this Exemption Shall not be taken
for the purposes of this Act to be a policy of insurance.”
Article 47—General Exemption
In Article 47, in ihe General Exemption, after the words “a policy of insurance”, the
words “other than a policy of marine insurance” shali be inserted.
Amendments to Sections 25(2) to 25(5)
and section 27(2), Marine
Insurance Act, 1963
In the Marine Insurance Act, 1963,—
(a) in section 25, sub-section (2) to sub-section (5) shall be omitted ;
(b) in section 27, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Suggestion 43,23. 1६ may also be added here that there are certain provisions in the English Stamp
regarding stamp. Law, namely, section 11 of the Finance Act, 1901 (regarding policies with a continuation
clause) section 8 of the Revenue Act, 1903 (for builders’ etc. risks) and section 8 of the
Finance Act, 1912 (for increase in premium), which are relevant and important on ihe subject
of siamp in matine insurance. The necessity of making similar provisions in the Indian Stamp
Law requires ta be considered.
Builders’ risk 43.24, In England, the Stamp Act of 1891 does not include builders’ risks insurance in
policies. > the definition of “policies of sea insurance”. The position was met by the Revenue Act, 1903
(3 Edw. VII, ८. 46), section $ of which reads as follows! :

“Section 8. A policy of insurance made or purporting to be made upon or to cover
any ship or vessel, or the machinery or fittings belonging to the
ship or vessel, whilst under construction or repair or on trial shall be
sufficiently stamped for the purpose of the Stamp Act, 1891, and the Acts
amending the Act, if stamped as a policy of sea insurance made for a voyage,
and though made for a time exceeding twelve months, shall not be deemed
to be a policy of sea insurance made for time.”

11 of 1963.

7. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1937), pages 134, 135.


235

43.25. The effect of these provisions is that Builders’ risks policies, although invariably
effected for time, are appropriately stamped as for voyage. As it may be difficult at the
outset to fix with precision the time which must elapse before delivery of the vessel to her
owners, such policies are usually arcanged in the first instance for a period of time anticipated
to be adequate, but a clause is normally inserted in the policy agrecing to hold covered any
hecessary extension. Strictly speaking, such extensions might be regarded as new contracts
rather than as continuations, bur in practice are endorsed on the original policies and signed
before the period originally mentioned has expired; otherwise, the extension would need to
be stamped as a separate contract.

43.26. Afier a policy has been effected, by an alteration of the risk the rate of premium
may, by the imposition of an additional premium, be increased so as to bring the total rate of
premium outside the concession: To meet this position, the Finance Act, 1912, provided as
follows in England? :

“Section 8. Where the premium or consideration for a policy of sea insurance is
expressed to be a sum not exceeding the rate of half-a-crown per cent of the
sum insured, and is subject to an increase (whether defined or not in the policy)
in the event of the occurrence of a specified contingency, the premium or
consideration shall, for the purpose of the Stamp Act, 1891, be treated as a
premium or consideration not exceeding the rate of half-a crown per cent on the
sum insured. But if, owing to the occurrence of the contingency which is the
occasion for an increase of the premium or consideration, the premium or
consideration, is increased so as to exceed the rate of half-a-crown
per cent of the sum insured, the policy or a new policy to be thereupon issued
small be stamped with such an additional sum as is required to represent the
additional duty payable, and may be so stamped without penalty at any time
not exceeding thirty days after the date on which the increased premium
or consideration becomes ascertained.

43.27. Section 4(2), Marine Insurance Act, 1963 covers construction, building, and launching
risks. There is one anomaly, namely, that while such insurances are treated as analogous to
marine insurances, the policies themselves are stamped with the duty applicable to non-marine
insnrance. 10 Bogland, builders’ risks policies are undec the Revenue Act, 1903 (3 Edw. VI,
Ch. 46), section 8, to be stamped as if for a “voyage” and not deemed to be policies for
time, even if made for more than a year. Other policies on adventures “analogous to marine
adventures” would presumably be liable to stamp only as non-marine policies? In India, there
is a 10 express provision, but entry 47 of the First Schedule to the Indian Stamp Act, sub-division
‘A’ relating to “‘sea insurance”, could not in terms apply and a fixed duty under sub-division पे!
would: be Jeviabie, because such policies would not be “sea insurance policies” as defined in
section 2(20) of the Indian Stamp Act.

43.28. The position is, in our view, anomalous. It is desirable that at least 2 provision
requiring all policies governed by sub-section (2) of section 4 of the Marine Insurance Act
to be stamped as marine insurance policies (for voyage) should be inserted in the Indian
Stamp Act.

43,29. The point is mentioned in the 21st Report of the Law Commission (Report on
Marine Insurance).? Construction, building and launching of sea going vessels is 2 costly and
lengthy process with attendant risks. It is customary to take cut insurance policies against
such risks.

43.30. Section 2(20) of the Stamp Act defines a “policy of sea insurance”, in terms
under which policies taken out for these purposes will not be taken as “sea policies” for

voyage.*

1. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 135.

2. See section 79, Enetish Act.

3. 2ist Report of the Law Commission (Marine Insurance), page 49, paras 2-3.

4, File No. 3(4)/57-L.C. Pt. L {Precis of important points in Misistry of Finance, Department of Revenue, File
No. 1/60/62. Cus. VIII, notings dated 28th December, 1962 and 21st March, 1963.),

Anomely 19

Stamp Act.
Insurance against
construction .


236

Recommendation 43.31. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of the following proviso to Article 47 of
Article 47. the Stamp Act:

“Provided that all policies governed by sub-section (2) of section 4 of the Marine
Insurance Act, 1963, shali be stamped as policies of sea insurance jor voyage.”

Policy under- 43.32. Then there are policies underwritten by several persons. With reference to the

पता by mene discussion contained in the Report! of the Lew Commission on Marine Insurance, it is desirabie®
company. that a policy underwritten by more than one company should be considered as only one contract

for the purposes should be added to Aritcle 47.

Voyage and time 27. (1) Where the contract is to insurance the subject-matter at and from or from one place
policies. to another or others, the policy is called a “voyage policy”, and where the contract is to insure
the subject-matter for a definite pericd of time, the policy is called a “time policy”. A contract
for both voyage and time may be included in the same policy.
(2) A time policy which is made for any time exceeding twelve months is invalid.
Designation and 3B. (1) The subject-matter insured must be designated in a marine policy with reasonable
subject-matter. certainty.

(2) The nature and extent of the interest of the assured in the subject-matter insured need
not be specified in the policy.

(3) Where the policy designates the subject-matter insured in general terms, it shall be const-
rued to apply (0 the interest intended by the assured to be covered.

(4) In the application of this section regard shall be had to any usage regulating the designa-
tion of the subject-matier insured.

APPENDIX 2

Section 2(20)—Revised definition of “Policy of Sea Insurance’.
“20. (4) ‘Policy of Sea Insurance’ or ‘Sea Policy’—
(a) means any instrument of insurance against loss, damage or liability arising from a sea
risk, made upon—
@ any ship or vessel (whether for marine or inland navigation), or
(ii) machinery, tackle or furniture of any ship or vessel, or
Gii) any goods, merchandise or property of any description whatever on board of any
ship or vesscl, of
(iv) the freight of, or any other interest which may be lawfully insured, in or relating to,
any ship or vessel, and
(b) includes any insirument or insurance of goods, merchandise or property for any
transit which includes not only a sea risk within the meaning of clause (a) but also
any other tisk incidental to the transit insured from the commencement of the transit
to the ultimate destination covered by the insurance.
(2) Where any person, in consideration of any sum of money paid or to be paid for additional
freight or otherwisc,—
(i) agrees to take upon himself any risk attending goods, merchandise or property of
any description whatever while on board of any sbip or vessel, or

1, 21st Report of the Law Commission (Marine Insurance) nage 63, notes to clanse 21. > cat
il FE. न... Part 1 (Precis of important points ian Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue Fils
sad हो 7220 Dotings dated 28th December, 1962 and 21 March, 1963). हैं


237 |

(1) engages to indemnity the owner of any such goods, merchandise or property against
any risk, 1055 or damages,

such agreement or engagement shall be deemed to be a contract for sea insurance.

APPENDIX 3

Statement showing law of Stamp Duty in England before 1959 regarding marine insurance.
The Stamp (Consolidation) Act, 1891
(54 & 55 Vict. Chap. 39)

Section 92(1), Act of 1891

(1) Defined policy of marine insurance to mean any insurance (including re-insurance) made
upon any ship or vessel or upon machinery, tackle or furniture of any ship or vessel or any goods
‘on board of any ship or vessel so as to cover the risk from the commencement of the transit te
the ultimate destination.

Section 92(2), Act of 1891

Defined a contract of sea insurance to mean an agreement whereby any person in censideration
of any sum of money takes upon himself any risk attending goods, merchandise, or property of
any. kind while on board of a ship or vessel or engages to indemnify the owner of any such goods,
merchandise or property from any risk, loss or damage.

Section 93(1), Act of 1891

Section 93(1) says thai a contract of sea insurance, excepting the one referred to in section
55 of the Merchant Shipping Amendment Act, 1862, shall not be valid unless expressed in a
policy of sea insurance.

Section 93(2), Act of 1891
It says that a policy of sea insurance for time shall not be for a period exceeding 12 months.
Section $4, Act of 1891

it says that a policy of sea insurance, if made for voyage and also for time or to cover
a time beyond 30 days after arrival at the destination and having been moored shall pay the duty
a3.a-policy for voyage and also duty as policy for time.

Section 95, Act of 1891

It provides how a policy of sea insurance, if not stamped at the time of execution, is to be

stamped. .
. . Section 96, Act of 1891
Section 96 permits alteration of the policy after it has been underwritten, provided the alternation

is done before notice for determination of the risk originally insured, and does not extend the
period beyond six months (in case of policies shorter than six months), or beyond 12 months (for

policies of over six months).
Provided further that the Property remains the property of the same person, and the altera-
tion does not extend the amount of the sum insured.
Section 97(1}, Act of 1891

Provides for penalty of one hundred pounds as fine, if one becomes an insurer or enters into
2 contract of sea insvrance in any manner without issue of a duly stamped sea insurance policy,
os if one is concerned in 8 fraudulent contrivance or device or any wilful act er neglect with an
intent to evade stamp duty.
24 M of Lawi77—31,


238

Section 97(2), Act of 1891

Provides for a fine as above, if a broker, agent or other person transacts 8 sea insurance
contrary to the true meaning any intent of this Act. or writes any policy upon material not duly
stamped. Further, he shall lose the commission or brokerage or agency, any money paid to him
shall be deemed to be paid without consideration, and shall remain the property of his employer.

दि Section 97(3), Act of 1891

Provides for a fine as above, if one makes a copy of the policy of sea insurance without ‘here
being, in existence, any duty stamped policy.

Section 11(1), Finance Act, 1901
{1 Edw. 7, ch. 7)
_ The Act of 1891 (section 91) was intended to insure a regular revenue, and to minimise
tax evasion.

But it caused hardship to the assured where the previous policy expired, when the ship was
encumbered with bad weather or due to some casualty. This was sought to be met by a “conti-
nuation clause”, but the same was held invalid, as it extended! the period of insurance beyond 12
montbs. This disability was removed by the Finance Act, 1901.

The Act of 1901 section 11(1) provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Stamp Act, 1891, a policy of sca insurance made for time may contain 8 continuation clause: and
the same’ shall not be invalid on the ground that it makes the policy available beyond 12 months.

Act of 1901, section 112)

The same Act provided that an additional duty of six pence shall be chargeable on a policy
aving 8 continuation clause.

Act of 1901, section 11(3)

The Act also provided for payment of separate duty without penalty, if the risk covered by
the continuation clause attaches and the duty is paid within 30 days after the risk has so attached.
Act of 1901, section 11(4)

It defines “continuation clause” to mean that the subject of insurance shall stand covered
until its arrival if the voyage is not completed within the time of the policy, or for a reasonable
time not exceeding 30 days after arrival.
है है Revenue Act, 1903 : (3 Edw. 7९. 46)

The definition of policy of sea insurance as given in the Act of 1891, did not include ‘buil-
ders’ risk, and hence that position was met by the Revenue Act of 1903,
हु Act of 1903, section 8

A policy of insurance made or purporting to be made upon ot to cover any ship or vessel or
the machinery or fittings belonging to the ship or vessel, while on construction, repair or trial, shall
be sufficiently stamped for the purposes of Stamp Act 1891 as a policy for voyage, and, though
made. for a period exceeding 12 months, shall not be deemed to be a policy of sea insurance for

Finance Act, 1912
: The Act of 1891 had provided for a concession in stamp duty where the preminum did not
exceed 2s. 6d. But a practice started of availing the concession, and then, after the concession
was availed of, of altering the policy by increasing the premium. To meet this situation, the
Finance Act, 1912 was enacted.

. Act of 1912, section 8
_ Section: & of the 8० ए 1912 provides for payment of additional stamp duty, if more duty’
was payable on account of increase of premium on the original premium. No penalty was payable

if the additional duty was paid within 30 days.


239

Finance Act, vies (10 & 11 Geo, ¢. 18)

The Act of 1920 revised the scale of stamp duty, and the same is now in force except where
repealed by the Act of 1959. It did not increase the stamp duty where the premium did not
exceed 2s. 6d, per cent of the sum insured (gross), nor did it interfere with the previous law
relating to builders’ risks and the continuaticn clause.

The Finance Aci, 1959 (77 8 Eliz. 2 ०. 58).
Section 30(5) of the 1959 Act says that paragraphs (2) to (5) of section 23 and sub-sec-
tion (2) of section 25 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1906 shall cease to have effect*
APPENDIX 4

Provisions of the Finance Act, 1959 (7 1 8 Eliz. 2 ८. 58) relevant to stamp duties on Marine
Insurance Policies. है a
“Finance Act, 1959
(7° 8 Eliz, 2 ८. 58)

Part iV |
Stamp Duties
Stamp duty on policies of insurance
30,--(1) In the first schedule to the Stamp Act, 1891. before the head of charge “Policy
of Life Insurance” there shall be inserted the following— —
“Policy of Insurance other than Life Insurance . £, 8. a.
G Q 6.
and the head of charge “Policy of Sea Insurance” and the head of charge beginning “Policy of
Iswurante against Accident” shall be omitted.
(2) The following shall be exempt from ali stamp duties :
fa} cover notes, slips and other instruments usually made in anticipation of the issue
of a formal policy, not being instruments relating to life insurance ; हि
(0) instruments embodying alterations of the terms or conditions of any policy of
insurance other than life insurance;

(०) policies of insurance on baggage or personal and household effects only, if made
or executed out of Great Britain,

and an instrument exempted by virtue of paragraph (5) of this sub-section shall not be taker!-for
the purposes of the Stamp Act, 1891, to be a policy of insurance.

(3) An instrument shall not be charged with duty exceeding six pence by reason ‘only that it
contains or relates to two or more distinct matters each felling within the head of charge inserted
‘by sub-section (1) of this section. -

(4) In consequence of sub-section (1) of this section, the Stamp Act, 1891, shall be amended
as follows :-—
4a) sections 92 to 97 (which make special provision for policies of sea insurance) shall
cease. to have effect ;
(9) section 100 (which imposes penalties in cases where there is no duly stamped policy
of insurance) shall have effect as if the exceptions therein as to sea insurance were
omitted

3 For detailed discussion of each provision of the Marine Insurance Act, see Dover, Handbsok of Marine
Insurance, (1957), pages 12913



240

(०) section 116 (which enables composition to be made for stamp duty on accident
policies) shai apply in relation to al] policies of insurance other than life insurance,
and the second part of the Second Schedule shail have effect accordingly;

and the said section 100 shall not apply in relation to an insurance or a policy effecting an insu-
Tance if the insurance is such that a policy effecting it is exempt from alt stamp duties.

(5) Paragraphs (2) to (5) of section 23 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1906, and sub-
section (2) of seciion 25 thereof (which are derived from provisions contained in section 93 of
the Stamp Act, 1891} shall cease to have effect.

(6) Notwithstanding the repeal of section 93 of the Stamp Act, 1891, a contract for such
insurance as is mentioned in section 506 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894, shall continye to
be admissible in evidence although not embodied in a marine policy as required by section 23 of
the Marine Insurance Act, 1906

(7) This section sball apply in relation to instruments made or executed after the beginning
of August, 1959,”

“EIGHTH SCHEDULE
Part IT

Repeals Relating tc Stamp Duty on Insurance Policies

_ Sestion and Chapier Short Title Extent of Repeal
54 & 35 Vict. The Stamp Act, Sections 92 -97.
2. 39. 1891. Tn section 98, in sub-section (1), the words from.

‘against accident ; and” to “a policy of insurance’
and from “or as compensation” to the end, and
and sub-section (2). section 99, the words “sea
insurance or”. In section 100,} the words “other
than sea insurance” and the words “other than a
policy of aea insurance”.

In the First Schedule, the head of charge “Policy
of Sea Insurance” and the sea of charge beginning
“Policy of Insurance against Accident”.

58 & 59 Vict. The Finance Act, 1895. Section 13.
6, 16.
9 & 60 Vict. The Finance Act, 1896. Section 13.
a
६2 & 63 Vict. The Finance Act, 1899, Section 11.
6.9.
1486७. 7, ७. 7. The Finance Act, 1901. Section 11.
3 Edw. 7, ०. 46. The Revenue Act, 1903. Section 8.
6 Edw. 7 ८. 41. ‘The Marine insurance Tp section 22, the words “although it ७५ uqstamped
Act, 1906. In section’ 23, paras. (2) to (5). -[n section 25,
sub-section (2): हू =
३ Edw. 7c. 13. The Finance Act, 1907. Section 3.
2 & 3 080. 5.0.8. The Finance Act, 1912. Section है
10 & 11 Geo. 5, ८. 18. The Finance Act, 1920. In section 40, sub-section (1), and in sub
the words “ninety-eight” :
Section 41,
21 & 22 Geo. 5, ८. 2. The Cunard (Insurance) In section 3, in sub-section (1) the words from ‘be
‘Agreement invalid” to “Sea Insurance, of”, and sub-section
12,13 6 14 689. 6, ०. 47. The Finance Act, 1949. In section 35, sub-section” Gh”
15 & 16 Geo. 6 & Eliz. The Marine and Aviation —_—iTn.section 7, in sub-section (1), the words from “be
2c. 57. Insurance (War Risks) invalid” to “seal insurance, ar, “aad in aub-section
Act, 1952 (3) the words “ninetyseven or” and the words

from “or be liable” to be end.



241

APPENDIX 5
English law as to Stamp Duties on Marine Insurance Policies after 1959.
(1) Certain provisions as in force in England in 1959 have now been altered*.
(2) The present position in England is this. The following provisions have been repealed
by the Finance Act, 19597,

Section § f Finance Act, 1912
Gncrease in premium)

Section 11 Finance Act, 1901
(continuation ciause)

Section 8 Revenue Act, 1903
(Builders Risk}

By the Finance Act, 1959, section 30(1) the previous ad valorem duty was replaced by a fixed
‘duty of six pence in the case of af! policies of insurance other than life insurance.

The Finance Act, 1959,-section 30(2) exempts from.all stamp duties cover notes, slips and
other instruments usually made in anticipation of the issue of a formal policy, and instruments
“embodying alterations in the terms or conditions of any” policy of insurance and policies’ of
insurance on baggage or personal and household effects only, if made out of Great Britain.

There is no corresponding section in the Indian Stamp Act.

(The repealed provisions of the 1906 Act correspond to section 25(2) to (5) and section
27(2) of the (Indian) Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 1963).

{4) The Finance Act, 1959, section 30(4) has also repealed sections 92-97 of the Stamp
Act, 1891. [Section 94 of the Stamp Act, 1891 correspond to section 7(4) Indian Stamp Act]
Section 97(3) correspond to some extent to Section 67 Indian Act.

(5) The Finance Act, 1959 also amends section of the Act of 1891 (penalties) (Section
100 corresponded to section 66, Indian Stamp Act).

(6) Further, the Finance Act, 1959 amends section 116 of the 1891 Act (composition of
Stamp duty) on accident policies by extending 1 to aH policies other than life. (There is no
section corresponding 10 section 116 in the Indian Stamp Act).

हि (7 Section 30 of the Finance Act, 1959 read with the Stamp Act, 1891 now governs stamp
dafies ig England on marine insurance policies. The position in England now is discussed, in the
undermentioned books*.

1 AS to position in 1959, see 21st Report of the Law Commission (Marine Insurance), page 62.

३ See Finance Act, 1959 (7 & 8 Eliz. 2०. 58), section 30...

3 See-(a)_ Dover, Analysis of Marine and other [asurance Clauses (1961), pages 45 & 93
() Chalmers, Marine Insurance Act (1966) pages 165-166, where the Finance Act, 1959 is quoted.
(०) Monroe, Stamp Duties (1964), page 133 and pages 267-268,


CHAPTER 44
ARTICLE 47 AND ACCIDENT POLICY

Introductory. 44.1. This Chapter deals with the question of stamp duty on policies of imsurance against
accident and sickness. A suggestion for reducing the duty on such policies was made by the
Indian Insurance Companies’ Association, Bombay,’ and the suggestion has been referred to the
Law Commission by the Ministry of Finance.?

44,2. The subject of rates of stamp duty on policies of insurance falls within the competence
of the Union’, The duties are levied by the Government of India‘, but they are collected by the
State* within which the duties are respectively leviable’. The proceeds of the duty leviable
within a State are assigned to the States’.

44.3. The existing provisions relating to Stamp Duty on fire insurance, etc. and accident

insurance i.¢., Entries 47-B and 47-C the First Schedule to Iadian Stamp.Act, 1899—are quoted
below ;—

Description of Instrument Proper stamp-duty

“AT-B. Fite Insurance and other classes of insurance, not elsewhere in
cluded in this article, covering goods, merchandise, personal
sffects, crops, and other property against lose or damage—
(1) in respect of an ofiginat policy

(0 when the sum insured does nat exceed Rs. 5,000 ; Fifty naye paise

(ii) in any other case ; and One rupee
(2) in respect of each receipt for any payment of an premium on any re- Ona half of the duty payable in respect of

riginal policy. ‘the original policy addition to the:
if any, chargeable under Na. 53.

“A7-C, Accident{and sickness Insurance

(a) against railway accident, Ten ॥। ise.
) valid fora pont Journey only. “ene

‘Exemption

issued (० s passenger travelling by the intermediate or the
third class in any railway,

(b) In any other case-for the maximum which may become payable in Fifteen naye paise « Provided that, im case
७) the case 0 ny, dng accident or sickness #%) such amount does of a policy insurance against deat!
not exceed Rs. and also where such amount exceeds Rs.1,000, accident when the annual, premium
for every Rs. 1,000 or part thereof. payable does not excead
1,000, the duty on such instrument akall
be ten naye paise for every Rs. 1,000 or
part thereof or the maximum amount
which may become payable under it.”

Article 47 Division CC
CC—INSURANCE BY WAY OF INDEMNITY against liability to
pay damages on account of accidents to workmen employed by or

under the insurance or against conspensation Ten naye paise
the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1921, tor every Rs. 100/+ or
part thereof payable as premium.

Question raised 44.4. The suggestion thet has been forwarded to us for consideration’ raises two major ques-
by he musapstion tions, first. reduction of the stamp duty on original policies of accident insurance, and, secondly,

tion: 1. For details of the suggestion, see dajra. ~ ;
2. File No. F. 3(4)/S7-1C. Part 1S. No. 35, being & copy of the suggestion in the Ministry of Finance (Deptt.
of Revenue) Cus. VII Section, File No. F. 1/77/6-Stamp.
3. Union List, Entry No. 91 of the Constitution.
4. Article 268 (1) of the Constitution
5. Axticle 268 (1) (6) of the Constitution.
6. In the case of Union territories, they are collected by the Government of India.
7, Article 268 (2) of the Constitution.
है, Seo 1, supra

242


243

clarifications regarding stamp duty on renewal of such insurance of stamp duty is not only on
Point the suggestion points out (giving illustrations), that the rate of stamp duty is not only on
the high side but is also out of proportion to the premium charged by the companies. It states
that in view of the hardship caused to Insurance Companies, the stamp duty under Article 47-(B)
should be reduced and brought in line “more or less with that under Article 47-B”.

44.5. As regards the second point, the suggestion states that in article 47-C and 47-CC there
is no provision (as in article 47-B) for renewal, so that the proper stamp duty for renewal “could
be nil, one half or anything”. It is stated, that it is difficult for Insurance Companies to follow
a uniform practice in the absence of a clear-cut provision for their guidance in this behalf. It is
also stated, that the omission should be made good by prescribing a specific duty payable on rene-
wals, “which any case could not be more than half the stamp duty payable on original policies.’

44.6. Before dealing with the merits of the suggestion, we shall try to deal with the history
of the existing law, the English law on the subject, the contract of insurance and the meaning
and scope of accident insurance, and other related matters. This is necessary, because without
such a study some important legal aspects are likely to be overlooked, and also because the
nature of the subject is such that a mere reading of the provisions of the Stamp Act may not give
8 full and concrete view of the problem which we have to deal with.

Comments of State Governments, received by the Ministry of Finance on the suggestion in
question, will be considered later?.

44.7. The history of the particular provision regarding policies of insurance may be referred
to, In the Act of 1860, Schedule A. entries 43 and 44 levied stamp duty on a policy of insurance
on life or upon ship etc. or goods on ship etc. or freight of ship etc, (There was no definition
of “policy”).

44.8. The Stamp Act (10 of 1862), Schedule A, entries 55 and 56, levied a duty on certain
policies of insurance {roughly speaking, life insurance, insurance against loss or damage by fire
upon any building or property (not being ship etc.) and policy of insurance upon any ship etc. or
goods or board or freight etc.] The Stamp Act of 1869, First Schedule, item 3, levied a duty
on “Poticy of life insurance”. but the definition of “policy” in that Act® stated that it did nor include
8 policy of life insurance’. The Act of 1879 contained a definition of “policy of insurance” which
included, inter alia a life Policy’. Life Insurance Policies, thus became chargeable under “other
insurances” by Article 49(c} of the Act of 1879,

44.9, Upto 1879, policy of accident insurance was not specifically mentioned. It was charge-
able (if at all) only on the assumption that the duty on a “policy of insurance” covered accident
insurance policies also, by reason of the definition in the Acts of 1869 and 1879.

44.10. Thus, in the Stamp Act of 1879, section 3(15) (so far as is relevant to accident
insurance) read as follows :—

“€15) ‘Policy of Insurance’ means any instrument by which one person in consideration
of a premium, engages to indemnify another against loss, damage or liability aris-
ing from an unknown or contingent event. It inckudes a life policy.

[Schedule II, exemption 14(a) of the Act of 1879 exempted a letter of cover or engagement
to issue a policy of insurance, subject to a proviso].

44.11. Fire insurance became a separate clause under Act 1 of 1888, which amended tne
Act of 1879.

1. Analogy of Acticte 47-B is in the suggestion given in this context).
2. See tufra

3. ef. The Stamp Act, 1870 (33 & 34 Vic. c. 97).

4. Section 11 (23), Act 18 of 1868,

5. Section 3 (15), Act 1 of 1879.

Scheme of
Report.

History.

the


छण्डाओ Law.

Schedule to the
English Act.

244

The Act of 1888 added a clause as to the renewal of a policy of fire insurance, which was
remitted to Article 47 by Act 5 of 1906. Act 6 of 1894 added two clauses including a policy: of
sea insurance, whether of ship or of cargo, which now forms part of section 2(20)

44.12, Accident Insurance became a separate clause under the Act of 1899 (i. the present
Act)

The proviso relating to policies wherein the annual premium for accident insurance does not
exceed Rs, 2.50 per Rs. 1,000, was introduced by the Repealing and Amending Act 18 of 1928.
to give statutory recognition to a. reduction. of duty granted previously* by notification No. 3
dated the 4th February, 1928

44.13. The article was re-arranged in the Act of 1899, and the words 107 Division D—“Life
insurance or other insurance not specifically provided for” were added to include all other forms
of insurance*-4.

44.14 Act 43 of 1923 transferred some of these to Division B, by adding therein the words
‘and other clauses of insurance not elsewhere included in this Article, covering goods, merchandise,
personal, effects, crop and other property against loss or damage.

44.15. Division CC of Article 47 was inserted by Aci 15 of 1925. providing for stamp duty
on the policy of indemnity insurance under the Workmen's Compessation Act, 1923. It was in-
troduced in consequence of the passing of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.

44.16. A specific provision for the levy of stamp duty on a policy of “group insurance” was
made in the Act 43 of 1955, by substituting, in Division D of Article 47, the words “or group
insurance or other insurance” for the words other insurance’

44.17. Certain amendments, act important for the present purpose, were made in 1961,
besides the amendment made in 1958 to implement decimal coinage.

44,18. The Jaw in England may now be summarised.

In the (English) Stamp Act, 1891,5 as originally enacted, there were three heads of
charge relating to policies of insurance, namely, “Policy of Life Insurance”, “Policy of Sea
Insurance” and “Policy of Insurance ageinst Accident”. The stamp duty for accident policy.
was one pence. By the Act of 1920,° the duty on accident policies was increased to six pence.
But, by the Act of 1959," the separate heads of “Sea Insurance”, and “Insurance against acci-
dent” were omitted. Consequential changes in the provisions in the nature of definition were
also made.

44.19. The Schedule to the English Act now reads thus® :—

“Policy of Insurance other than life insuratce
Policy of Life Insurance—
‘Where the sum insured does not exceed £10

Exceeds £10 but does not exceed £25 3
Exceeds £25 but does not exceed £500 .
For every full sum of £50, and also for any fractional part of £50. of the sum insured 6
Exceeds £500 but does not exceed £1000 for every full sum of £100, and also for any fractio-

nal patt of £100, of the amount increase पु 1 9
Exceeds £1000

For every full sum of £1,000 and also for any frectional part of £1,000, of the amount

insured 10 09

+ See Mulla, Stamp Act (1963), page 40.

1 See Donogh’s Indian Stamp Law, edited by Rustomji, (1935), pages 698-699.

2 ‘The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill, says Cander Article 47), “The drafting of this grti-
cle bas been altered to make its provisions

«As to the suggestion made in 1898 to reduce the duty on accident insurance, see paragraph 33, infra.

६ Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vict. c. 38) First Schedule, head of charge “Policy of Insurance etc.”

© The Finance Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo. 050. 18).

7 Finance Act, 1959 (7 & Eliz. 2e. 58), s. 30.

+ Stamp Act, 1891, (54 & 55 Vic. ०. 38) as amended up-to-date. See Monroe, Stamp Daties (1964),
213-214.


245
SPECIAL EXEMPTIONS

Policies under the Friendly Societics Act, 1896, section 33, ate exempt from stamp duty.”

44.20. We shall now deal with insurance and its various classes. Insurance is a contract Goyiact of
whereby one person, called the “insurer”, undertakes ta indemnify another person, called the insurance.
“assured”, against a loss which may arise or to pay a sum of money on the happening of a
specified event! Ii is a contract whereby, for an agreed premium, one party undertakes to
compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified events? “Insurance is indemni-
fication against the risk of loss, by distributing the loss over a group.”*

44.21. The two major types of insurance are marine and non-marine.* For convenience,
non-marine insurance mav be studied in its various species.

44,22. In the classification of insurance against main types of non-marine risks, as given personal insurance
by Halsbury® personal insurance is thus described :— and A ccidents
Insurance.
“(1) Personal insurance in which the event insured against effects the assured in relation
to his life 806 limb and physical well-being. This class includes life insurance, endowment and
Tetirement annuity insurance, personal accident insurance and sickness insurance.”®

- Accident policies insure against the contingency of accidental injury or accidental death.
Accident insurance, liability surance and automobile insurance, all share this feature,—that

the insurance covers loss or damage resulting from accident or unanticipated contingencies
except fire and the elements

44.23. Every insurance, whatever its nature, postulates that a sum of money will be paid contin
by the insurer on the happening of a specified event.” In one sense, all categories of insurance indemni iyo
are related to a “contingency”.® But, as a distinction is sometimes made between an “indemnity

instirance” and “contingency insurance”, it would be desirable to discuss “indemnity’® in some
detail.

and

44.24, The question of indemnity is thus dealt with in Halsbury!® :—
“Most contracts of insurance belong to the general category of contracts of indemnity

in the sense that the liability of the insurers is limited to the actual loss which
is in fact proved’?*

Indemnity.

The happening of the event does not of itself entitle the assured to payment of the sum
stipulated in the policy;!* the event must in fact result in a pecuniary loss to the assured’! ana

1 Slater, Metchantile Law, (1956), page 275. See also Stevens, Merchantile Law (1965), page 319.
* Bouvier, Law Dictionary (1914), Voll, page 1613

3 Lavine, Modern Business Law (1959), page 350.

4 Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol. 22, pages 7 et seq. and 179 ef seg. deal with the two separately.

4 Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Yor. 22, page 184, para 353(n),

* Emphasis added

7 Halsbury, 3nd Ban, Vol. 22, page 180, para 347,

* See Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol. 22, p.394, para 803.

* As to how far insurance is a contract of indemnity, see the option of the Judges in Irving v, Manni
1 छा... 287, 307; 6 0.9. 391 (Case of marine insurance). "a ¥. Manning, (1847)
% Halsubry, 3rd Edn. Vol. 22, pages 180, 181, 182 paragraphs 348, 349.
. ® Exoeptions are life insuranca, personal accident and sickness insurance, and some forms of cont
insurance; see Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol, 22, pages 181, 182, 394, 395. ms oF contingency

9 Sea e.g., Darrell ४. Tribbitts (1880). 5Q.B.D. 560, C.A. Castellain v. Preston (1883), 11 Q.B.D.
Meaceok v. Bravant & Co. (1942) 2 A, 8.8, 661. vron ) OBD. 380, CA,

™ Dane v, Mortgage Inurance Corpn., (1894) 1 0.8. 54, 0.4. at p. 61, per Lord Esher, M.R.: We
Wake Price & Co. ४. Ching, (1956) 3 ABR. 821, at 0. 835, per Devlin J. Pe ot, MLR; see also West

¥ Garden v, Ingram (1852) 23 LJ. Ch. 478, at 9. 479 per Lord St, Leonards.
24 M of Law/77—-32. .


246

the assured then and then only becomes entitled to be indemnified, subject to the limitation of
his contract.’

“He cannot recover more than the sum insured. for that sum is all that he has stipu-
lated for by his premium and fixes the maximum hability of the insurers®.
- Even within that limit, however, he cannot recover more than what he establi-
shes to be the actual amount of his loss;* the contract being one of the indemnity,
and of indemnity only, he can recover the actual amount of his joss and no
more,* whatever may have been his estimate of what his loss would be Iikely
to be, and whatever the premiums he may have paid, calculated on the basis of
that estimate.”

“Hn the strict sense previously indicated,® contracts of life insutance,* personal accident and
sickness insurance’ and some forms of contingency insurance’ are not contracts of indemnity.
in the case of contracts of this class there is normally no necessity to prove a pecuniary 1088९

If the assured chooses, for example, to value a leg or an eye at £50,000, and to pay
Premium accordingly, he is entitled to recover the stipulated sum in the event of his losing the
meémber in question.

“His estimate of his possible loss is, in effect, regarded as genuine and acceptable,
even if not agreed, because no one is likely “deliberately to inflict such damage
on himself, aad no one can in fact foresee, even at the date of loss of the mem-
ber, what the full pecuniary loss is likely to be. Similarly a person can value his
life at any figure that he can afford, particularly as he is unlikely to be able to
foresee, atthe date when he taken owt the policy, what at the date of his death
his financial obligations to dependants may be. Indeed, as has been said,? such
an insurance is really a form of investment.” .

44.25. As, however, we shall show later? there are many pcints of difference between fife
insurance and accident insurance. .

Hirtery of acci- 44.26, We shall now trace in brief the history of accident insurance. We would Ike to
jarance, quotd a passage from the judgment in an Australian case,1? where the history is lucidly stated.

“Personal accident insurance began with railways. Many companies were formed
between 1845 and 1850 to insure passengers against the consequences of railway
accidents. From this beginning, personal accident insurance was extended to
death or disablement resulting from other accidents, and then te various forms
of insurance against incapacity from sickness. But all this eccurred long after life
insurance policies had become well-known distinctive instruments. And origi-
nally accident insurence was transacted by companies not engaged in other forms

3, Dalby v. India and London Life Assurance Co., (1854), 15 C.B. 365. nt
’. Westminster Fire Office ¥. Glasgow Provident Investment Society, 1358), 13 Aop. Cas, 699, H.J, at p. 71%, par
Selborne, LC: of. ee Sons v. Matkews (1918), as reported in 35 T.L.R. 189, CA,
Chapman ¥. Pole P.O, (1870) 22 L.T. 306, at p. 307, per Cockburn, C.I.
Castellain ९. Preston (1883), 11 Q.B.D. 380, C.A,, at p.386, per Brett, LJ.

©, Seo Halsbury, page 120 arte.

3, Dathy v. Indian and Londen Life Assurance Co., (1854), 15 C.B, 365.

1, Theobald v. Railway Passengers Assurance Co., (1854), 10 Exch. 45, at page $3, per Alderson, B. A Policy
insuring a third person against personal accident is, howsver, a contract of indemnity (Bfascheck v. Bursell, (1916),
33 T.L.R. 51; 3 8 & 8. $79).

+. Haisbury, page 394 et seq., हि
vy, Indian and London Life Assurance Co., (1854), 15 C.B. 365; Law v. Landon indisputable Life Poltey

9. Dabs
Co, 1855}, 7 * & 3, 233, Gould v. Carts, (1913) 3 KB., 84, C.A., at page 95, per Buckley, L.J.
4%. Gould ५. Curtis, (1912) 1 KB, 634, at p. 640. per Hamilton J; affirmed, (1913) 3 K.B. 84 CA,
मे, Paragraph 29, infra. .
18, National Mutual Life Association ¥. Federal Commissioner for Taxation (1959-60) 33 Australian Law Journal
Reports, 16, 21-22 (Windeyer J.



247

of insurance. It was only towards the end of the nineteenth century that com-
panies which had been engaged in fire insurance began to undertake accident
insurance. The separate and late origin of accident insurance emphasises its
distinctive character, and emphasises, 1 think, that in a strict sense the term life
policy is not appropriate for mocem forms of combined insurance. Insurances
against accidental death do in some ways resemble life policies; and they are
within the Act of 17742 Yet ordinary accident policies providing for payment
on accidental death have been held not to be life policics for the purposes of
provision: in bankruptcy and similar legislation by which life policies are
protected.’?

44.27. The inception of accident insurance is bound up with the Industrial Revolution.
With the use of mechanical transport, the whole outlook changed. Serious accidents upon rail-
ways occurred with frequency in the early days and the demand for accident insurance was
manifest. Travel by ait also increased the demand. With the passing of the Employer's Liabi-
lity Act, 1880, which placed a burdon on the employers, a demand came for shifting that bur-
den. The advent of motor vehicles led to the further development of insurance. Further {in
respect of molor vehicles} legislation made third party insurance compulsory.*

It the past history

is nny indication, it would scem that with the passage of time, the scope

of insurance against accidential risks is bound to increase.

44.28. The scope cf “accident insurauce™*, in insurance business practice, seems to be rather
wider than mere “persona! accident” insurance’-*. The scope of accident insurance will be
best understood from its classification, which has been thus given’.

“Accident Insurance for the purpose of classification may be divided into the following
main clauses, vis., :

(a)
(b)
(०)

(५)

Tuturance cf the person.—Personal accident and sickness risks, with which must
be considered coupen and similar facilities.

Insurance of property against personal loss, of which burglary and plate glass
are good examples. .

Insurance of fiability, such as employers’ liability and public liability risks where
the insured is not the claimant with whom settlement has to be made.

Insurance of frieres?, such as fidelity guarantee.

Certain types of accident business represent a combination of two or these classes, while
others include no less than three. Comprehensive motor policies (private cars} embrace (a),
(b) and (c) under the one policy, as de Household Policies.”

44.29. It has been said that the business transacted by the Accident Department of a
composite office comprises all these sections of Insurance business for which provision is not
made by a Marine, Life and Fire Department!®. The variety of its scope will be evident from
the contents of the Accident Section of one of the year Books on Accident Insurance”, which
covers persons accident, disease and sickness insurance, burglary insurance, “All Risks” In-

1, See Raynes “History of British Insurance”, pages 283-299, 373-376.

23, Shilling v. Accidental Death Insurance Co., (1857) 2 H & N, 43; (1853) 1 F. & F. 116.
~ $, Etre Corteen, (1941) V.L.R. 254, in re Farley (1933) V.L.R. 271 ; Tn re Karr (1943) 5. 5.8. 8; Re Packer (Clyne,
J.—not yet reported),

3, See Stone and Cox, Accident Insurance Year Book, (1563), page 7.

3, See Stone and Cox, Accident Insurance Year Hook, (1963), page 8-9.

4. As to “accident”, see Chitty, contracts, (1961), Vol. 2, para 837.

१. The definition in section 98(2), Stamp Act, 1891 (now partly repealed), was narrower, as it was Confined fo per-

sonal accidents.

१. See also Lancashire, Insurance ¥. Inland Revenve (1899) 1 QB. 535,

*. Stone and Cox, Accident Insurance Year Book, (1963), page 12.

14, Stone & Cox, Accident Insurance Year Book, (1963), page 11.

4, Stone & Cox, Accident Insurance Year Book, (1963), Table of Contents.

Industrial Revol-
lution,

Accident insura-
rance scope of.

Business.


Object of perso-
oal accident insu-
rance,

248

surance, Insurance of Money, Baggage Insurance, “Combined Travel” Insurance, Stomm & Tem-
pest Insurance, Houseowners’ Insurance, Subsidence Insurance, Glass Insurance, Public Liability
Tosurance, Product Liability Insurance, Personal Liability lnsurance, Motor Insurance, ete.

44.30. In England, policies on motor vebicles are wider? than reguired by the Road Traffic
Act’, and may cover (a) tiamage to the vehicle, (b) liability for damage 10 praperty, (०) death or,
or injury to, the assured and (sometimes) his or her spouse, ‘besides fiability to third
parties.)

44,31. We shall now deal more specifically with personal accident insurance. The object
of personal accident insurance is to make provision for payment of a sum of money i the
event of the insured sustaining accidental injury.

“hy resembles life isarance, and differs from other types of insurance in that it is not 8
contract of indemnity! is merely & contract (0 pay a sum of money on the happening of a
specified event®; namciy, ihe sustaining by the assured af personal injury by such accidental
means as may be defined in the policy*, The event may involve the death of the insured, but
the insurance is not lor that reason a contract of life imsiwance?. In the case of life insurance,
the assured is bound to die some day, the uncertainty being as to the date when the death will
take place*. In the case of personal accident insurance, on the other hand, no accident may
ever happen; and, even if it does, there is no certainty that it will result in death of disable-
ment of the assured®,

44,32, Halsbury, further, states*® :—

“584, Need Jor inswable Interest—As in life insurance, an insurable interest is re-
quired by statute’, the interest normally being the potential pecuniary loss of the
assured as a fesult of the disablement, either of himself, or of the third party if
a third party is insured.”

Halsbury adds, “In fact, personal accident insurance developed out of life insurance”, but
it is necessary now to regard it as a different kind of insurance, and it is in fact generally so
Tegarded.”

I; may be added that the distinction is recognised in England in the Assurance Companies
Act",

44,33. Personal Accident Insurance is ordinarily effected by policies. But there is also
a system of “coupon insurance” prevalent in England.

2, Chitty on Contracts (1961) Vol. 2, paragraph 908,

3, Road Traffic Act, 1960 (8 & 9 Eliz 20. 16).

® See also analysis in Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, pages 353, 354, para. 726(7) and 727.

3, Theobald ९. Railway Passengers Assurance Co,, (1854) 10 Exch. 45, at p. 53, per Alderson, 3B. Policy insuring
the accused against'loss arising from any accident to a third person is, however, a contract of indemnity (Blascheck
v. Busseif, (1916), 33 T.L.R. 31; affirmed, 33 T-L.R. 74 C.A.}

+, Bradburn ए. Great Western Rail Co., (1974), LR. 10 Exch. 1, at p. 2, per Bramwell, B., (1874-1880) Al. 8.8.
Rep. 195. ; है धर

*, Bloyds Bank Ltd. vy. Eagle Star Insurance Co., Ltd. (1961) 1 All, E.R. 914 Ginsurance against personal injuries
held to include personal injuties resulting in death). For Som of personal accident policy, see 7 Ench. Forms and
Precedents Grd 869.) 532.

7, General Accident Assurance Corpn, v. Indand Revenue Commissioners (1906), 8 F, (Ct. af Sess.) 477.

*, See Halsbury, 3rd Edn, Yel. 22, page 272. 6 नि

", Ge 1 Accident Assurance Corpn. v. inland Reverue Conunissioners (1906), 8 F. (Ct. of Sess.) 477; of,
Lancashire lnsurance Co. y. Inland Revenze Commissioners, (1890) 1 Q.B.-353, at p. 359, per Bruce J.

1०, Halsbury, 3rd Edn. ¥o!. 22 page 293, para 584. ८

11, Life Assurance Act, 1774 (14 Geo, 3.¢. 48), section 1 ; Shilling v. Acyidental Death Insurance Co. (1857) प्र, &
N. 42. .
11, The Assurance Companies Act, 1909 (9 Edw. 7 9. 49), section 1.


249
44.34. The nature of “coupon insurance” is thus described in Halsbury!-? :—

“604, Nature ef coupon insurance,

The purchase cf a newspaper or other article frequently confers upon the purchaser
the right to an insurance against personal accident. ‘The insurance arises by
virtue of some arrangement made by the proprietors of the newspaper or article
sold with insurers, and the position of the purchaser is defined in a document
or coupon which is annexed to the article er, in the case of a newspaper, printed
as part of #, and in some cases nothing beyond the purchase is necessary to com-
plete the insurance®. In other cases the coupon has to be filled up, and it may,
further, have to be registered with the insurers. The protection given by the
coupon is usually in a narrow compass, being limited to accidents to vehicles
in which the holder of the coupon js a passenger, or accidents to pedestrians.

605, Fayment in case of aeatin

Provision is usually made, in the event of a fatal accident, for payment of the sum
insured to a specilied person, such as the holder's wife or next of kin. Where
the coupon is issued by a newspaper, power is usually reserved to make the pay-
ment to the person adjudged by the editor or some other person to be holder's
next of kin, in which case his decision is final.”

44.35. As to stamp duty on instruments by way of coupon iasurance, the relevant Stamp on
vowpons section in the English Act is section 116*. Where any person issuing policies so carries on
the business as to render it impracticable or inexpedient that the duty of six pence be charged
opon the policies, the section empowers the Commissioners to enter into an agreement with
such person. The agreement provides for the delivery of quarterly accounts of sums received
ag premium on such policies. Duty is charged on the aggregate (of the sums recovered), at
the rate of five pounds per cent, as stamp duty. This section, and the Second Schedule, (Second
Part) to the Act, make other detailed provisions, which need not be gone into.

44.36, We shall now discuss the meaning of the expression “policy”. The term “policy Policy.
is borrowed from the Italian merchants whe introduced insurance into England.* The Italian
“polizza”, it is stated’, may be derived from the word “polythcha"—a tablet of several folds—
used io late Latin for an account memorandum book. The expression “policy” may be used
to describe any contract of insurance, however, informal’-*. A policy must be issued within a
certain time after the receipt of premium’.

The definition of “policy” in the Indian Stamp Act!* is not very helpful for a consideration
of the question which we have 10 discuss.

3. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, pages 302, 308, paras, 604-605.
3, Matter in footnotes aot important for the present purpose is not reproduced.

3, See Carbill ५४. Carbolic Smoke Bail Co., (1893) 1 256, C.A. tis i ks v. Life
Assurant Ye ‘wali s 2६० jail Co., (1893) 1 0.8. 256, C.A. Payment is not essential (Shanks v. Sun Life

4, Section 116, Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vic. C. 39).

+. Chitty on Contracts (1961), Vol. 2, pages 344, 345, para 803, 804 and 1.0. 5.

3, The full word is “polizza d° assecurazione”. See Arnould, Marine Insurance (1961), Vol. I, page 9.
7. Chitty on Coatrarts (1961) Vol. 2, page 344, 345, para 803 304 and f.n. 5.

4, Forsikring Sektiesed Skabet ५. Attorney General, (1525) A.C. 639, 642.

and fener detailed discusston, see Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, page 209, paragraphs 393, 395, “Meaning of Policy",

7, Section 66, Indian Stamp Acl, 1899.
4, Cf. section 100, Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vic. c. 39).
2, Section 2(19) and 2(19A), Indian Stamp Act, 1899.


250

English law, 44,37. The definition of policy in the English Act of 1891 (as amended in 1959), relevant
10 the topic under discussion, may be quoted! :—

“Policies of insurance”

“91. For the purposes of this Act the expression ‘policy of insurance’ includes every

writing whereby any contract of insurance is made, or agreed to be made or is
evidenced, and th: expression “insurance” includes assurance.”

44.38. Policy of life insurance has been thus defined in English Act of 1891 (as amended
in 1959),

98. Policies of frsurance excep! policies of sea insurance

(1) For the purposes of this Act the expression “policy of life insurance” means 4
policy of insurance upon any life of lives or upon any event or contingency
relating to or depending on any life or lives except a policy of insurance for any
payment? agrecd lo be made upon the death of any person only from accident
or violence or otherwise than from a natural cause........-2.1.....9"

The stamp duty is thus prescribed im the Act of 1891 (as amended in 1959).

“90. The duty of six pencet upon a policy of insurance [other ‘than policy
“life insurance} may be denoted by an adhesive stamp which is to
led by the person by whom the policy is first oxecuted.”

Deftaition of 44.39, The definition of “policy of insurance against accident” which was given in section

policy of insurance 98(1) of the (English) Siamp Act, 1891 is useful. The definition has now been repealed by

syatast accident. the Finance Act, 1959, which places all policies other than life insurance policies in one class.
The definition, so far as is relevant, was as follows" :—

“,.....the expzession ‘policy of insurance against accident’ means a policy of in-
surance for any payment agreed to be made upon the death of any person only
from accident or violence or otherwise than from a natural cause, or as com-
pensation for personal injury, and includes any notice or advertisement in a
newspaper or other publication which purports to insure the payment of money
upon the death of or injury to the holder or bearer of the newspaper or pabli-
cation containing the notice only from accident or violence or otherwise than
from a natural cause’.”

Resemblince bet- 44.40. There are, no doubt, some points of resemblance between life insurance and accident

ween te aod insurance. A policy of insurance against accidents, as usually drawn, is not a contract of indem-
baie insurer nity.? It is a contract to pay a certain fixed sum per week in case of injury, and a certain other

ace.
fixed sum in case of death.?

44.41. The position regarding indemnity in regard to accident has been thus stared’? by a
writer on mercantile law :

1. Section 91, Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vie. ०. 39); Monroe, The Law of Stamp Duties, (1964), page 229.
Omitted words were repealed by Finance Act, 1959, section 37, and Schedule VII.

3. Omitted words were repealcd by Finance Act, 1959, section 37, and Schedule VIB.

4. “Six pence” was substituted for “one penny” by the Finance Act, 1920, section 4002). Seo also the Finanee
Act, 1959, section 30(1).
Omitted words were repealed by the Finance Act, 1959, section 37, and Schedule YIU.

6. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, page 228, footnote (0)

7. Stamp Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vict, c. 39), section 98(1), before its amendment by the Finance Act, 1989,

8. Chitty, Contracts, (1961), Vol. 2, Patagraphs 856-857,

9, Chitty, Contracts, (1961), Vol. 2, paragraph 857.

10. Slater, Mercantile Law, (1956), pages 280-281.


251
“ACCIDENT INSURANCE—

An accident insurance can be a contract of indemnity, but it can also be a contract
the payment of specified sum in the event of accidental death of the assured or of his losing, say
an eye or a limb, This kind of accident insurance is similar to the valued policies which are
common in maring insurance and in the insurance of art treasures against fire.

for

“Where, in the evert of an accident, the insurers pays the sum named in the policy, he is
not subrogated to the rights of the insured. Accordingly, the assured, or in the case of his death
his personal representative, can claim damages against the person who has caused the death or
the injury, for the insurance has been effected against this very contingency.”

44.42. The distinction between “indemnity insurance” and “contingency insurance” is recog-
nised in some decisions.'-? The observations of Bramwell, B in Bradburn’s case, state the posi-
tion accurately*

“A man pays the premiums upon these accident policies upon this kind of footing,
namely, that his right to an indemnity in case of an accident shall be an equiva-
Jent for the mischief or injury that happens to him. He gets more, no doubt,
if the mischief happens than al! the premiums which he bas paid would amount
to; but he runs the chance that he will not get any thing at all; and therefore it is,
T say, that he ought to have this sum in addition to the damages that he may
have sustained at the hands of the defendants by reason of the accident itself;
for otherwise he would be a loser by insuring against accidents in a case where
the railway company was in the wrong. I am, therefore, clearly of opinion that
the verdict stands at present for the right amount.”

44.43. The distinction between life insurance and accident insurance, is equally important.
This is very well elaborated in an Australian case.‘ Tt points out, first, that marine, fire burglary,
personel accident, motor vehicle and other miscellaneous insurances indemnity the insured
against loss from events which may or may not occur, while life insurance is related to a con-
tingeacy which must occur, the only uncertainly being about its time. Secondly, life policies
are capable of advance calculation, while in other forms of insurance the determination of pro-
babilities would seem io have a less scientific basis. Thirdly, accident and sickness policies are
ordinarily annual contracts, (like fire etc.), and have no surrender value.

44.44, We shall now proceed to consider the specific question which forms the subject-
matter of this Chapter. The poimt that we have to consider has a history.® It would appear
that on 18th February, 1898, the Chamber of Commerce, Bombay, seat a representation” to the
Government regarding stamp duty on accident insurance policies, for bringing the law inline
with the English Act. (This was with reference to the Draft Bill to amend and consolidate the

Stamp Act).

44.45. The Select Committee which examined the 1898 Bill, considered this representa:
tion.*. (The representation is mentioned in its Report, in the marginal list of papers considered).
The Sekect Committee did not, however, adopt the suggestion im 400, but stated :

"No. 47. Policy of Insurance—We have provided a reduced duty for insurance
against accident or sickness which is at present chargeable on the sanie footing
as life insurance.”

1, Of West Wake Price & Co. v. Ching, 1957) 1 WLR. 45, $1.
2 As to “indemnity”, see In re Miller, Gibb & Co. Ltd., (1957) | W.LR. 703, 708.
3. Bradburn v. Great Western Rail Co., (1874) LR. 10 Exch. 1; (1874-1980), A.E.R. Rep. 195, 196 (per Bramwell

.
4, National Mutual Life Association v. Federal Commisstoner of Taxation, (1959-60) 33 Australian Law Journal
Reports 16, 21-22 (Windeyer J.).
5. Paragraph 5, supra
6. For history of the provision itself, see paragraphs 7 to 9, supra.
7. Papers of Act 2 of 1899, Vol.2 (National Archives). .
B. Report of the Select Committee, dated 19th March, 1898. (Papers of Act 2 of 1899, Vol.2) (National
Lives).
9, See Supra. .

Distinction bet-
ween life insurance.
and — accident
insurance,

Question of
reductionofduty—
Previous discus-
sion,


Ast. 6, Sch. 4,
Notification No.
5199-S.R., dated
18६ | November,
1895,

Art.12(b), Sch 1,
Notification No.
5199-5.8., dated
191 November,
1895.

tion No,
RK. dated
Ist November,
1895.

Considerations to
be borne in mind
in ing
chatiges,

Comments of
State Goverm-
ments regarding
duty on Originat
policy.

252

44.46, The draft as suggested by the Select Committee on the Bill of 1898 was as follows? :
“47, Policy of Insurance—
C—Accident and Sickness Insurance—

(2) against Railway Accident, valid for a single journey only Proper Stamp duty
One anna.
EXEMPTION
When issued to u passenger travelling by the intermediate or the third class in any
Railway. .

“(b) in any other case—-for the maximum amount which may become payable in the cave —_
of any single accident or sickness where such amount does not exceed Rs.1,000/-, and
also where such amount exceeds Rs. 1,000 for every Rs. 1,000/ or part thereof. Two 29785.
D—Life Insurance of other, Insurance aot seecfically provided for, except such a re-
insurance as is described in Division P? of this acticle. . . .for every sum insured not
exceeding Rs. 1,000 and also for every Rs. 1,000 or part thereof insured in excess
of Rs. 1,000
1) if drawn single Six annas.
if drawn in duplicate, for seach part Threo annas.

Exemption
“Policies of life snsurance granted by the Director General of ihe Post Offices of India in

accordance with rules for Postal Life Insurance issued under the authority of the Government
of India.”

44.47, We have now to consider whether the law on the subject should be changed, For
this purpose, a consideration of the rationale of the existing law appears to be desirable. Now,
it is not always easy to discover the rationale of the provisions of a taxing law." For that reason,
it is not easy to formulate the considerations which should be taken into account while coming
to a conclusion whether a change should be made in such provisions or not.

On the one hand, from the point of view of the insutance corporation, a policy of insurance
is a business document. It brings profit, and its taxability is supportable on that ground.

44.48, On the other hand, from the point of view of the insured the policy is merely a
protection against a possible risk; there js no motive of profit, and it is not a commercial trantac-
tion so far as the assured 15 concerned. He does not view it as such. Jt is not even an ‘invests.
ment’, i.¢., the conversion of money into some species of property from which income or profit is
expected to be derived in the ordisary course of trade or business.4 Tt may be noted that in cont-
tast, some forms of life insurance-—e.g., endowment—are investments.

44.49, Again, m modern times, with the increasing risk of accidents, in the factory, from
transport, from the complexity of urban life and other similar factors, there is every need to
encourage accident insurance, so that the loss is not borne by one person, but is distributed
amongst many. Fron: thal point of view, there appears to be ample justification for keeping the
stamp duty to the minimum.

44.50, We shall now consider the comments received by the Ministry of Finance from

State Governments on the two points raised in the suggestion of the Indian Insurance Com-
panies Association.’ The points made in these comments may be thus summarised.

. This draft seems to have been adopted without further discussion.

‘The printed copy speaks of Division F, but this seems to be 4 slip for Division E. (Division 8 related to
Re-Insurance). - ५७० not . the
|" J. . the legislature have reasons and good reasons whic! not appear
3. Bante Cec ‘Searetor® of State, ALR. 1931 Cal. 193, 200. "pon

4. See Chamber's Encyclopaedia (1951), Vol. 7, Page 609.

5. See, supra.

6, ‘The summary is based on 8. No. 35 316 36 in the Law Commission File No. F.3(4)/S7/LC Part 1, Voll.

Ne



253

(1) Duty on original policy.

‘One State Government and the Administrations of most Union Territories agreed to the
proposed change, Two State Governments and the Administration of one Union Territory,
had no comments.

Nine State Governments were opposed to the proposed change. The reasons for oppas-
ing the change, as stated in the various replies taken together, werc—

(i) that the rate is not high when compared with life insurance policies;

(ii) that any concession in respect of policies under article 47-C and 47-CC will
give rise to similar requests by persons interested in policies governed by
articles 47-A and 47-D;

(iif) that accident and sickness insurance premia are paid by well-to-do people
either for themselves or for their workmen, and there can be no hardship invelved
in paying the present rates;

(iv) that no reduction of Government revenue can be contemplated during the present
emergency;!

(पे that the Insurance Companies Association has not been able to furnish points
of similarity between policies under article 47-B and those under article 47-C;

(vi) that looking to the huge amount insured for comparatively small amounts or
premiums, the stamp duty under article 47-C(b) is not likely to affect the
insorance business;

(vii) that under section 29, it is the person taking out the policy who bears the duty,
and insurance companies “are not directly concerned with the incidence of this
stamp Cuty.”

One State Government,* which was opposed to the reduction, suggested that bus journey
may be included alongwith railway accidents, for exemption under rule 47-C(a), “which
may lead to greater popularity of accident insurance among the less well-to-do classes.”

44.51, As regards the duty on renewal, two State Governments were of the view that
renewals are chargeable at the same rates as for the original, and that a specific provision tc
that effect may be inserted to remove confusion. One State Government expressed this view—
“Reduced rates in regard to renewals under item 47-B of the article have been prescribed
with a view to encourage insurance against fire and damage of property. Accident and sick-
ness insurance premia are paid by well-to-do people either for themselves or for their work-
fen.”

One State Government stated that in the absence of any provision, the duty for renewal
will be the same as on originals. Three other State Governments were opposed to the suggested
reduction.

Comments.
State
ments
Duty on

Two State Governments, and the Administrations of several Union Territories were

agreeable to the reduction of the duty on renewal to one-half of the duty on the original.

44.52, We have given anxious consideration to the points made in the comments sent
earlier to the Ministry of Finance. We think, that while likelihood of reduction in the revenue
of States-has to be taken into account, it should also, at fhe same time, be remembered, that
there is a strong need for popnlarising accident insurance. The similarity of accident insurance
with life insurance is mainly historical. A person taking out an accident policy has no motive

1, This was a reference to the emergency of 1962.
2. 8. No. 36 (Enclosures), in Law Commission’s File No. F. 3(4)/57/LC Part I, Vol. I.
24M of Law/77—33.

of
vi



254

of profit, and any profit that he makes is incidental. There are many points of difference
between life and accident policies’. (६ is therefore legitimate to make a distinction between
the two in regard to the scheme of taxation, particularly if other relevant considerations present
themselves. is

44.53. The limited similarity? between life and accident insurance in respect of the fixed
amount payable, appears to be due to the nature of the loss insured against.

I: has been pointed out’ that when an individual's life or earning power is affected, no
accurate measure of ifs value is possible. The insurance contract therefore assigns the risk
a fixed value, which is all that the insured recovers when the policy falls due.”

To put the matter differently, in a personal accident policy, the fixed sum dispenses with
the proof of the extent of the loss, by specifying the nature and effect of the injury sustained.¢

Classification of 44.54, A classification of the various types of insurance® from the point of view of the

Jasurance with subject-matter would be helpful for appreciating the relevant points.

subject matter, Tasurance
PROPERTY PERSONAL
(Loss from impairment (Loss of income or
‘or destruction of increased expenditure,
property—which may be—) duc to—)
| [|
Tangible property Intangible Death Survival Impaired Loss of oportunity to
(la) property (Ib) Qa) (2b) health contribute Once

Cc) skill, labour . and
wledeet2d)

44.55. Examples of each category given in the above classification® are :—
18. Marine, Automobile, Fire, Flood, ete. Insurance.

1b. Compensation and liability insurance. ‘Credit insurance. Insurance against
interruption of business, Mortgage insurance. Title insurance. Re-insurance.

2a. Life Insurance.
2b. Endowment Insurance.
2c. Sickness Maternity, Accident and Invalidity, Insurance,
2d. Unemployment Insurance.
44.56 Though both accident insurance and life insurance fall under “personal” insurance,
yet, in fact, accident insurance stands much nearer to the other classes of insurance than to
life insurance. Assuming (as is stated im one comment)? that accident insurance is taken out

at present by only well-to-do people, there is no reason why others should not be: encouraged -
to do se.

2 See supra.
3. Encycloapedia of Social Sciences (Macillan) (19$1-Reprint), Vol. 8, page 96.
4. Cf. Lvamy, General principles of insurance law (1966), page 8 and 357.
5. This is based mainly on Encycloapedia of Social Science
6. See supra.

'. See supra.
8. Sea supra.


255

44,57. As regards the objection’ that similar requests will be made by other persons {in
respect of other types of policies), we can only say, that any request by a person interested
in other policies—for example, policies governed by article 47-A and 47-D—can be considered
on the metits when it is put-forth.

44.58, Lastly, the fact that the stamp duty is paid by the Insured and not by the com-
pany, does not mean that a suggestion? made by an Association of the Insurance Companies

should oot be accepied, if it is in the general interest.

44.59, At this stage, we would like to elaborate the proposition that the policy does not
bring profit®. Accident insurance may not be “indemnity” in the strict sense*. But the amount
tecoverable under the policy is regulated.

As has been stated by Halsbury,® the policy usually provides for payment of a lump sum
in the event of the assured’s death by accident, and of other sums, varying in amount according
to the mature and extent of the injury. The specified amount is payable in the event of the
assured sustaining certain specified injuries, such as the loss of sight in one eye or total loss
of sight.*

Sometimes, the policy provides for increased compensation for certain forms of accident.
Thus, in one case’, a double benefit was payable if the assured, at the time of the accidemt, was
@ passenger on a public conveyance,

Halsbury observes’, “Where. the policy provides for payment of compensation in the event
of non-fatal injury, but makes no special provision for its amount, the assured is entitled to
receive compensation for his pain and suffering of and expenses incurred to an amount not ex-
ceeding the amount payable in case of death.”

44,60. (8) Having regard to the considerations summarised above?®, and also to the fact
that the premium in respect of policies of accident insurance is low, we think that there is a
ense for reduction of the stamp duty as follows. Under article 47, Division C, pargarph (b),7*
in respect of an original policy, (of insurance against accident and sickness), when the maxi-
mum amount which becomes payable in a case of any single accident or sickness docs not
exceed Rs. 5,000, the duty should be 10 paise for every Rs. 1,000 or a part thereof, and
when the maximum amount which may become payable in the case of any single accident or
sickness exceeds Rs. 5,000 the duty should be Re, 1 irrespective of the amount which may
become payable. If this change is made, then the existing proviso to article 47, Division C,
paragraph (b), added by Act 18 of 1928, will become superfluous, and may be omitted.

(b) We have considered the suggestion’® regarding bus journeys. We think that policies
of insurance against accidents in course of journey by bus, if valid for a single journey, should
be exempt, where the amount does not exceed Rs. 5,000. We are, further, of the view that
this exemption should extend 10 journeys by all conveyances iachiding rail or air.

We are of the view that policies for single journey or voyage above Rs. 5,000 should bear
duty of only 10 paise whatever be the mode of conveyance.

‘We are further of the opinion that aircraft should be treated in the same category as raifway,
since the article is dealing with accidents.

1, See supra,
2, See supra,
3. See supra,
4, See supra.
5 5 Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Val. 22, page 299, para 597.

6. Bawderi ९. London Edinburgh & Glassgow Assurance Co., (1892) 2 Q.B. 534(C.A.).
1. Fidelity and Casuality Co. of New Tork v. Mitchell, (1917) A.C, 592, 594 (2.C.).
&. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, page 299.
9. Theobald y. Railway Passengers Assurance Ca., (1854) 10 Exch, 45.

10. Paragraphs 36, 37 , 40 to 47, supra.

11. See supra.

12, See Appendix 1 (Draft Amendment to article 47, Division (2).

13. See supra.

Compensation
for loss—position
regarding

Recommendation
regarding duty on
original policy.


Duty on renewal,

256

We should mention that in the Questionnaire, in putting forth a re-draft, we ad made’ a
limited suggestion for amendment of the article. But, after fuller consideration, we are of the view
that certain other changes are required, for reasons already stated.

44.61. The next point to be considered relates to stamp duty on renewal. The existing provi-
sion (it is stated) is not specific on the point and the suggestion* is that it should be clarified by
inserting a specific provision, us in the case of fire insurance.

44.62. Now, in thcory®, renewal is a fresh contract, at least where the policy expressly sti-
pulates that it is not to continue beyond the period of insurance unless renewed by mutual consent.
But, in practice, a fresh proposal for renewal is not used in accident insurance‘, and the original
proposal is treated as repeated.* It seems, that the usual practice in England is to get an accident
insurance policy for one year‘-’, with a provision for renewal.

44.63, In this connection. we may refer to the observations of Sir James Westland while
Presenting the Report of the Select Committee on 21st March, 1898°—

“A difficult question arises in connection with insurance policies. It arises from the
fact that the system of transaction of business in Bombay is different from the
systen: of transaction of business in Calcutta. The duty upon insurance is by law
Jevied upon the issue of the original policy. We levy no duty upon renewals. The
consecuence is, when an insurance policy is renewed, that is to say, if the original
insurance policy is extended, then it bears no new duty, but if a person cancels his
policy, and takes another policy in the same terms from another Company, he has
10 pay the additional duty.”

He stated, that in Calcutta, the insurer transacted their business directly with the offices,
so that the policy was renewed year by year with the same Company and bore no duty, But,
in Bombay, the business was done through brokers, who might take policies with a new Company,
80 that it was a new policy.

44.64, It should, further be noted, that stamp duty under article 47 is chargeable only if
there is a ‘policy. A “receipt” for renewal premium cannot, as such, be charged as “policy”,
in case of insurance accident”, It is necessary to consider whether it is chargeable as a

“receipt”™3,

44.65. As regards stamp duty on renewal, therefore, the correct position (under the existing
law) is uncertain?®, Perhaps, it cen be stated that if a poticy is issued, it would be chargeable with
full duty", If a receipt only is issued, article 47 does not apply*S-"*. The position needs clarification
We recommend, that in respect of each receipt for any payment of a premium or renewal of an ,
accident policy, one half of the duty chargeable on the original should be chargeable, {in addition
to the duty, if any chargeable, under article 53). This is on the analogy’’ of article 47, division B

1. Question 98.

2. Paragraph 5, supra

3. See Halsbury, 3rd Bdu., Vol. 22, pages 248, 249.

4, Stokell १. Heywood, (1897) 1 Ch. 459.

5. Halsbury, 3rd Edn, Vol. 22, page 249, para 484.

6, See Stone & Cox, Accident Insurance Year Book (1963), Form cf Policy at page 66.

7. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 22, page 206, Footnote (0).

8. Donogh's Indian Stamp Law, Edited by Rustomji (1935), pege 17 acd page 19.

9. Indian Stamp Act, 1899, Article 47, speaks of “Policy of Insurance’.

0. As 10 the meaning of “policy”, see paragraphs 26-28, supra.

1. Contrast Indian Stamp Act, 1899, Article 47, Division “B’, which meations both an “original 00009" and a
“receipt” for renewal.

12. Indian Stamp Act, 1899, Article 53, “‘Reosipt”.

13. See supra.

14, See supra.

15. See paragraph 52, supra.

16, Article $3, Indian Stamp Act, 1899, may apply if a receipt is issued.

17, As to article 47, Division B, see para 4, supra.


257
{Fire Insurance). This will clarify the position. It will also make receipts chargeable under article

47; and to that extent, it is a new burden. But a policy, at present, appears to be chargeable
with the full rate, and to that extent, the proposed change will reduce the burden.

44.66. Article 47, Division CC, inserted in 1925 deals with stamp duty on “insurance by
way of indemnity against liability to pay damages on account of accidents «o workmen em-
ployed by or under the insured or against liability to pay compensation under the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923,”

44.67. Article 47, Division CC thus, deals with insurance against two kinds of liability,
namely :—

(a) liability to pay damages on account of accident, to workmen, and
(b) liability te pay compensation under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923.

Liability under the first head would be mainly at common law*. This ordinarily depends on
the proof cf negligence. It may be cither due to the employer's personal fault (for example, a
dangerous machine), or to the fault of a fellow-workmen?®.

(The liability may even be under statute,—e.g., under factories legislation,—and may ke
absolute liability in some cases).

Liability under the second head is statutory. In both cases, the insurance is by way of
“indemnity”.

In both cases again the rate of stamp duty is Ten naya paise for every Rs. 100 or part
thereof payable as premium.

44.68, Although the suggestiont which we are considering mentions article 47, Division OC,
it does not suggest any change in that article, except that the position regarding renewal may be
clarified. We recommend! that in article 47, Division CC, so far as renewal is concerned, a
provision similar to that which we have recommended® for renewal under article 47, Division
C, may be inserted.

44.69. 10 the light of the above discussion, we recommend the following re-draft of
the relevant portions of article 47, We may add that the suggested amendments were included
fn our Questionnaire? and have been generally favoured by the replies on this particular question.

Re-draft of Article 47, Division C
“C. ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS INSURANCE
{1} In respect of an original Policy
{a) against accident on any conveyance valid for single journey or voyage only, when

the maximum amount which may become payable under the policy exceeds Rs. 5,090, Text paise
if the policy is issued to any passenger travelling on such conveyance.
Exemption
‘When issued to a passenger travelling by the second? class in any cailway.
(०) agalast nocident valid for more than a single journey or voyage or against sickness, Ten raya paise
where the maximum amouat which tiay become payable under the’ avery Be. 000 a
bolicy in the case of any single accident of sickness does not excted Rs. 5,000. part thereof such

Maximum amount.

(c) inst ident vali 10 i journe: inst sickne:
© “flere the main aoc ena Siow क० payable under the policy in the case

‘of any single accident or sickness exceeds Rs.$,000. One rupee.
3. See Act 15 of 1925. ~
2. Asto liability at common law, see Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol22, pages 344-345, paragraphs 104-105,
3. Munkman, Employers’ Liability, (1952), page 1. .
4, Paragraph 5, supra.
5. See Appendix 1, Article 47, Division CC.
6. Para $3, supra.
7. Q 97 t0 99.

8. For “intermediate” and third, the word “second” has been bstit
adopted by विन ३9001 a8 substituted, in view of the changed nomenclature

Article 47—
Division C
Employers liabi-
lity,

Two kinds of
liabitity covered.

Recomendecion
regarding Act
Begs Meee


258

(2) in respect of each receipt for any payment of.a premium on any renewal of an One half af the uty
original policy. Payable in respect af
the orlginal policy,
in addition = 9
the amount, ef
any, oF un
der’ No, 53,”
Revised Article 47, Division CC
“CC. INSURANCE BY WAY OF INDEMNITY.
against liability to pay damages on account of accidents to workmen employed by or under
the ingurer ar ‘agaiast Lability 10 pay compensation under the Workmen's Compensation
Act, 1923
(2) In respect of an original polley. Ten naya paise.

for every Rs. 100 or part thereof payable es premium.
(2) im respect of each receipt for any payment of a premium on any renewal of an original One-haif of the duty
icy. payable in respact of
the original policy,
in ction
amount, नि
Changeable’ under
No, 53.”
The changes recommended are summarised below.
Articke 47-C,
(i) for ortgiaal policy.
{a) in respect of insuzance against accidents on any conveyance, including air-
craft, complete exemption upto Rs. 3,000 (for single journey policies).
(0) in othet cases—

(i) where the maximum amount payable does not exceed Rs. 1,000; Duty reduced from
15 np. to 10 2p.

(6) where the maximum amount exceeds Rs. 1,000 but does not exceed Duty reduced
Rs. 5,000 ; 15 np. per

. 5,000;
Rupees to 10 np.
1,000 Rugeas
(ii) where the maximum amount exceed Rs. 5,000 ; Dury reduced fom
15 ap. per 1,000

Rupees fo (fad.
Rapes jn
tive of the nent.

00 In reapet ofthe dus

the position is
Article 47-CC
Position as to duty on renewal is clarified.



CHAPTER 45
ARTICLES 48 to 50

45.1. Article 48, which deals with powers of attorney, is divided into seven clauses, which Article  48—
prescribe a stamp duty ranging from 50 P. to Rs. 10 and over. The material difference between TWroductory.
some of the categories ef instruments provided for in these clauses, and the actual range of
duty,—tfor example, between clauses (a) and (c)—is so small (50 P.) that it would be con-
venient if some of these clauses could be combined. A suggestion for such re-grouping will
be made at the proper place. हु

45.2. To some extent, the differences in stamp duty as prescribed in the various clauses
of the article are based on the difference? between general powers of a‘torney, and special powers Generaland special
of attorney. In Halsbury, the following explanation of these powers jis given under powers.
“agents”. A special agent is one who has authority to act for some special cocasion or purpose
which is not within the ordinary course of his business or profession. A general agent is one who
bas authority arising out of, and in the ordinary course of, his business or profession to do some
act or acts on behalf of his principal in relation thereto or one who is authorised to act on behalf
cf the principal generally in transactions of a particular kind or incidental to a particular business.

In Bouvier's Law Dictionary‘, it is stated that “a general power authorises an agent to act gen-
erally on behalf of the principal, a special power is one limited to a particular act.”

45.3. Some of the various clauses, if examined minutely, reveal a few common features. Clauses (a) and
The common feature in clauses (a) and (c) is that of “single transaction”. Clause (a) relates (si raa-
to an authority for procuring the registration of a document or documents in relation to a —
Single transaction or admitting the execution of one or more cf such documents (for registra-
tion). Clause (c) relates to acting “in a single transaction” otherwise than under clause
(a).

‘The expression “a single transaction”, according to the Madras High Court’, applies “either
to a single act or to acts so related to each other as to form one juridical transaction, such
as, all: the acts necessary to perfect a mortgage or a sale of a particular property,” This inter-
pretation would be in accordance with the distinction between a special agent and a general
agent, as set forth in the authorities already referred to*.

In view of the common features mentioned above, it may be convenient to merge clause
(9) and clause (c).

45.4, Clause (b) of the article charges duty on instruments which are required for pro- Clause (0).
ceedings under the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 Under that Act, such Courts are
set. up in Calcutta, Madras and Bombay."

Under section 2(21) of the Stamp Act, such powers of attorney as are chargeable with
court-fees, such as, Vakalatnamas under the Court Fees Act, 1870, are exempted from stamp
duty. But the Court Fees Act® did aot apply to Presidency Small Cause Courts, and there-
fore such instruments relating to these particular courts are chargeable under the Stamp Act.*

1. For definition, see section 2(21).
2. See Venkataramana lyer v. Narsitga Rao, (1915) U.L.R. 38 Mad. 134, 136.
3. Halsbury, 3rd Bdn., Vol. I, pages 150-151.
Mand ap net's Law Dictionary, Vol. 2, page 714, quoted ia Veckataramona Iyer. Narzinge Rao, (915) 11.7, 38
iad. bb be
5. Venkataramana Iyer v. Narasinga Rao, (1915) LL.R, 38 Mad. 134, 137.
6, Halsbury, 306 Edn., Vol, 1, pages 150-151.
7. Section 4, Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882,
8. Section 3(3). Court Fees Act.
१. Hormusti! K, Bhabha v. Nana Appa, A.-R. 1934 Bom. 299.

259


260

But, in the State of Maharashtra, under the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959, Court fee has
been imposed on these instruments; and hence the instcuments would not be chargeable under
the Stamp Act.

Since clause (b) appears to be of a special character, and the individual States can (by
State Acts) levy duty on such instruments covered by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act.’
there 1s no need to have this clause separately in the Central Stamp Act. Clause (9) should,
therefore, be omitted, Icaving the States concerned to deal with the matter in the Court Fees
Act in the manner they think proper. This will simplify article 48.

45.5, Clause (0) speaks of an authority given to not more than five persons “to act
Clause (d) and jointly or severally in more than one transaction or generally”. Clause (९) relates to a similar
slause (०). authority to more than five but not more than ten persons. Both the clauses relate to general
powers of attorney. Taking advantage of this common feature, one could conveniently com-

bine the two clauses.

It may be noted that these clauses take no account of the number of persous executing a
power of attorney.* tod

The Explanation 10 clause (e) provides that more than one person belonging to a firm
will be deemed to be one person.

45.6, Clanse (f) deals with a power of attorney given for consideration, authorising the
Attorney ta sell immovable property. We shall Jater make a recommendation* concerning the
duty to be charged on the sale deed which may be executed in pursuance of the power of
attorney.

45.7. Clause (g) deals with powers of attorney in other cases. This clause has to be
read with clause (e). When so read, it means that if there are more than tea persons authorised
Clause (9). to act jointly or severally in more than one transaction or generally, then the stamp duty pay-
able is according to the number of persons. (The duty is, at present, one rupee for each person
authorised). This clause needs no change, in substance,

45.8. On the basis of the above discussion, we recommend the following changes in the
grouping of the clauses of article 48,

for गत Gi) Clauses (2) and (८) should be combined into one clause, which will apply when
of olan

uses, one cr more persons are authorised to act in a single transaction,—whether the
transaction consists of a single act or of acts so related to each other so as to
form one jurel transaction.s Clause (b) should be omitted®.

(ii) Clawses (d) and (०), which relate to a general power of attorney, should be
combined. The difference in duty imposed under each of the two clauses at
present depends on the number of persons appcinted, 1.०., Rs. 5 for five persons
and Rs. 10 for ten persons. The duty should be revised, so that one duty is
imposed for a general power of attorney given to not more than, say, ten per-
sons, (the rate being one rupee per person),

(iii) Clauses (1) and (g) may be retained.? Clause (fj may be modified, on the lines
indicated below®, Clause (2) needs no modification of substance.*

Constitution, 7th Schedule, State List, item 63,

Jogi Ram v. Mohammed Rafi, ALR. 1925 Oudh 172.
Para 45.12, infra.

Pata 45.3, supra.

Pata 45.4, supra.

Para 45.5, supra.

Pare 45.6, supra.

Para 45.9 to 45.12, infra.

9. Para 45.7, supra.

Pe Aan १०


261
45.9. A few points of detail relating to individual clauses may now be discussed.

Clause (f) contemplates a power of attorney which is given for the purpose of sale of
any immovable property and for consideration. The duty on a conveyance ‘under Ariicle 23°
for the amount of the consideration charged is the same. The Allahabad High Court has
hel? 2“ #.... a consideration in relation to power of attorney can only mean a valuable con-
sideration and not good consideration”. In that case, the executants of the power of attorney
were indebted to a certain Bank on account of two equitable mortgages. The Bank filed suits
for the recovery of the amount by sale of the property mortgaged. After the filing of the suit,
there was a compromise between the parties, and a power of attorney was executed in favour
of the Bank in compliance therewith. Under the instrument, the Bank was authorised to sell
the property covered by the mortgage decrees, for the purposes of appropriation of the sale
proceeds towards the decretal amount. The balance (after such appropriation) was to be
paid 10 the execmants. The question before the court was whether this instrument was a
power of attorney given for consideration. 1६ was held that the compromise was for a good
consideration so far as the contract of agency or attorney was concerned. But it was not a
valuable consideration. Jt was held that “consideration” in relation to clause (f) of Article
48, means a valuable consideration, ané not a good consideration as it may mean in relation
to any other contract. In these circumstances, it was held that the power given was for the
ppointment of an agent, and not for eny valuable consideration. Therefore, the instrument
was not chargeable under Article 48(f). It was also held that there was no transfer of any
Property in consideration of any debt under section 24, and, therefore, there was no stamp
duty chargeable on the amount of the consideration on account of the two equitable mortgages.

45.10, It would appear, however, that there was valuable consideration in this case, consti-
tuted by the compromise of litigation which raised triable issues. In any case, the instrument
would fall under Article 48, clause (c), as the Bank was authorised to sell the immovable
property by public auction for payment of the amount due, to grant a receipt for the purchase
moncy paid by the auction purchase, to appropriate from the sale proceedings so received a
sum representing the total decretal amount and to pay the balance to the executants. All this
could be considered as belonging to one jural transaction, namely, the appropriation of sale
proceeds towards the decretal amount; and on this basis, Re. 1 ought to have been charged
as stamp duty.

45.11. With reference to article 48(f), the following explanation was given in the State-
ment of Objects and Reasons? :—

“It has been found that sales and mortgages were sometimes effected through the medium
of power of attorney and thus the stamp duty, payable as a conveyance was evaded. A pro
vision is, therefore, introduced in this article to charge such powers as a conveyance,

The Select Committee limited the clause ro cases of powers authorising sales of immovable
property'.

Points of detai-

@ Meaning
consideration”
in clause

Sir James Westland, in his speech presenting the report of the Select Committee to be _

Legislative Council in 1898, explained the object of his clause as follows :—

“eosseee+The reason of this was that it was found as a fact that what amounted to
3 conveyance was sometimes effected by means of a power of attorney. A,
in selling B property, instead of conveying it to him by a regular deed of con-
veyance, simply transferred it to him without any conveyance at all, but gavq
him a power of attorney authorising him to sell the property. This, so far as
B is concerned, enabled him to dispose of the property to the sams extent as
if he were the owner of it. We, therefore, provided that if a power-of-attorney was

1. Chtef Inspector of Stamps v. Muritdhar, ALR. 1970 All. 599, 603, Para 9.
2. Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill(1897):, Article 48.
3. Report of the Select Committee (1898), Article 48.

24 M of Law/77—44

of


Recommendation
ow article
4&f).

Further Con.
veyance.

(li) Propics .

Gil) Revocation.

Re-druft.

262

given for a consideration and gave authority for the sale of the property affected,
the duty should be levied in the same way as upon a conveyance. In the objections
that have been made to this provision, apparently some persons have thought
that we levy this duty upon a power-of-attorney given for affecting a sale, and
they fail to observe that it was levied purely upon a power-of-attorney given
for a consideration.”

45.12, We are of the view that the conveyance subsequently executed in pursuance of
the power of attorney referred to in clause {f) should not be chargeable, except for the excess
consideration that is received, We recommend en amendment of the article accordingly.

45,128. Accepting a suggestion made by a Law Society’, we recommend that there should
be no duty on a further conveyance after the levy of duty under article 48(f) except where
extra consideration is received by the person as the seller.

It is our intention that the proposed exemption should cover all sales in pursuanee of the
power, as also a sale between the parties to the power, i.c.,

{i) sale deed between the principal and the agent, and also
(ii) sale deed between the agent and third persons.

In our opinion, the principle ought to be that the transfer having been subjected once
to tax, should not be taxed again, except insofar as further monetary gain accrues after the
execution of the power of attorney. We regard the power of attorney as, in substance, though
not in form, a transfer of the property. That in fact, is the rationale underlying the ad valorem
duty.

45.13. The next point concerns proxies. In a Madras case,? it was held that a proxy which
empowered a person to vole at a particular meeting of a company “or at any other meeting”
fell within Article 48(g). Assuming that 2 proxy is a general power of attorney, the Court
considered the question whether clauses (d), (e) and (g) of Article 48 would apply. First, it
was said that clause (g) had to be read with clause (ce). Then, clause (०) applies when the
authority is given to not more than five persons, and relates to “more than one transaction or
generally”. Following an unreported judgment,’ the Court held a proxy which empowered a
person to vote at a particular meeting and then at any other meeting during thar year would
fall under clause (g) of Article 48. It was stated that if such a construction were not adopted,
“g power of attorney in favour of one person, in respect of more than one transaction, would
escape stamp duty altogether.”

Tt is suggested that it is possible to take the view that the instrument would fall under
clause (d), and not under clause (g). The opposite view is based, perhaps, on the words
“jointly and severally” in clause (१), which are not quite appropriate for one person. This
misunderstanding could be removed by a slight verbal change in clause (d).

45.14. There seems to be no specific entry in the Schedule as to the revocation of a
power of attorney. The revocation would, if attested, apparently, fall under the entry relating
to Iostrument of cancellation.‘

45,15. In order to simplify and amend the provisions of article 48 on the lines discussed
above, we recommend the following re-draft of the article :

“48. Power of attorney [85 defined by section 2(21), not being a proxy (No.52)}—
‘(ay When authorising one person or more t act in a single transaction, incluting® a pewer of ettornay +

executed 10 the sole purpose of procuring the registration of one of more documents in relation to
a single transaction or for admitting execution of ove ot more such documents ....

1. Incorporated: Law Society, Calcutta.

2. Narayan v. Kameleswar Mills Lid., ULB. (1952) Mad. 218, 256.

3. Referred cas No. 15 of 1905, cited In the Madras Stamp Manual.

4. Article 17.

उ, The specific mention of power pf at! ‘torney in telation to registration etc. contained in the present Act may be
desirable, since more than one document ia involved.


263

(0) when authorising ove person 10 act ix more than one transaction or gene- One rupee fot each pecson autbor!-
zally,t or not more than ten persons to act jointly and severally in more sed but not less than Five rupees.
than'one transaction or generally;
(© when given for consideration and authorising the attorney (० sell any The same duty as a conveyance
immovable property; (No.23) for the amount of the
consideration.

(9) in any other case, One rupee for each persom autho-
poe ee rised.
Explanation 1.---For the purpose of this Article, more persons than one when belonging
to the same firm shail be deemed to be one person.

Explanation 2.—The term ‘registration’ includes every operation incidental to registration
under the Indian Registration Act, 1908.

Explanation 3.-—Where, under clause (c), duty has been paid on a power of attorney
relating 10 amy property, no auty shall be chargeable on a conveyance of that property executed
in’ pursuance of the power of attorney or between the granter of the power and the graniees,
except in so far as the consideration for the conveyance exceeds the consideration for the
power of attorney.”

45.16, It may be convenient to summarise the salient points affecting the rate of duty
with reference to the re-draft; recommended by us :

G) Under the re-draft, there will be an increase of duty from 50 NP to one rupee, in
cases covered by article 48(a), ie. power of attorney executed for the sole purpose of procuring
registration, etc. | Though arithmetically the duty will be doubted, the burden will not, it is
hoped, be resented by the class of persons who have to bear it.

(ii) In the case of a general power of attorney in favour of six, seven, eight or nine persons,
the stamp duty, at present, is, under article 48(e), ten rupees, while, under the proposed re-
draft, it will be six, seven, eight and nine rupees respectively. But such cases will be rare,
and the reduction in duty is not likely to affect the revenue substantially.

(iii) A special provision will govern conveyances executed in pursuance of, or after
the power to sell, referred to in articie 48(f).
45.17. This takes us to article 49. Under article 49, the stamp duty on a promissory note

ty regulated by two sets of provisions. If the note is payable on demand, then, under sub-
depending on amount of value

article (a) fixed rates (as given in the sub-article) apply,
(entered in the promissory note). This part of the article presents no difficulty.

45.18. But, if the note is payable otherwise than on demand, the duty is the same as the

duty for a Bill of Exchange for the same amount payable otherwise than on.demand. Now, R

the duty for such Bills is to be calculated according to a very complicated scale*. तर कर + duty
on Bi of Exchange can be simplified—as we have recommended’, than it would indirectly
fesult in a simplification of the application of article 49 also.
Tt may be noted that in England, now, the duty on an inland bill of exchange or a promis-
sory note has been simplified‘, ax follows -—
“BILL OF EXCHANGE OR PROMISSORY NOTE of any kind whatsover (except
a bank note)--drawn, or expressed to be payable, or actually paid of endorsed,
or in any manner negotiated in the United Kingdom.”
The duty is two peace.
1, This case is even now regarded as falling within article 4804); but the words “jointly and severally” are not
appropriate. Hence a specific provision.
2. Article 13(0).

3. Seo discussion relating to article 13, supra.
4. Section 33, Finance Act, 1961 (Eng.).

(Existing claus
1

[Existing clause
{03

[Existing clause(s))

Difference in duty
under existing
section and
revised section,

Asticle 49—Pro-
Notes

eco mmendation
as to article 13.


Recommendation
to make the
articte self-contai-
ned,

Article 50,

264

45.19. Even if our recommendation to simplify the duty on a bill of exchange is not accepted,
we would emphasise the fact that the present figures of duty as mentioned in the Act, in Article
49(b), do not reflect the real position. This is for the reason that there have been important

reductions,

45.20, In our view, it is desirable that article 49 should, in the interests of simplicity, be
revised and made self-contained. We, therefore, recommend that the substance of the relevant
notifications sbould, in a suitable form, be incorporated in the article. This recommendation
is in addition to our recommendation for simplifying article 13.

45.21. Article 50 levies duty on a protest of a bill or note. This is a notarial act’, but
has been excluded from the general article*—article 42—dealing with notarial acts. The duty
charged under article 42 (notarial act) and article 50 (protest of bill or note) is, however,
the same, viz., Re. 1.

Under the Negotiable Instruments Act’, where a promissory note or bill of exchange hay
been dishonoured by non-acceptance of non-payment, the holder may, within a reasonable time,
cause such dishonour to be noted and certified by a notary public. Such cettificate is called
@ protest.

Such noting and protest is not made compulsory but is left to the option of the holder,
except in the case of foreign bills*.

No difficulty appears to have been caused by article 50, which needs no change.

1, Section 8(0), Notaries Act, 1952.

2, The articles in the Stamp Acts of 1879 and 1860, corresponding to the present article 42, included protests falling
under persent article 50.

3. Section 100, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.

4, Section 104, Negotiable Instruments Act.


CHAPTER 46
ARTICLES 51 TO 57

46.1, Article 51 levies a duty of one rupee on protest by the master of a ship, attested or Article 51.
certified by a notary public cr other person Jawfully acting as such. We have, while discussing
an earlier article’, dealt with the circumstances in which a protest can be filed. We have no
fnrther comments on this article.

46.2. Article 52 levies a duty of 15 maye paise on a proxy in certain cases. The duty Article 52००
Proxy—Introdue-

is chargeable on a proxy empowering any person to yoie at any one election of the members tory.
of a district or jocal board or of a body of municipal commissioners, or at any one meeting of ~
(8) members of an incorporated company or other body corporate whose stock or funds is or are
divided into shares and transferable, (b) a local authority, or (c} proprietors, members or
contributors to the funds of any institution.
46.3. In legal parlance, the expression “proxy” is used in two senses. It may (i) denote Meaning of
the person appointed by the share-holder (or other person) to appear at a meeting and cast
tho share-holder’s vote, or (४) it may denote the form (usually a printed copy), in which such
an 2ppointment is made*,
The word “proxy” is a contracted form of the word ‘procuracy’, procurator’.
A proxy is defined by Lord Hanworth M. R. in Cousins v. International Brick Co.*, as—
“a person representative of the shareholder who may be described as bis agent to
carry out a course which the share-holder himself has decided upon.”
This is the first meaning of the expression “proxy”.
, In article 52, however, the word “proxy” is used in the second sense, that is, the instru-
ment by which a person 15 appointed so to act.
In the Companies Act®, the Form of Proxy is thus prescribed—
[See Article 62 of the Table A and also section 176(6) 5.
“General Form

devestaeee sooeseseesName Of Company, I/We.
in the district of
Company hereby appoint.
in the district of

being a member/members of the above-named

vy as my/our proxy to vote for me/us on my/our behalf at the annual
general meeting/gencral mecting (net being an annual general meeting} of the Company to
be held on the ......-..--+- 00s day Of we cee ccc cece eee eee and at any adjourament
thereof.
46.4, It is well-known that proxy voting has become the dominant mode of share-holders’ frportence of
decision-making in public companies. There are a number of reasons for this*. Share-holders proxies
im such corporations are often geographically dispersed, so that a given share-holder may not

1. See discussion as to article 44—Note of protest. Review
2. Bisenberg, “Access to Proxy Machinery (May, 1970), 83 Harv. Law Review 1489, 1490.
3, Bouvier, Law Dictionary, (1914), page 2762,

4, Cousies पर. Internationa! Brick Co., (1931) 2 Ch. 90.

5. Companies Act, 1956, Schedule IX.

6. Bisenberg, “Access to proxy Machinery,” (May 1970) 83 Harv. L.R. 1489, 1490.

265


266

be living near the place where the meeting is held. Again, share-holders often have some
Principal business other than investing. Physical attendance at a share-holders’ meeting is,
for many reason, uneconomic use of time when they can vote by proxy.

Four kinds of 46.5. Coming, now, to ihe text of the article, we may note that it really deals with four

Broxics. kinds of proxies. In the first place, it charges duty on a proxy which empowers any person
to vote ai any one election of the members of a district local board or a body of municipal
commissioners. Secondly, it charges duty on a proxy empowering any person to vote at any
one meeting of members of an incorporated company or other body corporate whose stock
or funds is or are divided into shares and are transferrable.

Thirdly, it charges duty on a proay empowering any person to vote at any one meeting of
a local authority. Finally, it charges duty an a proxy empowering any person to vote at any
one meeting of proprietors, members or contributors to the funds of any institution.

Recommendation 46.6 So far as the first portion is concerned, the question may be raised why it should

to entendthe2rtl” mention only certain local authorities and Jeave out others. The reason for this appears to

ofall local autho- be primarily historical. The Stamp Act of 1879 did not contain the words “any one olection

ities. of the members of e district or Jocal board or of a body of municipal Commissioners”. By a
notification of the Government, a proxy executed by a female empowering any person to vote at
any one election of the members of a local board held under the provisions cf the Bombay Local
Boards Act, was made chargeable with a one-anna stamp duty—a reduced duty compared with
the duty on a power of attorney. The present Act has gone a step forward, and had made the
article applicable to proxies executed even by males, in respect of the election of the authorities
Mentioned therein. In doing so, however, the question of extending this part of the article to
the election of every local authority does not appear to have been considered. Such proxies might,
perhaps, be taken as chargeable under the article relating to power-of-attormey®, It should be
noted, however, that the duty under that article is much higher than the duty on_a proxy, and
moreover, that article is expressed in somewhat complicated terms’, We are of the view that
Proxies in respect of elections of alf local authorities should be brought within the scope of
article 52. No doubt, a person to whom a member gives a proxy is that member's agent for the
purpose of votmg!. However, since the legislature has, in this article, already dealt with a proxy
in respect of elections of local bodies specifically, there is no reason why all proxies in nespect
of local bodies should not be brought within its scope. We, therefore, recommend that this
part of article 52 should be extended to a proxy empowering any person to vote at any one
election of the members of a local authority. It may be noted, that that portion of the article
which refers to a proxy in respect of meetings, specifically mentions “a local authority", words
which were substituted by the present Act in place of the words “municipal commissioners”
which occurred in the Act of 1879.

Recommendation 46.7. The article does not mention proxies te be used at meeting of creditors, and.such
‘o prion me srticle jastruments would epparently fall under article 48—power of aitorney. However, it should
meetings of eredi- be stated that by a nofification® issued by the Government of India, the duty on such premies
has been reduced to the duty chargeable under article $2. In view of this, and in order to make
the article self-contained, we recommend that such proxies should also be brought within

article 52.

Proxies which do not fall under the article, as amended, will continue to be governed by
the article applicable 10 a power of altorney.

Emerson and Latcham, -e-holifers’, Demotracy (1954) pages 14-15, cited by Bisenberg. “Access to Proxy
Machinery”, (May, 1970) $3 Harv. Law Review, 1489,
2, Article 48
3, See discussion as to article 48, supra.
4. In re Tata iron and Stee! Company, A.1.R, 1928 Bom. 80, 86 (Crump 7.).
5, Government of India, Notification No. 6, dated 14th August, 1937.
6. Cf. Narain Chetialr v. Ramleswar Mills, ALR. 1952 Mad. 515, 528.



267

46.8. It may be noted that in England, no duty is chargeable on an instrument of prozy
for use at one meeting at which votes may be given by proxy, whether the number of persons
named in the instrument be one more. The Finance Act, 1949, so provided, by amending
the Schedule to the Stamp Act, 1891, entry relating to letter or power of attorney, by inserting
*xemption (5) ¢ Exemption is in these terms :

“(5) Letter of power cf attorney for the sole purpose of appointing or authorising a
proxy to vole at any one meeting ar which votes may be given by proxy, whether
the number cf persons named in such instrument be one or more.”

We are not, of course, suggesting adoption of this English provision.

46.9. We now come to a very important article, levying duty on receipts. Article 53 levies
a duty of 20 naye paise on receipt as defined by section 2(23) , for any money or other property,
the amount or value of which exceeds 20 rupees. There are 8 exemptions to the article, to
‘be found in clauses (a) to (1) of the Exemption.

46.10. Before we proceed to discuss matters of detail, we may record our view that the
amount should be increased from Rs. 20 to Rs. 100. We may mention that some States
have, in their replies to ovr Questionnaire?, agreed to the proposed increase to Rs. 100,
In this particular «matter, we would have been glad to have comments
from the Ministry of Finance, which we have not received’. However, we may add that we are
taking this recommendation after a careful consideration of all aspects and we think that
there is a strong justification for it, having regard to the purchasing powet of the rupee at the
present day in contrast with what it was in 1899.

It appears to us that in the present Act, the amount of Rs. 20 must have been fixed on
some logical basis. ‘That basis, as we conceive it, seems to be that for amounts 165४ than
Rs. 20, the aspect of revenue is over-ridden by the aspect of convenience and the aspect of

poverty.

Although we have no material for calculating the present amount corresponding to what
was Rs. 20 in 1899, Rs. 100 would seem to be proper on a rough calculation. In any case,
Rs. 20 appears at the present day to be too low an amount in a provision for taxing receipts.

46.11. So much as regards the main article. We now deal with the exemptions. Exemp-
tion (8) to the article relates to a receipt endorsed on, or contained in, (1) any instrument duly
stamped, of (ii) any instrument, exempt under the proviso to section 3 (instrements executed
by the Government cic.), or (iii) any cheque or bill of exchange payable on demand, acknow-
Jedging the receipt of the consideration money therein expressed, or the receipt of any prin-
cipal money, interest or annuity or other periodical payment thereby secured. The principle
on which this exemption is based is that, (2) the receipt is incidental to the main transaction, and
the instrumenc is not execnied with the primary object of acknowledging the receipt of money,
and (b) the primary instrument is itself duly stamped or exempt from duty. ‘The exemption
does not, however, mention instruments exempt from stamp duty by virtue of the exemptions
zontained below other articles in the Schedule to the Act, or instruments exempt by virtue of
a notification under section 9, or by virtue of any other law. We are of the opinion that a
Teceipt endorsed or contained in any such instrument, if it acknowledges the receip of
the consideration money there expressed, or the receipt of any principal money, interest or
annvity, or other periodical payment thereby secured, should also be exempt from the duty
under article 53.

1. Finance Act, 1949, 8th Schedule, Part 1, item 18.
2, 0. 106.
3. ‘The Questionnaire was sent to the Ministry of Finance.

Position in
gk

Article a
Introductory.

Increase to
Rs, 100 recommicn-
ded.

Artie — 58—
Receipt—Exemp-
Hon (a).


Article 553 —
Sxemption (a)

Exemption (b).

Exemption (०).

Exemptions (d),
* (०) and (Oke
. commendation,

Bxemption te).

Exemption (h).

Recommendation
to revise the

amountin Article
33.

Article 34,

268
Most repliest to our Questionnaire have favoured such amendment, which we recommend.

46.12, Exemption? (a) to Article 53 should, therefore, be revised as above. Less cf
revenue—a point made in one reply—cannot be a valid argument, when the main instrument
is itself exempt. The principle on which this exemption is based is that, (a) the receipt is
incidental to the main transaction, and the instrument is not executed with the primary object
of acknowleding the receipt of money, and (b) the primary instrument is itself duly stamped
of exempt from duty.

46,13. Exemption (9) exempts a receipt for ‘“‘any payment of money without considera~
tion”. There is no such exemption in English law. In general, the exemption is meant for
voluntary payments, or payments made in consideration of natural love or affection, of mere
gifts. Internal payments within an office, or payments by book transfer, are also treated as
falling within this exemption‘-*. It appears however, that a payment of house-tax to the munici-
pality does not fall® within the exemption; it is not treated as a payment “without consideration”.
This view receives support from the fact that exemption (g) was considered necessary to provide
for one specific case of receipt af tax. The exemption needs no change.

46.14. Exemption (९) relates to a receipt for payment of rent by a cultivator on account of
rent assessed to Government revenuc, or in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay and.
Madras, as they existed before 1st November, 1956, of Inam lands. It is obvious that the
exemption is not confined to receipts by the Government—these will be exempt even under
the proviso to section 3—but also covers receipts given to raiyats by the holders of revenue
paying Jand. The exemption, however, ceases to operate where a decree for such rent is
passed and payment is made out of court, under such decree’, The exemption needs no change.

46.15, Exemptions (0), (०) and (f) relate to receipts given by armed forces in respect
of certain payments. In this connection, our discussion relating to the definition of “saldier*”
may be seen. In these exemptions, “soldier”® should be substituted. We may state that such
an amendment has been generally favoured by the replies to our Questionnaire.

46.16. Exemption (g) relates to a receipt given by a headman or lumberdar for land
revenue of taxes collected by him. This needs no comment.

46.17, Exemption (h) exempts receipts given for money or securities for money deposited
in the hands of any banker, to be accounted for. The exemption needs no change,

46.18 There are two provisos to the exemption, which are not material for our purpose,
The principle of this exemption seems to be that the money received is to be accounted for ;
and, unlike other receipts the receipt is not issued for something to be retained permanently
by the person receiving. In other words, it does not discharge any liability, but merely evidences
a transaction of deposit. The factum of deposit itsel— may create a liability to return the
money or securities, But the deposit receipt is merely a receipt, and nothing more.

46.19, As regards the figure Rs. 20, we repeat our recommendation that it should be
increased to Rs. 100, having regard to the fall in the purchasing power af the rupee.

46.20. Acticle 54 levies duty on a reconveyance of mortgage

1, Question 104,

2, Point raised by $. No. 11 (Delhi Administration).

3. General Council of the Bar v. Intand Reverwe Commissioners, (1907) 1 1८.8. 462, 478.

4, (1910) LL.R. 37 Cal. 634, 640.

5. dnre Secretary to the Commissioner of Salt, Madras, (1911) 9 Indian Cases 342 (F.B.), Madcas.
6. Inve Karachi Municipality, (1888) LL.R. 12 Bom. 103, 104.

7. Emp. v. Doongar Singh, (1909) LL.B. 31 All. 36, 37.

8. See recommendation gs to section 2—“soldier”.

9. (३ 105.


269

If the consideration for which the property was mortgaged does not exceed Rs. 1,000
the duty is the same as on a Conveyance (No. 23) for the amount of such consideration as
set forth in the Reconveyance.

In any other case, it is ten rupees.
It needs no change.

46.21, Article 55 levies duty on a release, that is to say, any instrument (not being such
a release as is provided for by section 23A) whereby a person renounces a claim upon another
person or against any specified property. The duty is as follows :—
(a) if the amount or value of the claim does not exceed The same duty as a Bond (No. 15) for such amount or
Rs. 1,000; value as set forth in the Release.
(b) in any other case Five rupees.

It needs no change.

46.22. Article 56 levies duty on respondentia bond, that is to say, any instrument securing
ब lean on the cargo laden or to be laden on board a ship and making repayment contingent
on the arrival of the cargo at the port of destination.

In maritime law, this represents a loan of money, on maritime interest, on goods laden on
board of a ship, upon the condition that if the goods be wholly lost in the course of the voyage,
by any of the perils enumcrated in the contract, the lender shall lose his money; if not, that
the borrower shall pay him the sum borrowed, with the interest agreed upon’.

The Ioan is not recoverable if the ship is lost.

The contract is called respondentia, because the money is lent mainly, or most frequently,
on the personal responsibility of the borrower. It differs principally from bottomry, which
is ॥ loan on the ship, while respondential is a loan upon the 80०0४,

The Article needs no change.

46,23, Article 57 charges duty on a security bond or mortgage deed “executed by way
of security for the due execution of an office, of to account for money or other property
teceived by virtue thereof or executed by a surety to secure the due performance of a contract.”

When the amount secured does not exceed Rs. 1,000, the duty is the same as on a Bond
(No. 15) for the amount secured. In any other case, it is five rupees.

There are certain exemptions, which exempt bond or other instrument, when executed—

(a) by a beadman nominated under rules framed in accordance with the Bengal
Irrigation Act, 1876, section 99, for the due performance of their duties under
that Act ;

(b) by any person for the purpose ef guaranteeing that the local income derived from
private subscriptions to a charitable dispensary or hospital or any other object of
public utility shall not be less than a specified sum per mensem;

(८) under No. 3A of the rules made by the State Government under section 70 of the
Bombay Lrrigation Act, 1879 ;

(0) executed by persons taking advances under the Land Improvement Loans Act,
1883, or the Agriculturists’ Loans Act, 1884, or by their sureties, as security for
the repayment of such advances; and

(०) executed by officers of the Government or their sureties to secure the due execution

of an office or the due accounting for money or other property received by virtue
thereof.

1. Bouvier, Law Dictionary (1914), page 22.
2. Conard v. ins. Co., 1 Pet. (U.S.) 386, 7 L. Ed. 189.

24 M of Low/?77—35

Article 55.
Analogous

Article 56.

Introductory.


270

46.24. The article, thus, levies duty on two types of documents—(a) security bonds, or
(b) mortgage deeds, provided, in their case, that they are executed by way of security for the
specified purpose. There is another article—article 40 dealing with mortgage deeds’, but that
article expressly excludes from its scope a security bord gaverned by article 57. Then, there is
anather article’—article 15—-which levies duty on a bond; that article also expressly excludes,
from its scope, a bond which is otherwise provided for by the Stamp Act cr-by the Court Fees
Act. It may be noted that ihe exclusion in article 15 in respect of a bond provided for in the
Court Fecs 2०08 was added‘ in the Stamp Act of 1879 by a later amendment®.

First हम 46.25. It may be pointed out that a similar exclusion—i.c., in respect of documents provided
tinder Court Foe for by the Court Fees Act-—has not been made in article 40 or in article 57.

and Stamp Act.
This creates certain problems, A document which falls under article 40 or article 37 would,

in. certain cases, be chargeable both under the Stamp Act and under the Court Fees Act. This
leads to double taxation.

Second question 46.26. Secondly, a problem is created by the co-existence, in the Stamp Act, of several
rem 15651 articles, conceivably applicable to security bonds and mortgage deeds*. These articles do contain
Act applicable to words excluding each other; but what falls within one or the other remains undefined. In our
security monet’ view, it is desirable that the scope of each article should be indicated as precisely as possible.
deeds,
Security bonds 46.27. It should, in this connection, be pointed out that the want of a precise definition of
executed — under the scope of the relevant articles raises problems of great practical importance in relation to
‘order of Court. security bonds executed under an order of the Court. Hundreds of such bonds are executed daily
on behalf of Jitigants,—particularly, security bonds executed by a surety when a stay of execution
of a decree is granted. The crucial question that has usually arisen is—

@ whether such bonds are executed “to secure the due performance of a contract”, so
. as to fall within article 57, or

(ii) whether they within article 15 (unsecured bonds) or article 40 (mortgage deeds)
on the view that they do not fall within article 57

46.28. This controversy has arisen because, while one view taken on the subject is that an
uodertaking in compliance with the orders of a court imposes a contractual obligation, some
courts have taken a contrary view. It is not necessary to refer here to all the cases, Some of them
are conveniently reviewed in the Madras case of In re Kuppuswamy™.

Meaning of 46.29. There appears to be some uncertainty on the question whether the word “contract”
ae in in article 57 is appropriate for being applied to security bonds executed in the course of judicial
. proceedings in compliance with a statutory requirement. Generally speaking, there cannot be a
contract between the ccurt and a party to the suit, and this is the view taken by most High Courts
with reference to this article’, On this view, a bond given by a surety under Order 41, rule 5 or
Order 41, rule 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, does not fall under article 57, It is not

a bond for the “due performance of a contract”.

These decisions would regard such bonds as falling under article 40.

Article 40.

Article 15.

Court Fees Act, Second Schedule, Article 6.

Amendment in the Stamp Act of 1879 (Article 13), by section 18(4) of Act 6 of 1889.
For previous law, see Kulwant v. Mahavir Parsad, (1888) LL.R. 11 All. 16, 17

In re. Kuppuswamy, A.LR. 1949 Mad. 567, 568 (reviews cast law).

Jn re. Kuppuswamy, A.LR. 1949 Mad. 567, 568 (reviews case law).

Reference, ALR. 1931 All. 189 (F.B.). न
Abubacker १. Chinnathambt, A.LR. 1938 Mad. 262; (1938) 1 Mad. Law Journal 159.
10. Dadve Baiaji v. Kanhgilal, ALR. 1947 Nag. 26.

11. Akshay Zamindariv. Ram Nath Burman, LLR. (19379 1 Cal, 375, 380,

PON छू 2६ ७० २ १5


271

The view taken in some case, however, is that a security bond given under Order 41, rule
5 or 6 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, falls under article 57. This view was takea by
the Ouah Chief Court’, the Lahore High Court?, and by the Sind Chief Court’.

46.30. Presumably to settle the position on the above subject, there has been in the U.P.
an amendment of article 57% adding the words “or the due discharge of a liability” after the
words “ihe due performance of a contract”. Such an amendment, however, secms 10 go beyond
what is needed, and might even cover bonds not executed in the course of civil and criminal
proceedings. A similar ameudment was made in Bengal in 1939.

46.31. It appears to us that the position could be simplified if more attention is devoted to
basic principles. Two basic principles should in this context be borne in mind. Firs’, as far as
possible, the articles should be mutually exclusive—(this is a question of drafting),—and
secondly, a document which bears court fees should not also be liable to stamp duty—(this is a
snatter of policy). The second principle has been acecpted when the legislature amended the 1879
Act, There is na reason why the same principle should not be followed incharging duty under
other articles which are possibly applicable. We are, moreover, of the view that bands executed
in pursuance of an order of a court cannot be regarded as creating a contractual obligation. They
should be dealt with specifically, if considered necessary.

46.32, On the above principles, we recommend the following amendments in the various
articles :--

(का article 40 (morigage-deed ), the words “not being . . SECURITY BOND”
should be amplified by revising them as “not being. ...such SECURITY BOND
OR MORTGAGE DEED as is referred to in article 57.”

(ii) In article 57, the words “or in pursuance of an order of a court or public officer”
should be added after the words “due performance of a contract”.

(iii) In aricle 57, the words “not being otherwise provided for by the Court Fees Act,
1870 should also be added, after adding the above words.

(iv) In article 57, after the words “security bond or mortgage” (which occur in the
title), the words “where such sccurity bond or mortgage deed is” should be
added.

46.33. The object of the first amendment is to demarcate the scope of article 40 more
clearly, by indicating that not only a security bond but also a mortgage deed (if governed by
article £77) would be excluded from article 40.

The abject of the second amendment! is to put an end to the controversy as to the scope
of the words “due performance of a contract” in article $7,

Ths object of the third amendment® js to remove the liability to stamp duty under article
57 where the Court Fees Act is applicable. The object of the fourth amendment’? is to make it
clear that in article 57, the words “executed by way. of security. ........contract” govern the
words “security bond” es well as the words “mortgage deed”.

1. 177 Revenue v. Lalta Bakshi Singh, A.1.R. 1931 0000 91. See, However, Hunter v. Emp., AR. 1942 Oudh
371,87.

2. Tullak Shah २, Gulam Hassan, AJ.R. 1933 Lab, 1004

3. Reference A.LR. 1936 Sind. 41

4 Stamp Act Schedule 1A, Article 57, as inserted in the U.P.

S. 860 Supra,

6, To be carried out undre article 40

7, See Supra.

8. Seo Akshay Zamindari Lid. v. Rem Nath Verman, LL.R. (1937) 1 Cal. 375, 380.

9. Compare Article 15, .

10, See Akshay Zamindari v, Ram Nath Burman, 1.1... (1937) 1 Cal. 375, 380.

U.P. Amend +
ment.

Basic principles.

30 and article 57.


272

46. 34. The material part of article 57 should, accordingly, be revised so as to tread as
under +--
“87, SECURITY BOND OR MORTGAGE DEED Where such security bond or mortgage
deed—
(a) is executed by way of security for the due execution of an office, or to account for
money or other property received by virtue thereof, or

(b) is executed by a surety to secure the due performance of a contract or in pursuance
of an order of a court or public officer, not being otherwise provided for by the
Court Fees Act, 1870, —

902 to 911—
{a) when the amount secured does not exceed Rs. 1,000; The same duty as a bond (No. 15) for the
amount secured,
1. (b) im aay other case... Five Rupees.

(Exemptions as at present).



CHAPTER 47

ARTICLES 58 TO 60

47.1. Article 58 levies duty on an instrument of sctement, The definition of “settlement” as.
given in the Act ‘emphasises the occasion or purpose of the gift, that being the feature distinguishing
it from other transfers, Having regard to this special purpose, the legislature has fixed a lower rate
of duty on settlements, But for this specific article, the instrament would have been taxable as a

Article 58.

gift, thereby attracting the rate of duty leviable on a conveyance. Certain questions relating to 7

settlements and trusts will be considered when we come to article 64. (Trusts).

47.2, There is, in article 58, an exemption in respect of a deed of dower executed on the
‘occasion of a marriage between Muhammadans. This requires discussion.

The exemption was previously notified by Notification No. 855 dated 19th February 1886.
‘The principle of the exemption appears to be that in the case of a Muslim marriage, dower is obliga-
tory and is not a matter of bounty. Dower is a legat right of the wife and hence ought not to be
taxed.

As Mahammood J. observed in Abdut Kadir’s case* “Dower is not the exchange or considera-
tion given by the man to the woman for entering into the contract ; but an effect of the contract,
imposed by the law on the husband as a token of respect for its subject, the woman.”

47.3. This aspect of the concept of dower is brought out more clearly in the systems of Islamic
law in certain other countries which have codified the law on the subject of personal status. Accor-
ding to the law as enacted in the Ottoman Law of Family Rights*, dower and maintenance of the
wife become binding on ihe husband on the conclusion of the contract of a valid marriage.

A similar provision is contained in the law Iraq‘-°, according to which a woman is “entitled”
to the dower specified in the contract ; if it has not been specified, she shall get the proper dower.

47.4. The essential nature of dower came up for consideration in an English case in the
rather unfamilar setting of a libel action’. The Muslim plaintiff in that case complained that
he had been hek! up to ridicule and contempt by an article that appeared in the defendant's
newspaper under the heading “Child Wife bought for £800." The article had gone on describ-
ing the marriage of the plaintiff with a Moroccan girl in Casablanca in terms of a purchase.
The defendants put forth the plea of “Justiftcation” (truth of the libel). It was their plea
that they were justified in describing the marriage as a sale, because the negotiations for marriage
had been concluded between the plaintiff and the giri’s uncle and ‘because a sum of money
was involved. This plea was rejected, and it was held that the defendants had grossly muis-
represented the nature of the proceedings involved in a Muslim marriage. The marriage guar-
dian was in no sense acting as a vendor. It was the bride herself who received the dower.
The bride’s uncle had cuncluded the contract as & representative of the bride and acting upon
her wishes, because the Maliki Jaw required him to do so. The plaintiff was awarded £750
as damages.

3. Sectlon 2(24).

2, Abdul Kadir v. Satima, (1886) LL.R. 8 All. 149, 157.

3, Ottoman Law of Family Rights (1917), section 69.

4, Iraqi Lew of Personal Status (1959), section 19(1).

5. LIND. Aiderson, Changes in the Law of Personal Status in Iraq (1963) 12 I.C.L.Q. 1026.

6. Saloy ९. Odhams Press, London Times (27th June, 1963); Coulson, Conflicts and Tensions in Islamic Jurispru-
dence. (University of Chicago Press) (1965), page 27; Current Law Year Book (1953), item 2006 (Stevenson J),

273

Exemption
dower.

Dower in
countries.

Essential
of dower.

for

other

nature


Minimum dower.

No inaximum,

Words “as set
forth”.

Meraaing of the
words “occasion
of the martiage’

274

The points discussed above would seem to show that dower is (i) a right of the wife,
and (ii) it is obligatory by law to provide for it in the case of a Muslim marriage,

47.5. It is, presumably, for this reason that under the Hanafi law, the wife is entided
to claim as her dower a minimum amount, notwithtsanding any express agreement not to claim
dower? or an agrecment to accept a smaller sum. This is fairly clear from the original texts
cited by Karamat Husain J. in Asma Bibi's (६88४,

47.6. Dower is often fixed at a high amount in order to prevent the husband from divor-
cing the wife’. Payment of a portion of the dower could be postponed by agreement until ter-
mination of the marriage, and if the amount stipulated were high enough, it would obviously
provide an effective brake upon the capricious exercise of the right of repudiasion by the
busband*.

47.7, ‘The matter has been considered at Jength in a very learned judgment of the Punjab
Chief Court". It may be noted, that apart from cases where specific statutory provisions of
local application restrict the amount of dower’, there is no legal fimit of maximum regarding
the amount of dower under Muslim Law. This has been specifically held by the Privy Council’,
In an unreported case of the Bombay High Court", a decree for dower amounting to Rs. 18
lakhs was upheld. .

47.8, This being the principle underlying thc exemption regarding deeds of dower, no
modification of substance is suggested.in the exemption. We have, however, & point of phraseo-
1089 to consider, which will be discussed later.

47.9. Reverting to the main article, the words “as set forth in such settlement” are to
be construed with ‘value’, and not with the word ‘properly’, Turner C.J. had these observa-
tions 10 make —'If the terms as set forth in such settlement’ refer to the property settled, the
duty is chargeable uot cn the value of the property which may be mentioned in the settlement,
but on the value of the interest or interests created by the instrument which may not be
co-equal to the value of the property. But if this was intended, the intention might have
been less clumsily expressed’.

“We are, however, of opinion that the terms apply not to the interests created by the
instrument, but to the value set forth in the settlement, and the law suggests that the settlor
skould insert the value. It is obvious that it must often be difficult and sometimes impossible,
to value the interests created by a settlement, and the legislature has, we imagine, on this
ground amended by law by the introduction of the words we are considering”

It is to be pointed out that the Madras view has been followed in Allahabad!*, and also
ana Ja‘er case of the Madras High Court!*. .
47.10. In the exemption, the words “executed on the cccasion of a marriage” have bean

constructed by the Bombay High Court to mean “‘at the time of a marriage”. According to this
construction, a deed of dower executed a week before the marriage would not fall within the

exemption**,

1, 10 Dirhams (Hanafi Law)

2, The agreement is called a tafweez.

3. Asma Bibl v, Abdul Samad, (1909) LLL.R. 32 All, 167, 168.

4. Zaker! Begum v. Sokina Begum, (1892) LL.R. 10 Ind. App. 157, 165.

5. Coulson, A History of Islamic Law (1964), pages 207, 208.

6. Sahebzadi v. Saiduinissa, (1880) 15 Panjab Record 297 (No, 123).

7. Section $, Oudh Laws Act.

8. Zakeri v. Sakina, (1892) LL.R. 19 Cal. 689, 698 (P.C.).

9. dun all v. Baxca Begun, (0001 Appeal No. 1472), decided in September 1907; Tyabjin, Mohersmedan Edw
(1968) page 111. -

10. Eraphasis added

11. Reference, 8 Mad. 453 (Turner 0.3).

12, In the matter of Mohanunad Muzofar Ali, 1922 LLR. 44 All. 339.

13. Board of Revenue, Venkataroman Alyar, ALR. 1950 Mad. 738.

14, Bat Ameena v. Arab Abdul Taitb; 60 Bom. LR. 1206; A.LR, 1959 Bom. 108 (9-४. Vyas, J.).


275

To us, with due respect, this interpretation appears to be one which might require re-
consideration. In its judament, the High-Court made a distinction between a deed of dower
which is, purely and simpiy, a deed in consideration of marriage and a deed of dower “executed
on the occasion of the marriage”. The assumption seems to be that the latier phraseology is
narrower than the former. It was held that the words “on the occasion” mean “at the
time”.

47.11. We are of the opinion that this is not a reasonable construction, In our view, the
legislature did net use the words “on the occasion” with any intention of emphasising the exact
identity in point of tine; the primary object may have been to indicate that the mariage
must be between the Muslims and that there must be a connection between the marriage and
the deed. Apart from this question of construction, we may also statc that the Bombay view
woukl cause a lot of practical inconvenience since, in practice, parties do not necessarily execute
the deed of dower on the very day of marriage or at the very time of marriage. The deed
might precede the marriage or, if convenience so requires it might be executed even after the
marriage.

47.12, Should it, as & mattcr of policy, matter whether the deed is or is not simultaneous
with the murriage? We do not think so. Since the exemption in guestion incorporates a
remission granted previously by a Notification of the Government of India,! the available historical
material does not throw light on the precise scope which was intended for the exemption. But,
viewing the matter from the angle of principle, we do not sce any reason why the tact that the
deed preceded the marriage ot followed it should deprive it of exemption under the Stamp

"Law. If, as we have pointed out above,’ the principle underlying the exemption is that in the
case of a Muslim marriage, dower is a matter of obligation and not one of bounty, then the
distance in point of time should not be material, provided, of course, it is established that the
deed ‘is.one of dower and that it has a connection with the marriage. Of course, it may be
difficult to draw a line but no one would say that one week is too long an interval. To avoid
tecurrence of controversies and to put in the statute what we consider to be the proper policy,
we tecommend that the words “whether the deed was executed before or after the martiage”
should be added in the exemption at the end, and that the words “on the occasion of the
marriage” be replaced by the words “in connection with the marriage”, so as to eliminate the
construction that the marriage and the deed must be simultaneous.

47.13. Article 59 levies duty on share warrants to bearer, issued under the “Indian Com-
panies Act, 1882”, .

1 A share warrant is a negotiable instrument. A company limited by shares may, if autho-
rised by its articles, issue share warrants under its common seel in respect of fully paid shares,’
or stock.t A share warrant certifics that the bearer of it is entitled to the share. represented
by the warrant.

The legal title to the shares is transferred by mere delivery of the warrant from one person
to another with the intention of passing that title. Where a share warrant is outstanding, the
register of members bears a uote of its issue. The bearer of the warrant may surrender it
back 10 the company at any time and be registered on the register of members, and receive
a share certificate instead.*-*

47.14. We have no amendment of substance to recommend in the article. But the refer-
ence to the provision of the Companies Act should now be to “section 114 of the Companies
Act, 1956”. This is only a verbal amendment. We recommend that the article should be
amended so as to substitute those words.

47.15. Article 60 levies duty on a shipping order, for or relating to the conveyance of
goods on board of any vessel. It needs no change.

Para 47.2, supra.

Para 47.6, supra.

Frebb. Hale and Company v. Alexandria Water Co. (1905) 21 Times Law Reparts $72,
Section 114, Companies Act, 1956

Halsbury, 3rd Edn. Vol. 6, page 249.

Pliktaston v, United Raifway, (1930) 2 Chancery 108; (1930) AN 8.8. Reprint 649.

faye

Introductory.

Recommendation

Article 60.


6l—
Introductory.

pega
te an -
nation.

Article 62—
Introductory.

CHAPTER 48
ARTICLES 61—63

48.1. Proprictary rights may be transferred directly, e.g., by conveyance or gift,-or may
be enlarged indirectly, One mode of such enlargement is the surrender of a lesser interest in
favour of a larger one. The surrender of a lease falls in this category. In the Stamp Act, it
is dealt with in article 61. The distinction between a pure transfer and a surrender appears
to be that a transfer could be to a third person and creates in the transfers an absolutely new
tight, while a surrender is in favour of 3 person who already holds some interest in the property,
though that interest is not the same as that now surrendered.

Article 61 applies to express surrenders by an agreement,’ and would not apply to implied
surrenders.’ An implied surrender arises without’ any specific instrument for that purpose.

There is an exemption as regards a surrender in cases where the lease itself के xempted*
from duty.

Sometimes, a document may embody two transactions, Thus, a document by which the
lessee surrendered the lease, but in which the lessee also transferred certain moveable and busi-
ness assets which were not subject to the lease, was considered chargeable both as a surrender
of lease and as a conveyance of moveables,®

48.2, The article does not tell us whether the surrender should be total or partial. It

der. has been held in Madras® that it is immaterial that the surrender is only as regards the unexpired

part of the term, or is with regard te only a portion of the property, While the article needs
no change of substance, it appears to us that it would be useful to codify what has been held in
the Madras case, as such questions are likely to arise elsewhere also. हु

48.3. Accordingly, we recommended that the following Explanation should be inserted
below Article 61 :

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this article it is immaterial that the surrender of
the lease is only as regards the unexpired part of the term, or is with regard to
only @ portion of the property.”

48.4. Article 62 levies duty on certain transfers with or without consideration. The varions

kinds of transfers listed in the article seem to constitute a heterogeneous collection. Clauses (a),
(9) and (०) can, however, be grouped together broadly as transfers of “actionable claims”,
such as, shares, debentures and interests created by bonds, mortgage deeds and policies.
Clause (d) deals with the transfer of property under a particular provision of the Administrator
General's Act, dealing wich transfer by an executor. Clause (e) deals with the transfer of a trust
property witout ‘consideration? from one trustee to anoter trustee or from a trustee to a
beneficiary. There is one feature common to clauses (d) and (¢)—the transferor has no bene-
ficial interest.

. Section 111(e), Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

. Section 111¢f), Transfer of Property Act, 1882,

. See section 111, Transfer of Property Act.

For example, atticle 35, Exemption (a).

The Chief Controlling Revenue Authority v. Bhagya Lakshmi, A.LR. 1958 Mad. 535 (F.B.).
. Madras Hoard of Revenue, ruling, cited in Krishnamourthi, Stamp Act (1968), page 551,
The anomaly created by clause (2) is discussed, infra.

276

AOeeePo



277

It should be noted that all these transfers would, but for this specific article, have been
chargeable either as “conveyance” in view of the wide definition of that expression as given in
the Act,’ or as gifts or under some other entry appropriate to the nature of the right transferred.
The duty. under article 62 is lower than that on a conveyance or on a gift.—which shows the
sigmificance of the article. A lower duty seems to have been chosen either because what is
transferred is an actionable claim and not property in possession, ar because the beneficial
interest remains unaffected. There are certain aspects of business convenience also, relevant
to some instruments.

48.5. Taking up the clauses themselves, clause (a) deals with the transfer of shares in
an incorporated company or other body corporate. The duty is 75 9. for every 100 rupees
‘Of the value of the share. A few reported cases on this clause may be referred to. In an early
Bombay case,? the question was raised how an instrument executed in the following circum-
stances was to be stamped.

A Hindu joint family consisting of three brothers owned shares in a limited company,
which stood in the name of the eldest brother. The three brothers came to be divided in
interest. The shares remained in the name of the eldest brother, though dividends cn the shares
were divided amongst the three brothers. This fact was subsequently recorded in a deed of
partition. The eldest brother then executed two deeds under which he transferred to his brothers
the number of shares that fell to their shares. It was held that the deeds in question were
chargeable as instruments of partition under article 45, and did not fall either under Article
62(a} or under article 62{¢).

Mulla, who was one of the three Judges who decided the case, later seems to have revised
bia opinion.” He has expressed the opinion that in such a case, after an oral partition, whereby
Property continues in the name of the one brother and is subsequently transferred to the others
catitled to. it under the partition, the instrument wouki fall under article 62(e)—(transfer of
trust property). The reasoning scems to be that the partition has already been effected, and
the persons in whose names the shares continue to remain are not the beneficial owners.

In the same Bombay case,* it was remarked that the possession of the one co-owner of
joint property in his own name is no, that of a trustee for the other co-owerns. But, as pointed
wut by one author." the title of the co-owner who is registered holder, can be regarded as that
Of a trustee in regard to the shares of the other co-owners, and the instrument of transfer would,
on that view, be chargeable under clause (ce)

48.52. In another vase* decided under article 62(a), it was held that if a company registers
an instrument of transfer of shares which is not properly stamped, it would be doing something
‘which is not lawful. But there was no provision in the Companies Act, 1913 (which was then
in force), or in the Stamp Act, which would make the company liable for payment of the
proper stamp duty. If the document is brought before the revenue authority, the revenue autho-
tities will impound it, but the only right given to them to proceed for the recovery of the duty
18 egeinst the person who was liable to pay the duty, 1.6., the executant.”

48.6. The case-law so far discussed calls for no amendment of the clause, but we may

note that the singular word “share” in clause (a) (in the column relating to the amount) may “

1. Section 2 (10).

2, The Superintenctent of Stamps, Bombay v. Chimanlal, (1923) LL.R. 47 Bom. 321: ATR. 1923 Bom. 237 (Shah
Ag. 0... Crump & Mulla 32}.

4. See Mulla & Pratt, The Indian Stamp Act (6th Ed,. page 359), 1st Bd. was published in 1924.

4. Superintendent of Stamps ¥. Chimantal, (1923) L.L.R. 47 Bom. 321, 326; A.E.R. 1923 Bom. 237, 239 (Shak Ag.
CE, Crump and Mulla 17.)

5. Krishnamurthy, Indian Stamp Act, 1972, page 569.

6. Ie Re Jogdish Mills Lid, ALR. 1955 Bom. 79.

7. See also Mrs. Parry v. Union of India, A.J.R. 1961 Punj. 123.
24 M of Law!77—36.

Clause (a}—
Transfer of shares.

‘Use of singular
"share”.


Singular “Share”
in clause (४).

Verbal change in.
clause (a) recom:
mended to substi~
tote the plural
“shares”,

Clause (b)—-
transfer of deben
tures-—No
change,

Clause (०)--
transfer of inte-
test secured by 8
bond cte.—No
hange.

278

give rise to some problems. Here, we may refer to an Allahabad case! which, though falling
winder clause (c) of the article, discusses clause (a) also. In that case, a person was the
obligee of each of 29 bonds and mortgage deeds executed by different persons in his favour.
He transferred his interest in all these bonds and mortgage deeds to another person, by executing
ene document comprising them all. The consideration for the transfer was one lump sum. On
the question of the proper stamp duty payable, it was held by the majority, that section 5 of
the Act, dealing with instruments comprising or relating to several distinct matters, did not
apply to the case, and that under article 62{c) read with section 13 of the General Clauses Act,
the stamp duty chargeable on the deed in question was rupees five [under article 62(c) (ii)}.

Niamatullah. J. (dissenting) held that while section 5 of the Stamp Act did not apply,
under atticle 62(c) itself and without recourse to section 13, General Clauses Act, the proper
stamp duty payable was the sum of all the duties paid on the bonds and mortgage deeds,
Subject to the maximum of Rs. 5 for any one bond or mortgage deed.

Bennet J. (dissenting) was of the view that section 5 and article 62(c) each applied to
the case, though with the same result, namely, that the proper duty on the instrument in question
was the aggregate of the amounts of duty payable on each of the 29 transfers contained in the
instrument. Both the dissenting Judges (Niamatullah and Bennet JJ.) expressed the opinion
that the role that the singular inctudes the ptural (contained in section 13 of the General
Clauses Act) did not apply to the case.

48.7, We are not, at the moment, concerned with the decision on clause (c). But the
majority of the Judges in the Allahabad case discussed clause (a), which is of interest. They
referred to the language of article 62(a), by way of example, They said : “This lays down
that the proper stamp duty on & transfer of shares (plural) shafl be one half of the duty payable
on 8 conveyance (No. 23) for a consideration equal to the value of the share (singular), Mow,
in this case, it is beyond controversy that the word ‘share’ in the second column, must be
construed as including the plural, because that plural ‘shares’ is used in the first column.™®

The majority bas treated the use of the singular ‘shares’ in item 62{a) in the second column
e@ a grammatical error.

48.7A. The majority view as to clause (a), with respect, appears to be correct. We
recommended that that view should be adopted and in article 62(a)}, for the singular “shere”,
the plural “shares” should be substituted, so as to bring out the correct position.

48.8. Clause (08) of article 62 deals with the transfer of debentures, being marketable
securities,’ whether the debenture is liable to duty or not,’ except debentures provided fot by
section 8. Section है deals with debentures issued by local authorities raising a loan. Debentures
payable to bearer would be transferable by delivery, and not by assignment. This clause needs
no change. °

48.9. Clause (०) levies duty on the transfer of any interest secured by a bond, mortgage
deed or policy of insurance. This clause also takes out of “conveyance” a case which could
possibly fall under it. Thus, the sale of a bond, by endorsement on the back of it was held,
in an Ondh case*, to fall under this article, and not under article 23 (conveyance). The duty
under article 62(८) for the bond in question was Re. 1-8-0 and if it had been regarded as falling
under article 23, the duty would have been Re. 1/-. The endorsement on the back of the
bond read, “sold 10............ , and the lower court held that this amounted io a mle deed.
The Chief Court did not give any reasons for holding that the document in question. was

1. Ram Sarup v. Fvott Tett. (1933) LL.R. 55 All. 468, 473; ALR. 1933 All. 321.
2. Emphasis supplied.

3, See section 216A},

4. As to the duty on debentures, see article 27,

5. Jang Batadur v. Bhaggoo, A.1.R. 1934 Oudh 344,


279

chargeable under article 62 and not under article 23. But, since article 23 is a residuary article,
and the document in question can be regarded as a “transfer”, the Chief Court was, with respect,
fight in its conclusion.

48.10. There are a few cases on the transfer of a mortgage,’ and one case? of transfer of ther cases.
the interest secured by an equitable mortgage which were held to be chargeable under
article 62(¢).

it may be noted that if 3 policy of insurance is transferred by a separate instrument, it
must be stamped under article 62(c); if the transfer is by endorsement, it is exempt under
Exemption (c) to the article. Jt would, thus, appear, that the transfer of a policy of insurance
by endorsement would be cheaper method, involving no stamp duty.

The case Jaw and points referred to above do not call for any change in clause (c).

48.11. Clause (d) levies duty on a transfer under the Administrator Gencral’s Act, 1874, Clause = (d—
section 31. This Act was replaced by the Administrator General's Act, 1913. The corres. fansfet under the
ponding section in that Act was section 25. In 1963, a revised Act was passed, and ‘the General's Act—
corresponding section in that Act is section 22. This section refers to the transfer, by a pri- Yerbal change re-
vate executor or administrator, of interest under a probate or letters of administration to the

Administrator-General, by an instrument in writing.’ This section is quoted below :

“22. (1) Any private executor or administrator may, with the previous consent of
the Administrator-General of the State in which any of the assets of the estate,
in respect of which such executor or adminisirator has obtained probate or
letters of administration, are situate, by an instrument in writmg under bis hand
notified in the Official Gazette, transfer the assets of the esiate, vested in him
by virtue of such probate or letters to the Administrator-General by that name
or any other sufficient description,

(2) As from the date cf such transfer, the transferor shall be excmpt from all liability
as such execuior or administrator, as the case may be, except in respect of
acts done before the date of such transfer, and the Administrator-General shall
have the rights which he would have had, and be subject to the liabilities to
which he would have been subject, if the probate or letters of administration,
as the case may be, had been granted to him by that name at the date of such
transfer.”

48.12. We recommend that article 62, clause (d), should be revised so as to substitute
a reference te the Administrator-General’s Act, 1963, section 22, in place of the reference to
the earlier section.

48.13. Clause (e) levies duty on the transfer of any trust property without consideration Clause (0)--
from one trustee to another trustee or from a trustee to 2 beneficiary. In this clause, the Transfer of trost
words “without consideration” are inconsistent with the words “with oc without consideration” Property -Amead-
ocemring at the beginning of the article. If these words are regarded as limiting the opening words, ded.
then a transfer of property for consideration would be outside this clause, and would be charge-
able as 8 conveyance under article 23 or as a transfer under article G2, clauses (a) to (d).

This was the old law.' But, under the present article, there is now some uncertainly, in view
of the wide opening words of the article

48.14. We recommend that this matter should be clarified, by removing the words “with- Recommendal tion
out consideration” from clause (e). A transfer for consideration by a trustee to a beneficiary as to clause (न).

1. (४) Me Dowell & Co. ¥. Ragave Cherty, (1904) LL.R. 27 Mad. 71.
(0) Hitwardhak Cotton Mills v. Sorabji, (1909) LL.R. 33 Bom. 426.
2. dat re Kamla Ranjar Ray, L.L.R. (1937) Cal, 486.
3, Section 22, Administrator-General’s Act, 1963 (46 of 1953).
4 Stamp reference, (1884) LL.B. 7 Mad. 350, 351 (Article 60, Stamp Act, 1879).


Exemption
analysed.

Doubt as Ww
chargaability.

Recommendation
to addecertain
documents ia the
main article.

Article 63—-
Transfer of lease.

280

or to another trustee would then clearly fall within article (¢). Since the beneficial interest
is not transferted, this is justifiable also.

48.15, This disposes of the clauses of the priacipal article. Under the Exemption to the
article, transfers by endorsement of certain documents are exempt. The documents listed arc
certain commercial documents—as in Exemptions (a) and (b), or policies of insurance—
exemption (0), or securities of the Central Government—exemption (0).

48.16. It should be pointed out as regards some of the transfers provided for m the
Exemption, that their chargeabiliity under the main article—as it now stands-- is not very clear.
‘Of the various transfers deal with in the Exemption, the transfer of only one type of docu-
ment (policy of insurance)—mentioned in Exemption (c),—is specifically taxable under . the
main article. ‘Transfers of other instruments mentioned in the exemption~ -(a) transfer of bill
of exchange etc., (b) and transfer of securities of the Central Government,—are not Specifically
taxable under the main article, though they can become taxable under general provisions of the
main article, clauses (d) and (c). For all practical purposes, clauses (d) and (८) would
hardly be invoked in relation to transfers of pro-notes etc. The better course, therefore, would
be ta make transfers of these instruments taxable, by adding them in main! article 62, and
to retain the present exemption for their sransfer by an endorsement. .

48.17. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that the following clauses”
Should be added in article 62 :—

“(E) of a bill of exviiange, cheque or promissory note;

(g) of व bill of lading, delivery order, warrant for goods, or other mercantile docu-
ment of title to goods;

(h) of Securities of the Central Government.”

The duty should—on the analogy of clause 62(a)—be 75 paises for every hundred rupees
er part thereof of the value of. the property transferted.*

48,18, Article 63 levies duty on a transfer of a lease by way of assignment. Article 35
governs under-leases or sub-leases, Where the lease is itself exempt from duty, the transfer
thereof is also exempt from duty, as also transfers of leases on which duty has been remitted by
the Government under section 9. This article does not present any difficulties requiring any
change. :

1, To be carried out under article 62, main paragraph.
2. For other suggested amendments, see supra, under article 62, clauses (a), (0) and (e).
3. Compare article 62(a)—~Transfer of shares.


CHAPTER 49
ARTICLES 64-65

49.1, Article 64 levies duty on a declaration of trust. The duty is a fixed one, which is Article 64
much kess than the duty on a conveyance or on a bond. There is considerable overlapping Introductory.
‘between the entries taxing settlements and trusts. This nautrally raises a few questions of
importance. What is the precise scope of “declaration of trust” and “settlement”? Js a
“settlement” to be taken as confined to a direct transfer? These and other connected questions
arise.

There is also considerable obscurity as to what is to be regarded as a “declaration of
trust”. Does it cover dispositive documents? If so, can a person adopt the device of trust
and thereby avoid the duty that would otherwise be lawfully leviable as on “conveyance” or on
“aettlemént”?

The definition of “conveyance” excludes instruments otherwise expressly provided for.
But this would, if taken literally, mean that every declaration of trust is chargeable with tixed
duty even if it amounts to a conveyance.

49.2, “Settlement” is defined in section 2(24) in these terms :— Definition of
settlement.

“‘Setdlement’ means any non-testamentary disposition, in writing, of movable or im-
movable property made—

- (a) in consideration of marriage.

(७) for the purpose of distributing property of the settlor among his family or those
for whom he desires to provide, or for the purpose of providing for some person
dependent cn him, or

(c) for any religious oc charitable purpose; and imcludes an agreement in writing to
make such a disposition and, where any such disposition has not been made in
writing, any instrument recording, whether by way vf declaration of trust or
otherwise, the terms of any such disposition.”

There are four ingtedients of this definition which are material for our purpose—{) there
“must be a disposition, (ii) it must be non-testamentary, (ii) it must be of property, and {iv)
it stmst be made on the specified occasion or for the specified purpose. But ‘no ‘particular
machinery is required for effecting the disposition.

+2 Phe definition, for exaraple, seems to be- wide enough te- cover a- disposition -by way of
‘teost... The last paragraph is, in 8९९, specific on the point.

49,3. It may be noted that the definition of settlement in the Act is not identical with the Meaning
concept of settlement in conveyancing. A writer* on conveyancing has said—

“A settlement is an instrument whereby property or the enjoyment of it is limited to .
several persons. Unlike the assurance deak in the earlier chapters which have
for their cbject alienation of property either -absolutely or temporarily, a settle-
ment, as also a trust, seeks to prevent alienation of property to.the extent the
law will allow. Family settlement are very common in India and are freely
made by deeds inter vivos as well as by wills. Marriage settlements and post-

1. B. Chatlerji, Handbook of Conveyancing (1960),

281


Settlements and

other documents.

Settlement and
ais.

Antificial mesring
“piven to “sottte-
mepts”"—Settie:

‘ments and trusts.

282

nuptial settlements, which latter variety is mostly voluntary, both so common in

England, are known to Indian Law. Every settlement is effected by means of

trusts, and there is practically no difference in form and in substance between @
...ttust and a settlement that we have."*

We have quoted the above passage in order to show the similarity between a settlement
aod a trust

49.4. Coming to the definition of settlement in the Stamp Act, we may note that clause
(3) will include deeds of dower as well as marriage settlements. An English case? illustrates
this aspect. Where an instrument, after reciting a previous settlement and a revocation, went
on to declare certain specific trusts upon which the property was to be held after the death
of the intended husband, there being a power of appointment given to the husband and wife,
or the survivor of them, in favour of children or remoter issue of the marriage, and in default
of appointment trusts in favour of children declared, it was held to be a “marriage settlement",
being clearly an instrument by which property was settled or agreed to be settled.

Clause (b) of the definition suggests the creation of separate interests in favour of persons
who may have a legal or moral claim on the settlor, or for whom he may desire to make 3
provision. -It need not embrace the whole property of the settlor* .

वा a Madras case* before the Board of Revenue A assigned to daughter B a certain land, 8
house and some trees, to be enjoyed by her during her life-time. The question was whether this
document was a settlement, a deed of gift or an assignment. The Board of Revenue, Madras,
held, that it was a settlement It would appear from these and other decisions that the object
is the paramount consideration. In this case, the object was to provide for a dependant of the
executant of the deed.

A Bombay case® relates to clause (c). A deed of settlement disposed of two distinct funds,
one composed of the subscriptions raised by one of the settlors for a charitable object, and
ihe other of a fund bequeathed to the other settlors with an absolute discretion’ for disposal in
a like manner. It was held that the instrument in question was chargeable as a ‘settlement’
(Article 58) in respect of the first disposition, and as a power of appointment {Article 7) in
respect of the second. The High Court described the first disposition “as an instrument recor-
ding, by way of declaration of trust, the terms of the disposition.”

49.5. It may be noted that a document may be both a settlement and a gift. Gifts’ are
chargeable with a higher duty than settlement.’ The article relating to gift, however, ex-
pressly excludes a settlement from its scope. It would appear that the primary consideration
in deciding whether a document is a settlement, is the occasion mentioned in clause (a), or the
object of the person giving as mentioned im clause (b) or clause (c) of the definition of
‘settlement’ :

While this tést is, in’ general, enough to- distinguish - between ‘a. gift anda ‘settkement, the
position is not so simple when one comes to defining the relative scope of settlement. and trust.

49.6. The definition of ‘settlement’ departs from the crdinary meaning of ॥ ‘settloesent’®,
and gives it a wider scope. For the present, we shall assume that there is justification” for
giving it such a wide. scope. on.considerations ‘of revenue.

1. Emphasis supplied.

2, Russell v. Commissioners, (1902) LN.B, 142.

3. Reference, 1L.R, 7 Mad. 349.

4 Madiae Revenue Board’s Proceedings No. 16, 6th January, 1880 (Madras Stamp Manual, p. 163). (Object is im-
por

5. Inve Abdulla Haji, (1911) LL.R. 35 Bom. 444, 447 (Scott C.J. Russell and Rao 17.).

6. Article 33 (Gifts).

7. Atticle 53 (Settlement).

8. Article 33 (Gifts).

9. See Madras Board Case, supra.


283

But, in practice, nice questions arise whether a document is a trust or a settlement. This
difficutty is primarily due to the fact thatthe definition of settlement is so wide that one and
the same instrument can be a gift, a trust and a settlement. No doubt, where a dccument falls
under two or more articles, it should bear the higher duty! That general provision in the
Act will take care of the duty, and the object of levying the duty is achieved. But occasions
for the application of this general rule should, in the interest of the common man, be as few as
possible,—even if they cannot be totally eliminated. If something can be done to reduce the
occasions for such controversies, by an amendment of the law, the amendment would be worth
the trouble.

_ 49.7. It would appear that the case law shows some uncertainty and obscurity.2. For ex-
ample, the Calcutta High Court held in one case’ that a document styled “settlement deed”, by
which all the executant’s properties were given to certain deities, could not be regarded as a
settlement or deed of trust, but only as a deed of gift. Mitter J. observed as follows :—

“The word ‘settlement’, as it is generally understood, refers to a disposition of succes-
sive interests in immovable property,? and is generally couched in the form of
@ trust; and it is such a settlement which is in the nature of disposition of mova-
ble and immovable property either in consideration of marriage or for one or
more of the objects specified, namely, religion, charity, or provision for family,
dependants or others, that is contemplated by clause (24) of section 2.......... +4
Underlying the idea of settlement, there is the notion or conception of trust. It is
difficult to say that when a gift is made to a deity, the deity is to be regarded as
a trustee. This is also the view taken by a full Bench of the Nagpur High
Court-*

But this view was dissented from in a Jater Calcutta case,® where it was held that 6
similar document by which the executant’ property was given to certain deities
is a settlement deed for the purposes of the Stamp Act, notwithstanding that there
was no trust and no disposition of successive interests in the property. Tt was
there remarked that the express meaning given to the word ‘settlement’ in the Act
caunct be controlled by reference to the meaning given to the. word by . the
Specific Relief Act (which had been relied on in the earlier Calcutta case) where
a Statute gives a definition for an instrument, that definition cannot be contrclled
by the meaning commonly attributed to the instrument.”

49,8. On the specific question as to the meaning of “settlement”, what is more important
10 note fs that some misconception appears to prevail on the question of inter-relationship of the
two taxing entries. The following extract from an Allahabad case" will show how the High
Court had to take pains to explain the true position.

“We may ai the cutset mention that it appears to us that in. framing the questions
for our opinion the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority appears fo have proceed-
ed on the incorrect basis that the instrument under the Stamp Act can be either
@ deed of trust or a deed of settlement only and not both® The word ‘Settle-
ment” is defined in section 2(24) of the Act as follows : . .

(The definition is quoted).
“This definition of the word “settlement” itself makes it clear that even instruments
which are executed containing a declaration of trust can be settlements, provided

“1, Goction 6.
2, See Allahabad case, infra.
3. Bhupat! Nati: Chakravarthy v. Basanta Kumara Devi, ALR. 1936 Cal. 556 (D.B.).

4. Definition of “settlement” in section 3 of the Specific Retief Act, 1877 was refered to.
5. Chief Controlting Revenue Authority v. Sarju Bai, 1.L.R. 1944 Nag. 81; ALR. 1944 Nag. 33 (F-B.).
6. Upendra Nath Poder ५, Anat Chandra Lodh, 1.L.R. (1951) 1 Cal. 665, 669, 670 Bachawat 3).

के, ALR. 1964 All. $33:

8, Fenphasis supplied.

Mis-conception.


Dispositive and
non-dispositive
trusts. -

Conveyance and
‘trust,

Scheme proposed.

284

the conditions laid down earlier in that definition are satisfied? The question ia
these circumstances that falls for our opinion is whether this particular instrument,
to which this Reference relates, is a “settlement” or not, even though it may, en the -
face of it, be a deed of Trust. Under section 6 of the S amp Act, if a deed of Trust
also amounts to a settlement, the stamp duty will be chargeable on it as an instrument
of settlement under Article 58 of the Sch. 1.8. of the Act, and not as an instrument
of Trust under Article 64 of Sch, 1.8. of the Act.”

49.9. Even disregarding the case law, an important query that suggests itself in this context
is, how does one distinguish s settlement? from a trust (fot the purpose of the stamp Act) ?
The definition of “settlement” in the Act stresses the element of disposition of property. The Act
contains no deBnition of “trust”, but article $4 speaks of a “declaration of trust” without requiring
a dispositive clause. It is, then, the intention that an instrument showld fall under “declaration of -
trust”, only where it contains no dispositive clause ? A trust can arise without a disposition in -
praesenti where the trust is by will or whether the author of the trust is the trustee ; in such
cases, atransfer in praesenti of the property is not required. In other cases, a disposition is
necessary to create a valid trust!. This may be a possible distinction between a bare declaration of
trust and a settlement. If so, it is desirable that the relevant article should express the position
more clearly. It may be noted that Indian Law does not recognise distinction between legal and
equitable ownership.

49.10. It should be noted that the provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, do not deal
with the distinction between a settiment and a trust. In fact, the Act is primarily concerned with
how a trust can be created and what are the legal consequences of its creation. It does not deal
with the various descriptions of instruments that can or cannot fall under the head of trust. In
any case, that Act contains nothing inconsistent with the approach adopted in. the present dis-
cussion. namely, that an instrument of trust can also amount to a settlement as defined in the
Act, if the principal object or occasion is one specified in the definition of settlement.

Ordinarily, a teust is created by transferring the property to the trustee, but this is not neces-
sary if the trustee is none other than the author. In that case, it is enough if the author of the
trust declares himself to be the trustee.

Where, however, the owner transfers the property to the trustee, there is a “disposition” of
his interest and this disposition could amount to a settlement, if the purpose or occasion is one
specified in section 2(24). Should it make a difference that the machinery employed is that of
trust rather than of a direct transfer? We have, while analysing the definition of setthement im this
Chapter’, pointed out that the definition does net require the employment of a particuler machinery
for effecting the disposition. toe

49.11. The same query arises in relation to a conveyance and a trust. A dispositive instru-
ment, not for a purpose or on an occasion specified in section 2(24), would amount to a conveyance.
Should it make a difference that the instrument employs the machinery of trust, and not a direct
transfer ?

49.12, It is 10 resolve all these queries that we propose a scheme, of which the salient features
are—

(1) A trust amounting to setilement should be made so chargeable, by an express amend-
ment of article 64 (An Explanation could be added). At present, there is a misconcep-
tion on the subject.*

1, Emphasis supplied.

2, Article 58.

3, Atticle 64,

4. Seetion 6, Trusts Act.

5. Para 49.2, supra.

6. Board of Revenue v, Sreedhar, AR. 1964 41, 537,


285
(2) A trust amounting to conveyance should be made so chargeable, by an express amend-

ment of article 64. (Another Explanation could be added). Reasons for this amend-
ment may be listed as under :—

(a) Ambiguity of the expression “declaration of trust”.
(b) Words “not otherwise provided for” occurring in the definition of “conveyance”.
(७ The anomaly that arises if a contrary view is taken.

A trust for a single person not in need (.¢., who is not to be “provided for”), and who is
not dependant, would (on the contrary view), be chargeable only with a fixed duty (article 64),
while @ trust for a minor sou would be chargeable with duty 28 on ६ bond as it would amount to a
settlement. (Article 58). Really, the first-mentioned trust should be chargeable as a conveyance.

(3) Trusts not falling under (1) and (2) above, fall under article 64.

Our recommendation is that the scope of article 64 should be defined as above, and the
ing of “Declaration of Trust” indicated more clearly, in view of the ambiguity of the
expression “declaration of trust” and the overlapping with settlement and conveyance.

“49,73. The scheme recommended is based on the following propositions :— Propositions.
G) The article relating to ‘trust? is confined to non-dispositive trusts (non-testamentary);

(ic. where the author is himself to be the trustee and there is no dispesitive clause).

The duty is as on a bond, subject to a maximum of fifteen rupees.

(0) That article (Trust) seems to apply aiso in relation to public trusts, where the author
is the trustee and there is no dispositive clause. This can be deduced from the fact
that the definition of “settlement” does not apply where there is no “disposition”.

(id Private dispositive trusts bear duty as on a conveyance*, unless they are settlements.

Private dispositive trusts which are for religious purposes, or are in consideration of marriage
or for the members of the family, etc., ie., those falling under section 2(24)—bear duty as on a
bond.' Formally, these are charged as settlements, but the duty on a settlement is the same
as that on a bond.

iv) Public dispositive trusts also bear duty as on a bond‘ if the trust is for religious or
charitable purposes, because they fall within section 2(24), (Definition of “settlement”).

This is the scheme recommended by us, as put in the form of propositions, For ease of under-
standing the propositions as set out disregard minor points of detail and also employ rough descrip-
tions of instraments.

1, Article 64.
2, See article 23, regarding conveyance.
3. See ection 224), (a) & (0) and article 58 (Settlements in consideration of marriage or for the benefit of dependants,

4. See section 2(24)(0) and article 58 (Settlements for religious or charitable purposes).
24 M of Law/77—17.


286

49.14. To put the matter in the form of a chart showing how trusts will be taxed.
‘Trusts

| 4]

Disposicive

a |

268) Public—(Duty as on a 2(b) Privete—(Doty as

100 Public—(Duty as ona 3¢b) Private—Duty as on a ० ८
bond) (Article $8) conveyance ( 23}— bond, subject to a maximum on a bond, sobject to
but if it is on marriage of Rs. 15/- (Article 64) a maximum of Rs, 15/-
orfor dependants, then —"Trust”. (Article 64)—""Trust”,
duty as on a bond
(article $8).

We may state that such a restructuring has been favoured by mest replies tO out
Questionaire."
49.15. We recommend that article 64 should be amended to implement the above scheme,
Recommendation.

Axtiole 65— 49.15. Article 65 relates to warrant for goods. A Warrant for goods is given by the bailec
‘Warrant for gods of goods, and acknowledge the title of the transferee to the goods as between the transferee and the
bailee, who is the warehouseman.*
There is no difficulty caused by this Article, and it requires no change.
nt
1. The categories a and 2(b) bear the same duty but are shown as separate categories for maintenance of symmetry
with 1(a) and 1(b).
2, Question relating to section 1(24),—‘Settlement”.
3. See Steoud’s Judicial Dictionary, 3rd Ed. Vol. 4, 9. 3258.


CHAPTER 50
CONCLUSION

50.1. We have concluded our consideration of the Act, and would now like to say a few Introductory.
words about the recommendations made in this Report.

50.2. It would be apparent from the contents of the preceding chapters that we have not Object of cecona-

confined outselves to tidying up a few technical anomalies in the Act. Our recommendations are
aimed at improving the substance, form and working of the Act, within the limitation that we set
. Out in the first Chapter.1

Broadly speaking, the changes which we have recommended seek to achieve the following
objects :—
हि (8) improvement in the tax stcucture—though to a very limited extent? (e.g. our recom-
mendation a8 to powers of attorney).

(0) improvement in the practical working of the Act, by amending provisions that cause
difficulty. delay or inconvenience (e.g. our recommendation as to the mode of cancella-
tion of stamps.).

(०) improvement in the drafting of the provisions—in particular, removing uncertainty
caused by conflicting views.

(0) securing consistency with juristic principles (e.g. our recommendation as to the inclu-
sive portion of the charging article on lease and our recommendation as to Hiability to
bear the duty.

(०) giving proper recognition to sociological considerations relevant to the subject (¢.g. our
recommendations as to assignment of copyright and insurance policies for accl-
dent).

(0 providing for uniform interpretation of the Act within 8 State by strengthening the
procedure for reference (sections 56-57).

(® avoidance of injustice, ‘hardship or inconvenience to the citizens, in court as well as
elsewhere (e.g. our recommendation as to the definition of promissory note, and as
to section 35), where the requisite amendment could be made without a éerious
effect ot the revenue.

50.3. As to the question of hardship and convenience we woukl like to point out that
magy of the instruments with which the Act is comcerned are of an international character.
Billa of lading, Bis of Exchange, promissory notes and other documents relating to maritime
law of the law merchant are examples. Modem conditions of trade render it desirable that
fa regard to such instruments, the law should be simple and easily ascertainable.

For the purpose of academic treatment and other purposes, of course, the corpus of
the law is divided into compartments. But the businessman does not, when he enters into a
patticular transaction, view the matter as such.

‘The international character of maritime law is of peculiar interest. It has been said
that Bnglish maritime law is one part of English law upot which Roman law has had a direct

1. Chapter 1. TT
2 See Chapter 1.
3, Frledmann, Legal Theory (1967), page 526.

24M of Lawi77—38.


trade and India.

‘Vartous aspects.

288

impact. Lord Mansfield took many of the principles of maritime law from the Roman Law.
Again, negotiable instruments are essentially international institutions—which also renders
it desirable that, as far as possible, the law relating thereto should be simple rather than com-
plex.

The international character of some instruments bas a long history. Bottomry bonds seem
to have been in vogue in Rome at least as early as 530 A.D, because in that year an edict of
Justinian restricted the interest on money advanced on such bonds to 12 per cent.

In the Narratives of Demosthenes, it is stated that about the year 400 B.C. Grecian mer-
chants practised the negotiation of large loans tc finance commercial maritime ventures—a
statement for which support is to be found in the writings of Plutarch?

In India, there are cases of advances similar to bottomary being made for financing trade
बेड early as 600 B.C."

Yt is, therefore, appropriate that in the preamble to the first English enactment relating
marine insurance, it was stated that “it has been time out of mind a usuage among merchants,
both of this nation and of foreign nations, when they make any great adventures (specially
into remote parts) to give some consideration of money to other persons (which commonfy
are in no smalt numbers) to bave from them assurance made of their goods merchandise
ships and things sdventured.......... ”

504 India is no stranger to intemational trade. Pre-historic remains discovered at
several places in India in archacological excavations show that trade on rivers and oceans was
carried on by boats. The Rig Veda refers to the ship wreck of Bhujyu and the subsequent rescue
by the Ashwins ; these incidents give a definite indication of maritime trade. Later, in the
pre-Maurayan and Maurayan periods, such commercial activities seem to have become quite
common.® In fact, when the Roman Empire was as its height, Indo-Roman trade also seep
to have attained its climax. This is evident from the historical accounts available in regard to
Gupta period, when India’s internal and foreign trade reached great heights,

In the first century after Christ, India had a favourable balance of trade with Rome.*

The Manu Smriti has an interesting verse. which makes boatmen collectively responsible
for foss caused by their negligence.7-*

With such a volume and richness of international trade, it is axiomatic that contracts
must have been entered into and recorded in writing, even though the writings themsclves may
not be traceable at the present day. हु

50.48. We have said enough to indicate that even taxing statute like the Act with which
we are concerned involves the consideration of a number of theoretical and practical aspect
The rate structure could bear improvement, the practical working should be remedied Where
difficulty is caused by the defect in the content of the statute ; avoidable uncertainty ought to be
attended to ; fundamental juristic principles should not be overlooked ; sociological considera-
tions may not be totally irrelevant ; interpretation of the law ought to be uniform ; the kind

1, Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 2.
2. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1957), page 3.
4. Dover, Handbook to Marine Insurance (1557), page 3.
4, An Act touching the policies of assurances used amongst merchants (1601), (43 Elizabeth Chapter 12).
5, Soe in general R.K. Mookerjee “Indian Shipping” Bombay [2nd Ed. (1957) page 37-54)
6. See—
(2) R.K. Mookegji, Indian Shipping (Bombay) (2nd Ed, 1957), pages 37-54, 57, 62, 70.
(७) MLC. Bandophadhya, Economie Life and Progress 10 Ancient India (Calcutta 1945), Vol. L
© KAN Shastri, A History of Sonth Indla from pre-historic Times to the fall of Vijayanagar (Madras,

7, Mamu 8 : 408-409, . :
8. RK. Mookerii, Indian Shipping (Bombay), (1997), page 86, citing Pliny, Natural History, Vol. 2.18


289

of audience to which the law is addressed, and the class of citizens who will primarily be called
upon to comply with it, as well as the nature of the transactions which will normally fall
within its purview, are matters legitimatcly to be taken into account; above all, a well drafted
law, easy of application and not 100 difficult to understand, would ultimately result in benefit
to the State as weil as to the citizens.

50.5. Unfortunately, some of the aspects which we have outlined above are not properly
appreciated. Taxation law is often regarded as a technical branch of the law, not worthy of
academic study of capable of being subjected to juristic discussion. The Stamp Act, if we
imay say so, is the Cinderlla of the law. One hardly finds, except in judicial decisions relating
to particular controversies or in official documents dealing with particular problems, studies
discussing or exploring the basic principles underlying the taxing provisions of this particular
Act, It is appropriate to make this observation in order to explain why, at some places, we
have found it necessary to consider the fundamentals of @ particular provision and have not
dimited our discussion to the contours of the relevant problem as they appear on the surface.

50.6. It is this broad perspective from which we have approached the subject. We would
like to record our hope thai the Government will view our recommendations in the spirit in which

wo have made them.

At the cost of repetition, we would say that we have approached the task of revising the
Act not in a narrow pedantic manner, but from a broader perspective embracing a variety of
considerations, Unlike many other taxing measures, the Stamp Act is a self-executing Act,
in the sense that it is leit to the party chargeable with tax to calculate the duty and then to
put the proper stamp according to that calculation, The fact thet thete is no machinery [0
oversee the operation of the Act, or to watch how far the citizens have complied with the Act
may, to a certain extent, justify stringent provisions. But it must, at the same time, be remem-
bered that the very fact that the duty is to be calculated by the ‘assessee’ throws a very heavy
aod onerous burden on the Legislature, inasmuch as this part of the task of the citizen is often
Sifficult. If the legislative scheme is not indicated in clear and precise term in the Act, it becomes
still more difficult. It is only occasionally that the citizen faces the authorities entrusted with
the enforcement of the Act—the Courts, public officers, the Collector, the Board of Revenue
and others, Cases of compliance or non-compliance with the provisions of the Act also come
up before the authorities only occasionally.

However, whether or not a particular case comes up before the authorities mentioned
above, the law always operates and the citizen must decide for himself what, if any, is the
amount payable as stamp duty. This renders it desirable that the substance and form of the law
and the manner of its implementation should maintain a certain quality.

50.7. In this context, we attach the greatest impoztanuce to the easy accessibility of the
statutory material, In the course of our study of the Act, we have found that a plethora of
notifications has been issued under the Act, particularly under section 9 which confers upon
the appropriate Government power to issue reductions and remissions of duty. We are not
suggesting any radical change in this power, except the insertion of certain criteria’ in order
10 preserve the validity of the section against an attack on the ground of excessive delegation
of the legislative power, But-we wish to bring it te the notice of the Government that the
ordinary citizen must be finding it difficult, and sometimes impossible, to acquire accurate
jnformation about the notifications issued from time to time under this section. To some extent
we are recommending the incorporation of the substance of certain notifications ‘in’ the con-
cerned articles, but even then a 1828 mass of material contained in the notifications will ‘Survive
and retain its validity. To us, it appears desirable that some machinery must be devised of
making these notifications casily available to the public. No doubt, there-is a practice in the

Central Government of bringing out various statutory rules and orders in volumes arranged .

यू: ee recommendation as to section 9, supra.

Importance not
appeeciated,

Spirit of the
recommendations:

Notifications.


290

subject-wise, but the difficulty is that those volumes deal with a large number of subjects in
all of which, a particular citizen may not be interested. It will, in our view, be better if a handy
volume containing the upto date text of the notifications is also brought out at regular intervals—
say, every three years. The fact that the Stamp Act affects a large number of citizens and not
metely those whose cases come up before the courts or whose controversies happen to be
reported in the published law reports, becomes material in this context, The inconvenience
actually experienced in practice by reason of ambiguity in the statutory materials or their in-
accessibility, is very inadequately refiected in the case law that comes to the notice of those
whose business it is to advise the Government on the revision of the laws. We are, therefore,
aitaching the greatest importance to the need for re-publication, in a suitable form, of the noti-
fications and rules made under the Act. Of course, this problem is not peculiar to the Stamp
Act. But, at the moment, we are concerned only with that Act.

Conssirutionst 50.8. We are conscious that many of the recommendations which we have made relate
to documents other than these mentioned in the Union List. Some of the recommendations
touch fhe rates of stamp duty in regard to documents mentioned in the State List—e.g., our
recommendations as to article 64 (trust). However, we would like to make it clear that we
desire that our recommendations should be carried out even where subject-matter of a particular
recommendation may, in some respects, fall within the State List. Our intention is that the
change recommended will still be useful in regard to Union Territories, as improving and reform-
ing the law in relation to those territories. We are making this observation here, as we have not
discussed, under’ each provision, the constitutional position as to the precise legislative entry
appiicable to the particular provision under consideration.

Meaoing of 50.9, At this stage, a discussion of the constitutional position would not be inappropriate.
गाल So far as is material, and without entering into details, we may say that under the Constitution
one must consult all the three legislative lists ia the seventh Schedule for ascertaining the legis-
istive power on the subject. The topic “stamp duties” fails in the concurrent list,—but with the
very important exception that “rates of stamp duty” do not fall within that entry. As regards’
tates, the kegislative power is partitioned between! the Union and the States—it is, again unnecessary
to enumerate the documents placed in each list. But the broad scheme is as indicated above.
This brings to the forefront the precise scope of the expression “rates of stamp duty”.

Although the expression “rates” would, at first sight, seem to be confined to the arithmetical
figures of duty, the ensuing discussion will show that a different view would be better in the
particular circumstaace of this case.

50.94, In the first place, the case law? shows that the article regarding duty on entry
as Advocate is regarded as within State List, entry 63.

as It was, for example, held in State v. Bar Couneil, ANahabad*, that section 3(iii) of the WP.
to corokucat of Taxation Laws Amendment Act, amending Article 30 of Schedule IB of the Stamp Act, was
prima-facie, intra vires the State Legislature, for the subject-matter of this particular enactment
falis within Entry 63 of the State List. It so happened that the Act in that case had received
the assent of the President. But that does not affect the position that the subject-matter of the
Act was held to fall within the State List. That the Act received Presidential assent was om
aspect that was discussed presumably to repel the objection of repugnance to the Advocates
Act, 1961,

50.10. Similarly, in 3 Mysore Case’, the High Court uphold the of validity of Mysore Act
No. 29 of 1962. From the Gazette, it appears that the Act received the assent of the Governor
on the twenty-fifth day of September, 1962 and it had not been submitted for the assent of the
President.
L infia.
2, State पर. Bar Council, Alahabad, A.LR. 1971 All 186 (S,N. Dwivedi and C.D. Parekh , 31.).

3. BK. Vital v. Stote of Mysore, A.LR. 1966 Mysore 138, paras 17-18.
4, The Act wea first published in the Mysore Gazette on the twenty-fifth dey of September, 1962,



1

Tt was held that amended Article 17 of the Mysore Stamp Act was aot repugnent to the
provisions of section 24 of the Advocates Act, 1961. There was no conflict between the two
provisions. The Mysore Act prescribed rate of stamp duty in respcet of any entry on the roll
of Advocates, the Advocate Act deals with the admission of Advocates on the roli of the State
Bar Council. The former was enacted by the State Legislature in pursuance of the legislative
power conferred on it under entry 63 of the State List. That ficld is exclusively reserved for the
state Legislature.

The power exercised by Parliament is general legislative power. The power exercised by the
State Legislature is a taxing power. The two powers are independent powers and do not
collide with each other. Parliament is incompetent to encroach on thai field, directly or indirectly.
The question of repugnance can only arise in matters where both Parliament and the State
Legislatures have legislative competence to pass laws. If any repugtancy arises as a result of
encroachment by one legislature over the field reserved for the other, then the rule of ultra vires
steps in, and the Jaw enacted by the legislature having no competence becomes void. In such
matters there is no question of superior and inferior legislatare.

” $0.21. It may be noted that the Mysore Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962 (Mysore Act 29
of 1962) amended the Mysore Stamp Aci, 1957, in detail, and one of the amendments was con-
verging what is article 30 in the Central Act, namely, stamp duty on enrolment of Advocates.
In the Mysore Stamp Act, 1957, by virtue of the 1962 amendment, the duty is levied “ on a
certificate of enrolment in the roll of an advocate, prepared and maintained by the State Bar
Councit under the Advocates Act, 1961,” the amount of the duty being 250 rupees. The Aci of
1962 was not submitted to the President for his assent, And yet, the validity of the Act of
1962 was upheld by Hedge J. as he then was) and Honniah J’, Several points were in issue —
some bave been stated above. But we are concerned with only one of the propositions laid
dowa im the judgment, namely, that the High Court held specifically that the law in question
fell. within State List, entry 63. The argument that the Concurrent List, entry 44, would be
attracted, and that Parliament having evinced interest in the field, the ‘state legislature had no
ommpetence to enact the impugned provision, was not pressed, and the Court also specifically
held that thera was no substance in that argument-

50.12 Secondly, apart from the case law mentioned above,some support is also lent to the
above approach by the fact that adaptations of section 9 of the Act have all been based on a
similar ascumption, namely, that a modification of the text of the charging article even a modifi-
tation not affecting the arithmetic of stamp duties—is for the states.

30.13. Thirdly, it should also be pointed our that the ereation of new exempticns under an
article, or substantial modifications in the description of the instrument in the ariicle, would,
in ४०९६, modify the rate of stamp duty, because if a new exemption is created under an article
then the rate on the exempted instrument becomes nil. At least, the old rate disappears when a
new exemption is created. Conversely, when an existing exemption is taken away, the rate appli-
cable under the main article becomes applicable to the instrument now made texable by removing
the exemption. In this sense, a change i nthe left band column of the Schedule of duties—tex-
tually in the main article or in the exemption—affects the right hand column (which denotes
the rate}

50.14. Fourthly, it may also be noted that the legislatve practice (in the centre) so far
hes been to avoid amendment of exemptions, where the exemptions are contained below
an article concerning documents in the State List. हे

50.15. It is also not to be overlocked that if a wider view is taken of the entry in the Con-
current List, then the result would be that Parliament would be competent to reduce the duty
on the document mentioned in the State List fo a zero, but it cannot partially reduce the rate

1 aE Minalv, State of Mysore, ALR. 1966 Mys. 138, 141, 142, Paragraphs 17 and 18 (Hegde and Honniah,

Mysore case.

Adaptations,

Effect of exemp-

tions.


3292

of duty on the document. It can adopt the first mentioned course {total abolition of the duty
tither by textually deleting from the schedule the entry in the left hand column (description of
the instrument) or by providing that no tax shall be levied on the particular instrument

If a wider construction of the entry in the Concurrent List, is taken, then, from a strict legal
point of view, it would be open to Parliament to freeze the taxing power of the States on
Stamp duties—

(i) by not mentioning in the stamp Act any other instruments other than those men-
tioned in the Union entry, and
@) by providing further that no other instrument shall be subject to-stamp duty.
Such a system does not seem to have been adopted in the case of any other tax. A perusal

of the taxiag entries in the Constitution shows no such bifurcation in relation to the power to tax
on a given subject-matter.

In the very nature of things, the legislative arrangement regarding stamp duties presents
complex problems. As every aspect relating to stamp duties, excep; the tate of stamp dulies, falls
under the Concurrent List, the concurrent power assumcs importance, if taken literally. The mode
and manner of collection of stamp duties, the punishment for the violation of the Stamp Act and
evasion of the stamp duties and other consequences flowing from non-stamping etc, can, with-
cut much controversy, be regarded as flowing from it. But does it extend to such a vital matter
a8 ihe selection of the instrument for charging tax ?

Rates incomplete 50,16. Sixthly, it would be incomplete, if not meaningless, to speak of rates without the
without charge. charge of tax, just as it would be incomplete to speak of rates without the tax charged. Such,
a position is rather unusual in taxation legislation in India, to put it at the mildest.

50.17, It is for these reasons that there is, in our view justification for reading the entry
in the Concurrent List more narrowly than a literal construction would suggest, and for reading the
Entry as to rate more widely tham literal construction would suggest. No doubt, some af the
anomalies indicated above can be answered by afguing that when the Union cr a State ievies
tax on a particular document by way of stamp duty, it does so by a combined and simultaneous
exercise of its power in the Concurrent List read with its power in the Union List or the S'ate
List, as the case may be. But what requires to be pointed out is that such simultaneous and
combined recourse to both the Lists is rather unusual in the general scheme of the Constitution,
in regard to the power to tax.

‘Therefore, so fat as the constitutional position is concerned, we are of the view that it may:
not be within the competence of the Parliament to implement some of the recommendations made
by us in this Report in so far as their application to the States is concerned. We do not, iy this “4
context, pause to consider how far article 252 of the Constitution can be utilised.

50.18. Notwithstanding what we have stated above, it is our intention, as already siated*, that -
tbese_ recommendation should be implemented, so that at least in regard to the Union’ Terri«
tories the law would be reformed. Further, as regards States, we hope that the Union Govern-
mene will be able to persuade the States to make similar amendments in regard to the areas of

tates,

50.19. Finally, we may staté that we are aware that no-tax can be perfect. As & poet has
said? :

“Whoever hopes a faultless tax to see; Hopes, what never was, or-is, of e’er stiall be.”

But it should not be difficult 10 introduce a certain element of rationality and equity in che
provisions of the iaxing law.

3. Para 50.3, supra.

2. M Cullock, Adaptation of Pope, quoted by Mathrubhutham and Srinivaéan, Law of Sales Tax in India (1954),
ge

MGIPRRND—ssc. 1. D—24 Law/77—18-12-78—2200


293 -

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable assistance
we have received from Shri Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in the prepara-
tion of this Report.

12: 4 Gajendragedkar nae Chairman.
PK.Trpthi ae Member.
S.S.Dhavan, ee Member.
S.P.Sen-YVerma ne Member.
BC Mitra म  म म Member.
PLM.Bakshi nee Member-Secretary.

Dated New Delhi.
the Ist March, 1977.

MGIPRRND—Sec. D-1—-24M of Law/?7—19- 12-78-2200