LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON

THE POWERS OF ATTORNEY ACT, 1882

MARCH, 1977


P. B. Gajendragadkar D.O. No. F. 2(2)/77-L.C.
12, Tughlak Road,

New Delhi-11

March 15, 1977

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the sixty-eighth
Report of the Commission on the Powers of Attorney Act, 1882.
This, no doubt, is a very minor Act and the Report of the Com-
mission is more in the nature of a Note than the usual type of
Report. However, the Commission thought that since the Act
was very old, it needed a fresh look and so it examined the said
Act and has made some suitable recommendations.

One of the main points which we have made in the Report
relates to the definition of the “Poror ~* Attorney” which the Act
did not contain and we thought that an Act of this kind was
incomplete without the definition of “Power of Attorney”, The
Report makes certain other recommendations which it is not
necessary io set out in this letter.

The Report will show that the study of the Act has also
involved a close examination of several other Central Acts.

Before concluding, I would like to add that after the Commis-
sion was constituted in September 1971, it has forwarded twenty-
four reports (number forty-five to sixty-eight) including the pre-
sent one; and after the present Commission was reconstituted in
September 1974, it has forwarded eight reports including the pre-
SENL One.

In the end, let me repeat the suggestion which I have already
made on two or three previous occasions that, after the report
of the Commission is printed, copies of the report should be
circulated to the relevant academic and professional institutions
so that it may stimulate a debate on the questions considered by
the Commission and that, in turn, may assist Government in
comiiig to its own conclusions on the relevant recommendations
made by the Commission.

T may, iscidentally, add that the Commission has already
completed its study of the Indian Evidence Act and has finalised
its report including several recommendations for the amendment
of the velevant provisions of the Act. This, no doubt, was an
arduous task, but the Commission has done its best to examine
the Act in depth and has made recommendations which the Com-

mission thinks it is necessary to make in the Act. The final


ty

report deals exhaustively with all the questions which the Com-
mission discussed before reaching its final conclusions, It has
become an extensive document and spreads over more than two
thousand pages. It is now being typed and as soon as its typing
work is over, it will be forwarded to Government in due course.

In dealing with the problem of suggesting recommendations
in the relevant provisions of the Act, the Commission has been
fully conscious that the Act is a very commendable piece of iegis-
lation and has served a very useful purpose of affording invaluable
assistance in the conduct of proceedings before the Courts. Never-
theless, with the passage of time, it has been disclosed that there
has been a difference of judicial opinions on some relevant and
imperiant points and this aspect of the matter the Commission has
borne in mind in making its recommendations.

After the Act was passed, in, 1872, some new juristic princi-
ples have been evolved and received recognition from the jurists
and these have been carefully examined by the Commission in
making some of its recommendations.

At present, the Commission has undertaken another important
Act for its study and that is the Transfer of Property Act. This
Act was last amended in 1929 and the Commission feels that
since it is an important piece of legislation, a fresh look at the
Act is now required. Like the study of the Evidence Act, the
study of this Act also is being made by the Commission in full
depth, and though the task is heavy and arduous, the Commission
trusts that it will complete its work in regard to this Act and will
be able to make its report during its tenu.e which expires on the
31st August, 1977.

Yours

Sd./-

(P. B. Gajendragadkar)
Hon’ble Shri H. R. Gokhale, -
Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Government of India,
New Delhi.


REPORT ON THE POWERS OF ATTORNEY ACT, 1882

CONTENTS
PAGE No.

Cuarrer |. Introductory - . . . . 1
CHAPTER 2 a Extent and definitions . . . 2
Cuaprer 3 a Effect and construction of powers-of-attorney. 7
Cuarrernd Deposit of powers of attorney + . . 12
CHAPTER 5 oe Married Women . 2 . . 14
CHAPTER 6 न Miscellaneous पु . . . 16
APPENDICES,
APPENDIX 1 न Recommendations as shown in the form of a

draft Bill . . . . 21

APPENDIX 2 न Comparative table - . हे . 23


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY
Why the subject has been taken up

1.1 Revision of the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882, has been
ken up by the Law Commission as a part of its function of
revising Central Acis of general application and importance. The
law relating to powers of attorney touches on contracts and pro-
perty. The Commission has already forwarded a number of
Reports dealing with certain subjects forming part of the Law of
Contract’, and also a few Reports dealing with branches of the
Law of Property? or touching thereon. It, therefore, appeared
to be appropriate to take up this Act also.

Arother consideration which has weighed with the Commis-
sion in taking up the subject is the fact that the existing Act is
expressed in language which is manifestiy out of tune with.
modern legislative phraseology.

Need for revision

1.2 Though the Act does not require reform in many matters
of substance, the structure of its sections is, at many places, rather
antiquated*. A few of its provisions have become obsolete by
the passage of time'. का the circumstances, it is desirable that
the whole Act should be replaced, instead of mere amendments
being carried out in the various sections.

Reasons for enacting the existing Act

1.3 So much as regards the need for revision. We begin our
consideration of the Act with the Statement of Objects and Rea-
sons to the Powers-of-Attorney Bill No. 22 of 18815. The rea-
sons why the legislation in question was initiated were thus state
1. For example, the 7th Report (Partnership Act). the 8th Report (Sale
of Goods Act), the 11th Report (Negotiable Instruments Act) and
the 13th Report (Contract Act).

2. See the 6th and 30th Reports (Registration Act), the 17th Report
(Trusts act, and the 66th Report on the Married Women’s Property

ct,

3. For example, in sections 2 and 3, there are 2 number of paragraphs,
which do not appear as sub-sections.

4. For example, section 2, 2nd paragraph; section 3, last paragraph,

and section 4(g) dealing with the application of the Act to old

powers of attorney.

Gazette of India, 22nd October, 1881, Part V, pages 1473-1474,

“


“As the law stands, the donee of a power-of-Attorney,
when executing an instrument pursuant to the power, must
sign, and where sealing is required must seal, in his principal’s
name. The first object of this Bill is to render it legal for
such donees to execute in and with their own names and seals.
The law respecting the execution of instruments under
powers-of-attorney will thus be made accordant with what will
be the rule in England from and after the 31st December,
1881, and with what is believed to be the practice in the
North-Western Provinces, British Burma and, probably, else-
where in India. The section effecting this is copied from sec-
tion 46 of the recent Statute 44 & 45 Vic., ९. 41, which takes
effect from the close of the present year.

“The second object of the Bill is to preclude doubts as to
the liability of a donee of a power-of-attorney who makes
payment in good faith after the donor of the power has died
or become lunatic or bankrupt or insolvent, or has revoked
the power, when the fact of death, lunacy, bankruptcy, inso!-
vency or revocation was not known to the donee at the
time of making the payment. The section effecting this is
copied from section 47 of the Statute above-mentioned, and
merely extends to all attorneys the rule as to trustees, execu-
tors and administrators making payments under powers, which
has been in British India for the last fifteen years—see Act
XXVIII of 1865, section 39.

“The third and last object of the Bill is to provide for the
deposit of instruments creating powers-of-attorney, and for
the evidence of the contents of such instruments. The section
effecting this is copied (with the modificaiions necessary to
adapt it to India) from 44 & 45 Vic., c. 41, section 48.

—WHITLEY STOKES”

Aspect of power—its significance

1.4 The essential characteristic of an agent is that he is
invested with a legal power to alter his principal’s legal relations
with third persons : the principal is und*r a correlative liability
to have his legal relations altered. This theory (as to the essen-
tial characteristic of an agent) was advanced first by Hohfeld'.

The English judges have occasionally described an agent as

ar

holding such a “power”?~

. Hobfeld, Fundamental Legal Conceptions, page 52.

. Read v. Anderson, (1884) 13 Q.B.D. 779, 782; (Bowen, LJ.)
1 Lamb v. Goring Brick Co., (1932 1 K.B, 710, 713; (Wright. J.).
५ Salford Corporation v. Lever, (1891) 1 6.8. 168; (Lord Esher).

Reno


3

This is also the expression used by Mellish L.J.’, by Romilly
M.R.2 and by Lord Watson? in reported cases.

Restatements and academic writings

1.5 This theory was later developed by Seavey in an article
in the Yale Law Journal. The American Restatement® of the
Law of Agency states that an essential characteristic of the rela-
tionship of agency is that “an agent or apparent agent holds a
power to alter the legal relations between the principal and third
persons and between the principal and himself”. Falconbridge®
discusses the whole law of agency in terms of the agent’s power.

Salmond? employs this expression in his draft of the Law of
Contracts : “An agent is a person who is authorised by law to
exercise on behalf of another person, called his principal, anv
power possessed by that other person ........ of doing any
act in Law.”

J. L. Montrose’ accepted it in an article published a few years
ago.

English Act of 1971

1.6 In England, the Powers of Attorney Act, 1971 makes cer-
tain new provisions in relation to powers of attorney and the dele-
gation by trustees of their trusts, powers and discretions.

Section 1 of the Act contains rules for the execution of powers
of attorney. In brief, it requires attestation by two witnesses.

Section 2 abolishes the need to file or deposit instruments
creating powers of atiorney in the Supreme Court.

1. Parker v. Mckenna, (1874) L.R. 10 Ch, 96, 125.

2. Pariente v. Lubbock, (1855) 20 Beav. 588, 597-598.

3. Stumore v. Breen, (1866) 12 App. Cas. 698, 704.

4, Seavey in 29 Yale L.J., pages 859—95.

5. American Law Institute, Restatement of the Law of Agency.
6.

Falconbridge in 17 Can Bar Rev. 248. referred to bv F.E. Dowrick
in “Relationship of Principal and Agent” (1954) 17 Modern Law
Review.

Salmond & Winfield, Contracts, pages 338-40, cited by Dowrick.
“Relationship of the Laws of Principal and Agent” (1954) 17
Modern Law Review.

8. J. L, Montrose, “The Basis of the Power of Agent in cases of Actual

and Apparent Authority”, 16 can. Bar Rev. 757.

~


4

Section 3 concerns the proof of instruments creating powers
of attorney. In brief, it provides for proof by photographic
copies, certified to be true and complete copy. Section 4 deals
with powers of attorney given as security. Such a power cannot
be revoked so long as the security remains undischarged.

Section 5 deals with protection of a donee and third persons
where a power of attorney is revoked and the donee is ignorant
of revocation. Section 6 gives additional protection for trans-
ferees under stock exchange transactions (in case of revocation).
Section 7 m:kzs provisions for the execution of instruments, etc.
ace oF a power of attorney.

8 repeals section 129 of the Law of Property Act,
2 10 marricd women. Section 9 gives power to
7. ete, by a power of attorney. Section 10 deals
with the effect of a general power of attorney in the specified form
given in the First Schedule to the Act. Section 11 contains the
shori title, repeals, consequential amendments, commencement
and extent.



CHAPTER 2

EXTENT AND DEFINITION

Section 1—Extent

2.1 Addressing ourselves to the Aci, ¥ 1
certain preliminary provisions. The Act ac presen
whole of India except the S Jammu and
subject-matter of the Jegislation falls within the Co
and the relevant entries do not apply xo the State of Jan
Kashmir. Hence it is unnecessary fo consider the ques
extension of the Act to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Need for definition of “power-of-aitorney”

any definition
on of the A
tterncy”, it i
ampie of such
an Stamp

2.2 Curiously enough, the Act does not contai
of “power-of-attorney”. Since the operative por'
namely, section 2, uses the expression “power-of-
desirable that such a definition be inseried. An ex
a definition will be found in section 2(21) of the I
Act, 1899, which reads as follows :*

“Power of Attorney” includes any instrument (sot cl पु
able with fee under the law relating to Court tees for the time
being in force) empowering a specified person to act for and
in the name of the person executing it.

Wharton? defines a power of attorney as “a writing given and
made by one person authorising another, who, in such case,
called the attorney of the person (or donee of ihe power),
appointing him to do any lawful act in the stead of thai person,
as to receive rents, debts, to make appearance and application in
court, before an officer of registration and the like. It may be
either general or special, i.c., to do all acts or to do some particu-
lar act.”

sel in turn,

Stroud! defines it as an authority whereby जाए is
stead or place” of another to ब for him.

1. Concurrent List, Entry 7, “Contra
Entry 6, “Transfer of Property
Documents”.

2. Section 2(21), Indian Stamp Act, 1899.

3. Wharton, Law Lexicon (1953), page 7

4. Stroud, Judicial Dictionary (1953), page 2257.

5

2-351Mof Law/77


Rules of agency not dealt with

2.3 Several matters concerning agency are deali wilh, aot m
the Powers of Attorney Act, but in the Indian Contract Act, 1872
(sections relating to agency). Important amongst these are—

{a) who may execute a power;

(b) who may become an attorney;

(c) when is a power terminated; and

(d) whether a power coupled with interes: is revocable.

The reason, obviously, is that these mutters would be governed
by the general prncipiles of the law of agency’. A power of
attorney is an au/hority in writing to another person to act for
and in the name of the person who executed the power”. ‘There-
fore, speaking generally, the law relating to authority, that is,
agency, would be attracied when a power of of attorney is execut-
ed. Halsbury* explains the matters thus—

“An agent who to execute a deed, as for example, a
conveyance or deed of partnership must be appointed by deed
Such an authority is called a power of attorney.”

The definition given in the Stamp Act is less elaborate, but
may be regarded as adequate as a statutory definition’. The real
emphasis in the concept of power of attorney is on the authority

to use the name of the principal. That is sufficiently brought out
in the definition in the Stamp Act.

Recommendation to adopt a definition

2.4 We recommend that a suitable definition on that line may
be inserted*. For the purpose of the present Act. however, it is
unnecessary to exclude documents requiring court fees. Such
documents were excluded in the definition in the Stamp Act,

merely to avoid double stamp under the Court Feces Act and under
the Stamp Act®

1. Cf. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 1, page 153, para 365, relating to
Powers of Attorney, which deals with the subject under “Agency—
Formation of Agency—Appointment by deed.”

. Cf. Chapter 2, supra.

. Halsbury, 3rd Edn., Vol. 1, page 153, para 365.

. Supra, Para 2.2,

See Appendix 1 for tentative draft.

See Ramdeo v. Lalu Nath 1.L.R, (1937) Nag, 494, 496; ALR, 1937
Nag, 65, 66 (Stone, CJ.).

aw Rud


CHAPTER 3

THE E

ECT AND CONSTRUCTION OF POWERS OF
ATTORNEY

Section 2—Principle

3.1 The effect of a power of attorney is dealt with in section
2. ‘The section in its operative part provides that the donce of a
orney may execute or do any assurance, instrument
or thing in his own rame and signature, and an instrument or
thing executed or done shall be as effectual in law as if it had
been executed or done “by the donce of the power in the name
and with the signature and seal of the donor thereof”,

The wording of ihe section is somewhat unfamiliar and slightly
un-intelligible, but what it intends to emphasise is, that though
the signature is of the donce, the document is to be read as if
signed by the donor. This fegal fiction necessarily implies that
the document will be binding o: the donor. Simply stated, the
section provides that the signature of the agent will be deemed to
be the signature of the principal. The language of the section
has not caused such difficulty in practice, and need not be disturb-
ed on this point.

The section follows section 46 of the Conveyancing Act,
1881, which was in these terms :

“46, Execution under power of attorney :

(1) The donee of a power of attorney may, if he thinks
fit, exccute or do any assurance, instrument, or thing in and
with his own name and signature and his own seal, where
sealing is required, by the authority of the donor of the
power; and every assurance, instrument, and thing so executed
and done shall be as effectual in Jaw, to all intents, as if it had
been executed or done by the donce of the power in the name
and with the signature and seal of the donor thereof.

(2) This section applies to powers of attorney created
by instruments executed cither before or after the commence-
ment of this Act.”

Act. 1881 (44 & 45 Vic, ९. 41) (repeated and re-

1. Conveyanei
placed).

7


8

This section of the Conveyancing Act was, so far as England
is concerned, replaced by section 123 of the Law of Property
Act, 1925' which was in the same terms.

Object

3.2 As was stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons"
to the Powers-of-aitorney Bill, 1881, as the law relating to
powers of attorney stood before the Bill, the donee of a power
of attorney, when executing an instrument pursuant to the power
“must sign and, where sealing is required, must seal in his princi-
pal’s name.”* The first object of the Powers of Attorney bill,
was to render it legal for such donees to execute in and with
their own names and seals. The Statement of Objects and Rea-
sons added: “The law respecting the execution of instruments
under powers of attorney will thus be made accordant with what
will be the rule in England from and after the 31st December,
1881, and with what is believed to be the practice in the North
Western Provinces, British Burma and probably elsewhere in
India.”

Section 2, last paragraph

3.3. The last paragraph of existing section 2 relating to
application of the existing Act to power executed before its com-
mencement, need not be repeated in the new Act.

Expression “Assurance” to be omitted

3.4. The word “assurance” should be omitted from this sec-
tion, as it would be covered by the word “instrument”. It is
not the practice now to mention “assurance” separately. The
definition of “instrument” in the Indian Registration Act, 1908
may be scen, as an example of later legislative practice.

With the above changes, section 2 may be incorporated in
the new Act.

Section 3.

3.5. We now come to section 3, which indemnifies the holder
of a power of attorney for acts done by him in good faith before
notice of death of grantor. It is based® on section 7 of the

1. Law of Property Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. 5 Ch. 20).
2. Gazette of India, October 22, 1881, Part V, page 1473.
3. See Chapter 2, supra.

4. See Appendix 1.

5. See now section 5, Powers of Attorney Act, 1971.



9

Conveyancing Act, 1881, and is, in fact, a copy of it, That
section of the English Act was replaced, so far as England is
concerned, by section 124 of the Law of Property Act, 1925,
which was in these terms :
“124. Payment by attorney under power without notice of
death, etc.

(1) Any person making any payment or doing any act,
in good faith, in pursuance of a power of attorney, shall not
be liable in respect of the payment or act by reason that be-
fore the payment or act the donor of the power had died “or
become subject to disability or bankrupt, or had revoked the
power, if the fact of death, disability, bankruptcy, or Tevo-
cation was not at the time of the payment or act known to
the person making or doing the same.

(2) A statutory declaration by an attorney to the effect
that he has not received any notice or information of the re-
vocation of such power of attorney by death or otherwise
shall, if made immediately before or within three months
after any such payment or act as aforesaid, be taken to be
conclusive proof of such non-revocation at the time whe
such payment or act was made or done.

Where the donee of the power of attorney is a corporate
aggregate, the officer appointed to act for the corporation in
the execution of the power may make the statutory declars-
tion in like manner as if that officer had been the donee of

the power.

Where probate or leiters of administration have been
gianted io any person as attorney for some other person,
this section applies as if the payment made or acts dope
under the grant had been made or done under a power of
attorney.

“3) This section does not affect any right against the
payce of any person interested in any money so paid; and
th t person shall have the like remedy against the payee as
he would have had against the payer if the payment had not
been made by him.

(4) This section applies to payments and acts made and
done before or after the commencement of this Act, and in
this section ‘power of attorney’ includes a power of attorney
implied by a statute’.

(This was replaced in part by section 5 of the 1971

Act).”
3—-251MofLaw/77



10

The English Act is more claborate than the section in our
See particularly the portion relatin: ‘statutory declara-
However, it is noc necessary to make in our Act suck
elaborate provisions

Verhal changes

ction 2-—

3.6. A few verbal changes are needed in sx

() Mention of ‘lunatic? and ‘bankrupt? should be
omitted. The expression ‘unsound mind’ and ‘in-
solvent’ are more appropriate, and should be sub-
stituted.

Gi) The last paragraph of section 3, providing that the
section applies only to paymen's made after the
commencement of the existing Act, need not be
repeated in the new Act.

Nagpur case
3.7. An interesting argument advanced in a case before the
Nagpur High Court’ may be noted at this stage. An appellant
had Fed before the filing of the app orance of — the
death, a memorandum of appeal was filed on her behalf by her
counsel under instructions from her accredited agent. Before
her death, she had instructed her accredited agent to engage
pleaders to file an appeal. The engagement of the cou by
ihe agent took place after her death in ignorance of her death,
and the purchase of stamps and filing of the memorandum of
appeal also took place thereafter. When the fact of death was
iscovered, her counsel sought to make an appiication for sub-
The court held
that since the appellant had died before the filing of the apnea
पं ol va to substitute could rot be entertained, An ot
was made by counsel on the appellant’s side to bri he case
within the provisions of the Contract Act, and section 3 of the
Powers of Attorney Act was relied upon, the contention heins
tha. the various acts that took place in
he donor of the power were valid by virtue of the sectin

% the death
person granting if was unknown to him af the time 7!
* Gperate to indemnify the agent, but in this case the cour:
of concerned with any such question.

1. Mist. Radhabai v. Mong

ALR.



11

Construction of powers of attorney

3.8. Sections 2 and 3, dealt with so far, are the important
provi The general principles regarding the construction
of a power of attorney arc well settled. The power must
be strictly construed as giving only such authority as it
confers expressly or by necessary implication. In particular,—
(1) The operative part of the instrument is controlled by the
recitals; (2) where an authority is given to do particular acts,
followed by general words, the general words are restricted to
what is neccesary for the performance of the particular acts; (3)
the general words do not confer general powers, but are limited
to the purpose for which the authority is given, and are con-
strucd as enlarging the special powers only when necessary for
that purpose; (4) a power-of-attorney is construed so as to in-
clude all powers necessary for its effective execution’.

Where an act purporting to be done under a power-of-attorncy
is chailenged as being in excess of the authority conferred by
the power, it is necessary to show that on a fair construction of
the whole instrument the authority in question is to be found
within four corners of the instrument, either in express terms or
by necessary implication?.

The general words used in the subsequent clauses of a power-
of-atiorney must be read with the special powers given in the
earlier clauses, and cannot be construed so as to enlarge the
restricted powers therein mentioned?—'.

tha Pillai v. Rattnasabhabhale, (1968) 2 Mad. L.

Ave
Louk of Benga! « Ramanathan Chet'y, 43 1.0, 48, 55.

3. O.AP.RM.AR. Adaikappa Chettiar ५, Thomas Cook & Son, AUR.
1933 P.C, 78.

. काली Lata ९. Prajuia, TLE. (1966) Cut. 90, 93 (Misra, 7.).


CHAPTER 4
DEPOSIT OF POWERS OF ATiORNEY
Section 4—Deposit of powers-of-attorney

4.1. Section 4 provides for the deposit of powers of attorney
in High Courts, and for the issue by the High Courts of certified
copies of the powers-of-attorney so deposited. _ Corresponding
provisions existed in England in section 219 of the Supreme
Court of Judicature Consolidation Act, 1925, read with R.S.C.
Order 61A, but these provisions have now been repealed. Proof
in England is governed by the Evidence and Powers of Attorney
Act, 1940. हु

This procedure appears to be out of tune with modern no-
tions about the functions of the judiciary. Powers-of-atiorney
can be registered under section 18(f) of the Indian Registration
Act, 1908, which allows the registraiion of any document nor
required by section 17 to be registered. Section 57(5) of that
Act enables what are known as “registration copies” of such
documents to be given in evidence for proof of contents of the
original. _ In the circumstances, tion 4 of the of Attor-
ney Act, 1882 docs not serve any particular purpose. Tt may
also be noted. that there now facilities for the authentication
of power-of-attorney by notar Section 4 should, therefore,
be deleted, and we recommend accordingly.

G that section 4 is based on section 48
of the Conveyancing Act, 1881. The English section was 1c-
placed by section 219, Supreme Court of Judicature (Consoli-
dation) Act, 1925." which was in these terms :

4.2 Tt may be no

“219, Deposit oj original insiruniwents crouliig powers of
attorney +

(1) An instrument creating a power of — attorney. the
execution of which has been verified by affidavit, statucory
declaration or other sufficient evidence, may, with the affida-
vit or declaration, if any, be deposited in the central office.

1. See discussion in Chapter 6, infra.
2. Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925. 15 & 16
Geo V, Ch. 49.

12


13

(2) A separate file of instruments so deposited shall be
kept, and any person may search that file, and inspect every
instrument so deposited, and an office copy thereof shall be
delivered oui to him on request.

“(3) A copy of an instrument so deposited may be pre-
sented at the office, and may be stamped or marked and when
so stamped and marked shall become an office copy.

3 & 4 Geo. VE Ch. 28,

‘Sub-section (4) Hed by

s. 4].

purpose of
al oliice and
पाए, the fees

ure may

of Attorney Act, 1971, this pro-
brogated in England (section 2).



(CHAPTER 5

MARRIED WOMEN
Section 5.

5.1. Section 5, relating to married women’s power to execute
a power of attorney, was not contained in the original Bill of
1881. It was added later in pursuance of the following observa-
tions which Mr. Stokes made while introducing the Bill :

“It might also be worthwhile to declare (in accordance
with section 40 of that statute)’, that married women, whether
minors or not should have power to appoint attorneys on
their behalf for the purpose of executing a deed or doing any
other act which they might themselves execute or do. The
matter would be considered by the Select Committee

5.2. As has been pointed out®, section 5 of the Act is quite
general in its terms and there is nothing which limits the genera-
lity. The section, in so far as it expressly permits married
women to create a power, overrides section 183, Indian‘ ‘Contract
Act, under which only a person who is of the age of majority
etc. can employ an agent.

5.3. It may be noted that, but for such a provision, a minor
cannot execute a power of attorney‘.

Modification needed.

5.4. As regards Hindus and Muslims, the provision is, in
relation to proprietary transactions, an exception to the rule that
a minor cannot execute instruments affecting property. As re-
gards others governed by the Married Women’s Property Act,
1874 (3 of 1874), the provision extends the principle under-
lying that Act even to minors.

1. Conveyancing Act, 1881 (44 & 45 Vic., ०. 41), s. 40. Later section
129 1.9. Act 1925 repealed 1971.

2. See Gazette of India, December 17, 1881, Supplementary, page
14

3. Chinnammi v. Venkayya, A.L.R. 1933 Mad. 407, 409 (Pandalai, J.)
(Upholding the validity of a power executed by a Hindu minor mar-
ried women in favour of her husband and authorising him to apply
under section 73, Registration Act).

4. Bowstead on Agency, Tenth Edition, page 14, Article 6, footnote
(०).

14


15

We recommend that this part of the section ie. the words,
“whether a minor or not”, should be deleted, as it assumes that
a minor can marry. It is under the Chdd Marriage Restraint
Act, 1929, as amended, the minimum age for ihe marriage of
girls is 18 yea The marriage munor girl is prohibited after
this amendment. Retention of the present provision in the
Powers of Attorney Act would create a wrong impression about
the Iegal position as to the m/rimum age of marriage.

5.5. In England, the
Law of Property Ac
necessary”. However
legislation as to married wor
a useful purpose, and may be r
ton,

rovision—seetion 129,
ced in 1971 8४५ “ur

६ until compeehcusive
the section may serve
tained with the above modifica-

1. The Powers of Attorney Act. 1971, section 8.


CuapTEr 6
MISCELLANEOUS
Attestation and presumptions regarding attested powers.

6.1. We now come to the topic of authentication of powers-
of-attorney. Under section 3 of the Notaries Act', the Central
Government in the whole or any part of India, and any State
Government in the whole or any part of the State, has power to
appoint, as Notary a legal practitioner or other person who
possesses the prescribed qualifications. Under section 8(1)(a)
of that Act, one of the functions of a notary is to verify, authen-
ticate, certify or attest the execution of any “document”. Under
section 7, a notary is bound to have and use a seal.

Under section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the
court shall presume that every document purporting to be.a power
of attorney, and to have been executed before and authenticated
by a Notary Public or any court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Con-
sul or Vice Consul or representative of the Central Govern-
ment, was so executed and authenticated. Under section 57(6)
and (7) of that Act, the seals of Notary Public are taken judi-
cial notice of. The provisions of the Registration Act will be
noted Jater*.

Registration Act.

6.2. It may not be out of place to mention here in brief the
provisions relating to powers-of-attorney, contained in some other
Acts. There are provisions in the Indian Registration Act, 1908,
regarding powers of attorney for presenting documents at Regis-
tration offices. Under section 32(c) of that Act, a power-of-
attorney can be granted to an agent to present a document for
registration; but, under section 33(1), only certain powers of
attorney are recognised. Briefly speaking, section 33 requires
the power of attorney to be executed before and authenticated by
a Registrar or Sub-Registrar (if the principal resides in any part
of India where the Act is in force) or by a Magistrate’ (if the
principal resides in any other part of India) or a Notary Public
or any court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul
or representative of the Central Government, (if the principal
does not reside in India).

1. Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952).
2. Sections 32-33, Indian Registration Act, 1908, infra.
16.



17

Under section 33(4), a power of attorney mentioned in the
section can be proved by the production of it without further
proof, when it purports on the face of it to have been executed
before the person or court already referred to. These provisions
are of a special nature, and would not be affected by the changes
recommended in the Powers of Attorney Act.

Stamp Act.

6.3. Then there are provisions in the Indian Stamp Act,
1899, First Schedule, Entry 48, for the stamping of a power of
attorney as defined in section 2(21) of that Act. That also
will not be affected by the proposed revision of the Powers of
Attorney Act.

The provisions in the Notaries Act, 1962, and the indian
Evidence Act, 1872, have been referred to separately’.

Compulsory registration.

6.4. In certain cases, registration of a power of attorney may
become compulsory under section 17 of the Indian Registration
Act, 1908. Thus, a power which authorises the donee to re-
cover rents of immovable property belonging to the donor for the
donee’s own benefit is an assignment and requires registration
under section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act; similarly, a
power of attorney which creates a charge on the immovable pro-
perty referred to therein in favour of the donee of the power,
requires registration’. In other cases, a mere general power of
attorney, even though it deals with immovable property, need
not be registered? since it does not come under any of the docu-
ments specified in the Registration Act as requiring registration.

Irrevocable Powers—provisions in English Act of 1925.

6.5. At this stage, we may refer to certain provisions in
English statutes which may be of interest. Sections 126 and
127 of the Law of Property Act, 19254 made certain provisions
regarding the effect of a power of attorney given for value and
expressed to be irrevocable or a power of attorney, whether for
value or not. made irrevocable for fixed period’. The two
sections, and the definition of “purchaser” given in section 205(i)
(xxi), are reproduced below :

1. See para 6.1, supra.

2. (a) Ganpat y.Adarji, (1879) LL.R. 3 Bom. 312, 325:
(b) Indra Bibi v. Jain Sirdar, (1908) LL.R. 35 Cal, 845, 848.

3. Compare the discussion in Kochuvareed v. Mariappa, AJ.R. 1954
T.C. 10, 17,

4, Sections 126, 127, Law of Property Act, 1925 (15 & 16 Geo. V, Ch.
20). See now the 1971 Act.

5. See now section 4 of 1971 Act.



18

“126. Effect of irrevocable power of attorney for value :

(1)

If a power of attorney given for valuable considera-

tion is in the instrument creating the power expressed to be
irrevocable, then, in favour of a purchaser—

ci)

Gi

(iii)

the power shall not be revoked at any time, cither
by anything done by the donor of the power with-
out the concurrence of the donee of the power, or
by the death, disability or bankrup:cy of the donor
or the power; and

any act done at any time by the donee of the power
in pursuance of the power shall be as valid as if any-
thing dene by the donor of the power without the
concurrence of the donee of the power, or the death,
disability or bankruptcy of the donor of the power,
had not been done or happened; and

neither the donee of the power nor the purchaser
shal! at any time be prejudicially affected by notice
of anything done by the donor of the power without
the concurrence of the donee of the power, or of the
death, disability or bankruptcy of the donor of the
power.

“(2) This section applies to powers of attorney created
by instruments executed after the thirty-first day of Decem-
ber, eighteen hundred and eighty-two.”

“127. Effect of power of attorney irrevocable for a fixed

time :

(1)

If a power of attorney, whether given for valuable

consideration or not, is in the instrument creating the power
expressed to be irrevocable for a fixed time therein specified,
not exceeding one year from the date of the instrument, then
in favour of a purchaser,—

(i)

(ii)

the power shall not be revoked for and during that
fixed time either by anything done by the donor of
the power without the concurrence of the donee of
the power, or by the death, disability or bankruptcy
of the donor of the power; and

any act done within that fixed time by the donee of
the power in pursuance of the power shall be as
if anything done by the donor of the power without
the concurrence of the donee of the power, or the
death, disability or bankruptcy of the donor of the
power, had not been done or happened; and


19

“(iii) neither the donee of the power, nor the purchaser,
shall at any time be prejudicially affected by notice
either during or after that fixed time of anything
done by the donor of the power during that fixed
time without the concurrence of the donee of the
power, or of the death, disability or bankruptcy of
the donor of the power. within that fixed time.

(3) This section applies to powers of attorney created by
instruments executed after the thirty-firs. day of December,
eighteen hundred and eighty-two.”

“205. (i) (xxi) ‘Purchaser’ means a purchaser in good faith
for valuable considcration and includes a jessee, mortgagee or
other person who for valuable consideration acquires an interest
in proper.y except that in Part I of this Act and elsewhere where
so expressly provided ‘purchaser’ only means a person who ac-
quires an interest in or charge on property for money or money’s
worth; and in reference to a legal estate includes a chargee by
way of legal mortgage and where the context so requires ‘pur-
chaser’ and ‘valuable consideration’ includes marriage but does
not include a nominal consideration in money.”

No need.

6.6. We have devoted thought to the question whether
similar provisions are needed in India. Our conclusion is that
it is not necessary to insert these claberate provisions in the Indian
Act. No strong need has been felt for such provisions. In our
view, in the conditions of the country, it is not necessary to adopt
them.

Devolution of power given for value—English provision.

6.7. In section 188. Law of Property Act. 1925", there is a
provision for the devolution of power of attorney given to a
purchaser of property. It is as follows :

“128. Devolution of power of attorney given to a pur-
chaser :

(1) A power of attorney given for valuable cons‘deration
may be given, and shall be deemed to have been always capable
of being given, to a purchaser of property or any interest therein,
and to the persons deriving title under him thereto, and those
persons shall be the duly constituted attorneys for all the pur-
poses of the power, but without prejudice to any right to appoint
substitutes given by the power.

1. The Law of Property Act, 15 & 16 Geo. V, Ch. 20.



20

“(2) This section applies to powers of attorney created by
instruments executed after the thirty-first day of December,
eightcen hundred and eighty-two.

(3) This section docs not authorise the person deriving title
under the donee of the power to execute, on behalf of the regis-
tered preprictc instrument relating to registered land to
which effeci is to be given on the register, uniess the power is
Protected by व caution cr other entry on the register.”

‘There does not appear to be any necessity to make this pro-
vision

Repeal.

88. While repealing the present Act, provision will have to
be made fer powers एव attorney deposited under the present Act
with the High Court wader section 4. These should be returned
to the depositor or his successcr in interest, or, where such re-
turn is not practicable, be dealt with in accordance with rules
to be made by the High Cour:.

Appendices.

6.9. In order to give a concrete shape to our recommenda-
tions, we have, in Appendix 1, given them in the form of a draft
Bill.

Appendix 2 contains a comparative table, showing the pro-
vision in the existing Act and the corresponding provi:
any, Appendix 1.



APPENDIX 1

Recommendation as shown in the form of a draft
Bill.

(Note : This is a tentative draft only)
Contents of Appendix 1

Clause Subject matter
1. Short title and extent.
2 Definition.
3. Execution under powers-of-attorney.
4

Payment by attorney under power without
notice of death etc.

5. Powers of attorney of married women.
6. Repeal.

THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY BILL, 197......

A Bill to amend the law relating to powers-of-attorney.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the....year of Republic of
India as follows :

Short title and extent. {Existing section 1] 7

1. (1) This Act may be called the Powers-of-Attorney Act,
197. ... .

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the state of
Jammu and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on ...
Definition. [New]

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires. “power-
of-attorney” includes any instrument empowering a specified
person to act for and in the name of the person executing it.

Execution under powers-of-attorney. [Existing section 2]

3. The donee of a power-of-attorney may, if he thinks fit,
execute or do any ...... instrument or thing in and with his
own name and signature, and his own seal, where sealing is

21


22

required, by the authority of the donor of the power; and every
beens instrument and thing so executed and done, shall be as
effectual in law as if it had been executed or done by the donee
of the power in the name, and with the signature and seal, of the
donor thereof.

Payment by attorney under power, without notice of death, etc.
good, [Existing section 3]

4. (1) Any person making or doing any payment or act in
good faith, in pursuance of a power of attorney, shall not be
Itable in respect of the payment or act by reason that, before the
paymest or act, the donor of the power had died or become. ...
of unsound mind, or been adjudged an insolvent or had revoked
the power, if the fact of death .... unsoundness of mind....
insolvency or revocation was not, at the time of the payment or
act, known to the person making or doing the same.

(2) Nothing in this section shall affect any right against
the payee of any person interested in any money so paid; and
that person shall have the like remedy against the payee as he
would have had against the payer, if the payment had not been
made by him.

[Existing section 4 is omitted]'.

Powers of attorney of married women. [Existing section 5 modi-

fied)

5. A married woman of full age, shall, by virtue of this Act,
have power, as if she were unmarried,............ , by a non-
testamentary instrument to appoint an attorney on her behalf,
for the purpose of executing any non-testamentary instrument or
doing any other act which she might herself execute or do; and
the provisions of this Act relating to instruments creating powers-
of-attorney shall apply thereto.

7 of 1882.
6. (1) The Powers-of-attorney Act, 1882, is hereby repealed.

(2) Instruments deposited with a High Court under section
4 of that Act shall, on an application made for the purpose to the
High Court in which they are deposited, in accordance with such
rules as may be made by the High Court, be returned to the
person who deposited them, or their successors-in-interest, or
where such return is not practicable, be otherwise dealt with in
accordance with such rules.

1. See the body of the Report, para 4.1.


APPENDIX 2

Comparative Table showing the provision in the existing Act and
the corresponding provisions, if any, in Appendix 1

Existing Section Clause in Appendix 1
1 1
2 3
3 4
4 omitted
5 5

We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of
the valuable assistance we have received from Shri Bakshi,
Member-Secretary of the Commission in the preparation of this
Report.

P.B.Gajendragadkar es eee eee Chairman
P.K. Tripathi eee ee Member
S.S.Dhavan eee ee Member
S.P.Sen-Varma ne «००००० Member
B.C. Mitra na eee eee Member
P.M. Bakshi a ee eee Member-Secretary

Dated, New Delhi
the 15th March, 1977.

251Law/77—GIPF.
23