LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SIXTY-NINTH REPORT

ON THE

INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872

MAY, 1977


P. 8, GAJENDRAGADKAR हे
Chairman D.O. No. 2(2)/75-L.C.

‘A’ Wing, 7th Floor,
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 001.

May, 9, 1977

My DEAR MINISTER,

T have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Sixty-ninth
Report of the Commission on the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

As I had mentioned in my letter forwarding the last Report
(68th Report—Powers of Attorney Act), revision of the Evidence
Act was an arduous task, but the Commission has done its best to
examine its provisions in depth and has made recommendations for
amendment which the Commission thinks it is necessary to make in
some of them. Before making these recommendations. the Commis-
sion dealt exhaustively with all the relevant questions and then
teached its final conclusions. In consequence, the present Report has
become an extensive document and it spreads over more than two
thousand pages.

In dealing with the problem of making recommendations in
the relevant provisions of the Act, the Commission has been fully
conscious that the Act is a very commendable piece of legislation
and has served a very useful purpose of affording invaluable assist-
ance in the conduct of proceedings before the Courts. Nevertheless,
with the passage of time, it has been disclosed that there has been
a difference of judicial opinion on some relevant and important
points and, in making its recommendations, the Commission has
taken into consideration this aspect of the matter.

After the Act was passed in 1872, some new juristic principles
have been evolved and have received acceptance from the jurists
and these have been kept in view by the Commission in making
some of its recommendations.

The Act has always been regarded by teachers of law, Jurists
and Judges as a model piece of legislation. The scheme of the Act
and the meticulous and comprehensive manner in which its provi-
sions deal with all the relevant topics justly entitled it a place of
pride in the Statute-book of India.

While studying the provisions of the Act, the Commission has
fully borne in mind the respect which they have universally
received; but it mav not be inappropriate to mention that even in
regard to adjective law like the Evidence Act. respect for its excel-
lence should not amount to blind adoration bordering on teverence.
Since we feel that, even in regard to the branch of law covered by
the Evidence Act, compulsion of the changing needs of socio-eco-
nomic considerations has given rise to new concepts which, after
critical examination, have received acceptance from the furists, and


Gi)

its working for over a century has posed some vexed problems, the
Commission thought that the Act needs a careful study with a
view to find out whether any recommendations should be made to
change some of its provisions. After examining the provisions of
the Act from this point of view, we have decided to make recom-
mendations for amendment of some of them only where we thought
that it was necessary to do so. That is the approach which we have
adopted in making this Report and, indeed, that has been our
approach in dealing with all the subjects whose study we have
undertaken.

In considering this problem, we have come to the conclusion
that it has become necessary to make certain recommendations for
the removal of obscurities, the elimination of controversies and the
solution of problems raised by the working of the law.

It is a trite saying that no reform touches a people so closely
or has such a direct influence on their well-being as an improve-
ment in the system and machinery of administering justice.

As we have explained in the introductory chapters in this
Report, the Act has an important part to play in the scheme of
administration of justice. Of course, setting up the machinery and
recommending necessary reform thereof may not, by themselves,
meet the purpose we have in view; much would, inevitably depend
upon the members of the judiciary whose privilege it is to interpret
and administer the provisions enshrined in the Act. We have not
overlooked this aspect of the matter, as will be apparent from the
concluding Chapter of the Report.

The Report, I hope, will speak for itself. But I would like to
mention some of the important amendments which the Commission
has recommended in order to simplify and rationalise the law with
a view to improving its working.

In its examination of the Act, the Commission found that the
definitions of ‘Court’ and ‘Judicial Proceedings’ presented certain
problems. It has, therefore, attempted to solve them by suitable
redrafting of these definitions.

It is plain that in the Evidence Act, an important and indeed
vital matter pertains to the relative importance of oral and docu-
mentary evidence. The diversity of judicial opinion in respect of the
import of these provisions, particularly sections 91-92, appeared to
the Commission to weaken the very foundation of the law. After
a careful study of the true juristic position in this matter, the
Commission has recommended solutions which, it is hoped,
attempt to state the position in a clear, compact and easily intelli-
gible manner.

The law relating to hearsay has been the subject-matter of
much debate and controversy during recent times. While we have
not considered it necessary to suggest any radical amendment in
this branch of the law in view of the present conditions in India,
we have, nevertheless, dealt with the relevant sections at length,
particularly, sections 32 to 35 and 60.


Gii)

Similarly, the sensitive topic of what is known as Crown privi-
lege has, as all of us are aware, come up before the courts in vari-
ous contexts in India in reference to sections 122 and 163; and the
same problem has faced the higher judiciary in other countries as
well. It, therefore, became necessary for us to sift and examine in
depth the material—judicial as well as academic—which indeed
is voluminous. In this case, we have recommended certain amend-
ments which, we think, will hold the scales even between the rights
of citizens to lay before tite courts all factual material relevant to
the issues in a pending judicial proceeding against the Government
and the legitimate considerations of security of the State. Our
recommendation on this particular subject, it is hoped, will be
conducive to justice in the broadest sense.

If two contending values are apparently irreconcilable, it is fot
the Court—at least in a matter of adjective law—to act as the
final arbitrator. That has been the approach which the majority of
us have adopted.

I ought to add that, on this important matter, two of our
colleagues, Mr. Dhavan and Mr. Sen-Varma, have taken a different
view which has been expressed by them in a minute of dissent.

The majority and the minority views elaborately expressed
in the Report and the minute of dissent respectively will, it is hoped,
enable the Government to decide which of the two competing views
they should accept.

On section 63, the proposals for expanding its scope with a
view to bring it in conformity with section 65, which were intended
to be made, the Commission was equally divided. My colleagues
Mr. Sen-Varma, and Mr. Bakshi and I took the view that section
63 should be so amended, while my other colleagues, Dr. Tripathi,
Mr, Dhavan and Mr. Mitra took the view that no change should
be made in the said section. Since the Commission was thus equally
divided, we unanimously decided that the Report should content
itself by setting forth the two points of view and leave it to the
Government to decide which view to accept.

In regard to sections 23 and 68, my colleague Mr. Mitra
differed from the conclusion reached by the rest of us and has
expressed his view in a minute of dissent.

Except for these points, the recommendations made by the
Commission are unanimous and that, in my view, can well be
regarded as a distinctive feature of the Report when the subject-
matter under examination raised some issues which were complex,
complicated and difficult and needed an elaborate discussion during

the course of our study.

At present, the Commission is engaged on the study of the
Transfer of Property Act; and this task again is arduous and
exacting. But let me assure you that the Commission has under-
taken this task with the full confidence that it will be able to for-
ward to the Union Government its report on this subject before
its tenure expires on the 31st of August this year.


Gv)

I am happy to note that you agree with the suggestion which
I have been repeatedly making for some time past that the Com-
mission’s reports should be printed as early as possible and circu-
lated to all academic bodies like the Bar Associations in the whole
of India, the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, the
Bar Council of India and the State Bar Councils, and other institu-
tions interested in the study of law. If the course suggested by me
is adopted, it wil! stimulate an intellectual debate on the propriety
or otherwise of the approach adopted by the Commission and the
merits of the recommendations made by it in regard to specific Acts
which are the subject-matter of the reports.

Before concluding, I would like to add that, after the Com-
mission was constituted in September 197], it has forwarded twenty-
five reports (numbering forty-five to sixty-nine) including the
present one; and, after the Commission was re-constituted in
September 1974, it has forwarded nine Reports including the
present one,

Yours sincerely,

(P. B. Gajendragadkar)

Shri Shanti Bhushan, ‘
Minister of Law, Justice and Co. Affairs,

Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi-110001.


CONTENTS

Caspr Supecr

No,
L
a
3.

>

5. Preliminary provisions

13.
oS
15.
16.
M7.

Introductory -1, este teeter हम... tee
History of Rules of Evideuce in England ... oe oo बज
Scope and object of rules of evidence and their relation to judicial investigation of

Scheme of the Act

Definitions oe ee 3००
Relevant facts—the general provisions #4. ne tee
Relevancy in particular cases

Admissions and confessions on pee nee oe
Confessions—General discussion and Scheme. se

|. Confessions and admissions . oe न

Statements made under special circumstances by persons who cannot be called

Entrica in books of account wee Or #% ४०%... *** बन
Entries in public records and other published writings we ve on a
How much of & statement to be proved 60. sweeten eae
Opinion of Bxperts ase wee eos ee eee tee «९० ve on aoe
Foreign Law or 3 ऋम.। कन्‍ण. कऋऔऋ.. ह#%... है... #*+«
Opinion evidence-—-Other provisions wee tee nee nee nae wee
Character oe on oe fo oo oo os ws woe wee ae

Judicial notice tee tte net nee rte tenet «2०%
Certificate of the Government as to certain matters conceming international
Telations . eee eae “ oe ove

Facts admitted tee ete ae tee cee wee ete
Oral evideace—General discussion eee teen ae ae
Hearsay—whether basic changes necded 1 tee wee ete tee tte
Documentary evidence--the general scheme wo oo on oe vee सन
Secondary evidence or हहभ.... >*%* or i ed
Secondary evidence when admissible So ess

|. Proof of signature oe ese ue tee न न न nee ane

Attested documents 9 -.. ee cue cee eee te nese ee

Pace

“4

29

39

42
72
125
165
180
202

211
276
287
295
327
342
350
355
359

370
35
379
381
392
408
410
412
427
433
436


No Supmecr
33, Comparison of signature by the court tenes
34, Public documents and private documents on o
35. Certified Copies 18. 15... 0
36. Public documents न wee oo os wae oe
37. Presumptions as to documents ~ oe wee ne
38. Presumptions as to record of evidence -.. oo oo
39, Presumptions as to certain official documents oo
40. Miscellaneous presumptions as to documents... >>
41. Ancient documents ae wee +
42, Exclusion of oral evidence—in substitution for documentary
43. Variation of documentary evidence by other evidence
44. Evidence for interpretation of documents a a
45. Burden of proof oe oe wee oe on
46, Burden of proof—exceptions to criminal liability os
47, Facts especially within a party's knowledge oa
48. Presumption of life ...- ase oo wee os os
49. Presumption of death we oo a oe .
50. Proposed new section . a a
Si. Partnership, tenancy and agency ae on wee we
52. Possession see aes wee wee eee ae
53. Good faith न os on os oo ve on
54. Presumption of legitimacy wee wee कक ee one
55. Cession of territory... see tee ee tee oe
56. Presumptions—discretionary and rebutting wae
57. Estoppel wee we on nee oe oa oon
$8. Rule excluding evidence of title a we oo
59, Estoppel of acceptor of bill, bailee or licensee... a
60. Competence and compellability—General rule

61.

(सं)

Parties and their spouses wee ae

62, Privilege and disability—General observations «..
63. Judicial privilege vee on vee we oo
64. Marital privileges wee oe oe oe oe
65. State privilege... we o न्न oe we
66. Communications in official confidence vee बन
67. Information as to offences... 1. ose aoe
68. Legal professional privileges wee tae
69. Incriminating documents and title deeds... oe

70.

Incriminating Questions «© --. e teeta

evidence

PAGE

445
454
459

473
480
484
488
493
501

510

615


(CHAPTER Supyecr Pace
No,
71. Privileges of family counsellors ० ॥# तु... a ae 27
‘72. Patent agents wee 734
73. Accomplice evidence - ae we ae we a wee ae oe 734
74. Minimum number of witnesses os ae we wee on a बन oo 748
75. Order of Examination of witnesses on ae wee os we oe न 7357
76, Determination of questions as to admissibility te 160
77. Examination and Cross-examination we on ve oe oe oe न 764
78. Cross-examination—who can be cross-examined bee ae ee 772
79. Leading questions cee nee .. .. 773
80, Matters in writing used in examination... vee wee os we te a 778
81. Contradiction of witnesses... fear teen 781
82. Impeaching the credit fae eaten ne aes 790
83. Cross-examination as to credit—the powers of the court : we पु oe 194
84. Objectionable question in cross-examination ase ae oo oe se vee 805
85. Contradiction as to matters affecting credit we an a we tee oo 816
86. Cross-examination of one’s own witness... ae vee te wee oe te 820
87. Impeachment of credit of witnesses ween 826
88. Corroborative evidence and re-establishing credit vee oe 835
89. Credit of declarants other than witnesses oe wee te me oe . 848
90. Refreshing the memory of witnesses cee eee ae ae 850
91. Evidence with reference to past memoranda wee : os ce ae 855
92. Rights of adverse party with reference to writings used as aids to or substitutes
tor memory न न बन we ae oe ae ase ave tee eee 858
93, Production of documents ee wee bene nee 859
94, Documents produced atte: notice and inspected ue aes ws te ae 862
95. Documents not produced after noticu on om : ae पु we 864
96, Power of the Judge settee tee oe 866
97, Jury and assessors ene teeta .. .. ... 469
98. Improper admission or rejection of evidence oo ve we oe we tae 870
99, Discretion of the Judge beeen tea ae 873

100, Conclusion wenn etna ee 878



REVISED DRAFT REPORT ON THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report deals with the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The Law Com-
uussion has taken up the subject suo motu; but, it may be noted, that nume~
Tous suggestions for amending the Act’ have also been received by the Com-
mission ftom diverse sources, from time to time,

1.2. For the proper working of any legal system, adjective law is as important
as the substantive law and in the iield of adjective law, the law of evidence
is as important as the law of civil and criminal procedure. The Commission
bas, having concluded the examination of the chief procedural codes, con-
sidered it appropriate to devote its attention to the law of evidence which
regulates the enquiry into facts by judicial tribunals. Ihe law is principally con-
tained in the Act with which we ate concetned in this Report

Society governs the conduct of its citizens by principles and rules pres-
cribed by statutes, reguiations and ruies of court,

The machinery of trials in our law is designed io ensure the fair conduct
of a case before the courts of the land. This has been achieved progressively
over the years by rules ullimately derived from common sense and prudence.
These rules must change with the passage of time, not only in order that they
may improve their efficiency, but also in order to secure harmony.

Law is classified as substantive or adjeciive. Subsiantve law * is that
which has au independent standing, and determines the rights and obiigations
of persons in particular circumstances. Adjective law is dependent or subsi-
diary, and prescribes the procedure for obtaining a decision according to sub-
stantive jaw. Procedural law is often regarded as including both procedure
proper and evidence, for evidence is concerned with establishing the facts to
which substantive law is applied. Though procedure is only a means, in prac-
tice, it often assumes as great an importance as questions of substantive law.

13. Over the last half a century or so, increasing interest has been shown in
the reform of tbe law of Evidence. im those countries where the law was not
codified, many of the topics belonging to the Law of Evidence were regarded
as complex and confused, and sometimes even considered to be “absurdly
technical”.s In the United States, for example, two leading writers commented
in 1937 that “a picture of the hearsay rule with its exceptions would resemble an
old fashioned crazy quilt, made of patches out from a group of paintings by
cubists, futurists and surrealists.”

The movement for reform has now led to a number of official and unofficial
codifications.

‘he Act will hereafter be referred to as the Act.

*Nokes, Introduction to Evidence (1967), page 30.

8Myers v. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1965) A. C. 1001, 1019 (per Lord Reid).

‘Morgan and Maguire, (1937), 50 Harvard Law Review, 909, 921, “Looking back-
lence.’

ward and forward at evid

1

Introductory.

Experience of ad-
jective law.


Two postulates.

Need for guide-
Jines.

2

Elsewhere in the Commonwealth, until very recently, attempts to secure «
comprehensive code of evidence’ were not successful, owing to considerable pre-
judice against codes that is natural to persons who ate unfamiliar with their
operation. This is not the position now. In India, there never prevailed any
such prejudice.

The codification in the Act has avoided, in India, many of the problems
which were experienced elsewhere. Fortunately, some of the provisions of the
Act, one can now say, were a head of the times. But this does not dispense with
the necessity of examining its provisions with a view to checking up whether
they are complicated, obscure, irrational or unjust in operation and as such,
need to be revised.

14. Any statute relating to evidence is based on two fundamental postulates,
The first is that in the judicial process, facts come up for determination. The
second is that in such determination of facts, certain rules ate required. It is
obvious that the Evidence Act deals with a vital part of the judicial process—
the determination of facts. The necessity for determination of facts arises in
a judicial proceeding because?—

“In order that the Judge may decide upon a question in litigation, it
is necessary that the pasties to the action should satisfy him of the truth
of the facts submitted for his decision. But they must not only satisfy the
Judge; they must also prove the facts adduced. Facts that must be prov-
ed, and such as affect and are relevant to the decision to be given, are un-
certain facts, that, such as are disputed by the other party.”

This process of proving the facts, if it is to be carried on efficiently and
impartially, must need rules. The actual content of the rules may vary. But
there have to be some rules.

1.5, Archbishop Whateley, in his Rhetoric,’ has made certain obsetvations as
to the need for guidelines in certain intellectual processes, which apply with
equal force to rules of evidence :—

“Tt has been truly observed that genius begins where rules end. But,
to infer from this, as some seem disposed to do, that in any department
wherein genius can be displayed, rules must be useless, or useless to those
who possess genius, is a very rash conclusion. What I have observed else-
where concerning Logic, that ‘a knowledge of it serves to save a waste of
ingenuity’, holds in many other departments also. In travelling through
a countty partially settled and explored, it is wise to make use of charts,
and of high-roads with direction posts, as far as these will serve our pur-
pose, and to reserve the guidance of the compass or the stars for places
where we have no other helps. In like manner we should avail ourselves
of rules as far as we can receive assistance from them, knowing that there
will always be sufficient scope for genius in points for which mo rules can

be given.”

3, Keeton and Lloyd, The United Kingdom (1955), i, 343; Nokes, “Codification of
the tow of Evidence in ‘Common Law Jurisdictions” (1956) 5 1.C. L. 0. 347; Cross, “Some
Proposals for Reform in the Law of Evidence” (1961), 24 M. 1... R. 32 at 60.

*Tomkin and Jenckin, Modern Roman Law, page 92, cited by Field, Introduction to
the Evidence Act, page xi
tWhateley, Rhetoric, Preface, page vi.


3

The definition of “evidence” that was contained in some of the American
Codes—“evidence is the means sanctioned by the law of ascertaining im a judi-
cial proceeding the truth respecting a question of fact”—aptly brings out this
aspect.# .

1.6. While substantive law, as already stated. defines the rights, duties and
liabilities, adjective law regulates the pleadings, procedure and proof by
which the substantive law is applied in practice.

In India, pleadings and procedure are dealt with in the two procedural Codes;
the subject of limitation of suits is dealt with in the Limitation Act; and the
remaining part of the adjective law—proof—is dealt with im the Evidence Act.
As an abstract proposition, one could state that there is but one general rule
of evidence, namely, that that evidence should be the best which the mature
of the case can admit. However, circumstances in real life are so complex
that it is often not easy to discover what is the best evidence; and, even if one
could determine what is the best evidence, necessity might demand the sub-
stitution of the second best evidence in its place, in a particular case.

One of the objects of the law of evidence, then, is to “restrict the investi-
gations made by courts within the bounds prescribed by general convenience.”

1.7. Of course, the law of evidence does not command that every fact must
be proved. The cbject of restricting the scope of inquiry is achieved also* by
“the doctrine that certain classes of facts are alteady within the ‘judicial
notice’ of the Courts, and by ‘presumptions’ by which certain propositions are
to be assumed to be sufficiently proved when certain other propositions have
been established.”

18. Since, principally, the law of evidence restricts the scope of inquiry, a
part of the law of evidence consists of negative rules declaring what “is not
evidence”. Of this negative aspect, a striking illustration is found in section 5
of the Act, which provides that “evidence may be given of all facts jn issue
and all such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant ard of no
others.”* Evidence tendered must be shown to be admissible under one of
other of the sections of the Act’—or the provisions of some other Act previous-
ly passed and not repealed, or an Act enacted subsequent to the Act?

19. The nature and basis of the particular restriction laid down in the law
of evidence may vary. But, broadly speaking, the law excludes “certain kinds
of evidence as having too remote a bearing on the issue, or as incapable of
being satisfactorily tested or as coming from a suspicious quarter’.

'Section 1823, California Code of Civil Procedure, cited in Bouvier, Law Dictionary
(1914), page 109.

*New Jersey Rules of Evidence.

*Para, 1.2, supra.

‘R.¥ Prabhulal, (1874) 11 Bom. High Court Reports 91.

‘Holland Jurisprudence (1910). referting to ‘Thayer's, A Preliminary Treatise on
Evidence at the Common Law (1898).

"Cf. Lord Mansfield’s observations in the Berkley Pearage Case, 4 Camp. 414,

"See Collector v. Palakhdhari, (1899) 1. L. R. 12 All. 1, 43.

"See Lekhraj v. Mahipal, 7 Ind. Appeals 70, explained in Abinash v. Parash, 9 Cal.
Weekly Notes 402, 406,

‘Holland Jurisprudence (1910), referring to Thayer's, A. Preliminary Treatise on
Evidence at the Common Law (1898).

Substantive and
adjective law.

Every fact need
not be proved.

Negative

Tulos

forming the part

of the
evidence,

law of


History.

Presidency Towns.

Modification — by
Central Acts bas-
ed mostly on
English Statutes,

4

1.10. After this discussion of the essential] nature of the law of evidence, it
will be convenient to give a brief history of the Jaw of evidence in India since
the commencement of the British rule. For this purpose, it would be desirable
to deal separately with the position in the Presidency towns and the position
elsewhere.

हे 1.11. In the Presidency towns, the English rules of evidence were followed,

since the establishment of the Supreme Courts in Calcutta, Madras and Bom-
bay. and perhaps even earlier, that is, since the establishment of the Recorder's
Courts.

The royal charter of September 24, 1726 provided for the establishment at
Madras, Fort William and Bombay, of civil and criminal courts that derived
their authority from the King. instead of the East India Company. The charter
recites that a representation had been made by the company, that there was “a
great want” at these places of a proper and competent power and authority
“for the speedy and effectual administering of justice in civil causes, and for
the trying and punishing of capital and other criminal offences, and misdemean-
ours.” Thus was introduced into each Presidency town a Mayor’s Court, not
a court of the company as there had been in Madras, “though exercising its
authority in a land to which the King of England had no ‘claim to sovercionty.”
We do not consider it necessary to discuss the question where, in law, sovereignty
resided during that period.

Rankin states:!

“That the law intended to be applied by thesd courts was the law of
England is clear enough from the terms of the charter, though this is not ex-
pressly stated: and it has long been accepted doctrine that this charter intro-
duced into the Presidency towns the Jaw of England—both common and statute
Jaw—as it stood in 1726.”

Thus, the English rules of evidence were always followed in the Courts
established by Royal Chartets in the Presidency Towns of Calcutta, Madras
and Bombay.

1.12. Some Central Acts did modify or supplement the rules of English law.
The process of reform was, however, slow, and mostly followed the English
statutes that were passed from time to time.

At common law, “The oath of an infamous person is not accepted” In
1837, Act 19 abolished the incompetence of convicts to give evidence. This
reform seems to have been enacted in England later—in 1843.

Section 1 of Act 9 of 1840 made certain provisions as to interested witnesses.
Jt followed Statute 3 & 4 Will 4 Ch. 42. In 1843. in England, Lord Denman’s
Act—the Evidence Act, 1843 (6 & 7 Vict. c. 85)—was passed, which enacted
that no person offered as a witness should be excluded, by reason of incapacity
from crime or intetest, from giving evidence cither in person or by deposition.
There wete several exceptions, one of which excluded the parties and their
spouses. In India, Act 7 of 1844 introduced similar provisions applicable to Her
Majesty’s Courts in the Presidency towns.

In England, in 1846, the Statute 9 and 10 Vict. 6. 95, first declared parties
to the proceeding, their wives and all other persons competent as witnesses in

1Rankin, Background to Indian Law (1946), page 1.
Coke on Littleton, 1589.


5

the Country Courts; and, in 1851, the Evidence Act—Lord Brougham’s' Act No.
2 (14 and 15 Vict. Cap. 99), was passed, which declated the parties and the
persons in whose behalf any suit, action or proceeding might be brought or de
fended, competent and compellable to give evidence in any Court of Justice or
before any person having by law or by consent of parties authority to hear,
receive and examine evidence. In India, similar provisions were enacted for
Her Majesty’s Courts in India by Act 15 of 1852. It made the parties competent

witnesses except in criminal proceedings and proceedings for adultery or breach
of promise of marriage.

In England, the Evidence Amendment Act of 1853 (16 and 17 Vict., Cap.
83 introduced by Lord Brougham),—Lord Brougham’s Act No. 3—made the
husbands and wives of parties to the record competent and compellable as wit-
nesses, subject to certain exceptions—the exceptions were mainly concerned with
suits for breach of promise of marriage and proceedings based on adultery. In
India, the same reform was introduced by Act 2 of 1855.

1.13, The juristic interest of the Act Temoving incompetence on the ground
of “interest” is obvious. The older theory was, that a party would nautrally sup-
port his own case, and, therefore, would not be a truthful witness, and hence,
was not competent. In the Pickwick Papers, Charles Dickens exposed the ab-
surdity of this rule, by describing with ridicule the trial of Bardell and Pick-
wick. As stated above, the older theory was abrogated in England and in India
by legislation.

In Tilley v. Tilley? Denning L. J. (as he then was) gave a brief historical
survey of the English legislation on the subject—

(1) At common law, neither parties nor their spouses were competent to
give evidence at all.

(2) Lord Brougham’s Evidence Act, 1851, section 2, made the parties (but
not their spouses) competent and compellable. Section 3 made an exception in
criminal proceedings. Section 4 made exceptions in proceedings instituted in
consequence of adultery and in actions for breach of promise of marriage.

(2b) Lord Brougham’s Evidence Act, 1853, section 1, made the spouses of
the parties competent and compellable. Section 2 made exceptions to section
1 in criminal proceedings and ‘in any proceeding instituted in consequence of
adultery’,

(3) As a result of the Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857, the preservation of
the common law rule that parties and their spouses were neither competent
nor compellable to give evidence in proceedings instituted ‘in consequence of
adultery’ assumed a new importance, as proceedings under that Act fell within
this category.

(4) By the Evidence Further Amendment Act, 1869, section 1, the excep-
tions made in Lord Brougham’s Acts in respect of actions for breach of promise
of martiage and proceedings instituted in consequence of adultery were repealed.

Some of the reforms mentioned above were extended to Civil Courts of
East Indian Company in the Bengal Presidency by Act 19 of 1853.

‘Lord Brougham’s Act No. utvidence Act, 1845, related to official documents and
copies of Acts.

3 Tilley v. Tilley, (1948) 2 AH. EB. R. 1113.

Tocompetence.


Position in the
Mofussil.

Central Acts ap-
plying to Courts
outside Presid-
ency Towns,

6

Elaborate provisions dealing with evidence were made’ by Act 2 of 1855.
In fact, between 1835 and 1855, there were eleven enactments touching the
law of evidence and, by Act 2 of 1855, all the enactments were consolidated.

1,14. In the mofussil, however since the Courts were neither required to
follow nor debarfed from following the English law, a very vague customary
Jaw of evidence prevailed.* Courts sometimes relied on the Hedaya, sometimes
on English text-books, sometimes on lectures given in India and the like, Some
Regulations made between 1793 and 1834 dealt sporadically with some rules
of evidence in Bengal and in Madras, and somewhat more elaborately in Bom-
bay. But these Regulations touched only the fringe of the subject.

Bengal Regulation 9 of 1793 directed the Magistrates to be careful to
cause the witnesses on the part of the accused to be in attendance by the time
of the arrival of the court of circuit. The same Regulation provided that the
religious persuasions of witnesses were not to be considered as a bar to the
conviction of a prisoner. If, in any case, the evidence of a witness would be
considered inadmissible under the Muhammedan Law, on the ground only that
the witness was not a Muslim by religion, the courts were directed to give vali-
dity to that evidence, by a circuitous way, on the supposition that the witness
was of the Muhammedan persuasion”

Bengal Regulation 9 of 1796 directed that a prisoner was to be questioned
at the time of his being committed or held to bail, and his answer was to be
recorded on the Magistrate’s proceedings, with the specification of any witness
named by him. And the courts of circuit were expected to ascertain that all
due measures had been taken to cause the attendance of all witnesses both for
the prosecution and for the defence‘.

Bengal Regulation 4 of 1797 prohibited leading questions to witnesses,
but allowed cross-examination either by the Judge or by the opposite party
for the purpose of extracting the information they possessed and the discovery
of the truth. The court of circuit was directed to take note of any variations
in the depositions of the same witnesses before them and the Magistrates, but
depositions taken before the Magistrates were not to be read until the witnesses
were re-examined.®

Bengal Regulation 3 of 1812 prohibited Magistrates from issuing process to
witnesses without previously satisfying themselves that sufficient grounds exist-
ed for the prosecution. The prosecutor was to deposit in the hands of the Nazir
a sufficient amount of money for the maintenance of the witnesses during the
period of their stay.

1.15. Besides these occasional directions to be found in the old Regulations,
some other rules embodying the most sttiking reforms, then recently introduced
in England, were inserted by Central Acts—e.g. Act 19 of 1853, the operation
of which was, however, restricted to the Bengal Presidency. Two years after-
wards, Act 2 of 1855 was passed. This Act reproduced, with some additions,
all the reforms advocated by Bentham and carried out in England by Lords
Denman and Brougham; but nearly all its provisions pre-supposed the existence
of that body of law upon which these reforms and amendments were engrafted.

1866 infra.
First Report of the Commissioners appointed to consider the reforms of the judicial
establishments in India, Appendix B No. 3, page .39,
SSections 12 and 56 of the Regulation.
‘Sections 2 and 4,
'Section 7. clauses iii and vii.


7

1.16. The position outside the Presidency towns may be summarised as
under—

(a) All persons admitted that the Mohammedan law of evidence -was
not to be followed. -

(b) The whole of the English Law of Evidence had never by any general
enactment been rendered applicable to India, though some portions
of it, with or without modifications, had been expressly incorporat-
ed in the statute Law of this country; Act 2 of 1855 was the largest
specimen of this fragmentary legislation, while other fragments were
to be found scattered through the Statute Book, more specially in
the Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure,

(c) Where the Statute Law was silent, it devolved upon the higher
Courts to supply the deficiency with Judge-made law. In laying
down precedents and setting disputed points, these higher Courts
carefully considered the different systems in force in different coun-
tries, the former usage in India (if any), the peculiar circumstances
of the country and thei: modifying effect on principles of general
application; and where, with due regard to these considerations, they
found themselves able to follow the English Law of Eyidence, they
were generally willing to take it as their guide,

1.17, In Banwari Lal vy. Hetnarain Singh’, before the Privy Council, an
the 22nd February, 1858, Dr, Lushington remarked: “It is unfortunately too
much the habit of those Courts to receive documents without that just discrimi.
nation which would prevail, were the rules of evidence known and established,
but their Lordships are of opinion that they cannot in these cases take upon
themselves to determine what ought or ought not to have been received in the.
Courts in India. They may lament the great latitude with which documentary
evidence 19 received, but it would be contrary to justice, in any particular case,
to visit upon an individual penal consequences, because the administration of
justice was not more strictly conducted with reference to the admission of
evidence.”

1.18 The law thus rested in a state of great indefiniteness. In a Full Bench
decision of the Calcutta High Court, it wag held that the English law of evt-
dence was not the law of the Mofussil; that at the time the Mahommeden

. criminal law, inchrding the Mahommedan law of evidence, was no longer the
law of the country, and that by the abolition of the Mahommedan; law, the
law of England was not established in its place. The Mofussil Coutts were,
thus, not required to follow the English law, although they were not debarred
from following it where they regarded it as the most equitable.

4.19, We may, now refer to some of the Centra} Acts relating to evidence,
enacted before 1872, which introduced a modicum of certainty in the law.

The first Act of the Governor-General-in-Council which dealt with evidence
-strictly so-called was Act 10 of 1835, which applied to all the Courts in British
India, and dealt with the mode of proof of Acts of the Governor-General-in-
Council. This was followed by several enactments passed at intefvals during
the next twenty years, which effected various small amendments of the law

‘Banwart Lal v. Hernarain Singh, (1858) Moo I. A., 148; 4 W. R. P, 2. 148.
ween v. Khyroolah, (1866) 8. 1... R. Supp. Vol. App. 11; 6 W. R., Cr. 21; Fiold,
Ev, 16—18.
See R. पर. Ramaswamt, (1869) 6 B. H.C. R. Cr. क.

2131 LAD/ND/77

-Criticism
Courts,

Position summa
rised.

Observations. of
Privy Council.

by High.

-Central Pecte—

Acts of the Goy-
ernar-Generabn-

“Councit between .

$935 and 1872,


8

and applied, to the Courts in India, several of the reforms in the law of evidence
made in England. We have mentioned a few of them while dealing with the
position in Presidency Towns. We shall now refer to them in detail,

These Acts were as follows:

Act 19 of 1837 abolished incompetency by reason of conviction; Act 5 of
1840 dealt with affirmations; Act 18 of 1843, s. 9; Act 9 of 1840; and Act 7
of 1844 dealt with incompetency by reasons of crime or interest; Act 15 of
1852 dealt with competency of parties and other matters; Act 19 of 1853 ex-
tended several of these reforms to the Civil Courts of the East India Company
in the Bengal Presidency.

As a specimen of the type of legislation and its object, we may quote Act
7 of 1844, passed on the 6th April, 1844, whose long title was “An Act for
improving the law of evidence”. The Act was in these terms:—

“An Act for improving the Law of Evidence :

1. Whereas the enquiry after truth in Her Majesty’s Coutts of Justice
is often obstructed by incapacities created by the present Law, and
it is desirable that fall information as to the facts in issue, both in
Criminal and in Civil cases, should be laid before the persons
who are appointed to decide upon them, and that such persons should
exercise their judgment on the credit of the witnesses adduced, and
on the truth of their testimony.”

“Tt is hereby enacted, that within the local jurisdiction of Her Majesty's
Courts, no person offered as a witness shall hereafter be excluded by reason
of incapacity from crime or interest from giving evidence, either in petson
or by deposition, according to the practice of the Court on the trial of any
issue joined, or of any matter or question, or on any enquity arising in any
suit, action or proceeding, Civil or Criminal, in any of Her Majesty’s
Courts, or before any Judge, Jury, Sheriff, Coroner, Magistrate, Officer or
person having by Law or by consent of partics, authority within the juris-
diction of Her Majesty’s Courts to hear, receive and examine evidence, but
that every person so offered may and shall be admitted to give evidence
on oath or solemn affirmation, in those cases wherein affirmation is by Law
receivable, notwithstanding that such person may or shall have an interest
in the matter in question, or in the event of the trial of any issue, matter, ~
question or enquiry, or of the suit, action, or proceeding, in which he is
offered as a witness, and notwithstanding that such person offered as a
witness may have been previously convicted of any crime or offence: Pro-
vided that this Act shall not render competent any party to any suit, action,
or proceeding individually named in the record, or any lessor of the plain-
tiff or tenant of premises sought to be recovered in ejeetment, or. the Lond.
lord or other person in whose right any defendant in replying may make
cognizance, or any person in whose immediate and individual behalf any
action may be brought or defended, either wholly or in part, or the hushand
or wife of such persons respectively: Provided also, that this Act shall not
repeal any provision in the Act of the Government of India XXV of 1838:
Provided that in any of Her Majesty’s Courts sitting in Equity, any de-
fendant to any cause pending in any such Court so sitting, may be examin-
ed as a witness on behalf of the plaintiff, or of any co-defendant in.any
such cause, saving just exceptions; and that any interest which much defen-
dant so to be examined may have jn the matter or any of the matters in


9

question in the cause, shall not be deemed a just exception to the testimony
of such defendant, but shall only be considered as affecting or tending to
affect the credit of such defendant as a witness.”

1.20. In 1855, Act 2 was passed for the further’ improvement of the law of
evidence.

The Act of 1855 was the most important legislative enactment prior to 1872
in the field of evidence. We shall briefly summarise its provisions. Sections
2 to 5 of the Act declared that judicial notice should be taken of all Regulations
passed before 22nd April. 1834, all Acts of the Governor-General-in-Council, all
Public Acts of Parliament, the courts’ own members and officers, the name,
titles and authorities of the Governor-General and other specified officers; divi-
sions of time; geographical divisions, war and peace, the existence, title ard
national flags of States recognised by the British Government, Government
Gazettes, recitals in laws of facts of a public nature, and advertisements put-
porting to be published by authority. Sections 6 to 11 provided that the courts
may refer to books, maps and charts on certain matters. Section 12 provided
for evidence of foreign law, and by section 13, maps made under the authority
of Government or of any public municipal body, when not prepared for the
purpose of any litigation in question, were admitted without further proof.

1.21. As regards the competence to testify, the only persons incompetent to
testify were, by section 14, children under 7 yeas and insane persons, who
appear incapable of receiving just impressions of the facts respecting which they
were examined or of relating them truly. In the case of children and pefsons
of defective religious belief, sections 15 and 16 substituted a simple affirmation

- in place of oaths or solemn affirmations. Section 18 provided that no one was
10 be incompetent from interest or relationship, and section 19 specifically de-
clared that parties to civil suits might be examined as witnesses. Under section
20, husbands and wives were, in general, declared competent in every civil! pro-
ceeding to give evidence for or against each other.

1.22. Evidentiary privilege was dealt with in quite an elaborate manner, By
section 21, witnesses were exempted from producing documents relating to
affairs of State. Section 22 exempted parties from producing documents not
Televant to the case of the party requiring production, and also confidential cor-
respondence with legal advisers. Under section 24, bartisters, attorneys and
vakils were not, without their clients’ consent, to disclose professional commu-
nications.

By section 25, persons present in cout’s were bound to give evidence even
though not subpoenaed. Section 26 exempted persons summoned merely to
produce documents from personal attendance,

1.23. Except in the case of treason, the evidence of one witness was made
sufficient proof by section 28. But there was no provision abrogating the com-
mon law rule relating to corroborative evidence in support of the testimony of
an accomplice or of a single witness in the case of perjury. It may be noted
that the exception as regards treason was based on the English law as it was
then in force, and as it remained in force for a long time until abrogated dur-
ing recent times®,

By section 29, dying declarations were made admissible even thoxgh the
declarant expected to recover. It may be noted that this was a departure from

*As to this Act, see R. v. Gopal Dass, LL.R. 3 Mad. 271, 282.
"Treason Act. 1945.

ict 2 of 1855.
portant provi-
sions of the Act
of 1855.


Acts passed after

Act 2

vf 1855.

10

the English law, whereunder, to render a dying declaration admissible, the de-
clarant must have abandoned al! hopes of recovery. The English case Jaw on
the subject upto 1888 is reviewed in को, v. Glossler'. In this connection, section
371 of the Code of Crimina! Procedure, Act 25 of 1861, may also be seen, as
well as the under-mentioned 235९.

1.24. Section 30 of the Act of 1855 allowed a party. with ihe leave of the
Court, to cross-examine and discredit his own witnesses. By section 31, certain
former statements of witnesses were made admissible to corroborate their testi-
mony. Under section 32, witnesses were bound to answer criminating questions,
but the answer was not to be used against them unless they wilfully gave false
evidence. The question whether a witness had been convicted of any crime
could be put to the witness under section 33, and he might be cross-examined
as to previous statements made by him in writing, under section 34.

4.25. Secondary evidence was provided for, as also documentary evidence in
general. Thus, by section 36, secondaty evidence might be received where an
original document was out of reach of process, and by section 35 copies made
by a copying machine were deemed to be correct. The Common law regarding
attested documents was not modified; but documents which did not require at-
testation by law could, under section 37, be proved as if unattested; and section
38 provided that the admission of a patty to an attested instrument of its exe-
cution by himself was, as against him, prima facie, proof of such execution.

1.26. Section 39 provided that entries made against interest or in the course
of business were. in certain cases, admissible in the lifetime of the person mak-
ing them. Under section 40, entries in the course of business were, in certain
cases, made admissible for the purpose of identifying the payer or receiver.
Sections 41 and 42 made admissible receipts against certain persons other than
the giver. Certain books and other documents were made admissible as cor-
roborative evidence under sections 43 and 44. Witnesses were allowed to
refresh their memory by certain documents or copies thereof under sections 45
and 46. Under section 47, in cases of pedigree, the declarations of intimate
acquaintances were admitted. Under section 48, on the question of genuine-
ness of a signature etc., comparison of an undisputed signature, etc., was al-
lowed.

Under section 49, a power of attorMey purported to have been executed be-
fore a notary public might, in certain cases, be proved by its production. Sec-
tions 50 and 51 provided that despatch and receipt of a letter might be proved
by letter books and the receipt book.

Under section 56, an official document admissible by law was made prima
facie evidence without proof of any seal etc., which it was directed to have.

Section 57 provided that the improper admission or rejection of evidence
was not to be a ground for a new trial where there was other evidence to justify

the decision.

4.27. A number of Acts were passed after Act 2 of 1855, as follows :

Act 10 of 1855 (Attendance of witnesses) Act 8 of 1859 (Civil Proce-
dure; contained provisions similar to the present Code provisions as to
witnesses); and Act 25 of 1861. The Act of 1861, mainly dealt with Crimi-
nal Procedure; but it also contained provisions as to witnesses, confessions,
police-diaries, examination of the accused and Civil Surgeon, reports of
Chemical Officers, and dying declarations. .

पर, v. Glosser, (1888) 15 Cox 471. हु
iq the matter of Tenoo, (1871) 15 Weekly Reports Criminal 11.



ll

Act 15 of 1869 dealt with the evidence of prisoners;—provisions which
were later placed in the Prisoners Act, 1890 and then in the Attendance of
Prisonets Act, 1955, and now in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (so
far as they concern criminal courts),

1.27A. These Acts did not affect the applicability of the English law. While,
therefore, within the Presidency Towns, the English law of evidence was in force,
modified by certain Acts of the Indian Legislature, (of which Act 2 of 1855
was the most important), the Mofussil Courts, on the other hand, had, down to
1872, hardiy any iixed mules of evidence, save those contained in scattered
Regulations and Acts

English iaw was, therefore, more or less followed, especially in criminal
cases, till express enactments prohibited its operation. Act 2 of 1855, whilst
laying down certain isolated rules of evidence, did not prohibit the adoption
either of the English law or of the rules of Mohammedan law which, by custom
or practice, had been followed by the Courts. Indeed, section 58 of the Act
of 1855 expressly laid down ihat “nothing in this Act contained shall be so
construed as to render inadmissible in any Court any evidence which, but for
the passing of this Act, would have been admissible in such Court.” The Act,
therefore, did not operate to repeal the rules of evidence which existed before,
and, although it did not require the Courts to follow the English law or any
other particular system of evidence, it did not, at the same time, preclude them
from adopting the English rules of evidence where they appeared to be the
most equitable.

‘fo recapitulate, before the passing of the Indian Evidence Act (1 of 1872),
India did not bave any uniform laws on the subject of evidence.

(a) in the Presidency towns, the rules of the English law of evidence were
followed, subject to such modifications as certain Acts of the Indian Legislature
had introduced. Of these enactments, Ace 2 of 1855 may be said to be the
most impoitant, but that Act, even taken with the others, was far too imade-
quate to supply a substantial code of the rules of evidence.

(b) In the Mufassil, where the English law did not prevail, there were
scattered rules of evidence based upon the practice of the Courts, which had
never assumed any definite or systematic form.

1.28. The tax character of the law of evidence in the Mofussil Courts was the
subject! of frequent judicial comment.

This was the state of things found by the Legislature when the Indian Evi-
dence Act was undertaken as a legislative measure having, for its object, the
consolidation of the rules of evidence and repeal of all others that had prevailed
before. This appears from the express words of section 2 of the Act; and the
saving clause contained in the last paragraph of that section may be taken, in
fact, to have an extremely limited operation. The Act became law on the 15th
March, 1872, at a time when the Legislature had also in hand an equally im-
portant measure connected with the consolidation of the rules of Criminal
Procedure*.

2868 observations in—
{a} Unide ¥. Pemmasamy, (1858} 7 M.LA. 128, 137;
(0) Hureehur v. Majhée, (1874) 22 W.R. 355, 356, 357;
(0) Naragunty v. Vengamma, (1861) 9 M.C.A., 90;
(9) Gujju v. Fatteh, (1880) LL.R. 6 Cal. 193.
'Phul v. Susijan, LL.R. 4 All. 249, 250.
*Queen Empress v. Babu Lal, 1889, LL.R.6 All. 509; 4 AWN, 229.

Applicability
English Law.

Positien re-capitue
lated,

Lax
the

Character off
lax


Bill by Commis-
sioner.

The first Bill—
outline of.

Stephen’s Bill.

Systems,

12

4.29. The Draft Bill on the subject of evidence was drawn up by Her
Majesty’s Commissioners, and introduced by Sir Henry Maine, then the Legal
Member in Council. This first draft Bill did not, however, meet with approval.

The Bili did not get beyond the first reading, and was pronounced by every
Jegal authority to which it was circulated to be unsuitable to the wants of the
country. Tle chief objection to the Bill was that it was not sufficiently elemen-
tary for the officers for whose use it was designed, and that it was, in several
respects, incomplete so that it would not supersede the necessity of the judicial
officers acquainting themselves with the English law oa the subject. In other
words, it postulated a considerable knowledge of the English law.

1.30. The Commissioners, believing that the English law of Evidence con-
tained “the most excellent rules derived from most extensive experience”, while
omitting all that appeared to them unsuited to India endeavoured to adapt the
rest to the peculiar requirements of the administration of justice as above
described. But the Draft Bill did not meet with approval in India. The Select
Committee of the Legislative Council, to which the Bill was referred for report,
after a very careful consideration of the draft, arrived at the conclusion that
it was not suited to the wants of the couatry. The grounds on which this con-
clusion was based were, in a few words, “that it was not sufficiently elementary
for the officers for whose use it was designed, and that it assumed an acquain-
tance on their part with the law of England, which could scarcely be expected
from them”.

+ 1.321. Since the first Bill did not meet with approval, a new Bill was, prepared
by Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, and was ultimately passed as the Indian Evidence
Act, 1372.

It should be noted that Stepben prepared (a) the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, (b) an English Bill of 1873, and (०) Digest of the Law of Evidence (first
published in 1876)’.

The Act was adapted to territuries elsewhere, from Ceylon’, Burma,
Malayasia and Singapore in the East to countries in the West’, as well as to
large tracts of Africa’, such as Kenya, Nigeria and Uganda’.

1.32, That, broadly stated, is the genesis and historical background of the
Act.

1.33. There are several systems of the law of evidence in force in the various
countries of the world; but, principally, we could divide them into the Anglo-
American system, the Continental system, the system in force in Eastern
Europe and the native system. The continental system—to mention the prin-
cipal characteristics—has in contrast with common law system, the minimum of
tules of evidence in the legal framework, and assigns to the judge a more
active role. The most striking distinction between the continental system and
the common law system is the prominence of cross-examination in the letter
and the dominance of the presiding officer in the former. In addition, there

Nokes, “Codification of the Law of Evidence”, (1965) 5 1, 0. L. 0. 347, 350.
‘Jennings and Tombish, ‘The Dominion of Ceylon (1952), pages 236, 281, 297, refer-
red a in Nokes, “Codification ‘of the Law of Evidence”, (1956) 5 1. C. 1... ९. 347, ao od
*For example, Revised Laws of Grenada (1953), i, 939; Laws of the Turks ad
Caicos Islands T1952} 7 194 reterred to 10 Nokes, “Codification of tho Law of Evidence”,
(1956) 5 1. ८. L. Q, 347, 350.
‘Morris, Evidence in East Africa. 948), ii, 425
Slaw of Kenya in force,.....,.1948 (nn), i. 109; Law of Nigeria (1948), iii, 42;
Laws of the Uganda Protectoraio (1951), i. 92; See also Laws of the Zanzibar Protectorate
(1935), 4. 355.



13

are, in the continental system, provisions designed to ensure a pfe-fecording
of facts to a larger extent than the common law system. The greater use of
notaries and the fuller opportunity for a record of the statements of the accused
illustrate this. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the provision in section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, is reminiscent of the continental

system of recording statements—though, of course, this does not imply that a
statemeat under section 164 is substantive evidence.

In the common law system,—to mention only the very important charac-
teristics—there is a large mass of rules laid down by the courts or legislature for
the determination of facts; the judge plays a subordinate part, in contrast with
the part played by the counsel; where the system of trial by jury prevails, ques-
tions of fact are exclusively for the jury; and the content of the law of evidence
is, therefore, richer than in the continental system.

The system in force in certain countries of Eastern Europe, though largely
based on the continental system, differs from it inasmuch as there is lesser em-
phasis on technical rules and the search for the truth is not restricted by
numerous rules.

1.34. In the Encyclopaedia Britannica’, the systems of evidence have been
briefly described. .

“Generally speaking, two different systems of the law of evidence are
prevalent all over the world: the Anglo-American and the Continental
European systems. The latter can be sub-divided into three variants: the
Germanic, the French or Roman, and the Socialist patterns. The Germanic
variant tries to utilize all means of proof; it follows the principle of formal-
lessness and balance between the accusatorial and the inquisitorial principles.
The French or Roman variant favours evidence by documents and is domi-
nated by a very formal. procedure of “equete” or investigation. The Socialist
variant makes believe that objective truth might be ascertained by evidence.
It therefore favours the inquisitorial principle and does aot protect witnesses.
parties, and experts by privileges or procedural rights.

“Japan provides an interesting example of mixture of the Continental
European system (Germanic and Roman variants) with the Anglo-American
system with the continental model dominating, however”.

*Axticle on Evidence from the new Encyclopaedia Britannica Macropaedia Volume 7,

page


tatroductory

Origin in the 17th

‘Tho rules govern:
ing the ject of
documentary

eve
dena,

Sealed documents

CHAPTER 2
HISTORY OF RULES OF EVIDENCE IN ENGLAND
L INTRODUCTORY

2.1. The rules of law that underlie most of the provisions of the Indian

Evidence Act could be better understood if the history of the corresponding
English rules is borne in mind. For this reason, we Propose to deal in brief with
the history of some of the important English rules.

22, In England, the system known in practice by the title of “The Law of

Evidence”, began to form about the middle of the seventeenth century. Noting
this fact, Best! comments— .

“The characteristic feature which distinguishes it (the English system
of judicial evidence), both from our own ancient system and those of most
other nations is, that its rules of evidence, both primary and secondary, are
in genefal rules of law; which aré not to be enforced or telaxed at the ‘dis
cretion of judges, but ate as binding on the court, juties, litigants, and
witnesses as the rest of the comimon and statute law of the Jand, and that
it is Only in the forensic procedure which regulates the manner and otder
of offering, accepting, and. rejecting evidence, that a discretionary power,
and even that a limited one, is vested in the bench. A judge consequently
has now no more right to receive prohibited evidence, becadse he thinks
that by so doing justice will be advanced in the particular case, than he has
to suspend the operation of the Statute of Mortmain, or to réfuse to permit
an heir-at-law to recover in ejectment, because it appears that he is amply
provided for without the land in dispute. It must not, however, be supposed
that this great principle becamie established all at once; and indeed the
gradual development of our systém of judicial evidence, from thé above
epoch to the present day, may be studied alike with advantage and pleasure.”

IL DOCUMENTS
23, It will be convenient to begin with documentary evidence. In modern

law, it is the rule that, if the parties to any transaction have embodied their
intentions in a document or @ series of documents, no evidence may be given
of the terms of the transaction except the document itself, or secondary evidence
of its contents, when such evidence is admissible. Nor can the terms of the
document be contradicied, altered added to, or varied, by oral evidence’. This
is not & primitive principle. In fact, it was not fully established before the latter
half of the svenenteenth century; and the provisions of the Statute of Frauds
had something to do with the modern scope of the rule‘.

2A. That it was not 4 primitive principle is shown by the rules as to the

effect of the production of the sealed documents—the records and tha deeds

‘Best, Principles of Evidence (1922), page 100, para. 116.

*Holdsworth, H. प्र, L.. Vol. 9, page 173.

‘Stephen, Digest of the Law of Evidence, 95,

‘+Wigmore, iv., 2411, 2426, referred to by Holdsworth, H, 8, L, Vol. 9, page 173.

14


15

1 those documents were adduced as a conclusive proof, they were much more
than mere evidence. The party who was not prepared to deny their genuineness
was absolutely bound—he was estopped".

2.5. A statement made by the parties to a sealed writing was conclusive proof,
of the facts contained therein®. If, therefore, one of the parties to a litigation
could produce a sealed writing which showed that the other was bound, he
produced a proof as conclusive as a record’. The other party was estopped by
his deed.

2.6. The old custom of summoning the attesting witnesses with the jury’,
illustrates the transition from the older idea that the deed properly attested is a
form of proof, to the newer idea that the proof is to be made by the verdict
of the jury. The other party was estopped by his deed. That estoppel by deed
grew naturally out of estoppel by matter of record is very clearly explained by
Professor Wigmore’. He says: “the legal value of the seal was the result of a
practice working from above downwards, from the king to the people at large.
Tt is involved, in the beginning, with the Germanic principle that the King’s
word is indisputable.. The King’s seal to a document makes the truth
of the document incontestable. This leads............ to the modern doctrine of the
verity of judicial records. ... For private men’s documents, its significance
is that the indisputability of a document sealed by the king marked it with an
extra-ordinary quality, much to be sought after. As the habitual use of the seal
extends downwards, its valuable attributes go with it. this extension of
the seal (from the king to private persons) begins in the eleventh and is com-
pleted by the thirteenth century.” The effect of the rule that the party is estop-
ped by his deed, had no small influence upon the growth of the law as to
documentary evidence in general’.

2.7. The rule that written documents cannot be varied by oral evidence had
its origin in the days when the summoning of witnesses to testify before the
jury was a new thing. In the beginning, evidence was stated in the pleadings,
and that is why a written document could not be varied by a mere averment’.
This rigid approach gave rise to certain rigid rules as to the relationship between
documentary and oral evidence, and this rigid approach gave rise to the evolu-
tion of strict rules in the construction of written documents’, Even the illegality
of a transaction was not, initially, recognised as a defence which could be
pleaded to a bond, and lawyers tried to interpret a deed with as little reference
to outside facts as possible.

li. THREE LEADING RULES OF EVIDENCE RELATING TO
DOCUMENTS, OPINION AND HEARSAY

2.8. The three leading rules which were beginning to emerge during the 17th
Century, were,—The rule that the contents of a wijtten document: cannot be
varied by oral evidence, the rule that mere opinion is not generally admissible,

’Yoldsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 173.

*Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 154.

“Anything contained in the writin, i

wed’, YB. 21, 22 Ed 1 (8. S) 436 oy. BB tm 2 ba 685 ens
Ed. II (5: 3) 171 per Herle agr; Salmond, Essays in Jurisprudence

‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 1, page 334.

SEvidence iv. 3414, 2426.

‘Holdsworth, H. E. L. Vol. 9, pages 163 and 177.

3Holdsworth, History of English Law. Vol. 9, pages 176 and 219.

"Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 7, pages 392 and 394.

Estoppel by deed
doce:

telated

ments.

Deed and recerd,

Variation of writ-
ten by oral evid-

ence.


History of rule
ae to opinion
100.

History of expert
evidence—Learn-
ed Hand quoted,

Firat method

16

and the rule that “hearsay” is not evidence’. As regards the first of these
tules, we have already discussed the history”

OPINION

2.9. The mule as to opinion evidence has a Jong history. It was an old rule
of the civil and canon law that a witness should speak as to matters which had
come under the personal observation of his own senses.—“de visu et auditu®”.
This rule made for the exclusion of mere opinion. The main exception was
in the case of experts, to whose opinion courts had recourse as early as the 14th
century. For example, in 1353, surgeons were summoned by the court to give
their opinion on the question whether a wound amounted to a mayhem‘ (crime
of maiming the person so as to render him partly or wholly defenceless.

2.10. It may, im this connection, be of interest to note that as early as the
14th century’, experts with no personal knowledge of the facts in issue used to
advise the English Courts about matters of science that would be helpful in
determining the facts in issue. In this connection, we may quote Learned Hand,
who has observed’—

“In early times, and before trial by jury was much developed, there-
seem to have been two modes of using what experts knowledge there was:
first to select as jurymen such persons as were by experience especially fitted
to know the class of facts which were before them, and second, to call to
the aid of the court skilled persons whose opinion it might adopt or not
as it pleased. Both these methods exist, at least theoretically, at the present
day, though each has practically given place to the third and much niore
recent method of calling before the jury skilled persons as witnesses.”

2.11, In 1345, before the jury system’ developed fully, ne court summoned
surgeons to rule whether or not a wound was fresh. This practice illustrates

the established fourteenth century procedure of having qualified people decide
the issues. The special jury, in this connection, means a jury of persons especially
fitted to judge of the peculiar facts upon which the particular issue at bar turn#.
The practice is certainly old, at least in one instance of like kind—the jury of
matrons de ventre inspiciends’.
== 012. In this connection, it is pertinent to quote Learned Hand again. He
has stated”
“The method mentioned above was to summon to the advice of the
court certain skilled persons to help it out of its difficulties. I wish part
cularly to distinguish here between what we should today call matter of

Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 211
Seo supra.
ond, Essays on Jurisprudence, pages 81-83, cited in Holdsworth, History of

English Law, Vol. 9, page 211.

‘Holdsworth, H. E. L. Vol. 9, page 21.

‘See Learned Hand, “Historical and Practical considerations regarding expert testi-
mony” (1901) 15 Har. Law. Rev., page 40.

SLeamed Hand, “Historical and Practical Considerations regarding expert testimony”,
(1901), 15 Harv. Law Rev.

Anonymous Lib. Ass. 28, Pi, 5 (28 Ed, Hl), cited in “Impartial Medical Testimony”

(Civil), 34 Temple Law Quarterly
a “Historical and Practical considerations regarding Expest

Seo generally L. Hand.
Testimony”, (1901) 15 Harv. 1... Rev, 40, 48.

°C Beg v. Wycherly, 8 C. & P. 262.

MLearned Hand, in 15 Harv. L. Rev, 40, 42.


17

fact for the court and matter of fact for the jury. The cases I shall mention
are those in which during a procedure incident to the conduct of a case
there arose some question of fact which the court had io decide. That is, the
court, having no rule of law to administer and not intending to establish
any, had a mere question up for decision of something in that particular
case, and summoned experts to help it where its knowledge was lacking.”

“In 1345, in an appeal of mayhem, the court summoned surgeons from
London to aid them in learning whether or not the wound was fresh. This
was, however, in deciding whether or not the appellant should be allowed
to go to trial at all.”

2.13 and 2.14, In 1620, the conclusions of physicians‘, not called by either
side, were submitted to the jury for the first time. This represents the second
method.

Later, the third method was devised, namely, calling the expert as witness.

2.15. In course of time, many of the cases on which opinion was admissible
became the centres of separate rules of law—for example, rules as to handwrit-
ing. With some limitations, the rule was that a witness whose handwriting was
in issue, could express his opinion. The frial of Sidney’ is one of the earliest
Imown cases of the admission of such evidence. Some of the limitations dis-
appeared in course of time, and, in 1854,° {evidence of persons who got their
knowledge merely from a comparison of the disputed document with genuine
documents—that is, opinion of handwriting experts—also became admissible,
like the evidence of experts in any other art or science.

HEARSAY

2.16. The rule against hearsay evidence, in its modern form, was not esta-
blished fully till the end of the 17th century. It would appear that the develop-
ment of this rule was facilitated by several factors, of which the important are
mentioned below:—

(i) First, there was the old mule, applied in civil and canon law, that
witnesses should testify only to matters under the personal observa-
tion of their own senses. No doubt, this older rule is somewhat
different from the modern hearsay rule. According to the older rule,
once a witness gives evidence as to matters which he has himself
heard, an assertion of a person who is not called as a witness could
be given in testimony, but the modem rule would reject‘ it. The
modern rule might have developed separately, but its development
was helped by the memory of this older rule.

(2) The disappearance of the doctrine that a particular number of
witnesses was required, led to importance being given to the credi-
bility of witnesses.© This might have helped to call attention to the
admitted inferiority of hearsay evidence, and induced the judges to
agree to its total exclusion.

14isep v. Bowtrell, Cro, Jac. 541.
‘Trial of Sidnay, (1683).

™Common Law Procedure Act, 1854, extended criminal courts by the Criminal
Procedure Act 1865 {17-16 Victoria Chapter 125), section

‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 214.
‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 218.

Rule

hearsay.

against


Expansion of the
rule against
hearsay.

Exceptions to the
tule against
hearsay,

18

(3) During the 16th century, it was gradually coming to be evident that
juries based their verdicts neither upon their own knowledge nor upon
enquiries, but upon the oral evidence of witnesses given in open
court’ and the statute of 1562-1563 provided for the first time a
compulsory process for witnesses. More attention was, therefore,
paid to the nature of the evidence by which the juries were led?

(4) There was a strong condemnation of hearsay by Coke in his third
institute (1641)—a statement which was at once accepted as an
authoritative statement of law.. This might have fixed the attitude
of the post-Restoration judges in relation to criminal cases, and.
obviously, the rule for criminal cases would easily be applied to civil
cases also.*

2.17. Once the general rule of excluson of hearsay was established, there
was logical expansion of its scope. The first such expansion was the emergence

of the view that hearsay was 101 admissible even as corroborative evidence® In
this connection, it should be noted that at least upto 1683, the view seems to

have been canvassed that hearsay evidence was admissible as corroborative evi-
dence In fact, the utility of hearsay at least as corroboraiive evidence survived
for a long time, in the rule that a witness’s own prior statement could be
Proved to show that he had always told the same story and, therefore, ought to
be believed.

2,18. The next expansion of the rule against hearsay is illustrated by the
establishment of the rule that the bar applied even to previous statements made
on oath’ which are res inter alios octa.

2.19. The reason assigned was that the defendant, not being present when
the depositions were taken, bad lost the benefit of a cross-examination” It was
because cf this development that some depositions of wilnesses before justices of
the Peace were, by legislative action, excluded except under very stringent con-
ditions

220. No doubt, the tide turned in the 18th and 19th centuries, when some
exceptions to the rule against hearsay were elaborated.

2.21, In general, the exceptions to the rule against hearsay were intended to
permit evidence of a certain statemem where the nature and the special circum-
stances under which it was made, offered strong assurances of accuracy, and the
declarant was unavailable as a witness. This reform, sometimes by judicial ex-
position and sometimes by legislation, was gradual, and therefore, the process
was piecemeal.

2.22. The courts, it is said, “seem to be satisfied with ६ showing of circum-
stances in which a norma] man ip the situation of the declarant would have de-
sired to tell the truth, and in which the dangers from deficiencies in his per-
ception, memory and narration“are not incapable of intelligent appraisal by the

trier of fact.”*

iHoldsworth, History of English Law, Vol 2, pages 335-336.

‘Holdsworth, History of Englisb Law, Vol. 9, page 216.

tHoldsworth, History of English Law Vol. 5, pages 471-472.

‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Voi. 9, page 216.

SHoldswortb, History of English Law; Vol. 9, page 217.

See discussion between the Chief Justice Pemberton and the Attomey General in
R.v. Lord Russell, (1683) 9 State Trials, at p. 613.

"Caso of Penwick, (1696) 13 State Trials 618.

परे, y. Paine, (1696) 5 Mad. 163, 165, referred to in Holdsworth History of English
Law, Vol. 9, pages 218-219.

‘Edmond M. Morgan, “Hearsay and preserved memory”, (1926-27) 40 Harvard Law
Rev. 712, 714


19

2.23. In the various exceptions to the hearsay rule, the dangers of deliberate
or inadvertent departure from the ideal, as regards perception, memory and nar-
ration, though not eliminated, are usually reduced to a manageable proportion.
The following illustrations’ would bear this out*:—

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a

(९

(g)

fai)

(i

@

(ky

0)

Former testimony: The witness was subject to cross-examination
when he gave his testimony. Hence one of the safeguards of truth

is present.

Admission: The person who made the admission, can hardly object
that he had no opportunity to cross-cxamine himself.

Reputation ; The witness testifies, and can be cross-examined, as to
the existence and content of the reputed fact.

Commercial lists and reports: The compiler of such Jists has usually
power, opportunity and incentive for correct perception. The danger
of incorrect narration will usually be minimised by the fact that the
reports are likely to be checked by members of the trade or profession
for whom they ate prepared.

Learned treatises: Normally a person in the position of the writer

of the treatise would desire to speak truly, because his opinion would
usually be subject to criticism by professional colleagues.

Shop books and entries: Since the entries are usually of a regular
character, and relate to simple matters, and are made near the time
of the event, there is little danger of faulty memory. The danger of
fabrication and lack of opportunity for cross-examination is no doubt,

there, to some extent.

Official statements : Official duty usually furnishes a sufficient guaran-
tee of a desire to observe and record facts correctly, though it must
be stated that where the statement relates to matters observed not by
the person recording but by others, the defects of hearsay are present
in some degree.

Declarations of presently existing state of mind: Memory is not
involved, nor is there a danger of error in perception. The require-
ment that the declaration must be made naturally and without cir-
cumstances avoids suspicion.

Contemporaneous declarations (Res gestae):

There is little danger of fabrication or faulty memory, though not
sufficient means of checking the accuracy.

Dying declarations: There is no strain upon memory in general,
and the man would desire to tell the truth at the time of death. How-
ever, there may not be a guarantee of accuracy or completeness of
perception or of narration.

Statements against interest: Usually, there is a guarantee against
fabrication.

Statements as to pedieree: There is no motive to misrepresent the
facts, and normally the declarant would have some trustworthy infor-
mation.

1Some

of the reasons are taken from Edmond Morgan, “Hearsay and preserved

memory”, (1926-27) 40 Harvard Law Review 712, 714.
माह illustrations deal with exceptions in force in England or elsewhere.

Exceptions

based

on absence

danger
accuracy.

of

of


Statements of
conspirators.

Bar against ad-
mission of previ-
ous convictions.

Need for corro-
boration in cer-
tain cases.

Documentary
earlier than oral
evidence.

20

(m) Ancient documents: Where declarations in ancient documents are
accepted for the truth of the matter and accepted without qualifica-
tions, there is a danger of their being untrue.

2.24, In this connection, the position as to conspiracy is of interest. The
special evidentiary rule that permits out of court statements of one conspirator to
be used against another, has some cogent reasons in support thereof. On the
subject of the evidentiary advantages of a conspiracy trial to the prosecution,
considerable literatures has come into being during the Jast half a century?
Nevertheless, it is obvious that such statements are exceptions to the rule against
hearsay. The important pre-requisite to their admissibility is that, speaking
broadly, the statements made by one conspirator, in order to be admissible against
others, must be made in furtherance of the criminal purpose. The rationale of
admitting this evidence is that the common purpose having been established,
the acts and observances of one conspirator can be used against the other in
evidence because of the common purpose. The aspect of common purpose was
brought out in a working definition of conspiracy which was supplied by Mr.
Justice Holmes, who said, “A conspiracy is a partnership in criminal purposes.”*
There may be a practical reason also, namely, that every conspiracy is, by its
nature, secret. “A case can hardly be supposed where men concert together for
crime and advertise that purpose to the worlé.”.

2.25. The hearsay rule did not present any obstacle to the admission of, a
prior conviction in a civil case.‘ But the bar against admitting a conviction
seems to be an illustration of the opinion rule or, at least, an illustration of the
rule that transactions not between the parties to the present case are not, in
general, admissible. The position is different if the parties are the same. For
example, where the State is a party to the civil action, a previous acquittal would
be conclusive’-*,

IV. CORROBORATION

2.26. Cuming to corroboration, we may state that English criminal law sfill
requires that certain testimony should be corroborated. Statutory examples of
such requirement as to perjury’, and the requirement of corroboration of the
evidence of the plaintiff in suits based on breach of a promise to marry" The
last mentioned illustration has now no practical value, because the cause of action
for breach of promise to marry does not now survive in England. Judicial require-
ments as to corroboration exist—to. mention two important cases—in regard to
the testimony of accomplices’ and certain sexual offences".

V. WITNESSES

2.27. A few observations about witnesses may now be made. In this connec-
tion, it may be stated that documentary evidence came into existence earlier than
witnesses in England." It has been said’*

3886 note, “The Conspiracy Dilemma” (1948) 62 Harvard Law Review 276.

2U,.S. v. Kissel, 218 U. S. 601, 608.

Grunewald v. U.S., (1957) 353 U. S, 391, 402.

‘Gee Ghaffee, “Progress of the Law—Evidence” (1922) 35 Harv, L. R. 302, 440.

SCoffes v. U. 5. (1886) 16 U. S. 436. हि हु विद

Seg note, “Admissibility of Evidence in a prior conviction in a subsequent suits’
(1927-28) 41 Harv. L. R. 241, 241.

TSection 13, Perjury Act, 1911.

*Section 2, Evidence (Further Amendment) Act, 1869.

*Davis Vv. D.P.P., (1954) A.C. 378.

RK, ५. Zielinski, (1950) 2 All. B. R. 524.

USee also supra.

BHoldsworth, H. 8. L. Vol. 9, para. 163.


21

“The record authenticated by the King’s seal was conclusive.......,. This
naturally led to the establishment of the doctrine of estopped by deed. Other
matters stated under the seal, either of the King, or of private persons, were
equally conclusive. In other words, both matters of record and documents under
seal were proofs—proofs as conclusive as the older proofs by which in former
days men were won’t to try the truth of their respective allegations. It may thus
be said that the efficacy of these kinds of estoppel was derived, partly from the
new fashion of recording pleas and of authenticating the record by the King’s
seal, and partly from the application of this new idea to the old conception of
a trial, it gradually came to be seen that these sealed documents might have
another effect. The jury was a body of reasonable men, whose verdict could
be guided by the evidence put before them. -

And so the difference between the jury and these older modes of trial, which,
as we have seen, had a decisive influence on the development of the common
law system of pleading’, had an influence equally great on the law of evidence,
for, it gradually gave rise to the idea that these sealed documents could be
used, not only as providing an absolute proof by creating an estoppel, but also
as evidence. Hence we get the growth of the idea that a deed can be used, not
only to estop the party as against whom it is produced, but also to give the jury
evidence as to the truth of the matters in issue. Gradually this idea that a deed

en be used as evidence, is applied to other writings, and so we get the modern
‘conception of documentary evidence.”

2.28, There was, thus, no place for the witness as known to us in the old
system of procedure, according to which trials were conducted by means of fixed
methods of proof. And this fact was emphasised by two connected principles
which rendered the modern use of wifnesses legally impossible. The first of
these principles was that no one ought to be convicted of a capital crime by mere
testimony? The second was that a witness was neither competent nor compel-
Jable to testify to a fact, “unless when that fact happened, he was solemnly takefi
to witness." Both these principles profoundly influenced the development of the
mediaeval common law on this topic.

2.29, Oral evidence was a later-comer. Maintenance and champerty were
crying evils of the time’: and, by these practices, persons were able to use the
law courts, instead of the arms of their retainers, to prosecute their feuds when-
ever they thought this course desirable.' Nothing was easier than to get a partial
jury; and, as the verdict of the jurors was given as the result of their own know-
Jedge or inquiries, it was natural that they should get their instructions from the
side whom they favoured® The remedy for this state of things, suggested in a
Parliamentary petition of 1354, was that all the evidence should be openly pro-
duced at the bar, and that, after the jury had been charged and had departed
from the bar, no person should be allowed to confer with them.’ But this remedy
was plainly insufficient. In the first place, it did not prevent the jury from giving
‘a verdict in accordance with its pre-conceived ideas. In the second place, it did
not prevent persons, who were in a position to intimidafe the jury, from coming
forward and giving evidence at the bar in such a way as to make it quite plain

‘Holdsworth, में. E. L. Vol. 3. 613, 63.

™Nemo de capitalibus placitis testimonio convicatur, Leg. Henr. xxzi, 5.
गए, and M. ii 599; Wigmore, iv. 2190.

‘Holdsworth H. 8, L. Vol. 3. 394-407; Vol. 5, 203-203; Vol. 7, 524-525.
‘Holdsworth Vol. 2. page 416.

*R. P. ii 259 (27 Ed. गा. No. 30).

‘mid. dted Thayer, Preliminary Treatise on Evidence, 124-125.

No witnesses,
Oral evidence.
later.


How change
effected.

Statute of 15625
1563.

Development of
tules 89 to com-
petence and com-
pellability.

Rules as to com-
petency develop-
on native

Natural and arti-
ficial incapacity.

22

to the jury what the consequences of a hostile verdict might be. To meet this
difficulty the courts so stretched the conception of maintenance, that a witness
who, without having any intcrest or cause to meddle in the litigation, volunteer-
ed, his testimony, rendered himself liable to be proceeded against for this offence.'

2.30. The method by which the Legislature effected this change, was sugges-
ted by the existing state of the law’ and as Wigmore has said’: “The lead as
furnished by the existing qualification already noted that ‘what a man does by
compulsion of iaw cannot be called maintenance’ ,.,.......... ००० Let an order of
the judge commanding such a person’s appearance be obtainable as of course
before the trial, and the risk of a charge of maintenance would be removed, and
no man need fear to come forward as a witness,”*

2.31. This was the course adopted in England. The Act of 1562-1563*, which
created the statutory offence of perjury’, enacted that witnesses served with pro-
cess to attend and testify should be liable to penalty if they did not appear’. And.
though the common law courts had no compulsory process, the weapon of
subpoena, which had been used by the Council and the Chancery for upwards
of a century, was ready to hand, and was adopted by them,

VI. COMPETENCE AND COMPELLABILITY

2.32. When it became permissible to summon witnesses and to compel them
to give evidence under the Act of 1562-63, two questions arose, namely, (a) ००
petency, and (b) compellability of witnesses under which their testimony could
be admitted®.

2.33. As to the competency of witnesses, it would be noted that the canon
law had developed a number of detailed rules’ as to the class of persons who
were not competent to become witnesses. Some of these rules had been adopted
by the common law in relation fo jurors, when it became permissible to summon
witnesses. As such, the rules as to competency at canon law filtered into com-
mon law in relation to witnesses also.

2.34. Of course, the rules were not adopted wholesale or without modifica-
tions, but were developed on native lines". Ag a result of this process, rules
developed as to (a) the natural, and (b) artificial, incapacity of witnesses.
“Natural” incapacity was of witnesses who were insane or (subject to certain
qualifications) infants. The rule as to disqualification of women; which prevail-
ed in canon law was not, however, adopted".

2.35. Apart from natural incapacity, cases of artificial incapacity based on
@ religious grounds, (ii) moral grounds and on (iii) the ground of interest in
litigation, arose. As to the religious ground, it was presumed that only a Chris-
tian could be a competent witness, until the matter was settled in Omichund's

‘Floldsworth H. 2. L. Vol. 1 335; Vol. गा 398; Thayer, 125-129,
‘Holdsworth H. B. L. Vol. 9, page 185.

3Wigmore, Vol. 4, 2961, 2190.

‘Wigmore, iv. 2961, 2190

55 Elizabeth ०. 9 (1562).

‘Holdsworth H. E. L. Vol. 4, page 518.

ज Elizabeth ० 9, section 12 (1562),

Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 185
"See also chapter I, supra.

Woldsworth, History of English Law. Vol. 9, p. 186-187.
uBoldeworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, p, 187-189.


23

Case’. As to moral grounds, the idea that the commission of such crimes render-
ed a man so infamous that his testimony should be excluded, had its roots in
Roman law, which, in its turn. had borrowed the rule from canon law, The
operation of this disqualification was complicated by the intricacies of the crimi-
nal law as then in operation—for example, the benefit of clergy (which operated
as a pardon), and other complications. The rule was largely swept away in
1843° As to the disqualification of the party and other persons interested in
litigation. the rule is stated by Coke in Slade’s case’ where he said that experi-
ence rules that men’s conscience “grows so large” that the respect of their private
advantage rather induces men to perjury.

2.36. By the 17th century, this disability was established in civil cases, and,
in criminal cases, it was establiched later in the latter haif of the 17th century*
Gradually, by the process of fegislation in the 19th century, this disqualification
was abolished in respect of :—

a) persons interested *
(0) parties in civil cases.’
(c) parties in criminal cases ®

2.37. At one time? the unsworn evidence of children of tender years was not
* famissible except in special circumstances. The rule no longer prevails.

2.38 When the statute of 1562-63 had established” the general rule that all
competent persons could be compelied to testify.® the question soon arose whether
there were any, and, if so, what exceptions to the general rule of compulsion.
It is obvious that there is na necessary connection between the causes which
render 2 witness incompetent, and the causes which may make it fair that he
should be exempted from the general rule of compulsion. But in some cases
these two very different sets of exceptions to a general rule seem to have exercised
some influence upon one another. This influence is most marked in the case
of husband and wife. The rule that the husband or wife cannot be compelled
to testify against the other is stated by Coke in the same sentence as that in
which he states their incompetence to testify on one anothet’s bebalf;" and, it
would seem, that the privilege is better attested in the eaflfer cases than the
disability”, It was justified—as the rule of incompetence was justified—on the
ground that any other rule “might be a cause of implaceable discord and dis-
sension between the husband and the wife”. From that time onwards it wes
accepted as an absolute rule in civil cases, and, subject to one or two exceptions,

ag the general rule in criminal cases.

Tee Omichand y. Barker, (1744), 1 Atk. 21, 48, 50.
"Salmond, Essays in Jurisprudence, page 34-37, referred to in Holdsworth,
of Bnglish Law, Vol. 9, p. 191.
‘Statutes 6-7. Vict. Chap. 85.
‘Slacte's case (1602) 4 Co. Rep. at folio 95a,
SHoldsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, p. 155.
"6-7 Vict. Chap. 85 (1843). .
"14-15 Vict. Chap. 99 (1851) section 2
%61-62 Vict. Chap. 36 (1898).
+ {a} R. v. Powell, (1755), L. Leach 110, and
कि) R. v. 7, Brasier, (1779), 1 Leach 199.
@Holdsworth. H. E. L. Vol. 9, p 197.
uHoldsworth, H. E. L., Vol. 9. page 195
BCo. Litt. 6b.
uWigmore, iv. 3034-3035, 2227.

3+131 LAD/ND/77

History

Children

The rule of come
pulsion and its
exceptions.


Privilege _ against
eeif-incrimination.

Lilburne’s case,

24

2.39. While it became possible to compel witnesses to give evidence, privilege
in respect of certain particular kinds of questions survived. One such privilege
will now be discussed.

VU. SELP-INCRIMINATION

2.48. In the early Middle Ages, a party accused had no privilege to refuse
to atiswer incriminating questions.’

The older modes of proof, such as compurgation and ordeal, forced the
accused to a direct denial of the charge under oath; and, in the sixteenth century
the Legislature had no hesitation in sanctioning forms of procedure which involv-
ed an examination of accused persons. The Act Pro Camera Stellata of 14872
and many other Acts* sanctioned such an examination; and Acts of 1553 and
1555 required accused persons to submit to examination by justices of the peace.‘

241, The case of Lilburne is instructive’ in this context. The following is
Lilburne’s account of the oath he was asked 10 take in the Star Chamber :—

“, . and then he bid me pull off my glove, and lay my hand
upon the book. What to do, Sir said I. You must swear, said he. To
what? “That you shall make true answer to all things that are asked you”.
Must I so, Sir? but before 1 swear, I will know to what T must swear...

estes And witha! I perceived the oath to be an oath or inquiry; and for
the lawfulness of which oath, I have no warrant, and upon these grouads'
T did and do still refuse the oath.”

After being punished for contempt, Lilburne stated that he was condemned
“because I would not accuse myself.” It may be noted that Lilburne used the
old theological argument against the oath—that it violates man’s right of self-
preservation : “Withal, this Oath is against the very law of nature; for nature
is always a preserver of itself, and not a destroyer............

2.42. Interrogation as a method of investigating violations of fhe law has
a long history. Within the first few pages of the Old Testament, Adam is asked,
“Hast thou eaten of the tree . * and Cain replies to the demand “Where
is Abel thy brother?” with an evasive “Am I my brother’s keeper?”

The nature of a typical response by those subject to interrogation does not
seem to have changed much over time. Compare Adam's “the woman whom
thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat”, with what
Escobedo,’ the accused in the well-known case, said, “I didn’t shoot Mannel......
wneceeeneteetee (Digerlando) did it.”

2.43. Right down to the middle of the seventeenth century, the examination
of the accused is the central feature of the criminal procedure of the common
law Nor do we read anywhere that a witness could refuse to answer on the
ground that his answer might incriminate him. The first instance of this was

*Holdsworth, H. E. L. Vol. 9, page 198.

33 Henry VIL. ¢. 1 (1487).

43 Blizabeth ०. 7 x. 5—bankrupts; 35 Elizabeth ०. 2, H—Josuits; 43 Elizabeth ०. 6,
{—those who abused warrants.

4, 2 Phillip and Mary c, 13; 2, 3 Phillip and Mary ०. 10; Vol, i 296; Vol. iv. 529.

"Trial of Hon. Lilburne, (1697) 3 State Trials 1315, 1320-21, 1329-1332 (G. B. Star
Ch. 1637), cited by Helen Sitving, “The Oath”, (1959) 68 Yale L. J. 1329, 1366.

SGenesis 3.11, 4:9-10,

"Escobedo v. IMinols, 378 U. S. 478, 483.

"See infra, under “The Accused”.


25

in 1679, It is not till the Commonwealth period that this privilege to refuse to
answer incriminating questions is accordéd to accused persons.’ Existence of this
privilege of the accused was established after the Restoration’; and it was then
extended to ordinary witnesses.‘

VIII. THE ACCUSED

2.44. The history of judicial questioning of the accused in England is of
interest. By statutes’ enacted in the middle of the sixteenth century (1554-1555),
justices of the peace, before committing to goal admitting to bail a person charg-
ed with a felony, were required to question him and to record their examination
in writing. The Act passed in 1554 required the justice of the peace to con-
duct the examination only if the accused was applying for bail. Its purpose
seems to have been to prevent collusion between criminals and justices, who were
allegediy granting bail too easily and sometimes as the result of bribes*

2.45. The Act passed in 1555 extended the requirement for a judicial
examination to those persons who were cémmitted to jail. It was apparently
passed because the examination of the accused proved to be a useful proceeding
for all cases’ It has been stated in one study—

“The office of Justice of the Peace goes back over six centuries—to the
statute 1 Edw. 3, Stat. 2, c. 16, passed in the year 1327, which provided that
‘for the better keeping and maintenance of the peace, the king will that in
every country good men and lawful, which be in the country, shall be assign-
ed to keep the peace’. At first the duties of a justice were, generally speaking,
very much like those of a constable’—to arrest suspects and to see that they
were held in custody or to bail until they could take their trial. Various
important administrative functions, however, devolved upon him, and these
necessitated regular meetings with his colleagues. These meetings took place
‘in session's four times a year,—the origin, no doubt, of the courts of quarter
session as we know them today.

2.46. Gradually, the justices were empowered to try minor offences—such
as, drunkenness, swearing and vagrancy—‘out of sessions’ Side by Side with this
work they held preliminary examinations in relation to major offences. Their
duty was to examine accused persons about their alleged offences in much the.
same way as is done in France and other countries by a juge instruction. They
also examined the witnesses, but not in the presence of the accused, who were
Rot permitted to know the case which was to be alleged against them on their
trial. Such was the effect of a statute passed in 1555 in the reign of Philip
and Mary—2 & 3 Ph. & M. C. 10 (an Act to take the examination of prisoners

suspected of manslaughter or felony).”

These depositions were taken in private. Then, on August 14, 1848, was
passed the Indictable Offences Act which, as the Lord Chief Justice of England,

2R, v, Reading, (1679) 7 S. T. at p. 296, Wigmore, iv 3089, cited by Holdsworth,

a. 8. L., Vol. 9, page 198.
King Charles Trial, (1649) 4 5. T. at p. 1101; Lifburne’s Trial, (1649) 4 State Trials

at pp. 1292-1293, 1341.

4R. v. Screen, (1660) 5 S. T. at 9. 1039.
बज, ५. Reading, (1679) 7. S.T. at 9. 296; R. ५. Rosewall, (1684) 10 S.T. at 9. 169.

४1554) 1 & 2 Phil. & M., ०. 13, section 4; (1555) 2 & 3 Phil. & M., ०. 10, section 2.
(a) Plucknett, A Concise History of the Common Law (1956) 432;

(6) Stephen. History of Criminat Law, Vol. 1, pages 237, 238,

‘Holdsworth, History of the English Law (3rd 86. 1945), Vol. 4, page 529.

4y, P. Eddy, “Justices of the Peace” (1949) 65 L. 0. R. 51, 52.

‘Emphasis supplied.


Case of Socrates.

The mle that a
certain number of
wil is re-
quisite for proof.

26

Lord Goddard, has, said ‘effected a complete revolution in the position of justices
of the peace in regard to indictable offecnces’.

2.47. The earlier statutes contemplated an inquisitorial examination of the
accused rather than a judicial inquiry into the strength of the case of the prose-
eufion against the accused’. This examination was conducted without putting
the accused upon oath*. By these statutes the justices performed the functions
of police, detective, prosecutor, and chief complaining witness at trial, as well as
examining magistrate. Following the interrogation, the justice transmitted his
record of the evidence to the trial judge, and the compulsory examination of the
accused was read to the jury. Stephen noted’: “I do not think any part of the
old procedure operated more harshly upon Ptisoners than the summary and secret
way in which justices of the peace, acting frequently the part of detective officers,
took their examinations and committed them for trial.”

This practice of questioning the accused, prior to trial fell into gradual disuse
during the eighteenth century, and, by the beginning of the nineteenth, the prac-
tice had become limited to the recording of any voluntary statements that the
accused wished to make. The accused was being advised that such statéments
would be used against him at the trial. By statute enacted in 1848, to which
we have already referred’ the change from inquisitorial examination to pretiminary
inquiry was completed; the accused could be asked no questions; fe was
invited to make a statement if he wished and was cautioned that it would be
taken down and might be given in evidence against him: the witnesses were
examined in the accused’s presence and could be cross-examined by him or his
counsel.

248. In his work on “Historical Trials”.’ in the Chapter on Socrates,
Sir John Mcdonnell, Quain Professor of comparative law, University College,
London, has picturesquely described what would have been the fate of socrates
if he would have becn in modern Europe. He points out that instead of secluded
and uninterrupted colloquies with his philosophic friends until his painless end,
Socrates would have been cut off from his disciplies by the “Inquisition”, and
delivered over, shattered and crushed in body, to an excruciating death. Accord-
ing to Sir John Mcdonnell, “In Tudor or Stuart reigns he would have been brow-
beaten by the law-officers prosecuting, scolded by the presiding judge as a peSti-
lent nuisance in the State, and his last words might have been cut short or
drowned in the roll of drums beneath the scaffold.”

TX. NUMBER OF WITNESSES

2.49. The rule that at least two witnesses’ were needed for the proof of
certain facts is found in the classical Roman Law’: but it gained its great autho-
tity in mediaeval Europe from the fact that it became a rule of the canon law",
justified, not only by the authority of the Old" and New Testaments”.

एक Holdsworth, H. 8. L. (1945), Vol. 4, p. 529;

(b) Stephen, H.C. L., Vol. 1, page 228.

‘Stephen, H. C. L. Vol. 1, page 441. :

5, For description of the justices’ functions eee Stephen, H.C. 1. Vol 1, pages 221,

225, 228.

"See R. v. Green, (1832) 172 85. R. 990, for a description of the appropriate caution.

Jorwis’s Act, (1848) 17 & 12 Vie., ०. 42.

‘See supra.

1See Book Review of McDonnell, “Historical Trials” by Zecharich Chafes Jr. in
(19271928) 41 Harv. Law Rev. 410, 412.

"Holdsworth, H. E. L.. Vol. 9, pages 203-204.

Dig. 22.3.12; Code 4.28, 4; 4.20.9.

iDecret, Greg. 2.20c, 23; Decret. pars. ii causa iv qu. ii and ifi ९. iv, 26; both passages
cited by Wigmore, ifi 2696, note 5.

UDeut. xvii 6, aud xix 12.

Mat. xvili 16; John viii 17.



2i

It is not surprising that, under these circumstances, the maxim testis unnus
festis nullus shouid be regarded aimos as a provision of the Divine law. Its posi-
tion is well illustrated by the objecsion (० the syslem of triai by jury, which For-
tescue, in his De Luudibus, puts inio the mouth of the Prince. “Though”, says
the Prince? “we be greatly delighted in the form which the Jaws of England uss
in sifting out Lhe truth in matters of contention, yet whether the same law be
contrary to Holy Scripture or not, that is to us somewhat doubtful. For our Lora
saith to the Pharisees in the cighth chapter of Saint John’s Gospel, ‘In yous law
it is written that the testimony of two men is true’; and ine Lord, confirming the
samme, saith, ‘l am one that bear witness of myseif, and the Father that sent me
beareth witness of me. Now, the Pharisees were Jews, so that it was all one
to say: lt is written in your law, and it is written in Moses law, which God
gave to the children of Israel by Moses. Wherefore to gainsay this law is to deny
God's law २ whereby it foiloweth, tat if the law of England swerve from this
Jaw, it swerveth also from God’s law, which in no wise may be conwadicied. It
is written also in the eighteeath chapter of Saint Matthew's Gospel ‘But
it they brocher bear thee noi, then take ye with thee one or two, that, in the
mouth of two or tree wilnesses, every matter may be established’. if the Lord
have appointed every mutter to be esiaolished in the mouth of two or three wit-
nesses, then it is in vain for to seek for the verdict of many mea in matters ot
doubi. For no man is able to lay any other or better foundaiion than the Lord

hath laid.”

2.50. The idea that the evidence of one witness is not enough to prove the Evidice of one
fact in issue emerges’ during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, sometimes 7०5:
in the provisions of statutes, and sometimes in argument and judicial dicta.
Various statutes of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which required the
evidence of two witnesses for a conviction of the offences created by them, show
what the Legislature was convinced’ of the danger of allowing a conviction on the
unsupported testimony of oue person.

Bui, by i551, the common iaw (vide Reniger v. Fogossa'), had come to the
conclusion ihat iz would reject any rule requiring more than one witness ag a
general rule of the law of evidence. As Professor Wigmore points out", the deci-
sion in Keniger v. fogossa was in fayour of the defendant, though be only
produced one witness. Coke’s speech in the proceedings on Becon’s impeachment
shows that he rejected it; and, even in the Star Chamber the rule requiring more
than one witness was no. invariabie. After the Restoration, the rule that one
witness is sufficient is siaied as a positive rule of law.

2.54 Tbe only two exceptions recognised, other than exceptions introduced Two witnesses
by express statutes, were in the case of high treason’ and in the case of pesjury. for’ treason.

The requirement of two witnesses in case of high treason rested upon a
strained construction of the combined effects of statutes of Edward VI's and Mary’s

196 Laudibus ०. 31.

*Holdsworth, H. 8, L., Vol. 9, page 205.

*Statutory references omitted.

‘Reinger Vv. Fogossa (1551) Piowden 1.

‘Wigmore, iii 2702, note 22.

‘Holdsworth, H. E. L., Voi. 9, page 206.

1R, v, Tong, (1662) Kelyng at page 18; 2. v. Vaughan, (1696) 13 S. T. at page 535;
Hale, History of The Common Law (6th Ed.) 346—“they (the jury) may and do often
pronounce their verdict upon one singie testimony; which thing the civil law admits not

फुछा treason, the rule is now different in Rogland.


28

reign, and was not wholly freed from doubt till it was put upon a statutory basis
by the statute of 1696. The requirement of two witnesses in the case of perjury
is due to two main causes. In the first place, the offence was developed in the
court of Star Chamber, where the tendency to the adoption of the civil and canon
law rule had always been stronger’. In the second place, the requirement of
more than one oath against another oath is a particularly obvious measure of
justice’, and it was 8 requirement which in the shape of the attaint procedure
against a perjured jury,’ had a native tradition behind it.

‘Holdsworth, H. 8. L., Vol. 4, page 499.

2Wigmore, Vol. iii, 2720-2722, 2040.

*He that travaileth to convince witnesses of perjury must of necessity bring forth
many more than they were, so that the testimony of two or three men shall not ove
be judged true,” De Leubidus ०. 32.

‘Holdsworth, H. E. L., Vol. 1, page 339.



CHAPTER 3

SCOPE AND OBJECT OF KULES OF EVIDENCE AND THEIR RELATION
TO JUDICIAL INVESTIGATION OF FACTS

3.1. We propose to discuss, in this Chapter, the scope and object of rules of
evidence, and their relationship to the judicial investigation of facts.

As already staied,' the law of evidence is a law of procedure? Jt deals
with the meaus or the process of the law, as distinct from the substantive law,
which deals with rights and liabilities. We have already referred to some of
the American codes, which define evidence as the means sanctioned by law
of ascertaining in judicial proceeding the truth respecting a question of fact.
The nature of tae means so prescribed by the law bears examination.

3.2, it is 10 be noted that the law of evidence is distinct from the logical
processes of reasoning, but it based upon, and assumes, the existence of these
processes. Because of this assumption, as Holdsworth’ has pointed out, three
consequences foliow: In the first place, the rules of the law of evidence some-
times take the negative form of exceptions to these assumed processes of reason-
ing by laying down that this or that fact, which, on the general principles of
reasoning, has an evidential value shall not be admissible in a court of law.
Secondly, use court takes judicial notice of certain obvious facts. In this context,
we are concerned with defining the matters which are so notorious that the
court can notice and act upon them without further proof and the like’. Thirdly,
the existence of certain facts creates a presumption as to the existence of other
facts; but, as cases are decided aud ihe law gets more elaborate, a large num-
ber of these presumptions arise in connection with different branches of the
law, sometimes conclusive, sometimes not conclusive, but in both cases giving
mise to a inference as to the facts im issue’

3.3. Coming to presumptions we may state that in essence, presumptions
are rather rules of substantive law. However, because they are applied in the
conduct of litigation, and because of the form in which these presumptions are
expressed, they have been supposed to be part of the law of evidence.’ Though
belonging primarily to those particular branches of the substantive Jaw with
which they are concerned, these presumptions are connected with that part of
the adjective law which is concerned with evidence, because they direct the
court to deduce particular inferences from particular facts till the contrary is
proved. Ever irrebuttable presumptions of law, though they belong more
properly to the substantive law, are rules of substantive law which borrow the
terminology and adopt the disguise of that branch of law which deals with
evidence. There is much in common between an irebuttable presumption of

Jaw and an estoppel.

‘Chapter 1, supra.

2Gardner v, Lucas, (1878) 3 A. C. 582, 603 GE. L.).

SChapter i, supra.

‘Holdsworth, History of Baglish Law, Vol. 9, pages 128-129.

‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, 9. 135.

‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, 9. 139.

THoldsworth, History of English Law, Vol. p. 129, 139.

‘Thayer, Law Magaine, vi, 348 (1831), printed as App. A to Thayer, Evidence (pp.
539, $40), cited by Holdsworth, H. 8. 1.. Vol. 9, 9. 128.

29

Nature of law of
evidence,

Scope of the
rules of evidence.

Presumption.


Rules concerned
with selection of
material.

Object of rules.

Judicial evidence
of species of eyi-
dence,

30

In Thayer’s Essay on Presumption of Law and Presumptive Evidence.' it is
said that, ‘in some cases of conclusive legal presumption a party is said to be
estopped, and to have created an estoppel against himself. An estoppel is
when a man has done some act which affords a conclusive presumption against
himself in respect of the matter ai issue’; so too Stephen in his Digest of the
Law of Evidence, devotes one Chapter (Chapter 14) to ‘Presumptions and
Estoppels’.

3.4. In relationship to the rules of the logical process of reasoning, it can be
said that sometimes the law of evidence adopis them, sometimes it modifies
them and sometimes it suppiements them. The doctrine of ‘relevance’ repre-
sents the urea common to both. However, the rules of evidence with which
the law has been concerned all through its iistory, have never been solely
dependent upon the docirine of relevancy? They are concerned primarily with
the selection of the material on which these processes operate. As Thayer
observed, “in giving evidence, we are [urmishing to a wibunal a new basis for
reasoning. Tais is mot saying that we do not have w reason in order to
ascertain this basis; it is merely saying ihat reasoning alone will not, or at
east does not, supply it. The new element thus added is what we call the
evidence.” In this sense, the term ‘evidence’ is a term of “foreRsic procedure”,
and “imports something put forward im a court of justice.’”

3.5. To spell out this function of the law of evidence, it may be stated
that rules as to evidence and proof ate intended to attain one or more of the fol-
lowing objects,’ with a view to the ascertainment of truth, namely,

(1) to limit the discretion of judges in declaring facts as proved or
disproved,

(2) to provide for speedy decisions and, at the same time, to guard the
judges from error,’

(3) to preciude needless vexation aad expense in coming to decisions’
and

(4) ४७ preclude injury to the Stale or the pubiic.

3.6. The term “evidence” is not a term peculiar to the law. We employ
it in every-day life. “Evidence is that which tends to render evident or to
generate proof of a fact. The fact which is sought to be proved may be called
the principal fact, and the fact which tends to establish it may be called the
evidenciary fact." Judicial evidence is a species of evidence.

"THAYER, Law Magazine, vi, 348 (1831), printed as App. A to Thayer, Evidence
(pp. 539, $40), cited by Holdsworth, H. E. L. Vol. 9, 9. 128.

"Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page i28.

SThayer, Preliminary Treatise on Evidence at the Common Law, pages 263-264, cited
in Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 128.

‘Best on Evidence (7th Edition), paragraphs 38, 41, 47 and 49.

'B.g. provisions as to “relevant facts”.

°B.g. rule against hearsay.

7E.g rule as to judicial aotice.

*B.g. provisions as to affairs of the state etc.

*Senthem, Judicial Evidence, Vol. 1, page 18, cited in the Best, Principles of Evidence
(4922).


31

“Judicial” evidence may be used as indicating the evidence received by
courts of justice in proof or disproof of facts, the existence of which comes in
question before them’. In general, it is evidence modified by rule of positive
law. Some of these rules are of an exclusionary nature and reject, as legal
evidence, facts which are in themselves entitled to consideration. Others are
of an “investitive” character, inasmuch as they invest natural evidence with
an artificial weight, and may even aitribute the property of evidence to that
which, speaking in the abstract, has no probative force at all.

3,7. Doubtful and disputed facts come up for delermination in judicial
proceedings, what then, is the need for limiting the sphere of judicial evidence
to a narrower one than thal permitted by logic? The need for imposing some
limitations on the process of such determination arises for several reasons.
In the first place, while the relations of cause and effect are innumerable, the
power of a tribunal in relation to the determination of questions of fact cannot
remain unrestrained, because there must be some stability and uniformity in
the principles followed in the determination of questions of fact. This restraint
is illustrated by the rules which prevent judgcs from deciding facts on ther
own personal knowledge.*

More concretely, this aspect is also demonstrated by the requirement that
there must be some connection between the principal fact and the evidentiary
fact. 1

Judicial evidence is evidence connected with apy matter of fact, the effect,
tendency or design of which (connection) is to produce in the mind a persuasion,
affirmative or disaflirmative, of the existence of some other matter of fact.’
The Jaw seeks to define the nature of this connection.

3.8. Judicial fact-finding cannot be perfect. There may be weaknesses in
the methods employed for finding facts, or in the witnesses, or in the quality
of the judge. There are inherent difficulties in any restructuring of the past by
Oral narrative or even by a record. The non-congruence of facts as found by
the Court, with the actual facts, cannot sometimes be avoided, Even the most
perfect 10168 of evidence, and the most truthful witnesses before the most com-
petent judge, can reconstruct the past facts only in an approximate manner.

Need for fimita-
tions.

Imperfections of
judicial fact-find-
ing.

Again, the more complex the facts, the more difficult will be even the ©

approximate ascertainment of truth.

As has been pointed out by Best on evidence,‘ if things aro traced up to
their ultimate source, the remote but chief cause of the appearance of a criminal
at the bar might be found in his parents, his education, and the examples of
others, but the tribunal must look at the proximate cause,—his own act.

3.9. Secondly, a tribunal must give a decision, and must give that speedily.
“Litigation should not be interminable while litigants are merely mortal.”

This aspect has been well explained by Bonnier, a foreign jurist, in French,
of which the following is a transiation :* “The determining to what extent a
certain known element renders probable the existence of such or such an un-
known cause, governed, as it necessarily is, by the light of reason, in general

\Best, Principles of Evidence (1922), 9. 22, paragraph 33.

३८, section 165, first proviso.

*Bentham, Judicial Evidence, Vol. 1, page 17, cited in Best, Principles of the Law
of Evidence (1922), page 6, paragraph 11.

‘Best, Principles of Evidence (1922), page 26.

sBonnier. Traite des Preuves, 710, 2nd Ed, cited in Best, Principies of Evidence
(1922), page 29. ry


‘Process of deter-
fmination of facts
in — judicial pro-
ceedings.

Meaning of “evi-
dence”,

Judgment to be
based upon facts
relevant and duly
‘pro

Limitations of re-
form,

32

depends wholly on the discrimination of the judge. But, in the most important
cases, the law, desirous of imsuring the stability of certain positions, and of
cutting short certain controversies, has estabiished PRESUMPTIONS to which
the judge is obliged to conform.”

In an English case’ an emient judge observed: “The jaws of evidence as
to what is receivable or nui are rounded on a compound consideration of what,
abstract considered, is ca:cuiated to throw light on the subject in dispute, and
of what is practicable. Perhaps if we lived to the age of a thousand years,
instead of sixty or seventy, it might throw light on any subject that came into
dispute, if all matters which could by possibility affect it were severally gone
into; and inquiries carried on irom month to monih as to the trath of everything
connected with it. I do not say how that would be, but such a course is
found to be impossible at present.”

3.40, Thus, while facts which are in dispute in courts of justice are enquired
into and determined in the same,way as doubtful or disputed facts are enquired
into and determined by making in general, positive law interposes with
artificial ruics to secure impartiality and accuracy of decision or to exclude
collateral mischiefs likely to resuit from the investigation?

3.11. So much as regards the function of legal rules of evidence. Some
altentain may now be paid to the term “evidence”. The word “evidence” is
derived from the Latin “evidentia”, and signifies the state of being evident,
that is, plain, apparent or notorious. But, as has been pointed out, it is
applied to that which tends to render evident or to generate proof. In A. पर.
Earl of Banbury’ Hold C.J. observed : “All causes......... consist more of matters
of fact than of law, and it is beneath the dignity of their Lordship to be
troubled with matters of fact.”

The history of this reluctance of the appellant courts has been dealt with
exhaustively by Dixon C.J‘ in an Australian case. Jt is for these reasons
that facts as are taken for purposes of a particular judicial proceeding can, at
best, only have an approximate relation to the actual facts.

3.12, To supplement these deficiencies, where they are regarded as causing
serious injuries, the court has a power to call witnesses of its own, and in
matrimonial causes, it has a special duty of satisfying itself about the truth of
the allegations on which relicé is claimed.

‘The judgment in a case must be based upon facts which are relevant and
duly proved in the proceedings in that particular case. It is so enacted ini the
first proviso to section 165 of the Evidence Act.

3.13. It is in the light of the above aspects, that a reform of the Jaw on
the subject will have to be thought of. It may not be difficult to enunciate
theoretically the broad principles on which a well-designed and well-constructed
code can be built. Two leading principles were enunciated by Thayer, more

iAttorney-General v, Hitchocock, (1849) 1] Jurist, 478, 482; $. 6. 1 Exch, 91, 105;
74 R. R. 592 (Rolfe B.).

*Best, Principles of the Law of Evidence (1922), page 2, paragraph 2.

Best, Principles of the Law of Evidence (1922), page 6, paragraph 11.

‘RK. v. Earl of Banbury, (1695) Skin. 517, 523.

"Paterson २. P., (1953) 89 C. 1... R. 212, 219.

Thayer, Preliminary Treatise on Evidence (1898), cited in “Evidence” (1937) 50 Har-

vard Law Rev 923.


33

that about cighty years ago, “(1) that nothing is to be received which is not
logically probative of some matter requiring to be proved; and (2) that every-
thing which is thus probative should come in, unless a clear ground of policy
or law excludes it.”.

3.14, As often happens, formulation of broad principles does not prescut
much difficulty; what presents difficulty, however, is the prescribing of rules
to implement the said broad principles. We have carefully borne in mind this
aspect of the problem in examining the several provisions of the Act, and our
approach in the present inquiry will, therefore, be to recommend changes in the
existing provisions of the Act only where we are satisfied that the working of
the Act has shown that some of its provisions do not adequately mect the
complex requirements of modern litigation.

Difficulty of ap-
plication.


Object of legal
Proceedings = —
determination of
tights and liabi-
ities.

Basic _principle—
facts in issue and
relevant facts.

Relevant facts,

CHAPTER 4

SCHEME OF THE ACT

4.1, The object of legal proceedings is the determination of disputed rights
and liabilities on facts.' Those facts may be themselves in issue? or they may
be facts relevant to the facts in issue’

4.2. So far as facts in issue are concerned, they are facts from which, either
by themselves or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence,
nature or extent of any right, liability or disability. asserted or denied in any
suit or proceeding, necessarily follows. They constitute such a state of things—
physical or psychological—that the existence of a disputed right or liability
would be a legal inference from them. Facts which are not directly in issue
may, however, affect the probability of the existence of the fact in issue, and
thus be used as foundations of inferences respecting facts in issue. These facts
are described in the Act as “relevant facts”. The word “relevant” means that
any two facts to which it is applied are so related to each other that, according
to the common course of events, one either taken by itself or in connection
with other facts, proves or renders probable the past, present or future existence
of non-existence of the other.‘ In general, under the Act, evidence can be
given only as regards facts in issue and “such other facts as are hereinafter

declared to be relevant”. This emphasis on “facts in issue or relevant facts”,
is intended to exclude the reception of other facts which might tend to distract
the attention of the tribunal and to waste its time. The law of evidence is
framed with a view to restarining the trial within practical limits."

4.3. Having laid down these basic principles for confining the evidence to
facts in issue or relevant facts, the Act proceeds to indicate what facts are to

be regarded as relevant. Broadly speaking, these facts are—

(a) connected with the7issue ;’

(b) admissions ;*

(०) statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses ;?
(0) statements under special circumstances ;*

(e) judgments in other cases ;*

(0 opinions 17

(8) character.

78७01०1 3.

Section 3.

Section 3.

sStephen, Digest of Evidence. Article 1.

"Section 5.

‘Managers Asylum Districts + Hill, 47 Law Times, House of Lords 29, 34 (Lord
O'Hagan).

‘Sections 5 to 16.

Sections 17 to 31.

Sections 32 and 33.

M$ections 34 to 39.

USections 40 to 44.

USections 45 to 51.

Sections 52 to 55.


35

4.4, Stephen’s work on the Law of Evidence was originally undertaken in
connection with the drafting of the Indian Evidence Act. Sections 6 to 11 of
the Act contain the most important provisions as to relevancy. We need not
quote these sections: but the emphasis on “highly probable” found in section 11,
is noteworthy. Section 11 reads—

“Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant:

(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if, by themselves or in connection with other facts, they make
the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue, or relevant fact
highly probable or improbable”.

4.5. By 1876, when the first edition of his Digest of the Law of Evidence
was published, Stephen had amended the definition of relevancy to read as
foRows. —

“Facts, whether in issue or not, are relevant 10 each other when one is,

or probably may be, or probably may have been—

‘The cause of the others;
The effect of the other;
An effect of the same cause;
A cause of the same effect;
Or when the one shows that the other must or cannot have occurred,
wf probably does or did exist, or not;
Or that any fact does or did exist, or not, which in the common
course of events would either have caused or have been caused by
the other:

Provided that such facts do not fall within the exclusive rule contained in
Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6: or that they do fall within the exceptions to those rules
contained in those Chapters”.

4.6. In the Introduction to the first edition of his Digest, Stephen stated the
meaning of “relevance” in the following terms:

“A fact is relevant to another fact when the existence of the one can
be shown to be the cause, or one of the causes, or the effect or one of the
effects, of the existence of the other, or when the existence of the one,
whether alone or together, with other facts, renders the existence of the
other highly probable, or improbable, according to the common course of
events”,

In later editions of the Digest, however, Stephen adopted a much shorter
definition of the word “relevant”, namely:

“The word ‘relevant’ means that any two facts to which it is applied
are so related to each other that according to the common course of events
one either taken by itself or in connection with other facts proves or
venders probable the past, present or future existence or non-existence of the
other”,

4.7. It will be noted that at first—vide section 11, Indian Evidence Act}—
Stephen was disposed to emphasise cases in which the existence of one fact
was rendered ‘highly’ probable or improbable by reason of the existence of

1866 supra.

Stephen's views.


Important —_rele-
vant facts.
Materials by
which facts can
be proved.

36

another. But, in his later views that he expressed on the matter—vide the
later editions of the Digest—he was content to refer merely to probability!

_Of course, ‘relevancy’ and ‘admissibility’ do not always coincide: facts
logically relevant may be rejected for reasons of policy.

48. It is also to be noted that, although Stephen (in later editions of the
Digest) omitted the word ‘highly’ from his definition of ‘relevant’, so as to
apply the term ‘relevance’ to a connection of mere probability as opposed to
high probability, Article 2 of his Digest contains a proviso—“that the Judge
may exclude evidence of facts which, though relevant or deemed to be relevant
to the issue, appear to him to be too remote to be material under all the
circumstances of the case.”

49. Of the various relevant facts under the Act, the most important are the
following: —
(1) Facts which form part of the same transaction as a fact in issue (४. 6).

(2) Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of relevant facts or
facts in issue {s. 7).

(3) Facts relating to motive, preparation or conduct with reference to a
fact in issue or relevant fact (s. 8).

(वी. Explanatory or introductory facts (s. 9).
(5) Statements and actions referring to common intention (8. 10).

(6) Facts inconsistent with, or affecting the probability of, facts in issue
or relevant facts {s. 11).

(7) Facts affecting the quantum of damages (5. 12).

(8) Facts affecting the existence of any right or custom in question
(s. 13).

(9) Facts showing any state of mind or feeling when the existence of
such state of mind or fecling is in issue or is relevant (s. 14).

(10) Facts showing a system (5. 15).

(11) Facts showing a course of business (5. 16).

4.10. Having laid down the facts which can be proved, the Act proceeds to
deal with the materials by which they can be proved.

4.11. The topic of proof of facts in issue and relevant facts is dealt with
in sections 56 to 100 of the Act Certain facts are judicially noticed and need
not, therefore, be proved.” Facts which require 10792 proved may. be proved
by oral evidence,‘ or they may be proved by documentary evidence.

4.12, Oral evidence must be direct ‘This is the general rule, but exceptions
thereto are found in a few sections’

1866 supra. है
*This aspect will be discussed in detail under section 3, infra.
‘Chapter 3, sections 56 to 58.

‘Chapter 4, sections 59-60.

SChapter 5, sections 61-90.

‘Section 60.

7B.g., sections 21-31 and 32-33.


37

The inter-relationship of oral and documentary evidence is dealt with in
ten sections.'

Documentary evidence, in its turn, may be—
(a) primary or secondary?

(b) attested or unattested?
(0) public or private.‘
(6) sometimes presumed to be genuine!

(2) exclusive or not exclusive.®

4.13. The Act then deals with the party who has to produce proof. The Burden of proof.

proof may, and must, be produced by the parties on whom the burden of
proof lies.’ but, in certain cases, the party may be estopped from doing so."
If the proof is given through withnesses,” they must testify in court in accord-
ance with the fules as to examination, cross-examination and re-examination.”
Fhese are the detailed rules, but they have to be administered in a liberal spirit.
Hence, the effect of mistakes in the reception and rejection of evidence on the
Tesult of the trial is dealt with by a specific provision” of the Act.

4.34, The Act contains 167 sections in all. Their source is heterogenous. source of the sec-
Some of the sections are taken from the earlier Indian legislation—the most tions.
important being the Evidence Act, 1855 (2 of 1855)". Some of the sections,”
as was pointed by West, J., in a Bombay case, are suggested by Taylor’s
Book on Evidence.

Some of the sections are taken from the Code of Criminal Procedure, 186,
which was the Code then in force.

4.15. The Evidence Act does not contain all the rules of evidence which Other Acts rela-
‘are recognised in the Indian legal system. In the first place, the two Codes of ting to mules of
Procedure—Civil and Criminal—contain rules on particular matters which है
pertain to evidence. In the second place, there are Central Acts—such as the
Bankers’ Books Evidence Act and the Commercial Documents Evidence Act—
which contain a few rules of evidence. In the third place, other Central Acts
{special laws) or local laws, while dealing with substantive law, incidentally
provide rules of evidence in the nature of presumptions or otherwise, and these
are now a familiar feature of modern legislative measures. Therefore, while
the Evidence Act repealed various rules of evidence, it was not intended to affect
special laws. This is clear from section 2 of the Act which stood thus” :—

‘Sections 91-100.
Sections 61 to 66.
Sections 67 to 73.
‘Sections 74 to 78.
‘Sections 79 to 90.

+ ‘Sections 91-100.
Chapter 7.
5Chapter 8.
"Chapter 9.
“Chapter 10.

USection 167.
"For example, sections 9 and 13, sections 18 and 37, and section 57, clauses 1, 2,

7, 13, sections 81, 83, 84, 118, 120, 123, 124, 126, 129. 131 and 162.
जाए 6, Section 92.
uLLR. 4 Bombay 581 (West J.).
Sections 25 to 27, corresponding to sections 148 to 150 of the Code of Crimi
हण्नन पथ 2 ‘ode of Criminal
*Section 2 has since been repealed.


38

“2. Repeal of enactments—On and from that day', the following laws
shall be repealed:

(0) all rules of evidence not contained in any statute, Act or Regula-
tion in force in any part of British India;

(2) था such rules, laws and regulations as have acquired the force of
law under the 25th section of the Indian Councils Act, 1861 (24
& 25 Vict. c. 67), in so far as they relate to any matter herein
provided for; and

(3) the enactments mentioned in the Schedule hereto to the extent speci-
fied in the third column of the said Schedule.

But nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect any provision
of any Statute, Act or Regulation in force in any part of British
Tadia and not hereby expressly repealed.”

Oaths. 4.16. Before closing this Chapter, we may state that the subject of oath
is dealt with by a separate Act—the Oaths Act®. It is allied to evidence. The
Constitution,” in the entries dealing with the distribution of legislative powers,
Gp entry 12, Concurrent List), mentions evidence and oaths together.

1The date of commencement of the Act.
The Oaths Act, 1963.
‘Constitution, Seventh Schedule, Concurrent List, entry 12, “Evidence and oath”.


CHAPTER 5
PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS

5.1. Section 1 of the Act deals with the sfiort title, commencement, extent section 1 — Te-
and application of the Act. Insofar as the section deals with the applica- troduction.
tion of the Act, it requires some examination. This part of the section really
deals with two aspects, namely, application of the Act as regards authorities,
and application of the Act as regards proceedings. As regards the authorities.
the section provides that the Act applies to all judicial proceedings in or before
any court including courts martia!, other than courts martial convened under
the Army Act. the Naval Discipline Act or the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,
1934 or the Air Forces Act, but not to any proceedings before an arbitrator. As
regards proceedings, the section provides that the Act applies to Judicial proceed-
ings only, and not to affidavits.

5.2. As originally enacted, the section! was much simpler, and read :

“1. This Act may be called the Indian Evidence Act. 1872:
Tt extends to the whole of British India, and applies to all judicial pro-
ceedings in or before any court, including courts martial, but not to aff-
davits presented to any court or officer, nor to proceedings before an
arbitrator;
and it shall come into force on the Ist day of September, 1872."

There was no express exclusion, by the text of the original section or Euro-
pean courts-martial, but the Army Act, 1881 (@ British statute? excluded the
application of the Indian Evidence Act in relation to courts-martial convened
under that Act, and made the English law of evidence applicable to those courts.

Courts Martial.

53 Let us first examine the question of courts martial. The appellation Courts-nrartial
‘marshal’ is derived from the Court of the Constable and the Marshal which, हु
in England, administered regulations and articles issued by the King for the
governance of the Army until the passing of the Mutiny Act in 1688!

In India, section 73 of the Government of India Act, 1833 empowered the
Governor-General-in-Council to legislate for what was then referted to as
native army — and laws so made were given general application to all nafive
officers and soldiers wherever serving. Arlicles made in exercise of this power
(first made in 1845) were amended from time to time; and when the Indian
Evidence Act was passed, the articles were to be found m an Act of 1869. It
was in 1911 that the Indian Army Act was passed.

5.4. Apparently, the specific mention in section 1 of courts martial was
considered necessary because these courts do not belong to the ordinary judicial
system. The primary objects of military law, — which these courts administer—
are disciplinary and administrative.

5.5. In 1919, the textual amendment of section 1, for excluding Courts-

Martial convened under the Army Act, was made. The amendment excluding
courts martial convened under the Naval Discipline Act and the Indian Navy

1566 infra.
See infra.
4See Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 1, pages 573-580.

39
4-131 LADIND/TI .- .


Exception regard-
ing courts martial
constituting ‘a
modification of
lex fori.

‘

British Statutes
already repealed.

Indian Courts
mattial.

Court and | Judi-

cial proceedings,
Section (4 — Affi-
davits,

40

Q@iscipline) Act was made in 1934. The amendment excluding courts martial
convened under the Air Force Act was made in 1927. These enactments should
not be confused with post-Independence legislation relating to the three wings
of the defence forces of the Union.

5.6. What was the need for this exception? The answer seems to be this,
In general, the law of evidence is the lex fori. But, by excluding the applicabi-
lity of the Act to Courts which may be described convenienily as European
Courts Martial, Section 1 constitutes an exception to this sule. Sections 127 and
128 of the Army Act, 188! (a British Statute), provided that the rules of evi-
dence to be adopted in a proceeding before European Courts Martial shall be
the same as those which are followed in civil cousts in England. That is why
these courts have been excluded.

5.7. The Army Act, the Naval Discipline Act and the Air Force Act
referred to in the present section are statutes of the British Parliament. The
exception in regard to courts constituted under these statutes was made for the
purpose of European courts martial, on the basis that these courts were governed
by the English law of Evidence,’ as already stated?

5.8. It should also be noted that the Army Act, 1881 (44 and 45 Vic.
Ch. 58), has been actually repealed, in its application to India, by the British
Statutes (Application to India) Repealing Act, 1960 (57 of 1960). As regards
the Naval Discipline Act, (29 and 30 Vict. c. 109), it may be stated that the
Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934), when it was adapted by the
Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, ceased to refer to the (English) Naval Dis-
cipline Acts, vide adaptations made in the preamble, and fong title, the addition
of new sections and the omission of section 102 which referred to the Naval
Discipline Act. The current Indian legislation regulating the naval forces is the
Navy Act, 1957, which has repealed the Act of 1934.

The Air Force Act, ie., the Air Force (Constitution) Act, 1917 (7 and 8
Geo. V. Ch. 51), has also been repealed, in its application to India, by the
British Statutes etc. Repeal Act, 1960, just now referred to. In fact, in the
changed political context, these Acts had no relevance, and even their repeal
was only a legal formality, because, even without such repeal, these Acts had
jost their utility for India. Therefore, the references to these Acts should be
deleted from section 1, as obsolete.

5.9. So far as Indian courts-martial are concerned, the Evidence Act applies
to them, first, because section 1 so provides and, secondly, because the relevant
provisions of the Indian statutes applicable to the Defence Forces expressly
provide that the Indian Evidence Act shall, subject to the provisions of those
Acts, apply to all proceedings before a court-martial*

5.10. The Evidence Act applies to ‘judicial ptoceedings’ before. all ‘courts’.
Points arising out of these two expressions will be dealt with later,‘ when consi-
dering the definitions in the Act. .

5A1. The Act does not apply to affidavits: but it may be noted that the
Code of Civil Procedure contains rules as to the facts which can be mentioned
jn an affidavit’ The Code allows a person to mention, in an affidavit, facts on

7866 sections 127, 128, Army Act, 1881 (Eng. read with sections 163-165.

‘Para. 5.6 supra.

38०2, for example,— (i) The Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), section 133; (ii) The Air
Force Ac 1950 (45 of 1980), section 132; and Gil) The Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957)
section 130.

‘See discussion under section 3—Court’, and Section 3—Judicial proceeding’, infra.

‘Order 19, rule 3, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.


41

information and belief. In interlocutory applications, the Court acts on evi-~
dence given on information and belief, because no other evidence is obtainable

at so short a notice.
5.12, As regards arbitrators, they are not, in matters of procedure, bound

by technical rules of court, and they are also unfettered by technical rules of
evidence’. The expression ‘court’, as defined in the Act,’ also excludes arbi-

trators.
5.13. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section |

should be amended so as to delete that portion of the section which excludes
the courts martial mentioned above, ie. those constituted under British Statutes,

now repealed *

Ya) Howard y. Wilson, (1878), LL.R. 4 Cal. 231.
(9) Supu v. Govinda, (1887) LL.R. 11 Mad. 85.
*Section 3.

*para. 5.8 supra.

Arbitrators,

Recommendation
as to section 1.


lntroductory

detaitions. in the
Act.

Section 3 — De-
finition of ‘court’.

CHAPTER 6
DEFINITIONS

I. INTRODUCTORY

6.1. We shall now consider the definitions contained’ in sections 3 and 4.
Some of the definitions given in the Act require careful scrutiny, hav-
ing regard to the obscurity felt with respect to their scope
and meaning. Of particular interest in this connection is the definition of
“evidence”. Another definition which is of importance is that of “relevant
fact”, The question to be considered with reference 10 the latter definition
is more basic, and will be discussed in detail later." The question does not
pertain to the content and form of the particular definition, but concerns the
scheme of the entire Act in regard to its terminology, ie., concept of “relevant
facts” as distinguished from “admissible evidence”.

6.2. The definitions given in sections 3 and 4 are of vital impottance, Many
of them are fundamental for understanding the scheme of the Act and appli-
cation of the Act. For example, the definition of “court” is of importance,
because the Act applies only to “courts” under section 1. Similarly, the defini-
tions of “facts in issue” and “relevant facts” are important, because, in general,
evidence can be given only of these facts.’ Again, the definition of “evidence”
indirectly Jays down the scope and meaning of numerous sections in the Act

which employ that expression.

If. COURT—THE GENERAL CONCEPT

6.3. The definition of ‘court? in section 3 provides that it includes all
Judges and Magistrates and all persons except arbitrators legally authorised to
take evidence. The words ‘Judge’ and the word “Magistrate” have not been
defined in the Act, but assistance in this regard can be obtained from the defini-
tions of these expressions as contained in:—

(a) Section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, section 19 of the
Indian Penal Code, section 3(17) of the General Clauses Act, 1897,
and .

(b) the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and section 3(32) of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 respectively.

6.4. It is to be noticed that ‘court’ has been defined with reference to
“evidence” and the expression “evidence” has been defined with reference to
court”. Strictly speaking, this is not satisfactory. Since we are recommending
a redraft of the definition‘, this difficulty will now recur, and we need not concern
ourselves with this defect in the present law.

6.5. The definition is inclusive and courts have been called upon to lay
down some test or the other. Several tests—statutory and others— have been
formulated for defining the expression “court”. Tt would be convenient to refer

‘Section 2 is repealed.
See discussion at the end of this Chapter, as to “relevance”.
Section 5.

‘See infra.

42


हि 43

to a few of them, before considering the question whether the definition in the
Act should be revised,

66. The principal tests found in the statutory provisions, or in the important
judicial decisions, for determining whether a body is to be regarded as a court,
may be enumerated as follows:—

6) Test of exercise of judicial functions under authority derived cither
immediately or mediately from the sovereign’;

Gi) Test of definitive judgment’;
(9) Test of legal power to take evidence*;
Gv) Test of judicial power, or of being a part of the judiciary*;

{v) Test of exercise of a power otherwise exercisable by Civil and
Revenue Courts’;

गा. SOVEREIGNTY

6.7. As regards the first criterion (exercise of judicial functions under
authority derived from the sovereign), it may be mentioned that the adminis-
tration of justice is a primary function of sovereignty. In England, it is accepted

. that the administration is one of the prerogatives of the Crown, though it is a
prerogative which has long been exercisable only through duly appointed courts
and judges*. In earlicr times, the King himself might sit in court, and he was
presumed to be present in the King’s Bench, though the judgment was given
by the court. Henry IV, and even Edward IV, occasionally sat in court; by
the end of the fourteenth century, however, the opinion prevailed’ that though the
King might be present with his Judges, he could not himself give judgmenf*.

Earlier, Henry वा rendered justice in his own presence’. But the court which
was held before him had no regular staff, no regular records, no regular proce-
dure, and when he left the country, the court went overseas with him. The
Kings of England had not been Englishmen since 1066, and would not be
Enlishmen for many generations to come. They were Frenchmen, Fretch in
language, French in culture, French in interests, and though naturally they
prised their power in England, they left their hearts in France. Thus, Henry वा
spent 13 years in England and 21 years in Normandy; Richard I spent only
eight months of his ten years as King in England. The novel problem of how
the king was to govern England and Normandy, when absent from one or the
other, was solved by creating a Justiciar in both the kingdoms and the duchy,
who held the most exalted office that man could conceive of as existing under
the king. So this court began to sit in bane at Westminster; it became a
sedentary court, and the single central court of law, through the accident of
the king's absences. Kiag John had, however, after the deprivation of Normandy,
to stay at home, and he reversed the process, keeping the court coram rege
with him and allowing the ‘bench’ at Westminster to wither away.

1869 discussion as to exercise of functions under sovereignty, infra.

2See discussion as to definitive judgment (Penal Code), infra,

5Present definition of ‘Court’, in the Evidence Act.

‘See discussion as to section 195, Code of Criminal Procedure, infra.

586९ the Contempt of Courts Act.

*Hood Phillips, Firet Book of English Law (1955), page 16.

THood Phillips, First Book of English Law (1955), page 1.

See case of Prohibitions, infra.

"Professor G. 0. Sayles, History of Court of King’s Bench, Address to Salden Society,
19 Masch 1959 (1959) 227 Law Times, 229.

Exercise of func-
under

tions
authority
sovereignty.

of


Halsbury's view.

Definition of
“court” in the
fvidence Act.

Section 195, Code
of Criminal Pro-
cedure -~ Judi-
cial power and
being a एड of
the judiciary.

44

8. Chief Justice Coke relates that he “greatly offended” James 1, when that
monarch wished to revive the earlier practice, by saying’: “The King in his
own person cannot adjudge any case, cause............ but this ought to be
determined and adjudged in some court of Justice, according to the law and
custom of England......... Thus it was that God had endowed His Majesty
with excellent science, and great endowments of nature; but His Majesty was
not learned in the laws of his realm of England, and causes which concern the
life, or inheritance, or goods, or fortunes of his subjects, are not to be decided
by natural reason but by the artificial reason and judgment of law, which law
is an art which requires long study and experience, before that a man cau
atlain to the cognizance of it.”

69. According to Halsbury*, “Originally, the term “court” meant, among
other meanings, the Sovereign’s palace: it has acquired the meaning of the
place where justice is administered and, further, has come to mean the persons
who exercise judicial functions under authority derived either immediately or me-
diately from the Sovereign’.” All “Tribunals, however, are not courts, in the sense
in which the term is here employed, namely to denole such tribunals as exercise
jurisdiction over persons by reason of the sanction of the law, and not merely
by reason of voluntary submission to their jurisdiction. Thus, arbitrators,
committees of clubs, and the like, although they may be tribunals exercising
judicial functions, are not ‘courts’ in this sense of that term.”

6.10, Utilising one of the points made in the discussion in Halsbury’, we
may say that since all tribunals are not courts, it becomes desirable to indicate,
in each statute, or by case law, how far a particular tribunal is or is not to be
regarded as ‘court’ for the purposes of the particular statute.

IV. DEFINITIVE JUDGMENT

6.11, The second. test is the test of definitive judgment, In the Indian Penal
Code’, section 20, “Court of Justice” is defined as mcaning a Judge or body
of Judges empowered by law to act judicially, when such Judge or body of
Judges is acting judicially. In the same Code, section 19, the expression “Judge”
is defined in terms which require a power to give a definitive judgment.

- For the purposes of that Code, the definition has, on the whole, worked weil.

V. LEGAL POWER TO TAKE EVIDENCE

6.12, The next statutory test is to be found in the Evidence Act, where
the definition of “court” includes all judges and magistrates and all persons
except arbitrators legally authorised to take evidence. The emphasis in the
Penal Code’ is on the power to give definitive judgments —- that being an
essential ingredient of the definition of “judge” in the Code. In the Evidence
Act, on the other hand, the emphasis is on the authority to take “evidence”.

Vi. JUDICIAL POWER OR BEING PART OF THE JUDICIARY

6.13. Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (so far as is material)’,
enacts thai certain offences against public justice, which are alleged to have
been committed in or in relation to any proceeding in any “court”, cannot be
taken cognizance of except on the complaint in writing of the court or some
other court to which it is subordinate. But Section 195(2} in the Code of 1898

\Prohibitions det Roy, (1607) 12 Co, Rep. 63.

*Halsbury, 34d Ed. Vol. 9, page 342.

‘Emphasis supplied.

‘Para, 6.9, supra.

‘Sections 19-20, LP.C.

‘Sections 19-20, LP.C. (supra).

‘Nand Lal v. Khetra Mohan, (1918) ३. 1.. R. 45 Cal. 585.


45

enacted that the term “court”, for the purposes of that section, includes a civil
revenue oc criminal! court, bui does not include a Registrar or Sub-Registrar
under the Registration Act, Because of this wording of the old Code, controver-
sy used to arise whether a particular wibunal or officer was or was not ६ court
withia the meaning of section 195. Since the expression “court” js a generic ex-
Pression, this controversy was unavoidable, as also because of the inclusive na-
ture of the definition in the old Code. Some of the High Courts adopted the test
of performance of quasi-judicial functions and duty to act fairly and impartially.
Some of them went further, and required power to regulate tegal rights by the
delivery of definitive judgments and a power io enforce iis orders by legal
sanction, coupled with a procedure judiciaj in character’.

The test approved by the Supreme Court in 1963 with reference* to section
195, in a case which reiated io a sales tax officer under the U.P. Sales Tax Act,
was different. The Supreme Court held that a sales tax officer was not
regarded as a cout for the purpose of section 195 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. in ihe view of the Supreme Court, though the Sales tax officer
was required to periorm some quasi-judicial functions and to act fairly and
impartially, ke was not @ part of the judiciary’; he was merely an instrumentality
of the State for the purposes of assessment and collection of tax. The nature
of his functions and the manner prescribed for the purpose showed that he
could not be equated with a court.

6.44. As regards income-tax officers, the same quesiion arose, but the
question was not decided by the Supreme Court, in the case of Lalji Haridas‘.

A person to whom the judicial power is not entrusted and who is merely
an arbilralor authorised within the limits of the power conferred to adjudicate
upon the dispute before him, would not be a court’ within section 195 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure.

6.15. The Supreme Court has also pointed out, in a case decided under
the Code of Crimunal Procedure* of 1898 ihat the true test for finding out
whelher a tribunal is a court is whether it has judicial power, that is, as was
observed in the case of Shell Co. of Ausiralia’, the exercise of judicial power
does noi begin until some tribunal, which has power to give a binding and
authoritative decision, is calied upon to take action.

As we have noted, the meaning of the expression “Court” for the purposes
of s. 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, (compiaini regarding offences
against public justice commilicd in relation to proceedings in a court), created
considerable uncertainty, and in view of the obscurity that was felt in this
regard, the new Code of Crimimal Procedure has the following definition of
court in the corresponding provision’: “Court” means a civil, revenue or

+Y. Mahabateswarppa y. Gopulswamy Mudaliar, A1.R. i935 Mad. 673; 69 Madras

Law Journal 589,

'agan Nath Parshad v. State of U. 2, (1963) 2 S.C.R. 850.

‘Emphasis supplied.

‘Lalji Haridas v. State of Maharashtra, (1964) 6 5. C. R. 700,

*Rama Rao v. Narain, (1969) | 5.९... 945, 954.

"Rama Rao ४. Narait, (1969) 1 $.0.1. 945, 953, (reviews cases under s. 195, Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898).
‘Shell Co. of Australia v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (4931) A, C. 278 (B.C).

“Para. 6.13, supra,


Contempt of
Courts = Act _
Exercise of power
otherwise falling
on civil and re-
venue cousts

Right of Appeal.

Administrative
Courts.

Administrative
Tribunals —
evolution of,

46

Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central,
Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes
of this section’,

VIL POWER OTHERWISE VESTED IN COURTS

6.16. With reference to the Contempt of Courts Act, ii may be that on
the terms of that particular statute, an officer or a tribunal not forming part
of the ordinary judicial hierarchy may be held to be a court, when he exercises
3 power which would otherwise have fallen on the ordinary civil and revenue
courts of the land.’

This concludes our consideration of the principal vests adopted for determi-
ning whether a particular body is a court.

6.16A. We are not concerned in this Report with the question whether
there is a right of appeal when a court is vested with certain special jurisdiction.
That aspect need not, therefore, be considered.

We shall now consider the question (a) whether the definition in the Act
needs an amendment, and (9) if so, in what direction. This necessitates an
examination in detail of the position regarding certain bodies. We begin with
adniinistrative courts.

Vill. ADMINISTRATIVE COURTS

6.17. In recent years, the movemenj to create specialised administrative
courts has received considerable impetus. The need for economy and experiness
led to the development of executive officers dealing with particular subjects, as
also to specialisation in respect of courts sitting im judgment on executive officers.
Courts so set up could hope to become specialists after some experience with
work in their respective fields.

6.18. It was in the fifties of the last century that Britain — and the world
with her — became the creature of the railway age. Disputes relating to
Railway rates and the hike were put under administrative agencies, and thus
started the uend away from the courts, — a trend which is still continuing."
Almost with each successive Act is created a special eibunal, Their number
is legion. They vary in standing, function and powers, but they are all vested
with judicial or quasi-judicial functions.

Jn India, the number of such courts (administrative courts) is fairly large,
and many more are certain to come into existence in future. Various industrial
tribunals, tribunals dealing with compensation, tfibunals dealing with matters
relating to taxation, tribunals dealing with railway rates and claims in respect
of motor accidents, are important examples. Moreover, quasi-judicial powers
have been conferred on agencies which are jJabelled not as tribunals but as
boards, such as, Ibe Press Registration Appellate Board’ the Copyright Board’,
and the Central Board of Indirect Taxes’. Some of them are even described
as “courts” — for example, the Employees’ State Insurance Court?

1gection 195(3), Cr. P. C. 1973.
°fhakur Jugal Kishore v. Sitammarhi Central Cooperative Bank Lid., (1969) 1 S.CJ.
559.
“(he case-law on this subject is reviewed in 3. D. Transport Company v. Maden Lal,
ALR. 1968 Punj. 277.
-Cf. the recent constitutional amendments.
'Section 80, Press and Registration of Books Act, 1067
"Section 6, Copyright Act, 1958.
7[he Customs Act 1962,
*The Employess’ State Insurance Act, 1948.



47

Some of them are described as Commissioners — e.g. the Settlement
Commissioners dealing with claims of displaced persons’, or the Appellate
Assistant Commissioners under the Income-tax Act’.

1X. WHETHER ACT SHOULD APPLY TO ADMINISTRALIVE
TRIBUNALS

6.19. ‘While many of these tribunals, boards and other authorities certainly
perform judicial functions, must observe the rules of natural justice and are
subject to the special appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Couri under article
136 of the Constitution, that does not conclude the matter as regards the need
for applying or not applying the Evidence Act to them. Nor does the power
conferred on them to summon witnesses and examine them on oath conclude
the maiter, because that only means thal persons who make false statements
before them could be prosecuted for the offence of giving false evidence, having
regard to the legal obligation .mposed on them by ihe oath to stafe the truth.
The essence of the maiter is that these tribunals are not necessarily places where
“justice is judicially administered”, and even if they very nearly resemble courts—
to borrow the language used by Kania, C.J., in the Bharat Bunk case,’ they
cannot, merely on that ground, be equated to courts for the purposes of the
Evidence Act. This is apparent from ihe fact that the relevani statutes, or
rules made thereunder, usually contain provisions deeming them to be civil
courts for certain purposes only, and deeming their proceedings also to be
judicial proceedings for certain purposes only. It is for this reason that in
the absence of specific provision, a general provision which would apply
the Act automatically to them is not required.

X. POSITION IN U.S.A. AND ENGLAND AS TO COURT

6.20. We may bricfly refer to the position in the U.S.A. and in England
as to adminisirative tr-bunals. In the U.S.A., the Federal Administrative
Procedure Act’ contains the following rules as to evidence: —

“(c) Evidence.—-Except as statutes otherwise provide, the proponent of
a rule or order shail have the burden of proof. Any oral or documentary
evidence may be received,» but every agency shall as a master of policy
ptovide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evi-
deuce and no sanction shall be imposed or rule or order be issued except
upon consideration of the whole record or such portions thereof as may be
cited by any party and as and as supported by and in accordance with the
reliable, probative and substantial evidence. very party shall have the
tight to present his case or defence by oral or documentary evidence, to sub-
mit rebuttal evidence, and to conduct such cross-examination as may be re-
quired for a full and true disclosure of ihe facts. In rule-making or deter-
mining claims for money or benefits or applications for initial licences any
agency may, where the interest of any party wili not be prejudicial thereby,
adopt procedures for the submission of ail or part of the evidence in writ-
ten form.”

6.21. in England, the Committee on Administrative Tribunals and Enquiries
(the Franks Committee)’ plainly stated that it would be a mistake to introduce

'Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954.
Jincome-tax Act, 1961.

*Bharat Bank v. Employees of Bharat Bank, AJ.R. 1950 S.C. 188,
‘Section Hc), Administrative Procedure Act (U.S.A).

'Emphasis supplied.

_ ‘Report of the Committee on Administrative Tribunais and Enquiries (Frank’s Com-
mittee), page 22.

Act not neces-
sarily applicable
to administrative
tribunals.

Positionin U.S.A.

Recommendation
of Frank's Com-
mittee.


Local laws.

Power to make
rules as to evi-
dence conferred
by parent Act.

48

the strict rules of evidence of the courls into proceedings before administrative
tribunals.

XI. SOME STATULORY PROVISIONS IN INDIA AS 10
ADMINISTRATIVE COURTS

6.22. In general, in India also, adminisirative tribunals and quasi-judicial
bodies are not required to adhere to strict rules of evidence. The position
depends on the provision in the parent Act.

It may be noted that many local laws have often provided for the adjudi-
cation of claims in respect of taxation or vaiuation by tribunals. For example,
the Bombay Municipal Corperation Act,’ provides for the hearing of various
proceedings — such as, election enquiries, references to the judge, appeals
against valuation and taxes, appeals against certain orders of the Municipal
Commissiuner to the Judge or the District Court, references to magistrates in
respect of certain matters, and the fike. The Act? makes specific provisions
as to the application of the Code of Civil Procedure, the law of limitation,
execution of orders and, when appropriate, the application of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, to enquiries and proceedings before magistrates.

Similarly, the Bombay Public Trusis Act* empowers the Charity Commissioner
appointed under the Act to frame certain schemes for the governance of public
trusts. He has power to summon and examine witnesses etc. on oath. The
Act also contains provisions as to, for what purposes, such enquiries shall be
deemed (0 be judicial proceedings within the Penal Code.’

6.23, Often, the parent Act confers power on the appropriate authority,—
sometimes even on the tribunai,— to make rules regulating its procedure.

The Unlawful Activities Tribunal Rules, made under the Unlawful Activities
Act, 1967, provide that in respect of inquiries and proccedings concerning the
disposal of applications, the Tribunai should follow, “as far as practicable”,
the rules ol evidence set out in the Evidence Act, 1872. It has also been provided
that the Tribuga! may require the Centra} Government to produce documents
claimed 10 be confidential.”

6.24. The Railway Rates Tribunal’ is governed by the rules made under
the parent Act." Rules 43 and 44 of the Rules read:

“43, The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act shall generally be
followed in proceedings before the Tribunal : Provided thay in the discretion
of the Tribunal, any of its provisions may be relaxed in order that needful

and proper evidence may be conveniently, inexpensively and  spcediiy
produced in the interests of justice, while preserving the substantial rights
of the parties.”

\Sections 403 to 437, Bombay Municipal Corporations Act (Bombay Act 59 of 1949).
Sections 434 to 437, Bombay Municipal Corporations Act (Bombay Act 59 of 1949).
‘Section 50-A and section 73, 74, Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 (Bombay Act 29 of

1950).

‘Section 74, Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950.

‘Rule ३(1), Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968.

Rule 3(2), Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968.

कल Railway Rates Tribunal Rules, 1959.

8See sections 34-44, Indian Railways Act, 1890.


49

“44(i) The evidence at the hearing of a complaint may be taken either
by affidavit or by viva voce; or partly by affidavit and partly by viva voce:
Provided that if either party intends to rely on any evidence. he shall send
or deliver to the other party a copy of the affidavit, failing which he shall
not be allowed io use the same except by special leave of the Tribunal.

(1) Either party may send or deliver by registered post to the other
party a notice requirmg the deponent 10 be produced at hearing of the
complaint for cross-examination...... :

(iii) For the purpose of any aliidavit to be swom im ary proceedings
before the Tribunal, the Chairman may empower any official to administer
an oath to the deponent of the affidavit.”

XIL JUDICLAL AND QUASI-JUDICIAL

6.25, The Donoughmore Committee (Committee on Ministers Powers) in
England formulated the following distinctions between judiciai and administrative
powers :*

(3) A true judicia} decision presupposes an existing dispute between two
or more parties, and then involves four requisites—

(1) the presentation (mot necessarily orally} of their cases by the parties;

(2) the ascertainment of any disputed facts by evidence adduced by the
partics, often with the assistance of argument on that evidence;

(3) the submission of argument on any disputed question of law;

(4) a decision which disposes of the whole matter by a finding upon
disputed facts and “an application of the law of the land to the
fact so found, including where required a ruling upon any disputed
question of law.”

(b) An administrative decision is one in the making of which the authority
is not required to employ any of the processes familiar in courts of law (hearing
evidence and arguments, etc.) and where the grounds upon which he acts are
Jeft entirely to his discretion.

6.26. The Committce also sought io define a “quasi-judicial” decision by
reference to its definition of a judicial decision: “A quasi judicial decision
equally pre-supposes an existing dispute between two or more parties and
involves (1) and (2), but does not necessarily involve (3) and never involves (4).
The place of (4) is, im fact, taken by administrative action, the character of which
is determined by the minister's free choice.”

The analysis of “judicial” and “quasi-judicial” functions as made by the
Donoughmore Commitice’ came to be recorded judicially in the case of Cooper v.
Wilson, in the judgment of Scott L.J., who had taken a leading part in the
Donoughmore Committee. He described the Watch Committee in the case
before him as obliged to make a “quasi-judicial approach” which meant that
they were “exercising nearly judicial functions”, though “noz tied to ordinary

judicial procedure.”

XU. NATURAL JUSTICE

6.27. There is no doubt that bodies exercising judicial and quasi-judicial
powers will be held to the observance of the rules of natural justice. Classifi-
cation of a power as executive or administrative has sometimes been used as a

‘ommittee on Ministers’ Powers Report (1932), (Cmd. 4060), pages 73 and 81
2Committee on Ministers’ Powers, Report (see supra).
Cooper v. Wilson, (1937) 2 All. E.R. 726, 740 (CA).

Discussion in_Re-
port of Com-
mittee on Minis-
ters’ Powers.

Natural justice,


Evidence
based on
mises

Coroners.

not
sur

30

means of cxcluding the application of the rules.’ But this approach is inconsistent
with the actual decisions, and with dicta in numerous cases. Lord Denning
M.R., has said’: “That heresy was scotched ia Ridge v. Baldwin’”

In the Australian case of Banks v. Transport Regulgtion Board‘, Barwick,
C.J., expressed entire agreement with Lord Reid's judgment in Ridge v. Baldwin
and also indicated that the prerogative writs may, in appropriate circumstances,
be available in respect of an administrative discretion, if the discretion is not
an “absolute and unfettered” one.

As Parker J. observed in R. v. Manchester Legal Aid Committee’:
“ the duty to act judicially may arise in widely different

circumstances wh.ch it would be impossible, and, indeed, inadvisable, to
attempt to define exhaustively.” यु

6.28. For example, decisions of tribunals will not be on surmise. As the
Mysore High Court observed :*

“Surmises have no place in judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings.”

XIV. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNALS

6.29. The question of industrial tribunals may be considered in some detail
It has been held by the Calcutta High Court’ that it is a “Court” within the
Evidence Act. We may, however, point out with respect that the Industrial
Tribunals Act, 1947, contains limited provisions,” which do not make the tribunal
a court. This aspect {the provisions of the Act) was not.fully discussed in the
Calcutta case. That case relied partly, if not mainly, on the judgment in the
Bharat Bank case.” But it may be pointed out that in the Bharat Bank case
itseti, Kania C.J. observed that the Industria} Tribunal is not technicality a court,
though it has all the essential attributes of a court of justice.

He described the tribunal as “discharging functions very near to those of a

Moreover, that case was decided with reference to article 136 of the

court”,
tribunal”

Conslitulion, and ibe judgment emphasised the werds — “court or
and “cause or matter”, which occur in that article.

As regards article 136, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is discre-
tionary. As the Supreme Court pointed out in the case of Dhukeshweri Cotton
Mils v. C17. it is not possible to define with any precision the limitations
on the exercise of this discretionary jurisdiction

629A. The question may arise whether the present definition of “court”
covers Coroners appointed under the Coroners Act.’ Coroners have powers to
administer oath and take “evidence” {section 19, Corners Act), Coroners are
“magistrates” for the purposes of section 26, Evidence Act (section 20, Coro-
ners Act).

‘Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne, (1951) AC. 66; Testro Bros. Pry. Lid, v. Tait, (1963) 109
GLR. 353.

मर, v. Gaming Board for Great Britain: Ex parte Benaim, (1970) 2 AN E.R. 528, 533.

SRidge v. Baldwin, (1964) AC. 40 (AL).

4Banks v. Transport Regulation Board, (1968) 42 A.L.LR. 64, 67, 68.

अर, व. Manchester Legal Aid Committee, (1952) 1 All, E.R. 480, 489.

SE. Aswathiat v. LT.C., (1965) 1 Mys. LJ. 76; judgment approved in ALR.

Mys. 36, 38, para. 5-6. ह
Raghu Singh v. Burrakur Coal Co., 8, 1966 Cal. 504 (Bose and B.C. Mitra JJ).

‘Particularly, sections 11(5), 15, 17, 38B etc. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.

*Bharat Bank case, ALR. 1950 S.C. 188.
’Dhkakeshwari Cotton Mills v. CLT., ALR. 1955 S.C. 65, 69 para. 7.

UCoroners Act, 1871 (4 of 1871).

1968

ae


31

But they need not be termed as “courts” for the ptesent purpose. They
hold merely an “inquest” (section 21, Coroners Act), and draw up an inguisi-
tion (sections 23-24, Coroners Act), It should be noted that they do not give
any definitive judgement and, in that sensc, are not analogous to courts. They
may be “courts of investigation”, but they do not give final decisions affecting the
liability of the citizen. It may be noted that under the Coroners Act, proceed-
ings before Coroners are judicial proceedings only for limited purposes.

XV. NEED FOR AMENDMENT

6.30. Having regard to the fact that since 1872, so many tibunals have
come into existence and many more will come into existence, an attempt to
evolve a precise test is preferable to the present position. The discussion above
would show—(i) how, in the absence of a very precise test, conflict and uncer-
tainty may arise, and ‘ii) why the only precise test would be to confine it to
civil, criminal or revenue courts, in the absence of statutory provisions.

XVI. RECOMMENDATION AS TO COURT

6.31. Having taken into consideration all aspects of the matter, we have
come to the conclusion that it is essentia} that the scope of the definition of
“court” should be indicated more precisely than at present; and we are of the
view that this delimitation should take the shape of a revised defintion, which
will confine the ambit of the expression “court” in this Act to civil, criminal
and revenue courts. at the same time leaving scope for including a tribunal of
a special nature within the definition by appropriate legistative action. No defi-
nition can be perfect, but we believe that the first part of the revised detiaition
wih introduce « modicum of certainty, while the second patt will leave scope
for that much of elasticity as is desirable in such mattets. The elasticity will
not, however, be achieved at the cost of precision. because, whenever a special
tribunal is created, it will be open to the Legislature to take a decision whether
60 not it should be regarded as court within the meaning of the Evidence Act,
and such a course wi!l minimise the scope for controversy arising in the matter.

Every authority with judicial functions is not a court under the Evidence
Act, There are features common to courts and tribunals, and features distinct

to each! One cannot catalogue them.

6.32. It is, no doubt, true that the definition as proposed to be revised will
restrict the scope of “court”, unless the Legislature declares the particular tribu-

nal as court.

In some cases, as noted above, for example, Industrial Tribunals have been
held to be courts for the purposes of the Evidence Act. and the amendment
would change the existing law. This departure from the existing law. as inter-
preted by some High Courts, is deliberate. It may, however, be pointed out"
that the amendment will not preclude Parliament or State Legislature from mak-
ing such provisions;' and if any statutory provisions exist, they also would be
saved under the draft suggested.

The present uncertainty will be avoided, and in each case, the apprapriate
Legislature can make a suitable provision.

TAC, v. 2, N. Sharma, (1965) 1 S.C.A. 723.

2562, supra,
Section 87(3), Representation of the People Act, 1951.

‘Check up as to pravisions “uoder law”.

on existing Acts
—Interpretation.


Recommendation.

Section 3 — De-
finition of “docu-
ment”,

Definition in
General Clauses
Act, 1897.

Section 3— “Evi-
dence”,

52

6,33. In the light of the above discussion our recommendation is to confine
the definition of court to “civil, criminal or revenue court’, and, as regards
tribunals, we would include only such tribunals as may be declared by or under
Central or State or Provincial Acts to be tribunals for the purposes of the Evi-

dence Act.’

We. therefore, recommend the following revised definition of “court” :—

“court” means a civil, criminal or revenue court, and includes a
tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declar-
ed by or under that Act to be a court for the purposes of this Act, but
does not include an arbitrator.

6.34. In the formula suggested above, the inclusive portion is. in a sense,
redundant, because, if the other Act provides for applying the Evidence Act, the
provision in the other Act possesses its own potency, and will operate whether
or not the Evidence Act refers to it. However, the inclusive portion makes it
clear, by implication, that “tribunals” do not fal! within the definition, in the
absence of an express plovision. The express provision could, as already stated,
be made by the appropriate legislation.

वा may incidentally be noted that the first part of the formula uses phraseo-
logy used in the legislation relating to traditional judicial hierarchy-. such as, the
Civil Courts Act and the Code of Criminal Procedure.

XVI. & XVIII. DOCUMENT

6.35, The term “document” has been defined in section 3 as “any matter
expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks,
or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used”.
for the purpose of recording that matter.

6.36. In our Report on the Genera] Clauses Act’, the following re-draft of
the definition of “document” in that Act has been recommended:

“document” shall include any substance having any matter written,
expressed, inscribed, described or otherwise recorded upon it by means
of letters, figures or marks or by any other means, or by more than one
of these means, which are intended to be used or which may be used for

the purpose of recording that matter.
Explanation.—It is immaterial by what means the letters, figures or
marks are formed.”

6.37. The definition in the Evidence Act should be similarly revised, aS
the reasons which we mentioned in that Report for revising the definition in the
General Clauses Act apply to the definition in the Evidence Act also, and need

not be repeated here.

XIX. EVIDENCE

6.38. The next definition to be considered is of “evidence”. “Evidence”,

as defined in section 3, means and includes—
(1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before
it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry, such
statements are called oral evidence;

‘Cf. section 195(2), CrP.C., 1973.

*Shri Dhavan has a reservation in the matter.

860th Report (Report on the General Clauses Act), Para. 3.40, recommendation as to
section 3 — “document”.


53

(2) all documents produced for the inspection of the Court: such docu-
ments are called documentary evidence.

The definition is not exhaustive of all matters which a Court can consider
in determining questions of fact. The expression “matters before it”. in the
definition of the expression “proved”, obviously includes matters which do not
fall within the definition of “evidence”. This is pointed out in a Calcutta case’.

6.39. The definition of evidence has been objected? to for incompleteness,
in so far as, by its terms, it does not include the whole material on which the
decision of the Court may rest. Thus, in so far as a statement by a witness
only is “evidence”, the following are not “evidence” according to it, (a) the
oral statements of perties and the accused in Court by way of admission or con-
fession or in answer to questions by the Judge’, (b) a confession by an accused
person affecting himself and his co-accused‘, (0) “real evidence*”, and (d) the
presumptions to be drawn by reason of the absence of producible witness or
evidence. Bui it should be pointed our that this clause is an interpretation
clause, and is only meant to indicate what is intended to denote whenever the
word “evidence” is used in the Act’. The definition must be considered together
with ihe definition of “proved’’. When it is so considered, we have a certain
measure of elasticity and the apparent incompleteness becomes immaterial. As
Jackson J. has observed’, “it seems to follow therefore that if a relevant fact is
proved and the law expressly authorises its being taken into consideration, that
is considered for a certain purposes or against certain persons. in a certain situa-
tion, the fact in question is ‘evidence’ for that purpose, or against such persons,
although the result bas not been expressed in these words by the Legislature:
and, being evidence, it must be used in the same way as everything else that is
‘evidence’. Thus, an oral admission in Court is a matter before the Court
which may be taken into consideration”.

The confession of a prisoner affecting himself and another pefson charged
with the same offence is", when duly proved, also one of such matters, as the
law now stands", although in actual practice courts are reluctant to rely on it.

6.40, The expression “evidence” is used im several sections, including sec-
tion 5 (evidence of fects in issue and relevant facts). 59, 60 (oral), 60 (evidence
must be direct}, 61-100 (documentary), 91-100 (exclusion of oral by documen-
tary), 114(g), (producible but not produced), 100-116 (production and effect of),
118-166 (witnesses), 167 (improper admission and rejection of evidence).

641. It may be of interest to note that the Bill, as originally drafted, con-
tained a third sub-division included in the definition of “evidence”. namely—
“(3) All material things other than documents produced for the inspec-
tion of the Court;

“Fay Comar v. Bindu Lal, (1882) LL.R. 9 Calcutta 363, 366.
*Tbayer’s Preliminary Treatisa on Evidence (1898), 263, referred to by Woodroffe.
SSeetion 165.

‘Section 30.

See infra.

"Section 114, illustration (डर.

IR. v. Ashootosh, (1877) LL.R. 4 Cal. 492 (FB).

oy v. Bundhoolall, (1882) LL.R. 9 Cal. 366.

°R. ¥, Shootosh, (1877) LLR. 4 Cal. 492 (F.B).

"Joy v. Bundhoolall, (1882) 9 Cal. 366.

Wa} R. v. Ashootosh, LL.R. 4 Cal. 483.

(0) R. v. Krishna Bhat, (1885) LLR. 12 Bom. 386.

(0) R.v. Dada. (1889) LL.R. 15 Bom. 459.

ection 30.

Objection to in-
completeness of
the definition.

Use of the ex-
pression.

Real or material
evidence,


Academic  discus-
sion.

Categories, of
real evidence.

Inspection.

Photograph of
object.

No change is
ne

54

such things are called material evidence”.

However, this part of the definition did not find a place in the Act as enact-
ed. Stephen’, regarded the definition as unnecessary. on the ground that mate-
rial objects will, in any case. bave to be produced by witnesses who give oral
evidence.

6.42, There is considerable academic discussion about real evidence. Phip-
son’, in an article in the Yale Law Journal, defincd reaj evidence as “material ob-
jects other than documents provided for the inspection of the court”,

It may be noted that the name “real evidence” was adopted by Best, though
the division of evidence into personal and real dates from the time of Bentham.

6A3. Certain writers include, in the category of real evidence, (a) evidence
from things as distinct from persons, (b) material objects produced for the ins-
pection of the Court. (c) perception by the court as distinct from the facts per-
ceived, and ([छ) the behaviour of witnesses.

6.44. There are, in the two procedural Codes’, appropriate provisions for
the inspection of premises of property; but these provisions are usually interpret-
ed not as furnishing a fresh species of evidence, but as useful for appreciating
evideace already given.

However, if the view of the place is accompanied by a demonstration by the
witness, it is regarded as a part of the evidences, The witness, if taken to the
spot, to make his evidence intelligible, may start to give his evidence all over
again. As Shakespeare said‘ “Old man forget, yet all shall be forgot; but he'll
remember with advantages what feats he did that day;"—that is to say. if he is
taken to the place.

6A5. Sometimes, the teal object is not produced in Court and only its
photograph is produced. In Lucus v. Williams*® the production of the photo-
graph of an engraving of a picture was admitted as evidence, in an action infring-
ing the copyright of the picture by selling the photograph.

Again, the appearance of a person who is not a witness may have value as
evidence when identity or age or physique is in issue. Thus, the resemblance
of an infant to an alleged parent may be relevant (though not cogent) evidence
of paternity’. and the alleged similarity or dissimilarity’ may be observed by as
comparison of the child and the adult in court’.

6.46. We are mentioning this species of real evidence or matters analogous
thereto, in order to facilitate an examination of the question whether it is neces-
sary to include such evidence in the definition in the Act. After careful consi-
deration, we have come to the conclusion that it is not necessary to do so. Such

‘Stephen, Introduction to Indian Evidence Act (1872), page 11. See
“Real Evidence” (1949), 65 Law Quarterly Review 57.

*Phipson, “Real Evidence” (1920) 29 Yale Law Journal 717.

%a) Order 38, rule 18. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

(b) Section 310, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

3566 discussion in Tameshwar v. R., (1957) 2 All, E.R. 683, 686 {P.C), following
Karamat v. Reg. (1956) 1 AD. E.R. 415.

8Shakespeare, Henry the Fifth, Act 4. Part 3.

‘Lucas v. Williams, (1892) 2 0.8. at page 116 (GA) (per Lord Esher).

जब) Burnoby १. Ballle, (1889) 42 Ch. 70. 282, 290, 297, 298.

(b) Russell v. Russell, (1923) 129 L.T. 151, 153 (this point was not discussed in the

appellate courts; see (1924) A.C. 687 at 705, 749).

35९6 Kenny, “Physical Resembiance as Evidence of Consanguinity” (1923) 39 L.Q.R.
297.
*See note in 102 Law Times Journal] 188.



55

material can be produced for the inspection of the court and is, in that sense,

not unknown to the scheme of our law. This is, in a sufficient measure, esta-
blished by the provisions for production of the material objects before the court
which are contained in the two procedural Codes and which are also indirectly
referred to in section 60. The extent to which the courts can rely on such real
or material evidence or local inspection and the like is a matter not dealt with
in the Act and would, in fact, seem to be a topic rather difficult of legislative
codification. Moreover, the fact that a court can, in coming to a conclusion,
have regard not only to what is strictly speaking “evidence” as defined in the
Act, but also to matters which are properly for its consideration is, as already
stated, a proposition implicit in the definition of the expressions relating to
proof. In the circumstances, we do not consider it necessary to recommend
any change on this point.

XX. FACT

6.47, The next definition to be considered is that of the expression “fact”.
defined in section 3 as meaning and including—

(1) any thing, state of things or relation of things, capable of being per
ceived by the senses;

(2) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.

The first clause of the definition of “fact” refers to externa! facts which
are the subject of perception by the five senses’, and the second clause refers
to internal facts, which are the subject of conscivusness*. Tllustrations (a), (b)
and (c) are illustrations of the first clause; i!lustrations (0) and (०) of the second
Facts are, thus, (adopting the classification of Bentham), either physical,—e.g.,
the existence of visible objects, or psychological,—e.g., the intention or animus
of a particular individual in doing a particular act. The psychological facts are
incapable of direct proof by the testimony of witnesses; their existence can be
ascertained only by the confession of the party whose mind is their seat or by
presumptive inference from physical facts‘. This constitutes the only difference
between physical and psychological facts,

6.48, The expression “fact” has a comprehensive connotation. The defi-
nition in the Act, taking “this into account, is also comprehensive enough. The
concept of “fact” is itself wide enough to cover not only things at rest, but also
things in motion—acts and events*.

The concept of “thing” is not confined to objects of right. As in meta-
physics, it covers whatever is capable of being petceived by the senses or be-
ing contemplated by the mind. Al phenomena are covered. As Immanuel
Kant has said’.

“That alt our knowledge begins with experience, there can be no doubt.
For, how is it possible that the faculty of cognition should be
awakened into exercise otherwise than by means of objects which affect our
senscs, and (which partly of themselves produce representations, partly rouse
our powers of understanding into activity, to compare, to connect, or to

‘Rama v. Harakdhari, 47 LC. 710,

“Steph. Dig., Article 1.

‘Bentham, Judicial Evidence, Vol. t, page 45.

‘Best, Evidence (1922), pages 6 and 7.

‘Bentham, Works, Vol. 6, page 217.

"Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, [ntroductory Chapter, first paragraph.

5—131 LAD/ND/77

Section 3 —
“Fact”.


Meaning of
thing.

Legal meaning of

Psychological
facta,

thin;

56

separate these, and so to convert the raw material of our senuous impres-
sions into a knowledge of objects, which is called experience? In respect
of time, therefore, no knowledge of ours is antecedent to experience, but
(0 begins with it.”

648A. Bentham gave the following as important examples of psychologi-
cal facts": --

“Lt. Sensations : feelings having their seat in some one or more of the
five senses—sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch,

Sensations, again, may be sub-divided into those which are pleasurable,
those which are painful. and those which, not being attended with any consi-
derable degree of pleasure or pain, may be called indifferent.

2. Recollections : the recollections or remembrances of past sensations.

3. Judgments: that sort of psychological fact which, has place when
we ate said to assent to or dissent from a proposition.

4. Desires: which, when to a certain degree strong, are terms passions,

5. Volitions: or acts of the will etc.”

6.48B. “Thing” — an expression used in the definition — is defined* in the
Oxford English Dictionary as —- “That with which one is concerned (in action,

speech or thought); an affair, business, concern, matter, subject;. .. That which
is done or to be done; a doing, act, deed, transaction; an event, occurrence,
incident: a fact. circumstance, experience . . . . - That which is said: a saying,

utterance, expression, statement: with various connotations eg. a charge or
accusation made against a person, a form of prayer, a story, tale; a part ot
section of an argument or discourse: a wifty saying, a jest. Formerly used.
absol: (without article or qualifying word) also a thing, in indefinite sense —
anything, something. An entity of any kind. That which exists individually (in
the most general sense, in fact or in idea), that which is or may be in any way
an object of perception, knowledge or thought’, a being, an entity. (Including
persons, when a personality is not considered.” {t is not thus confined to static
phenomena.

Tn Webster's Dictionary’, “Thing” is defined to include; assembly, reason
a matter of concern, affairs; a particular state of affairs; situation, complication;
Deed, act, accomplishment, used commonly as cognate object of do;
wee a product of work or activity... the end or aim of effort or acti-
vity. Whatever exists or is conceived to exist as a separate entity or as a distinct
and individual quality, fact or idea; 4 separate or distinguishable object of
thought | - - - - & something that is said, told or thought.

6.48C. In legal discussion also, the expression “thing” is used to refer to
events.

The word ‘occurrence’ has been judicially defined as that which occurs —
an event, incident or happening’ — and as that which occurs especially adversely
— an appearance of happening*. Incidentally “occurrence”, to the Jay mind, and

ientham, Works, Vol. 6, page 236.
शुक्ल Oxford English Dictionary. (1933), Vol. 11, page 308-309

“Emphasis supplied.

‘Webster's Third New International Dictionary (1956), Vol. 3, page 2376.

SJones v. Kansas City, 243, SW. 2d 318, 320 (Mo. 1951).

“Portaro v. American Guarantee & Liaba. Ins. Co., 210 F. Suppl. 411.
Ohio 1962).

415 IND.


57

more so to the legal mind, has a much broader meaning than the word “acci-
dent”. “As these words are generally understood, accident means' something
that happened in a certain way, while an occurrence means? something that

came about in any way.”

It would appear that there are precedents for taking the expression “thing”
as covering every thing that exists or can exist in reality -- physical or psychic,
animate cr inenimate, static or dynamic. Not only what exists without change,
but also what represents a change or an event, is covered. If the body can
feel or the mind can conceive of a subject, then it is a “thing”. Every matter
within the ambit of the physical or the intellectual apparatus of man can, there-
fore, be regarded as a “thing”. It is not confined to what can be seen again
and again, —- a permanent physical object. Tt covers also events or acts which
can be perceived only once — phenomena which have a transient effect on the
senses.

“Relation of things” would, in any case. seem to cover acts — see illustra-
tions (b) and (c) — and events also, because an event represents a “relation” in

point of time.

6.49. This discussion does not lead to any radical change in the definition.
But the words “and includes” should be deleted. as confusing and inaccurate.
We recommend accordingly.

XXI. RELEVANT

6.59, Then we come to the definition of “relevant”. One fact is said to be
relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in any of the ways
referred to in the provisions of this Act relating to the relevancy of facts. The
expression’ “relevant” occurs mainly in sections 5-55. Expressions cognate
thereto occur in sections है, 32, clause (8), 132, 135, 137, 148 and 153. The
expression “irrelevant” occurs in sections 24, 29, 43, 52, 54 and 165.

The definition needs no change. It may be noted that the concept of
relevance is linked up with the definition of ‘fact in issue’ in the scheme of the
Act

6.51. The expression “facts in issue”, as defined, means and includes—

“any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the
existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any right, Hability or disability,
asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.”

Where under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating
to Civil Procedure. any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted
or denied in the answer fo such issue is a fact in issue.

The expression “facts {or ‘fact’) in issue” occurs in sections 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,
17, 21, ill. (9), 33, 36, 43; “questions in issue” occurs in section 33; “matters in
issue” in section 132.

Illustrations to the definitions ate as follows:—

A is accused of the murder of B. At his trial the following facts may
be in issue;

That A caused B's death;

That A intended to cause B’s death;

Wee Aerial Agricultural Eerv. Inc. v. Till, 207 7, Supp. 50, 57 (ND. Miss. 1962)

referred.
Vincent Veldorate, “Corpus Delicti*, (1965) 39 Temple Law Quarterly 1. 3.

%The enumeration is not exhaustive.

Recommendation.

Section 3— “rele-

vant”

Section 3—
“facts in issue”,


Section 3 — De
finitions

58

That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B;

That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B’s death, was, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature.

6.52, and 6.53. In the definition of “facts in issue” also, we recommend that

the words “and includes” should be removed, as unnecessary and confusing.

XXIT. PROVED
6.54. We now come to the definition of the expressions ‘proved’, ‘disproved’

0 +्- 29 .
“proved”, _‘‘dise and “not proved”. These three expressions have been thus defined.

proved", ' and “not
proved”,

Proof,

“Proved” — A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the
matters before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its
existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of
the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.

“Disproved” — A fact is said to be disproved when, affer considering
the matters before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or
considers its non-existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the
circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it
does not exist.

“Not proved” — A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither
proved nor disproved.

6.55. Whether an alleged fact is a fact in issue or a relevant fact, the Court

can draw no inference from its existence, till it believes it to exist. “Evidence”
of a fact and “proof” of a fact are not synonymous terms. A judgment is to be
based on facts duly proved'. “Proof”, in strictness, marks merely the effect of
evidence Proof considered as the establishhment of material facts in issue jn
each particular case by proper and legal means to the satisfaction of the Court
is effected® by (a) evidence of statements of witnesses,’ admissions or confessions
of parties, and production of documents’ and also previous statements:* (b) pre-
sumptions:’ (c) Tudicial’-" notice: (d) inspection, — which has been defined as
the substintion of the eve for the ear in the reception of evidence,’ — as in the
case of observation of the demeanour of witness," local investigation.” or the
inspection of instruments used for the commission of a crime™

6.56. It may be noted that the expression ‘not proved’ does not appear to

occur anywhere in the Act. However, the definition is useful for explaining the
concept of ‘not proved’, and the expression has come in handy in the under-
standing of the general scheme of the Act. It need not, therefore, be disturbed.

We may point out that the words “matters before it” in the definition of

‘proof? are wide enough to cover matters which are not ‘evidence’, as defined™
in the Act. Those words are not confined to ‘oral’ and ‘documentary evidence’.

Section 165.
°Stephen, Digest, Article 58.

Sections 3, 5-55, 58, 60 (oral proof).

‘Sections 61-100 (documentary proof).

SSections 157-158, sections 32-33; R. v. Ashootosh, (1878) LL.R. Cal. 492
"Sections 4, 79-90, 112-114,

"Sections 56, $7

"See R. v. Ashootosh, (1878) I.L.R. 4 Cal. 492.

sWartoh, Evidence, section 345, quoted by woodroffe.

"Order 18, Rule 12. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

‘yoy v. Bundhoolall, LER. 9 Cal. 363.

12९22 discussion as to real evidence under sec. ‘evidence’.

"Gee discussion as to section 3, ‘evidence’. supra.



59
6.57. “India” is defined in the Act as meaning the territory of India exclud-
ing the State of Jammu & Kashmir. The definition of ‘india’ should be deleted.

In the substantive sections, the expression “‘territories to which this Act
extends” should be substituted with such consequential changes, if any, as may
be required. The reasons which have been sei out in our Report on the Stamp
Act‘ are applicable to the definition in the Act under consideration also.

XXII. JUDICIAL PROCEEDING
A. INTRODUCTORY

6.58. We shall now deal with the term “judicial proceeding”, which has
not been defined in the Act. It may be noted that the very section which deals

Section 3-~
‘India’

Judicial proceed:

ing.

with the application of the Act — section 1, second paragraph — provides that -

the Act applics to all “judicial proceedings” before the specitied “courts”, The
expression “judicial proceeding” occurs also in seclions 33 and 80. We shall first
refer to the important case-law under the Evidence Act, uhen to definitions as
given in a few other Acts or in some decided cases, and then record our own

conclusions.
B. CASE LAW UNDER THE EVIDENCE ACT

6,59. So iar as cases under the Indian, Evidence Aci are concerned, it has
been held, under section 80 of the Evidence Act, that the record of a statement
made by a witness to a police officer in the course of a police investigation is not
a record of “evidence”, and such statement does not prove itself.

On principle, the statements recorded by Magistrates during investigation
should also not be regarded as made in “judicial proceedings”, as the Magistrate
does not intend to give any judgment or to determine any question of law or fact,
and records the statcments merely in order to preserve evidence. The object of
the power conferred on the Magistrale is to provide a convenient machinery
whereby a witness whose cvideatce is of some imporance may be asked to record
his immediate recollection of the facts. Such a staiement can be used to corrobo-
rate, refresh or contradict the witness, but is not substanlive evidence ai the trial
or inquiry. ‘The relevant section in the Code appears in the Chapter on Investi-
gation; the Explanation iv that section makes it clear that the Magistrate
receiving and recording a confession or statement need not be a magistrate
having jurisdiction in the case. Ali this would seem to support the view that it
is Dot a judicial proceeding.

6.60. Bui the above discussion is academic for the Evidence Act. The
definition of ‘evidence’ has been interpreied’-* as excluding slatement recorded
by Magistrates during investigation in gencrai. It is not intended thai the Evi-
dence Act should be applied to such siatements; the question of relevancy of
facts or admissibility of evidence cannot, in the very nature of things, be of any
importance in such statements, and such statements would be of no use so far
as section 33 is concerned. As regards section 80 of the Act, am express provision
can be made, it necessary’ to mention these statements specifically.

"Report on the Stamp Act, discussion as to the definition of “india”.
*Roghuni Singh v. Emperor, (1882) LL.R. 9 Cal. 455, 458.

3Bhuboni Singh v. The King, AAR. 1949 P.C. 257, 259; 76 LA. 147,
4a) See observations of Bose J. in Rambharose v. Emperor, ALR. 1944 Nag. 105,
110, 111; LL.R. 1944 Nag. 274.

(0) However, Paramanand v. Emperor, AJR. i940 Nag. 340, 344; LL.R. 1940
Nag. 110 apparently seems to take a contrary view, as the Court relied more

upon section 32 than upon section 33.
See discussion of case law in Sheo Raj ¥. The State, ALR. 1964 All, 290 (FB)

‘To be considered under section 80.

Meaning for
Evidence Act.

the


Coroners.

Proceedings be-
fore — Income-tax
Officer.

Industrial = Tribu-
nals.

60

6.61. In a Bombay case’, one of the question to be considered was whether
proceedings before the coroncr are judicial proceedings. Tulzapurkar J., after
referring to some of the case law on the subject, said:

“In view of the aforesaid citations, it seems to me clear that in its
ordinary or normally acecpted connotation, the expression ‘judicial  pro-
ceeding’ means a proceeding in which judicial function are 2xercised and
a final decision is given affecting either the right or liability of one or the
other party thereto, for, according to Sir James Stephen, unless the purpose
of the proceeding is ascertaining of some right or liability, the proceeding
would not be a ‘judicial proceeding. Looked at from this point of view,
it would be very dificult to come to the conclusion that the ‘Inquest pro-
ceeding’ held by the Coroner under the Coroners Act at which no right or
fiability of any ove is finally or effectively adjudicated upon is a ‘judicial
proceeding’ for the purpose of the Evidence Act.”

6.62. It has been held’ that proceedings before the Income-tax authorities
are not “judicial proceedings” under the Evidence Act.

Regarding Industrial Tribunals appointed under the Industrial Disputes

Act, 1947, it has been held by a Division Bench of the Ajlahabad High Court--'
thal the Evidence Act does noi apply to such Tribunals.

It may be noted that section 11(3){a) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
gives power to examine witnesses on oath, but that has not come im the way of
ihe Court holding as above. There was a single judge decision of the Calcutta
High Court’ to the effect that the Evidence Act applies to Industrial Tribunals;
this is based on the definition of “court” in ihe Evidence Act, which includes all
persous legally authorised to take evidence. The reasoning of the High Court
was that the Act (the Industrial Disputes Act) authorises the Tribunal to take
evidence, and the Tribunal has the power as a civil cour: of examining witnesses
on oui. in a subsequent case," the Caicutta High Court held that the Evidence
Act does not apply to such Tribunals. The High Court relied upon the
Supreme Cour decision in Union of India y. D. R. Verna’ where Venkatarama
Auyar J. made the lollowing observations with reference to a Tribunal holding
an enquiry for the purpose of disciplinary action against a Government servant
—. presumably an enquiry under the Public Servants (inquiries) Act, 1850 (37
ot 1850): —

“Now, it is no doubt true that the evidence of the respondent and his
witnesses was not taken in the mode prescribed in the Evidence Act; but
that Act has uo application to enquiries conducted by Tribunals even
though they may be judicial in character.”

After this, again, a dillerent view was taken in 1966 by the Calcutta High
Court in a Division Bench ruling. In view of our recommendation as to “court”,
this aspect loses its importance.

‘Yanajirae v. H. J. Chinoi, (1969) 71 Bom. LR. 732, 736 (Tulzapurkar J).

*Anraj Narain ¥. CLT, ALR. 1952 Puaj. 48, para. 12, following Ses Gurumukh
Singh v. CLE, ALR. 1944 Lah. 3530) (FB).

"Mehnga Ram v. Indian Labour Appellate Tribunal, ALR. 1956 All. 644, 652,
para. 43.

‘See also Electro Mechanical Indusiries v. Industrial Tribunal, ALR. 1950 Mad, 839,
840, para, 5 holding that rules of evidence do not apply to them.

*Burrakur Coal Co. v. Labour Appellate Tribunal, A.LR. 1950 Cal. 226, 228, para. 4
(Simba 3.3.

"Hachura Tea Estate v. Labour Appellute Tribunal, A.LR. 1959 Cal. 650, 652 (०, B.
Mukherjee J.)

"Union of India v. D, R. Verma, AIR. 1957 5.0, 882 11958) Sy

‘See discussion as to “Court”.

» 110,


61
९. DEFINITIONS IN OTHER ACIS

6.63. Definitions in other Acts may now be seen. 10 begin with, we may
state that the expression “judicial proceeding” is defined im the Code of
Criminal Procedure,' as “including any proceeding in the course of which
evidence is or may be legally taken on oath’.”

6.64. 1६ may be noted that in the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1872,
the expression “judicial proceeding” was defined as “proceeding in the course
of which evidence is or may be iakep, or in which any judgment, sentence,
or final order is passed on recorded evidence.”

‘Lite Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882, section 4(d), contained the following
definition—

“Judicial proceeding” means any proceeding in the course uf which
evidence is or may be taken... ”

6.65. The words “proceedings in which evidence is or may be taken” (in
this definition in the Code of 1882), were interpreted’ to mean a procecding in
which evidence is or may be legally taken. The Code of 1898 added tie
word ‘jegally’ apparently to implement this interpretation. The requirement
of “oath” was also added in the definition in 1898, and the latter limb of the
definition (in relation to judgment etc.) was removed. In one of the Allahabad
cases’, decided with reference to the oid Criminal Procedure Code, 1872, it
was held thai where, afwx an appeal is preferred to the High Court against
the judgment of acquittal of the Court of Session, the persons acquitted are
arrested by the police and brought before the Magistrate, and the Magistrate
illegally directs thal they should be detained in custody pending decision of
the appeal, the High Court could not imtcricre in revision under section 297 of
the old Code (under which the court could mieriere in a proceeding if there
was a material error in any “judicial” proceeding of a subordinate court).

6.66. With reference to the Indian Penal Code, ihe question whether the
expression “judicial proceeding” includes, for the purposes of sections 191 to
193(1) of that Code, (punishment for giving or fabricating false evidence in
a judicial proceeding), a statement recorded by a Magistrate in the course of
uvestigation, has given rise to difficulty, as appears from decisions under the
Penal Code, The view taken by the Madras High Court’ is that such proceedings
are judicial proceedings for the purposes of section 193, Indian Penal Code’.
One of the Madras’ cases stresses two points, vi. (i) the Magistrate is empower-
ed by jaw to administer vath, and (ii) the statement is one which the law (section
164) permits to be made before the Court by a “witness” and is, therefore,

'Section 20), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; section 4(1})(m), Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898.
शुक्र following sections of the Code use the expression “judicial proceeding”;

Section 343(2), a
Section 34411), > 1973 Code.
Section 345(3), J

sQueen v, Cholam Ismmail, (1875) LR. 1, 6 All. 1, 6 (Turner 0. C. 1).
5Qucen v. Cholam fsmail, (1875) 1L.R. 1 All. 1, 6.
See — (a) 28th Report of the Commission (Oaths Act), pp. 29-30.
(७) 37th Report of the Law Commission (ss, 1 to 176) (Criminal Procedure
Code), para. 466.
(व 4ist Report of the Commission (Criminal Procedure Code), Vol. L

page 75.
*Maromma y. Emp., AAR. 1933 Mad. 125, following Quecn-Empress v. Alagu, LLR.

16 Mad. 421, and Suppa v. Emp., LL.R. 29 Mad. 89.
76, B. vy. Alagu, LL.B. 16 Mad. 421.

Defiaition in the
Code of Criminal
Procedure,

History of defini-
tion in the Code
of Criminal Pro-
cedure,

Whether the defi-
nitton could in-
clude statements
recorded by
Magistrates.


No definition in
the Cade of Civil
Procedure.

62

“evidence” within the definition in the Evidence Act. The later Madras case
stresses a further point, namely, that the Magistrate is acting in the discharge
of a duty imposed upon him by law. The High Court also observed, that an
investigation is a “stage of a judicial proceeding”.

6.67. The Allahabad High Court’ once took the view that if the Magistrate
who recorded the statement has himself authority to complete the vial, the
statememt becomes a judicial proceeding, for the purposes of the Penal Code.
But, in a later case,’ it took a different view with respect to section 80, Evidence
Act.

A decision of the Bombay High Court’, in a matier which also arose under
section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, may be noted. The question at issue
was, whether a statement recorded by a Magistrate in the course of a police
investigation was “evidence in a stage of judicial proceeding” within section 193
of the Indian Penal Code. The High Court held that such a statement cannot
be saia to be made in the course of a “judicial proceeding”, for the reason
that the staemeni is recorded duting a police invesligation, and a police investi-
gation cannot be a stage of a judicial proceeding. In the course of the discussion,
ihe High Court observed that though a Magistrate examining a witness during
investigation does so on oath, the definition of “judicial proceeding” in the
Criminal Procedure Code is “limited 40 that Code and does not apply to that
phrase as used in the Indian Penal Code.

The Labore High Court’, following the Bombay decision summarised above,
held that such a statement is not “evidence” in a stage of judicial proceeding
within the meaning of the Explanation to section 193, Indian Penal Code.
ihe Courl saw no reason to dissent from the Bombay decision.

6.68. Thus, though controversy often arises whether a particular procee-
ding is or is not a judicial proceeding for the purposes of the Penal Code,
Courts have refrained from attempling a definition, choosing to decide each
case on a consideration of the nature of the proceedings, the body before which
they were held, the parent legislative provision and other relevant circumstances.

The expression occurs also in section 228 of the Penal Code’, (intentional
insult to a public servant silting in a stage of judicial (proceeding).

6.69. There is no definition of the expression “judicial proceeding” in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. In fact, the expression itself does not occur
at many places in that Code. In one Bombay case,’ the question arose whether
an order under section 244 of the old Code of Civil Procedure (corresponding
to section 47 of the existing Code), was passed in a judicial proceeding so as
to entitle a party to an appeal (since an appeal lay from all “decress”), The
definition of “decree” in the old Code was as follows:

“Decree” means the formal order of the court in which the result
of the decision of the suit or other judicial proceeding is embodied.

2Suppa v. Emp. LLR. 29 Mad, 89.
20.8. v. Khem, (1900) ILL-R. 22 Al. 115, 117.

’Sheo Raj ¥. State, ALR. 1964 All. 290 07.8.) holding that such statements are not
judicial proceedings, and section 80, Evidence Act does not apply to them,

*Purshottum Ishwar Amin v. Emp., A.L.R. 1921 Bom. 3; LL.R. 45 Bom 834 (F.B).
°Mohummad v. Emperor, ALR. 1932 Lah. 2541) (Dalip Singh J).

"The enumeration is not exbaustive.

*Dalpat Bhai v. Amarsing, LL.R. 2 Bom. 553, 5956.


63

The Court did not foiiow the definition of “judicial proceeding” given in
the Code of Crimina] Procedure then in force, on the reasoning that in the
definition of the term “decree” in the Code of Civii Procedure, the expression
“suit or other judicial proceeding” must, according to a common rule of
construction, be understood as meaning a suit or other judicial proceeding of
the same nature as व suit. Moreover, “decree” is limited to a formal order,
1.९., cases where a decision is recorded in a particular formal manner.

6.76. It has been held’ in Madras that if a confessional statement of a
person is recorded by a Magistrate in an executive capacity, it is not receivable
in evidence under section 80 of the Evidence Act, the document not having
been taken in accordance with law.

D. DEFINITION SUGGESTED BY MAYNE

6.71. We may now refer to the definition suggested by Mayne. The
definition of “judicial proceedings” suggested by Mayne* is—‘“‘any step in the
lawful administration of justice in whith evidence may be legally recorded for
the decision of the matter in issue in the case, or on a question aecessary for
the decision or final disposal of such matter.”

The definition given by Mayne is, in substance, satisfactory, for the
purpose of the Evidence Act. The definition given in the Code of Criminal
Procedure’ is, no doubt, satisfactory so far as that Code is concerned. But it
is of no use in the Evidence Act, in view of section I of the Act, which makes
the very applicability of the Act dependent on the existence of a ‘judicial
proceeding’.

6.72. It has been said in one earlier Bombay case‘ that ‘judicial proceedings’
mean nothing more or less than a step taken by a court in the course of
administration of justice in connection with a case. This agrees, in substance,
with the definition given by Mayne,

In a Madras case, Queen v. Venkatachalam Pillai’, Scotland C, J. accepted
the definition of ‘judicial proceeding’ given by Mayne. In Question-Empress v.
Tulja’ though the Bombay High Court was principally concerned with the
question as to whether a sub-Registrar of Assurances was a ‘Court’ within the
meaniog of section 195 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the Court has
explained what is meant by ‘Judicial inquiry’:

न >> Ap inquiry is judicial if the object of it is to determine a
jural relation between, one person and another, or a group of persons: or
between him and the Community generally; but, even a iudge, acting
without such an object in view, is not acting judiciaily.”

E. QUERIES RAISED WITH REFERENCE TO MAYNE’S DEFINITION

6.73. We shall now deal with several queries raised with reference to
Mayne’s definition of “judicial proceeding”.

‘Queen Empress vy. Biran and Others, (1886) LL.R. 9 Mad, 224.

2Mayne, Criminal Law of India, 2nd ed. page 565, cited in Woodroffe and Ameer
Ali, Law of Evidence (1957), Vol. J, page 108 and also in favaji Rao's case. 71
R. 732, 733.

*Cited above.

*A.LR. 1921 Bom. 366.

SQueen v. Venkatachalam Pillai, (1864) 2 Mad. H.C.R. 43.
5, v. Tulja, (1887) LL.R. 12 Bom. 36, 42.

Confessions

Te~

corded in execu-

live capacity.

Defimtion
Mayne.

Test of step
the lawful
ministration
justice.

by

in
ad-
of


Difficulty

if likety

in criminal trials.

Affidavits
Prior steps.
Hall-marks of
judicial proceed-
ing,

64

First, it is stated, if the definition is incorporated in the Evidence Act,
it is to be carefully considered whether that might create some difficulty in
crimina] trials, in view of the existing inclusive definition of the expression
“judicial progeedag” in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 where it has
been defined as follows:

“judicial proceeding” includes any procceding in the course of whic
evidence is or may be legally taken on oath.”

This answer to this query is, that each of these definitions is confined to
the respective Acts, and the proposed definitiva cannot affect the interpretation
of the expression as occurring in the Code.

6.734. The query has been raised if “affidavit evidence” comes within
the scope of “legaily recorded evidence’. The answer should be “no”,
because uffidavits are not “recorded”. It may, incidentally, be stated that
section 1 expressly excludes affidavits.

6.74. The query is then raised that Mayne’s definition is too narrow.
According to Mayne’s definition, “judicial proceeding” is “any step in the
lawful administration of justice ip which evidence may be legally recorded
for the decision of the matter im issue in the case. -” Would “judicial
proceeding” include only the step in which evidence may be legally recorded?
Should not the steps preceding or following the step in which evidence may
be legally recorded be included in “judicial procceding”?

The answer, however, is that the preceding or subsequent steps have no
significance for the Bvidence Act.
6.74A. 1६ has next bevn stated that the hall-marks of a judicial proceeding
ate not exhausted by mere recording of evidence. The Commitice on Minister's
powers’ laid down four essential characteristics of the judicial process ;
(a) a presentation either orally or in writing of the case for each side
1.0. joinder of issue ;
(09) right of each party to adduce and examine evidence to prove its
case (the recording of evidence will conie within this characteristics) ;

{c) arguments by the parties on facts and law; and
(0) a decision disposing of the matter in hand, ihe findings being based
on stated conclusions concerning facts.

6.75, The query is raised that if the recording of evidence without anything
more is made the hall-mark of a judicial proceeding, then, cvidence required
to be recorded in any proceeding before any administrative tribunal or other
authority—such as, an income-tax officer or customs official etc.,—will make
such proceeding judicial proceeding, although such tribunal or authority may
not be a court but may be acting only judicially.

Moreover, it is stated, section 1 of the Evidence Act speaks of judicial
groceedings in or before any court.

In reply to this query, we may point out that the definition given by

Mayne does not make the recording of evidence the sine gua non of a Court.
There are other ingredients. Moreover, as regards Income-tax Officers and the

like, we may state that section 1 clearly provides that there musi be a “court”,—
an expression which we are going to define.

1Donoughmore Committee,


65

6.754. A query is also raised as to the expression “administration of
justice”. It has been uscd in the Constilution, State List, entry 3. and the
expression “judicial proceedings” has been used‘ in entry 5 and entry 12 of the
Concurrent List, but neither of these expressions (it is stated) has been
defined in the Constitution. In this connection, we would state that the
absence of a definition in the Constitution should not be a material consideration
when ieviewing an Act where the expression needs, on the merits, to be
defined. A statute defines expressions for its own purposes.

6.76. It has been stated that it should be considered whether any dejinition
of “judicial proceeding” is at all necessary; it is stated that the Act has worked
quite wel] without such a definition during the last 103 years. In dealing
with this query, we may ‘point out the case law on the subject of statements
under section 164, Code of Criminal Procedure and also the judgment of
Tulzapurkar J. In Bombay case* illustrate the obscurity as to “judivial
proceeding”. Hence there is need for a definition.

6.76A. An objection has been raised that the word “lawful”, in the
expression “Jawfu) administration of justice”, uscd in Mayne’s definition, is
unnecessary and redundant.

6.77. In answer to this objection, it may be stated that the contrast is not
between ‘lawful’ and ‘unlawful’. The word “lawful” in this context means
“according to law”, or according to the machinery established by law.

We have, in this context, to make a distinction between—

{a} (i) justice in the abstract; and
(ii) justice according to law, and also between

(b) (i) administration of justice by a private tribunal, and
Gi) administration of justice by a public agency.

6.78. Justice in the abstract reminds one of natural law. The view that
natural law is written on the hearts of men, is traced back to St, Paul and
his Jetter to the Romans’ where he says,—

“When Centiles who have not the jaw do by nature what the law
requires, they are a Jaw to themselves, even though they do not have the
law. They show that what the law required is written on their hearts......”

However, when we talk of “lawful administration of justice”, we do not
merely indicate justice in the abstract which may be described as the ideal
relations among men. We refer to justice, according to law, ie., in accordance
with the scheme of a positive legal order. We also imply that the traditional
machinery of the law is employed. We are speaking of the (i) principles and
(ii) procedure in force in a patticular society, Positive law is real, actually
existing law, with its own macbinery. And what Mayne meant by “lawful
administration of justice” was—administration of justica in conformity with
the positive legal order as established in a particular society—or, briefly,
administration of justice according to law.

F. ENGLISH ACT OF 1968

679, We have, by now, dealt with the important points relevant to the
statutory and other material regarding “judiciat proceeding”, Before conclu-
ding the discussion, we would refer to the expression “civil proceeding” in the

‘Constitution, 7th Schedule, State List, entry 3; Concurrent List, entries 5 and 12,
*Tanaji Rao v. H. J. Chinoy, (1969) 71 Bom. LR. 732.
‘st. Paul's letter to the Romans, Il, 14.

Use of various
expressions in the
Constitution.

Necessity of
amendment,

Meaning of law-
ful.


Function of ad-
ministration of

justice

essential.

66
Civil Evidence Act (Eng.). The principal object of the Civil Evidence Act,
1968, was to modify the rules of hearsay in civil proceedings. The expression
“civil procetding”, as defined in that Acl,' in section 18, in a positive form.
really covers (so far as tribunals are concerned), only proceedings before
those tribunals where the strict rules of evidence apply.

Having so defined the expression “civil proceedings”, the draftsman of the
Act was faced with a problem, namely, while the proceedings to which the
important sections of the Act applied would, in view of this definition of civil
proceedings, cover proceedings before those tribunals where the sirict rules
of evidence applied, the substantive sections of the Act’ used only the
expression “court”, and not the expression “court or tribunal”.

6.80. To meet this situation, the draftsman of the English Act has defined
“court” as meaning, in relation to proceedings before a tribunal not being
one of the ordinary courts of Jaw, the tribunal. The last mentioned definition
(of “court”) is a verbal device, intended to dispense with the use of the
cumbersome expression “court or tribunal” in the main sections. Far fron:
equaling all tribunals to courts, this device implicitly recognises the fact
that there is a distinction between the two. The words “not being one of
the ordinary courts of law”, in the definition of “court” may be seen.

It appears that the Lands Tribunal is one of the very few tribunals to which
strict rules of evidence apply in England.

G. CONCLUSION

6.81. If a definition of “judicial proceeding” were necessary the function
of administration of justice should be emphasised, in this context, a> has been
done by Mayne, Essentially, it is for proceedings held in exercise of this func-
tion of the State that the Act is primarily intended. The mention of ‘‘court” in
section 1, in juxta-position to judicial proceedings, also lends support to this
approach.

In fact, at one stage we tbought that the following definition should be
inserted in section 3:-—

“ Judicial Proceeding” means any step in the administration of justice
according to law in which evidence may be legally recorded for the decision
of the matter in issue in the cuse, or of व question necessary for the deci-
sion or final disposal of such matier.”

However, since we are re-defining the expression “court, no definition of
“judicial proceeding” is now required.

6.82. At present, though “court” is defined widely, the expression “judicial
proceeding’ is understood somewhat narrowly, and in section 1 the net effect ol
the double requiremen; that there must be “court” and a “judicial proceeding”,
is that the Act applies only to proceedings before courts proper. In other
words, the apparently wide scope for applying the Act, created by the present
definition of “court”, is cut down by the requirement that the proceeding must
be a “judicial proceeding”. Since we are recommending a more precise definition
of “court” than at present, it is no! necessary to make any change by way of
clarification in regard to the expression “judicial proceeding”.

4Section 18(1Ma), Civil Evidence Act, 1968 {See Appendix to this chapter).
2Sections referring, for example, to “rules of court” or using other phrases containing

the word “court”.
8Section 18(2), Civil Evidence Act, 1968 (See Appendix).


67

XXITL “ADMISSIBLE”

6.83. For reasons which will be indicated later’, when we discuss the
distinction between “relevant” and “admissible”, we recommend that the
expression “admissible” should be defined as meaning “admissible in evidence”.

XXIV. SECTION 4

6.84. This takes us to section 4. The definitions of “may presume”, “shall
presume” and “conclusive proof”, contained in this section, are of great import:
ance in relation to presumptions. The expressions denote various classes of
presumptions.

684A. The subject of presumptions has been the subject-matter of academic
discussion in other countries and, as a result, nice classifications have been made
as to the various kinds of presumptions. Fortunately, the Act enables us to
avoid most of these problems by providing a simple formula which, while
retaining the basic classification of presumptions, does not suffer from the com-
plexity that prevails in other countries. We shall not, at this stage, refer to the
Yarious presumptions to be found in succeeding sections of the Act. It is
sufficient to explain briefly the scheme of section 4.

6.85. The section contemplates three classes of presumptions, which can be
classified as—

(i) rebuttable and discretionary presumption — “may presume”;
(ii) rebuttable but mandatory presumptions— “shall presume”, and
(iii) irrebuttable and mandatory presumptions — ‘conclusive proof”.

6.86. The first paragraph of section 4 provides that whenever it is provided
by this Act that the Court may presume a fact. it may either regard such fact
as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it. In such
a case, as is evident from the words used in the section, it rests with the discre-
tion of the court whether or not to draw the presumption, and even if it is drawn
in a particular case, it is rebuttable. Such presumptions are cssentially inferences
formed not by virtue of any law but by the spontaneous operation of the
reasoning faculty. They correspond to what Stephen described as ‘bare presump-
tions of fact’?

6.87. The second paragraph of section 4 provides that whenever it is direct-
ed by this Act that the Court shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as
proved. unless and until it is disproved. The presumption in this case ts manda-
tory, and must be drawn where the conditions requisite, ag laid down in the
particular section, are satisfied. However, it is rebuttable, and the fact presumed
can be ‘disproved’ — it being borne in mind that the expression ‘disproved’
bears the meaning assigned to it by section 3.

6,88, The third and last paragraph of section 4 provides that when one fact
is declared by this Act to be conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on
proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence
to be given for the purpose of disproving it. Usually, in illustrating the expres-
sion “conclusive proof”, sections 112 and 113 of the Act are referred to. These
sections do use the expression “conclusive proof”. However, it may be noted
that section 113 has been declared ultra vires. For reasons to be given later’,
we propose to recommend its deletion. Section 112 provides that birth during

‘Para. 6.99, infra.
*Stephen, Introduction to the Evidence Act, page 174.
3908 recommendations as to section 113.

Section 4 — Defi-
nitions of ‘may
Presume’, ‘shall
Presume’, ‘con-
elusive proof’.

Scheme.


Question of ter-
minology. em:
ployed in other
sections.

Section 3 —- Re-
Jevancy and ad-
missibility =
Three proposi-
tions,

Connection Te-

quisite,

Nature of — the
connection.

68

martiage is conclusive proof of paternity; but the section does leave scope for
rebutting this presumption by showing that the parties to the marriage had no
access to each other at any time when the person in question (ie. the person
born during marriage) could have been begotten.

Tt may also be pointed out that section 41 uses the expression “conclusive
proof”; that section provides that a final judgment, order or decree of a compe-
tent court, in the exercise of probafe. matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency juris.
diction, which confers or takes away any legal character etc.. is conclusive proof,
inter alia, \nat any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when
such judgment. order or decree came into operation. In this section, the word
‘conclusive’ seems to haye been suggested by the discussion by Peacock C. J.
in Kanhya vy, Radha’ where it is said of a decree of divorce — “It is conclusive
upon all persons that the parties have been divorced and that the parties are
no longer husband and wife: but it is not conclusive. nor even prima facie
evidence against the strangers that the cause for which the decree was pro-
naunced existed.” The expression “conclusive evidence” occurs also in one of
the Icading English cases on res judicata — the Duchess of Kingstons case!

6.89. Lastly, section 31, provides that admissions are not conclusive proof
of the matters stated.

XXV. “RELEVANT” AND “ADMISSIBLE”

6.90, Before concluding our discussion of the definitions, we should deal
with an important question concerning the terminology employed in other
sections of the Act. The question arises by reason of the broad principle
underlying the Act, namely, thet evidence can be given only of facts in issue
and facts relevant to facts in issue, — unless the evidence is excluded by
specific rules of exclusion, Such relevant facts as are not facts in issue can be
conveniently described as “collateral facts.”

6.91. This broad principle shows the importance of three propositions,
namely—
(1) Facts sought to be proved must be connected with facts in issue.
(2) The connection must amount to relevance as provided in the Act.
(3) There should be no rules of exclusion applicable to the particular
evidence.

6.92. The first proposition stresses the importance of facts in issue and of a
connection between the fact in issue and the collateral fact. The collateral
fact must be relevant to a fact in issue. It must, in other words, be ‘material’
for the purpose of the particular dispute. According to Nokes,’ “Materiality”
indicates that a fact is adequately related to a party’s case; in other words,
that a fact constitutes or relates to some element of his claim or defence.
without which he cannot establish the right asserted, or resist the claim. The
element of ‘materiality’ has been stressed in other writings‘ also.

6.93. The second proposition is concerned with ‘relevance’. Relevance is
really a question of validity of thought, or a question of probative value The
need for using the expression ‘relevant’ in the Act has been felt only in

\Kanhya v. Radha 7 Weekly Report 339 (Calcutta).
°Dutchess of Kingstons Case, 11 State Trials 262.

Nokes, Introduction to Evidence (1967), page 83.
‘See, for example, J. L. Montrose, “Basic Concepts of the Law of Evidence” (1954)

70 L.Q.R. 527.


69

order to indicate, broadly, the circumstances in which one fact is regarded as
of probative value to another fact which is to be proved. This part of the Act.
— that is to say. mainly (but not exclusively) sections 5 to 16 — is really a
codification of rules about probative value based on ordinary principles of
common sense.

To quote Stephen! again? “The word ‘relevant’ means that any two facts
are so related to each other that according te the common course of events
one, either taken by itself or in connection with other facts. proves or renders
probable the past, present or future existence or non-existence of that other.”

6.94. As Montrose has observed’, “The concept of relevance is concerned
with the relationship which the tendered evidence has to the fact it is sought
thereby to prove because of the order of naturc; it posits a natural connection
between factum probans and factum probandum.” Thayer‘ often used, as a syno-
aym for ‘relevant’, the phrase ‘logically probative’, and Wigmore used the phrase
‘rationally probative’®

6.95. The third proposition really relates to the ‘admissibility’ of evidence,
and not to its relevance. A fact otherwise relevant may be excluded, because
of some policy of the law.—e.g. hearsay, opinion, character, privilege, State secrets
etc. The reason for excluding hearsay evidence, evidence of opinion, character,
privilege, State secrets and the like is not that the fact concerned is not relevant.
Hearsay may be relevant.* As has been often pointed out, in a trial for murder
the fact that B (non-witness) told A (witness) that B saw the accused stabbing
the victim, is ‘relevant’ in the logical and rational sense. The relationship
between the two facis the fact in issue and what B told he saw— is such that
according to the common course of nature, one fact does render the other pro-
bable. What B saw is, if not a fact in issuc, at least a collateral faci. If the
collateral fact is true, its truth tends to show the existence of the fact in issue.
The rea} reason for excluding the evidence in qucstion is the policy of the law.
Relevance is a ‘pre-legal’ concept.” Admissibility is legal concept. The two
should be kegt apart.

6.96. The logical relevance of hearsay, can hardly be doubted, and its
exclusion must, in our view, rest on the infirmities inherent in second-hand in-
formation. In fact, it has been held in Australia® that it is proper to pay regard
to hearsay, if, by accident or design, the party entitled to object to it lets it in.
This shows that hearsay would be ‘relevant’, though this does not imply that it is

admissible.

6.97. The same reasoning applies to character. In Brown v. Fastern & Mid-
lands Rly. Co.” Stephen J id, “you must not prove. . that a particular
engine driver is a careiess man in order to prove that a particular accident was
caused by his negligen:c on a particular occasion”. This is because the law ex-
cludes evidence of character as shown by habit,--except in special cases, as a
matter of policy.

‘Stephen, Digest of the Law of Evidence.
28०७ also supra.
भू, 1., Montrose, ‘Rasic Concepts of the Law of Evidence’, (1954) 70 L.Q.R. 527,
537,
‘Thayer, quoted in J. 1... Montrose, ‘Basic Concepts of the Law of Evidence’, (1954)
538.

70 1.O.R. 527.
SWiomore, cited in J. L. Montrose, “Basic Concepts of the taw Evidence", (1954)

70 1.Q.R. 527, 528.

५58९ para. 6.96, infra.

*The expression ‘pre-legal’ is suggested by J. L. Montrose, “Basic concepts of the
Law of Evidence”, (1954) 70 L.Q.R. 527, 538.

“Walker v. Watker, 57 Commonwealth Law Re. 630 (Australia).

*Rrown v. Eastern & Midlands Rly, Co. 22 QBD. 391. 393.

Rules of exclu-
sion,

Example — Hear-
say not admis-
sible though rele-
vant.

Another example
— Character and
opinion,


Flaw in the pre-
sent wording,

Recommendation.
to, substitute ‘ad-
missible' in cer-
tain sections and
to define ‘admis-
sible’,

Confessions and
character.

70

The position regarding opinion is the same. The fact that a person holds
a particular opinion as to the facts in issue may be relevant; but, in general, the
opinions of non-experts are excluded. Generally speaking, it is for the tribunal
of fact to formulate its own opinion on facts presented by witnesses who perceiv-
ed them by the exercise of their physical senses. Nevertheless, logically, the
opinion of an eye-witness who perceived the fact in issue might be of value, even
though the witness had no recollection of the fact perceived, but only a recol-
lection of an opinion formed at the time. In fact. in some cases, evidence is
allowed to be given of an opinion formed by a non-expert. Age, identity, speed,
and intoxication are. for example, subjects om which non-expert opinion is admis-
sible2*

6.98. Now, the term‘nological flaw in the Evidence Act, in this respect, lies
in its using the expression ‘not relevant’, where what is really meant is ‘not
admissible’. According to Nokes*: “Relevance depends on reasoning, but
admissibility depends on law; and, to be received in evidence, facts must be
both relevant and admissible. Admissibility denotes that there is no rule of
law or practice by which facts must or may be excluded. It is, thus, necessary
to bear in mind the distinction between relevance and admissibility: or, mote
clearly. the distinction between relevance and inadmissibility.”

6.99. In view of the inaccuracy in the present terminology as discussed
above, the better course, in our vie ५, would be to avoid the term ‘not relevant’ in
those sections where what is meant is ‘not admissible’. Whilst preserving the
word ‘relevant’ in sections 5-16, we should, therefore. substitute the word ‘ad-
missible’ for the word ‘relevant’, wherever the former appears to be more
uppropriate. — a definition of ‘admissible’ being added. in section 3. as mean-
ing ‘admissible in evidence’ *

6.100. The sections relating to confessions and character require some dis-
cussion in this connection. One of us was of the view* that in section 24. the
confession is, logically also, not relevant. In seCtions 52-55 also, according to
him, character evidence is excluded because logically, it is not welt.

The rest of us are, however, of the view that both in section 24 and in
sections 52-55, the evidence would be relevant, but is excluded for certain reasons
For example. character evidence is excluded. not because it has no relevance
in the sense of probative value, but for certain reasons of policy. If a man has
committed a hundred thefts previously, logically he may have committed the
present theft. But the law excludes such evidence for reasons which are well-
known.

Similarly, involuntary confessions are not ‘irrelevant’, speaking logically. It
\is true that they are not the products of a free will, But it can be said that
even if a confession is involuntary, it may be logically probative. The law ex-
cludes it for reasons of policy.

6.101. It may be stated that though the words ‘logically relevant’ are not
used in the Act, the concept of lagical (probative) effect is writ large in sections
5 to 16.

IR, v. Davies, (1962) 1 WLR. 1111.
Hudson Opinion evidence in Intoxication” (1963) 79 L.Q.R. 31.

E.G. Sections 51 to 55 etc,

4Nokes, Introduction to Evidence (1967), page 83.

Section 3 to be amended to insert a definition of ‘admissible’ See para 6.83 supra.
‘Shri Sen-Varma.


71

It could be argued that Stephen's scheme is inut i: Use definition in the Act
of ‘relevant’, ihe scope of ‘irrelevant’ includes what is inadmissible. It should,
however, be pointed out that ‘relevance’ mus! be based on a@ logical connection.
Section 5 provides that evidence may be given of facts ‘hereby declared io be
celevant’. But that does nol mean that rules of admissibility are disregarded.
it only shows that logical and legal relevance are vot the same. The mere fact
that a fact is relevant does not make evidence of it admissible. The crucial ques-
tion is, whether facts, which are relevant, spoulu, when they are excluded on
grounds of policy, be described as ‘irrelevant’ or whether they still remain
relevant and would be better descriscd as inadmissible. We take the lalier view.

In, Stephen’s scheme, he used the expression “ureleyan as covering ‘inad-
Missibie. The quesiion is whether ue ai usage Siivuld be retained, or
whether there is scope for improvement, to think that an improvement is needed,

दवाई:

and is practicable.

6.402. 17 the light af the abuve discussion, we recommend that the sections
concerned should be amended accordingly.’ and also that a definition of “admis-
sible” should be added, as suggested above.

(a) Section 3 (व definition of ‘admissible iv v2 iaserted}.
(bj Section 5 Explaautiossto be added). (Expression
evant? प७ be
replaged by the
expression)
(c) Sections 21-23 (A Linissicns) ‘admis.ible’
Section 24, 28,29 (Confessions) where the context
है so Justifies, fur
Secticas 32-36 (Slatement: out sections in.
of court}. group (०)

Section 38 (Law Reports)
Sections 40-44 (Judgments)
Sections 45-51 (Opinions)
Sections 52-55 (Character).
Appendix
Exract of section 18 of the Civil Evidence Act, 1968 (Eng)
“General interpretation und savings
18. (i) In this Act “Civil proceedings” includes in addition io civil preveedings in any
of the ordinary courts of law—
(a) civil proceedings before any other प्राप्त), being proceedings in relution to which

the strict rules of evidence appiy: and

(b) an arbitration or reference, wheter under au enactment or not, ‘
but dues not include civil proceedings im reiution te which the strict rules of
evidence do not apply

(2) In this Act—
eure” does not include @ court martial, and in retativn to en arbitration of
reference, means the arbitrator or tenet and. in relation to proveedings before
a tribunal (not being one of ihe o:divaiy couit. of jaw), means the tribunal.
“Legal proceedings” includes an arbitration or reference, whether under an enact-
ment or not;”

‘The list is tentative,

6--131 LAD/ND/77

Recommendation.


Facts in issue

Grouping.

Sub-divisions.

Cuapter J

RELEVANT FACTS—THE GENERAL PRUVISIONS
SECTIONS 5 TO 11

7.1. Under section 5, evidence can be given only of facts which are in issue
or which are relevant to a fact in issue. Sections 6 to 55 deal with facts which
may be relevant to a fact in issue. For this reason, sections 6 to 55 constitule
an important group of provisions.

7.2. The facts treated as relevant under these sections fall into a few broad
groups. The first group includes a few sections (sections 6 to 11) containing
general provisions which could apply to all cases; the next group comprises a
few sections {sections 12 to 16), which deal with facts which may be relevant in
particular cases. These are followed by provisions as to the admissibility of
statements, opinions and character. Thus, we have five broad groups under
which the provisions as to relevant facts can be placed, namely,—

(1) Facts in general';

(2) Facts in particular case?;
(3) Statements (of facts)’

(4) Opinions’; and

(5) Character’.

7.3. These could be sub-divided, according to the nature of the facts, as
follows: —~

FACTS IN GENERAL

(1) Facts which form part of the same transaction as —a fact in issue
(section 6).

(2) Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of relevant facts or facts
in issue (section 7).

(3) Facts relating to motive, preparation or conduct with reference to a
fact in issue or relevant fact (section 8).

(4) Explanatory or introductory facts (section 9).
(5) Statements and actions referring to common intention (section 10).

(6) Facts inconsistent with, or affecting the probability of, facts in issue
or relevant facts (section 11).
FACTS IN PARTICULAR SITUATIONS

(7) Facts affecting the quantum of damages (section 12).

‘Sections 6 to 11.
*Sections 12 to 16.
3a) Sections 17 to 31;
(0) Sections 32, 33;
(0) Sections 34 to 39;
(d) Sections 40 to 44.
‘Sections 45 to 51.
SSections 52 to 55


73

(8) Facts affecting the existence of any right or custom in question {sec-
tion 13).
(9) Facts showing any state of mind or feeling when the existence of
such state of mind or feeling is in issue or is relevant {section 14).
(10) Facts showing a system (section 15).
(1) Facts showing course of business (section 16).
STATEMENTS
Evidence is also admissible, under certain circumstances, of the following
statements :-—~
(1) Admissions (sections 17—23).
(2) Confessions (sections 24—31).
(3) Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses (sections
32—33).
(4) Statements under special circumstances (sections 34—35).
(5) Judgments of courts (sections 40—44).
OPINIONS
Opinions of third parties (sections 45—51).
CHARACTER
7.4. Section 5, which may be regarded as the basic section of the Act, lays
down the fundamental rule that evidence may be given of (1) facts in issue, and
(2) relevant facts, and of no others.

The Explanation to the section goes on to provide that the section shall not
enable any person to give evidence of a fact which he is “disentitled to prove”
by any provision of “any law fpr the time being in force relating to civil pro-
cedure”. Illustration (b) puts, in this context, the case of the plaintiff not bring-
ing with him (and not having in readiness for production at the first hearing) a
document on which he relies. The Explanation had obviously in mind, provisions
corresponding to present Order 7, Rules {4 and 18, Order 13, Rule 1 and Order
41 rule 27, of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908. The words “law for the time
being in force relating to civil procedure” in this Explanation should, however.
be made more precise by mentioning the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

As regard areas where that Code is not in force—areas referred to in para-

gtaphs (a), (b) and (c) and proviso to section 1(3) of the Code,— suitable words
can be added to cover cases of the corresponding laws in force im such areas.

4.43. We recommend an amendment of section 5, Explanation. on the
above lines.

7.5. With section 6 begins the group of provisions enumerating the facts
dectared by the Act as “relevant”, According 10 section 6, facts which, though
not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same
transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and place or at
different times and places.

There are four illustrations to the section. Illustration (a) puts these facts.
A is aceused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by
A or B or the by-standers at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to
form part of the transaction, is a relevant fact.

Section 5.

Recommendation
to amend section
3, Explanation.

Section 6
Facts forming
part of the same
transaction.


4

That the accused need not be present, is illustrated by another illustration.
A is accused of waging war against the Government of India by taking part in
an armed insurrection in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked, and
gadls are broken open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming part
of the general transaction, though A may not have been present at all of them.

Hlustrations (९) and (4) deal with civil cases. They read :

“(cl A sues B for a libel contained in a ictter forming part of a cortes-
porndence. Letters between the parties relating to the subject out
of which the libel arose, and forming part of the correspondence in
which it is contained, are relevani facts, though they do not contain
the libel itself.

(व) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered
to A. The goods were delivered to several intermediate persons
suecessively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.”

Prnciple of sec- 7.6. The principle of section 6 is clear. If the connected facts form part of

tion 6, the same transaction as the fact which is the subject of enquiry, manifestly evi-
dence of those facts oughi not to be excluded, because, to view a fact in isolation
would be to have only a partial or incomplete view’. Moreover, such facts,—i-e.
facts forming part of the same transaction—could not often be excluded without
rendering the evidence unintelligible.

Formulatron in 7,643. There have been several atlempts to formulate the® exceptions recng-
other countries, mised under the head of res gestae. The phrase itself has been criticised as a
“bubble of verbiage”’. But the concept is fairly intelligible,

The California Evidence Code’ deals with the matter under the head of
“spontapeous statement” and “contemporancous statement” in these terms.
“1240, Spontaneous statement

“1240. Evidence of a statement is not made inadmissible by the hearsay
rule if the statement:

(a) purports to narrate, describe, or explain an act, condition. or event
perceived by the declarant; and

(b) was made spontaneously while the declarant was under the stress
of excitement caused by such perception.

~1241. Contemporaneous statement
©1241, Evidence of a statement is not made inadmissible by the

heaisay rule if the declarani is unavailable as a witness and the statement :

(a) purports to narrate, describe or explain an act, condition, or event
perceived by the declarant ; and

(b) was made while rhe declarant was perceiving the act, condition, or
event.”

1566 Norton, Evidence, 101, referred to in Woodroffe, Evidence (1941), Comment 00
section 6.

See rules 512-513 of the Model Code and rule 63(4) and 63(12) of the Uniform
Rules.

SPollock in Pollock-Holmes Letters (Cambridge, 1942), Vol. UJ, pages 2834-85 (Letter
dated 23rd April, 1931).

‘Sections 1240-1241, California Evidence Code.


75

7.7, In England. acts. declarations and. circumstances which constitute or
accompany. and explain the fact or transaction in issue, are admissible as
forming part of the res gestae’, The section deals with a substantial’ part of
this topic. The point for decision under the section will always be whether
the facts sought to be adduced do form part of the same transaction, or are
too remote to be considered really part of the “transaction” before the Court.

Position in Eng:
iand.

7.8. The illustrations to the section bring out a few important aspects. Significance of
~ illustrations to

Illustration (a) makes it clear that the facts relevant under the section could the section,
include acts and declarations, not only of the parties involved in a crime, but also
those of by-standers, provided they are part of same transaction as the fact in

issue,

Illustration (b) indicates that the nature of a crime may be such that the
acts of several other persons could be relevant as parts of the same transaction,
even though the person charged as the principal offender was not present at any
of them. The illustration relates to waging war—an offence which usually. if not
invariably, requires the participation of numerous persons. In fact, these occur-
rences are part of the waging of war—a fact in issue. Incidentally, the facts are
reminiscent of a celebrated English treason trial’,

Mlustration (c), relating to a suit for tort, is useful as making it clear that the
section applies as much to documents as to acts and declarations and also that
it is not confined to criminal proceedings’. The correspondence is admissible,
because the letter cannot be viewed in isolation.

Tllustration (d) also pertains to a civil suit—this time a suit on contract. The
various deliveries have to be viewed cumulatively. They are part of the face in .
issue—-Did the goods pass from A to B?

10 an English case*, the question was whether A sold goods to B personally,

or to B as C’s agent, the sale being made subject to inquiry from D, B’s referee.
A letter written by A to his own agent, asking him to “inquire from D as to the
credit of C and also of B, who is making large purchases for C”, was held admis-
sible for A as part of the transaction and in corroboration of other evidence,
though there was no proof per se that B's purchase was for C. In that case
also, the transaction was the cumulative result of a number or arrangements.

7.9. According to Cross and Wilkins’— English law.

“J. Statements connected with, and made substantially contemporaneously
with, the occurrence of the facts to which they relate are often said to be receiv-
ed as part of the res gestae (part of the happenings or part of the story). State-
ments received as part of the res gestae are sometimes received by way of excep-
tion to the rule against hearsay, but they can now only be so received in criminal
cases: on other occasions they constitute original evidence, ic. they are not
proved in order to establish the truth of that which was asserted.

2. Statements proved as conduct are sometimes said to form part of the

res gestae.

‘As to the history of this “catch ali phrase, see Phipson in 19 Law Quarteriy

Review 435.
256९ discussion as to “English Law and Section 6”, infra.

मर, v. Lord George Cordon, 2) Howard State Trials 535.
‘See K. N, Singh v. Karmapara Dev Co. Lid., AR. i950 Pat. 134, 166.

'Milne v. Leister, (1862) 7 H.&N. 786; the action was by A. who gave
against a third party to whom B had pledged the goods.

‘Cross and Wilkins, Outlines of Evidence (197!) pages 139, 140, Article 51

evidence.


English law and
section 6.

Declarations.

Three senses of
res gestae.

16

3. Facts forming part of the transaction under investigation are also said
to form part of the res gestae.

4. The doctrine of the res gestae is inclusionary, allowing for the reception
of evidence by way of exception to a number of exclusionary rules.”

7,10. The phrase “res gestae” has often been criticised in England. In
Homes y. Newman’, Lord Tomlin, sitting as an additional Judge in Chancery,
suspected that “the phrase ‘res gestae’ had been adopted to provide a respect-
able legal cloak to a variety of cases to which no formula of precision can be

applied.”

The word “res gestae” has been used in several senses, that is. as mean-
jng the transaction itself, or the events constituting the transaction. or the
surrounding circumstances accompanying the transaction, or the transaction
together with the accompanying circumstances. However. the principal idea
sought to be conveyed. namely, the idea of a whole in relation to its consti-
tuents or its constituent parts, is intelligible enough, and the principle of ad-
mission of such evidence is also sound. Of course, section 6 does not exhaust
the field of res gestae. Some of the later sections—for example, section 8—also
deal with matters which are usually dealt with in English text books under the
topic of res gestae. But, in practice, most of the cases under res gestae are
of declarations falling or alleged to be falling within section 6.

FAL. Academic writers in England and elsewhere, when discussing res
gestae, usually concentrate on declarations or utteTances*, because, in practice,

they figure frequently.

7.12. The expression “res gestae”. in the context of the law of evidence,
may be used in at least three different ways, as has been pointed out in the
judgment of Lord Wilberforce in Ratten v. R?

1, When a situation of fact (e.g. a killing) is being considered. the ques-
tion may arise when does the situation begin, and when does it end. It may
be arbitrary and artificial to confine the evidence to the firing of the gun or
the insertion of the knife without knowing, in a broader sense, what was happen-
ing. Thus, in O'Leary v. The King‘, evidence was admitted of assaults, prior
to a killing committed by the accused during what was said to be a continuous

orgy.
As Dicon, J. said (in that case):

“Without evidence of what. during that time. was done by those men
who took any significant part in the matter and especially evidence of the
behaviour of the prisoner, the transaction of which the alleged murder
formed an integral part could not be truly understood and, isolated from
it, could only be presented as an unreal and not very intelligible event.”

2. The evidence may be concerned with spoken words as such {a part from
the truth of what they convey). The words are then themselves the res gestae
or part of the res gestae, ie. are the relevant facts or part of them.

IHomes v. Newman, (1931) 2 Ch. 112; 1931) Alf ER. Reprint 8587.

For example, see Morgan, “A suggested classification of utterances admissible as
res gestae” (1922) 31 Yale Law Journal 229.

3Ratten v. R., (1971) 3 W.L.R. 930 AL).
"40° Leary v. The King. (1946) 73 CLR. 566, 577 (Australia).


77

3. A hearsay statement is made either by the victim of an attack or by
a_bystander-—indicating directly or indirectly the identity of the attacker. The
admissibility of the statement is then said to depend on whether it was made
as part of the res gestae.

7.13. The following discussion by Taylor, on the subject, will also be found
ta be very useful’:

“Certain other declarations and acts are admitted as original evidence,
being distinguished from hearsay by their connection with the principal fact
under investigation. The affairs of men consist of a complication of cir-
cumstances, so intimately interwoven as to be hardly separable from each
other. Fach owes its birth to some preceding circumstances, and, in its
tum, becomes the prolific parent of others: and each, during its existence.
has its inseparable attributes, and its kindred facts, materially affecting its
character. and essential to be known, in order to a right understanding of
its nature. These surrounding circumstances may always be shown to the
jury afong with the principal fact. provided they constitute parts of what
are termed the res gestae: and whether they do so or not must, in each
particular case, be determined by the Judge in the exercise of his sound
discretion, according to the degree of relationship which they bear to that
fact. Thus, on the trial of Lord George “Gordon for treason, the cry of
the mob, who accompanied the prisoner on his enterprise received in
evidence, as forming part of the res gestae, and showing the character of
the principal बिल,”

7.14, Tt has often been pointed out‘ that statements which are otherwise
excluded would be admissible if they fall within section 6 or, in England, the
doctrine of res eestae. Tn particular, evidence which may be excluded by virtue
of the heatsay rule. the opinion rule, rule against self-corroboration® or rule
against evidence showing bad character’, may be admissible as providing the
circumstances in which the statement was made.

715, After this general discussion, a few special features of section 6 may
be noted. Section 6 takes care to make it clear that the declaration or other
facts relevant thereunder- “facts which are so connected with a fact in issue as
to form part of the same transaction”—are relevant, whether they occur at the
same time and place or at different times and places.

716. Jn this respect, the position in England is somewhat controversial. In
Bedingfield’s case’, a man who had cut a woman’s throat was tried for murder.
Tt was proved that the deceased. with her throat cut, came suddenly out of a
roam. in which she had left the prisoner. Evidence was tendered to show
that immediately after coming out of the room, and shortly before she died.
she had made a remark was something like “Oh: See what Harry’s done”. ft

'Taylor on Evidence. cited in Field on Fvidence (1964), Vol. 1, page 263.
Per Parke. 1., in—
Rawson v. Haigh, 2 Bing., 104;
Ridley v. Cyde, 9 Bing. 349, 352;
Pool v. Bridges, 4 Pick 379;
Allen vy. Dancan, 11 Pick. 3099.
"Lord George Gordon, 21 How. St. Tr. 14, 529.
4R. v. Hardy, 24 Howard State Trials, pages 1066 to 1096.
Site v. Spitile. (1965) 3 All. E.R. 451.
हर, v. Egerton, R. & R. 375. approved in R. v Sims. (1946) King’s Bench 531. 542.

नूर, v. Bedinefield, (1879) 14 Cox CC 34.

Time and place
how far material
under section 6.

Bedingfield'«
cane,


Thayer’s view,

78

was held that her statement was not admissible in evidence, either as a dying
declaration, as it did not appear that she was in fear of death, or as res gestae
as it was made after the transaction was complete.

7.07. This was a judement'! of Cockburn C.J. and the case gave rise to
considerable comment. Wriling’ cxtra-judicially. Cockburn? (whose view is
phrased with Bedingfield in mind). enunciates the principle as follows :--

“Whatever act, or series of acts. constitute, or in point of time imme-
diately’ accompany and terminate in, the principal act charged as an offence
against the accused. from its inception to its consummation or final com-
pletion, or its prevention or abandonment—whether on the part of the agent
or wrongdoers, in order to its performance. or on that of the patient or
party wronged, in order to its prevention -and whatever may be said by
either of the parties during the continuance of the transaction®, with refer-
ence to it, including, herein. what may be said by the suffering party, though
in the absence of the accused. during the continuance of the action of the
latter, actual or constructive—as, ९.2... in the case of flight or application
for assistance—form part of the principal transaction, and may be given
in evidence as part of the res gestae, or particulars of it, while, on the
other hand, statements made by the complaining party, after all action on
the part of the wrong-doer, actual or constructive, has ceased, through the
completion of the principal act or other determination of it by its preven-
tion or ifs abaudonment by the wrong-docr -such as, e.g., statements made
with a view to the apprehension of the offender do not form part of the
res cestae, and should be excluded.”

This shows that what weicthed with the court in Bedingfield’s case was the
interval that had lapsed between the crime and the exclamation which destroyed
the continuity.

72.18. Thayer, who was one of the first to intervene in the Bedingfield con-
troversy*, considered that Cockburn should have reccived the declaration, He
observed? :

“The leading notion of the doctrine... seems to have been that of
withdrawing from the oncration of the hearsay rule declarations of fact
which were very sear in fime to what they tended to prove, fill out, or
illustrate—-being at the time oot narrative, but importing what was then
present or but just gone by. and so was open, either immediately or in
the indications of it. to the observation of the witness who testifies to the
declaration, and whoa can be cross-examined as to these indications; this
nearness of time is made specific by the ‘erm ‘contemporaneous’ and ‘a
part of the res cestae’, and it is enowzh that the declaration be substantially
contemporancous: it need not he literally so.”

Both Cockhurn and Thayer. thus, insist on the requirement of substantial
contemporaneity, and the controversy between them is a matter of degree,
Cockburn requiring that at the time of the statement the action of the accused

IR_ y. Bedingfield, (879) 14 Cox C. C. 34.

*Cockburn. writing extra-judicially in (1880) 15 1.1. 16, 17, quoted by Ro N.
Gooderson, “Res Gestae in Criminal Cases”, 1936) Cambridge LI. 199, 201 to 203.

Emphasis supplied.

‘Para. 7.17, supra.
Thayer, (1881) 15 American L. R_ 107, cited in R. N. Gooderson “Res gestae in
20:

Criminal Cases” (1956) Cam L.J. 199, 201.


79

should be continuing, either actually or constructively, while Thayer does not
demana this, provided that the statement is substantially contemporaneous with
such action.

7.19. Wigmore’ rejects both thesc views. He regards the element of con-
temporancity as properly applicable only to what be calls the “verbal act”
doctrine. where the utterance is offered irrespective of its truth as accompany-
ing and explaining a material equivocal act*. His other main head of res gestae
evidence is “spontaneous exclamations’—a statement of exclamation, by a
participant, immediately after an injury, declaring the circumstances of the
injury, or by a person present at an affray, or rail road collision, or other
exciting occasion, asserting the circumstances of it as observed by him’. Instead
of the requirement of contemporancity, there is, according to Wigmore, a “liberal
time-allowance” which is exhausted only when the influcnce of the exciting
ipated*.

cause has been dis:

Wigmore explains the cases as depending upon the consideration that the
exciting nature of the event evokes a spontaneous and sincere response which
tends to put aside self-interest and to make the utterance particularly trust-

worthy.

7.20. Wigmore’s reasoning, however, ignares psychological considerations
put forward over a quarter of a centuty ago by Hutchins and Slesinger*, who
pointed out that the exciting event might very well prevent or limit accurate
observation, so that the assumption of truthfulness in Wigmore’s argument might,
for reason not considered by him, be very dubious. The criticism of Wigmore’s
position did not, however, lead the authors to conclude that such utterances
should be excluded under the hearsay rule; but that they should be admitted

on more satisfactory grounds.

7.21. So far as the English authorities are concerned, the admission of such
statements has often been inadequately explained in the cases: quite often,
res gestae is relied on. A brief but important discussion of the problem is to
be found in the iudgment of Dixon J. (as he then was) of the High Court of
Australia in Adelaide Chemical and Fertilizer Co. Ltd. v. Carlyle’. There a
question for the court was whether a statement made by a deceased person
shortly after an accident was admissible. The Court held it to be inadmissible
In the course of deciding this point. it was necessary to review some of the
cases which Wigmore classifies under “spontaneous declaration”. Dixon J.
observed that the general tendency of English law was not to explain the cases
in this way. While the cases provided some support for the view that spon-
taneous and unreflecting siatements were more trustworthy, Dixon J. pointed
out that the question which the courts normally asked in considering admissi-
bility was whether the statement formed an integral part ef a transaction.

7.22. On this point, — i.e. on the question of contemporancity — the section
is specific. As we have already pointed out’, the section (last fifteen words}
make it clear that the declaration need not be literally contemporaneous with

1Wigmore, referred to in R. N. Gooderson, “Res Gestae in Criminal Cases”, (1956)
Camb. LJ. 199, 201 to 203.

?Wigmore (1940) vi, para. 1756, pages 162-164, 197.

*Wigmore (1940) vi, para. 1746, page 134,

‘Wigmore (1940) vi, para, 1750, page 142.

SHutchins and Slesinger in (1928) 28 Columbia L.R. 432.

S4delaide Chemical and Fertilizer Co. Ltd. v. Carivle, (1940), 64 Commonwealth
LR. 514. 531-2,

See supra.

Wigmore'’s

English
tities.

Position
section
Unity of
required.

6

view.

antho-

under

action


Meaning of

‘transaction’ in
section 6,

“Meaning of the
word ‘transaction’
in section 13

Origin of — the
word ‘transaclion’
io connection
wilh res gestae.

80

the principal fact. Nor need it be made at the same place. The test. and the
only test. is whether the declaration and the act form part of the same trans-
action. Of course, this does not mean that the interval of time between the
two can be immaterial. As is often pointed out, a few minutes can make a
difference in deciding whether the two form part of the same transaction: but
this aspect is not conclusive One could make use of the classification. popularly
attributed to Aristotle, of the three “dramatic unities”, and say that section
6 does not place so much emphasis on unity of time and unity of place. as on
‘unity of action’.

7.23. This takes us to the meaning of the word ‘transaction’, in section 6
The word ‘transaction’ has not been defined in the Act, though it occurs at
several places’ e.g, section 6, section 13 and section 32(1).

7.24. As occurring in section 13, the word received judicial construction in
the Calcutta High Court in a case where the question was whether a judgment
is a transaction. According to R. C. Mitter the word ‘transaction’ in section
13 means ‘that which is done”. A ‘transaction’, in its ordinary sense, is. accord-
ing to Garth, C.J.. one business or dealing which is carried on or transacted bet-
ween two or more persons’. A ‘transaction’. as the derivation denotes, is some-
thing which has been concluded betwen persons by a cross or reciprocal action
as it were, whereas the judgmert of 3 court is something imposed bv the
authority of the tribunal’. This interpretation of section 13 is not, it seems,
conclusive for interpreting the word ‘transaction’ in section 6.

7.25, The principle that acts which are part of the same transaction as the
fact in issue form part of the ‘res gestae’ can be traced at least to R. v Elis’
The prisoner in that case was charged with stealing six shillings. marked money,
from a till, Evidence was aflowed of the taking not only of that amount. but
also of other moneys taken during the same day. Bayley J. said:

“J think that it was in the discretion of the Judge to confine the pro-
secutor to the proof of onc felony. or to allow him to give evidence of other
acts, which were alf part of one entire transaction, then the one is evidence
to show the character of the other. Now all the evidence in this case iend-
ed to show that the prisoner was suilty of the felony charged in the indict-
ment. It went to show the histery of the till from the time when the mark-
ed money was put into it upto ¢be time when it was found in the possession
of the prisoner. 1 think, therefore, that the evidence was properly receiv-
ed.” (Holroyd J. concurred).

Under the Code of Criminal Procedure? offences committed by several per-
sons “in the course of the same transaction” can be tried together. With refe-
tence to this provision, the general consensus is that whefe the transaction con-
sists of different acts, those acts, in order that the chain of such acts may con-
stitute the same transaction, must be connected together by proximity of time,
proximity or unity of place, continuity of action and community of purpose or

1The list is not intended to be exbaustive.

2Gujia Lal v. Fatteh Lai, (1879) 1.LR. 6 Cal. 171, 175 (F.B.) (per Mitter, 1).
IGujia Lat v. Faitch Lal, (1879) LL.R 6 Cal. 171, 186 (F.B.} (per Garth, CJ.)
4Gujja Lal v. Fateh Lal, (1879) LL.R. 6 Cal. 17. 185 (F.B) (ver Jackson, J).
कर. v. Ellis (1826) 108 E.R. 406 (KB).

‘Section 223(a), Code of Criminal Procedure, 197%


81

design.’ But, it should be noted that under section 6 of the Evidence Act, state-
ments, to be admissible as substantive evidence of the truth of the facts stated
therein, must themselves be ‘part of the transaction’, and not merely uttered
‘in the course of the transaction’?

7.26. The area of events covered by the term ‘res cestae’ or by the term
‘part of the transaction’, depends on the circumstances of each case. Murphy
J. said in Emperor v. Ring’, that while all acts and events are linked together,
and while, in reality, there is no independent act or event. yet on the other
hand, “there is a practical unity in men’s actions which enables us to draw a
mental circle round an act or event, or a series of them and to call it. for prac-
tical purposes, a single transaction. though theoretically this may not be a truc
description.” These observations were made with reference to the Code of
Criminal Procedure, but they arc quoted here to illustrate how every case in-
volving interpretation of the word ‘transaction’ in section 6 reqnires the court
to draw ‘mental circle’. The question to be considered is. whete exactly the line
should be drawn in each varticular casc. The enswer must. to a large extent,
depend on the facts of each case.

7.27, In the English case of R. v. Foster‘, for instance, the accused was
charged with man-slaughter by the dangcrous driving of a carriage. A witness
was allowed to narrate what the deceased said immediately after he had been
run down, and the report makes i# plain that the statement was reccived as
evidence of the the cause of the deccased’s injuries. The statement was not receiv-
ed as a dying declaration, because there was no evidence that the deceased
was aware of his impending death: nor was there any question of the statement
being made in the presence of the accused. in which case it might have been
received on certain other principles. The statement was allowed to he proved
as evidence of the truth of its contents. With this case, the case of Bedingfield*
may be contrasted. In Bedingfield the utterance of the women was excluded.
on the ground that the ‘transaction was over’. The conclusion thus depends on
the facts of each case.

7.28. Sicphen bas offered a definition of ‘transaction’, According to
Stephen.".-“For legal purposes a transaction is a group of facts so connected
together us to be referred to by a single legal name, as a crime, a contract, @
wrong or any other subject of inquiry which may be in issue.” This definition
is not, however, very helpful for understanding the scope of section 6, because
the crucial question in each case is,—Do the facts exhibit the required con-

nection?

7.29. We shall now refer to selected Indian decisions which illustrate the
application of the section. In a murder trial’, the question wis whether the
accused, who had some injuries on his body. had those injuries self-inflicted,
the prosecution case being that he. the accused, had declared his decision to
finish the deceased and then to finish himself. A threat uttered by the accused
on the morning of the day of occurrence (murder) that he would finish off the

Wee Amritial Hazara v. Emperor, ALR. 1916 Cal. 188. 196.
*Hadu v. State, AAR. 1951 Orissa 53, 58.
‘Emperor v. Ring, ALR. 1929 Bom, 296, 303.
‘R. vy, Foster, (1834), 6 C.&P. 325. The case is referred to in the matter of Surat
Dhobini, (1884) LL.R. 10 Cal. 302, 304 (infra).

5R. v. Bedingfield, (Para. 7.16, supra.).

‘Stephen’s Digest of Law of Evidence. Article 3. p. 4, cited in Chain Mahto v.
Emperor, 11 C.W.N. 266, 270.

'Wasu Pillai v. The State, A.LR. 1961 Bom. 114, 117 (Gokhale & Kotwal JJ.).

Area of — events
dependent on cit-
cumstances.

R. v. Foster.

Selected Indian
cases —  State-
ments by the ac-
cused,


Statements by the
deceased.

Complaints.

Statements by
witnesses.

How far _ state-
ments admissible
in proof of truth
of the Contents—
Position in Eng-
land.

82

deceased and then finish off himself was held admissible on the ground that
evidence as to the manner in which the injuries came to be sustained by the
accused was closely connected with the offence of murder as to form part of
the evidence of murder and part of the transaction.

Even an explanation given by the accused himself spontaneously, right at
the moment when the offence is alleged to have been committed, may become
part of the same transaction within section 6.

7,30. The same is the position regarding statements by the victims. In an
Assam case’, injuries had been infticted by the accused on the person of the
deceased, resulting in a fracture of his ribs. Soon after the incident, the deceas-
ed was questioned as to the injuries, and he stated that it was the accused who
had inflicted the injuries. This statement, having been made very shortly aftet
the deceased sustained the injuries, was held admissible under section 6 (be-
sides section 32), in view of the fact that the doctor’s evidence established that
the injuries to the ribs wete contributing factor te the death.

7.3L. Particularly in respect of complaints of sexual and other offences, the
question whether the statement was made spontaneously or whether it was
merely the narrative of 2 past transaction comes up for consideration. A
statement which does not explain the physical act, and is not spontaneous
but is a mere narrative, is generally regarded as not covered by action 6,
and it is for this reason that a statement by a ravished woman to ber mother-
in-law, or other relative, made some time after the alleged rape, is regarded
as not forming part of the same transaction. Whenever recollection comes in
and whenever there is opportunity for reflection and explanation, then the
statements cease to be part of the res gestae’. Such statement may, on the
facts, amount to a complaint’ and thus be admissible under section है.

7.32. Somewhat on the same line of reasoning, statements made by witnesses
which are not spontancous are excluded from use under section 6. For example,
in a trial under section 294 of the Indian Penal Code, for teasing a girl on the
road and using obscene language towards het’, the prosecution relied solely on
the testimony of a witness who had reached the spot after the incident and
was told by the girl about the words used. This evidence was regarded, on
the facts of the case, as outside the scope of sections 6 and 8, and inadmissible
as hearsay.

7.33. The question whether a statement falling within the general require-
ments of section 6 is admissible as evidence of the truth of those facts or
alegations of which the statement consists, has been debated in England, and
judicial pronouncements on the subject are confliciing. The case of R. v.
Foster,’ to which we have already made a reference, takes a wide view in the
matter. The discussion in a judgment of the House of Lords’ would seem to
support the. view that the statements are evidence of the tluth of the matter
stated. The discussion in a judgment of the Privy Council*, on the other hand.
suggests a narrower view on tbis point. In that case, at the trial of the appellant
on a charge of indecently assaulting a girl jusi under the age of four years, the
trial judge held to be admissible evidence by the child’s mother of a statement

\Krishna Ram v. State, ALR. 1964 Assam 53, 54, para. 3.

*Sreehary v. Emperor, ALR. 1930 Calcutta 132, 133.

3Raman v. Emperor, ALR. 1921 Lahore 258, 259.

*Raman v. Emperor, A..R. 1921 Lahore 258.

’Kashmira Singh v. State, ALR, 1965 Jammu & Kashmir 37, 38, para. 3.
®R. v. Foster, Pata. 7.27, supra.

IR. v. Christie, (1914) AC. $45, 553 (A).

8Sparks v. R., (1964) AC, 964; (1964) 2 WLR. 566, 575, 576 PC).


83

made to her by the child shortly after she had been assaulted (the child not
being a witness at the trial), that “it was a coloured boy”. The appeliant was
a white man aged 27 years, The judge also admitted cettain statements
(involving admissions cr confessions) made by the appellant to police officers
or made in their hearing. The «ppellany, who was found guilty, appealed
against his conviction on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that the evidence of the
child’s statement should have been held to be admissible either as evidence of
identity or because the words of the child formed patt of the res gestae, and
(2) the statements to the police officers were not admissible because they had
not been voluntarily made. It was conceded by the prosecution that unless
the statements made to the police were admitted, there was no evidence on
which the appellant could have been convicted. 1६ was held that the mother’s
evidence of what her child bad said to her would have been heatsay evidence,
and the child having neither given evidence nor said anyrhing in the presence
of the appellant, there was no basis on which her statement to her mother could
be admitted, it was in this context that the Privy Council observed that even
if the statement had been admitted as res gestae it could not furnish evidence
of the truth of the maiter stated.

7.34, In a recent judgment of the House of Lords,’ the statement, though
admitted, was not tendered in proof of the truth of the matter stated, and hence
the judgment is not conclusive on his point.

7.35. It may, however, be stated that even in England, statements accom-
panying acts are sometimes treated as part of the res gestae—see R. v. Foster,
supra. They could be conveniently styled as “verbai acts’? In the Mersey
Docks Board case,' tor eaxmple, A sued B for damages for negligently causing
a fire on A’s landing stage, One of B's workmen, as he was escaping from a
manhole just after the fize occurred and near the place where it was first seen,
said: ‘Ob! my God. The stage is on fire. 1 did it. 1 am a ruined man”!
‘This was held admissible as part of the res gestee, not as narrative but as con-
duct relevant to the issue.

Julius Stone’ has pointed out that the American view is that statements ad-
missible ag res gestae constitute an exception to the hearsay rule. Stone takes the
three situations about which most of these problems revolve, namely, (3 state-
ments as to bodily or mental feelings; @i) spontaneous slalemeats in the face
of an emergency, and (iii) statements of intention, He says that all these ale
exceptions to the rule against hearsay.

7.36. For the purposes of the Indian Evidence Act, however, the controversy
referred to above should not be material, because section 6 does not lay down
any limitations as to the evidentiary use to which a statement admissible under
this section can be put.

In a Calcutta case,’ the only evidence against the accused woman who was
charged wilh having voluntarily caused grievous hurt to her daughter-in-law
with a pair of tongs which bad been heated, was a slatement made in the
presence of the accused by the person injured 10 a neighbour immediately after

\Ratien v. R., (197) 3 WLR. 930 GL).

*Compare Bateman ४. Bailey, (1794) 5 T.R. 512; Hyde v. Palmer, (1863) 32 Law
Journal Queen’s Bench 126; Bennison v. Cartwright, (1864) 33 Law Jourma) Queens Bench
137.

3Mensey Docks Board v. Liverpool Gas Co, (The Times August 23, 1875) (Facts
taken from Phipson).

Julius Stone, “Res Gestae Resigitata”, 55 L.QR.

Sin the matter of Surat Dhobini. (1884) LL.R. 10 Cal. 302, 304 (C.D. Ficid and R.C.
Miter JJ.)

Statements some-
times part of res
gestae even it
England.

Position under
the Evidence Act.


Aspect of spon-
taneity,

Statements also
failing under sec
tion 8.

No amendment
suggested.

Introductory.

84

the infliction of the injuries. The accused did not deny the allegation (contained
in this statement) that she had inflicted the injuties. It was held that this state-
ment way admissible under section 6, as res gestae and also under illustration
(g), section 8, as conduct influenced by a relevant fact (acquiescence in a charge).

In this case, the statement was made in the presence of the accused. But
that aspect, it is suggested, was not maierial for the purpose of application of
section 6. It was emphasised to show relevance under section 8—the conduct of
the accused by remuining silent. In fact, the High Court referred to the English
case of R. v. Foster’ as in point, though the court took care to observe that
English cascs could be taken merely as illustruiions and not as binding. It may
be noted that in RK, v. Foster, the accused was not present when the statement
was made.

7.37. In this connection, it should be pointed out that statements in the
nature of spontaneous exclamations are reaiiy statements through which the
transaction speaks. Although physically they come from the mouth, they
really cume from the heart. The will is subsidiary, the emotion paramount.
They express the immer commotion of the soul. No doubt, such utterances or,
for that matter, any other utterances—are not conclusive; but they render pro-
bable the existence of the fact assefted (which is the general lest of relevanceY
and, for that reason, it seems (0 be legitimate to regard them as admissible not
only for proof of the factum of the statement, but also in ptoof of the truth
of the contents. In a recent English case, Lord Wilberforce vividly described
such statements as made under the ‘pressure of the drama’.

7.38, This aspect of spontaneity could be illustrated. If a passenger in a
var spomtaneously makes the following utterance as to the defendant's
car—"See. He has come over on the wrong side”, it is more pro-
bable than uot that the other car had come over to the wrong side. It is
diificuli 10 see what utility such utterances can have as evidence, if they are
not to be utilised for the purpose of proving the truth of the matter stated.

7.39. Incidentally, it may be stated that some of the later sections in the
Act deal specially with statements which are discussed in English text-books
under res gestae. Discussion in the under-mentioned 1 ५7३ decisions show that
the evidence covered by section 8 etc. is of the mature usually referred to as
res gestae,

7.40. We have considered it necessary to deal with the salient features of the
section, in view of its importance. However, the discussion docs not nece: sitate
any amendment. Such difficulties as may be felt in practice are difficulties of
the application of the section, which ate not avoidable by any vetbal improve-

ments.

SECTION 7

7.41. According to section 7, facts which are the occasion, cause or effect,
immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts or facts in issue, or which constitute
the state of things under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity
for their occurrence or transaciion, are relevant.

"GR. ए. Foster, (1934) 6 C.&P. 325, para. 7.27, supra.
+See Chapier 4, supra.
sRatten v. R. (1971) 3 W.LR. 930 GL).

‘Particularly, section 8. ॥
ड्जफर्बगवत v. The State, AJR. 1968 S.C. 147, 149 (section 8).

(1879) LL.R. 3 Bom. 17, 18 (Section 8).

(1951) All. L.3. 49, 50.
*Chhotka ¥. The State, ALR. 1958 Cal. 482, 487, para. 23,


85

There are three illustrations to the section. Hlustraten (a) takes these
facts. The question is whether A robbed B. The facts that, shortly before
the robbery, B went to a fair with mon., in his possession, and that he showed
it, or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.

Under illustration (9), where the question is whether A murdered B, marks
on the ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place where the murder
was committed, are relevant facts.

Under illustration (०) where the question is, whether A poisoned B, the
state of B's health before the symptoms ascribed to poison and habits of 8,
known te A, which afforded an opportunity for the administration of poison,
are relevant facts.

7.42. It may be stated that in illustration (3), the facts in question are rele-
vant as giving occasion or opportunity for the fact im issue or as being the cause
of the fact in issue. in illustration (b), the facts in question are admissible as
effects of the tect in issue, Incidentally, this illustration furnishes an instance
of “real evidence”. As io illustration (c), the state of B’s health before the
symptoms ascribed to poison and the habits of B, known to A, constitute the
state of things under which the facts occurred, as also an opportunity for the
administration of poison.

7.43. The reason for the admission of facts of this nature is that’, if it is
desired to decide whether a fact occurred or not, almost the first natural step
is to asceriain whether there were facts at hand, which were calculated to pro-
duce it or afford opportunity for its occurrence. It is a natural human tenden-
cy 10 look to the cause when an eifect is visible, or to look for the eliect if the
cause is known. Moreover, in order to the proper appreciation of a fact, it is
necessary to know the state of things under which it occurred. Knowledge
of the circumstances enabling a person to do the act is also relevant. Al these
facts can be conveniently summed up as “contributory or consequential factors.”

7.44, In this sense, section 7 embraces a larger area than section 6, While
section 6 deals with the transaction itself, section 7 provides for the admission
of a variety of facts, whch, though not possibly forming part of the transaction,
are yet connected with it in particular modes. These modes—occasion, cause,
effect, opportunity-—are really diflerent aspects of contributory of consequential
factors. In the case of the particular person who is a victim of robbery—illus-
tration (a}—-it is obvious that his physical presence, within a proper range of
time and place, forms one step on the way to the belief that he was robbed.
Section 6, broadly speaking, concentrated on the immediate present. Section 7
lakes us into the immediate past and the immediate future.

7.45. In permitting evidence of these facis, the section is, no doubt, faithful
to the general principle’ underlying the scheme of the provisions of the Act-—
the principle of probability. The various contributory and consequential factors.*
tendered admissible uader section 7, are admitted on the assumption that they
render probable the existence of the fact in issue, and their absence may render
it improbable.

7.46. In so far as the section enables evidence to be given of facts which
afforded ait opportunity for the occurrence of a fact in issue, care must be taken

‘Woodroffe.
3७6०७ Chapters 3-4, supra,
"Para 7.57, supra.

Illustrations
analysed,

Reason for
mission
Section 7
pared with
tion 6.
Principle of
vance.
Opportunity
evidence of

ad-

com-
sec=

rele-


Wide language.

Variety of uses
—~ Footprints.

Position in Eng-
land.

Scientific evi-
dence — Tape re-
cords.

Utility of | sec-
tion 7,

86

against a hasty inference from opportunity for a crime to the commission of a
crime. As Norton pointed out,’ there can be no crime wilhout the opportunity,
but there is a wide gulf, to be bridged over by evidence, between opportunity

aud commission.

7.47. On the other band, no circumstances can be more destructive of a
criminal charge than that the accused had no opportunity of committing the
crime.“ On the strength of this proposition rests ihe froce of a defence founded
on un alibi, which is admissible under section 11 read with section 7.

7.48. Attention must also be drawn to the rather wide language of the
section, in so far as it provides that facts which are the cause or effect immedia-
tely or otherwise of relevant facts or facts in issue, afe relevant. These wards,
if taken literally, would take in the remotest cause, and. if pursued 10 its logical
extreme. such a course would open up a field for endless inquiries. That, how-
ever, ‘could not be the intention. nor is ihe section so interpreted in practice.
Presumably, the draftsman has deliberately employed un clastic phraseology in
order to avoid any objections being raised to tie effect that a particular fact
sought to be proved under the section was not the immediate cause of the fact in
issue and that some other cause had intervened between it and the fact in issue.

749. The section could be pressed into service in a variety of situations.
An interesting species of evidence admissible under the section is that relating
(० footprints, The fact that there were footprints at or near the scene of offence,
or that they came from or relate to a particular place, is relevant under the
section, because they represent the effect of a relevant fact. Illustration (b) to
the section, in so far as it relates to marks on the ground produced by the
struggle near the place of murder, is itself an illustration of the effect of a fact
in issue or a relevant fact.

7.50. In England also, finger-prints or footmarks’ of an accused found near
the scene of the crime are admissible in evidence. In Callis y. Gunnt, evidence
ot the defendant's finger-prints was admitted although he had not been caution-
ed by a police officer when asked to provide his prints. The Court of Criminal
Appeal has upheld convictions where the only evidence against the defendant
was thal of finger-prints.*

7.51. In fact, the potentiality of section 7 as regards scientific evidence is
vast. Dealing with recorded tapes, the Supreme Court has held that the imprint
on the magnetic tape is the direct effect of the relevant sounds, and, like all
photographs of a relevant incident, a contemporaneous tape record of a rele-
vant conversation is a relevant fact and admissible under section 7— though,
of course, the evidence must be received with caution’. This aspect was also
brought out in a Punjab case.”

7.52. The utility of section 7 was demonstrated in a Saurashtra case* The
accused was a Clerk in the office of the Chief Minister, and his duty was to
receive remittances addressed to the Chief Minister's Office towards

‘Norton, Evidence, 104; cited by Woodroife, Evidence Act, commentary on sec-
tion 7.

2Woodroffe.
3a) R. y. Shay, (1830) 1 Law. CC. 116, per Parke B;

(0) R. v. Heaton (832) 1 Lew. 0.0. 116, per Alderson, 8.
sCallis v. Gunn, (1864) 1 0-8. 495.

5R. v. Castleton, (1909) 3 Cx. App. R. 74.

°Yusufulli v. The State, AIR. 1968 S.C. 147, 149, Para 5.
‘Dial Singh v. Rajpal, ALR. 1969 Punjab 350, 351, Para 4.5.
*A.LR. 1955 Saurashtra 68, 70.


87

the Scarcity Relief Fund and send them to the Treasury or hand
them over to a superior officer. A particular amount, which had
been received from an overseas donor, was not so credited, and the superior
officer of the accused wrote two lettcrs to the overseas donor for particulars re-
lating to the remittance. The accused was himself entrusted with posting these
letters. When no reply was received. the superior officer wrote to the overseas
donor another letter, which was despatched by a different Clerk, and a reply
was received in due course. On the prosecution of the accused under section 409
of the Indian Penal Code for breach of trust. the letter received in reply was
given in evidence for the prosecution. Tt was held that, although the contents
of the letter could not be received against the accused under section 32,
because there was no proof that the writer of the Ietter was the same person as
the overscas donor, yet the letter was admissible under sections 7 and 11, to
prave the fact that when letters were given to the accused for despatch, no reply
was received from the addressee, while a reply purporting to be from the same
addressee was received when the letter was given to despatch to some other
to the inference that the accused had suppressed the

person, —thus leading
letters entrusted to him.

7.53, The above discussion reveals no need for change in the section.
SECTION 8

7.54, According to section 8, any fact is relevant which shows or consti-
tutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.

The conduct of any party. or of any agent to any party, to any suit or oro-
ceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in
issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any proceeding are also rele-
vant under the section, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in
issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto,

According to the first Explanation to the section, the word “conduct” in
this section does not include statements, unless those statements accompany and
explain acts other than statements; but this Explanation is not to affect the rcle-
vancy of statements under any other section of this Act.

According to the second Explanation, when the conduct of any person ix
relevant, any statement made to him or in his presence and hearing. which affects

suck conduct, is relevant.

7.55, There are eleven illustrations,

According to illustrations (2), if A is tried for the murder of B, the facts
that A murdered C, rhat B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had trie
10 extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge public. are rele-

vant.
Tilustration (b) takes the case where A sues B upon a bond for the payment
of money. B denies the making of the bond.

The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made B

required money for a particular purpose, is relevant.
A criminal trial is presented in iMustration (c}. A is tried for the murder of

B by poison.
7—131 LAD/ND/77

Conclusion,

Motive, — prepara=
tion and previous
or subsequent
conduct,

Tllustrations


88

है The fact that, before the death of 8, A procured poison similar 10 that
which was administered to B, is relevant.

ae illustration (d), the question is, whether a certain document is the will
of A.

The facts that, not long before the date of the alleged will, A made inquiry
into matters to which the provisions of the alleged will related; that he consulted
vakils in reference to making the will, and that he caused drafts of other wills to
be prepared, of which he did not approve, are relevant.

According to illustration (e). where A is accused of a crime, the facts that,
either before, or at the time of, or after the alleged crime, A provided evidence
which would tend to give to the facts of the case an appearance favourable to
himself, or that he destroyed or concealed evidence, or prevented the presence
or procuted the absence of persons who might have been witnesses. or suborned
persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.

According to illustration (ft, where the question is, whether A robbed 8, the
facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A’s persence — “the police are coming
to Jook for the man who robbed B,” and that immediately afterwards A ran away,
are relevant.

Where the question is, whether A owes B rupees 10,000, then, according to
illustration (g), the facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said
to C in A’s presence and hearing — “I advise you not to trust A, for he owes
8 10,000 rupees.” and that A went away without making any answer, are rele-
vant facts.

Yn illustration (h), the question is, whether A committed a crime.

The fact that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him that inquiry
was being made for the criminal and the contents of the letter, are relevant,

In illustration (i), A is accused of a crime.

The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime, he absconded,
or was in possession of property or the proceeds of property acquited by the
crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or might have been used in
committing it, are relevant.

Ttustration (j) deals with rape. The question is, whether A was ravished.

The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she made a complaint
relating to the crime, the circumstances under which, and the terms in which,
the complaint was made, are relevant.

The fact that, without making a complaint, she said that she had been
ravished, is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be rele-
vant—

As a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1), or

As corroborative evidence under section 157.

The same aspects are illustrated in illustration (k). The question is, whe-
ther A was robbed.

The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery. he made a complaint relat-
ing to the offence, the circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the
complaint was made, are relevant.


89

The fact that he said that he had been robbed, without making any cow
plaint, is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be relevant—-

As a dying declaration under section 32, clause (1), or
As corroborative evidence under section 157.

9.56. This section is. in a sense, an amplification of section 7. One of the
facts relevant under section 7 is ‘cause’, and another fact so relevant is ‘effect’.
Motive, which is relevant under section 8, may be described as the psychological
cause of the act which is done with the motive. Similarly, conduct which is in-
fluenced by a fact (section 8) is, in a sense, the effect of that fact (section 7).

7.57. The classes of facts which become relevant under section 8 fall into
three broad groups. namely, (a) facts showing motive, (b) facts showing prepara-
tion, and (टी facts showing conduct,—in each case, it being necessaty that some
connection between the fact sought to be brought under section 8 and some other
fact already in issue or relevant, is established.

7.874. As io motive, as the etymology of the word indicates, a motive is,
strictly, that which moves or influences the mind. It has been said that an action
without a morive would be an effect without a cause; the particulars of external
situation and conduct will, in general. correctly denote the motive for the criminal
action. Statements accompanying acts are often necessary to show the animus
of the action,

7.58. In some cases, motive may have an importance of its own, being
an ingredient of the crime or tort,--e.g., motive on a privileged occasion in
relation to defamation, When motive is such an ingredient, it is not merely a
relevant fact, but is a part of the “fact in issue” as defined in the Act’, because
on motive depends the existence of the liability in such cases. Then, there
may be cases where motive may affect the extent of the liability, and is, there-
fore, a fact in issue. In all these cases, evidence of motive can be given undet
section 5, and recourse to section है is not needed. However, even where sec-
tion 5 docs not apply, motive may be relevant under section 8.

lt has been said? that the section embodies, in a statutory form, the rule
of evidence that the testimony of res gestae is always allowable when it gocs
to the root of the matter concerning the commission of the crime.

7.59, In a consideration of the cause or occasion of a fact, or the siate of
things under which it fuppened, nothing can be more material than to know
whether any person had an interest in its happening, or took any measures
calculated to bring it about. For this reason, motive and preparation become
of the utmost importance. If A is found murdered, the fact that B had a strong
motive for wishing A dead is, so far as it goes, a piece of evidence against
B. So, if A is poisoned with arsenic, the fact that B, shortly before. procured
arsenic, or made arrangements by which he would have access to A’s food,
points, in a measure, to B being the poisoner, and would be relevant fact at

his trial*.
7.60. Preparation is also relevant, it being obviously important in the
consideration of the question whether a man did a particular act or not; to

know whether he took any measures calculated to bring it about. Premedi-
tated action must necessatily be preceded not only by impelling motives, but

‘See section 3, definition of “fact in issue”.

*Kalijiban v. Emperor, AIR. 1936 Cal. 316, 318: LL.R. 63 Cal. 1015.

‘Cunningham, pages 93-94, cited by Woodroffe, Evidence (1941), commentary on
section 8.

Section 8 and
section 7.

Classes of rele
vant facts under
section है;

Motive
Motive, a fact in

issue.

Importance of
motive and — pre-
aration explain-
ed.

Preparation.


Term ‘conduct’,

Illustrations.

AJustration (a)
elaborated.

Iilustration (०)

Hlustration (2)

90

also by appropriate preparations.'. The existence of a design or plan is usual-
ly employed evidentially to indicate the subsequent doing of the act planned
or designed.

It may be mentioned that, as a matter of law, a preparation for com-
mitting an offence is different from an attempt to commit it. The sufficiency
of the actus res of attempt is a question of law which has led to some diffi-
culty because of the necessity of distinguishing between acts which are
merely preparatory to the commission of a crime, and those which are suffi-
ciently proximate to it to amount to an attempt to commit it. However, the
distinction is, to quote the Supreme Court*

“The preparation consists in devising or arranging the means or
measures necessaty for the commission of the offence. On the other hand,
an attempt to commit the offence is a ‘direct movement’ towards commis-
sion after preparations are made.

In order that a person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a
crime, he must be shown to have had an intention to commit the offence,
and secondly to have done an act which constitutes the actus reus of a
criminal attempt.”

761. The next broad category relates to conduct. “Conduct” is the ex-
pression, in outward behaviour, of the quality or condition operating to produce
these effects. These results are the traces by which we may infer the moving
cause, In point of time, conduct is closely associated with the internal condi-
tion giving rise to it; nevertheless, the indication is strictly not a concomitant,
but a retrospectant one, because the argument is backward from effect (con-
duct) to cause (internal condition)."

762. Ulustrations (a) and (b) to section 8 refer to motive. Illustrations (c)
and (d) refer to preparation. Tlusttation (०) refers to previous and subsequent
conduct of an accused. Illustrations (e) and (7 and (h) indicate a desire to
avoid or stifle enquiry, thus representing conduct, and illustration (g) is an in-
stance of silence which may amount to admission.

7.63. A case analogous to illustration (a) to section 8 may be cited. In a
trial of the accused woman for the murder of her husband’s elder brother, the
circumstances that the relations between the deceased and the accused were
strained, that the deceased threatened to expose her to her husband on his return
from outstation, that the deceased was beaten by the paramour of the accused
five days before his murder—were held to be relevant under section 8, as showing
motive or preparation.

7.64, Illustration (०) would apply if it could be shown that the act of
the person providing evidence would have the effect of giving an appearance
favourable to himself.*

7.65. As to illustration (g), we may refer to a Calcutta case". The accused
wonian was present, when the person for injuring whom the accused was tried
stated, almost immediately after the infliction of the injuries, that the accused

1866 the case of Patch, cited in Stephen, Introduction sections 99-106.

‘Malkiat Singh vs. State of Punjab, (1969) 1 S.C.R. 157 (Ramaswami, J.).

sWigmore, Vol. I, section 190 page 640, cited by Woodroffe, Evidence (1941), page
343.
‘Himachal Pradesh Administration v. Mst. Shiv Devi, ALR. 1959 H.P. 3 11 (1959)
Cr. LJ. 448.

8The State v. Debnu, ALR. 1957 HP. 52, 57.
‘In the matter ‘of the petition of Surat Dhobini (1884) J.L.R. 10, Cal. 302, 304.


1

woman inflicted them, and the accused did not contradict the statements of the
injured. These statements were held to be admissible under illustration (g).
In Engiand', it is a general rule that a statement made in the presence of the
prisoner, which he might have contradicted, if untrue, is evidence against him?

7.66. The case law as to offences of corruption furnishes interesting
Hlustrations of conduct as a relevant fact. In a Mysore® case, at the time when
the Inspector of Police, Anti-Corruption Branch, cailed upon the accused to
produce the money which had been received as a bribe, the accused hesitated,
and was trembling and perspiring. It was held that the conduct of the accus-
ed under such circumstances was a relevant fact which could be taken into
consideration by the Court. In Shiy Bahadur Singh's case’ the Supreme Court
took into consideration the reaction and confusion on the part of the a,pellant
in that case, at the time when be was called upon by the police to explain his
possession of the bribe money. In the case of State of Madras v. Vaidyanathad
also, the Supreme Court took into consideration evidence to the effect that when
the accused was caugh!, he was seen ta be trembling.

7.67. There is also a Calcutia case® illustrative of conduct. The accused
was charged with the murder of his wife, $, who was missing for some time.
A photograph of the dead body was published in the newspaper for establish-
ment of the identity of the dead woman. With the publication of the photo-
graph in the newspaper, the matter moved swiftly towards identification, On
seeing the photograph, the members of the wife’s family had no deubi in their
mind that this was the body of S. Soon after the pholograph was published, the
accused was the first to speak to B about the photograph appearing in the news-
paper and told him--“peopte are saying that the photograph is that of 5, please
gov and see”, When the accused spoke to B, the accused appeared to be in a
disturbed state of mind and tried to go away, taking Teave. It was held that
the statement which the accused made to B, clearly came under the second para-
graph of section 8, as showing the conduct and was a relevant fact. The parti-
cular slatement by the accused accompanied and explained acts showing his
reaction of a disturbed mind on the publication of the photograph in the news-
paper, coupled with the suggestion that the photograph was of his dead wife.
The statement by the accused to B, immediately on the publication of the
photograph of S, was an incfiminating circumstance against the accused.

Cases relating to
corruption,

7.68. A few words about silence as evidencing conduct are nceded. The Silence as con-
fact that an accused person remains silent when denounced in the presence of duct.

witnesses by another person as the latter’s assailant, is admissible in evidence.
The situation represents a confrontation of the accused by the person he is a
leged to have harmed. First, the evidence is of importance as «affording evi-
dence of identification. If the victim dies, it may be of the highest importance
that before his death he identified the accused as his assailant; if he lives and
gives evidence of the identity of the accused at the trial, the fact that he did
so at the first possible moment is often valuable as showing the consistency
of his story. Secondly, it affords the accused person an oppottunity,— though
he ig not bound to avail himself of jt—either of denying that he is the person
who harmed the injured party or of setting up some fact which may at a later

stage form part of his defence.

IR. y. Mallory, 15 Cos, 456, 458 (Per Field 3).
2866 also discussion as to ‘silence’, infra.

8M. M. Gandhi v. State of Mysore, ALR. 1960 Mys. 111, 9. 129.
‘Shiv Bahadur Singh, A..R. 1954 S.C. 322.

®State of Madras v. Vaidyanath, A.LR. 1958 S.C. 61.

®Arun Kumar Banerjee vs. The State, ALR 1962 Cal. 504, 508.


Silence
sent,

as

con-

92

The degree of weight to be attached to the silence of an accused person
in such circumstances depends upon the nature of the case. Many factors must
be taken into account in assessing it, and no hard and fast rale can be laid down.
Mlustrations which may afford guidance can be found in the cases." Care
niust be taken in all cases not to put too high a value on the absence of an
immediate denial unless the surrounding facts point uncquivocally to the con-
clusion that any accused person, whether educated or ignorant, cautious or im-
pulsive, voluble or taciturn, would have felt bound to make a rejoinder in view
of the particular charge against him and in the particular circumstances pre-
vailing when he was made aware of it. It is not permissible to atrive at an
adverse verdict on the strength of the opinions formed as to conduct of an
accused person to supplement a case for the prosecution which. at the conclu-
sion of the evidence heard on both sides, is too weak to justify conviction‘

7.69. The admissibility of silence in such circumstances is usually based
upon the Latin maxim “gui facet, conseutir videtur’. -silence indicates consent;
thus, the silence is thought to be a tacit admission. The alternative justification
is that, since “it is the nature of innocence to be impatient of a charge of
guilt whenever seriously made and distinctly understood, an innocent person
will usually spontaneously deny the accusation,” the failure to make a denial
is unnatural in an innocent man, and therefore evidence of a guilty conscience.

Thus. the inference from silence is based on the assumption that it is natural
for the person against whom the allegation is made to repudiate it. This as-
sumption is as old as the Bible,’ where we find the following passage:

“And Jesus stood before the governor: and the govefnor asked him,
saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou
sayest. And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders. he ans-
wered nothing. Then said Pilate unto him. Tearest thov not how many
things they witness against thee? And he answered him to never a word;
in so much that the governor matveied greatly.”

7.70. The assumption that silence indicates consent is not always valid.
No doubt, sometimes this assumption is justified. For example, in Egan v.
United States’ the accused, his lawyer, other company officers, and their law-
yers. were the only persons present at a meeting. The attorney for one of the
other officers read a statement made by his client to the Securities Exchange
Commission, about a matter then under investigation, admitting the  ctient’s
guilt and implicating also the accused. In those circumstances, it might well
have been natural for an innocent man to reply.

But there are situations where a repudiation may not be expected. This
is particularly so where the police are present, For a variety of reasons, the
person concerned may not like to make a repudiatory statement. In fact, the
existence of such counter—balancing considerations is itself a relevant fact under

section 9.

\Rex v. Feigenbaum, (1919) 1 K.B. 431.

2Rex v. Whitehead, (1929) 1 K.B. 99.

‘Rex v. Tate, (1908) 2 K.B. 680.

‘Stephen Seneviratne v. The King, AJR. 1936 P.C. 289; 41 CW. 65, 78 (Lord
Roche).

Speople v,_ Nitti, (1924) 312, 111, 73, 94, 143, N.E. 448, 455, ated in (196S-1966} 79
Harvard Law Rev at p. 1036.
*Mathew 27; 11-14.
iEgan v. U.S, 137 F. 2d 369 (Sth Ci). cert. denied, (1943) 320 U.S. 788.


93

7,71. it follows that when the silence of the accused is readily explained
by special circumstances negating the inference of guilt, it cannot constitute an
admission! Thus, the silence of a person under the influence of narcotics or
at a forma! hearing before a magistrate, is inadmissible.

In applying section 8, all these considerations will have to be borne in
miod.

7.72, Similar comments apply to conduct by way of absconding—-IIlustra-
tion (hj, Even innocent persons may evade apprehension owing to the instinct
of sclf-preservation?

7,73 We shali now deal in detail with illustrations (j) and {k), which are
concerned with slatementts accompanying and explaining the conduct of a per-
son an offence agaiust whom is alleged to have been committed—ie. the victim.
Urder these illustrations, the terms in which the compiaint was made are rele-
vant. A distinction is to be made here between a bare statememi of the fact
of rape or robbery, and a complaint. The latter evidences conduct; the former
has no such tendency. There may sometimes be a difficulty in discriminating
between a statement and a complaint. It is conceived that the essentials differ-
ence between the two is that the latter is made with a view to redress or punish-
ment, and must be made te some one in authority—the police, for instance, or
a parent, or some other pefson to whom the complainant was justly entitled to
look for assistance and protection. For instance, a petition impugning the con-
duct of a police officer and begging that he may be put on trial is a complaint
within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure.’

7.74. The distinction is of importance, because, while a complaint is al
ways relevant as conduct, a statement not amounting to a complaint will be
relevant Only under particular circumstances;—eg., if it amounts tu a dying
declaration,, or as a corroborative evidence* Section 8, in so far as it admits
a statement as included in the word “conduct”, must be read in connection with
sections 25 and 26, and cannot admit, as evidence, a statement which would be
shui out by those sections.*

7.75. A complaint, as we have already stated’, is one made with a view
to redress or punishment, and must be made to some authority or some person
to whom the complainant is justly entitled to look for assistance and protec-
tion’ In a Lahore case,” a woman who was raped, was questioned by a rela-
tive of her husband. The woman toid him that the accused had raped her end
asked him to teil her father-in-law in his field, which the relative did. When
ier father-in-law came home, she made the same statement to him. It was
held that while the above statements could not be regarded as forming part of
the same transaction as the offence and so section @ would aot apply, the state-
ments were admissible under section 8 as evidencial conduct.

15०9 (1965-1466) 79 Harvard Law Review at page 1037.

Xa) Thimma भर. State of Mysore, ALR. 1971 S.C. 1871, 1877, para 11;
(b) Rahman v. State of U-P., ALR. 1972 S.C. 110, 116, para 21.
SGangadhar v. Emperor, (1915) LL.R. 43 Cal. 173.
‘See the illustrations to section 8.
5See — {a) Apurba ४. R., (1907) LL.R. 35 Cal. 141;
(७) #. v. Shamlal, (1889) LL-R. 14 Cal. 707.
कर, हर. Nana, (1889) LL.R. 14 Bom. 260.
*Para 7.73, supra.
*See — (a) Gangadhar v. Emperor, \.L.R. 43 Cal. 173;
(b) Emperor v. Phulel, 1.L-R. 35 All. 102.
®Raman v. The Crown, ALR. 1921 Lah. 258.

Silence when ex-
plained.

Absconding.

Hlustrations i)
and (0) ~ Com-
plaint as distinct
from bare state-
ment.

Importance of
distinction.

Essence of a com-
plaint.


Complaint when
hearsay.

Statements by
ravished female,

Reason for mak-
ing a_ distinction
between mere
statement and
complaint.

Position in Eng-
Jand,

94

7,76. If a statement does not amount to a complaint and is outside sec-
ton 8, it is inadmissible unless some other section covers it. In the Patna case
of Emperor v. Phagunia Bhuian,' it was observed:

“If the gir] went to her relatives straight after the occurrence and com-
plained on her own initiative, there is no doubt that ber conduct would have
a direct bearing upon and connection with the occurrence itself; but if she
only answered questions, her statement would be mere hearsay.”

The conduct of a woman who has been raped is, thus, relevant under sec-
tion 8 only if she lodges @ compiaint. Jf she does not make a statement with
a view to making a complaint, then that statement will not be admissible in evi-
dence under section 8 as conduct and would be ruled out as hearsay, unless
admissible under some other section.

7.77. It should be noted that a statement by a ravished female after the
commission of the offence, though not covered by section 6, is admissible, not
valy as explanation of her conduct under section 8, but also under section 157
by way of corroboration.” Thus, where the statement of the girl to her mother
Gf she had made any) does not form part of the transaction, viz. the raping of
the girl, or occur during it, but is made after this transaction, and the rape of
the girl was over when the perpetrator had gone away and the girl came away
from the scene of occurrence to her mother’s house, the statement is not rele-
vant under section 62 But it may be relevant under section 8. A statement
made to the mother by the raped girl is also reievant'’ under section 8, if the
girl is a witness, as she usually is, section 157 would also be relevant. If, how-
ever, owing to any circumstances, she is not a witness, section 157 would not
apply.

The statement should not, however, be made in answer to question’

7.78 We have stated that illustrations (j) and (k) make a distinction bet-
ween (i) complaints, and (ii) other statements. The reason for regarding the
former as relevant is that they are influenced by a fact in issue (namely, by the
offence alleged).

7.79. It may benoted that the position under the section is, in some
respects, wider than the English law on the subject. In England, complaints
ate (according to the usually accepted view), admissible only in sexual cases
and in matrimonial proceedings based on adultery. They are admissible to
confirm the story of the complainant to prove its intrinsic credibility. and also
to prove nonconsent. They need not, however, be literally contemporaneous.
According to one English writer*—

“Complaints are admissible, though not made at the very first opportunity,
provided they are made at the first reasonable opportunity, but, unlike state-
ments admitted as pare of the res gestae, they are admissible only io show the
consistency of coaduct of the complainant, or the absence of consent if in issue.”

sEmperor v. Phaguitia Bhutan, A.1R. 1926 Pat. 58.
2Sorsatal ¥. Emperor, A..R. 1925 Nag. 74, 76.
3Sreekari v. Emperor, AR. 1930 Cal. 132, 133.
‘ALR. 1930 Cal. 132, 133.

58 1.8. 1963 Orissa $8, 59.

a) ALR. 1926 Pat. 58-60;

(9) (1961) 2 Cr. LJ. 137, 138, 139.

*See Stephen's introduction, cited m Woodrofle, (1941). page 91.

*Sec, however, Gooderson’s view, “Res Gestae in Criminal Cases”, (1956) Cam. LJ.
198, 209.

°R. N. Gooderson, ‘Res Gesiae in Criminal Cases”, (1956) Cai, LJ. 198, 209.


95

_ ‘Thus, in charges of rape and similar sexual offences against women, and
children of cither sex (even though they consented. where consent is no defence),

evidence may be given that the victim made a “sponraneous complaint on the
first opportunity which reasonably offered itself after the offence. This need
not be to the first pesson she saw.’ kn this case, the words said may be given
in evidence.* Such evidence is given to show the consistency of the cond
of the victim with the story told by him or her in the witness box”’,

In India, the section is not confined to sexual offences,

7.80. If it be held that those statements were in the nature of a complaint Use in evidence
and are thus relevant and admissible under section 8, the next point for consi. 7 Purpose,
deration will be as to what would be the value of those statements; could they
be used as the basis for conviction of the appellant? In this connection, it
would be useful to refer to the observations of Lord Porter in Gillie v. Posho
Ltd?

“In certain cases as. e.g., in the cases of sexual offences against women,
statements made to third parties are in some circumstances admissible.
But the careful limits placed upon the admissibility of such statements is
evidence of the jealousy with which their admission is regarded. They
must he complaints made voluntarily and at the earliest convenient moment,
and even then they are received not as evidence or corroboration of the
facts complained of, but 2s evidence of the credibility of the complainant's
testimony to the fact alleged, and where consent is a defence, to negative
consent. They are inadmissible in any other class of cases”.

A similar view was expressed by the Madras High Court in the case of
Kappinaiah ५. Emperor.’ It was beld in that case that—

“If the conduct of a woman who has been ravished is such that she
lodges a complaint, then that conduct is relevant and the terms in which
the complaint was made are relevant as conduct but they are not releyant
as direct proof of the act’.

7.81. In England, the Court has a discretion to exclude prejudicial evi- y ints
dence which may influence the jury. In R. v. Parker? the accused was charged rule,
with wounding his wife by shooting.’ A neighbour testified for the prosecution
that after the shooting, the wife had come to him, showed him her face which
was bleeding, and complained that her husband had shot her. The judge direct-
ed the jury to attach no weight to the words of the neighbour. Nevertheless,
the jury convicted the accused. The Court of Criminal Appeal allowed the
appeal against the conviction, on the ground that the evidence was prejudicial
and likely to influence the jury. In India, under section 8, the evidence would
be relevant and the court has no discretion to exclude it.

to the

7.82. In England, it is now well settled’ and held that in prosecutions for position in Eng-
ape and offences of similar character, the statement in the nature of @ com- land.
plaint made by the prosecuttix to a third person, need not be in the presence

IR, v. Cummings, (1948) 1 AER. 551.
29) R. v. Osborne, (1905) 1 K.B. 551.
(०) R. v. Cametleri, (1922) 16 CAR. 162.

(गे R. v. Wannell, (a boy of 19), (1922) 17 Cr. App. Rep. 53. — all cited in Cod-
dington’s Laws of Evidence, Constable's Guide, (1962) pages 11-12.

पर, Gillie v. Posho Lid, ALR. 1939 P.C. 146: (1939) 2 All. 8. R. 196, 200 (7.0).
‘Kappinaiah v. Emperor, A.1.R. 1931 Mal. 23312).

5R. v. Parker, (1961) 45 Cr. App. Rep. 1.

*For earlier cases, see Cross, “Scope of Rule against hearsay", (1956) 72 L.Q.R. 91.
पर, v. Osborne, (1905) 1 K.B. 551.



96

of the accused, provided such statement is shown to have been made at the first
opportunity which reasonably afforded itself after the commission of the offence.
The particulars may be so given in evidence in this class of cases,—but only
in this class,- not as being evidence of the truth of the charge against the ac-
cused. but as evidence of the consistency of conduct of the prosecultix with the
story told by her in the witness-box and as negativing consent on her part! It
was, at one time, thought that this evidence was only admissible in cases where
non-comsent was a material element? But that is not so.

But the complainant must be called. hus, if the victim of indecent assault
is unable to give any evidence of it, evidence by another witness of a complaint
made te her by the alleged victim shortly afier the incident becomes
inadinissible’ * in England.

Matrimonial 7.83. Corroboration mcy be required in England in some civil cases also,

cases, e.g. matrimonial proceedings based on adultery and the like. Although Lord
MacDermott, i Preston Jones v. Prestone Jones,’ expressly recognised that the
jurisdiction of the Divorce Division must be regarded as entirely distinct from
that of a Criminal Court and declared that his conclusions in this respect were
not based on any analogy drawn from the criminal Jaw, it is clear that, where
adultery is relied on in support of a petition for divorce, the fact that this is a
quasi-criminal offeace cannot be overlooked. Asking himself what could be
the reason why strict proof and corroboration of the adultery wete required,
Vaiscy J., in Ginesi v. Ginesi,’ observed; “the finding that the offence has been
committed may be far more serious in its consequences both 10 the individual
and to sociely than conviction of a crime. That is true even in these days when
its gravity is not so widely appreciated and accepted as it used to be.”

History of rule 7.84. History of the tule permitting such evidence is intimately connected
requiring _corro- with the history of criminal procedure. The rule could, in its ultimate origin,
boration. be traced to the doctrine of hue and cry. 11 is a survival of the ancient require-
ment that the woman should raise “hue and cry” as a preliminary to an “ap-
peal” of rape, the “appellee” being allowed, in defence, to deny that hue and

ery had been raised.

In its origin, the process of accusation which the common law evolved was
a private one. The accusation could be made either by a single individual, or
by 2 group. Accusation by a single individual was known as an appeal (of trea-
son or felony, as the case may be), and when the accused appeared before
the Court and answered to the charge, the appropriate method of trial was by
battle. These “appeals” of treason and felony had largely become absolete in
England by the end of the 16th century, but their formal abolition took time.
In a case reported in 1818, an abortive effort was made to tevive these proceed-
ings. and this led to the formal abolition of “appeals”.
some more effective means of bringing
This led to the practice

7.85. As society began to develop,
persons suspected of crime to trial had to be found.

Ya) R. 9. Osborne, (1905) 1 K.B. 551;

(9) A. v. Liliyman (1896) 2 K.B. 167;

(०) R. प्र. Rowland (1898} 62 LP. 459.

सर, v. Kingham, (1902) 66 1.9. 393.

YR. y. Osborne (1905) 1 K.B. 551; R. v. Lillyman, (1896) 2 0.8. 167.
*R. ४. Wallwork, (1958) 42 Cr. App. 8. 153.

Preston Jones v. Prestone Jones (1951) All. E.R. 124, 138.

5Ginesi v. Ginesi, (1948) 1 All. 8.8. 373, 376.

"See Note “Cotroboration in Civil Cases” (1954) 218 L.-T. 182.
8Ashford v. Thorton, (1818) 106 England Reports 149,


97

of the Kings’ Justices, when visiting various countties and in hundreds, as-
sembling men from the locality who would be sworn fo state what persons were,
to their knowledge, suspected of crime.*

In the beginning, the trial was by ordeal, but Jater,—somewhere between
the 13th and 15th century,--it developed inte the procedure of indictment. An
“indictment” was a written charge of crime made by a body of men known as
the grand jury. If the grand jury found a prima jacie case. they could present
a “true bill” (bifla vera) which provided the formal accusation upon which a
court of appropriate jurisdiction would ity the charge. It was in the above
contex: that “hue and cry” had an importance,

7.86. Afterwards, “appeals” became obsolete, and rape was dealt with on
wndictment. The woman was then an admissible witness, and her testimony was
corroborated or not, according as she made, or failed to make, fresh complaint and
pursuit of the offender. At this period, when rules of evidence were in their
infancy, it was generzlly allowable to corroborate all witnesses by ptoof of their
prior similar statements;° but, later on, the rule permitting cotroboration ty proof
of former statements was reversed.* Complaints, however, survived as an ex-
ception to the changed rule.

7,87, At this stage, it would be convenient to sum up the position regard-
ing statements by victims of offences in India, in the form of a table as follows »—

(a) Statements as to the offence, other than complaints—
Admissible under—
(i) section 6, if forming part of the same transaction;

Gi) section 32, if amounting to a dying declaration;

Gii} section 157, for corroboration, if the mzker of the statement is
called as a witness, and if the other conditions of that section are

satisfied;

(iv) section 159, to refresh the memory, if the maker is called as a
witness and if the other conditions of that section are satisfied;

(vy) section 145, for contradicting the maker when called as a witness.
But the statement may be excluded by virtue of section 162 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or some other specific provision of the law.

(०) Statements as to offence when amounting to complaint.
Admissible under —
(@ section 6, if forming part of the same transaction;

(ii) section 8, as showing conduct influenced by a fact in issue (regard-
img the alleged offence);

(iti) section 9, as negativing consent where consent is material;

{iv) the other sections mentioned in (@Xii) to (aXv) above, where ap-
plicable,—including section 32.

But the complaint may be excluded if it falls within section 162 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or some other exclusionary provision.

iAssize of Clarendon of King Henry the 2nd (1166).
2Lutterell ¥. Reynell, (1670) Mod, 282, 283.

3R, v. Parker, (1783) 3 Doug. 242.

4R. v. Osborne, (1905) 1 K.B. 551.

Statements
victims.

by


No change
needed.

Introductory.

Grammatical
errot in opening
words — Amend-
ment recommend-

Llustrations.

98

7.88. The above discussion reveals no need for a change in the law as en-
acted in section 8.

SECTION 9

7.89. Under section 9, “facis necessary to explain or introduce a fact in
issue or relevant fact. or which support or rebul an inference suggested by a
fact in issue, or relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything or per-
son whose identity is relevant. or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue
or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any
such fact was transacted, are relevant in so f:r as they are necessary for that
Purpose.”

There are 6 illustrations appended to the section, which we shall discuss
later.

7.90. The opening 13 words of the section—“Facts necessary to explain or
introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact”, are not in symmetry with the subse-
quent full clause beginning with “or which”. The proper form should be—
“Facts which are necessary 10 explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant
fact or which support” etc.

The quoted words should be so amended, and we recommend accordingly.

791. Illustration (3) to the scction provides that where the question is
whether a given document is the will of A, the state of A’s property and of his
family at the date of the alleged will ‘may be relevant facts’. These are facts
which are necessary to explain or introduce ihe fact in issue—the document sup-
posed to be the will. As is apparent from the last nine words of the section,
such facts are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose. This,
apparently, is the reason why, in this illustration and also in iliustration (9), the
words “may be” are used. It should also be noted that in illustration (a), only
the factum of the will is in issue.

7.92. Illustration (b) deals with a case where A sues B for a libel imput-
ing disgrace to A; B affirms the matter alleged to be libellous to be truc. The
position and relations of the patties at the time when the libel was published
“may be” relevant facts under this illustration. The reason is that they intro-
duce the facts in issue--the libel and the disgraceful conduct imputed thereby.
The illustration also provides that the fact that there was a dispute between the
parties, if it affected the relations between the partics, may be relevant: but the
particulars of a dispute about the matter unconnected with the alleged tibel are
irrelevant. The existence of the unconnected dispute, though not the particulars
thereof, would be relevant either as introducing the alleged libel (section 9), or
as constituting a motive for the libel (section 8), or as showing the conduct which
influenced the libel (section 8) or as showing facts which are the cause of the
libel (section 7.).

7.93. In cases of libel, malice may be inferred not only from the transae-
tion itself (Ae, the nature of the libel, with its mode and extent of publica-
tion), but also from previous ill feeling or disputes between the parties, the re-
petition of the libel, the publication of similar ones on other occasions’ and, in
fact, from the defendant’s whole conduct down to, or even at, the time of libel.

7.94, [iustration (०) relates to leaving one’s house by a pefson accused
of crime, soon after the accusation. The fact that he had some sudden and
urgent business is relevant. This refers to facts which ate explanatory of con-
duct which may otherwise appear to be incriminating or wrongful. The pre-
sumption or inference which would otherwise arise from the act of absconding

'Praed v. Graham, 24, QB.D. 53 (0.3); Simposon v. Robinson, 12 QB. 511.


99

(section 8) is rebutted. The fact that the accused had sudden and urgent busi-
ness, rebuts the inference suggested by his suddenly leaving home after the crime
was committed.

Tilustration (d) refers to alleged breach of contract. A statement by the
person alleged to have committed the breach, explaining why he left, is rele-
vant,

7.95. Mlustration (€) not only illustrates section 9, but also throws some
light on the meaning and scope of section 6 The illustration is as follows :—

"(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen pfoperty to छे, who
is seen to give it to A’s wife. B says as he delivers it—‘A says you are
to hide this’. B’s statement is relevant as explanatory of a fact which is
part of the transaction.”

Tilustration (f) takes the case where A is tried for a riot and is proved to
have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of the mob are relevant as ex-
planatory of the nature of the transaction.

Both illustrations (७) and (0 make it clear that statements made by a person
other than the accused may be tendered in evidence as explanatory of the trans-
action which comprises the alleged crime.

7.96. While sections 7 and 8 provide for the admission of facts causative
of a fact relevant or in issue, section 9 generally provides for facts explanatory
of any such fact. There are many incidents which. though they may not strictly
constitute a fact in issue, may yet be regarded as forming a part of it, in the
sense that they accompany and tend to explain the main fact, such as identity,”
names, dates, places, description, circumstances and relations of the parties and
other explanatory and introductory facts of a like nature?

The particulars receivable will necessarily vary with each individual case:
it is not all the incidents of a transaction that may be proved; for the narrative
might be run down into purely irrelevant and unnecessary detail. It should be
noted that the facts are relevant, “in so far as they are necessary for that pur-
pose”.

7.97. Both these illustrations raise an important question as to whether
the statements which are made relevant by those illustrations are receivable only
as evidence that such statements were made, or whether they are receivable as
evidence of the truth of the facts declared. It would be obvious, on a close
reading of the section and the wording of the illustrations. that the former is
the cortect view. Under illustration (d), for example, the statement made by the
person leaving the service as to a better offer made by another person, is rele-
vant only as explanatory of the conduct of the person leaving, and does not, it
is suggested, amount to any evidence that B did, in fact, make such a better offer.
That fact has to be independently proved, This view has the support of Nerton.*
Since the conduct of the pefson leaving is a relevant fact,—or rather, a fact in
issue whatever explains that conduct, is admissible under section 9. Such
explanatory facts are relevant, as the section says, “in so far as they are neces-
sary for that purpose”.

1866 also discussion below.
See—
(a) R. v. Richman, 2 East, P.C.. 1035;
(0) R. ¥. Rooney, 7 0, & P. 517.
See R. v. 4mir Khan, (1871) 9 BLR.. 36, 50, 51.
"Para 7.99, infra.

Rationale of sec-
tion 9.

Questions __ raised
by illustrations
(d) and {e) as to
statements.


Comments by
Norton on illu-
strations (d) and
(९०).

Mlustration (f),

Identity and simi-
lar facts,

100

7.98. The same comment applies to illustration (e). Though, at first sight,
it may appear that. by virtue of this illustration, what a person said is going to
be made evidence against the accused, it is not in reality so. Before the illustra-
tion can apply, two facts, postulated in the illustration, must exist, namely, that
the accused was seen to give stolen property to B. and B was seen to give the
stolen property to the wife of the accused. If these two facts ate proved, then,
in explanation or elucidation of the conduct of B (giving stolen property to the
wife of the accused), what B said at the time becomes relevant. It is, however,
relevart only for the purpose of explaining his conduct, and his statement that
“A says vou are to hide this” cannot be used to prove that A said so. but can
be usec to prove only why B gave the property to the wife of the accused.

7.99. Cormmenting on illustrations (d) and (e), Norton? in his work on
Evidence. expresses the opinion that this section introduces a dangerous innova-
tion, Statements explanatory under this section are admissible, irrespective of
the Enelish “hearsay” rule. which requires the pfesence of the person against
whom the statement is made. Tt is necessary to distinguish the purpose for
which such statements are admitted, and Norton’s suggestion that the statements
made by C in the one case and B in the other are receivable only as evidence
of the fact that they were made and not of their truth as affecting B or A res-
pectively. appe2rs to be justified. No doubt. if such a statement be once ad-
mitted and the Court believes that it was in fact made, it may be difficult to
exclude its purport from consideration. But the law does require the court to
do so. On this interpretation of the scope of the section, there is no need to
object to the illustrations under discussion.

7.100. Tlustration (0 to the section is taken from the case of Gordon2 In
the case put in this illustration, the cries would be made in the presence of the
leader thouch they were the cries of third parties, and the silence of the leader
would be equivalent to an admission that he acquiesced in those cries as expla-
natory of the common object of himself as well as of the persons whom he led.
His presence. and the fact of his having led the mob, are essential pre-condi-
tions for the application of the illustration, which also assumes that he did
not protest or object to the cries. They are also declarations accompanying the
transaction.

7.101. Quite a number of cases relate. in practice, to that part of section 9
which declares, as relevent, facts which establish the identity of anything or per-
son whose identity is relevant. The most troublesome problem which has arisen
in this context, both in England and in India, is that relating to evidence of
similar facts. The Jaw on the subject in England is still in a fluid condition.
Tt cannot be said that similar facts ere always relevant. There must be a
nexus between those acts and the offence charged which helps to identify the
accused. The leading statement of the Jaw is stil! that of Lord Sunner,* in
Thompson v. R. which is to the effect stated above.

7.102, Another very commonly cited judicial statement of the rule is that
of Lotd Herschell in Makin v. A. G. for New South Waless

“Tt is undoubtedly not competent for the prosecution to adduce evi-
dence tending to show that the accused has been guilty of criminal acts
other than those covered by the indictment for the purpose of leading to

'Norton, Rvidence, page 116, cited by Field.
°R. vy, Lord George Gordon, (1781) 21 How. State Trials 535, 536.

8Norton, Evidence 119 cited by Woodroffe, Evidence (1941), page 159, footnote 5.
‘Thompson v. R.. (1908) A.C. 221, 234.

SMakin v. A.G. for New South Wales, (1894) A.C. 57 (CP.C) @.C).


101

the conclusion that the accused is a person likely from his criminal con-
duct or character to have committed the offence for which he is being
tried.”.

In the House of Lords in Harris v. Director of Public Prosecutions,’ it was
stated that the jury must be directed that they can only make use of the
conduct on other occasions in determining the question of the accused's guilt
on the occasion in question. if satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the occur-
‘rence of the former conduct that similar facts should be connected in sone
relevant way with the accused and his participation in the crime.

7.103. How difficult a decision of this question could be is iustrated by
the xclchrated English case of R. ९. Beck,? which fed to a famous public inquiry
Tn that case, Beck was charged with obtaining moncy by false pretences in
1895. An expert gave opinion that the handwriting of the letters which contain-
ed the false pretence was, though disguised. the same as that of a list. which
Thad heen written by Beck, and had been found in his Inggage when he was
arrested. वा cross-examining the exnert, the defence proposed io ask a question
whether the handwritine of the letters was not the same as that of certain
other documents which the prosecution had previously submitted to the witness
for examination, being exhibits in the trial of X for a similar offence in 1877.
The defence was also prepared to show that while X was undergoing his sentence
for such offence, Beck was in America.

This was held to be inadmissible, as involving a collateral issuc likely
to mislead the jury. namely, whether Beck was or was not the man convicted
fin 1877 under the name of X. There was, at that time. no provision for a
tight of appeal in criminal cases. But there was a public agitation and a
public inquiry after the conviction of Beck.

7.104, The public inquiry presided over by Colfins M.R., exenerated Beck.
The names, handwriting and methods employed in the two crimes (1877 and
1895) were remarkably similar, and the defence of Beck was that they must
have been committed by the same man. Tf, therefore, Beck proved that he
could not have committed the crime of 1877, it went far to show that he had
not committed the crime of 1895, and that the crime was committed by X.
This evidence, as already mentioned. was reiected at the trial. but wis considered
in the public inquiry as clearly relevant and admissible for Beck.

Tt was this case which Ied to the establishment of the Court of Criminal
Appeal under the Criminal Apneal Act. 1907.

7.105. Broadly spcaking, it may be stated that evidence of similar facts is
not admissible if its effect is only to show generally bad character or good
character. But, if the evidence has rational probative value otherwise than
as showing bad and good character——for example. as showing identity—it is
admissible. The question whether it renders the fact in issue highly probable,
cannot be disregarded. ‘In an Australian case,’ McTiernan J. said that “there
is that degree of probative foree in the evidence of similar acts which qualifies
it to be the basis for judicial inference concerning the existence of the fact
in issue.”

muse v. Director of Public Prosecutions, (1952) A.C. 694; (1952) 1 All E.R. 1044,
OL).

कर, v. Beck, (1897) 31 Law Journal 197.

"For later developments, see 47 Taw Journal 379: 133 Law Times Journal 157.
‘Now the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).

*Martin v. Osborne, (1936) 55 C, 367, 404.

Case of R.
Beck.

General rule,

v.


Position in India
summed up.

102

7.106. One attempt to state the English rule, for legislative purposes, was
as follows :*

“Evidence which merely shows that a person has a propensity to do
acts of a certain kind, or that his disposition. character or antecedents
makes or make it probable that he will act in a certain way or with any
particular intention, is not admissible to prove that he did any such act
or acted in such way or with such intention on any particular occasion:
Provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to exclude evidence tending
to show such matters if it is otherwise relevant, and. in particular (without
prejudice to the generality of this proviso). the foregoing provision shall
not render inadmissible any evidence which is adduced to show—

(a) that any occurrence is one of a series of two or more similar occur-
rences, and that the facts of the occurrences comprised in the series
indicate some system. plan. or design on the part of any person;
or

(b) that any person imolicated by any evidence in the commission against
or in resnect of another person of anv particular act has committed
other acts indicative of some passion, emotion or feeling in regard
to the other person. which would naturally lead or dispose to the
commission of the particular act aforesaid with a view to establish-
ing —

{f) that the occurrence or act was the act of. or was caused or com-
mitted by. the person concerned in such svstem. plan or desion
or so implicated as aforesaid:

Gi) that. being his act or caused or committed by him, it was done,
caused or committed by him intentionatty or with any particular
intent.”

7.107. The legal position is realistically described by Stone in the following
words’ while discussing evidence of similar facts:—

“Evidence must be excluded which indicates that the priconer is more
likely than most men to have committed it. but evidence mnst be admitted
which fends to show that no man but the prisoner. who is known to have done
these things before. could have committed it. There is a voint in the ascend-
ing scale of probability when it is so near to certainty. that it is absured to
shy at the admission of the preiudicial evidence.”

7408. Position in India is as follows :-—

Evidence that a nerson committed an offence or civil wrone on a specified
oecasion is inadmissible to prove his disposition to commit an offence or civil
wrong as the basis for an jnference that he committed an offence or a civil
wrone on another specified occasion. But such evidence may be admissible
46 prove some other fact in issue. or relevant, fact. including motive intent.‘
plan! knowledge! identity,’ or absence of mistake or accident!

*Stow in (1922) 38 L.O.R. 63. 72.
Stone in 46 Harvard Law Review. pages 983-984.
Section 8.
Section 14.
Section 11.
‘Sections 5 and 14
Section 9.
Sections 14 and 15


103

7.109, Coming to identity, the type of evidence which can be used as
ancillary to identity is varied. For cxample, where a fact is relevant, scientific
records thereof would be relevant. Hence, when relevant and properly authen-
ticated, motion pictures would be admissible, apparently to establish the scenes
or events they depict and would not be subject to the objection of hearsay.
They must be ‘relevant’. in the sense that they must tend to prove or disprove
some fact in issue or relevant fact. They must be authenticated. in the sense
that the persons, objects or places pictured should be identicd oy witnesses.
As a motion picture describes more fully and accurately the event than a witness
can describe, it may be valuable in many cases. particularly when the relative
positions of various objects or the detailed conditions under which an event
took place. are of importance.’

7,110. The importance of section 9 has rendered necessary a discussion of
the above points which do not call for any substantial modification of the
section. The only chenge te be made in section 9 a verbal improvement
in the onening words. namely the section should read~— “facts which are. ”

SECTION 10
1. INFRODUCTORY

7.111. Section 10 vrovides that where there is a reasonable sround to
believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence or
an actionable wrong. anything said. done or written by any one of such persons
in reference to the comunon intention, after the time when such intention was first
entertained hs any one of them is a relevant fact. as against each of the nersons
helieved to be so conspiring : and this relevancy is as well for the purpose of prov-
ing the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that such person
was 2 party to it.

7.112. The illustration to the section emphasises certain propositions, namely,
that the statement of a conspirator X or Y is admissible against a conspirator
2. “although he {Z) may have been ignorant of all of them and although the per-
sons by whom they were done were strangers to him and also they may have
taken place before he (2) joined the conspiracy or after he left it.” Tt may be
pointed out that the proposition emphasised in the illustration, namely. that the
statement is admissible even though it was made after the other conspirator
(against whom it is sought to be proved) left it, is a departure from the English
law?

The cccasion for applying the section may arise in a criminal prosecution,
as also in a civil suit. —that. in practice. most of the cases relate to the former.
Tt will be convenient to examine the relevant provisions of the substantive crimi-
nal law, and also the position with reference to the law of torts.

व्‌. CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY—INDIAN LAW

7,113. Under Indian Criminal law, conspiracy has two aspects — (a) it is
a species of abetment:? and (b) it is offence by itself. As a species of abet-
ment, it is governed by section 107 of the Indian Penal Code. The terms of that
section are restrictive : an overt act is required, and this is essentially an instance
of an auxiliary criminal lability. as is clear from the provisions in the connected
sections--sections 108 and 109—of that Code.

See the note. “Motion Pictures as evidence” (1962). 64 Bom. Law Reporter, {Jour
nal. 1९4, 186, reproduced from “C and C”.

गए, ९. Blake (18441 6 0.8. 126: 115 E.R. 49.

Section 107. LPC.
‘Sections 120A, and 1208, 17.0.

8-131 LAD/ND/7?.

Evidence of iden-
tity — Motion

pictures as
dence.

evi-

Verbal changes

recommended,

Section 10 — In-

troductory.

Hlustration to
section.

Two aspects
criminal
spiracy.

the

of

con-


Definition of ‘cri-
minal conspiracy’.

Punishment
etiminal
spiracy,

History.

History.

of
con-

104

Section 107 of the Code classifies abetment under three heads, namely, abet-
ment by instigation, abetment by conspiracy and abetment by intentional aid. The
second paragraph of the section defines abetment by couspiracy, by stating that “a
person abets the doing of a thing who ensages with one or more other person or
Persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing. if an act or iNegal omission
takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy and in order to the doing of that
thing.”

7.414, The other important aspect of criminal conspiracy is conspiracy as
a substantive offence. This is governed by sections 120A and 1209 of the Indian
Penal Code. Section 120A defines the offence of criminal conspiracy as follows:

“120A. When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done,—
(0 an iftegal act, or
(2) an act which is legal by illegal means such an agreement is
designated a criminal conspiracy:

Provided thai no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence
shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement
is done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof.

Explanction —It is immaterial whether the iflesal act is the ultimate
object of such agreement. or is merely incident?! to that object.”

The punishment is neescrihed as follows ir the same Code.

. “1208. (1) Whoever is narty to a criminal conspiracy to commit an
ofenes punishable with death, imprisonment for fife or rigorons imprisonment
for a term of tem vearc of upwards shall, where no expres<e provision is
made in this Code for the prmishment of such a conspiracy, be pumished
in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence.

(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal
conspiracy to commit an offence nunichahle ac aforesaid shall b> punished
with imnrisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months,
or with fine. or with both.”

7.115. For more than half a century. the Penal Code recognised only
abetment hy conspiracy as defined in clause secondly of section 107, and not the
offence of criminal conspiracy as such. The fatter notion was introduced in the
Penal Code by the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1913 (which inserted a sepa-
rate Chapter 5A consisting of two sections 120A and 128), Thus. if a person
js engaged wifh another or others in a conspiracy fo commit an offence and if
some act or illegal omission takes place in pursnance of that consniracy and in
order to the doing of the criminal act. he is Hable to be punished as an abettor
directly under the relevant section in Chapter 5. But, whether or not such act
or illegal omission takes nlace. he is euilty of a criminal conspiracy as soon as
he becomes a party to the agreement ta commit the offence and is punishable
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 129B, as the case may be. in

Chapter 5A.
पा. CRIMINAT. CONSPIRACY: - ENGLISH LAW

7.116. In England. conspiracy originated in the 13th century as a crime
punishing’ conduct equivalent to that which is now covered by the action for

iSayre, “Criminal Conspiracy” (1922) 35 Harv. La ह
“Conspiracy and Abuse of Lesal Process” (1929) 37 Law Quarterly Review 462.
(Book Review of Winofield, History of Conspiracy and Abuse of Legal Procedure).

Rev, 393, 395 and by Holdsworth
467



105

maticious prosecution. By' the early 17th century. it had become an inchoate
crime, encompassing the malicious agreement alone, even if its object had not been
attained? Later, the Judges of the King’s Bench extended the conspiracy concept
to make criminal aif aereements which had crimes as their objects.*

By the early 18th century conspiracy came to be used as a means to punish
“all confederacies whoatsaever. छाए: ¥ te preiudice the third person”.4 Finally.
in 1832, Lord Denman defined ‘consniracy’ as “an agreement to do an unlawful
act, or a lawful act by unlawful means” 5S But the word “unlawfrl” was found to
be vague. Tt is well-known that becanse of the vagueness of the word “unlawful”.
acute controversy arose. The law of conspiracy even became an economic and
political weapons directed against sroups threatening the status quo

TAVT. At present, in England. while it is well established that conspiracy to
commit an indictable offence is itself a crime, the auestion how far conspiracy to
commit (i) an offence triable summarily. or (i) a tort. ot (iii) a breach of contract
is punishable has been the sehicct matter of controversy for some time. Ever
since the famous work by RS Wricht on Conspiracies was published. this topic
has engaged the attention of courts end writers, not only because Wright was a
Judge of the Pigh Court sith ereat renutation fer his knowledge of criminal law.
but also becavse of the scholarly asd penetrating analysis cresented in the book.

7.148. Tt can be said. however. that in England. the law of conspiracy ts
not so widely dr-wn as in Ind While the commission of a crime. even a non-
indictable crime—fs saturally recsenised as an unlawful nurpose. with reference
to criminal conspiracy, there are no nrecise or clear rules in regard 10 “non-crimi-
nal™ unlawful purposes. Conspiracy is a common law misdemeanour. punishable
with fine or imprisonment at the discretion of the court. excent in the case of
murder where. by statute there is a maximum punishment of ten vears invprison-
ment.

eles to defraud. to commit a tort involving malice, or to commit a

Consnir:
public mischief are. broadly sneaking, indictable. A conspiracy to commit or

induce breach of contract is probably not indictable at the oresent dey in Ensland

7.419. Where the agreement is not to ecmmit a crime but other iflegal
act, the positian 1 Eneland as to the exact scope of the crime of conspiracy is
thus in a fluid state. However. we are not concerned with the details of that de-
bate. The law of ciminal conspiracy in England was dealt with in come detait
jn Kamara! case. where Lord Bailsham, Lord Chancelior. discussed at teneth
the offence of criminal conspirsev. As Lord Diplock said in another 2१९९५ “the
least systematic. the most irrational branch of English penal law {criminal cons-
piracy) still rests upon the legal fiction that the offence lies not in the overt acts
themselves which are injurious to the common weal. but in an inferred anterior
agreement to commit them.”

1Ordinance concurrent Conspirstors (1305) 33 Pdward 1. reproduced by Sayre “Crimi-
nial Conspiracy” (1922) 35 Harv. Taw Rev 393

*Poultere’s cave (1611) 77 Enalish Ren. 813.

Wright. Criminal Conspiracy & Acreements (1887) pace 26. referred to in Goldstein,
“Conspiracy to defraud the United States”, (19890) 68 Yale Taw Journal 405, 416

‘Hawkins, Pleas of the Crawa (1787) Vol. t. page 348. cited by Goldstein, “Con-
spiracy to defraud the US.”. (1959) 68 Yale LJ. 405, 416.

5The Kine v. Tones, ($832) 110 English Rep. 485. 487; and see Pettibone v. US.
(1893) 148 U.S. 197. 203

Holdsworth: History of Enzlish Law. Vol. & pages 381 to 384: Netles. “The First
American Labour case” (1931) 41 Yol= Faw Journal 165, 193: Sayre. “Labour and the
Court. (1930) 39 Yale Caw Tournal 682. 684

Kamara v. D-P_P_(1973)3 WLR. 198 ALL)

®8D.P.P. v. Bhagwan, (1972) AC. 60, 79, FLL.

Criminal cons
spiracy — Eng-
lish law at pre-
sent.

Criminal con
spiracy in Eng-
lish law.


Conspiracy com-
plete before an

offence
ted.

Mens rea.

Overt act.

Various
criminal
spiracies.

commit-

types of
con-

106

7.120. That a conspiracy is complete before any offence is actually com-
mitted, was established long ago in England. In a case in which judgment was
delivered by Lord Ellenborough, Chief Justice.’ De Berenger and others were
convicted on an indictment which averred that they conspired to circulate false
rumous of the death of Napolean. with the intent that it would be thought that
peace would soon be concluded between England and France so that the market
price of government stack would rise. After conviction, they moved for arrest
of judgment. on the ground that it was no crime to raise the price of public funds
and that the indictment was defective in that it did not name fhe a}lesed victims.
Rejecting this motion. the court said that it was not necessary to specify the per-
sons who become nrrchasers of the stock. Avart from the fact that the nersons
to be affected by the consniracy would, at the fime of the conspiracy. not he known
because the accused “contd not except by a spirit of nronhecy. divine wha would
be purchasers on a subsequent day.” such a statement was wholly nnmecessary,

“the consviracy heine complete independently of any persons heine purchasers? *

7.121. The mens rea in conspiracy consists in the intention to execute the
illeeal elements in the conduct contemplated hy the arreement in the knowledge
of thase facts which render fhe conduct legal®

The agreement represents actualisation of the intent. the assumntion being
that the individual merely thinkine evil thoushts is not punishable. the require-
ment as to agreement is intended to ensure that the evil intent of the man branded
as a criminal has heen exnresced in a manner sienifvine harm to society. - that
is, the threat renresented hy the aptreement. However. it must be recoeniced that
punishing consriracv means punishing conduct which may nowhere cnme near ta
the carrying out of the supposed threat.

7.122. Pyen where there is a statutory requirement as to an overt act,
it does not mean that the overt act itself must be harmful. The overt act may be
completely harmless and may indicate little or nothing of the kind of injury to
society which the conspiracy seeks to bring about.‘ Tt is well established that it
need not itself be criminal. excepting that it must stem from the agreement.’ The
agreement to accomplish the prohibited purpose furnishes, without more. the basis
for criminal liability"

7.123. An agreement with a common (criminal) design may take various
shapes. Howart C. J. in Mevtick.” had occasion to deal with this aspect. The
facts were as follows: —

Between the years 1924 and 1928, in London, a racket existed with regard
to the conduct of night clubs in the West End. The police in this district consis-
tently tumed a blind eye to the activities of these clubs, which were carried on in
a manner involving breaches of the law, particularly of the licensing faws. Ulti-
mately, the matter was investigated. and it was found that one Sergeant Coddard
of the Metropolitan Police Force had been bribed by a number of night club ope-
rators, including Mrs. Moyrick, Luigi Ribuffi, Anna Gadda, and others. Mrs.

IR. v. De Berenger (1814) 105 E.R. 536.

*Bmphasis added.

*Kamara, 7.07, (19731 3 WER. 198 (HE).

4Piswick v. U.S., (1946) 329 U.S. 211, 216, footnote 4

जा. v. Rablowick, (1915) 238 US. 78. 86.

*Braverman v. U.S. 317, US. 49, 53. 54,

Rv. Movrick and Ribuffi (1929) 21 Criminal Appeal Report 94.


107

Moyrick and Ribuffi were charged. together with Sergeant Coddard, on an indict-
ment containing several counts. They were convicted and sentenced to imprison-
ment, and Mrs. Moyrick and Ribuffi appealed. Describing the variety of such
crimes, Hewart C.J. said: --

“Such agreements may be made in various ways. There may be one
person, lo adopt the metaphor of counsel, round whom the rest revolve. Tue
metaphor is the metaphor of the centre of the circle aad the circumference.
‘There may be a conspicacy of another kind, where the metaphor would be
rather that of a chain; A communicates with B, B with C, C with D, and
so of to tbe end of the lisi of conspirators. What has to be ascertained is
always ihe same matier: is it true to say, in the words already quoted, that
lhe acis of the accused were done in pursuance of a criminal purpose beld
in common between them.’?

7.124, So much as regards the nature of the crime. It is well-known that
the prosecution in a trial for conspiracy bears some advantage in contrast with
other criminal trials. The general rule of the law of evidence is that actions or
statements of X are not admissible against the accused, unless they are done
or made either in his presence or by his authority. This limitation does not,
however, apply to conspiracy trials. The prosecution is permitted to enter
evidence which could not be regarded as having adequate probative value to be
admissible fur trial in any other offence. We shall have occasion to revert to
this aspect later.

1५. CONSPIRACY AS A TORT
7.125. Conspiracy io injure is itsclf a tort, if certain conditions are satisfied.

In the law of wrt:, a conspiracy is “a combination of several persons against
one, with a vicw io harming’ him”—to adopt the language of Bowen LJ. In
criminal law the classical definition of conspiracy is that given by Willes J. in
advising the House of Lords in Nulcaby पर. का. “A conspiracy consists not
merely in the intention of two or more, but in the agreement of two or more
to do an unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means.” This was
with reference (0 criminal law. ‘he civil right of action is not, however, com-
pleic unless the conspirators dv acis in pursuance of their agreement to the
damage of the piainuils. The concep of civil conspiracy to injure has, in the
main, been developed in the course of the last half a century, particularly since
the great case of the Mogul Steamship Co. y. McGregor & Co. Its essential
character is described by Lord Macnaghten in Quinn v. Leathen, basing him-
self on Lord Watson’s words in Allen v. Flood: “a conspiracy to injure might
give rise to civil liability even though the end were brought about by conduct
and acls which by themselves and apart from the element of combination or
concerted action could not be regarded as a legal wrong.” In this sense, the
conspiracy is the gist of the wrong, though damage is necessary to complete the

cause of action.

7.426. The identity between criminal and civil law in this regard is denied
by Lord Porter in Crafter's case’ though it has been later suggested by Lord
Reid in his dissenting speech in the famous case of Shaw’. The difference bet-
ween tortious and criminat conspiracy is that conspiracy giving rise to an action

(1889), 23 Q.B. Div. 598, 617 (Bowen

‘Moghul Steam Shipping Co. v. McGregor,
1).

°Mutcahy v. R. LR. (1868) 3 HLL, 306, 317.
3Crafter Handwoven Harris Twed vy. Veitch (1942) AC. 435, 488 (IL).

‘Shaw v. D.P.P. (1962) AC. 220 (BLL).

Advantages of,
the prosecution.

Civil liability.

Civil and_crimi-
nal conspiracy.


Principte,
History.

Present __ section
considered,
Ordinary tule
modified in rela-
tion to conspira-
cies,

108

tor damages, being an action on the case, must have been put into execution,
and must have given rise to actual damage, whereas, in a crimina] conspiracy,
the agreement’, and not the execution of the agreement, is the gist of the
indictment.

7.127, Thus, so far as the tort of conspiracy is concerned, it occurs where
ihere is an agreement between two deiendanis to effect an unlawful purpose
which results in damage to the plaintiil. The tort was fully considered in Crafter's
case’, where the following principles were iaid down: —

0) The tort covers acts which would be lawful if done by one person;

(0) The combination will be justified if the predominant motive is self-
interest or protection of one’s trade rather than the injury of the

piaintif,

(ii) Damage to the plaintiff must be proved. There are statutory excep-
tions, particularly in legislation relating io Trade Disputes and indus-
trial Regulations, which need nol ve gone iato for the present purpose.

7.128. Conspiracy as an offence, like libel, was developed by the Star
Caamber, and when taken over by the Courts in the common law, came to be
regarded by them not only as a crime, but also as capable of giving rise to
civil Hability*

7.129. The persons combining should have acied in order that the plaintiff
should suiler damage’.

V. CERTAIN IMPORTANT ASPECTS OF SECTION 10

7.130. We may now proceed to examme ceriain important aspects of
section 10.

On an ¢xamination of the section in the Evidence Act, the धर thing that
strikes ibe reader, is ils provision for adnutuag out of court statements of one
person against another. If the conditions givea im the section are satisfied, a
person becomes subject to a special mule of evidence, oamely,—the evidence
admissible agaist bim may include acts aad admissions of another person. This
is 4 departure irom the ordinary rule.

7.431. Ordinarily, on the wial of A for an offence other than conspiracy,
what B said or wroie to C about A would normally be inadmissibie to prove,
as against A, the trutiiuiness of the statement. So, if A, a public oflicer, is
charged with taking bribes trom B and C, a letter trom B to C stating that A
was asking for his monthly cheque and that he wished the matter to be kept
confidential would, 00 the trial of A, be inadmissible to prove the wuthfulness
of its contenis, ie., that A was taking bribes. The rationale for this is that A
cannoi cross-examine B and this evidence is, therefore, potentiaily very dangerous.
Bat, if A is charged with a conspiracy with 8 and C to take bribes, thea, once
“there is reasonable ground to believe m the existence of a conspiracy”, the
wetter would be admissible against A to prove the truncss of its contents.”
However, in England, this exception applies only to acts or statements of any of
the conspirators in furtherance of the common design’ So, if B and C then

\Poulter’s case, 9 Co. Rep. 558, referred to by Lord Hailsham L.C. in Kamara v.
DBP.P, (1973) 3 LR. 198, 212.
Crafter Handwoven Harris Twed v. Veitch (1942) AC. 435.

8Friedman “Mens rea in Conspiracy” (1956) 19 Modern Law Review 27:

‘Para 7.127(ii), supra
58568 R. v. Whitakar. (1914) 10 Cr. App. हि. 245

oR. v. Blake, (1844) 6 Q.B. 126, 115 E.R. 49.


109

confessed to the police that A had received bribes from them, that confession
would be inadmissible in England to prove that A had conspired with B and C,
because the confession would not be in furtherance of ihe common design.’

7.132. No doubt, there is a justitication for this depariure from the ordinary
rule. ‘Thal justification is furnished by the identity of interest -the combination
to act for on unlawful purpose. In Mirza Akbar's case*, tne Privy Council
observed :

“Where the evidence is admissible, it is, in their Lordships’ judgment,
ou the principle thar ube uning done, written or spoken, was sumelhing done
in cairying oui the conspiracy and was receivable as a step in the proof of
the caspiracy. ine words written or spoken may be a declaration accow-
panying an act and indicating the quality of the act as being an act in
the cuurse of Lie conspiracy: or ihe words written or spokea may in them-
seives be acts due in the course of the conspiracy.”

7433. 188 approach was approved by the Supreme Court in Sardué
Singh's case’- मे two or wore persons combine to commu an oilence, eaci:
musi shai: liability for whatever is done by the other in pursuance of the
combination.

VI. SECTION 10 AS COVERING ACTS BEYOND COMMON PURPOSE

7.134, What is the position where a persoa uavels ovycud ihe common
purpose and where acts not dune in pursuance of the combination (or, as the
English decisions pui it, not in furtherance of tae odject of the conspiracy),
are sought to be rendered admissible. It is not fair that acts and statements not
so made should bind or be admissible against ihe co-conspirators. As it stands,
the section admits acls or statements made or done “in reference io the
common desiga,” and docs not contain the furiber requirement thai they must
be made in juriherance oj ie common design.

7,135, It should, ॥ this connection, be remembered that in 1872, the general
Offence ot criminal couspiracy as a substantive offence was not recoguised in
india, aud couspiracy appeared only as a species of abetment in section 107,
clause secuud of the inwan रात Code, whereunder an overt act is required?
As a subsuiniive ollence, ३६ appears only in section 121 of the Peaal Code which
reiers 10 woMspiiacy to wage war agaist the Government of India, or to overawe
by dorce the Goverment Gnseried im 1870)... 1895 comspiracy to wage war was,
practically, the ouly जाए of conspiracy punishable as a subsiantive oilence.

7.1354. ‘Lhe positivn now is dilferent. Seclioa 12UA of the Penal Code
{inserted in 1913) covers—

Wan agreement tv commit any olfence, and
(0) an agreement iv comaut an illegal but noi a criminal act, and
(iii) uu uyreement to commit 3 legal act by illegal means.

7.136. 4६ may be woted what 01 Cugiaud, admissions of the conspiracy, made
after failure of iis objects, or aller accomplishment of its objects, if not made in
pursuance uj the conspiracy, ate admissible only against the party making
admission.’

AR. v. Pepper, (1921) 16 Cr. App. B. 12.

'Mirza Akbar v. Emperor, ALR. 1940 P.C. 176, 180.

'ardul Singh v. The State, ALR. 1957 S.C. 749, paragraphs 38-42.
“But see Bhagwan v. State of Maharashtra, A.LR, 1965 S.C, 682, 687.
Section 107, second para. and section 108, Explanation 5, LP.C.
SBlake, (1844), 6 Q.B., 126, 115, English Reports 49.

Justification for
departure from
ordinary rule.

Injustice of pre-
sent wide provi-
sion.

Wide scope oi
offence.

Position in Eng-
jand_as to ad-
missibility.


Tilustration from
‘O'Connell's case.

Stephen's view

Difference bet-
ween English and
Indian law,

Stage at which
conspiracy punish-
able,

110

Acts done in pursuance of the conspiracy ate evidence of the objects of
conspiracy against all the conspirators'. The main application of the rule is
where all the accused have done acts tending towards on obvious purpose.’
But acts not done in pursuance of the common purpose are excluded.

7.437. Pennefeather, C.J., in R. v. O'Connell,’ observed:

“When evidence is once given to the jury of a conspiracy against A, B
and C, whatever is done by A, B or C in furtherance of the common crininat
object is evidence against A, B and C though no direct proof be given that
A, B, or C knew of it or actually participated in it ...... If the conspiracy
be proved to have existed, or rather if evidence be given to the jury of its
existence, the acis of one in furtherance of the common design are the acts
of all; and whatever one does in furtherance of the common design, he
does as the agent of the cO-conspirators.”

7.138, In Stephen’s Digest, he states the English law thus ;*

“When two or more persons conspire together to commit any offence or
an actionable wrong, everything said, done or written by one of them in
the execution or furtherance of their common purpose, is deemed to be sv
said, done or written by every onc and is deemed to be a relevant fact as
against each of them, but statements made by individuai conspirators as
10 measures taken in the cxecution or furtherance of any such common pur-
pose are not deemed to be relevant as such as against any conspirator
except those by whom or in whose presence such statements are made.
Evidence of acts or statements deemed 10 be relevant under this article may not
be given until the judge is satisfied that apart irom them there are prima
facie grounds for believing in the existence of the conspiracy to which they
relate.”

7.139. The difference between English and Indian law, as given in the text
of section 10, can be thus illustrated. A letter written by one of the conspirators
to a fricnd, giving the details of the conspiracy, will not be admissible under
English law, as it does not further the cause of conspiracy of cominon design,
nor is the letter written with that object; but it would certainly be admissible
under our law, as it has a “reference” to the common intention as is provided
by section 10 of the Act, if taken literally.

7.140. Even in England where the scope is narrower, the Cour, of Criminal
Appeal has observed,’ that unnecessary conspiracy counts in a complicated case
“imposed a quite intolerable strain both on the Court and on the jury”.

7.141, The stage at which a person becomes liable to be punished ior
criminal conspiracy is also much earlier than the stage when an attempt becomes
punishable. A mere agreement to commit an offence is enough. No physical
act need take place. Even preparation—the devising and arranging of the means
for committing the offence—is not required.

lgsdale, (1858) 175 E.R. 196; see para 7, 149, infra.
WShellard, (1840) 173 E.R, 834.

378, ४, O'Connell, 5 St, Tr. N.S. 1.710.

‘Article 4, Stephen's Digest of Evidence.

‘Dawson (1960) 44 Criminal Appeal Reports 87, 93, 95. 96; Griffith (1955) 3 W.L.R.

405,


lil

7.142. The aspect of “common purposes” is recognised in the U.S.A. Judge Position in U.S.A.
Learned Hand said in one case,’ “Nobody is liable for conspiracy except for as sommen
the full import ci the concerted purpose of agreement as he understands it; if हु
later—coners change that, he is not liable for the change.”

7.143. Logically, the test followed in the English law is more satisfactory, gnglish test pre-
for the reason that it brings out the element of “association” and “common ferred.
purpose”. The law makes the acts and declarations of a conspirator admissible
against his associates, for the reason that he is an agent of the associates in
carrying out the object of the conspiracy’. In India, however, on a literal reading
of section 10, an account given by one of the conspirators would be relevant
even though it is not in furtherance of the conspiracy.

VII. POSITION IN U.S.A.
7.144, The position in the U.S.A. may be noted briefly.

Ip the federai Jaw,’ a conspiracy is punishable only if it is ४0 commit any
offence against the United States, or to defraud the United States or any agency
thereof, in any manner or for any purpose. Typical States enactments‘ punished
conspiracy to commit a crime or conspiracies to punish certain other specified
acts, most of which are in the nature of fraud or preventing another person from
doing any lawful act and the like.

The attribution of the statements made by the alleged conspirator to
another conspirator is, in the U.S.A. dependent on the scope of the agreement.
Such statements are attributable to the co-conspirators within the limits of the
principle that each member is liable for the act of other members which are
within the scope of the agreement among them, and only while that agreement
is still operative.

7.145. The Supreme Court of the U.S.A. had stated the rule as to evidence
of such atts as follows: —*

“Li is firmly established that where made in furtherance of the objectives
of a yoing conspiracy, such statements are admissible as exceptions to the
hearsay rule. This pre-requisite 10 admissibility, that hearsay statements
by some conspirators to be admissible against others must be made in
furtherance of the conspiracy charged, has been scrupulously observed by
federal coucts.”.

7.146. Ji should be noted that there has been extensive criticism in the "पक ip
U.S.A. even of the limited rule permitting evidence of such statements of co- U.S.A.
conspiators, In the leading U.S. case* on the subject, is a trenchant
criticism of the wide scope of the offence of conspiracy, as also of the special
rules of evidence. Jackson J. observed in that case—

“The co-defendant in a conspiracy charge occupies an uneasy seat”.

1U.S. v. Peony, (1938) 100 F 2nd 401 (per Learned Hand, J.}.

%a) Cf. Vishendas v. Emperor, LL.R. (1944) Ker. 449; ALR. 1944 Sind 1.
(b) Emperor v. Vaishampayan, 1.L.R, 55 Bom. 839, ALR. 1932 Bom. 56
(०) Bholanath v. Emperor, AAR. 1939 All. 567.

3ULS, Code, Vol, 18, section 371.

‘See Note in (1955) 68 Harv. Law Rev. 1056.

sDethi Poli v. U.S., (1957) 352 U.S. 232, 237.

'Krulewitch v. United States, (1949) 336 U.S. 440,


Need for amend-
ment.

Rational justi-
fication —_furnish-

by common
Purpose.

112

It has also been pointed out that while the basis for admitting in evidence
the statements of a co-conspirator made in furtherance of the conspiracy is that .
there is a conspiracy—which would postulate the prior proof of the existeace of
conspiracy by independent evidence,—the rule permits statements of co-conspira-
tors 10 be used for the purpose oj proving the conspiracy itself. Thus, there is
a@ movement in circle.

Incidentally, we may observe that this criticism can apply to the Indian
sectiun also, because section 10 operates once there is “reasonable ground to
believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence”.

7.147, Judicial pronouncements spelling out the rat-onale of the rule in the
U.S.A, emphasize the aspect of agency.’ “Having joinacd in an ualawtul scheme,
having constituted agents for its performance, until tull fruition be secured, until
he does some act 10 disavow or deieat the purpose, he is in no situation to
claim the delay of ihe Jaw”. “As the offence has not been terminated, or
accomplished, he is still offending.”.

ii has been said:* “And so long as the partnership in crime cottinues, Ube
partners act for each other in carrying it forward.” It is settled that “an overt
act of one partner may be the act of all without any new agreement specifically
directed to that act.’ Motive or intent may be proved by tie acts or declarations
of some of the conspirators in furtherance of the common objective. A scheme
io use the mails to defraud, which is joined in by more than one person, is a
conspiracy, and ali members are responsible, though unly one did the oiailing.*

जता, PRESENT POSITION

7.148. 11 was suggested to us that the section, as now worded, is not defen-
sible ou principle,’ and should be narrowed down.

7.149. Although the section is expressed in ierms of conspuucy, the real
principle aud the rational justilication, as we have already indicated above, is the
common purpose which Jeads to their being engaged in a common enterprise.

Ja England, for example, where A and B, employed im a Customs House,
are charged with conspiring to pass through Custom goods without paying duty,
jaise entries made by A are admissible against B also, since these entries are
ynade in turtherance of lie purpose of the conspiracy.’ Bu, an entry made by
A on the counterjoil of his own cheque book, saying how be had snared the
proceeds oi the transaction wilh B, is aot admissibie agaiasi B, not being in

furtherance of the common purpose.

Similarly, if A and B are charged with conspiracy, a lever writen by A to
a third person (go a member of the conspiracy) describing the proceedings
already taken and enclosing the songs composed by A and sung in the proceedings,
is not admissible against B, not being in furtherance of the conspiracy’.

Hyde v. United States, 225 US. 347, 369.

Pinkerton v. U.S. (1946) 90 LEd, 1489.

sUnited States v. Kissell, 218, US. 601, 608.

‘Wiborg v. United States, 163 US. 632, 657-658.
SPinkerton ¥. United States, (1946) 90 L. Ed. 1489.

556७ “Injustice of present wide provision”, supra.

IR, v. Blake, (1844) 6 Queens Bench 126.

aR. y. Hardy, (1794) 24 Howard State Trials 200, 451, 453.


113

7.150. Again, in a trial for illegal abortion, a diary kept by B, incriminating
A, and a letier intended for A but not seni to him, both written after the abortion,
would be rejected in the absence of conspiracy.' In this case, A was charged
with causing 95 death by an illegal operation, and statements made by B, the
woman, to a doctor during her illness that A had operated upon her and that
lier iliness was caused thereby, were held to be inadmissible. The rejection of
the first mentioned evidence was on the ground that there was no conspiracy.”

7.151. In England, it is well established by R. v. Blake that acts not done
mi furtherance of the conspiracy are not admissible. This is in harmony with
the rule in substantive criminal jaw that a party is not, in general and in the
absence of special considerations, criminally responsible for the acts or declara-
lions vf others, unless they have been expressly directed or assented to by him‘,

452. It should also be noted that in England, the husband and wife cannot
be guilty of conspiracy. [his is not so in India. In Queen Empress y. Buich’, it bas
been beid that there is no presumption that a wife and husband constitute one per
son iu India for the purpose of the criminal law. ‘“Lhus, the Lndian law in sectiow
10 is wider than the English law in other respects also.

7,153. The reason for the wording of the section is a matter of conjecture.
A inere slatemen; made by one conspirator to a third party or any act, not
done in pursuance of the conspiracy, is not evidence for or against another
conspirator,

Patterson, J. described it in (2.5, v. Blake’ as a statement “made after the
conspiracy was eilected”.

Williams J, said that it merely related “to a conspiracy at that ume cum-
pleted”. Coleridge J. said that it “did not relate to the furtherance oj the come
mon object’. ‘Lhe words used in section 10, Evidence Act, are—

“in reference to their conunon intention”. These words were perhaps chosen

’ as having the same significance as the word “related” used by Williams and
Coieridge JJ. Lf so, the choice was not happy. In Mirza Akbar’, the Privy
Council observed ;

“Where the evidence is admissible, it is in their Lordships’ judgment on
ibe principle that the thing done, written or spoken, way something done in
carrying out the conspiracy and was receivable as a step in the proof of the
conspiracy. The words written or spoken may be a declaration accompanying
an act and indicating the quality of the act as being an act in the course
of the conspiracy; or the words written or spoken may in themselves be
acts done in the course of the conspiracy.”.

LR. v. Closter, (1888) 16 Cox 471.

29. ४. Blake, (1844), 608, 126. The case is discussed in R. v. Thomson, (1912) 3
Kangs Bench 19.

AR. v. Blake, (1844) 6 Qavens Bench 126, US ER. 49.

(a) Hugging, (1730) 2 Stra. 883.

(b) Vane v. Vjanauapoulus, (1965) A.C. 486 (HLL).

SQueen Empress v. Butch, (1894) LL.R. 17 Mad. 401.

१६९७ also Tiruranguda Madalai v. Triprasundariammal, 1.L.R. 49 Mad. 738, ALR.
1926 Mad. 906;

1Abdul Khader v. Taib Begum, A.LR. 1957 Mad, 339, 340 para. 5.

"Queen Empress v. Blake, (1844) 6 Queens Bench 126.

१७68 Mirai Akbar, ALR. 1940, P.C,

Husband and
wife.

Possible reasons
for present word-
ing in section 10.


Agency

in

rela-

tion to corpora

tions.

Agency
tion 10,

in

sec

114

7.154 to 7.156. A reference has been made to the aspect of agency. It may
be noted. in this connection, that the attribution of criminality to a corporation
originated in the principle of agency. in Mackay vy. Commercial Bank of New
Burnswik’, the opinion of the Privy Council (given by Sir Montague Smith)
includes this passage, quoted from the judgment of Lord Cranworth, L.C., in
Ranger v. Great Western Rly. Co2—

“Strictly speaking. the corporation cannot itself be guilty of fraud. But
where a corporation is formed for the purpose of carrying on a trading or
other speculation for profit, such as forming a railway, these objects can
only be accomplished by the agency oj individuals: and there can be no
doubt that if the agents empioyed conduct themselves fraudulently, so that
if they had been acting for private employers the persons for whom they
were acting would have been affected by their fraud, the same principles
musi prevail where the principal under whom the agent acts is a corpo-
ration.”.

7.157. This aspect of agency, as relevant to section 10, has been noticed in
Indian cases. In Indra Chandra’s case*, Courtney Terrell, C.J., commenting
on s¢ction 10, said:

“Now, the object of this section is merely to ensure that one person shall
not be made responsible for the acts or deeds of another until some bond in
the nature of agency’ has been established between them and the act, words,
or writing of another which it is proposed to attribute vicariously to the per-
son charged. The Act, words or Wwriling must be in furtherance of the
common desiga and after such desiga was entertained.”.

1X. NO CHANGE

7.158. Having carefully considered all aspects of the matter, we are of the
view that though according to decision, section 10 is narrowed down so as to
limit it to acts and declarations made in furtherance of the common intention
of ihe persons concerned’, yet it is not desirable to amend the section.

Judicial decision had taken the narrow view. Since there may be extra-
ordinary cases where special considerations apply, a wider view is not ruled out.

Section 10 brings out the following points:
(a) Section is an exception to hearsay;
(b) Rationale of the section is agency;
(c) Prima facie case to be proved even under the section, 1.6., reasonable

ground for belief in conspiracy should be first proved:

(9) Distinction between reasonable ground and proof;

Reasonable belief may be elevated into proof by use of the material

allowed under the section;

(® Taylor, in dealing with the corresponding English doctrine, has used

the formula “in furtherance of”. The section has used the expression

“im reference to”.

(०)

Mackay ५. Commercial Bank of New Burnswick, (1874) L. 8. 5 8. C. 394.
°Ranger v. Great Western Railway Co.
Yndra Chandra v. Emperor, ALR. 1929 Pat, 145, 146 (F.B.).
4Emphasis supplied.
See case of Mirza Ali Akbar, supra
‘Chairman's suggestion accepted.


115

(g) The words used in the section are wider than the English law, but
have been judicially narrowly construed, as already noted in the draft
report of Shri Bakshi.

Tn all ordinary cases. the narrower construction of these words will be
applied. In extraordinary situations. the scope for a wider view does
not appear to be ruled out. Even then. the evidence to be admissible
under the section should be of such direct and proximate act or state-
ment as would prove the fact of conspiracy or participation therein.

th

There is also a minor point to be noted with reference to section 10.
Curiously, the section does not link up the relevance of the facts mentioned in
the section with another “fact in issue or relevant fact”, — as do sections 6 to 9
and section 11 ef seq. Strictly speaking. the section should have the following

words at an appropriate place :

“Where the existence of the conspiracy, or the fact that any such per-
son was a party to it, is a fact in issue or a relevant fact”.

We recommend that these words. or some similar words, should also be
added at an appropriate place in the section.*

7.159. As to those words in section 10, which refer to “reasonable ground
to believe in the existence of a conspiracy. etc..”, the question may he consi-
dered whether the standard of proof should हज be expressed in more stringent
terms than at present. Occasionally, the matter js discussed. in some text hooks,
by stating that the Judge must be satisfied of the existence of an agreement het-
ween A and B — the alleged conspirators. But this does not accurately reflect
the true position even in England.

7.160. 11 appears that there are differing points of view in this regard. The
English case of R. v. Griffith’ stands at one extreme. In that case, the Court of
Criminal Appeal deprecated the practice of “rolled up conspiracy counts” and
emphasised. that in order to prove one conspiracy. there had to be evidence from
which it could be inferred that each alleged conspirator knew that there was,
or was coming into existence. a scheme 16 which he was attached — a scheme
to which there were other parties, and which scheme went beyond the act that
he had agreed to do. Where these conditions are not satisfied, the various per-
sons would not be acting in pursuance of a common criminal purpose. In this
case. there was no evidence of the conspiracy existing between one farmer or
any other farmer, and none was connected with the other.

7161. At the other extreme, are cases where there is such proof of the
existence of the conspiracy as it required by the definition of “proved” in the Act,

which is as follows :

“A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence
so probable that a prudent man ought. under the circumstances of the
particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.”

Tn between the two extremes lies the situation which frequently presents
itself. namely, that there is reasonable ground to believe that there is a conspi-
macy. though the material is not yet of that quality as would satisfy the test
required by the definition of “proved”. Tn such circumstances, section 10 comes

into play, as is clear from the opening words of the section.

1A redraft of section 10 is given, infra.
बह, v. Griffiths, (1965) 2 ANE. R. 448, 451, 453, 454.

See section 3.

Section 10 and
the words ‘rea
sonable ground’,

Differing views.

‘Proved’


116

ह 7.162, Tn the absence of any serious hardship arising from the present posi-
tion as Tegards the aspect discussed above, we are not inclined to suggest any
change in this regard in section 10.

Recommendation, 7.163. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 10
should he revised as follows:—

Revised section 10 (without the illustrations)

10. Where—
(a) the existence of a consipracy to commit an offence or an actionable
wrong, or the fact that any person was a party to such a consipracy,
is a fact in issue or a relevant fact; and

(b) there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more petsons have
entered into such conspiracy.
anything said, done or written by any of such persons in reference to
their common intention, after the time when such intention was first en-
tertained by any of them. is a relevant fact as against each of the persons
believed to be so comprising, as well for the purpose of proving the
existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such
person was a party to it.
(Mitustrations as a present. with such consequential changes as may be

required),
SECTION 11
1. INTRODUCTORY
Introductory. 7,164, Section 11 provides that facts not otherwise relevant are televant—

(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact: or
(2 if. by themselves or in connection with other facts. they make the
existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact. highly

probable or improbable.

There are two illustrations to the section. The first deals with a plea of
alibi. The second deals with facts which eliminate possible alternatives.
Discretion of 7,165, The scope of the section is. annarently, very wide 34. Clause (1) takes

courts as to col-
lateral facts, within its sween facts inconsistent with facts in issue. or relevant facts—-Clause
(2) emphasises the high degree of probability suggested by the fact sought to be

siven in evidence thereunder. But 8 certain amount of elasticity is introduced by

the wards “by itself or in connection with other facts’. There must always be

room for the exercise of discretion when the relevancy of testimony rests upon
its effect towards making the affirmative or negative of 8 proposition “highly

probable”? and with anv reasonable use of discretion. the Court of avpeal oucht
Tt has been held’ that in order that a collateral fact may

moat to interfere.*
the reauirements of the Jaw are—

he admissible as relevant under this section. 2
(a) that the collateral fact must itself be established by “normally conchusive
evidence”. and (b) that it must. when established, afford a reasonable presum-

ption or inference as to the matter in dispute.

We have not dealt with consequential chanecs in the illustrations,
2—AR. v. Prabhnt Das (1874) 11. RHLCR. 94 (Per West, 7).
See also Naro v. Narhari (1891) LR. 16 Bom. 125.

3966 also Buriva v. Ram Kali AYR. 1971 Punj. 9. 11. para. 5.
‘Sultan Khaver v. Sultan Rukha, (1904) 6 Bom. LR. 983, 985.


ui7

The expression “highly probable or improbable” in the section is, thus, very
significant, It indicates that the comection between the facts in issue and the
collateral facts sought fo be proved must be immediate’. as to render to co-
existence of the two highly probable or improbable. The relevant facts under
this section either (i) exclude, or (ii) imply more or less distinctly the exist-
tence of the facts sought to be proved.*

7.166. The theoretical justification for the section is easy to explain; it has
a part to play in the scheme of the Act. The topic of ‘relevant facts’, in general,
has been treated in sections 6, 7, 8. 9 and 10. Section 11 concludes this treat-
ment, by making a residuaty provision’ as to relevant facts. But the practical
application of the section is nat so easy. The position can be best understood

from the decided cases.

Il. ILLUSTRATIVE CASES

7.167. We may now take a few illustrative cases under the section. In a
suit for rent of land due from the defendant, the plaintiff alleged that he had
bought the land from the defendent. and had thereafter leased it to him year by
year. The defendant totally denied the sale and the Jease. Jt was held that
though the fact in issue was the lease alone. evidence might be given of the
fact of the sale also, as a relevant fact, corroborative of the fact of the lease*

Jn a Rangoon case,’ it was stated that the admissibility of a particular
evidence under section 11 in each case must depend on how near is the connec-
tion of the facts sought to be proved with facts in issue. to what degree do
they render facts in issue, probable or improbable, when taken with other
facts in the case and to what extent the admission of the evidence would be in-
consistent with principles enunciated elsewhere in the Act. In that case, A
was charged with entering into a conspiracy to bring false evidence against B
and C. All the previous acts of which evidence was to be given were acts in
which A acted against B or C, or both. Tt was held that such evidence was
admissible under section 11 (but not under section 10 and 15). The connection
was held not to be too remote.

The evidence in question indicated the state of mind of A against B and C,
and added to the probability of his having taken part in concerted action against
them. The High Court specifically decided that whether or not scction 8 was
applicable, section 11 did apply to such evidence.’

We may also refer to an Irish case. In an action for money Sent, the
poverty of the alleged lender was a relevant fact to disprove the Joan.

7.168. In a Nagpur -case’, where an oral tenancy was denied and the sale
deed in favour of the person suing as landlord was alleged to be bogus. evidence
as to the nature of the sale deed was held to be relevant on the question of exis-
tence or non-existence under section 11. In a Calcutta case* a statement in a
scheme to an arbitration award as to certain deposits made by third persons was

‘Para 7.167, infra.

28, H. Ihabrata v. Emp., ALR, 1933 All. 691, 705.

गृह support of the proposition ihat the section is a_residuary provision, sce Rangayya
v. Innasimuthu, ALR. 1956, Mad. 226, 230, para. 14 (Ramaswami J).

‘Kaung v. Sen, 3 LBR. 90.

SHtin Gyaw and Others v. Emp., A.LR. 1928 Rangoon 118, 127, 122.

SDowling v. Dowling, (1860) 10 Trish CLR. 244.

"Sikander Rashid v. Hussain, ALR. 1943 Nagpur 265, 266.

SHrishikesh v. Kantamani Dasi 4 LR. 959 Cal, 257, 259, pata. 17.

Theoreticol

justification.

Illustrative

cases.


Calamity.

Facts suggesting
an inference.

118

held to be relevant in a suit by the depositors on the basis of the award, the
suit being for directions on the receivers to pay them the sums of money which
the arbitrators found as belonging to them, though the depositors were not parties
to the proceedings before the arbitartor.

7.169, Section 11 could be utilised in cases of calamity, where two or more
persons perish at the same time. and the question is who’ survived. In England,
before the law on the subiect was regulated by statute? there was no legal pre-
sumption of survivorship or of contemporaneous death. but such a presumption
could, on the facts. be raised. having regard to the comparative age. strength
and आती) of the parties* Incidentally. we may add that on this particular point.
we are going to recommend the insertion of a specific provision‘,

Where the question at issue was about the religion of a person. a solemn
declaration by that person as to his religion has been held to be relevant under
section 11.5 The dangers of admitting hearsay under section 11 are also stressed
by a Madras case*, where a witness’s statement as to what a deceased person
had told him regarding the ownership of the property alleged to have been stolen
was held to be inadmissible. since it did not fall under section 32. We shall
discuss this aspect in detail] later?

7.170. In a Calcutta case’. the proceedings were for the taking of security
from certain persons, who were alleced to be members of a gang of swindlers,
the allegation being that they hab‘tunfly committed cheating and extortion, being
members of a gang formed for this purpose. It was held that the fact that the
person proceeded against was a member of an organisation formed for habitual
cheating, was relevant under section 11.

गा. FACTS SUGGESTING AN INFERENCE

4.77. In many of these cases. the decision as to the applicability of section
11 may he said to agree with common sense. Difficult question, however. arise
concerning facts suggesting an inference. The Calcutta case of Booth v. Erp?
is interesting in this context. On January J3. 1913, one Kali Charan, handed
over to Cox & Co. (Shipping agents in Calcutta). a bill of lading and invoice
relating to certain goods then on board the steamship, “Borneo”, and paid them
Rs. 30/- on account of clearing charges. The invoice described the goods cover-
ed by it as 6 bales of old wearing apparel. shipped bv C. Potter & Co. of
London. to one Ram Prasad at Darjeeling, containing 900 ladies’ jackets. The
bill of jading stated the goods to be 6 packages of old wearing apparel “RP.
Darjeeling Via Calcutta Nos. 479 to 484” and purported to bear the endorse-
ments of C. Potter & Co. and Ram Prasad. The goods arrived in Calcutta
by the ship “Borneo” and were seized in the Customs House before clearance.
They were opened on the same day to Cox & Co. to receive delivery. but was
taken to the Customs House and was ultimately made over to the police. placed
on trial and convicted by the Chief Presidency Magistrate of usiawfully
importing and being in possession of the cocaine in violation of section 46 and
52 of the Bengal Excise Act, 1909. On revision, the Higk Court altered the con-
viction te one of attempting to import cocaine under sectian 61 of that Act.

TWoodroffe.

Section 184, Law of Property Act, 1925.

जगह v. Booth, (1841) 11 Law Journal Chancery 41.

See sections 107-108 ard 108-A. infra.

SLeone Hone Waing v. Leon Ah Foon. A.LR. 1930 Rangoc~ e

‘In re Doraswamti Iyer, 16 Criminal Law Journal 640

See “Statements how far relevant”, infra.

8Kalu v. Emperor, .L.R. 37, Caleutta 91.

*8Booth v. Emp. (1914) LLR. 41 Cal. 545 (Mookerjee andReachcroft J)


119

7.472. It appears that the appelisnt, Booth, was also suspected by the
customs authorities in connection with the above transaction, and, before Kali
Charan was convicied, the customs authoritics had obtained an order to detain all
letieis addressed to G. Potter & Co., Losdon, aud, later on, also obtained an
order to stop the deiivery of all सास addressed to the appellant, Booth, A
letter addressed to C. Potter & Co, dated 28th January, 1913, was, accordingly,
intercepted at the Post ollice und was found to be entirely in the hand-writing of
the eppelluut, Booth, iwo telegrams purporting to have been sent by C. Barker,
7A, Canning Street - the busivess place of the zppellant Booth - were also inter-
cepted by the authorities. Of these, one was addressed 10 the telegraphic address
of C. Paticr & Co, and the other to some other name, each containing the single
word “Mila”. The other addressee was, or had been, a partner of the appellant.
‘The handwriting of the game and address of the seuder in the telegram was found
10 have been liai of the appellant. Two letters posted in England and address-
ed 10 the appeiiant, of which one slated “your mills received”, were also intes-
cepted at the post office and delivery withheld.

The appeliant was tried before tbe Secoad Presidency Magistrate for unlaw-
fully imperting cocaine, and convicicd. [here was an appeal to the High Court.
The principal argument on bebalf of the wppellant was that the only evidence on
which the comvictiou could be based was the letter dated 28th January, 1913,
addressed by the appellant 10 C. Potter & Co. The letters posted in England and
addressed to the appellant never came into his possession. They were not, there-
fore, admissible against him, according to his contention, As regards the jelter
dated 28th January, 1913, written by the appellant, it was contended thai it was
not written by him, and even if it was written by him, it only showed partner-
ship with consignor of the goods. The consignors were the exporters from
London, but they were mot importers into Beagal. The importer under the
Bengai Act is the buyer im india. Ibe property im the guods passed to Ram
Prasad, and uo connection was shown between Ram Prasad and ihe accused,
and, therefore, there was no importation into Bengal on behalf of the accused.

7.473. Dismissing the appeal, the Calcutta High Court held, first : that the
Jeticr way written by the appellant; secondly, that even though the ietter was not
signed, it was well-seitled that a iplier written by the accused person, when self-
disserving, is prima jacic evidence agaiust him, if it relates disiinctly to a rele-
vant point. It is enough uf it is Waced to the writer (im this case, the hand-
writing was proved to be thar of the appellant on the expert evidence of Mr.
Hardless and other evidence). Thirdly, 1६ was immaterial डिक the accused was
not the consignee; he was certainly a imporicr, and he did atiempt to import
cocaine in contravention of the law, even though it was noi possible io deter-
ininy with precision the benefil that might have accrued to him under a successful
venture, Fourthly — and this is the point most material for ihe purpose of
section 11-—“ihe fact that a reply from Potter & Co., posted immediately atter
the telegram purporting to be sent by C. Barker and referring to the telegram,
was addressed to Boul, would be a relevant fact under section 11 of the Evi-
dence Act’ and cogent evidence to show that Booth was the sender of the
telegram”. The High Court followed the English case of Queen v. Cooper’ on
this point. in that case, A was charged wiih obtaining and attempting to obtain
money by false pretences from four persons by an advertisement offering employ-
ment to al! who seat him one shilling in stamps. Letters from 282 other persons
expressed to be in answer to the advertisement, and each enclosing twelve one

‘Emphasis supplied.
2Queen ¥. Cooper, (1875) 1 Queen's Bench Division 19.

9131 LAD/ND/77


Statements how
far relevant.

Different shades
of view—First
view.

Second view.

120

penny stamps, were held to be admissible, although the letters had been intercept-
ed at the post office and had never, in fact, reached A and could consequently
be deemed at best, only constructively in his possession.

7.174. While the above Calcutta case is one where section 11 was applicd,
we may refer to another Calculta case,' where the section was regarded as inappli-
cable. A and B were charged with theft committed in 1914 in the house of a
Prostitute; evidence was brought forward lo show thal C and D commited «
theft in the Aowse of another prostitute in 1918, in somewhat sinular circum
stances. It was beld thai the evidence was not admissible either under section 9
or under section [1 to prove that A and B were the same persons as C and D.
Presumably, the court did not regard the earticr theft as rendering the fact in
issue in ihe present case “highly probable”,

IV. STATEMENT HOW FAR RELEVANT

7.75. 1: is now time to examine the question whether section 11 can be
pressed into service for admitting into evidence statements which are not admis-
sible under section 32 or other specific provision of the Act. This has been the
subject matter of considerable controversy”. From the judicial decisions on the
subject, several shades of view can be discerned.

7.176. The first view on the subject is that section 11 must be read subject
to the other provisions of the Act, and a statement not satisfying the conditions
laid down in sections 32-33 cannot be admitted, merely on the ground that it imay
render lughly probabi: or improbable a fact in issue or a relevant fact. This
view is represented by the Madras." and eurlier Allahabad cases.3,3.» The view
is based ou ihe reasoning that section 32-33 are exhaustive ot the law relating to
relevancy of statements made by persons mentioned ip sections 32 and 33.

7.177. In the Madras case,‘ the defendant relicd on certain documents
between third parties showing that the limits of an estate extended to certain
property. It was contended that these documents had been wrongly rejected by
the trial court, 800 one of the sections under which the documents were admissible
was section 11. Rejecting this contention, Varadhachariar J. observed: “As
regards section 11, it seems to us that section 11 must be read subject 10 the
other provisions of the Act and that a statement not satisfying the conditions
laid down in section 32 cannot be admitted merely on the ground that, if ad-
mitted, it may probabilise or improbabilise a fact in issue or relevant fact.”

7,178. The second view, which is a slight variation of the first, is repre-
sented by a Mysore case.’ It is based on the reasoning that section 11 deals with
facts, while section 32 deals with statements. This view does not agree that sec-
tion 32 controls section 11. According to the second view, on a proper construc-
tion, statements falling under seclion 32 are excluded from the scope of section
1. Recitals found in documents which are not between the parties are not,
according to this view, “facts”, within the meaning of that word in section 11"

मर, v. Panchu Das, (1920) 1.1..0. 47 Cal. 671; ALR. 1920 Cal. 500 (#, B.) (Chaudhuri 5,
dissenting), followed in Katabuddin, ALR. 1927 Cal. 230.

*Ravjappa v. Nilakanta Rao, A.LR. 1962 Mysore 53, 61. (Hedge and Mir Iqbal Hus-
sain JJ.) (reviews case-low).

2a. Sevugan Chettair v. Rughunatha, ALR. 1940 Mad. 273.

Rela Rani v. Mahabir Singh, (1912) LL.R. 34 Ail. 341.

“a. Naima Khalim, ALR. 1934 All. 406, 409 (Sulaiman C. 1. and Young 1).

'Sevagan Chettiar, v. Raghunath, AIR. 1940 Madras 273, 278 (Varadachariar and
Abdur Rehman JJ.).

SRoyianpa v. Nilakunta Rao, AR. 1962 Mysore 53, 61. para. 35

‘Kalappa v. Bhima Guvind, A1.R. 1961 Mysore, 160.


121

There is also a Calcutta ruling', substantially to the same effect.
y

7.179. According to the third view’, such recitals are inadmissible because
they caimot have such probative force. A recent Punjab‘?* case gives this as

one of the reasons for not applying section 11.

7.480. The fourth vicw is that slatements can be admissible under section 11
evea when they are not admissible under section 32. This is represented by
certain Bombay,’ Calcutta,' and, later, Allahabad’ cases. The reasoning on which
this view is based was lucidly stated by Desai J. in au Allahabad case:*

“There is no connection between the provisions of sections 1! and 32
and there is no justification for saying that oue section is dependent on the
other. As a matter of fact, each section creates new relevant facts; if a
fact is relevant under section 1], evidence about it can be given as permitted
by section 5 even though it may not be relevant under section 32. If there
is one provision under which a fact becomes a relevant fact, it can be proved
tegardless of whether it is made relevant under some other provision or not,

“If a fact is relevant under section 32, it can be proved notwithstand-
ing that it is not relevant under section 11 and to say that a fact relevant
under section 11 cannot be proved unless it is covered by the provisions of
section 32 is nothing short of striking out section 1] from the Evidence Act.
When section 32 itself is sufficient to allow a fact to be proved, it would have
becn futile for the legislature to enact section 11, if a fact made relevant by
that section would not be proved unless it was also relevant under section

32”.

7.181. This question—-ie, the question whether statements made by a
third person can be relevant under section I1- 4s, thus, a difficult one. In our
opinion, on the present wording, the fourth view’ is the most cogent. No doubt,
the court must exercise a sound discretion and see that the connection between
the fact to be proved and the fact sought to be given under section 11 to prove it
is so immediate as to render the co-existence of the two highly probable." But
it is legitimate to read sections 11 and 32 independently of each other. ‘The
section, it should be remembered, makes admissible only those facts which are
of great weight in bringing the court to a conclusion one way or the other as
regurds the existence or the non-existence of the fact in question. The admissi-
biliiy under this, section must, in each case, therefore, depend on how near is the
connection of the facts sought to be proved with the facts in issue when taken
with other facts in the case.

Subject (o this observation, section 11 does not exclude statements as such
on its present wording.

7.182. A similar controversy exists as to recitals in documents. In the case
of Dwarka Nath y. Mukunda Lal," it was held that documents though not inter
partes, which contain recitals that a particular land belongs to a particular tenure

1Radha Krishna v. Sarbeswad, ALR. 1925 Cal. 68402).

2Bhuriya v. Ram Kale, A..R. 1971 Punj. 9, 11, para. 5 (A. 0. Koshal, 1.).

2-0 Bhuriya v. Rum Kale, supra,

5R. D. Sethana v. Mirza Mohd. (1907) 9 Bom, Law Reporter 1047 (Beaman J.) (Factum
of statement).

‘Ambica Charan ९. Kumar Mohan, A.L.R. 1928 Cal 893, 895, see Factum of statement.

SHakurji v. Parmeshwar Dyal, ALR. 1960 All, 339 (Ray J).

°State v. Jagdeo (1955) All. Law Journal 380.

"Para. 7.180, supra.

'Rangaayyan v. Innasimuthu, AIR, 1954 Mad. 226, 230, para. 14.

*Dwarka Nath v. Mukunda Lal, (1906) 5 C.L.J. 55 cited in Field on Evidence.

Third view.

Fourth view,

Question a difficult

one.

Whether recitals in

documents
inter partes
admissible,

not
are


122

which is in question, are admissible in evidence under either section 11(b) or
section 13, although they are not conclusive or binding evidence, and may be

very weak evidence or even of no weight at all.’

A contrary view was, however, taken in the Calcutta case of Abdul Ali v.
Svea Rajan’ and in the later case of Ketabuddin.>

In at Patna case’, a statement by a lady witness was held admissible “at least
under section 11”, though the statement was in her favour and in a document
not égter paries. In that case, however, it was used as explaining her other
statements.

7.183. The difficuliy of the subject is illustrated by the fact that Dr. Justice
Mookerjee, who, in Bisteswar Dayal v. Harbuns Sahay’ had apparently held that
a document of this nature was admissible in evidence under the provisions of
sections 11 and 13, aliered his view in Abdallah v. Kunj Behari Lal where be
held that a document of this nature was not admissible in evidence under the
provisions of sections 1] and 13,—thus differing from the view which he had
previously expressed, In Saroj Kumar vy. Umed Ali, again, the question was
regarded as not free from doubt, by two other judges.

Calcutta cases.

in P. N. Choudhury’s case’, it was definitely held that recitals in docu-
ments between third paities were not admissible under section 11 or section 13.

Recitals as to 7.184. The same controversy exists on the more particular question whether
boundaries. Tecitals as to boundaries of other lands in documents between third parties are
admissible,

Some of the cases referred to above,’-" related to recitals about boundaries

In the Calcutta case of Brajeswari Prasud y. Budhunudhi,” it was held:

“A recital in a decd or other instruments is in some cases conclusive, and
in all cases evidence, as agaiust the parties who make it. Bat it is no more
evidence as against third persons than any other statement would be.”

In another Calcuita cuse,* a statement appearing in the Schedule attached
to the order for delivery of possession as to the rent payuble for the holding
was heid inadmissible ia evidence in a suil between the landlord and the tenant
in which the rent payable is in dispute.

7.185. In a Calcutta case reported” in 1923, it has been held that
when 4 cucument bas been admitted in evidence as evidence of a ‘transaction’,

‘See also—
ja) CRhatradhani Manton v. Akiashwar Mahion, AAR. 1952 Pat. 382;
(b) Raghu Nath v. Bindershri, ALR. 1924 Ail. 520;
(० Katori v. Om Parbash, ALR. 1935 AH. 351;
(4) Thakur v. Lalji, ALR. 1934 Pat. 31.
*Abdul Ali v. Syea Rajan, (1913) 19 C.W.N, 465.
\Ketabuddin v. Nafar Chandra, AIR. 1927 Cal. 230.
"Under Deo ४. Deon Karan, A.L.R. 1955 Pat. 292, 294 (D-B.).
*Bisheshwar Dayal v. Harbans Suhay, (1907) 6 C.L.J. 659.
%Abdullak ए. Kunj Behari Lal, 1911) 16 C.W.N, 252, 257.
"§aroj Kumar v. Umed Ali, ALR. 1922 Cal. 251.
“Pp, N. Choadhury v. हू, C. Bhattacharjee, A.I.R. 1924 Cai. 1067.
"Abdullah v. Kunj Behari Lal, (1911) 16 C.W.N, 252.
"Save; Kumar v. Umed Ali, AAR. 1922 Cal. 251, 253 (Question not free from difficulty).
“Brajeshwari Prasad पर. Budhanudhi, (1880) LL.R. 6 Cai. 268.

“Pramatha Nath Choudhri vy. Krishna Chandra Bhattacharjee. AIR, 1924 Cal. 1067;
Chandra Mohan Talikdar v. Shaikh Elim, A.LR. 1926 Cal. 415.

Nihar पर. Kador, AUR. 1923 Cal. 299.


123

the recitals therein are not evidence, especially if they are not used as assertions
by a person who is alive and who might have heen brought before the court as
a witness. Jn the same year, however, there is another case! in which a state-
ment by a party, in a document not inter partes, was admitted.

7,186A. Keeping the judicial decisions in mind, it would be convenient to
state briefly the position in regard to recitals of boundaries, in documents. Cases
falling under this hcad may be divided into three classes:

(a) When the recital is in a document ‘iter partes’. In such a case, the
recital is a joint statement made by the parties to the document and,
therefore, relevant against all of them as an admission’.

(>) When the recital is in a document between a party and a stranger.
In such a case, the recital is relevant against the party as an admis-
sion, but is not admissitle in his favour? unless the fact recited is
deposed to in court by the executent of the document, in which case
the recital wil! become admissible‘ to corroborate the evidence of
the executant’ or to contradicts’ such evidence’:

(से When the recital is in a document between strengers. It is well-
settled that a recital as to boundaries in documents between third
parties is not ordinarily admissible to prove possession or title as
against a person who js not a party to the document. However, if
the recital can come within the relevancy and admissibility cortem-
plated by (a) section 11: (9) section 13; (c) section 3203): and

(d) sections 155 end 157, then an exception may arise. The scope of
section |] in this regard is controversial, as already stated’. The
scope of section 32(3) is also controversial in this regard.

V. QUESTION OF AMENDMENT CONSIDERED

7.187. Having taken note of the above controversy. we have addressed
ourselves to the question whether any amendment in the section is needed and,
if so. on what lines. We have already expressed our opinion” that on the present
language of th section, the fourth view jis the most cogent. On the present
languaze. we find it difficult to reconcile ourselves to the view that the section
(as it now stands) excludes statements as to facts. In many other sections of
the Act, “facts” are taken as including statements. In section 6, for example,
illustration (a) makes this clear. Section 9, illustrations (@) and (2), may also
be seen. It is well-known that most of the teported decisions under section 6
(res gestae), have been concerned with statements spontaneously made in con-
nection with a dramatic event. Same is the position as resards seclion है, where-
under complaints are specifically relevant as facts influenced by conduct—vide
illustrations (j) and {k) to that section. The position with reference to sections
7 and many other sections is not, in its essence, different. We may also add

\Saeruddin v. Sanuruddin, ALR. 1923 Cal, 378.
*Section 21.

Xa) Radha Krishna v. Saradeswar, ALR. 1925 Cal. 6842)(8);
(b) Daulat Shak v. Bishan Das, ALR. 1934 Cal. 750.
‘Section 157.

'Ketabudin v. Nafar, ALR. 1927 Cal. 230.
*Ambicacharan ५, Kumud Mohun, ALR. 1923 Cal. 893
*Dasmal v. Sunder Singh. ALR. 1937 Lah. 489.

*Para. 7.182 to para, 7.184, supra

3566 para 7.181. supra.

para. 7.180. supra.

Recitals

as 0

boundaries — Po-
sition briefly sum-

med up.

Present

language

wide enough to

cover

statements.


Judicial teluc-
tance to admit
statements.

Stephen's sugges-
tion to exclude
statements.

Need for amend-
ment,

Recommendation.

124

that section 11 begins with the words “Facts not otherwise relevant”, and these
words show beyond doubt that the section, as it now stands, is not controlled
by any other section making certain facts relevant.

7.188. Nevertheless, we do not recognise jcdicial reluctarre to allow sec-
tion [1 to be uscd for proving statements. This reluctance shows that courts

have considered it unwise to construe section 1! widely, and have, in the inte-
rests of justice, considered it essential to read some limitations therein, though
such limitations do not flow from the literal text of the section. We are, there-

fore, of the view that the matter should be put beyond doubt, and that the sec-
tion should, in its wording, be brought nearer to what has in practice been
its interpretation by some of the most eminent of Indian Judges; by excluding
statements from its ambit by an express provision.

7.189. Stephen seems to have anticipated the problem. We find’ that he
suggested that the meaning of the section would have been more fully expressed,
if words to the following effect had been added to it:—

“No statement shall be regarded as rendering the matter stated highly
probable within the meaning of this section, unless it is declared to be a
relevant fact under some other section of the Act.”,

7.190. We have, after careful consideration, come to the conclusion that
statements should be excluded for the reasons already mentioned.’ The form
in which the amendment should be couched, however, requires some consideration.
If the form suggested by Stephen’ is adopted. the section would become some-
what otiose, because, if a statement is also relevant under some other section,
there is no point in treating it as relevant under this section. We are, vherefore,
of the vicw that the amendment should be as suggested below:

7.191. Our recommendation is that section 11 should be amended by
inserting an Exception on the following lines :—

“Exception—Evidence shall not, by virtue of this section, he given of
व Statement, whether by a party or by any other person; but nothing in this
Exception is to affect the relevance of a statement under any other section.” .

1Waradachariar 1, and Mookerjee J.

38tephen, Introduction to the Evidence Act, pages 160-161
Para. 7.188, supra.

‘Para, 7.189, supra.


CHAPTER है
RELEVANCY IN PARTICULAR CASES

8.4. Sectiuns 5 to 11, which were dealt with in the previous Chapter,’ were
concerned with certain facts that would be relevant in the generality of case:
With section 12 begins a group of sections dealing with facts that are relevant
in particular cases.

8.2. Section 12 provides that in suits in which damages are claimed, any
fact which will enable the court to determine the amount of damages which
ought to be awarded, is rclevant. The section. of course, postulates the exist-
ence of the liability to pay damages. It does not deal with the principles of
liability to pay damages.

8.3. According to Maync*, damages are the pecuniary satisfaction obtain-
able by success in an action.

8.4. Facts which show the extent of the Joss are relevant under section 12.

Sometimes, actual damages—often called special damage*’—must be proved in
order to show a cause of action in a tott not actionable per se. Ta such cases,

it is a fact in issue, since the existence of the liability depends thereon.

85, There are some points which may be relevant both for the purposes of
limitation and for the purpose of damages. For example, the dis! ion bet-
ween continuing and other torts is important, both with regard to damages
and with regard to limitation for suits.* As regards limitation, a fresh period
of limitation begins to run at every moment of time during which the breach

of contract or the tort continues.

8.6. Where the defendant has committed a continuing tort, (such as, a
private nuisance), the damages are assessed so as to compensate the plaintiff
for the harm suffered until the date of the trial. If the defendant continues
the tart after that, the plaintiff can bring fresh proceedings, to obtain compen-
sation for the further injury suffered until the second trial. He can suc “from
day to day” or do die in diem, until the defendant discontinues the rort.

8.7. On the other hand, where the tort is noi a continuing tort’ the plaintiff
can sue only once. He does not get a fresh starting point for limitation. The
damages have also to be assessed once and for all. The future consequences
of the tort have to be assessed and evaluated, as well as the losses actually

suffered already.

8.8. It may be noted also that the definition of “fact in issue” in the Act*
covers facts from which, inter alia, the extent of any liability asserted in any
suit or proceeding necessarily follows. In suits in which damages are claimed.
therefore, the amount of the damages is a fact in issue. So long as the evidence
pertaining to damages is confined to arithmetical calculations to indicate the

2Mayne on Damages, cited in Kameshwar Rao, Damages (1953), page 15
SIversun v. Moore. (1699) 1 Ld. Ray 486, 488 (per Gould J.)

‘Section 22, Limitation Act, 1963.

SAbdulla v, Abdulla, A.LR. 1924 Bom. 290.

"Section 3—“fact in issue”.

125

Introductary,

Section 12.

Points relevant
fot limitation as
well as damages,

Evidence of dav
mages under sec-
Gon 5.


Questions of de-
tail,

Suits for defama-
tion as illustrative
aggravating factor.

Principles of da-
mages matters of
substantive law.

126

extent of the harm caused by a breach of contract or tort such evidence would
be admissible under section 5, being directly, related to a fact in issue, and
Tecourse to section 12 is not necessary for admitting such evidence,

8.9. However, very often, questions of detai! may arise in relation 10
damages. The principles on which damages arc to be assessed belong to the
domain of the substantative Jaw applicable १0 the case,—for example. the question
as to when damages may he recovered, the amount of damages recoverable in
particular suits, the defence which can he nleaded, ard the like. The facts
necessary for applying these principles, however. could be of wide variety. It
is, apparently, for this reason (1१ section 12 does not specify how the facts
made relevant by the section are to be related with the interest injured by the
civil wrong that constitutes the cause of action. It lays down, in general words,
that evidence which wil] enable the court “to determine” the amourt of dama-
ges, is admissible. This would certainly include evidence which tends to in-
crease or diminish the damages.’

8.10. Thus, for example, in a suit for damages for defamation, where injury
to the fectings is an element to be considered in computing the quantum of
damages, this aspect is of importance. The circumstances of time and place—
the time when, and the place where, the defamatory insue was given—require
different damages. As has been said* by Bathurst J., “it is a greater insult to
be beaten upon the Royal Exchange than in a private room”.

8.11. We have already stated' that the principles on which damages may
be awarded are outside the Jaw of evidence. These are matters of substantive
jaw, and may not necessarily be the same in all countries. German law, for
example, does not deny some element of retribution or satisfaction as a moti-
vation for the award of damages. Somewhat similar is the position in Swiss
Jaw.’ The principle in these two continental countries—in respect of non-mate-
rial injury—is that of “mollifying” or giving satisfaction to the plaintiff.

8.12, The principle of full compensation for the wrong committed could
include not only out-of-pocket damages (danum emergens) and loss of profits
(lucrum cessans), but also those outlays and expense which are the inevitable
consequences of the wrong complained of. What should and should not be re-
garded as such consequence, is for the substantive law.

8.13. Factors which are, and which are not, — to use Lord Denning’s
phrase* “uncompensatable”, are matters for the substantive Jaw. For
example, even in proprietary actions, there is (in England) a disinclination to
gtant compensation for sentimental attachment of the plaintiff to a piece of
property damaged by the defendant.*

8.14. As we have already stated. section 12 pre-supposes the existence of
the relevant principles, and provides, in effect, that evidence is admissible of
facts which may bring those principles into play. We shall indicate the princi-
ples below.

1566 Norton, page 124, cited by Woodroffe.
'Tullidge v. Wade, (1769) 3 Wills 19.
‘Paragraph 8.2.

‘Stoll, “Penal purposes in the Law of Torts”, (1970) 18 American Joutnal of Com-
parative Law 3.

"Hinz v. Berry, (1970) 2 Queen's Bench 49 (Court of Appeal).
"Daorbishire v. Waren, (1963) 1 Weekly Law Reports 1067 (C.A.).


127

8.15. The application of the section will vary according to the nature of the
cause of action, as well as according to the other-circumstances. In actions for
breach of contract, for example, apart from the damages which would be award-
ed for the loss arising naturally from the breach of contract,—i.e., according to
the usual course of things -damages can be claimed for such loss as may reason-
ably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of the parties as the pro-
bable result of this breach. Hence, the special circumstances under which the
contract was made, if communicated by one party to the other, might be relevant
under section 12.1

8.16. As to the consequences of breach of contract, the Indian Contract
Act® provides as follows :—

73. When a contract has been broken, the patty who suffers by such
breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract,
compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which natu-
rally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the
parties knew, when they made the contfact, to be likely to result from the
breach of it.

“Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect
loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach.

“When an obligation resembling those created by contract has been
incurred and has not been discharged, any person injured by the failure
to discharge it is entitled to receive the same compensation from the party
in default, as if such person had contracted to discharge it and had breken
his contract.

EXPLANATION.—in estimating the [055 or damage arising from a
breach of contract, the means which existed of remedying the inconveni-
ence caused by the non-performance of the contract must be taken into
account”,

8.17, According to this section, in estimating the loss or damage for which
compensation is made recoverable in cases of breach of contract, the following
broad rules ate to be followed as guidelines,

(1) Damages recoverable must be such as naturally arise in the usual
course of things from the breach of contract; or

(2) It must be damage which the parties knew, when they made the
contract, to be likely to result from the breach;

(3) Such damage must in neither case be remote or indirect; and

(4) In both cases, the means which existed of remedying the inconveni-
ence caused by the non-performance of the contract, that is to say.
from the breach, must be taken into account.

8.18. In actions for tort also, apart from general damages, special damages
can be sought. Evidence required to assess special damages will be parti-
cularly relevant under section 12,

8.19. Evidence useful for determining the amount of damages under sec-
tion 12 could, therefore, be of wide variety. In cases where a claim is for com-
pensation for death, specialised evidence may, for example, be useful. Prepa-
ration of the analysis of gross and net eatnings of a deceased person may re-
quire the help of accountants. An actuary can give evidence of the life

‘Compare Victoria Laundry Windson v. Newman (1946) 2 All. 8. R. 806.
*Section 73, Indian Contract Act, 1872.

Application

vary.

Consequences

breach
tract,

of

will

of
con-

Section 73, (कक
tract Act analys-

Torts,

Variety
dence.

of

evi-


Awards in similar

cases,

Breach of

con-

tract of marriage.

Character.

Statements

Non-material
Josses.

Reason for com-

pensation,

Mental —_ anguish

and breach
contract.

of

128

expectancies of the deceased and beneficiaries. Evidence of ordinary witnesses
might be required to show the prospects of the deceased increasing or decreasing
his income, and the probable benefits that would flow to his family. Even the
evidence of economists as to the cost of Hving and similar factors may be useful.”
While the court cannot compe! a physical examination of a claimant, the health
of claimants may be relevant? In an English casc,' Phillimore J.. while refusing
to speculate on the tkelibood of the re-marriage of a widow. suggested that the
statistics of the various ages at which women re-marry might be appropriate.

8.20, In assessing the amount of damages. the court can also take into
consideration awards in similar cases.‘

8.21. Similarly, in an action for breach of contract of marriage. injury to
feclings would enter into the realm of damages.’

8.22. In certain cases. character of the parties may be relevant in regard to
damages: this is specifically dealt with by another section.’ In actions for seduc-
tion or enticement. the character of the woman may be relevant for mitigating
the damages,

8.23. Statements may be admissible under section 12, on the facts. Where
a defamatory statements.’ imputine misconduct to a man in relation to his step-
daughter, is the foundation of the suit, and. in defence, tfuth is pleaded, evi-
dence that the slen-dauchter hersclf had been spreading rumours abroad that
her step-father hat been making improper advances to her, is relevant under
section 12. in order to assist the court in assessing the damages awarded,”
though it is mere hearsay as regards the truth of the libel.

8.24. In cases of grave personal injury, the level of awards for pain and
suffering is often high, particulorly in Westetn countries, This is because there
cannot be any precise and objective yardstick for translating non-material losses

into monetary terms.

8.25, The question may be asked why the law should measure, in monetary
terms. losses which have no monetary dimension. In 1900, Lord Halsbury said’
“What manly mind cares about pain and suffering that is past.” The answer is
that monetary compensation is the best that the Jaw can afford. It is often
pointed out that in assessing “general” damages, the law usually purports to
give compensation and not restitution.”

8.26. In recent times, the question how far damages can be awarded for
mental anguish as a result of breach of contract has also come up prominently,
—for example, in cases when promised accommodation in a hotel or elsewhere
has not been given by travel agencies or others undertaking such obligation by
contract,” and this failure on their part has spoiled a holiday.

ingallert v. Mc onagle, (1969) 2 All. ६. R. 178.

Baugh v. Delta Water Fittings Ltd., (1971) 3 All. ४. R. 258.

"Buckley v. John Allen etc. Ltd., (1967) 1 All, E. R. 539.

‘Waldon v. War Office, (1956) 1 W.L.R. 51.

5Hamson ५. Great Northern Railway Company, 36 Law Journal Exchequer 20.
Section 55.

'Me Sein Tin v. U. Kvaw Maung, A.LR. 1936 Rang. 332.

Apparently as increasing the extent of herm owing to repetition of the libel.
°The Medina (1900) A.C. 113, 117.

British Transport Commission v. Curley, (1956) AC. 185. 208, 212 (House of Lords).
UUryis v. Swan Tours, (1973) 1 All. England Reports 71.


129

8.27 In an action on an alleged libel appearing in the Saturday Evening Judge

Judge Wymanski’s careful and detailed charge’ to the jury is a classic. He said---

“In a libel suit? the appropriate measure of damages is the loss of re-
putation suffered by the plaintiff, the physical pain which he has suffered
and the mental anguish which he has snffered.

“You will note that I have said the svffering must be by him. aot by
others.

“You cannot, under any circumstances, include punitive damages. You
may, however, properly take into account malice, if you find that there is
malice, and you may enhance damages on account of malice.

“You are entitled to take into account the standing of the plaintiff
in the community and group in which he moves. You are entitled to take
into account the extent of the publication of which complaint is made. All
those are proper elements.

“Under the pleadings in this case, no special damage of a technical
nature is alleged, and so you cannot consider any pecuniary toss which the
plaintiff may have suffered, nor can you consider the loss of an election,
if the loss of the election was in any way attributable to the publicetion.
You must forget that entirely......

“As to damages—damages ate an clement about which a Judge has no
better knowledge than a jury. You are practical men. You know what
the consequences practically are of articles which are defamatory and not
true or privileged, and articles which are defamatory and are imaticious.

“J do not suggest that this article is defamatory or maficious or untrue
or unprivileged. 1 take no position on tha: matter. That is for you. But
if you should decide that you have to consider the question of damages,
then, gentlemen, your experience is sufficient fo decide the matter, and
twelve of you are much better estimators than I alone would be.”.

" s
Post. the jury. returning after 11 hours, was unable to agree and was excused. the jury.

Wyman-

charge

8.28. According to some English cases, there is an evident distinction, Damages

almost etymological in nature—between the terms “damages” and “compensa-
tion”, While the term “damages” is used in reference to pecuniary recompense
awarded in reparation for a loss or injury caused by a wrongful act or omission,
the term “compensation” is used in relation to a lawfal act which caused the
‘injury in respect of which an indemnity is obtained under the provisions of a
particular statute.

8.29. Thus, Esher MLR. said,? “The expression compensation is not ordi-
natily used as equivalent for damages. Jt is used in relation to a lawful act which
has caused injury. Therefore, that word would not, I think, include damages at
Jarge.”*-’ We shall revert to this aspect later.

compensation.

8.30. It may be noted that so far as the expression “damages” is concerned. Damages
it is confined to civil cases, but the legal system of many countries imposes an Compensation.

obligation on the criminal court to deal with claims for compensation, The

Iurley v. Curtis Pub. Co., 48 F. Supp. 29 (D. Mass. 1942).

2Gregory and Kelven, Cases and Materials on Torts (1969), page 1039.
L pepe M.R,, in Dixon v. Caleraft, (1892) 1 0.8. 458; 61 L.J.Q.B. 529; 66

‘See also Mookerjee, J. in Muhammad Mazaharal Ahad ¥. Muhommad Azimuddin,
ALR. 1923 Cal. 507, 511.

‘See also per Fazl Ali, J. in Ram Rachhya Singh v. Raghunath Prasad, A.1.R. 1930
Pat. 46, 49, 50.

to

and

and


Compensation in
criminal court.

Provisions

for

compensation — in
criminal Codes.

Ancient
Law.

Hindu

130

provision may be framed in terms of “punishment”, or as a direct one for
compensation. But whet be the form adopted, the principal idea is prompt
payment of reparation to fhe victims for the injury caused by the affender.

8.31. Briefly, the position in this regard’ is as under: (i) some countries
require the court to deal with claims for damages against the accused,—eg.
Cubs, Mexien, Peru. Portugal. Colombia, Uruguay, even if the victim has not
anplied: (ji) some countries permit the court to deal with such claims, if made

hy the victim rance, Spain, Chile, Venezuela. and some Provinces of
Argentina: मी) come countries relegate the claim for damages to civil courts.
This is the treditinnal rositio> in most common law countries, apparently be-
couse the Crewn’s rizht to forfeit the property of the felon had, in ancient times,
precedence over private claims: (iv) some countfies empower the crimina} court
to award compensation. but without a right to demand compensation to any
person. India is in this last catecory:? (v) Fn some countries, the State under-
tekes to pay compensation. Such a scheme is in force in England (non-statu-
tory) since 1964. and in some other countries {by siatute—e.g. in some States
of the U.S.A). :

8.32. In the Criminal Codes of some countnes. there is a mandatory provi-
sion for compensation. For example. the provision in Peru’ is as follows: —

“In case of rane. seduction, chduction or indecent assaule upon a
woman, the offender shall 2lso be sentenced to pay a special compensation
to the victim if she is a single woman or a widow, according to his means
and to support any offspring which may result in the same cases. the offen-
der shall be exonerated from the effects of the sentence “if he marries the
victim with her full consent after she is returned to the custody of her
father, euardian or some other place.”

8.33. In ancient du law, the law-givers were fully aware of the necessity
of directly compensating the victim of the crime. Thus, Manu’ says~-

“If a limb is injured, 8 sound {is caused) or blood (flows, the assilan?
shall be made to pay (to the sufferer) the expenses of the cure, or the whole
{both the usual amercement and the expenses of the cure as a) fine (to
the King).”

Manu also says:

“He who damoges the goods of another, be it intentionally or unin-
tentionally, shall give satisfaction to *he (owner) and pay to the king a
fine equal to the (damages).”

Mann, this, nrovides for direct reparation to the victim of the crime apart
from pavment or fine to the king (the State). Brihaspati says:§

“He who injures 2 limb. or divides it, or cuts it off, shall be compelled

to pay the exrenses of curing it: and (who forcibly took an article in a
quarreD restore his plunder.”

“A merchant wha conceals the blemish of an article which he is selling.
or mixes bad and cood articles together, or sells (old afticles) after repair
ing them. shall be compelled to give the double quantity (fo the purchaser)
and to pay a fine equal (in amount) to the value of the atticle.”

Jemin«, in Book Review in (1973) 2! ALCL. 614. 615.
See section 357. Cr. P.C.. infra.
Article 204. Criminal Cede of Pema. HELA. Cooper “Sexnal offiences in Peru”.
(1973) 21 Am Journal Comp. Law 113. footnote 133.
‘The Laws of Manu in “Sacred Books of the East™ by Max Muller, Vol, 25, Cher

ter 3, Verse 287-288.
sprihaspati in the “Sacred Books of the East’, by Max Muller, Vol. 33. Chapter 21.

Verse 10, and Chapter 22, Verse 7.



131

8.34, Section 357(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is as
follows :—

“357, (1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (in-
cluding a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may,
when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered
to be applied—

“(a) in defraying the expenses properly incurred in the prosecution;

(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury
caused by the offence, when compensation is, in the opinion of the
court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court;

(©) when any person is conyicted of any offence for having caused the
death of another person or of having abetted the commission of
such an offence, in paying compensation to the persoens who are,
under the Fatal Accidcnts Act, 1855, entitled for the loss resulting
to them for such death;

(0) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft,
criminal misappropriation, crimina} breach of irust, or cheating, or
of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily
assisted in disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason
to believe the same io be stolen, i compensation any bona
fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such pro-
perty is restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto.”

8.35. Section 357(3) of the same Code provides—

“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form
a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the avcused person.
to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specificd in the
order to the person who has suflered any loss or injury by reason of the
act for which the accused person has been so sentenced.”

8.36. It is obvious that in proceedings where issues relating to such com-
pensation arise, whether or not section 12 applies, facts necessary in order to
enable the court to determine the amount of compensation would be relevant.

8.37. In many countrics, the viclim is permitted 10 request the prosecution
to include his claim in the criminal case against the accused. Amongst such
countries are Austtia, Colombia, Italy, Norway, Spain and Sweden’, In France,
a special action knowa as “actionecivile” can be started by the injured person,
and it is beard along with the criminal] case’.

8.38. We have referred above to the use of the word “compensation” in
some context. Dixon J. in an Australian case’, dealing with compensation for the
acquisition of property, said that it means “recompense for loss”, and explained
that the purpose of compensation in this context is to place in the hands of ihe
owner expropriated the full money equivalent of the thing of which he has been
deprived.

Articles 234, 85 to 91, 371 to 375, 418 to 426, 497, French Code of Criminal Procedure.

2Note, “Crime and Punishment—Reparation to the Victim,” (1959) 227 Law Times 117.

Welungaioo Property Lid, ¥. Commonwealth, (5948) 75 Commonwealth Law Reports
495, 571.

Order to pay
compensation.

Facts necessary
to determine com-
pensation,

Compensation
and damage.


132

8.39. In another Australian case’, Lathan C.J., interpreting 3 provision in
ihe Seamen’s Compensation Act which barred the right of a seaman to recover
“compensation” both independently of and also under the Act, said that the
word “compensation” way wide enough, in its ordinary signiticance, to include
compensation by way of damages fur the injuries suffered by the seaman, whether
or not some default by the employer was part of the seaman’s cause of action.

Recommendation 8-40. Having regard to the fact that Indian legislative practice — vide the

sition, indian Contract Act’ and also the Limitation Act—frequently uses the word
“compensation”, it is desirable’ to substitute the word “compensation” for the
word damages” in section 12, We recommend that the seclion should be 5०
amended.

SECTION 13
4, INTRODUCTORY

8.41, Section 13 reads—

"13. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question :—Where the
question is as to the existence of any right or customs, the following facts are
relevant:

(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created,
claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was in-
consistent with its existence;

(>) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, re-
cognized, or exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted
or departed from.”.

8.42. The illusiration to the section deals with a right to fishery, and
enumerates certain transactions or instances as relevant facts. Since these are
ot a nos-controversial nature, the illustration is not of much help in solving
the controversy that has arisen under the section’,

Extent and scope 8.43, 11 may be pointed out. that clause @) of the section is not confined to

of the section. evidence of a grant creating the right. It includes transactions and instances
as evidence of facts relevant to the fact in issue im any particular case’, and it
thus makes these transactions and instances relevant for the purpose of establish-
ing any right or custom,

Similarly, clause (0) of the section is not confined to particular instances
in which the right was asserted. The clause speaks of the particular instances
in which the right was (i) claimed, or (ii) recognised, or (iii) exercised, or (2) in
which its exercise was disputed or departed from.

8.44. The need for such a provision can be explained without much diffi-
culty, Rights or customs are intangible facts or invisible phenomena; they are
abstractions; and they are static. Their existence can, in general, be ascertained,
only from concrete instances,—e.g. transactions by which they were created,
ciaiined, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which are inconsistent with
their existence, or from particular instances evidencing such claim, recognition
or exercise or the contrary thereof. In other words, the right can, in general,
" Vjovce V. Australian United Steam Navigation Co. Lid. (1930) 62 Commonwealth
Law Reports, 160, 165.

’Section 73, Contract Act, supra.

“One of us—Shri Sen Verma—regards such change as unnecessary.

‘See infra under “Judgments” and “statements”.

SSecretary of State V. District Board, Rangpur, ALR. 1939 Cal, 758, 762.

Signiticance of
section 13,



133

be conveniently proved by cumulative instances and transactions, and not by
a single document or fact or an isolated transaction or imstince—except where
the single document itseli creates the right. This is the a.sumption on which
the section is founded. Dominion or ownership is characierised by particular
acts of enjoyment’, these acts being fractious of tiat sum toial of enjoyment
which characterises dominium.

$45. The most cogent evidence of rights and custums would be judgments
between the parties. But such evidence is rarely available.

The least cogent evidence of rights would be the expression of opinion.
The examination of actual instances and transactions in which the alleged custom
or right has been acted upoa or not acied upon, or of acts done, or not done,
involving a 1ecognition or deniai of their existence, lies in the middie. Such
evidence is usually available without much difiiculty.

“In the absence ox difect title-deed, acts of ownership are the best
proois of title.”

$8.46. Acts of ownership, when submitted to, are analogous to admissions or
declarations by the party submitiing to them that the party exercising thein has
a right to do so, and that he is, therefure, the Owner of the property upon
which they are exercisec. But such acts are 3150 adnussible, of themselves,
proprig vigore, for they tend io prove that he who does them is the owner of
the soil’, The section is appbcable lor Ube latter purpose.

8.47, The principle uf the sccuun is, thus, sound enough. Bui the phraseo-
logy in which it is couched--particuiasly, the word “transaction’—nas proved
to be a fruitful source of controversy. it will be necessary to discuss this aspect
of the matter in detail.

8.48, The facts made relevant by section 13 are (3) transactions, and (0)
instances. Neither of these terms is defined by the Act.

A “transaction” is the doing or performing of any business; management
of avy aifuirs, performance, that which is done; an uaifair, as the transactions
on the exchange. A transaction is something already done and completed; a
“proceeding” is either something which is now going on, or, if ended, is still
contemplated with reference to its progress ur successive stages, “We use the
word ‘proceeding’ in application to an aiiray in the street, and the word ‘trans-
action’ to some commercial negotiations that have been carried on between
certain persons. The ‘proceeding’ marks the manner of proceeding, as when
we speak of proceedings in a Court of law.” The “transaction marks the busi-
ness transacted, as the transactions on the exchange.”*

A “transaction”, as its derivation deavtes, is something which has been
concluded between persons by a cross or reciprocal action as it were.”

“Transaction”, in its largest sense, means that which is done Garth,
C.J. said:* “A transaction”, ia the ordinaty sense of the word, is some

ones v. Williams, 2 M. & W., 326. Followed in Sabram v. Odoy, (1922) 1.LR. 4,
Pat. 375.
“Collector v. Deorga, (1865) 2 WR. 212 (Cai) Jackson J).

*Starkic, Evidence, page 470, cited by Woodroife.

‘Webster’s Dictionary, “Transaction”.

*Grabb’s Synonyms, cited in Woodrotte.

२. Fatieh, (1880), LL.R. 6 Cal. 171, 185, (per Jackson, J.}

vy. Fatteh, (1880) LL.R. 6, Cab. 171, (75 (per Mitter, 1 3.
vy. Fatteh, (1880) LLR. 6, Cal. 171, 186, (per Garth, C. J.).

Admissions.

“Transactions”

and

“Instances”,


134

business or dealing which is carried on or transacted between two or more
persons.”

849, The qualifying character of the “transaction” spoken of in the section
are (व) ereation (b) claim, (०) modification, (9) recognition, (e) assertion, (f)
deniai, (g) inconsistency. OF these, (0) and (d) are also qualifying characters
of “instances.”*

3.50. An “instance” is that which offers itself, or is offered, as an illustra-
tive casc, something cited in proof or exemplification: a case occurring; and

exaimple.*

8.5L, The section distinguishes between a claim and an assertion. Under
Statemenis how clause (0), however, instances are admissible ia which the exercise of a right
far admissible. or custom was asserted. The word “assertion” includes both a statement and
eniorcement by act. Ordinarily, the evidence tendered under this section will
be eviuence of acts done, but a verbal statement not amounting to, and not
acconipanicd by, any act would also be admissible if it amounted to a “claim”.

We shall revert to this aspect later,

Ul. JUDGMENTS

8.52. How far the word “transaction” in this section includes a judgment
Bot inter partes is @ matter on which serious controyersy has arisen. The case
law on the subject is legion, and it will not be practicable even to meniion
the innumerable decisions of the various High Courts on the subject. We shall,
iberefure, confine ourselves to important judgments of the Privy Council and
the Supreme Court, and very important cutings of the High Courts.

Judgments,

8.53. A brief analytical summary of the pronouncements of the Privy Coun-
cil and ihe Supreme Court would be useful. We shall begin with the decisions
ot the Privy Council relating 10 relevancy of judgments under section 13.

(a) A wide view has been taken by the Privy Council in ceriain decisions,

Privy Councit थी which judgments not imer partes have been taken into account. To this
decisions as to caicgory belongs Ram Ranjan v. Ram Narain,’ where the question was whether
aaissibility undo the defendants were mukarraridars, and, therefore, not liable to ejectment by
the plaintifl. Previous judgments not inter partes, in which the defendants had

section 13.
been found to be mukarraridars, were admitted, though section 13 was not
expressly referred to.

8.54. In Dino Mony v. Brojo Mohin,’ the section was expressly referred to,
apd reports forming part of prevarious proceedings under section 145 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (disputes as to possession of immovable
property), were held to be admissible in evidence. The following observations

in the judgment may be nored:—

“These police orders are, in their Lordships’ opinion, admissible in
evidence on general principles as well as under the thirteenth section’ of the
Indian Evidence Act to show the facts that such orders were made....... v
Reports not referred to in the orders may be admissible as hearsay evidence
of reputed possession........ To begin a report within that section,
the report must be ‘a transaction in which the right or custom in question

‘Woodroffe.
*Websier’s Dictionary, “instance”. i
*Ram Ranjan v. Ram Narain, (1895) LL.R. 22 Calcutta 533, 22 Indian Appeals 60.

‘Dinu Mony v. Brojo Mohini, (1901) LL.R. 29, Calcutta 187, 29 Indian Appeals 24.
‘Emphasis added.


135

was created, claimed, modified, recognized, asserted or denied or which
was inconsistent with its existence.’ These words are very wide and are
wide enough to let in the reports forming part of the proceedings in 1847,
1876 and 1888......... ”

{b) On the other hand, there ate certain decisions of the Privy Council
which scem to lay emphasis o# the proceedings. Jn Maharaja Sir Kesho Prasad
th ov. Panuria Mst, Bhas Joena Kuer, Sir Georee Rankin. delivering the
judgment of the Privy Council, made the follawing observations :— -

“The admisstbility of the decree of 1916 is the next anestion. Whether
hased upon sound general princintle or merely sunnorted by reasons of
convenience. the mle that so far as regards the truth of the matter decided
in a indement is not admissible evidence against one who is a stranger to
the cuit has lone heen accented as a general rule in Enslish law. That the
same tile anovlies in India though it is not expressly formulated in these
terms. mav be seen from a reference to section 41 of the Evidence Act. and
the illustration civen thereunder Or the other hand anart from all dis-
cussion whether 8 iudement is or is not 2 transaction* within the meaning
of certion 13° Evidence Act Cf 6 Cal. 171% and 29 TA 2435 the judement
of 1916 together with the nlaint which preceded it and the stens in eve-
ention which followed are evidence of an assertion by the Raj of the rieht
which it claims to have acanired in 1993 and are thus admiccthle evidence
of the richt........... But the fact that a person not in nnseescion of the
Jand sow ir snit claimed in 1911 to have been entitled fo it since 1903 fs
not bv itself serious evidence of ite right .. Serious consequences might
enste as regards titles to land in India if it were recognised that a indoment
against a third party altered the burden of nroof as between rival claimants
ing misht be expected ta follow therefrom.”

and much indirect !

8.55. These observations seem to regard the judgment—

(i) as admissible when read with the proceeding, but as fii) not cons-
titvting such serious evidence as would displace the burden of proof.

8.56. Tn a case from Catcuttas it was held bv the Privy Council that the
Court is not entitled to refer to. or rely unon, a judement given in nroveedines
te which neither the plaintiff ner the defendant was a patty. as proving the

facts stated therein.

(c) In Collector of Gorakhpur’s® case, two pedigrees filed with a previous
suit were sought to be given in evidence Section 13 was discussed by the
Privy Council incidentally. The nediorees were found with the decree in the
previous suit. and the decree recited that the pedierees had been filed by both
the parties: the decree also set out the descent of the persons concerned.
according to the pedierees. The Privy Council held. that the statement in the
decree that the pedigrees were filed was admissible. either under section 35 as
an entry in a public record, or under section 13 as evidence in the course of
proceedings in a suit. and that the narticular pedigree w2< admissible ac a
relevant admission. Referring to the observations made by Sir John Woodroffe

'Maharaja Sir Kesho Prasad Singh v. Pahudia Mst. Bhag Joona Kuer, AR. 1937
Privy Council 69; LER. 16 Patna, 258.
2Emphasis supplied.
"Gujje Lal v. Eatteh Lal, UL.R. 6. Calcutta 171.
‘Dinomoni v. Brofa Mohini. 1910). LL R. 29. Cal. 187, 29 LA. 24,
5Coca Cola Co. of Canada Lid. v. Pepsi Cola. Co. of Canada, AYR. 1942 PC. 40

(Case from Canada)
“Collector of Gorakhpur v. Ram Sunder Mal, ALR. 1934 PC. 157, 164, 51 TA.

286, LL.R. 56, All. 468.
10-131 LAD/ND/77


Privy
decisions
rised.

Council
summa-

136

in his Commentary on the Evidence Act (1931 Edition), where the view had
been expressed that judgments and decrees were aot admissible under section
13, their Lordships pointed out that this view was not in accordance with the
decisions of the Board in Ram Ranjan's case’ and Dino Mony’s case?

(a) Thus. a iudement being admissible under section 13, the use to which
the judement can be put is, according to certain decisions of the Privy Council,
a limited one. Findings of facts arrived at in one case do not constitute evi-
dence of that fact in another case. This was decided in Gopika Raman v. Atal
Singh! In a later case‘ in which partibitity of the Pandara estate «vas an issue,
Sir George Lowndes made the following observations: . -

“The judement in auestion is only admissible under the provisions of
sections 13 and 32, Evidence Act, as establishing a particular transaction
in which the partib'lity of the Pandara estate was asserted and recognized.
viz., the partition resulting from the 1793 suit. The reasons upon which the
judement is founded are no part of the transaction and cannot be so te-
garded nor can any transaction itself. be relevant in the present case......... हा

(e) The sum and substance of the decisions of the Privy Council, referred
to above, appears to be. that a judgment in a previous case is relevant under
section 13 by virtue of the portion referring to “transaction”, but not the
reasons behind the iudgment. nor the findings of facts on which it is based
Much weight may not. however, attach to such judgment, though it is ad-
missible.

8.57. We shall now refer to two relevant decisions of the Supreme Court
bearine on the point.

(a) Th Srinivas v. Narain} the point at issue was whether cerlain properties
were joint family properties. Jn a previous litigation, maintenance had been
claimed by a femafe member. with a prayer for charging the maintenance on the
family property. This prayer had been granted, and the judgment was peing
tendered in evidence: the objection raised was that in the previous litigation.
no question of title was directly involved. The Supreme Court. however, regarded
the Judgement as admissible under section 13 as an assertion of the female mem-
ber that the pronerty belonged to the joint family. Tt was pointed out that the
amount of maintenance would depend on the extent of joint family property:
that an issue as to extent was actually framed in the previous litigation, and that
the prayer for charging the maintenance on the family property had also been

granted.

Sital Das v. Sant Ram aeain. involved the question of succession to the
office of a Mahant, and a previous judgment was admitted under section 13 as
a “transaction” in which a person from whom one of the parties derived his
title, asserted his right as a spiritual collateral of a previous Mahant and got a

decree accordingly.

{b) The Supreme Court decisions referred to above show that a judgment
can be treated as a “transaction” in which a risht was asserted Tt may,

Ram Ranjan's case, supra.

2Dino Mohinis case, supra.

8Gopika Raman v. Atal Singh, ALR, 1929 Privy Council 99. TLR. 56, Cal. 1006,
56 LA. 119.

उठगाहव Narain v. Shuam Lal, ALR. 1931, P. C. 89; LR. 58, Cal. (187, 58 Indian
Appeals, 125.

Srinivas v. Narain, AR. 1954 SC. 379. (1955)

*Sital Das v. Sant Ram, A.LR. 1954 S.C. 606.


137

incidentally, be naied that in neither of the two cases before the Supreme Court,
the decisions of the Privy Council or any other case on this point was discussed.

हु 3.58. Decisions of the High Courts are conflicting as to whether previous Rulings of High
judgments ard decrees not inter partes, are, or are not, included in the term Courts.
“transaction”. Difference of opinior has arisen in the same High Court also.’

Remarks of Sargent. CJ. in Ranchhoddas v. Basu,’ were—former
judgments are not themselves transactions.”

8.59. On the allied question whether previous judgments and decrees not Decisions of High
inter partes, atc, or are not. included in the words “particular instances”, the Courts as to “in-
decisions of the High Courts are, again, conflicting. In some cases, it kas been stances".
held that judgments and decrees are not themselves “transactions” or
“instances”, but the suit in which they were passed and made is a “transaction”

or “instance”.

8.60. While it is too late in the day to say that a judgment is never admis- Logical position.

sible under section 13, it must be stated that in order that the admissibility of
a judgment under section 13 can be justified, a slightly complicated process of
reasoning has to be undergone. On a literal construction of the word “trans-
action”, 2a judgment would not be covered by it. A judgment is an act of the
court embodying its opinion. and is not easy to see how an act of a Court can
constitute a “transaction” ir which a party asserted etc. a right. It will be more
accurate to say that the Hitigation amounts to an assertion of a right etc. and
that the judgment is admissible as evidence of the litigation.

8.61, As was pointed out by Sir Gurudas Banerji J. in the referring judg-
ment in a Calcutta case. litigation may itself come within the meaning of section
13. His observations were as follows :+—

“If the existence of the judgment is not a transaction within the mean-
ing of clause {a) of section 13, it proves that a litigation terminating in the
judgment took place: and the litigation comes well within the meaning of
the clause as being a transaction by which the right now claimed by the
defendants was asserted. So again, the litigation which is evidenced by the
existence of the judgment was a particular instance within the meaning of
clause (b) of section 13, in which the right of possession now claimed by
the defendant was claimed.”

8.62. The chain of relevance can be demonstrated thus :-— Chain of tele
vanes,

Gi) The judgment proves the litigation.
(7) The litigation amounts to a transaction or instance.

ii) The transaction or instance is relevant under clause (a) or (b) of sec-
tion 13, if it is one by which the right ete. was created etc. or in
which the right cte. was claimed, ete.

Yay Neamut v Cooro, (1874) 22 W. R, 365;

(09) Guiiu v. Patteh, (1880) LL.R. 6, Cal. 175.

(0 Collector of Gorakhpur v. Palakdhari (1889) LL.R. 12, All. 1, 43;
Ya) Guin v. Fatteh, (F. B) 1L.R. 6 Cal. 183, 185, 187.

(b) Collector v. Palakdhari, LL.R. 12, All. 14, 27, 28

5Ranchhodas v, Basu, (1876) .L.R. 10 Bom. 459.

fa) Keondo v. Dheer, (1873) 20 W.R. 345 {Cal};

(b) Jianotulla ¥. Ramani, (1887) LL-R. 15, Cal. 233;

(ce) Ramasvami v, A ppavu, (1887) 1.L.R. 12, Mad. 9.

STepu Kh. v. Rajani Mohum Das, (1896) LL. 25 Cal. 522, 527, 2 C.W.N. 501, 504.


Judgment — why
not to be regard-

pd as a transac-
tion,

138

8.63. It seems to be an incorrect use of language to describe a judgment as
a “transaction”. In any case, a Court does not claim or assert or deny or exer-
cise a right or custom. Nor does it dispute, or assert, or depart from the exer-
cise of a right or custom. The parties do that What the court does is to
determine the cause presented to it for trial and for that purpose it considers the
claims, assertions, denials, exercise and so forth of the litigants before it or of
those persons whose acts and statements the law treats as their own.

8.64. Even assuming that a judgment is a transaction, it cannot be said
to create or modify a right or custom. The right or custom cither exists, or it
does not, before the cause comes to trial. The Court merely finds, that before
and at the date when the suit was instituted, the right or custom did or did not
exist. Tf the parties litigating had no right, the Court cannot give it to them
And, if a right or custom exists. the Court has no jurisdiction to modify either.

8.65. The only portion of the section which may, with any show of reason.
be made applicable to judements is the word “recognised” in clauses (a) and (b).
and the phrase “which was inconsistent with its existence” in clause (a).

But it seems that neither was, in fact, intended to apply to iudements since
in the context al! other acts mentioned in the section refer to acts of parties The
“recognition” referred to in the section appears to be, like the other acts men-
tioned, an act of a person and not of a tribunal. In that context, it is an act of
admission. A Court does nant admit a right, but adjudicates upon it. As Garth
C. 73 has said: “Tf the parties to a suit were to adinst their differences inter se,
the adjustment would be a transaction and, by a somewhat strained use of the
word, the procecdings in a suit might also be called transactions. but. to sav
that the decision of a Court of Justice is a transaction appears to me 8. mis-
application of the term.”.

8.66. Straight J. said' that a judgment is not itself an instance. “hut the
suit in which it was made is an instance.”

8.67. Jn this connection, the obcervstions in the Allahabad case of Collector
of Gorakhpur v. Palakdhari* say also be referred to.

(a) “In my opinion. a previous litigation, although not between the
same parties, may be a particular instance within the meaning of section 13(b)
in which the right or custom in question or the subsequent litisation “was
claimed”, etc. (Edge, C.I.)}—

(h) “It seems to me that the true point is not that the judements and
decrees themselves are the “transactions”. but that the suit in which they
were made was a transaction, and that to establish that such a transaction
took place, they are the hest evidence.” (Straight J.).

8.68. The observations in a Calcutta case’ may also be compared. It was

pointed out that the thins to be proved is the right. the transaction evidences
the right: and the transaction may need to he proved. for which purpose the
judgment may be used as proving the transaction.

1Woodroffe.

*Gujju v. Fattch, (1880) LTR. 6 Cal. 17. 196.

Wollector of Gorakhpur vy. Palakdhari, \A.R. 12 All

‘Collector of Gorakhpur v. Palakdhari. (899 TIR. 12 All 1.
(Straight J.) 28 (Fyrell J. who agreed entirely with Edge. C. 13.

8Galanatar Ali Khan v Province af Assam. AYR. 1944 Calentia $7 TTR (1944) 1.
Calcutta 203, 213, 214 Pal. J., Mukherjee J. agreeing).

14. 25 (per Straight. 1).
14 (Eder. ©. 10. 25


139

8.69. From the above discussion, it would appear that—
(७) it is desirable to clarify the relevancy of judgments with reference to
secuion 13;

(u) the clarification, however, should be made in a manner consistent with
rhe meaning of “transaction”, because it is only by a chain of reuson-
ing' that a judgment becomes relevant as ploving the iligation waich
proves the iransactivn which is equivalent to an assertion etc. of the
night;
un Explanation should, therefore, be added to section 13, to the
elect’ liut a previous 1०४३१ proceeding, whether between ihe same
parues or nol, may be relevant as a “transaction’ or ‘instance’ within
tue mealiog of tie section, and a judgment delivered in such pro-
ceding, is admissible as evidence of such legal proceeding, but not
lde tugs of iacis or the reasons contained in it. This is not to
ailect ihe rJevaiice of a judgment under any other section.

(iil

8.76. A judgment ta another suit not between the same parties is, of course,
aduussivic (० sivw ibe iact ol the judgment and who were parties thereto and
wial was Ue subject matter of the su and facts of the decision, and the like,"
where lise inalic?s are relevamt under amy other section, However, the finding
ot छाए facts 11 ie Judgment or che reasons upon which the judgment is formed,
caunot be admitted, even under secuun 13.* if the judgment can be brought
uguer some specilic provision of the Act,’ then it would be admissible. This is
laitly ciear rum the words “unless the existence of the judgment is relevant under
some ७७७1 provisivo ol ibis Act,” used in section 43,

411, RNULISH LAW AS TO JUDGMENTS

&7i, iu isngiaod, in general, a judgment winch is uot a judgment in rem
wha whic is berweeu slallyers or between a party and a stranger, and which
Woes आए icltie iv quesuuils 0 9०010 aud general interest or raise issues based
01 Culkraci, auliostun Of ucquicscence, Is nut evidence of the truth of the deci-
s10M OF Ui Ils yiouuds, Lhvugh there is a limited exception in bankruptcy, adminis-
trauuu, divurce aud pateal caoes. 4115. rule was settled long ago in tho
Duchess ०) Kigsivn's cuse, ana claborated 10 Natal Land Company's case! As
regards ils existence and legai cltect—as distinct trom the findings and reasons—

eVel ७ judyineni 4 personai ds evidence.

8.72. 1018 imadmissibity of judgments between strangers, is sometimes
alribuicd lu the rule agaist opinion evidence or the rule against hearsay, but
1b is usually based on the ground of res inter alios acts alteri noceri non debet.
Ju 18 uujusi that a man should be affected by proceedings in which he could not

make deteuce, cross-examine or appeal.

8.73. 10 Collector of Gorakhpur v. Palakdhari* Mahmood J. said, — “Now.
as 1 understand the English law, that system of the law of evidence has by
itsclt speciai technicalities rendered judgments such as those involved in this
case wuduiissible in evidence 107 reasons beter known to English lawyers who

1886 discussion as to chain of reasoning, supra.

2This is not a draft.
‘Harihar Prasad v. Munshi Narhar Prasad, ALR. 1956 S.C, 305, 309.

‘Govindan Narain Singh v. Sham Lal, ALR. 1932 P.C. 89, 92,

sRoop Chand v. Har Kishan, 23 Weekly Reports 162 (Calcutta).

oR. v, Kingston (Duchess), 20 Howard State Trials 355; 168 E.R. 175.

‘Natal Land Company v. Good, (1868) Law Reports 2 Privy Council 121 (1889).
‘Collector of Gorakhpur v. Palakdhari, LLR. 12 All 14.

Conclusion as to
need for clarifica~
tion in regard to
judgments.

Judgments admis-
sible in general to
show the fact of
the judgment,

English Law, as
to admissibility of
judgments.

Reasons for in-
admissibility of
judgments.


140

have founded the doctrine than to me who can only claim a slight knowledge of
those doctrines. But, however slight that kuowledge may be, I know enough of
that system to feel sure that it does not permi: of the admissibility of the evidence
furnished by judicial adjudications except when such previous adjudication ope-
rates either as res judicata or relates to a custom or right of a public nature.
Judgments of that character cannot, of course, Operate as res judicata in the
English system of law or any other unless they are between the same parties or
those whom they present. But the question arises as io judgments which are
not between the same parties but which represent solenin adjudications by Courts
of justice as tu the facts in issue in the trials which result in the judgments
sought to be produced as evidence in later trials where the same or similar
questions arisc, but where the absolute identity of the opposing patties is wanting.

“The English Jaw says as to the admissibility of judgments what the
Latin adage intends—aut Caesar aut mullus, i.c., either the judgments sought
to be produced is evidence should be conclusive inter partes, or they should
not be admitied in evidence at all, unless they relate to a public custom
or right, or the factum of judgment be a matter in issue.”.

Two English cases 8.74 and 8.75. The rule against admissibility of judgments between strangers

Mustrating  , tule is illustrated by two English cases. Both ihe cases were of actions based on the

of judgments, same motor car accident, and the earlier judgment, being in relation to a
stranger, was regarded as inadmissible. We are not coacerned with details of
the English law as to judgments. In the present context, it will suffice to say
that in England there is no specific rule, corresponding to section 13, allowing
judgments beiween strangers to be admitted im evidence on the ground that it
represents a “transaction or instance” by or in which a right is asserted, recog-
nised ete—except where, as already stated, the judgment refers to matters of
public or generai right’ In particular, it may be stated that English decisions
referring to acts and documents showing ownership or possession do not, in
general, involve the use of judgments as such proof. There are, no doubt, deci-
sions holding that a stranger to a judgment may be indirectly estopped by his
acquiescence therein.’ But the relevancy of the judgment in such cases, is
strictly speaking, based not on the judgment, but on the conduct of the party in
the nature of acquiescence.

Iv. STATEMENTS

Receipts to be 8.76. As regards statemeDts to or by third ‘parties, including recitals as to

boundaries. boundaries, the same controversy that has arisen under setcion 11 has arisen
jn connection with section 13, namely, whether recitals of boundaries in docu-
ment not between the same parties may become relevant under section 13, which
states that where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, any
transaction by which the right or custom was recognised etc. and particular
instances in which the right was recognised elc. are relevant. Emphasis is often
laid on the words “by which” and the words “in which” in the two parts of the
section. But this distinction does not seem to be very material, since a transac-
tion by which the right was recognised is expressly covered, and the relevant
wording is not confined to transactions which create a right.

?Townsend v. Bishop, (1939) 1 All. England Reports 305; and Johnson v. Cartledge,
(1939) 3 All England Reports, 654.

See sections 40 to 44.

3See, for example, Mohan v. Broughion (1900) Probate 56.

‘See discussion as to section 11.

’Yenkotaraya Gopala v. Narsayya, ALR. 1915 Madras 746.


141

8.77. We are of ihe view that such statemenis should not be relevant under
section 13,

In the firs: place, it will not be right to hoid a party as bound or ailected
by a recital as io the making of which he could have no control whatever, and
which has been cumpletcly behind bis back.

dn the second place, such third partics have no particular reasons to be
accurate as lo who is ihe owner of the ianu adjoining their own, and, therefore,
a mistake miay casily creep in, in the mentioning of such boundaries. Boundaries
tay often be mentioned on imperfect knowiedge, or merely on hearsay informa-
lon.

There is no reason why the ordinary rule“ tha, recitals in a deed are not
cvidence against third partics, should be departed from.

$.78. To remove the obscurity on the subject, we recommend that a suitable Recommendation.

Exception suvuld be added below section 13.

9५. RIGHTS

8.79. There exisicd for some time a controversy as to the word ‘right’ in Menping
i .

section 13.

After ihe decision of the Privy Council in Ram Rajan, it is clear that
the section is mot co.dined (as the law is confined in Biiylaud) w the provi of
incorporcai rights: Toe sectivn applies to ali kitsis ui sights, -wnhether rights
of [01 ownership, or ialling short of ownership, e.g. rigitts of easement, ete. A
right may be public or general or privaic. Further, a rigut may be (i) incorpo-
real, e.g. a right of way; or (i) corporeal, ०.8. right of owuership.>

of

it may be ovied that the word night occurs only once in the Code belore Other — supporting
decisions of Bom-

section 13,—in the delinilion oi “Lacis in issuc’—where it must necessarily have bay High Court

been used in its largest sense. का ihe absence, therefore, of any qualiiication—-
such as is to be found in seclion 48,—ihe expression “rights aad cusioms” in
section 13 uiusi be understood as compreieading all rights and customs recog-
mised by jaw, and, theretore, including a right of owneship.

On this point, a clarification is not needed.
VI. RECOMMENDATIONS

8.80. Our recommendatious relating to section 13, then, are as follows: Recommendations

(a) ‘Tbe following Explanation should be added to the section:

“Expianation—A previous legal proceeding, whether it was or it was
not between the same parties or their privies, may be relevant as a transac-
tion or instance, within the meaning of lis section; aud, when a jegal pro-
ceeding so becomes relevant uuder this section, a judgmene delivered in thai
preceeding is admissible us evidcive of such legal proceeding, bui uot so as
to make reicvant the findings oi facts or the reasons contained in the judg-
ment; but nothing in this Explanation is to affect the relevance of a judg-
ment under any other section.”.

\Karuppanna v. Rangaswami, AR. 1928 Mad. 105 (2), 107.
Shri Nivas Das v. Meheybar, A.LR. 1916 P.C. 5.

3Ram Ranjan Crakerbati v. Kam Narain Singh, LL.R. 22 Cal 533; 22 LA, 60.
‘Raghupat Tewari, v. Pandit Narbadeshwar Prasad Tewuri, A..R. 1938 Pat. 103.
a) Tepu Khan Vv. Rajani Mohun Das, LL.R. 25 Cal. 5221,

(0) Rambrishna v. Niranjan Pande, ALR. 1933 Pat. 285.

(०) Rangayyan v. fanasimuthn Mudali, ALR, 1956 Mad. 226, 229.

‘See cases, supra.


Section 14.

142

(b) An Exception excluding recitals of boundaries should be added on
the following lines:

“Exception —Nothing in this section shall render relevant recitals of
boundaries in documents which are not between the same parties or their
privies.”.

8.81 fo 8.86. Section 14 is an important section and may be quoted :

“14, Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body or bodily
feeling.—Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention,
knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or good-will towards
any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body or
bodily feeling, are relevance, when the existence of any such siate of mind
or body or bodily feeling, is in issue or relevant.

Explanation 1.—A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant
state of mind must show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in
reference to the particular matter in question.

Explanation 2.—But, where, upon the wial of a person accused of an
offence, the previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant
within the meaning of this section, the previous conviction of such person
shail also be a relevant fact.

“(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen.
Iv is proved that he was in possession of a particular stolen article.

The fact that, at the same time, he was ia possession of many other
stulen articles is rejevanl, as tending 10 show that be knew each and all
of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen,

(b) A accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counter-
feit coin which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to be
counterfeit.

The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was possessed of a number
of ollicr pieces of counterfeit coin is relevant.

The fact that A had been previously convicied of delivery to another
person as genuine a counterfeit coin knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.

(०) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B's which B knew to be
ferocious.

The facis that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, und that they
had made complaints to B, are relevant.

(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew
that the name of the payee was ficiitious.

The tact that A had accepted other biils drawn in the same manner
before they could have been transmitted to him by the payce if the payee
had been a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the payee
was a fictitious person.

(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to
harm the reputation of 8.

The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on
the part of A towards 8, is relevant, as proving A’s intention to harm B's
sepuation by the particular publication in question.


143

The facts that there was no previous quarrel betwecn A and B, and
that A repeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as
showing that A did not intend to harm the repulation of B.

(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent,
whereby B, being induced to truct C, who was insolvent, suffered loss.

The fact that, at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was
supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by persons dealing with bim,
is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in good faith.

(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of
which A is owner, by the order of C, a contractor.

A’s defence is that B’s contract was with C.

The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as
proving that A did, in good faith, make over to C the management of the
work in guestion, so that C was in a position to contract with B on C’s own
account. and not as agent for A

(h) A is accused of the dishoaest misappropriation of property which he
had found, and the question is whether, when he appropriated it, he
believed in good faith that the real owner could not be found.

The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been given
in place where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good
faith believe that the real owner of the property could not be found.

The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice was
given fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the property and
wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant as showing that the fact that
A knew of the notice did not disprove A’s good faith.

(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order
to show A’s intent, the fact of A’s having previously shut at B may
be proved,

0). A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening
letters previously scat by A to छ. may be proved, as showing the
intention of the letters.

(6) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his
wife.

Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after
the alleged cruelty, are relevant.

(0. The question is, whether A’s death was caused by poison.

Statements made by A during his illness as to his symptoms, are relevant
facts.

(m) The question is, what was the state of A’s health at the time when
an assurance on his life was effected.
Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time
in question, are relevant facts.

(1) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for hire not
reasonably fit for use, whereby A was injured.

The fact that 85 attention was drawn on other occasions to the eflect
of that particular carriage, is relevant.


Principle,

Five parts of the
section.

Proof of mental
state,

Proof of | men-
tal and physical
condition.

14

The fact that B was habitually negligent about the carriages which he
Tet to hire, is irrelevant.

(०) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.

The fact that A, on other occasions shot ai B is relevant, as showing
his intention to shoot 8.

The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to
murder them is irrelevant.

(p) A is tied for a crime.

The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit that
particular crime is relevant.

The fact that he said something indicating a general disposition to
commil crimes of that class, is irrelevant.”.

8.87. The principle of the section is that if the existence of a mental or
bodily state or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant, then acts from which the
existence of such menial or bodily state or bodily feeling may be inferred, are
also relevant. This may be described as the positive aspect. The first Explana-
tion siresses the negative uspect, and is in the nature of a restriction.

8.88. The section could be analysed into five parts — (a) the provision
permiiting evidence, (0) the conditions for applying the section, (०) the restriction
on tbe scope, (9) the use of the evidence and (०) mode of proot.

8.89, First, as to the proof of the mental siate admissible under the section.
A wan’s intention or, for that matter, aay mental state, is a matier of fact
capable of proof, “The state of a man’s mind is as much a fact as the state
ot his digestion. It is true that it is very difficult to prove what the state of
a man’s mind at a particular time is; but, if it can be ascertained, it is as much 8
fact a> anything elsc.”' intention cam, thus, be ptoved like any other ‘fact’, by
the evidence of conduct and surrounding circumstances. The state of mind is
not only relevant, but a fact in issue, in many criminal cases where the offence
under trial requires a mental element. Often, it may be in issue in civil suits
also, where the suit is in tort and the liability is not absolute.

8.90, Now, the mental and physical condition of a person may be proved
either by that person speaking directly to his own feelings, motives, intentions
and the like, or by the evidence of another person describing facts from which
the given condition may be inferred.

8.91. A person may himself give evidence about his mental slate. So, in an
English case* for malicious prosecution, where the defendant himself was called
and was asked in examiuation-in-chief, “Had you any other object in view,
in taking proceedings, than to further the ends of justice?”, the question was

admitted.
8.92. And, on a question of domicile, a person may state what his intention
was in residing in a particular place.*

\Edingto v. Pitzmauricé, (1885) 29 Ch. D. App. 483 (Bowen, L.J.).
*Balmakand v. Ghansam, (1894) LL.R. 22 Cal. 391, 406.

tHardwick v. Coleman, 1 कि. & F., 531.
‘Wilson v. Wilson, LR. 2 P. & D. 435, 444.


145

8.93. However. there are certain shortcomings im a person testifying as to his
own state of mind. If a person’s acts and conduct ate shown to be at variance
and inconsistent with the intent he swears to, then his own testimony in his
own favour would ordinarily obtain yery little credit.

8.94, Moreover, it is obvious that in many cases the evidence of the person
himself may not be available. Hence, it is open to other witnesses also to Lestify
as to state of mind. But other person may not, in general, testify directly to
the state of mind of the first, and may state only those external and perceptible
facts which may form the material of the Court’s decision, In general, witnesses
must speak to facts and let the inference from those facts be drawn by the Court
or jury.

895. Section 14 is in accordance with the principles mentioned above —
principles laid down in numerous English case,*—namely, that, to explain a
state of raind, evidence is admissible, though the evidence does not otherwise
bear upon the issue to be uied. As regards this principle, there is no difference
between civil and criminal cases."

8.36. While on this question, a reference may be made to mens rea,
Archbold’ states:

“it has always been a principle of the common law that mens rea 1s an
essential clement in the commission of any criminal offence against the
common law «+ In the case of statutory offences,
it depends on the effect of the statute ....................--०००५-०००--०----५ There is
presumption that mens rea is an essential ingredient in a statutory offence,
but this presumption is liable to be displaced either by the words of the
statute creating the offence or by (he -ubject-matter with which it deals.
Couiess a statute clearly or by implication rules out mens rea, a man should
aut be convicied unless he bas a guilty mind. In finding whether pacny rea
ls excluded, the court should consider whether the offence consists in doing
prohibited acts or in failing to perform a duty which only arises if a parti-
cular state of affairs existes.”*

8.97. In State y. Lakshman Das, Patel J. observed:

“Section 14 next relied upon on behalf of the prosecution makes facts
relevant if (1) they show the existence ot any state of mind or (2) the state
of body or bodily feeling, such such state of mind or body is in issue or
is relevant. Explanation 2 says that the prior conviction of a person for
an offence is relevant if the offence itself is relevant under this section. It
would seem that it only means that if the prosecution brings forth the
evidence of a prior offence as being relevant under this section, then it may
also prove the conviction, which would make the evidence of previous ofience
more eifective in its being accepied. It is also true that the general tendency
of an accused cannot be proved as that would amount io proving his bad
character, but the facts offered in proof must show the state of mind in
reference to a particular matter in question.”*

‘Swift, Ev., 111 (cited in Woodroffe} “A witness must swear to facts within his
knowledge and re-collection and cannot swear to mere matters of belief”.

*R. v. Richardson, 2 F. & F., 346 (Williams, 13.

’Blake v. Albion Life Assurance Society. 4 C.P.D. 102.

*Archbold’s Crimina] Pleadings, Evidence and Practice in Criminal Cases, 33rd Ed.,
pages 23-24,

‘The quotation is to be found at page 398 of Vol. 1 of Woodroffe Il Ed.

‘State १. Lakshman Das, (1966) 69 Bom, LR. 808, 827, 828.

Mens rea.


Provision permit
ting evidence.

Difficulty of ap-
plication.

146

1. PROVISION PERMITTING EVIDENCE.

8.98. The section declares, as relevant, facts “showing the exislence of anv
slate vi mund, state or body or bodily feeling’. A few examples of the statc of
mind are given in the seclion, we need not quote them again,

8.99. The provisions of the section are simple in form, but not always easy
to apply.

In Srinivasmal's case,’ for example, A was a salt agent and B yus_ his
employee. A was entrusted with the duty of allotting appropriate quantity of
salt to vach retail dealer. B was convicted of having sold salt to certain dealers,
at a price exceeding the statulory maximuni. A was convicted of abetting B in
this olfenee. It appears that the statutory maximum was circumvented in the
following manner. The iawiul price was paid to another empivyee of A, and
the excess charged was paid to B. The aigument of the defence was that the
excess paid to B went into B’s pocket, and did 000 form part of the purchase
price, At ihe wial, evidence was given by several dealers who spoke of uther
transuctions (uot the subject matter of the present procecdiag), with the accused,
shortly before and after the period coveted by the offence. Lhe evide.ice showed
that ihe accused A knew of the illegal transactions of B, but connived ay them.
The Privy Council] held that tis evidence was relevant, ooth on ibe charge for ine
principal ofience and on the charge ot abetting. The evidence was reievant to
the charge oi abeiting, becau,e it showed an intention to aid the commission of
an ofieuce and an inlentionai omission io put a stop to an illegal practice.

8.106. The facts in another case which went upto the Privy Council’ are
also interestisy. At Uae trial of the appellants for the murder ut Karnail Singh,
the approver gave evidence that he and the appeliapis hau murdered Baan Singh
a few days beiore the murder of Karuail Singh, and that they proposed to con-
ceal the murder of Bhan Simgh by causing injuries to Karnaii Singh and getling
ihemscives arrested ior so deiag. That is to say, the evidence oi the approver
was Liat the motive, or at ay rate one of the motives, for the injuries caused
10 Karnail Singh was a uesire. [0 conceal the murder of Bhan Singh. Lhe Privy
Councu obseived: The suggested motive is, no doubt, a singular one, but
however uuprobable au ulieged motive may be, the prosecution is entitled to
call evidence in support of it, and aone the iess so because such evidence may
suggst that the accused bas commitied some crime other than that with which
he is charged [see iliustration (a) to section $1, Evidence Act].

8.101, It may be noted that in this case, if evidence ihat the appellants had
murdered Bhan Singh had been given with a view 10 showing that they were
persons likely to have commitied murder of Karnail Singh, the evideice woulu
have been inadmissibic, but it was admissible to establish the motive for the

murder with which they were charged now.

8.102. To some degrce, of course, (he intentions of parties to a wrongful
act must be judged by the event.’ The presumption of intention depends upon
the tacts of each particular case.‘ A guilty knowledge is not usually a matter
on which direct evidence can be afforded. It is a matter of conscience, and it is
connecied wilh the secret motives of a man’s conduct; it must be inferred from

facts. _ 7

SSrinivasmal ¥. Emperor, A.l.R. 1947 P.C. 135.
2Naiha Singh v. Emp, ALR. 1946 PC. 137, 189.
aR. ¥. Gookeel, (1866) 5 W.R, Cr. 33, 38

4R. ¥. Gora, (1866) 5 WR. Cr. 45, 46.

. ¥. Shurfuffouddeen, (1870) 13 W.R., Cr, 26.



tas

147

8.103. Intention may thus be presumed from conduct. But the rule that a
person is presumed to intend the ordinary and natural consequences of his acts
is not taken as one in the nature of a conclusive presumption. As is well-known,
this aspect became the subject matter of acute controversy in England, and a
decision of the House of Lords' was taken as holding that there was an irre-
huttable presumption of law that a person foresces and intends the natural conse-
quences of his acts. The matter is now setiled by a statute. and it is now
Provided? as follows in England:

“A court or jury in determining whether a person has committed an
offence,

{a) shall not be bound in law to infer that he intended or foresaw a
result of his actions by reason only of its being a natural and probable
consequence of those actions: but

(b) shall decide whether he did intend or foresee that result by reference
to all the evidence, drawing such inferences from the evidence as
appear proper in the circumstances.”

8.104, In regard to facts relevant onder the section, it is to be noted that the
application of the section is dependent on an important condition being satisfied,
The crucial question to be considered is~Is a state of mind a relevant fact, having
regard to the nature of the charge, or cause of action? This question cannot be
answered without a reference to the substantive law. In civil proceedings, it
would require an examination of the essential ingredients of the cause of action,
in order 10 determine whether, and if so, how far, a mental element is required
Ordinarily, this question will have to be discussed with reference to sections 5 to
12: section 5 deals with facts in issue, sections 6 to 12 deal with other relevant
facts,

8.105. In a criminal case, the question of state of mind may assume
importance either in a getieral way, or in a particular manmer. In the general
way. state of mind may become important if the accused pleads one of the general
defence: to criminal liability given in the Indian Penal Code. Many of these
defences are based on the absence of a criminal state of mind—the factors justi-
fving cxcmption being such as to affect the freedom of will or the cognitive
faculties, or to mitigate the criminality in the particular circumstances of the case.

8.106. Broadly speaking, the various detetices to criminal liability could be
classified into three main groups, namely, justification, excuse and mistake or
ignorance or constraint. Justification ig iflustrated by the defence of duty to
act, judicial duty, justification by law and justification on the basis of an act
done ta avoid other harm.“ Excuse exists where the harm was inflicted with
consent or in good faith for the benefit of the sufferer or was very slight’ Both
the categories of justification and excuse assume that the injurious event is the
~onsequence of the conduet of the individual; but, in the circumstances of the
case, the conduct is not criminal, because the mind was innocent.

8.107. Even where justification or excuse does not apply, innocence may be
established on the ground of mistake or ignorance or constraint. Under the cate-
gorv of misiake or ignorance, we can put the defence of insanity;-—the accused
being “incapable of knowing the nature of the act”, and the defence of intoxica-
tion, as also the defence of mistake of fact!

'D.P.P. y. Smith, (1960) 3 All England Report 161.
*Section 8. Criminal Justice Act, 1967 (Eng.}.

Sections 76 to 106, LP.C.

‘Section 76 to 79 and 81, Indian Penal Code
Sections 87 to 92, 93 and 95, Indian Penal Code.

ter

Principle as to in-
nt.

Defences to lia-

bility.

Defences to cri-

minal
classified,

liability


148

8.108. Under the category of constraint, we can put the sections of the Penal
Code relating to self-defence? compulsion by threat® and the like. In cases of
mistake or ignorance or constraint, either the conduct is not voluntary (thus the
will is not free}, or the consequences are not known, or. if the consequences were
known, they were not known to be wrong. To sum up the discussion. in most of
the general defences to criminal liability, either the mental element was absent
हर though it “as apparently present. it was not criminal in the circumstances of
the case

है 8.109, We may illustrate what is stated above. An infant under seven years
is free from criminal responsibility. because “he knoweth not of good and evil.”

8.110. The Indian law on the subject of infancy as a defence in criminal
cases is contained in two sections of the Penal Code.* Section 82 provides :

“Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under seven years of

age’
Section 83 of the Penal Code provides:

“Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of
age and under ten who has not attained sufficient degree of maturity of
understanding to judge the nature and consequences of his conduct on that
occasion.”

8.111. The immunity for children under seven years is absolute. However,
where the accused stands between childhood and maturity, criminal _ liability
depends upon whether or not the accused in fact possessed @ guilty state of mind.
This principle is the basis of the provisions quoted above.

8.112. The exemption from criminal liability on the ground of mental incapa-
city, which is to be found in section 84 of that Code. has its foundation in the
view that criminal punitive responsibility pre-supposes a basic common frame
of reference — a frame of reference shared by the community and the accused. If
the accused. by reason of insanity. is unable to think and feel within a frame
of reference that is of the vast majority, he ought not to be punished for failing
to conform to its demands and rules. That is the general principle underlying

the defence of insanity.

8.113. Then, there is the defence of consent or acts done for the benefit of a
person. Sections 87. 90 and 91. LP.C. deal with the subject of consent. The
act done is excused. because the sufferer had consented to its being done. In
cases of a beneficial act, it is excused because it was done for the benefit of
the sufferer. Most of these sections require “good faith”, thus involving a
determination of a state of mind. Moreover. in so far as they rest on consent,
an inquiry into the state of mind of the victim is also needed.

8.114, Tt is of interest to note what Macaulay* observed as to consent :

“We conceive the general rule to be that nothing ought to be an offence
by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person of tine age. who.
undeceived. has given a free wd intelligent consent to suffer that harm
or to take the risk of that harm. The restrictions by which the rule is
limited affect only cases where human life is concerned.”

ISections 84, 85. 86, 76 and 79 TPC.
%ections 96 to 106, LP.C.

Sections 82-83, LP.C.

‘praft Penal Code. Note B. pace 106 (1837).
‘Sections 94, EP.C.


149

8.115. The above discussion deals with the menta{ element in a general
sense. In addition, the state of mind in a particular sense may become relevant.
When the statutory definition of a crime makes a particular intent a necessary
ingredient. such intent must be proved by the prosecution, and there is no
onus on the accused?’

8.116. In this connection, it may be noted that this is not always an easy Crucial _ question

question to determine. In a Bombay case.‘ for example. a serious difference —St##e of mind.
arose, on this very point, between Chandavarkar J. and Jacob J. which had
to be resolved by referring the matter to Aston J. In that case, the precise
question to be considered was whether, for the offence of keeping a common
gambling house under section 4 of the Bombay Prevention of Gambling Act,
1887, a previous conviction under the Act would be relevant. Chandavarkar J.
considered it fo be relevant on the ground that. since the section uses the
word “keeping”, it presupposes something habitual, and the previous conviction
was, by virtue of explanation 2 to section 14, relevant because the user of a
place or keeping it for a particular purpose necessarily connotes the existence
of a state of mind—intention to use the place for that purpose and knowledge
that it is so used. To “keep” a common gambling house is, according to
Chandavarkar व... to hold the house and manage it with the intention of using
it as such habitually. To prove knowledte or intention and habitual course
of dealing with the house or place. previous convictions are relevant under
section 14.

With this view, Aston J. agreed. but. according fo Jacob J. the relevance
of such previous convictions would be excluded by the terms of the first Expla-
nation to section 14 read with illustration (p) to the section. and he did not
tegard the offence charged in the case as Concerned with any such states or
conditions as are specified in section 14 of the Evidence Act.

8.117. A recent Supreme Court case* though it did not relate to section 14.
illustrates how difficult it is to determine whether ar not a mental state is an
ineredient of an offence. Tn that case. construction of sections 9 and 10 of
the Opium Act. 1878 was in issuc. Those sections read as follows: —

“9. Any person who. in contravention of this Act. or of rules made
and notified under section 5 or section &—~fa) possesses opium. or (b)
transports opium, or (ले omits ta ware-house opium or removes or does any
act in respect of warehouse opium and anv person who otherwise contra-
venes any such rule, shall, on conviction before a magistrate. be punishable
for each such offence with imprisonment which may extend to three years.
with or without fine: an. where a fine is imposed. the convictine magistrate
shall direct the offender to be imprisoned in defautt of payment of the
fine for a term which may extend to six months, and such imprisonment
shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been
sentenced.

“10. Tn prosecutions under section 9. it shall be presumed. until the
contrary is proved. that all opium for which the accused person is unable
to account satisfactorily is opiam in respect of which he has committed
an offence under this Act.”

*Ret _v. Dart, 14 Cox, 143
2Ree v. Gary. 17 Cox. 299
Ree, v. Sleep. 1. and C.. 44 .
tmperar v AHomiva, 1904) VLR. 2% Bombay 129. 175. 143, 151 (F. BD.
nder Sain v. State of Puniah. (1974) 1 S.CR. 25: ALR. 173 5.0. 2309.


Requirenent of
intent implied

Use of facts rele-
vant as showing
state of _ mind.

150

8.118. After a review of the English cases and Indian cases on the subject
of possession, the Supreme Court! held, in the first place, that by reason of
section 10 of the Opium Act, the prosecution need not prove conscious posses-
sion before it could resort to the presumption in section 10; secondly, however,
it does not fellow from this proposition that the word “possessed” in section 9
did not connote conscious possession. The Supreme Court observed—

“Knowledge is an essential ingredient of the offence as the word ‘possess’
connotes, in the context of section 9, possession with knowledge. The
legislature could not have intended to make mere physical custody without
knowledge an offence. A conviction under section 9(2) would involve some
stigma and it is only proper then to presume that the legislature intended
that possession must be conscious possession.”

8.119. The conviction was. however, confirmed on the facts.

8,120. Even where there is no such provision as to intent, in a statute, the
court might hold one fo be implicd. In Sweet v. Parsley? for example the
House of Lords seems to agree with a doctrine developed in Australia—~*

“When a statutory prohibition is cast in terms which at first sight
appear to imnose strict responsibility. they should be understood merely
as imposing responsibility for nevligence but emphasising that the burden
of rebutting negligence by affirmative proof of reasonable mistake rests
apon the defendant.”

8.121. Thus. the most important question that arises in each case where
section 14 is sought to be invoked is—Is the charge or cause of action such

that a state of mind is a relevant fact?

8.122. Tt should be noted that evidence under this section is not admissible
when the case depends on the proof of actual facts and not upon the state of

mind‘ In a Mysore case® Hedge J. pointed out—
poi

“The principle on which evidence of similar acts is admissible is not
to show (thet) because the accused has committed already some crimes.
he wonld therefore be likely to commit another. but to establish the animus
of the act for which he is charged and rebut. by anticipation. the defence
of ignorance, accident. mistake. or innocent state of mind. In this case
funder section 477A. P.C—falsification of accounts.) it is not sufficient
for the prosecution to prove that the entries which are subject matter of
the second charge are wrong entries and that they were made by the ac-
cused: the prosecution must go further and prove that those entries are false
entries und the accused made those entries wilfully and with intent to de-
fraud the State. Therefore. the prosecution can prove similar instances to
prove that the accused made the entries in question wilfully and with intent
to defraud the State. Those instances can also he proved to rebut the ac-
cused’s plea that he innocently made those entries at the behest of his supe-
tiors. But that evidence cannot be used to show that the accused was guilty
of temporary misappropriations in past or to probabilisc the charge levelled

‘Mathew and Dua JJ.
Sweet v. Parsley, (1969) 1 All ER 347 (per Lord Reid). 357 {per Lord Pearce), 362

fer Lord Diplack)
जूक) Maher vy. Musson, (1934) 52 CLR. 100;
(6) Proudman v, Davman, (1941) 67 CLR. 536.
‘Gokul v. R. (1924) 29 CW.N. 48२.

'Krishna Murthy v. Abdul Subhan. ALR. 1965 Mys 128. 133, para. है.


151

against him by proving his past bad conduct, if any. To the extent the trial
Court has relied on that evidence in support of its पाए that the accused.
was now and then temporarily misappropriating certain sums of money in
thc Treasury, the finding in question és vitiated.”

वा. THE RESTRICTION

8.123. We now come to that part of the section which ays down an
important restriction in regard to its application.

8.124, The first Explanation to the section emphasizes that the state of mind
must exist in reference to the particular matter in issue. Thus. for example.
in a charge for rash driving. evidence regarding similar previous occurrences
resulting from rashness of the accused is not admissible, as it must be proved
that the rashness existed in relation to the particular incidemi! ‘To lustriets the
first Explanation, we may state that if the charge was of belonging to a gang
of dacolts, evidence as to habitual commission of thefis (as opposed to dacvity)
is inadmissible. But. as was he!d in a Patna case*, in order to prove the asso-
ciation of an accused with a gang of dacoits, -association in the abstract,

evidence of previous convictions may be relevant.

8.125. One of the exclusionary rules of the law of evidence relates to evidence
of character and previous convictions.--a rule primarily designed to avotd undue
preiudice. Where the object of evidence of character ix to persuade the court
that it is likely or unlikely that a party acted in a particular way, then, as a
general rule, such evidence is excluded if it relates to bad character. This
genera] rule was, however, on proper grounds, modified, and evidence allowed
to go in of previous occurrences (“similar facts”), even though, incidentally,
it might reveal bad character, In section 14, we are concerned with that aspect
of character which reveals a state of mind, if the state of mind is itself of
relevance in the facts of the case. Evidence might have rational probative
value in other respects, and may indirectly reveal bad character; but we are not
concerned with that aspect. Nor are we concerned with the question of charac-
ter as establishing identity.’ The ficld of reception of evidence within section 14,
so far as it relates to similar facts, is limited. But. even in this limited field.
the section is not an easy one to administer.

8.126. To borrow an illustration from the facls of an English case‘ of ७
person is charged with the murder of a child and takes up the defence of in-
sanity (sudden mania), evidence of a voluntary confession by the accused as
to how the accused killed another child. is receivable, in rebuttal to show the
state of mind.

8.127. On the other hand, if the question is merely of the factum of the
offence, the fact that the accused had committed similer other crimes, would
be irrelevant. In England, in the Brides in the Rath vase? the accused was
charged with the murder of his wife. who was found dead in her bath. Evidence
that subsequently to the wife’s death, two other women with whom the accused
had contracted bigamous marriages had also been found dead in the baths
under very similar circumstances, and that in all the three cases the accused
had benefited by their death, was hald admissible. to rebut the plea of accident
or innocent intent. ‘This case is also refevant with reference to section 15: but,
in ४0 far as it relates to intent, it belongs to the field covered by section 14.

11929) Mors ekly the Digest.
Yhalehand ४. Sete. AAR. 1961 266. para. 16 and 80 ALR. 1986
Orissa 777.

“See divcussian as to secon 9.
कि, 5. आला 123 ९.0. C. Sessional Paper 1203 (Collins J), cited by Phinson.
SR. v. Smith, (1915) Criminal Appeat Reports 259.

_ 1-31 LAD/ND/77

Restrictions,

First Explanation

Character

ence
facts,

cevid-
similar


Sexual offences.

Illustration @)
and Explanation

Previous _ convic-
tion — Explana-
tion 2.

Second Expiana~
tion—Scope of.

152

8.128. Cases relating to sexual offences often present problems in this context.
Where a question of intent or passion or guilt is not material.’ the evidence of
prior sexual assaults cannot be admitted under section 14. For example. A
is charged with house-breaking with intent fo commit rape on B: evidence that
an hour later. he entered another house down the chimney and bad connection
with afothcr woman with her consent, is inadmissible." It would make no
difference that his intercourse with the other woman was without her consent.

8.129. On the other hand, where a person is charged with carnal knowledge
of a girl under 16 years, evidence that he had sexual connection with that
same girl seven months prior to the charge. would be admissible, not to prove
that he committed the second offence, but 10 show sexual passion‘ for the
particular girl.

8.130. Upon the trial of a person charged with being in dishonest® possession
of stolen property, evidence could be given of a previous conviction of the
accused for attempting to receive stolen property. and of the same person knowing
it to be stolen, under sections 511 and 411 of the Indian Penal Code.

8.131. There was not, in the law of this country, any such special provision®
as was made in England in 1871, relating to the admission in evidence, against
a nerson charged with having received stolen goods knowing them to be stolen,
of previous conviction of such person, for any offence involving fraud or dis-
honesty. The question was, however, answered in the affirmative, because
section 54 (as it then stood} made previous conviction relevant in every case.

By the amendment of 1891, the scope of section 54 was severely restricted,
but, in section 14, Explanation 2 was added. The amendment also made a
verbal change in section 14, Explanation 1, but that change is not material for the
present purpose

8.132. Explanation 2 to the section, if properly construed, has a very limit-
ed scope, Tt does not provide that the previous conviction is always a relevant
fact——-not even where the state of mind is in issue. If. however, the previous
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of the
section—i.e., as showing the state of mind when relevant—then the previous
conviction of such person {of that offence)’ is also a relevant fact under the
Explanation. Tn order that the Second Explanation may apply, the prosecution
must establish, first, that state of mind is relevant, and secondly, that in order
to show that the state of mind, the previous commission of an offence is relevant.
These two things being established. the Explanation clears the way for giving
evidence of a previous conviction. The Explanation thus makes the conviction
relevant where previous Commission is relevant.

8.133. Evidence of the previous conviction of the accused person amounts to
evidence of bad character and is not admissible under section 54. unless and
until the accused produces evidence of good character nor are convictions ad-
missible to show the state of mind of accused. As Sultan Ahmed J. said * “the
whole principle of British criminal jurisprudence condemns the prejudice which

‘Para, 8, 129, infra.

पर, v. Rodicy, (1913) 3 KB. 468.

3Compare section 14, illustrations {n) and (0).

अर, v. Shellaker, (1914) 1 KB. 414, C.CC. followed in R. ४. Rogers, (1914) 10 Crimi-
nal Appeal Repert 276.

SCf. s. 14, illustration (a) and Explanation 2.

"Prevention of Crimes Act, 3871, (34 and 35 Vic., ०. 112), section 19

F These words do net ovcur in the Explanation, but are implied

*Peaa Ahir v. Emp.. AAR. 1920 Pat. 351, 353.


153

“may be caused to the accused by the admission of previous conviction before
he has been found guilty of the offences on which he has been arraigned.” This

general rule is modified by Explanation 2.

8.134. Under the law before 1891, evidence of previous com. tion was
admissible in evidence beth to show the reputation and disposition of the
accused, however unconnected it may be to the present trial.’ This’ was altered
in 1891, as already stated.

पा. ILLUSTRATIONS

8.135. The illustrations to the section are very important. [llustration (a)
which allows evidence to be given of the possession by the accused of other
stolen property. makes no reservation as to ownership or time of theft in relation
to the various stolen articles in possession. Jt is not required that the other
stolen property must belong to the person whose property is now alleged to
be stolen. However, it must first be proved that the particular stolen article
was in the possession of the accused. It may be noted that, in England? on
the trial of an indictment for receiving stolen goods, evidence may be given
that other property stolen within a period of 12 months preceding the date of
the offence charged was found with, or had been in possession of, the prisoner,
although such other property is the subject-matter of another indictment against
him to be tried at the same assizes.

8.136. The history of the offence of receiving is of interest. The old “appeal
of larceny” was the early ordinary method of recovering stolen goods in another’s
possession. and this ancient procedure was not yet obsolete in the thirteenth
century! It lay against anyone, even though not the thief or wrongful taker.
who might be in possession of stolen goods not retain on immediate pursuit.
Consequently, the “appeal” could be successfully waged without proof of any
mental element on the part of the appellee: and, the English actio furti, closely
linked to the appeal for larceny, “can be effectually used against one who is not
thief, but an honest man.” Bracton, however, defining larceny, borrows from
‘the Roman law the definition of the ancient actio furti, and makes much of the
mental element, the animus furandi. “Theft”, he says, “is according to the law
the fraudulent taking of another’s property with an animus furandi against the
will of the owner. I say with intent. because without an animus furandi the
crime is not committed.”

8.137. Thus, animus furandi is the appropriate means rea for the thief. For
the receiver, the knowledge that it is stolen property is the requisite mens rea.

8.138. It should be noted that the case quoted in illustration (a) represents
a rule which was previously applied in an earlier case in England;* but, later,
the evidence of possession of the other goods, stolen at other times from different
people, whether found in the possession of the accused at or before the finding

11887) LLR 14 Cal. 721, 729 (FB).

%See section $4 before 1891.

SSection 273) Theft Act. 1968, replacing section 430), Larceny Act, 1916.

‘Sayre, “Mens Rea” (1931-1932) 45 Harv. L. Rev. 974, 987.

'pollock and Maitland, HE.L. Vol. 2. p. 161-62. See the interesting case of Moor v.
Piggun, Selden Society. Select Pleas of the Crown No. 192.

"Pollock and Maitland, op. cit. supra note 6 at 162.

tBracton, De Legibus 150 6. The definition of furtum is taken from Institutes 4, 1,
1, See 2 Pollock and Maitland. op. cit. supra note 6, at 498, No. 4; 3 Holdsworth, op.
cit, supra note 6, at 360, No. 5.

AR. ४. Blessdale, (1848) (2 0 & K 765).

Iustration {a).

History.


Mlustration 18).

Ulustration {c).

154

of the property in questien, was regarded as inadmissible! The reasening for
ever-raling the earlier decisions, was that porsession of stolen property merely
went to show that the accused was a bad person, and not that he had received
stolen property on a particular date with evilty knowledee. ‘Thus position
bo altered by a statute?

8,129.
vering, to another person as

14 renders admissible a previous conviction
auine. 2 counterfeit coin known io be
yandulent delivery of a counter-

४ (1 10 se thor

hat coin
number of pisces of counterfeit coins.

Tn cither case. the evidence is admiss le fo nreve guiliy knowledge. The
assumption js that detivery of a counterfeit Coin is Jikely to have resulted in a
ming of the counterfeit article by the son to whom it was presented,
and thus drawn the attention of the accused to its suspicious nature. In Rex v.
Whiley? Lord Ellesboroneh. Chief Justice. evolains] that if the previous utter-
ints of the counterfeit coin are. in polit of Hime, re detached, they will bear
“the Tess relation” to the particular uttering stated in the indictment, but this
would set render the evidence (about the previous utterances) inadmissible.

quest

8.140. ‘Ifustration (c) fo the section relates to the case of a suit by A
avainst B for damage done by a dog of B. which B knew to be ferocious. The
illustration assumes the substantive rule of law that where animals. - -such as
dov---belong to a species which is ordinarily harinless. liability for harm caused
by the animal does not generally arise until the defendant knew. or had reason
to know of, the dangerous propensity of the particular animal in question.

8.141. Illustration (तो is sdapted from an English case

8.142. Illustration (e) reminds one of another Fnglish case’ where libellous

hand bills were carried backward and forward before the plaintiff's house, and
it was held that the mode of publication was relevant to show the intent of
the defendant.

8,143. Illustration (1) to section 14 is appropriate. because the gist of action
in such cases is fraud, and where there is bona fides. there can be no fraudulent
intention. The illustration is hased on an English case? where Cockburn, C. 1.
pointed ont that it was important to asceriain the s!ate of mind of the defendant
when he made the representation complained of: and that the state of mind
could be shown only by inference. Just as the pleintiff could prove certain facts
necessarily leading te an inference of falsehood—for example. calling every
tradesman in the town to say that the person in question was insolvent--simi-
larly. it would be proper if, after the plaintiff had established a prima facie
case. the defendant calls a number of tradesmen to say that the person in
question was believed by them to be perfectly solvent.

8.144. Illustration (g) is also an actual case. Normally, such evidence
would be of no consequence in a suit for the price of work which is essentially
based on contract, inasmuch as the sbsence or presence of “good faith”, refer-
red to in the illustration, is ordinarily irrelevant in casc of contract. However,

R. wv. Oddy. (18570 5 Cox Criminal Cases 210,
Seciien 43. Larceny Act. 1916. now Theft Act. 1968. section 27/3).
21 ciled in Qreea पे, Vujeram. WLR. 16

Rex v 3;
Bombay 414. 431.

Mas v. Burdert, 9 QB, 212.

‘Gibson 5. Hanter, 2 HBL

Bond भा. Powdus. 7 (0. & 79, 6%,

Sheet v. Bempstad, 2 UL & C. 193.

rooish पर, Chartier. 1 Con के. 13, referred to by Weodtolfe.



ida

it appears ihat in the actual ९५ whieh we have mentioned, a considerable
body of evidence had been given by the plaintiif io show Uhat C interferred in
the matier 88 the agent of the defeadaat, arid it was acCessury io rebut this
evidence by showiag the good faith of the defendant. In an aciivn for goods
sad und delivered, a genera’ deleuee is that the defendant is iiable io pay for
the goods to another person, : since the jury might come to the conclusion
that the defendan to keep ihe goods wiihout paying for them, it becomes
material for the defendant to snow Ure dora jades ot his defence, by proving

payment to such third person.
8.143. Mlusiraton (1) is similar to an English case."

8.146. 10 may by vied iat boih under the Indian Penal Code — definition
ot theft-- and in English Ceiminal iaw, dishonest intention is required. In the
English common flaw offence of larceny, both the act and the intent must concur.
At common iaw, lesceny was 11: taking and removing, by trespass, of personal
properly which the trespasser knew to belong either generally or specially to
tent of depriving the other person of his

another persoa, with the iclonious

ownership therein?

8.147, Since thy act 61 trespass and Une intent to sival are both required, the
oifence is not committed if there t» dishonesty. In the Indian Penai Code,
this requirement is expressed in छा of “dishonesty”, which is defined-—so tur
as is releyant--as the inicnbon to cause wrongful gain or wrongful Joss. in
England, as carly as 1849, the specitie situation which is referred 10 in the illus-
tration was deali with in these words by Parke Bé

“Lt a man finds goods that have been aciually lost, or are reasonably
supposed by him io have been lost, and appropriates them, with intent to
take the entire dominion over them, really believing, when he takes then,
that the owner cannot be found, il is not larceny; but if he takes them, with
the like intent, though fost, or reasonably supposed to be lost, but reasonably
believing that the owaer cua be found, it is larceny.”

148, In this connection, it may be noted that though, in general, things
wnich are abandoned are nol cap: vi being stolen, yel sometimes there may
be special siluations whereby cycn in prope ty abandoned sume person may
have a special property.

8.149% In Sievert १. MeNiceian, the divisional Court held that a gout
club, which intended to excivde the genera: public from its land, had a spetial
property in goif balls 1908 on the course after being lost and abandoned by
पार original owners; that the pivperiy was suiticient to support an indictment
for larceny against a trespasser who picked up the balls animo furandi; and
that it was immaterial that at any given moment the officials of the club did
act Know the exact number or position ० the abandoned balls lying on the

course,

8.150. lilustration (h), where it says that the Lact that public notice of the
1055 of the property had been ¢! iu the place where A was, is relevant,
assumes that some evidence would be given to show that the notive was within
the kuowledge ७६ A, the accused.” It would, therefore, be de: to add

पर, v, Thurborn, (1349) 1 Den. 387.

°Bishop, Criminal Law (1923), page 412, para. 566.

मर, ४. Thurborn, (1849) 1 Den. 387; approved by the Court of Criminal Appeal in
R.v. Mortiner, 1 Cr. App. R. 20.

‘Hibbert v. McKiernan, (1948) 2 K.B. 142, (1943) 1 AF.R. 860,

8Compare Stephen’s Digest, article 11, iliustration (j).

lilustration (9,

Mental element in
theft,

Nlustration (hy
and abandoned
property.

Recommendation
10 amend illustra
tion (h).


Mlustration 00.

Mlustration (j).

No change need-
ed except in illus-
tration (0).

Section 15, Intro-
ductory.

General rule why
quatified.

156

the words “and in such a manner that A knew or probably might have known
of it”, after the words “in the piace where A was” in illustration (h). We re-
commend accordingly.

8.151. Llustration (i) is based on the English case of R. v. Voke! It is
different from illustration (०), which is a case of murder outright, while illustra-
tion (0) is a case of shooting with intent to kill. Of course, so far as section 14
is concerned, the facts made admissible are admissible only to show the existence
of the particular state of mind. This is clear from the last 17 words of the
section.

8.152. In R. v. Voke* previous attempts at shooting were given in evidence
to rebut the theory of accidental killing.

8.153. Llustration (j) to the section is taken from the case of R. v.
Robinson?

The remaining ilustrations need no comments

8.154. The above discussion does not show any need for amendment of
section 14, except in illustration (0) 10 the extent indicated above.

8.155. According to section 15, when there is a question whether ap act
was accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or intention,
the fact that such act formed part of a series of similur ocCurrences, in each
ot which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.

There are three illustrations to the section.

In illustration (a), A is accused of burning down his house in order to
obtain money for which it is insured.

‘The facts that A lived in several houses successively, each of which he
insured, in each of which a fire occurred, and after each of which fires A
received payment from a different insurance office, are relevant as tending
to show that the fires were not accidental.

In illustration (b), A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B.
It is A’s duty to make entries in a book showing the amounts received by him,
He makes an entry showing that on a particular occasion he received less than
that he really did receive.

The question is, whether this false entry was accidental or intentional.

The facts that other entries made by A in the same book are false, and
that the false entry, is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.

In iltustration (c), A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B 4 counterfeit
rupee,

The question is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.

The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A delivered
counterfeit rupees to C, D and E are relevant, as showing that the delivery to
B was not accidental.

$.156. In general, it is not permissible to give evidence of similar occur-
rences with which a party is concerned, because that would protract the pro-
ceedings without much corresponding benefit.

पर, v. Voke, (1823) Rus and Ry. 531.

अर, v. Voke, (1823) Rus and Ry. 53.

मर, ५, Robinson, 2 East Pleas of the Crown.



157

Jt has been aptly stated'\—“Although some people intentionally err and
others systematically err, there are yet others who never make the same mistake
twice, and it is a wise principle of our jurisprudence which provides that a
person shall not be condemned on account of his previous mistakes. Thus, in
Hollinghan’s case? Wvilles J. observed: 1 do not see how the fact that a
man has once or more in his life acted in a particular way makes it probable
that he so acted on a given occasion”. In another civil case,’ which was an
appeal from a County Court, the Divisional Court delivered a reserved judg-
ment on a point which Swift J. characterised as of “great importance”, as it
constantly arose in actions for damages in personal injuries sustained in strect
collisions, In the County Court, the plaintiff had succeeded in obtaining damages
for negligent driving by the defendant of a motor bicycle which had ran on to
the pavement and struck the plaintiff. In cross-examination, the counsel for
the plaintiff asked the defendent whether he had, at about the same time, an-
other accident in the same street, whether the results were fatal and whether
the had told the jury at the inquest that exonerated him that he had had this
accident, The answer to the first two questions was “yes”, and to the third
question the answer was “no”. On appeal, the defendant contended that these
questions ought not to have been asked, that they were irrelevant to the issues
and that they were unfair and prejudicial to the defendant. The Divisional
Court held that where a defendant was charged with negligence in a particular
case, it was not competent to ask bim a question to obtain an answer which
would show that he had been negligent on some oiher occasion. In this case,
however, the questions were directed towards the defendant’s credibility and his
general skill as a driver and were relevant to that extent. The appeal was

dismissed.

To the general rule referred to above, section 15 constitutes a qualification,
for the limited purpose provided in the section.

8.157. in Stephen’s Digest,‘ in the general rule corresponding to section 14,
there 18 added a clarification as follows:— “But such acts or words may not
be proved merely in order to show that the person so acting or speaking was
likely on the occasion in question to act in a similar manner.” Some such
limitation is to be read in section 15 also, although it is not cxpressed. This is
because the section has a limited application.

The restriction is of the utmost importance. Two English cases in the
Court of Criminal Appeal show its importance.

In R. v. Dunnico,’ the appellant was sentenced, at the Lanchshire Quarter
Sessions, to three years’ penal servitude, for obtaining money by false pretences.
The false pretences alleged were untrue statements to the effect that he had
becn sent to interview the defrauded man about an advertisement, and that he
was carrying on a genuine business. Two other counts of the indictment alleg-
ing similar false pretences, were abandoned, but the evidence of four witnesses
as to those charges was admitted “to show system”. The Court of Criminal
Appeal regarded this as wrongly admitted, saying, in effect, that one could not
‘rag in evidence as to other charges by alleging them as part of a system.

भर मु ctor’ 5 “By; i ”
(1932) $4 bombay Pas Hees, Sona eraget in note, idence of previous conduct’
?Hollingham v. Head, C. B. New Series 388.
‘James v. Audigier, 76 Solicitor’s Journal 528.
‘Stephen’s Digest, Article 11, last paragraph.
5R. vy. Dunnico, (1931) 23 Cr. App. Rep, 77.



Why departure
justified.

158

fhe statements alleged to have been made in the case being tried were

हु they were सील true cr untrac. Their making
ved, entiicly without recourse
Io ¢ ‘the repetition of a statement neither mez if true or
false. Je is the cid faliuzey that nought plus nought « rcumst-
aiees. amount to nm than zero. A system of noughts, a series of noughts
to fofinity. is stil sething. This self-evidem! iuth received amusing illustya-
tion in the bastardy case of Thomas ४... Joucs, where a number of facts,--no
une af which by itself amounted to corroboration, was wrongly considered to
aout to evtvoboration, “Zero plus zero cannot produce a plus quantity,”
said Log Hewart. re-aflirming the truism which had been lost sight of.

eH, mie ७ ie

he preved or not

and dior

पु some ९

158, ‘the other ca as so. similar facts was R. ४. Tidmarsh? In that
: Wan was charged 1 house breaking on one date. On a later date,
was un fer the wide provision of the Va Act, under which,
as re-inforced by the decision in Hartley v. Ellnor,’ suspicion in a police offi-
filles arre:

The evidence ol this suspicious loitering was admitted on the trial for
use-breakine oy: the earlier date, on the ground that, “it becomes evidence
sause it is evidence of system, showing what he was doing”. This was
held (9 be a iis tion by Uke court of cfimina! appeal which quashed the
conviction “This evidence and this direetiun to the jury tended to show that
ibis wos the kind of inun who would commit this particular crime of nouse-
irection which vitiuies this conviction.”

bh

4

kins. Tint sas a mi

8,159, ‘Ibis rule is, however, properly qualified, where the question is
vigther in act was accidental or inteational, or whether an act was done
vahou partatier knowledge or intention. That the act formed pari of a
7 eecwyences in each of which the person doing the act was
is reiesunt, because the assumption is that if there is a repetition
7 oscurrences, the theory of accident would be rebutted,

In Makin ¥. Attorney-General for New South Wales,* Lord Herschell, L.
C. delivering the judgment of the Board, laid down two principles which must
be observed im a case of this character. Of these, the first was thar:

“Ie is undoubtedly not competent for the prosecution to adduce evi-
dence tending to show that the accused has been guilty of criminal acts
other thas those covered by the indictment, for the purpase cf leading
lo the conclusion that the accused is a person Sikely from his criminal
conduct or character fo have committed the offence for which he is be-
ing tried.”

8.160, In 1934. this principle was, by Lord Sankey, Lotd Chancellor,

the concurrence of all the noble and fearned Lords who sat with him,
of

ved

series of sin

with
said to he ‘one of the most deeply rooted and jealously guarded pricciple
our criminal Jax” and to be ‘fundamental in the law of evidence as convei

in this country’s
8.161. The second principle stated in Makin’s case’ was that—

“the mere fect that the evidence adduced tends to show the commis-
sion of other crimes does not render it unadmissible if it be relevant to

' Thomas v. Jones, (1921) 1 K. 8, 22.

IR. y. Vidmarsh, (1931) 23 Cr. App. Rep. 79.
“Hartley ¥. Elnor, (1917) 86 LAK. B. 938.
Malin v. Attorney-General for New South Wales, (894) AC. 57, 63
Macwell v. The Director of Public Prosecwions, (1935) AC. 309, 317, 320,

*Makin's case. (1894) A.C. S7 (supra).



159

an issue before the jury, and it may be so relevant if it bears upon the
question whether the acts alleged to constitute the crime charged in tae
indictment were desigied or accidental. or to rebut a defence which would
otherwise be open to the accused.”

the evidence that the accused hud been connected with
e. is udmissible on the gues.’on of know:

8.162. Simi)
similar
edge and intention.!

as

2 ane under ¢

8.163. Evidence of similar facts may have probitive value. Neverthe-
less, the policy of the law is that in genera! al! evidence tending to show a
disposition towards a particular crime must be cxcluded, unless a_ specific
justification is availublo-~-in the present case, the justificciion is that i: tends
vw rebut a defence otherwise open to the person charged.

It may be nvted that in the case of Brides in the Bat’, the prisoner Smith
raised the defence that his wife had died in a fit—these were the words used
in the telegram to the uncle afler the death, and the prisoner even quoted
the doctor as saying that his wife had fil in the bath. However, it so happen-
ed that some person who read in the newsppers about the circumstances of
her death had noted the similarity between this death ami another death, and
informed the police about it. This put the police on the track. The theory
of natural ceath was disproved, beccuse, if the girl had died a natural death
in the bath, she would have dropped the soap. As it was, she was killed sud-
denly, her hand had immediately stiftened and she held on to the soap which
she was using. This point was used by Dr. Spilsbury to show thet the death
‘was nol accidental. ‘The similarity of this incidenp and other incidets in
which the accused was mvolved, also rebutted the theory of accidental death.

8.164. It may be stated that pot oly the mode of committing the nuur-
der, but also the defences advanced by the accused, or rather the false de-
fences advanced, were similar. He would pretend that at the time of the
death, he was out for purchasing fish or tomatoes or eggs. The landlady
would tell the woman that the bath was ready. Then she would hear some-
one go upstairs, and the sound of splashing in the bath-room, the noise of
someone putting hands against the side of the bath and the jong-drawn sigu
would be heard

8.165. The evidence of similar facts is not admissible where ils only
effect is to show that a person is of general bad character or good character
and therefore likely to have behaved in the way alleged. But such evidence
is admissible to show his intention or knowledge, and the fact that it inciden-
tally reveals good or bad character docs not make it inadmissible. That is
the general principle on which section 15 is based.

8.166, Section 15 is a specific application of the principle of section 14.
Compared with section 14, section 15 has, however, a narrower application,
In the first pluce, while any state of mind brings section 14 into operation
{apart from a state of body or bodily feeling), section 15 is confined to the
specified ststes of mind. Secondly, any kind of evidence can become relevant
under section 14, subject, of course, to the other requirements of section while
section 15 concentrates on evidence of similar facts. The similarity makes
the probab of an innocent explanation so remote that the law provides
that the evidence ought to be received.

‘Emperor ९. Harjivan Valji, ALR. 1926 Bom. 231, 234.

Similar facts.

Comparison _ bet
ween sections 14
and 15


Similar facts.

Two situations
covered by sec-
tion 15.

Same transaction
fot necessary

Mlustrations,

160

8.167. Similar facts or acts may have been committed before! or after
the offence’ charged. But they must be similar transactions which do not
merely tend to show a gepera! criminal dissesitiun, but show an intention
which is relevant in the particular case.

8.168 It should be pointed out ihit iere are छत kinds ef cases which
fall within section 15. In the first place. the section may come into opera-
tion where the question is whethes an 2ct was accidental or inentional. Ia
the second place, the section may come into operation where the question is
whether an act was done with a purticu’ar intention or knowledge. In the first
case, the defence that is taken by the person charged would be that there was no
intention at all, while, in the second casc, the defence would be that व particular
intention or knowledge was absent. Th: basi» of admissibility of the evidence
on the issue of accident is the improbability of the coincidence of many identical
or similar accidents. As was observed in &. v. Sisns, “a series of acts with the
same characteristics is unlikely to be produccd by accident तर inadvertance”.
In the second case, on the other hand, the relevance of the cvidence in ques-
tion on the issue of a particular intention o- ‘nowledge is to show not only
the existence of a state of mind in the abs. but also the existence of a

particular state of mind.

8.169. The words of the section, us well 2s the language of illustration
(a), show that it is not necessary that all the acts should form parts of one
transaction. But it is necessary that such acts should form parts of a series
of similar occurrences, and also—as the opening words require—thal “there
is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional or done with a parti-
cular knowledge or intention.”*

This section, as already stated, is an application of a rule laid down in
section 14 to a particular set of circumstances. Tt will always be a matter
of decision of the Court whether there is a sufficient and reasonable copnec-
tion between the fact to be proved and the evidentiary fact. If there is no
common link, they cannot form a series’ as observed by Norton.

8.170, The illustrations to the section are important. Wlustration (a) is
founded on an English case.° The authority of this case. is doubted by Stephen,
but the principle of the illustration seems to have been approved jin a Bombay

case! and in a Calcutta case.

In Queen-Empress v. Vajiram,” Telang J., observed,

“And, further, I may point ont that in India we have what may be
called a legislative approval of the decision of Willes, J., for illustra
tion (a) to section 15 of the Evidence Act is really a statement of the case

oo

of Rez. v. Gray.

(a) R. v, Mason, (1914) 10 Criminal Appeal Reports 169
(b) R. v. Armstrong, (1922) 2 King’s Bench 555.
*Cf. the Brides in the Bath case.
मरे, v. Sims, (1946) K.B. 531, 537.
‘See—

fa) Stephen, Digest, Article 12; and

(6) 5. ४. Debendra, (1909) LL-R. 36 Cai. $73 (P. Cp
2Norton, Evidence, 140, cited in Woodroiie.
घर, v. Grey 4 F & F. 1102 (see infro).
‘Stephen, Digest, Article 12, Note. है
पर, v. Vajiram, LL.R. 16 Bom. 433 (see_infrai.
अर, y. Devendra, (1909) TLR, 36 Cal. 573.
wR. v. Vajiram, LLR. 16 Bom. 414.
Reg. v. Gray, 4 की & F 1102.


161

8.171. Llustration (0) to section 15 is. in principic, identical with the
English case of Reg. v. Richardson’ the only difference being that the English
case was one of swelling debits, and the illustration is a case of reducing cre-
dits® It is well established® that the gist of the section is that, unless there
is a sufficient and reasonable connection between the fact to be proved and
the evidentiary fact, that is, unless, there is in substance some commen link,
they cannot form a series.*

Illustration (c) is comparable to section 14, illustration (b). The pre-
sumption in both the cases is the same. In section 14, the illustration refers
to possession, while, in section 15, the illustration refers to delivery.

8172. Jn general, it may be stated that the caution to be exercised in
applying section 14 should also be exercised in applying section 15. It is
only when there is a question whether the act (mow under considetation) was
accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or intention,
thar the section applies. In particular, what is relevant under section 15--
the fact that an act formed part of a sefies of such occurrences in each of
which the person doing the act was concermed—is so relevant only ta show
that the act now under consideration was not accidental but intentional, or
tha: it was done with a particular knowledge or intention, While discussing
section 14 we have pointed out that the application of that section is depend-
ent on an important condition, and also that the use of that section is sub-
ject to a restriction. The same comments apply in relation to section 15 also.

8.173. The section is, therefore, not an easy one to apply. The diffi-
culty of applying the section is illustrated by a Calcutta case’ where, on a
charge involving thefts from rich prostitutes, certain facts were sought to be
given to establish that A and B had, in several instances, taken part in thefts
from rich prostitutes in a series of incidents from 1914 to 1918, and that they
had lived together and had transactions together, that a system had been
followed by them and that they used to go about together under different
mames and had associated together with the evil motive of committing such
thefts. By a majority judgment, the evidence was held to be inadmissible
under section 14 or under section 15, thete being no question involved of a
criminal object.

8.174. With this case, we may contrast a Bombay case.” The accused
was a shopkeeper at Bhiwani, and used to get goods by lorries from Bombay
through the limits of the Kalyan Municipality. The lorry-driver, instead of
paying octroi duty on the goods at Kalyan. rapidly drove past at the octroi
post of the Kalyan Municipality. The accused was prosecuted under sec-
tion 77(2) of the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, for introducing the
goods wifhin the octroi limits without paying the octroi dues, in three instances
in August and September, 1923, The accused was convicted and was sentenced
to pay a fine of Rs. 15 or, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for 7
days, by the trial court. The trial court admitted, as evidence, the sintilar
complaints which were made against ihe accused in the year 1921,

The matter came up before the High Court, on a reference by the Ses
sions Judge for quashing the conviction of the accused. One of the points
for consideration before the High Court related to the admission of evidence

*Reg. v. Richardson, 2 F & F 343.
"QE. v. Vajiram, LLR. 16 Bom. 414, 433 (par Telang, J).

‘Emperor v. Panchu Das, A.JLR. 1920 Cal. 500; Stephen Digest, Article 12, page 20.
‘Emp. v. Pancha Das, ALR. 1920 Cal, 500.

SSee discussion as to section 14, supra.

®R. vy. Panchu, (1920) LLR. 47 Cal. 671.

‘Emperor v. Harjivan Valji, ALR. 1926 Bom. 231.

Caution to be
exercised,

Difficulty of ap-
plying.


Acts of same
kind necessary

No change need-
ad.

Section 16.—
Introductory.

Mlustrations

Cognate provi-
sions of the Act.

182

igh Court held that this was
under sections 14 and 15.
fin Geo cases’? of the Cal

of similar complaints ef the year 1921.

admissible fo prove the inte ities
Reliance was piaced ui:
cutta High Court, in the following word

ihe uma:

“In getiera, whenever it is recessar. to rebut, even by anticipation,
the defence of acet or other 1 nerent condition of ind,
erhience that the defer has bec concerned ia a systematic course
of conduct of the same specific kind as that in question, may be given,”

he conviction of the accused was unheld by th: High Court,

der this head, however. the other acts ter-
specific kin जा question. and not of a differ-
ed mist ac hae been proximate in point

8.175. To ad
dered must
ent char and t:
of time to that in question?

In Noor Mohomed v. The King! the accused wis tried before the Court of
British Guiana, on a charse of murdering a woman commonly known as
Ayesha, by poisoning her, Evidence wi mitted to show that the accused
had carlise murdered another woman—his wife, Ge ah—in similar circum-
stances. It was held that the admission of such evidence was not justified,
there being no issue as to whether the aci was intentional or accidental.

ely tem

8.176. The whovs ¢.c.ssion is intended fo elucidate varions aspects of
ca

the section. Hewever, co change ij the Isw is recommended.

8.177. Section 16 provides that when there is a question whether a parti-
cular act was done. the existence of any recourse of business according to
which it naturally would have been done is a relevant fact. Iustration (a) to
the section relates to the case where a particular letter was despatched, and
provides thar the fact thet jt was the ordinary course of business for बी letters
put in a certain place to be sent by post, and that that particular letter was
put in thar place, would be relevant. This corresponds to one of the English
cases."-" It may also be noted that the Evidence Act. 2 of 1855, sections 50
and 51, to some extent dealt with this situation.

8.173. Wije illustration (a m: mainly deals with private
basinss -toourh if is not so confines ‘Wustration (6) is mainly felevent for
public busines. That illustration provides thet where the question is whe-
ther a particular letter reached A, the fact that it was posted in due course and
the dead leiter offiec, is relevant. This illustration
lish cave - Warren v. Warren, where Parke B-

was not Teturecd thro

may be compare
observed, —

“IE a letier is sent by post, it is prima facie proof until the contrary

be proved that che patty to whom it is addressed received it in due

course.”*

8.179. The matier dealt with by section 16 is usually dealt with in
English text-beoks under the sabject of “presumptions”. जा this connection,
we may refer to the observations of the Privy Council in a case decided before

‘Amrita Lal Hazara v. Brperor, (1915) LLR. 42 Cal. 957.
2Emperov v. Parchu Das. (1920) 1.1..8 47 Cal. 671.
<amrit Lal Hacara v. Emperor. ALR. 1916 Cal, 188, 202: LLR. 42 Cal. क्रय.
‘Noor Mohomed v. The King, ALR. 1949 PC. 161, 164, para, 17,
sHetherington v. Kemp, (1818) 4 Camp 193: 16 E.R.
"Sec Ningawa v. Riaramanca, (1897) 11.2, 23 Bom. 63, 65,
ren, (1834) 1 CM. & R. 250.

can Telegraph Co. y. Colson, (1871) LR. 6 Exch. 108.

ferren v. Wa
alse Bris

A Aries



163

the Evidence Act. to the effect that “it is reasonable to presume that that

which was the ordinary course was pursued in this case.”

32, second clause. wheie the ex-

is ased. und to section 114, ibustration

Reference may also be गा:

pressi
(6, under which the Court me esume that the common course of business
has been followed in pari cases, Similar essions Occur in sec

{section 114, illustra-
of business relevant,” and the
pion that the course of

tions 34 and 48. The dist On between x
tion (0, is that the former makes the cor:
Jatter then empowers the Court to draw ८ presum

business was followed in ihe particnlar case.

with the ‘Postal business,

8.180. Of coutse. Hfisirction (bY ta section 16 does not d:
question of the time when the Jeter mey be oresumed to have re
addressee. Stephen, in his Digest’ has a specific iMustration on this point—
“A letter is presumed to hay sived at its destination at the Ume at which
it would be delivered in the ordinazy course uf postal business.”*

ched the

8.181. Nor does the section deal with any presumption as to ros!-mark.
on letters as furnishing prima facie evidence thai letters were in post at the
time and place therein specified? As to such matters, the Court is free (0
regard to the facts of each case. under

draw a suitable presumption, having
the general provisions in seciion 114.

8.182. Besides the Evidence Act, there are other slatutory provisions rele- Other statutory
vant to the subject of “course of bu: RSS onl

rs ess” in relation to post. There is, for fon 27, General
example, a rule of construction in section 27 of the Genetal Clauses Act. 1897. Clauses Act (Post).
It relates to service by post, and consists of two limbs, dealing, respectively
with (i) the mode of service, and (7) the time of service. Under the first part
of the section, for the purposes of an Act authorising or requiring a document
to be served by post, service shall be deemed io be effected by properly ad-
dressii pre-paying and posting by registered post a letter containing the

document. This deeming provision, of course, applies unless a different inten-
tion appears from the Act under construction. At present, there is no ex-
press saving for cases whexe the contrary is proved; an amesdment in this
regard has been recommended by us in our Report on this Act!

8.183. Although the presumption under section 27, Generél Clauses Act,
can arise लाए when ihe notice is sent dy registered post, ihere inay arise a
presumption under section 114. Evidence Aci, when notice is sent by ordinary
post. But the presumption to be drawn under section 114 is not mandatory.

8.184. Under the second purl of section 27--General Clauses Aci, 1897,
the service shall be deemed to have been effected at the time at which the
Jetter would be delivered in the ordinery course ef post. This deeming pro-
vision applies, less the contrary के proved. and unles, a diferent intention
appears from the context.

8.185. Reference should also be made to section 106 of the Transfer of Section 106—
Under thst sectien, the Tessor cam determine the lease ही हि, Pro-
fone of the modes of service of such notice is sending

Property Act, 1882.
by a notice to quit, ar

'Dwarka ¥. Jankee. (1855) 6 MLA. 9019. CI.

Compare Stocken y. Coffin, 1! ६41:
Sce 60th Report (General Cl:
Cont 2



Mlustrations of
various presump-

164

it by post to the party intended to be bound by it. There are similar provi-
sions in certain other Central Acts.

8.186.

We have already referred to section 114. A number of presump-

tions under sec- tions can be drawn by virtue of this section. A few relevant matters con-
cerning letters sent by post may be referred to, by way of illustrations:

tion 114, concern-
ing post.

No change need-

(0)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

In a Calcutta case.’ a notice was sent by a_ registered letter, the
posting of which was proved, and which was produced in Court in
the cover in which it was despatched. That cover contained the
notice, with an endorsement upon it, purporting to be by an officer
of the post office, stating the refusal by the defendant to receive the
document served. It was held, having regard to two earlier cases*
and also to section 16, illustration (b), that the notice was sufficiently
served.

In England, the posting of a letter may be proved by showing that
it was handed to, or left with, the clerk, whose duty it was in the
ordinary course of business, to carty it to the post, and whe, though
he had no recollection of the particular letter, habitually and in-
vatiably took all the letters delivered to him to the post office.* The
position would be substantially similar in India under section 114.

In England, the post-mark on a letter has been held to be prima
facie evidence that the letter was in the post at the time and place
therein specified.‘ The position in India would be the same under
section 114.

The post-marks on letters ate considered as evidence of the dates
and places mentioned therein.’

Thus, on the question whether a letter was sent on a given day, the

)

postal mark on it was held to be a relevant fact’

The possession by a person of a letter with the address tom off
prima facie shows that it was addressed to him.”

8.187. The above discussion does not disclose any need for amendment

of section

~—TYorendra Chander Ghose v. Dwarka Nath Karmoker, (888) 11.R. 15 Cal, 681, 683

16. ‘

hose v. Di 7888 ~ 15 Cal. 681, 68:

(Pigot & Rampini, JJ.).

%(a) Papilion v. Bruton, 5 H & N 518.

(b) Lootf Ali, 16 W. R, 223 (Cal.).

8Skilback v. Garbett, 14 L.J.Q.B, 338; 115 E.R. 706, discussed in Bank of Bihar v.
7.8. D.C. (Cal) Ltd., ALR. 1960 Cal. 475, 476.

‘Fletcher v, Braddy, 1, 3 Stark, R. 64.

SR. v. Johnson, 7 East,
«R. v. Cunning, 198, Law

"Cartis

mes, 370.
v. Richards, 1 M. & G. 47.


Cuseier 9

ABMISSIONS AND CONFESSIONS—SECTION 17

9.1, Sections 17 to 31, which we shall now proceed to consider, deal with
admissions in genera!. ang -nore <laberately with a particular species of admis-
sions, namely, . in popular language. the expression
“admission” is used to connote a statement against one’s interests, that is not
“the meaning given to it in the Act. Nor is the expression, as defined, confined
to civil cases.

2. An admission has been so defined as to cover, inter alia, any state-
ment by a party, and it is not necessary that at the timc when a statement was
made, the statement was against the interests of the person making it.

9.3. A few fundamental peints may be noted at the outset. First, as
already stated, admissions as di with in these provisions are not confined
to civil cases. This is clear from the definition given in section 17, and also
from the reportect cases. १- *

Secondly, admissions by way of conduct are not dealt with, in the relevant
sections, they having been already Covered by section 8.

9.4. Thirdly, admissions constitute an exception to the rule against hear-
say.

9.5. Juristically, therefore, the importance of sections 17 to 31 lies in
their covering all kinds of procecdings, and in making statements by the par-
ties and other specified persons relevant, thereby creating an exception to the
tule against hearsay. At the same time, it is made clear‘ that admissions are
not conclusive proof of the matters admitted; but they may operate as estop-
pel under the provisions hereinafter contained.

9.6. The principle on which these sections are based is that what a per-
son states, may be presumed to be true as against himself. The general rule,
therefore, is that an admission can be given in evidence against the party mak-
ing it and not against any other party.’ In other words, they are admitted
if tendered by the opponent. In this sense, they are adverse to the maker of
the statement.

9.7. Admissions are admissible even though, when made, they were not
against the party’s interests,’ and even though the party did not have personal
knowledge of the fact which he admits, Of course, he can show that he was
mistaken--seclion 31. The justification for regarding them as relevant fies!
in this,—that a party cannot be heard to say that his own statements should
have been subjected to the usuci tesis of truth,—oath and cross examination.
This is the ground for departure from the general rule against hearsay.

Para. 9.18, infra.
Xa) Sahoo, ALR. 1966 5. C. 46:

(b) Bishen Das, (1915) P.B. No. 106 of 1915 (Civil:
(०) Azinuddin, (1926) TLR. 54 Cal. 237.

356९ infra para 9.18

‘Section 31.

4m Re Whitely, 61891) Law Rer
"Stanton v. Percival. 5 House of 1.
talcon v. Famous Players Film Co. (1926) 2 KB. 474, 489

165

Introductory.

Definition.

Some | fundamen-
tal points,

Principle.

Justification.


Identity of Inter-
est,

Scheme of — the
sections.

Section 17 analys-
ed.

166

9.8. It may be noted that the rule permitting admissions to be given in
evidence takes in statements not only of parties, but also of persons who have,
what may be called, an “identity of interest” with a marty. It is for this rea-
son that admissions made by certain persons who share the identity of inierest,
are made relevant; the relationship creating such identity includes (a) agency;
(b) proprietary interest or pecuniary interests’ and (c) derivative interest?) On
the other hand, where there is no identity of interest, the reason for admitting
the stalement disappears and. therefore, statements by strangers are net, in
general, relevant.|. The case i, different where the strangers are persons to
whom a reference is made by a party himself

9.9. The rationule of treating. evant, admissiens made by an agent
is that if the principal ccnstitu'es the cgent his representative in a certain
ansaction, then whatever the gent does in the lawful prosecution of the
action, is the act of the principal.

describes admissions made by a
as “authorised admissions”, and admissions made by a person whose state-
ment a party adopts are referred to as “adoptive admissions”. In the scheme
of the Act, these two ove covered by sections 18 and 19. respectively.

9.10. American usage occasion

XU The scheme of the s-ctivns is as follows. Every statement suggest-
ing an inference vs to a fact in issue or a relevant fact is, subject to certain
quulificztions, an admission by virtue of section 17, provided it is made by the
partics or other persons specified, and under the circumstances specified, in
sections 18 to 20. Ifa statement amounts to an admission by virtue of the
provisions just now referred to, its relevancy is provided for by section 21—
unless, of course, there are provisions excluding it from evidence either in the
Act or in any other law. The Act itself furnishes examples of such exclu-
sionary rules --in section 22 {oral admission as to contents of documents) which
applies in all cases; in section 23, which, in civil cises, excludes an admis-
sion made on the express condition that evidence of it is not to be given;
and in sections 24 to 26, which apply to confessions. The exclusionary rules
in sections 24 to 26 are, however, themstives subject to certain qualifications,
which are contained in sections 27 to 29. In section 30, there is a provision for
“taking into consideration” the confession of a co-accused, in certain cases.
Section 3} provides that admissions are not conclusive proof, but may operate

as estoppels.

We muy now consider each section in detail.

9.12. Section 17 defines an admission as “a statement, oral or docu-
mentary, which suggests uny inference as to any fact in issue or a reevant
fact, and which is made by any of the persons and under the circumstances,

is section lays down three requirements. Tp must be a
statement: secondly, it must suggest any inference as to a fact in issue or a
relevent fa ad thirdly, it must be made by the specified person and under
the specified circumstances.

‘Sections I$ and 20.
‘Section 18. clause {1}.

2).

Section 18. clause
‘Srophen. Di
‘Section 19.



167

9.14. The first requirement presents no problems. The statement miust
be oral or documentary—so that admissions by conduct do not fall under this
section, though they can become relevant under section 8 or other section
applicable on the facts’.

9.15. As regatds the second requirement, it is enough if the statement
suggests an inference as to a fact in issue or a relevant fact. The words re-
ferring to “suggesting an inference” are obviously intended to include state-
ments which do not amount to a direct admission of a fact in issue or a rele-
vant fact, but which suggest an inference about it. Of course, when one turns
to confessions, the scope of “confession”, in the scheme of the Act, is res-
tricted. Stephen’s definition of “confession” as an “admission made at any
time by a person charged with crime stating or suggesting the inference that
he committed the crime”? is not applicable to the Indian Evidence Act*.

9.16. Thirdly, the statement must be made by the specified person and
under the specified circumstances.

9.17, Apart from the cases specifically mentioned in section 17 read with
sections 18 to 20, it may be noted that statements made by a person may bind
others, One such example is futnished by section 10, under which declara-
tions etc. of a co-conspirator, when made in reference to the common inten-
tion of the conspirators, are relevant against the co-conspirators.

9.18, In the scheme of the Act, the expression “admission” is applicable
to criminal cases also. In Sahoo's case‘, it was observed that statement is a
genus, admission is the species and confession is the sub-specie. It was also
observed that admissions and confessions are exceptions to the hearsay rule.
In the same case, it was held that it was not necessary that a statement, in
order that it may amount to an admission, should have been communicated.
Words not addressed to others but uttered in soliloquy. or uttered in confi-
dence, would be admissible against the person uttering them, if independently
proved. The Supreme Court gave the following hypothetical illustration :—-
“A kills B; enters in his diary that he had killed him, puts it in his
drawer and absconds, When he places his act on record, he does not com-
municate to another; indeed, he does not have any intention of communicat-
ing it to a third party. Even so, at the trial, the said statement of the ac-
cused can certainly be proved as a confession made by him. If that be so
in rhe case of a statement in writing, there cannot be any difference in princi-

ple in the case of an oral statement.”

Of course, with reference to oral statements put in the illustration given by
the Supreme Court; independent proof will be required.

9.19. It may be noted that “confession” is narrower than “admission”.
Under the Act, acknowledgement of a subordinate fact, though incriminating,
would not be a confession, though it would be an admission. Every confession
is an admission, but every admission is not a confession.’ This is obvious from
the fact that sections 24 to 30 deliberately use the word “confession”, as distinct
from “admission”. If the two were identical, there was no need to use the ex-
pression “confession” —an aspect which has been dealt with elaborately in one

‘See introduction, supra.

Stephen, Digest, Article 22.
spakala Narainaswamy v. Emperor, ALR. 1939 Privy Council 47, 52.
‘Sahoo V. State of U.P., A.LR. 1966 S.C. 40, 42, paragraph 5.

8Neetai Chandra v. Emperor, A.LR. 1937 Cal. 433, 445.
12-331 LAD/ND/77

Admission in cri-

minal cases.

Admissions
confessions.


No change recom-
mended.

{utroductory

168

of the earlier Punjab cases‘. It is for this reason that there is no bar to the ad-
missibility of an admission of any relevant fact made by an accused person to
a police officer prior to the commencement of an investigation’. The statement
may be admissible in evidence as an admission’, if it is not hit by the excluding
sections of the Evidence Act relating to confession, or by section 162 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure’.

9.20. Reference may also be made to a case” decided by the Privy Council,
which related to a tria] for murder.

9.21. The Ceylon Evidence Ordinance came up for construction in that case®.
By section 25 of the Ceylon Evidence Ordinance: “No confession made to @
police officer shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence”.

9.22. By section 17: ८ (1) An admission is a statement, oral or documen-
tary, which-suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact. .
(2) A confession is an admission made at any time by a person accused of an
offence stating or suggesting the inference that he committed that offence”.

9.23. The Privy Council had to consider the question whether certain state-
ments made by the accused to a police officer were admissions or confessions.
Those statements narrated the relationship between the accused and the murder-
ed woman; but they did not admit guilt as such. The Privy Council held that
with reference to section 25, quoted above, the correct view was that taken by
Acting Chief Justice Garvin in a Ceylon case" where he stated, after quoting sec-
tion 17. “The term ‘admission’ is the genus of which ‘confession’ is the species.
It is mot every statement which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue
or relevant fact which is 4 confession, but only a statement made by a person
accused of an offence whereby he states that he committed that offence or which
suggests not any inference but the inference that he committed that offence”.

9.24, Any doubt in this regard would disappear if one bears in mind the
fact that confessions become relevant ouly because they fall within sections 5,
17, and 21. Section 21 constitutes the provision, and the only provision, that
makes admissions relevant. If that section is kept aside, there is no other sec-
tion providing for the relevancy of confessions specifically.

The above discussion does not disclose any need for amending the definition.

SECTION 18

9.25. Section 17 having laid down that admissions must be made by the
persons and under the circumstances “hereinafter mentioned”. section 18 deals
with the persons whose statements !are to be regarded as admissions. The
section consists of three paragraphs, of which the first is of general application
and deals with parties and agents. The second paragraph introduces certain
qualifications as regards parties to suits who are suing or have been sued in
a- representative character. The third paragraph deals with statements made by
persons having a proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the
proceedings or by persons from whom the parties fo the suit have derived their
interest in the subject-matter of the suit. Somehow, the various paragraphs do

'Mlahi Bux v. Emperor, (1886) Punjab Record No. 16, Crim, Pages 28—31.
*Lachhuman v. State of Bihar, ALR. 1964 Pat. 210, 212.

3Harnam Kisha v. Emperor, A.1.R. 1935 Bom. 26.

‘Akbal Sahu ¥, Emperor, A.LR, 1948 Pat. 62.

5Anandagoda v. The Queen, (1962) 1 W.L.R. 817, 821, 823 (PC).
"The King ¥. Cooray, (1926) 28 N.LR. 74. (Ceylon).


169

not use identical language while describing the nature of the legal proceeding.
The first paragraph speaks of “proceedings”. The second paragraph speaks of
“suits”. In the third paragraph, sub-paragraph (1) speaks of the “proceeding”,
while sub-paragraph (2) speaks of “suit”. We shall revert to this aspect later’,

9.26. The general principle of the section is sound enough. Statements
made by a party are admissions, and so are statements of persons with identity
of interest? in the subject-matter. But certain changes appear to be desirable in
the section. The discussion that follows wil) indicate that the changes which we
contemplate are partly of expression, partly of substance and partly of structure
and arrangement. The changes of substance are needed so that the section may
be brought into conformity with the correct principle—identity of continuance of
haterest.

9.27. We may first refer to a verbal point of a general nature. Some
paragraphs of the section use the expression “suit”, while some employ the
expression “proceeding”, as already stated." There is, in our view, no reason
why the various paragraphs of this section which apply to “suits” should not
apply to all civi) proceedings. We, therefore, recommend that the expression
“civil proceeding” should be used in those paragraphs which speak of “suits”.

Changes of substance may now be dealt with.

9.28. The first paragraph of the section deals with admissions by parties and
agents. No change is required in its substance. We propose to split it up into
two, in accordance with the changes in structure to be indicated later’.

9.29, The second paragraph relates to statements made by parties to
suits “suing or sued” in a representative capacity. It provides that statements
made by such parties are not admissions unless the statements were made while
the partics making them held that character. No changes of substance are needed
in this paragraph. We have already indicated" the need to substitute “civil pro-
ceedings” in place of “suits” in the section.

9.30. It may be stated that the legal concept of “suit in representative
character” is wide enough to cover several situations—e.g. suits by trustee®
Mutawalli, or executor. In this connection, Order 7, Rule 4 and Order 7, Rule 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure etc. may be seen, and also a Bombay case’ and
a Calcutta case’, These provisions and cases show the general understanding of
the expression “suit in representative character”. In our opinion. it is desirable,
having regard to the illustrations of representative suits which have been men-
tioned above, to extend section 19, second paragraph to civil proceedings other
than suits also. A trustee may, for example, have to file applications (and not
merely suits), Such a situation should be covered.

9.31. The Third paragraph of section 18 consists of two sub-paragraphs.
According to sub-paragraph (2), statements made by persons who have “any
proprictary or pecuniary interest” in the subject-matter of the proceeding. and
who make the statement in their character of persons so interested. are admissions.

YParagraph 9.27, infra.

%See introductory discussion before discussion as to section 17, supra.

YPara, 9.25, supra.

‘Para, 9.43, infra.

356७ pata. 9.27, supra.

‘Order 31, Rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure.

1Gurushidappa v. Gurushidappa, A.LR. 1937 Bom, 238, 239, 240 (Rangnekar, J).

*Upendranath, 1L.R. 42 Cal, 440 (Mookerji 1).

Amendment need-
ed—Admissions.

Section 18, first
Paragraph,

Section 18, second
paragraph,

Section 18 —~

and suits in a 10-
Presentative’ ‘cha-
racter.

Section 18, “third
Petagraph, | snb-
paragraph (1).


Principte.

Joint interest.

Tomt interest.

170

The application of this paragraph is usuaily illustrated by referring to ‘joint
contractors’. It is to be pointed out that this provision appears to be too loosely
worded, In the first place, it covers persons who have any proprietary or pecu-
niary interest, though, really, it should have covered only persons having a joint
interest. If two or more persons are jointly interested in the subject-matter, the
admission of any one may be receivable against the other; but this does not
mean that any kind of interest in the subject-matter. should entitle a person to
make an admission that may bind any other person having a different kind of
interest,

9.32. The principle of this part of the section was thus stated in a Calcutta
cast,’ where Garth C.J. observed:
“The principle of the rule is that for the purpose of making these

statements with reference to the joint concern or common subject of interest,
one partner or co-contractor is considered to be the agent of the other.”

Having so stated the reason of the Rule, Garth C.J. further observed:

“and this rule, as I take it, is enacted, rhough in a somewhat concise
form, in section 18 of the Indian Evidence Act.”

9.33. The following discussion will show, how, in the process of a concise
statement of the rule, some important requirements have been left to be inferred,
and not expressed, in this paragraph of the section.

9.34. We first take up the question of joint interest. In the Calcutta case
already referred to, the following rule laid down by Taylor was quoted :—

“When several persons are jointly interested in the subject matter of
the suit, the general rule is that the admissions of any one of those persons
are receivable against himself and fellows, whether they be ali jointly suing
or sued, provided the admission relates to the subject-matter in dispute and
be made by the declarent in his character of a person jointly interested with
the party against whom the evidence is tendered.”

9.35. Thus, where two or more persons have a joint, as apposed to common’
interest, an admission by one of them may be used against the other or others,
provided it is made during the continuance of the joint interest. The principle
of identity of interest is properly applied where there is a joint interest, but not
where there is any interest'.

9.36. The above discussion will show that besides the requirements men-
tioned in the section, it is. as a matter of principle, necessary that:-——
(a) the person making the statement must have a joint interest in the
subject-matter, and
(b) the statement must relate to the subject-matter’.
9.37. In a subsequent Calcutta case* the rule was thus stated — “when
several persons are jointly interested in the subject-matter of the suit, an admie-
sion of any one of these persons is receivable not only against himself but also

"Howsulliah v. Mukta, (1885) LLR. 11 Cal. 588, 591.
*Taylor on Evidence, Vol. 1, 1st edition, page 489, 525.
5Dan v. Browne, 4 Comen 483, 492.

‘See para, 9.31, supra,

‘Jaggers v. Binnings, (1815) 1 Stark 64.
‘*Meajan Mathar v. Alimuddin Mis. (1916) LLR. 44 Cal. 130, 143.


171

“against the other defendant, whether they be all jointly suing or sued, provided
that the admission relates to the subject-matter in dispute, and be made by the
declarant in his character of a person jointly interested with the party against
whom the evidence is iendered.”

9.38. For the reasons stated above, wé recommend that in the third
paragraph, the first sub-paragraph should be revised so as to introduce these
requirements, which ate reasonable and have been judicially recognised.

9.39. The third paragraph, second sub-paragraph, which relates to privies,
feeds no change of substance.

9.40. We recommend a redraft of the second paragraph, so as to cover
civil proceedings other than suits. As regards criminal proceedings, no change
is needed.

9.41, In the third paragraph, in the first sub-paragraph the word “proceeding’
may be retained.

942. The third paragraph, second sub-paragraph, will not cover criminal
proceedings, while ihe third paragraph, sub-paragraph (1) would (as at present)
extend to criminal cases aiso. We do not, as a matter of policy, wish to extend
the third paragraph, second sub-paragraph, to criminal cases.

9.43. Apart from the points of expression and points of subsiance discussed
above, it is desirable that the structure of section 18 should be revised. In the
first place, it would obviously be convenient if the paragraphs are numbered in
the usual form.

9.44, Then, the first paragraph of the section mixes up parties and agents,
These should be kept separate, for the sake of convenience and neatness.

9.45, The third paragraph of the section deals with two situations,—persons

with (joint) interest, and privies. These two should be dealt with separately,
since the two stand in categories different from each other.

9.46. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 18
should be revised as follows :—
“18. (1) Statements made by a party to the proceeding are admissions.
(2) Statements made by an agent to a party to the proceeding, whom the

court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly
authorised by him to make them, are admissions.

(3) Statements made by parties to a civil proceeding, where the proceed-
ing is instituted by or against them in their representative character, are
not admissions, unless they were made while the party making them held

that character.
(4) Statements made by persons who have a joint proprietary of pecu-

niary interest in the subject-matter of the proceeding are admissions, pro-
vided the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) such statements are made by such persons in their character of persons
~ so interested, and during the continuance of the interest of the per-
sons making the statements;

(9) such statements relate to the subject-matter of the proceeding.

Recommendations
to amend section
18 third — para-
graph, sub-para-
graph (1).

Section 18, third
Paragraph, wub-
paragraph’ (2).

Section 18, second
paragraph.

Section 18, third
paragraph,

Structural changes
needed in section

Recommendation,

{Ex. section 18.
first para. in part).
section 18,
para., ip
pargj.

[Bx. section 18,
second para. 6]

Ex. section 18,
<third para, sub-
para (1).


(Ex. section 18,
sub-para. (2).].

‘Section 19~
“Introductory.

Statements by
strangers.

Merbal change re-
commended.

172

{5) Statements made by persons from whom the parties to the civil
proceeding have derived their interest in the subject-matter of the proceeding
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of
ihe persons making the statements.”

SECTION 19

9.47. Section 19 deals with statements made by persons whose position or
liability it is necessary to prove as against any patty 7o the suit. Statements
made by such persous are admissions if such statements satisfy two conditions,
namely—{u) such slaltements should be relevant ag against such persons in rela-
“on (0 such position or liability for a suit brought by or against them, and (b)
such statements are made whilst a person making them occupies such position or
is subject to such liability.

9.48. For understanding the section, it is necessary to refer to the illus-
tration,

9.49. The illustration given by the legislature below the section says, in
effect, that where a person who has undertaken to collect rents from a_ third
person is sued for not collecting the rent due from the third person and takes
the defence that no rent was due from the third person, a statement by the
third person that he owed rent to the plaintiff in the suit is an admission, and
is a relevant faci as against the person so sued if he denies that the third person
did owe rent to the plaintiff. This is not the precise wording of the illustration;
but we have put it in a language which will bring out the working of the section.
The principal significance of the section lies in this, that a statement made by
a third person becomes an admission, in the limited circumstances mentioned in
the section.

9.50, In general, statements by strangers are not relevant as against the
parties’ To this general rule, an exception made, apparently for the reason
that if the person whose position or liability is in dispute, though a stranger, has
himself made an admission, his statement should be relevant. Of course, a
very important condition is that,—as the section provides,—“such statements
would be relevant as against such persons in relation to such position or liability
i it bre or against them.” This requirement in the section implies
that iy Eta inonts ‘made by the third person in his favour would Bea
within the section. ,

9.51, It would appear that, in England, admissions of a bankrupt made
before the act of bankruptcy are receivable in proof of the debt of the petition-
ing creditor, as against the trustee in bankruptcy.? The position would be the
same in India under section 19. Similarly, in England, in an action against
the Sheriff, for not executing a process against the debtor, statements of the
debtor, admitting his debt to the executing creditor, are relevant, as against the
Sheriff. The position would be the same in India.

9.52. The above discussion does not reveal need for any change in the
section, in its substance. But we are of the view that the section should apply
to all “civil proceedings”, and we, therefore, recommend that for the word
“suit”, the word “civil proceeding” should be substituted.

1Coole y. Braham, (1848) 3 Exchequer 183.
4Covle V. Braham, (1848) 3 Exchequer 183. हु है
'Stephea’s Digest, article 18: Kempland v. Macaulay, Peake, 95, cited in Woodroffe.


173

SECTION 20

9.53. Under section 20, statements made by persons to whom a party to
the suit has expressly referred for information in reference to a matter in
dispute, are admissions. The iliustration to the section puts the case where
the question is whether a horse sold by A to B is sound. A says to 8-50
and ask C, C knows all about it”. C’s statement is an admission.

9.54, The position in this regard in Engiand is, in substance, the same.
Persons to whom one of the partics has asked another party to refer, are des-
ecribed in English text-books as “referees”. Stephen’ even says thal admission
by a person referred to by a party comes very near to the case of arbitration.
Some o! ihe earlier English cases cven go to the length of saying that the admis-
sion of the referee would be conclusive; but opinion on the subject is aot settled.
In this respect, section 31 of the Indian Evidence Act is quite clear, and the
admission is not conclusive as such, though it can operate as an estoppel. Of
course, if the parties agree to be bound by any statement which a third person

may make, on a reference, then the statements of such referees may be binding.*.*
But this would be by reason of contract, and not by reason of the law of evidence,

concerning stoien property, and the list in question was a list of stolen articles
which the accused had bought. From certain later cases,‘-* however, it would
appear that the absence of the accused would not affect the admissibility of the
statement of the referee in such cases.

9.55. Reverting to English cases which specifically deal with the admissions
of a referee, we may mention an action against executors, where the defendants
(executors) had written’ to the plaintiff that if the plaintiff wished for further
information as to the assets, it could be ascertained from a ceriain merchant.
The reply of the merchant was held to be receivable against the executors.

9.56. The section is confined to suits. The principle may noi be different
in the case of criminal proceedings. The matter arose, but was not conclusively
decided, in an English case.’ The accused told a constable that his wife would
make out a list of certain property. A list which was afterwards made out by
the wife and handed over to the constable in the presence of the accused was held
to be evidence against the accused, Coleridge C.J. however expressly refrained
from giving an opinion upon the question if the position would have been
different if the accused had been absent. This case related to a trial concerning
stolen property, and the list in question was a list of stolen articles which the
accused had brought. From certain later cases,** however, it would appear
that the absence of the accused would not affect the admissibility of tne statement
of the referee in such cases.

9.57. While occasions for applying section 20 in criminal cases are rare,
it is proper that for the expression “suit”, the expression “civil proceeding”
should be substituted? We recommend that the section should be so amended.

SECTION 21

9.58, Sectiun 21 consists of two braaches, namely, the positive branch and
the negative branch. The positive deals with the persons against whom admis-
sions are 1elevant and may be proved. It provides that admissions are relevant

'Stephen’s Digest, Article 19, nate.
%See discussion in Himaanchal v. Jatwar, LL.R. 46 Allahabad 710.
See also discussion in Akhari Begum v. Rahmat Hussain A..R. 1933 AlL 861, 880;
(1933) Allahabad Law Journal 1127.
अर, v. Gray (1911) 6 Criminal Appeal Reports 242.
5R. v. Campbell, (1912) 8 Criminal Appeal Reports 75.
‘Williams v. Innes, 1 Camp 364.
IR, v. Mallory. (1884), 15 Cox 458; 13 Q.BD: 33.
‘Compare recommendation as to section 19. .

Introductoty,

English law.

Recommendation.

Introduction.


174

and may be proved as against the person who makes them or his representative
in interest. The negative provides that admissions cannot be proved by or on
behalf of the person who makes them or by his representative in interest, except
in the specified cases.

The excepted cases are three in number. Of these, the first covers admis-
sions made under special circumstances, where if the maker of the admission
were dead, the case would fall within section 32. The special circumstances are
supposed to be a guarantee of truth, so as to make the admission relevant.
The second exception covers the case where the admission consists of a statement
of the existence of any state of mind or body, and is accompanied by conduct
rendering its falsehood improbable. What justifies this exception is the fact that
there ix conduct, and not merely a statement—and that conduct renders the
falsehood improbable. The third exception covers cases where the admission is
relevant otherwise than as an admission. This is only a formal exception.

(lustrations.

9.59. The following illustrations are appended to the section :

“(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not
forged. A affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may

Prove a statement by A that the deed is forged; but A cannot prove a state-

ment by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by

himself that the deed is forged.

(>) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.

Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of her proper
course.

A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his business,
showing observations alleged to have been taken by him from day to day,
and indication that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may
prove these statements, because they would be admissible between third
patties, if he were dead, under section 32, clause (2).

(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Calcutta.

He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on that
day, and bearing the Lahore post-mark of that day.

The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were
dead, it would be admissible under section 32, clause (2).

{d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen.

He olfers to prove that he refused to sell them below their value.

A may prove these statements, though they are admissions, because
they are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.

(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit coin
which he knew to be counterfeit.
He offers to prove that he asked a skillful person to examine the coin,
as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that that person did
examine it and told him it was genuine.
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the last preceding
illustration”.
Opening part in 9.60. The opening portion of the section provides that “admissions are ~
complete. relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them, or his

representative in interest”. This statement of the law is somewhat incomplete,
inasmuch as, under the preceding sections, statements made by certain other


175

persons are also admissions, in certain situations. For example—{i) statements
made by an agent to any party are admissions under section 18, Ist paragraph;
Gi) statements made by persons having a joint interest are admissions under
section 18, 3rd paragraph, sub-paragraph (1); (iii) statements made by persons
whose position must be proved as against a party to the suit, are admissions
under section 19: and {iv) statements made by a referee are admissions under
section 20.

9.61. All these situations are leit uncovered by the opening portion of
section 21, because the words “the person who makes them or his representative-
in-interest,” if taken literally, would not (for example) cover the principal, or
the person jointly interested (not the maker). This part of section 21 should,
therefore, be revised in a suitable manner.

9.62. Incidentally, such revision could be more conveniently done, if the
section is split up so as to deal, first, with the positive branch--when _ the
use of admissions is permitted--and then with the negative branch—when their
use is not permitted. Of course, the negative branch is subject to certain ex-
ceptions, which are contained in clauses (1), (2) and (3) of the existing section.

9.63. It would therefore be convenient if the opening words of section 21
are revised as follows: —

“21. (1) Admissions are relevant and may be proved against the
following persons, that is to say.—
(a) the person who makes them, or his representative in interest;

(b) i: the case of an admission made by an agent where the vase falls
within section 18, first paragraph, the principal of the agent; .

(c) in the case of an admission made by a person having a joint proprie-
tary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the proceeding,
where the case falls within section \8, third paragraph, sub-paragraph
(1), any other person having a joint proprietary or pecuniary interest
in that subject-matter;

(d) in the case of an admission made by a person whose position or
liability it is necessary to prove as against a party, where the case
falls within section 19, that party;

(e) in the case of an admission made by a person to whom a party has
expressly referred for information, where the case falls within section
20. the party who has so expressly referred for information”.

9.64. The fatter portion of the section may be revised as follows:—
(2) Admissions cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who
makes them or by his representative in interest, except in the following

cases : —
(a) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making
it, when it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead,
it would be relevant as between third persons under section 32.
tb) Ap admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making
it, when it consists of a statement of the existence of any state of
inind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or about the time when
such state of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by conduct
rendering its falsehood improbable.
{c) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making
it, when it is relevant otherwise as an admission.’

THe the paragraphs of section 18 are renumbered as recommended, this should be

altered. i
2Reference to be altered if section 18, paragraph third is renumbered.

4l|lustrations as at present.

Recommendation
as to opening
part.

Recommendation
to split up the
section.

Recommended re-
draft of opening
portion,

Recommended re-
draft of latter por-
tion.


Introduction.

Generai sule,

Rule in England
different.

Reasons for _de-
parture from
English Jaw.

176

SECTION 22

9.65. Under section 22, oral admissions as to the contents of a document
are not relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove them shows that
he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such documents
“under the rules hereinafter contained”, or unless the genuineness of a document

produced is in question,

9.66. The general rule in the Act is that the contents of a written instru-
meni, which is capable of being produced, must be proved by the instrument
itself and not by parol evidence.’ The substance of the section is, thus, in con-
formity with the other provisions of the Act, which lay down the general rule
referred io above. Briefly speaking, these other provisions, so far as is material,
require that the party must give notice to produce and must account for the
absence of the original, in general.

9.67. ln England, the rule laid down in Slgiterie y. Pooley’ is that
admissions are receivable to prove the contents of documents without notice to
produce and without accounting for the absence of the originals. The principle
on which such evidence is received, in England, is that what a party himself
admits to be true may reasonably be presumed to be so, and such evidence is
not open to the same objection that applies to other parol evidence.

9.68. Thus, the corresponding exception in England, to the rule prohibiting
the substitution of oral testimony for the document itself, is wider. The admissions
being primary evidence against a party (and also against those claiming under
him), are receivable to prove the contents of documents without notice to
produce, or without accounting for the absence of the originals.

9.69. However, recognising that such a wide altitude may lead io dangerous
consequences, the section, departing from the English law, adopts only a modified
rule, and oral admissions are not relevant until the general conditions for the
adriission of secondary evidence are satisfied.

9.70. The consequences which are liable to follow on the reception of
such evidence without there being a case for secondary evidence, were pointed
ovt in an Irish case? where the English rule was criticised. Section 22 is based on
the principle underlying this criticism. The section modifies the English law.
inasmuch as the admissions in question are admissible only if the conditions for
secondary evidence exist. Yn the Irish case,’ Pennefather, C.J. observed while
commenting on the case of Slatterie v. Pooley’—

“fs there no danger of untruth or misrepresentation when used against
the party making the admission? That is the ground put by Parke B. in
Slattery v. Pooley, and in which I cannot agree, when I know by experience
how easy it is to fabricate admissions and how impossible to come prepared
to deiect the falsehood. Why are writings prepared at all but to prevent
mistakes and misrepresentation and why, having taken that precaution, with
such writing at hand and capable of being produced, is the same to be
laid aside. and inferior and less satisfactory evidence resorted to?”

‘Sections 59, 64, 91.
“Slaterie v. Pooley, (1840) 6 M & W 669, 151 5. R. 579.
3See discussion in Muttekaruppa v. Rama, (1866) 3 Mad, H.C.R. 158.
'See the observations of Pennefather, C. J., in Lawless v. Quesale, 8 Ir. Law R. 382,
28S (infra).
sLawless v. Quesale, 8 Ir. Law R. 382, 385.
SSrattrie v Pooley, supra.


177

9.71. In a case which went upto the Privy Council, the piaintif sued for
a setilement of account, and the plaintiff, instead of producing and proving the
account current between himself and the defendant, produced evidence to prove
the oral admission of the debt. The Privy Council rejected the evidence and
held—

“They consider that it is a very dangerous thing to rest a judgment
upon verbal admissions or a sum due. without very clear evidence, especially
when there are other means of proving the case. if a true one.”

9.72. There is a parallel provision’ in the Act under which, when the
existence, conditions or contents of the original document have been proved 10
be admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his
Tepresentatives in interest, such written admission is admissible. But, we are
not concerned with that provision.

9.73. Where the question is of genuineness, the last part of the section
permits oral admissions. Although this portion is somewhat cryptically worded,
its true meaning is what Norton® has stated, which is in these words:

“Or, unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question. The
effect of the last clause of this section seems to be that if such a document
is produced, the admissions of the parties to it that it is, or is not, genuine
may be received.”

9.74. No changes of substance are needed in the section, but the last
portion of the section could be made more clear, by spelling out its true intent
as mentioned above.* To carry out this object, we recommend that the section
should be re-drafted as follows :—

“22. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are uct rele-
yant—

(a) unless .. ihe party proposing to prove them shows
that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of
such document under the rules hereinafter contained: or

(b) except where a document is produced and its genuineness is in
question.”

SECTION 23

9.75. Section 23 provides that in civil cases, no admission is relevant, if it
is made either upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be
given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer that the parties
agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.

Under the Explanation to the section, nothing in this section shall be
taken 10 except any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil from giving evidence
of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under section 126.

9.76. One of the most impertant applications of the section is in relation
to offers made “without prejudice”. It should, of course, be pointed out that
the section is not confined to cases of offers “without prejudice”. The section
comes into play whenever here is an express condition or implication that
evidence of the matter stated is not to be given.

9.77. In regard to an offer without prejudice, the principle of the section
may be thus stated*—“Confidential overtures of pacification and any other offer
ition between litigating parties, expressly or impliedly made without

\heo Parshad v. Jaggar Nath, (1884) 10 Indian Appeais 79 (P.C.}
§Section 65. clause (5).
*Norten cited by Field on Evidence.
‘Para, 9.73, supra.
SJayler on Evidence, page 795. cited in Woodroffe.

Dangers of admit-
ting oral admis-
sions without es-
tablishing case
for secondary
evidence.

Last part of the
section.

Recommendation.

Admission in civil
cases, when rele-
vant.

Principle as to
offers without
prejudice.

Principle as to
offer without pre-
judice.


Rule narrow in
the present sec-
tion,

Old law wider.

Question to be
considered.

Views expressed
by Denning, L. J.

178

prejudice, are excluded on ground of public policy. Now, if a man says his
letter is without prejudice, that is tantamount to saying, “I make you an offer
which you may accept or not, as you like; but if you do not accept it, the
having made it is io have no effect at all”. As has been said do not ‘without
prejudice’ mean, ‘I make you an offer; if you do not accept it, this letter is not
10 be used against me’.

9.78. The section is sound enough so far as it goes. We would, however,
like to point out that the rule in the section is narrow in one respect. It requires—
( an express agreement prohibiting the giving of evidence, or (ii) circumstances
from which such an agreement cay be implied. This requirement may not cover
all statenenis made for negotiations. It would, we think, be fair to provide that
statements made with a view to. or in the course of, negotiations for a settle-
ment should always fall within this section. At present, in the absence of any
express or strongly implied restriction as to confidence, an offer of compromise
is admissible.

But it should be noted that the essence of compromise is that the party
making it is willing to submit to a sacrifice. or to make a concession, though
nothing at the time was expressly said respecting its confidential character. The
offer might have been made for the sake of purchasing peace. and without any
intention to admit liability as to the extent of the claim.

9.79, It may also be noted that the old law in India was, to some extent,
wider inan the present section. In the observations of Mr. Justice Phear in the
case of Mohabeer Singh v. Dhujjoo Singh? the following statement will de
found: “It is a rule which all Courts of Justice find it right to observe that
nothing that passes between the parties to a suit in any attempt at arbitration
or compromise, should be allowed to effect the slightest prejudice to the merits
of their case as it eventually comes to be tried before the Court: unless this were
so, the only thing which could be prudently recommended to suitors would be
never to listen for one moment to any proposal to settle the matter or to compro-
mise it, after it had come into Civil Court”.

9.80. This proposition was enunciated in respect of a case not governed
by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The question now to be
considered is not whether the above statement was a correct enunciation of the
law, but whether that ought not to be the law.

9.81. In order to appreciate the need for a change in the law, i is first
desirable to consider the rationale underlying the legal provisions. Denning L.J.
(as he then was) said in an English case* relating to matrimonial relief:

“The rule as to ‘without prejudice? communications applies with
special force to negotiations for reconciliation. It applies whenever the
dispute has got to such dimensions that litigation is imminent.

“In all cases where the entrangement has reached the point where the
parties consult a probation officer, litigation is imminent. It is clear that
there is a dispute which may end either in the Magistrates’ court or the
divorce court. The probation officer has no privilege of his own from
disclosure...”

Un re River Steamer Co. (1871) LR. 6 Ch. 822, 831, 833.
*Mohabeer Singh v. Dhujjoo Singh, (1873) 20 W. R. 172 (Cai).
*Emphasis added.

‘McTaggast v. McTaggart, (1948) 2 All. E.R. 754.


179

9.82. In a iater English case,’ the principle stated in McTageart's case
was applied to proceedings before a probation officer in connection with
matrimonial relief. It was observed “It is essential, if a reconciliation is to be
attempted, with the probation officer as intermediary, that statements made by
either party, as soon as the probation officer is asked to act in that capacity,
should be treated as privileged. Counsel for the wife suggested that if one
apples that principle at such an early stage as in the present case, it tends to
prejudice the working of another principle, viz., that a spouse is no longer in
desertion if he or she has made a bona fide attempt to be taken back, and he
argued that if such a bona fide attempt is made through a probation officer, it
ought to be taken into account.

“There is some force in that argument, but one must bear in mind that,
in matrimonial disputes, the State is also an interested party and is more
interested in reconciliation than in divorce, and if the rule as to privilege
tends to promote the prospects of reconciliation, I think it ought to be
applied, although it may make it difficult for the spouse in some ways to
prove a hona fide attempt to return home. That difficulty can always be
got over by the deserting spouse writing a suitable and bona fide letter and
sending it by registered post to the deserted one.”

9.83, The observations were made in the context of matrimonial relief:
but there is, in our opinion, justification for adapting the same approach in other
fields also.

9.84, There is, in our view, a fundamental aspect of social policy which
should justify the exclusion of any admission made during negotiations for
settlement. The general policy of the law is to favour and encourage the
amicable settlement of disputes out of court. For that reason, it should not
allow, in evidence, as admissions of liability, settlements or offers for settlement.
Many such offers would never be made if they were to be treated as admissions
of liability. The present narrow provision in section 23 is, as a matter of social
policy, somewhat inadequate. One who makes an offer for settlement should
at least have an assurance that the offer which he makes will not prejudice his
case later, if a settlement is not reached. Without such a protective rule, it would
often be difficult to take any effective steps toward an amicable compromise or
adjustment.

Men should be permitted to buy their peace without prejudice to them,
should the offer not succeed. It is most important that the door should not be
shut against compromises. When a man offers to compromise a claim, he does
not thereby necessarily admit it, but simply agrees to pay so much so as to be
rid of the impending proceeding. There is, therefore, a justification for making
a specific provision in regard to settlement or offers for settlement.

9.85. For the reasons stated above, we recommend that the following
Explanation should be inserted’ as Explanation 2, below section 23:—

“Explanation 2.—Where an admission is made for the purposes of or
in the course of negotiation of a settlement of compromise of a disputed
claim, the parties shall be deemed to have agreed together that evidence of
that admission shall not be given.”

We may note that this does not affect the operation of Order 23, Rule 3,
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 {as recently amended) since the compromise in
writing can be proved.

IMole v. Mole (1950) 2 All. BR. 328, 329.

™McTageart’s case, supra.
Existing Explanation may be renumbered as Explanation 1.
‘Act 106 of 1976.

English case

Amendment why
needed,

Recommendation.


intrcductory.

Relevance of ad-
missions.

Result of the
scheme.

CHAPTER 10

CONFESSIONS — GENERAL DISCUSSION AND SCHEME

10.1. With section 24 begins a group of sections dealing with confessions,
and we propose to devote this chapter mainly to the scheme of the sections
concerning confessions.

10.2. There is no statutory definition of the expression “confession” in
the Act. Nor is there a separate provision specially making confessions relevant,
because relevancy, as such, is in fact dealt with, and is governed, by the general
provision in section 17 (and the succeeding sections), whereunder “admissions”
are relevant. In the scheme of the Act, confessions are treated as a species of
admissions. so far as the basis of their relevance is concerned. The principal
object of the sections dealing with the subject (sections 24-30) is to Jay down
certain special rules regulating the use of confessions. Of course, the above
comment relates to relevance. and not to weight. Nor does it deal with the
quantum of proof in criminal cases,—an aspect which may bring certain special
considerations into play.

10.3. Any admission by an accused of an incriminating fact falls within
the scope of sections 18 to 21, Evidence Act, and is, therefore, relevant? In
Pakala Narayanswami’s case? the Privy Council observed that a confession is an
admission, in terms, of the: offence itself, or at any rate, substantially, of all the
facts which constitute the offence. Ii this sense. a confession is more restricted
than an admission. What we want to point out is that the relevancy of confes-
sions having been provided for by sections 17-21, it was not necessary to provide
for it again. But special rales of irrelevance had to be provided for. The circum-
stances under which @ confession becomes irrelevant, are, therefore, elaborately
dealt with in sections 24, 25 and 26. These are followed by sections 27 10-30,
which impose some limitations on the operation of sections 24 to 26, or other-
wise make certain provisions by way of clarification or other provisions appro-
priate for confessions.

10.4. The entire group is followed by section 31 — a section dealing with
admissions. We may also mention that confessions recorded by Magistrates
must comply with the.Code of Criminal Procedure.*

10.5. The result of this scheme is that a statement, in order that it may

be admissible in evidence with reference to the group of sections: now under
discussion. must satisfy the following conditions, or possess the special features

mentioned below:—
0) it must amount to an admission (sections 17-21).
(i) if it amounts to a confession (an expression not defined}, it must not
he excluded by sections 24 to section 26. But this is subject to (iii)
below.
(ii) certain restrictions or doubts as te the admissibility of confessions
are removed by section 27 to 29.

1Ghulam Hussain v. The King, 77 1A. 65 (PC).
*pakala Naravanswamt ¥. Emperor, ALR. 1939. P.C. 47, 52.
Section 164, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,

180


181

{iv} certain special rules are given in section 30, Evidence Act (confession
of a co-accused), and section 164 of the Code of Crimina] Procedure,
1973,

10.6. It is clear that’ every admission made by an accused person is not, Every admission
in the view of the law, a confession: for. if that were so,—that is, if the expression not a confession,
+ “admission made by an accused person” were identical in meaning with “con-

fession made by an accused person”,—-then there would be no occasion for the
legislature to change the form of expression, and, after using the word “ad-
mission” in sections 17 to 23, to use the word “confession” in sections 24 to
30. Further, it is impossible to hold that admissions mean only statements made

by parties to civil proceedings and do not include statements made by patties
accused in criminal proceedings, withou: restricting the language of sections 17
to 23 in a manner at variance with its natural meaning and import, and especially

' {at variance) with the illustrations (b), (c), (d) and (e) to section 21. all of which
refer to statements by accused persons as being admissions.

10.7. Confessions (like all admissions) are an exception to the rule against Confession an ex-
hearsay. As a general proposition, the rules of evidence exclude most aut-of- net ad hear-
court statements—either oral or written—if they are offered to prove the truth
of the matters asserted in them. However, there are several exceptions to the
“hearsay” rule, one of the most important of which permits the prosecution to
introduce, in a criminal trial, any relevant out-of-court statement made by the
accused’, In this sense, confessions constitute an exception to the rule against
hearsay.

10.8. There is some controversy as to the theoretical basis in support of
admitting such statements. Wigmore, in adopting the approach first put forth
by Professor Morgan’, grouped, in one exception to the hearsay rule, all state-
ments made by an accused and those made by a party to a civil litigation’. So
far. he was logical. But he claimed that the major justification for the hearsay
tule was to ensure that the side not offering the evidence has an opportunity
to cross-examine the original declarant. And, (he added), whenever the declarant
was the party against whom the evidence is being offered, the reason for in-
voking the hearsay rule was absent: If the defendant wishes to contradict the
truth of his former assertion, he has only to take the stand. But, this argument
could not provide a satisfactory historical explanation for the exception,
because, until the 19th century, a party to a civil litigation was not competent
to testify, and the opportunity for the defendant to refute his earlier statement
was, thus, limited to the possibility of presenting the full story to the court
through other witnesses. Yo criminal cases, again, the accused was not a com-
petent witness until the law was altered by a specific statutory provision-- in
England (1898) and in India (1955).

Ullahi Baksh, (1886) 21 P.R. Cr. No. 16, pages 28, 31.

1@XPlowden J.).

*Morgan, “Admissions as an exception to the Hearsay Rule” (1921) 30 Yale LJ. 355.
: sMorgan, “Admissions” ete. (1921) 30 Yale LJ. 355.
ह ‘Wigmore, Evidence (rd Bd. 1940), 1048,

a) The Criminal Evidence Act, 1898 (Eng).

(b) The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955, inserting section 342-A

of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898: See, now, the Code of 1973, section
315(1).


Importance

of

voluntary chatac-
ter,

Provision in Cr.
PBC.

Classification
confessions.

of

182

10.9. In one of the American cases, a fairly satisfactory explanation for
admitting statements by an accused appears: “Basically, these statements, being
relevant, material, and competent, are admissible. The problem is whether any
specific rule excludes them, whether there is some idiosyncrasy which denies
to them the general basic rule of admissibilily otherwise applicable.”

10.10. Two principles form the basis of the provisions relating to confes-
sions in England. First, confessions, like other admissions, are received on the
presumption that no person will voluntarily make a statement which is against
his interest unless it be true®

10.11. But, secondly, the force of the confession depends upon its voluntary
character’. The object of the rules relating to the exclusion of confessions in
England is to exclude all confessions which may have been procured by the
Prisoner being led to suppose that it will be better for him to admit himself
to be guilty of an offence which he really never committed’.

10.12, In R. v. Baldry‘, Lord Campbell C.J. observed—

“The reason is not that the law supposes that the statement will be
false, but that the prisoner has made the confession under a bias, and that,
therefore. it would be better not to submit it to the jury.”

10.13. The admission of such evidence would naturally lead the agents
of the police, “while seeking to obtain a character for activity and zeal, to
harass and oppress prisoners, in the hope of wringing from them a reluctant

confession*.

10.14. It should be also noted that the Code of Criminal Procedure
specifically prohibits’ the police from offering threats, inducements or promises
to induce confessions. Of course, a substantially similar result is achieved in
practice by the Judges’ Rules in England, though those rules have no statutory
force.

10.15. It will help to a clear understanding of the relevant provisions of
the Act if confessions are classified as—{a) those made to Magistrates (briefly,
“Magisterial” confession)* (bj those made to a person in authority; (c) those
made to the police: (d) those made while in police custody; and (e) others.
Classes (c} and (d) overlap, to some extent; but they are not identical. For
example. a confession made while the accused is in police custody, to a person
other than a police officer, falls only within class (d).

(a) Confessions before Magistrates are specifically dealt with in section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The effect of the
corresponding section of the Code of 1898, as interpreted by the
Privy Council in Nazir Ahmed’s case’, is that if a confession is sought
to be admitted in evidence. it can be proved only if it is a valid
record of the confession under that section.

Yones vy. U. S. 296 P. 2d 398. 403-04 (D.C. Cir. 1961), cert, denied, (1962) 370 U.S.
913.

"Taylor, Evidence, section 865, cited in Woodroffe.

मर, v. Thompson, LR. (1893), 2 0.8. at page 15.

मर, ५. Court, 7 C.&P. 486 (Littledale 13.

भर, v. Baldry, 2 Den., CC. 430.

"Taylor, Evidence, section 874, cited in Woodroffe.

TThe Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, section 1631; also see the 1973 Code, section
163.

पट, Nazir Ahmed, ALR. 1936, P.C. 255, 258.

"Nazir Ahmed, ALR. 1936 P.C. 255.


183

(b) As to confessions made to a person in authority, section 24 must
be especially complied with.

(c) As to confessions made to the police, section 25 is of special im-
portance

(8) As to confessions made while the maker is in the custody of the
police, section 26 is of special importance.

(९) Other confessions, e.g.. confessions made to a private person not
in authority, have no special rules applicable to them.

10.16. A few more words about the scheme of the sections would be
useful. Section 24 is a somewhat general provision, and is inteaded to ensure
that only voluntary confessions are admitted in evidence. Sections 25 and 26
are special rules, relating respectively to a confession made fo a police officer
ard a confession made in the custody of the police officer. The former is com-
pletely excluded. But, as regards the Jatter, a confession made in the imme-
diate presence of the Magistrate is made provable under section 26, even though
the accused is, at the time, in the custody of the police.

10.17. The position, therefore, is that confessions, other than confessions
to the police, are admissible,—subject to their being excluded by the “appear-
ance” of the vitiating circumstances mentioned in section 24.

10.18, Under section 27, when a fact is deposed 10 as discovered in conse-
quence of information received from an accused person in the custody of a
police officer, the information, in so far as it relates distinctly to the fact so
discovered, may be proved, whether it amounts to a confession or not. The
fact so discovered is taken as showing that so much of the confession as imme-
diately ,elates to it is true. Under section 28, if a confession referred to in
section 24 is made after the impression caused by the inducement, threat or
promise had been fully removed, it is relevant. Section 29 makes it clear that
a confession which is otherwise relevant, does not become irrelevant because
of promise of secrecy, or because it was made in consequence of deception
practised on the maker, or because it was made when he was drunk, or because
it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered or because
he was not warned that he was not bound to make the confession. Section 30
empowers the Court “to take into consideration” the confession of a co-accused,

in certain cases.

10.19. “Magisterial” confessions' are specifically dealt with in section 164
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

10.20. The scope and applicability of sections 24-27 were lucdly ex-
plained in State of U.P. y. Deoman Upadhyay, by Shah J. (as he then was). He
observed—

“Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act is one of a group of sections
relating to the relevancy of certain forms of admissions made by persons
accused of offences, Sections 24 to 30 of the Act deal with admissibility
of confessions, i.e., of statements made by a person stating or suggesting
that he has committed a crime. By section 24, in a criminal proceeding
against a person, a confession made by him is inadmissible if it appears
to the Court to have been caused by inducement, threat or promise having
reference to the charge and proceeding from a person in authority. By
section 25, there is an absolute ban against proof at the trial of a person
accused of an offence, of a confession made to a police officer. The ban
which is partial under section 24 and complete under section 25 applies

‘For this word, see Nazir Ahmed, A.LR. 1936 P. C. 253, 258 (Lord Roche)
SState of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya, A1.R. 1960 S.C. 1125.

13-131 LAD/ND/77

Scheme of the
sections.

Scope of sections
24--2'


184

“equally whether or not the person against whom evidence is suughl [0 be
led in a criminal trial was at the time of making the confession in custody.
For the ban to be effective the person need not have’ been accused of an
offence when he made the confession. The expression, ‘accused person’ in
section 24 and the expression ‘a person accused of any offence’ have the
sae connotation, and describe the person against whom evidence is sought
to be fed in a criminal proceeding. As observed in Narayanswami v.
Emperor! by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. ‘Section 25
covers a confession made to a police officer before any investigation has
begun or otherwise not in the course of an investigation.’ The adjectival
clause ‘accused of any offence’ is therefore descriptive of the person against
whoni a confessional statement made by him is declared not provable, and
does not predicate applicability of the ban. Section 26 of the Indian Evi-
dence Act by its first paragraph provides ‘No confession made by any
per-on whilst he is in the custody of a police officer, unless it be made in
the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against a person
accused of an offence’. By this section, a confession made by a person
who is in custody is declared not provable unless it is made in the imme-
diate presence of a Magistrate. Whereas section 25 prohibits proof of a
confession made by a person to a police officer whether or not at the time
of making the confession, he was in custody, section 26 prohibits proof
of a confession by a person in custody made to any person unless the con-
fession is made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate. Section 27
which is in the form of a proviso states ‘provided that, when any fact is
deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received from
a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much
of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates
distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved’. The expression,
‘accused of any offence’ in section 27, as in section 25 is also descriptive
of the person concerned, 1.०. against a person who is accused of an offence.
Section 27 renders provable certain statement made by him while he was
in the custody of a police officer, section 27 is founded on the principle that
even though the evidence relating to confessional or other statements made
by a person, whilst he is in the custody of a police officer, is tainted and
therefore inadmissible, if the truth of the information given by him is
assured by the discovery of a fact, it may be presumed to be untainted and
is therefore declared provable in so far as it distinctly relates to the fact
thereby discovered. Even though section 27 is in the form of a proviso to
section 26, the two sections do not necessarily deal with evidence of the
same character. The ban imposed by section 26 is against the proof of
confessional statements.

“Section 27 is concerned with the proof of information whether it
amounts to a confession or not, which leads to discovery of facts. By sec-
lion 27, even if a fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of infos-
mation received. only that much of the information is admissible as distinctly
relates to the fact discovered. By section 26, a confession made in the
presence of a Magistrate is made provable in its entirety.

“Section 162 of the Criminal Procedure Code also enacts a ule of
evidence. This section in so far as it is material for purposes of this case,
prohibits, but not so as to affect the admissibility of information 10 the extent
permissible under section 27 of the Evidence Act, use of answers by any per-
son to a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter 14 of

'Narayaitswaumi v. Emperor, 66 Ind. App. 66, A.LR. 1939 P. ९. 47.


185

the Code, in any enquiry or trial in which such person is charged for any
offence, under investigation al the time when the statement was made

“On an analysis of sections 24 to 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, and section
162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the following material propositions
emerge:

(a) Whether a person is in custody or outside, a confession made by him
io a police officer or the making of which is procured by inducement,
threat or promise having reference to the charge against him and pro-
ceeding from a person in anthorily, is not provable against him in any
proceeding in which he is charged with the commission of an offence.

(0) A confession made by a person whilst he is in the custody of a police
officer to a person other than a police officer is not provable in a pro-
ceeding in which he is charged with the commission of an offence unless
it is made ia the iminediate preseace of a Magistrate.

(०) That part of the information given by a person whilst in police custody
whether the informatica is confessional or otherwise, which distinctly
relates to the fact thereby discovered but no more, is provable ia a pro-
ceeding in which he is charged with the commission of an offence.

(d) A statement whether it amounts [0 a confession or not made by a person
when he is net in custody, to cnother person, such latter person not
being a police officer, may be proved if it is othe’wise relevant.

(० A statement made by a person to a police officer in the course of an in-
vestigation of an offence under Chapter 14 of the Criminal Procedure
Code cannot, excepi to the extent permitted by section 27 of the Indian
Evidence Act. be used for any purpose at any enquiry or trial in respect
of any offence under investigation at the time when the statement was
made in which he is concerned as a person accused of an offence.

“A confession made by a person not in custody is, therefore, admissible
in evidence aguinst him in a criminal proceeding unless it is procured in the
manner described in section 24, or is made to a police officer. A statement
made by a person, if it is not confessional, is provable in alf proceedings uiless
it is made to a police officer in the course of an investigation, and the pro-
ceeding in which it is sought to be proved is one for the trial of tha: person
for the offence under investigation whea he made that statement. Whereas in-
formation given by a persou in custody is to the exient to wh: h it distinetiy
relates to a fact thereby discovered, made provable, by section 162 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, such information given by a person not in custody
to a police officer in the course of the investigation of an offence is not pro-
vable. This distinction may appear to be somewhat paradoxical. Sections 25
and 26 were enacted not because the law presumes the statements to be untrue
but, having regard to the tainted nature of the source of the evidence, the law
prohibited them from being received in evidence. It is manifest that the class
of persons who needed protection most were those in the custody of the police,
and persons not in the custody of police did not need the same degree of
protection. But by the combined operation of section 27 of the Evidence Act
and section 162 of the Code of Crimiaal Procedure, the admissibilily in evi-
dence against a person in a criminal proceeding of a statement made to a
police officer leading 10 the discovery of a fact depends for its determination
on the question whether he was in custody at the time of making the state-
ment. Jt is provable if he was in custody at the time when he made it,
otherwise it is not.

There is nothing in the Evidence Act which precludes proof of informa-
tion given by a person not in custody which relates to the facts thereby



History.

186

discovered: it is by virtue of the ban imposed by section 162 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, that a statement made to a police officer in the course of the
investigation of an offence under Chapter 14 by a person not in police custody
at the time it was made, even if it leads to the discovery of a fact, is not prov-
abie against him at the trial for that offence. But the distinction which, it
may be reinembered, does not proceed on the same lines as under the Evid-
ence Act, arising in the matter of admissibility of such statements made to the
police officer in the course of an investigation between persons jn custody and
persons not in custody, has fittle practical significance. When a person not in
custody approaches a police officer investigating an offence and offers to give
information leading to the discovery of a fact, having a bearing on the charge
which may be made against him, he may appropriately be deemed to have sur-
rendered himself to the police. Section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
does not contemplate any formality before a person can be said to be taken in
custody; submission to the custody by word or action by a person is
sufficient. A person directly giving to a police officer by word of mouth
information which may be used as evidence against him, may be deemed to
have submitted himself to the ‘custody’ of the police officer within the
meaning of section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act.) Exceptional cases may
certainly be imagined in which a person may give information without
presenting himself befere a police officer who is investigating an offence.
For instance, he may write a letter and give such information or may send a
telephonic or other message to the police officer”.

10.21. The principal sections of the Aci relaling to confessions can be
traced to the Code of Criminal Procedure of 18613. That Code itself was largely
based on an earlier Regulation of 1817; but we shall concentrate on the Code
of 1861. Section 146 of the Code of 1861, repeating an earlier provision, provided
as follows: —

“146. No police officer or other person shalt offer inducement to an
accused person by threat or promise or otherwise to make any disclosure or
confession”.

Section 147 of the Code of 1861, markedly reversing the law, as it stood in the
earlier Regulation?, provided as follows: —

“147. No police officer shail record any statement, or any admission or
confession of guilt, which may be made before him by a person accused of
any offence”.

The section was subject to a proviso, allowing a police officer to reduce into writ-
ing any statement or admission or coafession “for his own information or guidance”.

10.22. But the most important change consisted in the introduction of
a new provision, contained in section 148 of the Code of 1861, which, in the most
imperative terms, laid down as follows:

“148. No confession or admission of guilt made to a police officer shall
be used as evidence against a person accused of any offence.”

Section 149 of the Code of 1861, going even further in the same direc-
tion, Jaid down—

“[49. No confession or admission of guilt made by any person whilst
he is in the custody of a police officer, unless it be in the immediate presence
of a Magistrate, shali be used as evidence against such person.

Ls 167; ALR. 1922 P.C.

245 Remembrancer v. Lalit Mohan Singh, 1. 49, Cal.
342; Seah Beldar y. Emperor, LL.R. 12 Pat. 241; ALR. 1933 Pat, 149 ($. B.

‘The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1861 (25 of 1861).
Section 19(1), Regulation 20 of 1817.



187

Then foliowed a distinct proposition of jaw, contained in a separate sec-
tan [50, which was as follows: —

“150. When any fact is deposed to by व police officer as discovered by
him in consequence of information received trom a persan accused of any
offence, so much of such information, whether it amounts to 8 confession or
admission of guilt or not, as relates distinctly to the fact discovered by it,
may be received in evidence.”

10.23. Sections 146 and 147 of the Code of 1861 were purely administra-
tive prohibitions to police officers against employing any inducement, threat or
promise for cbtaining any disclosure or confession, and against reducing to writ-
ing any statements or confessions made by accused persons. The next three sec-
tions 148. [49 and 150, however, contained important rules. which perhaps did
not properly belong to the province of Criminal Procedure, but to that of Evidence.
Sections 148 and 149 must not be understood to contain identical propositions of
law. Section 148 laid down ॥ general proposition. against the admissibility of
confessions made to police officers. Section 149 carried the principle further, by
rendering similar confessions inadmissible, even though not made to a police
officer, but made by a person “whilst he is in the custody of a police officer”
Then came a general proposition, which extended over an area covered by hoth
the preceding sections, and, under certain conditions, rendered such confessions
admissible as would otherwise be inadmissible under these two sections. This
general proposition appeared in the form of a separate and independent section
150, laying down that a police officer might “depose to” any confession made by
an accused person so far as such confession Jed to discovery of some fact. The
-words of the section were general, and could be understood to govern confessions
‘contemplated by both the preceding two sections. For example, suppose the accused
said to the policeman: “I concealed the articles which T got in the dacoity A
under my stack of straw, and those which got in dacoity B under the floor of my
‘cow-house”. As long as the information related distinctly to the fact discovered
in consequence of it. it might be received in evidence under section 150 of the Cri-
“minal Procedure Code of 1861, even though the confession was made to the police
-oflicer and by a person in his custody? But an essential feature of the section was,
that the confession must be proved by the deposition of the police officer himself,
<i order to render it admissible in evidence. In the case of Bishoo Manjee},
Jackson J. observed: “The police officer to whom the statement was made was
not examined at all. and, therefore, it seems that the admission, so far as it was
am. admission, is not taken out of the general terms of section 148, which exclude
such admissions generally.” But, in the same case’, another important rule was also
laid down, which has a bearing upon the interpretation of section 150, as it
originally stood in the Code of 1861. It was held that an admission obtained by
a police officer from a prisoner by persuasion and promises of immunity, in con-
travention of section 146 of the 1861 Code, was not admissible in evidence, even if
it led to the discovery of facts. The view had already been previously adopted by
a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Queen v. Dharam Dutt
Oiha4 These two cases, therefore, are distinct authorities for the proposition that,
notwithstanding the general terms of section 150, it was never taken to qualify the
prohibition contained in section 146 (concerned with involuntary confessions.)

10.24. Such was the the law before 1869, when Act 8 of that year was
passed. The Act amended the Code of 1861, by revising section 150. It substituted,

ICf. section 163, Cr. P. C. 1973.
%S.W.R. 16 Cr. Letters,

‘Bishoo Manijece, 9 W.R. 16 (Cr. R) (Calcutta).

‘Queen v. Dharam Dutt Ojha, 8 W.R. 13 (Cr. R).

Act of 1869,


188

in iis place @ section in which the change of language is noticeable. The revised
section 150 run as follows:

“150. Provided that, when any fact is deposed to in evidence as dis-
coverei] in consequence of information received from a person accused of any
offence', or in the custody of a police officer, so such of such information,
whether it amounts te a confession or admission of guilt or not, as relates
distinctly fo the fact thereby discovered. may be received in evidence.”

Comparative 10.25, For conven‘ence of reference, sections 148. 149 and 150 of Act
art. 25 of 1861, section 150 as amended by and Act 8 of 1869, and sections 25, 26 and
27 of Act 1 of 1872. are quoted below:

Act 25 of 1861 Act 8 of 1869. Acti of 1872

(Criminal Procedure (Evidence Act).

Code}.

1 ~ 2 3
§-148. No confession vt aimissionnf Amending the Act of 5.25. No confession made

guilt mide to a police officer shall 1861. to a police officer shall
be used as evidence against a per- be used as evidence
son accused of any offence. against a person accused

of any offence.

8,149, No confession or admission Sec. 26. No confession
ef guilt made by any person whilst made by any person
he is in custcdy cf a prlice ¢fiicer, whilst he is inthe custody
unless it be made in the imme of 3 police officer, unters
diate presence «f a Magistrate. it be made inthe fume.

such be used as evidence a: diate presence of a Ma-
shall perscn. gistrate, shall be proved
as against such person.

S. 150, When any fact is deposed to S. 150. Provided that when 5. 27. Provided that whery
by apolice officer disc vered by any fact is deposed to any fact is disposed
him ia consequence of informa- in evidence as discover- as discoveredin conse.
tion received froma person accu- edin consequence of in- quence of iaformation
sed of any offence. s+ much of formation received from received from a. person
such iafarmation, whether it apersom accused of any accused of any offence
amcunts to ac nfessicn cr ad- offence, or in ihe custo- in the custody of a po~
missicn ef guilt <r not, as telates dy of a police officer lice officet,8o much of
distinctly to the fact discovered by so muchof such informa- such iaformatiou, whee
it, may be received in evidence. tion, whether it amounts therit ameuntsto acon

to a confession or ad- fession or mot, as relates
mission of guilt.or not, distinctly to the fact
as rclates distinctly to thereby discoeered may
the fact discovered, may be proved.

be reccived in cviden-

ce.

This much of historical discussion wil] be enough for the present purpose.

English law. 10.26. We now proceed to a brief discussion of the English law.

The position in England may be very briefly stated’ in the form of these
propositions—-
“1. A confession of guilt in a criminal case is only admissible if it was
not made in consequence of an unlawful threat, or inducement of a
temporal nature made or held out by a person in authority.

'Note the word “or”.
"Cross. Evidence (1971). pages 15-116, Article 40.


189

2. Confessions obtained in contravention of the judges’ rules or by means
of other improper questions, may be excluded by the judze in the
exercise of his discretion, although the conditions mentioned in clause
1 were fulfilled.”

10.27. The law of confessions in England has thus two important aspects —-
(1) Involuntary confessions are excluded in England. (2) Confessions made by
the accused in police questioning, where the questioning was in breach of the
Judges’ Rules, are, at the discretion of the court, excluded.

The English law as to first aspect was laid down in Ibrahim v. The King,’
in the following terms. This was a judgment of the Privy Council, but has been
universally cited as authoritative :+--

“It has long been established as a positive rule of English Criminal

Law, thal no statement by an accused is admissible in evidence against

hin unless it is shown by the prosecution to have been a voluntary state-

ment, ia the sense that it has not been obtained from him either by fear of
prejudice or hope of advantage exercised or held oul by person in autho-
rity.”

10.28. Several theories have prevailed in England as to the basis for
excluding involuntary confessions :

(i) The motion that the rule relating to the inadmissibility of such confes-
sions is based on considerations of their possible or probable untruth,
was supported by Wigmore. According to him, the question to be
asked was, “Was the inducement such that there was any fair risk of
a false confession?”

(ii) The other theory rests on a breach of faith or confidence; that is,
that a false promise of favour or reward had been made.

(iii). The third theory is concerned with ilegality in the method of cbtain-
ing the confession.

(iv) The fourth theory is based on the privilege against self-incrimination.

Historicat roots of the two doctrines are separate‘, but, there is a view e.g.
‘dictum of White J. in Bram ९. U.S.S—that the privilege against self-incrimination
“fas but a crystallisation of the doctrine as to confessions’.

. 10.29. In R. v. Baldry,’ decided in the middle of the nineteenth century,
‘the court discusséd at some length the policy of the confession rule, and said:

“The ground for not receiving such evidence is that it would not be
safe to receive a statement made under any influence or fear. There is no
presumption of law that it is false or that the law considers such statements
cannot be relied upon; but such confessions are tejected because it is suppos-
ed that it would be dangerous to lead such evidence to the jury.”

This statement has been cited with approval in subsequent decisions, notably
by Lord Summer in Ibrahim v. R’ It rejects the view that testimonial untrust-
worthiness is at the root of the confession rule.

Ubrahim vy. The King, (1914) AC. 599, 609; ALR. 1914 PC. 155 (P.C.
"Emphasis added

sWigmore, Evidence (3rd ed. 1940), Vol. 3, section 824, page 252.
‘Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 9, page 198-210.

5Brdm v. U.S., (1897) 168 U.S. 532, 543.
6R. v. Baldry, (1852) 2 Den. CC. 430, 441, 442 (Potleck C. 8).

‘Ubrahim v. R. (1914) A.C. 599, 611, A.LR. 1914 PC. 155, supra.

Statements must
be voluntary in
English law,


Truth or

falsity

not decisive.

Dixon 1.5 obser-
vations as to self- ,

incrimination.

Burden of proof
of — voluntariness

on the — prosecu-
tion.

Confessions—
Some English
cases,

190

10.30. The actual English cases in wh’ch the courts have excluded state-
ments made by persons in custody, show that the question ‘Is the confession likely
to be true?’ is not decisive The approach seems rather to be one of defining
Proper police practices, and is also affected by considerations which suegest the
strong influence of the privilege against self-incriminat'on, although the language
used is that of the confession rule. This is brought out very clearly in a decision
of the High Court of Australia. McDermott v. The King! This was an applica-
tion for leave to appeal from a New South Wales conviction. The police, having
decided to charge the prisoner with murder, took him into custody, adminis-
tered a caution. and then questioned him for an hour, after which he confessed.
The prisoner was then formally charged. Counsel for the prisoner argued that
the common law doctrine as to the exclusion of confessions was not founded upon
nor concerned with the likelihood of falsity or unreliability of the confession.........
The doctrine was founded upon broad policy. His submission was that the con-
fession should be excluded, as it had been procured by cross-examination of a
prisoner in custody by the police in violation of the Judges’ Rules. A further
point that was taken was the argument that the custody was unlawful, as it was
the duty of the police, having decided to charge the prisoner before the interroga-
tion. to take him before a mzgistrate. It was argued that a confession obtained
from person in iHegal custody was inadmissible.

10.31, The High Court of Australia, on the facts. held the confession to be
admissible, and held that the confession was voluntary. It was observed that
in any even the Judges’ Rules did not bind Australian Courts. But Dixon 3’s
observations are of interest in regard to the principle to be applied—

“It is apparent that rule of practice has arisen, deriving almost certainly
from the strong feeling for the wisdom and justice of the traditional English
principles expressed in the precept nemo tenesur se ipsum accussare, .........

10.32. The English cases on the subject cf what is an illegal inducement
to confess, are very numerous. and far from consistent with each other. But
there can be little doubt that the rule which excludes confessions unlawfully
obtained, is regarded as a very salutary one.

10.33. I! must be taken to be settled by Reg. v. Thompson,: that, in order
that evidence of a confession may be admissible, it must be affirmatively proved
that such confession was free and voluntary, that is, was not preceded by any
inducement to the prisoner to make a statement held out by a person in authority,
or that it was not made until after such inducement had clearly been removed; but
it is also clear that in the absence of inducement, the answers of a person charged
to the questions of a police constable. are admissible. subject to the dis-
cretion of the Court to exclude answers obtained without compliance with the
Judges’ Rules All questions relating to the admissibility of extra-judicial
confessorial statements ate of course, to be decided at the trial by the Judge,
and not by the jury; and such questions may now be appealed, or reserved
for the decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal.*

10.34. It is well recognised in England that admissions and confessions are
exceptions to the rule against hearsay. If a statement or confession is made by
the accused {the statement may be relevant as an admission), evidence of such
statement or confession may be given at the trial. if the prosecution is able to
prove affirmatively that it was made freely and voluntarily.

‘McDermott v. The King. (1948) 76 Commonwealth L.R. 501, 504, 513.

3Ree. v. Thompson. (1893) 2 0.8. 12 (C.C.R). affirming the ruling of Parke, B., in
R. v. Warringham, 15 Jur. 318; 2 Den. CC. 430, 447, note: R. v. Rose. 18 Cox, 717,

‘The Criminal Appeal Act. 1907,


191

The Courts draw a distinction between a moral exhortation and temporal
fear. Thus, it has been held,’ that where an employer advised his suspected
employee to tell the truth “so that if you committed a fault you may not add to
it by stating what is untrue”, the advice was of a moral character, and not suffi-
cient tc render a subsequent confession inadmissible.

10.35. In another English case of Rex v. Wild? a boy of 13 years was
charged with murder, and was told: “Now, kneel you down, I am going to ask
you a very serious question and I hope that you will tell me the truth in the
presence of the Almighty”. In consequence, the boy mede <eftain statements.
These were held not to render it inadmissible.

In the case of Richards’ a girl had been accused of poisoning, ind was told
by her mistress: “If you don’t tell me all about it, I will send for a constable”.
The confession made subsequently was rejected, since the threat would have made
obvious. to the girl’s mind, the desirability of making a confession.

10.36. The accused has long been entitied* to demand that an involuntary
confession should be excluded, and the Introduction to the Judges’ Rules takes
care to state that. “The principle (that voluntariness is a fundamental condition of
admissibility). ..ds overriding and applicable in all cases. Witihin that
principle the following rules are put forward as a guide to police officers con-
ducting investigations.”

10.37. Statements by accused persons have been considered involuntary,
not only when resulting from an explicit threat, such as - “you had better tell
the truth”.

But there seems to be little case law defining the precise scope of “involun-
tariness”, - especially that resulting from tacit intimidation. Judges are known
to take a dim view of coercion in any form, and the prosecution consequently
does not attempt to make direct usc of arguably involuntary statements’. If
there has been no intimidation or promise, but the accused has been tricked
into speaking, the statement will be considered “voluntary”,* but 285९-७७ indi-
cates that the judge may exclude it as matter of discretion. if the tactics seem.

st

in some sense, “unfair .

10.38. We shall now deal with the Judges’ Rules. Police investigating a
crime, when they wish to question someone held on a charge. must comply with
the Judges’ Rules.’ which define the right to question at the various stages of
investigation.

There is no direct judicial control over the initiation or supervision of
police activities or conduct in England. But judicial control is exercised indirectly,
through the rules which the judges apply to determine the admissibility of evi-
dence at the trial, and some additional protection is clearly afforded by the law
governing the civil wrongs of unlawful imprisonment and malicious prosecution.

1Reg. v. Jarvis, (1867) Law Reports 1 C.C.R. 96.
*Rex v. Wild, (1935) 1 Mood 0. C. 452.
®Rex v. Richards, (1832) 5 C & P 318.

‘Ibramim v, Rex, (1914) A.C. 599

See discussion in Culombe v. Connecticut, (1961) 367 U.S. 568, 598, 599 (opinion of
Frankfurter,

a) Rex v. Firth, (1913) 6 Crim. App. R. 152; (dictum).

(b) The King v. Robinson, (1917) 2K. B. 108. ~

"See Reg. v. Hinted, (1898) 19 Cox Crim. Cas. 16 (South-Bastern Cir).
5For Judges’ Rules, see Appendix 4 to this note.

Implicit threats,

Judges’ Rules—
violation of.


Principle of
Rules,

the

Judges’ Rules do

not have the
of law,

Discretionary
basis,

force

Law in the U.S.A.

—Various
om,

sour-

192

10.39. The fundamental principle underlying the rules applied -by the
courts is that answers and statements made during the course of police inquiries
are admissible only if they have been made voluntarily— “in the sense that they
have not been obtained by fear of prejudice or hope of advantage, exercised
or held out by a person in authority, or by oppression. To assist themselves
and provide guidance to the police in applying this principle, the judges have
devised their own set of Rules, which are officially known as “the Judges’
Rules”.

10.40, Evidence obtained in volation of the Judges’ Rules will not always
be rejected. It was made clear from the beginning that “these rules have not
the force of law; they are administrative directions the observance of which
the police authorities should enforce upon their subordinate as tending to the
fair administration of justice.

10.41. During the Jate nineteenth century, the Courts had shown gteat
distrust of the police, and were apparently inclined to reject automatically any
confession made in police custody? But, in 1909, the Court of Criminal Appeal
decisively rejected a strict exclusionary rule,’ and since that time, despite the
adoption of the Judges” Rules, the courts have adhered to the principle of
excluding confessions only on a discretionary basis.

Where the basis of exclusion is discretionary, it is natural that there will
be @ diversity—apparent or real—in approach. In some cases, confessions have
been admitted even though the circumstances under which they were obtained
prompted strong disapproval. On the other hand, in some cases confession?
have been exciuded, because the caution was omitted.’ But courts have often
admitted statements even when the caution was lacking, either as a matter ot
discretion,® or on the ground that the rules were not violated. — when, for
example, a suspect was “invited” to the police station and therefore not techni-
cally “in custody”.’ In one study the proposition’ was stated that “it is no
jonger the practice to exclude evidence obtained by questioning in custody.”
Nevertheless, now that the tules have been clarified, one may expect that the
judges will become less willing to overlook violations? of the rules.

10.42, In the United States, the rules under which a confession is to be
excluded are derived not from one, but from several sources. At one time or
other, each of these has assumed prominence.

(a) In the first place, there is the constitutional privilege against -self-
incrimination." Historically, this has some importance, it being
a view widely held that the rule against “coerced confessions” is funda-
mentally linked up with the privilege against self-incrimination, This
is of importance in relation to cases coming from Federal courts.

The King v. Voisin, (1918) 1 K. 8. 531, 539.

35९८, e.g., Reg. v. Male, 16 Cox Crim. Cas. 689 (Oxford Cir); Reg. v. Gavin, (1885;
15 Cox Crim, Cas. 656 (Northern Cir.).

The King v. Best, (1909) 1 K. B. 692 (CCA).

‘See, e.g, Rex v. Mills, (1947) 1 K.B. 297; Rex v. Gardner, (1915) 11 Crim. App
R. 265.
SEg., Rex v. Dwyer, (1932) 23 Crim. App. R. 156.

नर, v. Smith, (1961) 3 AU. ER. 972 (Ct. Crim. App).

tRegina v. Wattan, 36 (1952) Crim. App. R. 72.

sWilliams, Questioning by the police : Some Practica! Considerations (1960), Crim. -L.
Rev. (Eng.) 325, 33

*3, C. Smith, “The New Judges’ Rules—A Lawyer's View” (1964) Crim. L. Rev, Eng.)
176, 182.

WFifth Amendment.


193

(0) In the second place, there is the due process clause of the Con-
stitution.’ This has proved to be the most fertile source of contro-
versies in the last decade or so. in cases coming from 5| Coutts.

(०) In the third place, there is the constitutional right to counsel. as judi-
cially interpreted. *

(7) In the fourth place, there is the guarantee against unteasonable scsrch
and seizure’

(९) In the fifth place. there is the equality clause of the Constitution, which
is of some relevance where counsel was not provided by the State.

(f) Sixthly, there are the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure imposing
the requisite safeguards.

In many cases, more than one of these constitutional and other provisions
co-operate, and their combined effect may have to be considered.

10.43. Thus, a number of constitutional proscriptive directives to protect
the accused, become relevant. For example, the rule excluding from evidence
“the fruit of unlawful searches or seizures is implied from the fourth. and fifth
> amendments.’ The protections furnished by the due process clause of..tie four-
teenth amendment agzinst the use of “coerced” confessions’-and against the use
of evidence obtained through brutality which offends a sense of justic2*, are made
‘available by the fifth amendment’ to the accused on trial in a feder2! court...

10.44. In addition to these constitutional provisions, there is, of course,
the general rule that " a confession must be excluded from evidence, if‘it is not
voluntary. Jt is a cardinal principle of American criminal justice ‘that the ‘ac-
“cused cannot be forced to aid the Government in making the case against*him.
“The guarantees in the Bill of rights emphasise this principle in the ‘consti-
tutional sphere, but the principle would be valid even apart from” the
“constitutional provisions.

10,45, The case Jaw in the U.S.A. as to confessions is so prolific — parti- Supreme — Court
cularly, recent cases—that even a short review of the decisions of thé Supreme decisions (U.S.A.).
Court of the United States would occupy pages. And it must be remembered
that the Supreme Court is not a court of general appellate jurisciction.

10.46, Decisions of the Supreme Court of the U.S.A. in regard to confes-
sions, fall under two broad heads. One line of cases arises from the supervision
exercised by the Court over federal officers and inferior federal courts. The
second line of cases concerns State Courts, . The distinction was “important
«for sometime, though its practical importance has now diminished because of
the decisions on the Due Process Clause and its application to the States.

114th Amendment (cited, infra), read with Sth Amendment. “ 2

%Set Malboy v. Hogan, and later cases. .

8Sixth Amendment.

‘See Gideon's case, infra,

5Fourth Amendment.

SWeeks १. United States, (1914) 232 US. 383.

"Brown v. Mississippi, (1936) 297 U.S. 278 (1936).

a) Rochin v. California, 1952, 342 U.S. 165;

(b) Cf. Schmerber v. California, 1966, 384 U.S. 757, 770-771 (1966) (blood -test could

deprive the accused of due process).

Lane v, United States, 321 F. 2d 573, 576 (Sth Cir. 1963) (dictum). cert. denied, 1964,
377 U.S, 936; Blackford v. United States, 247 F, 2d 745, 753 (9th Cir. 1957) (dictiim), cert.
denied (1958), 356 U. S. 914.

CH. legislative recognition of this principle in a federal statute passed recently-18 U.S,
Code section 3501 (a} and (b). (See, infra).


Casea from Fede-
ral Courts.

Cases from State
Courts.

194

10.46A. So far as cases coming from the Federal Courts are concerned,
a confession might be rendered inadmissible because of violation of the Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure one of which' requires the arresting officer to take
such suspects to the magistrate without unnecessary delay. Confessions secured
by Federal officers during the periods of detention were held to be inadmissible
in Federal criminal trials. in the case of Mc Nabb v. U.S? This was followed
in the later case of Mallory v. U.S3 For a long time, the “Me Nabb-Mallory”
rule was a favourite topic of discussion.

1047. As to cases from State Courts, the Supreme Court vegan to deat
with the problem of coerced cunfessions from the point of view of the Due
Process Clause (Fourteenth Amendment). and the first important case in this
context was of Brown v. Mississippi where the confessions had been secured
through physical torture and beating. In Ashcraft v. TennesseeS the confes-
sions were obtained through psychclogical coercion, and the same principle
was applied. In Brown v. Mississippi® the Supreme Court quashed the convic-
tion of three negroes by a Mississippi Court. The confession which had been
admitted by the trial court had been obtained by physical torture. Hughes
J, stated that a trial was a mete pfetence when the State authorities secured
a conviction depending entirely on confessions obtained by violence. The
Supreme Court? hzs also quashed convictions in cases where confessions - had
been obtained by other techniques inspiring fezr, such as the threat of mob
vicience.

The invocation of the due ‘process clause in such cases has been explained
on the footing that the admission of confessions so obtained would violate ‘the
fundamental fairness essential to the very concept of justice’* Confessions ob-
tained in this manner carry a very real risk of untfustworthiness,’ but the Supreme
Court does not, in such cases, inquire into the effect that the violence or threat
had upon the particular prisoner. Demonstration of the means used to extract
the confession suffices to exclude it.”

16.48. In 1964, the Fifth Amendment was held! to apply to the States by
virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment. In the famous case of Gideon v. Wain-
wright}? the Sixth Amendments’ guarantee of the right to counsel was also held
to be applicable to the States, under the Fourteenth Amendment. After these
developments, the scope of interference is expanded.

Thus, the second line of decisions rests upon the constitutional controt of
the Supreme Court over State tribunals, in cases in which it is argued that’the
admission of a confession violates the due process clause of the Fourteénth
Amendment® to the United States Constitution, in relation to cases from State

Courts.

*Rule 5(a), Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.

°Me Nabb v. U. S., (1943) 318 U. 5. 332.

*Mallory v. U.S., (1957) 354 ए. 5. 449.

4Brown v. Mississippi, (1936) 297 U.S. 278 (see infra).

SAsheraft v. Tennessee, (1944) 322 US. 143.

‘Brown v. Mississippi (1936) 297 U.S. 278.

'White v. Texas (1940) 310 U.S. 530.

*Lisemba v. California (1941) 314 US. 219, 236.

°Stein v. New York (1953) 346 U-S. 156, 182 Gackson J.).

UStein v. New York (1953) 346 US. 156.

Malloy v. Hogen (1964) 378 US. 1.

NGideon v. Wainwright, (1963) 372 US. 335.

114th Amendment — wa. nor shall any State deprive any person of fife,
liberty, or property without due process of law.”



195

10.49. There have been a number of important developments in recent
years in the U.S.A. bearing on the admissibility of a pre-trial confession in a
criminal case. Two decisions Escohedo' and. Mirandd’—were pronounced
during the sixties. The case of Miranda’ requited, as an absolute federal con-
stitutional pre-requisite of the admissibility, in a criminal case, of a confession
or other incriminating sictement made by an accused in custody to the police.
that the police must inform him. prior to interrogation, (i) that he has a right
to remain silent. (ii) that any statement which he makes may be used as 2vi-
dence against him, and (iii) that he has a right to engage counsel, There were
four dissenting judgments. Jt was one of the first rulings of the Warren Court
to be slightly modified later. But a substantia] part of the propositions laid
down still holds good. We shall discuss these cases in some detail.

10.50. In the case of Escobedo v. Ilinois,* the accused was taken into
custody by the Chicago police, and interrogated about the murder of his brother-
in-law. Permission to consult his attorney, though requested, was refused. Sub-
sequently, the accused confessed; and this confession was admitted at the trial,
where he was convicted of murder. On appeal to the Supreme Court, the con-
viction was reversed on the ground that the refusal to allow him to consult his
attorney had denied him his right to counsel under the Sixth and Fourteenth
Amendments. The confession was, therefore, inadmissible. Speaking for the
majority of the Court, Goldberg, J. observed: —

“Where, as here, the investigation is no longer a general inquiry into an
unsolved crime but has begun to focus on a particular suspect, the suspect
has been taken into police custody, the police carry out a process of interro-
gation that lends itself to eliciting incriminating statements, the suspect
has requested and been denied an opportunity to consult with his lawyer,
and the police have not effectively warned him of his absolute constitutional
right to remain silent, the accused has been denied ‘the Assistance of
Counsel’ in violation of the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution as made
obligatory upon the States by the Fourteenth Amendment’ ............ and
that no statement elicited by the police during the interrogation may be used
against him at a ciriminal trial.”

10.51. Due process of law has become, through jud'cial interpretation.
“a broad umbrella” which covers most of the specific guarantees in First to
Ninth Amendments, including the protection against _ self-incrimination,
(Fifth Amendment), guarantee against unreasonable searches and seizutes,
(Fourth Amendment) and representation by a lawyer when accused of a crime
(Sixth Amendment).

In Miranda’s case, the Supreme Court brought together several constitu-
tional guarantees. The facts were as follows :

On March 2, 1963, an eighteen-year-old girl employed at the Paramount
Theatre in Phoenix, Arizona, was walking to a bus after leaving her job. She
was accosted by a man who shoved her into his car, tied her hands and feet,
drove to the edge of the town, and raped her. He then drove her back to a
street near her home. where he let her out of the car, After hearing the girl’s
story and patching together pieces of evidence. the police asked Ernesto Miranda
if he would consent to answering questions about the case. He agreed to do so
voluntarily.

Iscobedo v. Ilinvis, (1964) 12 Lawyers’ Ed. 2nd 977 (see infra).
§Miranda y. Arizona (1966) 16 Lawyers’ Ed. 2nd 694 (see infra).
*Miranda v. Arizona, (1966) 16 Lawyers’ Ed. 2nd 695.

‘Escobedo v. Ilinnis (1964) 378 US. 478, 12 Law Ed. 2nd 377.
‘Miranda v. Arizona, (1966) 384 U.S. 436.

Recent develop-
ments.

Due a
broad Timbretla,


196

Mirenda was 2 twenty-three-years-old eighth grade drop-out, with a police
record. including several previous arrests as well as convictions for assault and
automobile the!t, He consenied to appear in a police line up (identification), and,
although the girl could not positively identify him, in a subsequent interrogation
the police told Miranda that she had named him as her assailant. Miranda then
confessed and. when confronted with the girl, acknowledged that she had been
his victim. Jn a written statement, Miranda said that the confession had becn
made voluntarily and with full knowledge of his legsl rights. At his ‘rial. poth
the ‘oral and the written confessions were admitted into evidence by the judge, over
the objections of Miranda’s lawyer. Miranda was convicted and sentenced to
serve from twenty to thirty years in prison. On appeal, the Supreme Court of
Arizona held that Miranda's constitutional rights had not been violated.

10.52. A majority of the Supreme Court of the United States, however,
disagreed. In summarising the decision of the Supreme Court, Warren €. ३
declared that the government may not use statements obtained from “custedial
intsrrogstion” of a defendant unless it can show that his right against self-inerimi-
nation had been carefully secured by effective “procedural safeguards”.

The two key phrases, “custodial interrogation” and “procedural safeguards”,
wete then defined. The former, (“custodial interrogation”) meant “questioning
initiated by Jaw enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody
or otherwise deprived of his freedom in any significant way.” The latter (“proce-
dural safeguards”), as a minimum include: a warning prior to any questioning (i)
thai & person has a right to remain silent, (ii) that eny statement made by a suspect
might be used against him, and (iii) that he has a right to the presence of an attor-
ney. appointed or retained.

These rights may be waived; but the waiver, must be made “voluntarily,
kaowiagly and intelligently.”

10.53. For the purposes of satisfying the above-mentioned requirement that
the accused must be in custody before there is a duty to warn him, it does not
matter whether he is in custady for the offence under investigation or for an
unrelated olfence. This was laid down in subsequent case.’

10.54, A later case” Harris, modified the raling in Miranda to a very
fimiied exteat. Harris had been indicated in New York for selling heroin to an
under-cover police officer on two different occasions, Testifying in his trial, Harris
said that he had only made one transaction and that he had sold baking soda,
not heroin. The prosecuting altoraey for the State, in seeking to impcach the
credibility of Harris, read a statement that Harris had made to the police after
his arrest, which was at odds with his testimony in court. Under police interro-
gation, he had admitted to both sales, maintaining that: (1) he was acting as
a middie men for the police; (2) he had received money and heroin for the
service performed: (3) be had not claimed that he had sold only baking soda.
In permitting the prosecutor to read the statement, the trial judge informed the
jury that the information contaisied therein could not be used as evidence of guilt
but might be used to impeach Harvis’s credibility.

10.55, After being adjudged guilty, Harris claimed that the use of the
statement violated his rights as outlined in Miranda y. Arizona; and. for-a
majority of five, Chief Justice Burger wrote an opinion upholding the use of the
statement for purposes of impeachment.

~~ "Nfathis v. United States. (1968) 20 Lawyer's Edition 2nd 381.
*Harris, (971) 401 UL $. 222.
8Miranda v. Arizona, (1966) 16 Law Ed, 2nd 694.


197

The case of Miranda was distinguished. It prohibited the use of an illegally
obtained confession as evidence of guilt, but petmitted the use of such state-
ments to impeach a defendant’s credibility so long as the jury was properly
instructed.

10.56. It has also been held,’ in the U.S.A. that the admission of a pre-trial
confession may depend on whether or not it was voluntary. In determining whe-
ther the confession made by a person under trial before a State Court is volun-
tary, the Supreme Court would consider “the totality of circumstances” from
ao independent examination of the whole record? *

Thus, in Bouidon's case,’ a Habeas corpus proceeding had been taken to at-
tack the conviction for murder. The Supreme Court pointed out that two con-
fessions were, in fact, obtained,—although only the second was actually pro-
duced in evidence, and that the question was whether the second confession was
properly admitted. The Court said that it would consider the voluntariness of
the first confession also, since the second confession must have been the end-pro-
duct of the earlier one, inasmuch as the accused may have been acutely aware
that he had earlier made an admission against his interests, and was, therefore,
repeating his ostensibly “unreasonable words of confession.”

10.57. And, in Boyking y. Alabama, the Court noted that the admissibility
of confession in evidence at a criminal trial must be based on are liable deter-
mination on the issue of voluntariness which satisfies the defendant's constiiu-
tional rights,

10.58. A defendant’s constitutional rights are violated if his conviction,
in a federal or state court, is based, in whole or in part, on an involuntary confes-
sion, regardless oj its truth or falsity. A number or cases® have held or recogniz-
ed, either expressly or by necessary implication that the yoluptariness of a de-
fendant’s pre-trial confession was the determinative factor in its admissibility
in evidence against that defendant in a criminal prosecution.

10,59. Thus, for example, in Sims ५४. Georgia,’ the Supreme Court said
that a confession produced by violence or threats of violence 15 invOluntaty, and
cannot be constitutionally used against the person making it.

10.60. Attention may also be drawn to a recent federal statutes which
provides’ that in any federal criminal prosecution, a confession is admissible in
evidence if voluntarily given; that it is for the trial judge to determine any issue
as to the voluntariness of the confession, and that in so determining, he must
take inlo consideration all the surrounding circumstances, including the time

\Brooks ¥. Florida, (1967) 19 Lawyer's Edition 2nd 643.

*Bouldon v. Holman, (1969) 22 Lawyer's Edition 2nd 433.

“Darwin v. Connecticut, (1968) 20 Lawyer’s Edition 2nd 630.
‘Bouldon v. Holman, (1969) 22 Lawyer's Edition 2nd 433.
*Boyking v. Albama, (1969) 395 U. $. 238, 23 L Ed. 26 274.

(a) Garrity v. New Jersey, (1967) 385 U. S. 493, 17 L Ed 2d 562;
(०) Sims v. Georgia, (1967) 385 U.S, 538, 17 L Ed. 2d 593;

(०) Olewis ५. Texas, (1967) 386 U.S. 707, 18 L Ed. 24 527;

(d) Pinto v. Pierce, (1967) 389 ७. S. 31, 19 L Ed 2d 31, reh den 389 U.S. 997, 19 L
Ed 2d 499;

(०) Beecher v. Alabama, (1967) 389 U. S. 35, 19 L Ed 2d 35, Sims v. Georgia, (1967)
389 U.S. 404, 19 L Ed 2d 6:

(0 Brooks v. Florida, (1967) 389 U. S. 413, 19 L Ed 2d 643;

({g) Greenwald v. Wisconsin, (1968) 390 U. $. 519, 20 L Ed 26 77;
(0) Darwin v. Connecticut 1968, 391 U.S, 346 20 L Ed 2d 630.
‘Sims vy. Georgia, (1967) 385 U. S. 538, 17 L. Ed 2d 593.

448 U. S: Code, Sections 3501 (a) and (b).

“See 22 L. Ed. 2d 872, 879, for details.

Voluntariness  re-

quired.

Truth or

falsity

not the criterion.

sion in 18 Bes,

Code,
350i,

section


Statements
police not
signed:

to
to be
Use of

statements in evi-

dence.

No inducement to
be offered.

Recording of con-

fessions and state-

ments.

198

elapsing between the arrest and the arraignment of the accused, if the confession
was made afict arrest and befote arraignment, whether the accused knew the
nature of the offence with which he was charged or of which he was suspected
at the time of making the confession, whether he was advised or knew that he
was not required to make any statement and that any such statement could be
used against him, whether he had been advised prior to questioning of his right
to the assistance of counsel, and whether he was without the assistance of counsel
when questioned and when giving such confession. It is further provided that
the presence or absence of any of these factors need not be conclusive on the
issue of voluntariness of the confession.

With these general observations, we now proceed to consider the sections
in our Act relating to confessions.

APPENDIX 1
Section 162, Cr. P. C., 1973

462. (3) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of aa
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing. be signed by the person
making it; nor shail any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary
or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save a8
hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investiga-
tion at the time when such stalement was made :

Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial
whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if
duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the
prosecution, to contradict such winess in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian
Evidence Act, i872, and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof
may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of
explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within
the provisions of clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect
the provisions of section 27 of that Act.

Explanation—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred
10 in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant
and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and
whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a

question of fact

APPENDIX 2
Section 163, Cr. P. C., 1973

163. (1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or cause
to be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 24
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

(2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent. by any caution or otherwise,
any person from making in the course of any investigation under this Chapter any state-
ment which he may be disposed to make of his own free will :

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect, the provisions of sub-section (4)
of section (64.

APPENDIX 3
Section 164, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

164. (1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may, whether of not
he has jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the
course of an investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being
in force, or at any time afterwards before the commencement of the inquiry or. trial :

Provided that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power
of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.

(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person
making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be
used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession
unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is being
made voluntarily.

(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the
Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not
auihorise the detention of such person in police custody.


199

(4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided ia section 281 for
recording the examination of an accused person and shail be signed by the person making
the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record
to the following effect

“1 have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that,
if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and

I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in my presence

and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be

correct, and’ it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him.

(Signed) A. 8.
Magistrate”.

(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be record-
ed in such manner hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion
of the Magistrate, best filted to the circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate shall
have power to administer oath to the person whose statemem is so recorded.

(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward
it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be inquired into or tried,

APPENDIX 4
Judges’ Rules (England)

In 1964, at the sitting of the court, the revised edition of the Judges’ Rules? coming
into operation on January 27, 1964, dealing with the admissibility in evidence at the trial
of any person of answers and statements made by him to police officers, were announced.

Lord Parker C. J.—The origin of the Judges’ Rules is probably to be found in a
100७0 dated October 26, 1906, which the then Lord Chief Justice, Lord Alverstone, wrote
to the Chief Constable of Birmingham in answer to a-request for advice in consequence
of the fact that on the same circuit one judge had censured a member of his force for
having cautioned a prisoner, whilst another Judge had censured a constable for having
omitted to do so. The first’ four of the present rules were formulated and approved by
the judges of the King’s Bench Division in 1912 the remaining five in 1918. They have
been much criticised, inter alia, for aileged tack of clarity and of efficacy for the protec-
tion of persons who are questioned by police officers; on the other hand it has been
maintained that their application unduly hampers the detection and punishment of crime.
A committee of judges has devoted considerable time and attention to producing, after
consideration of representative views, a new set of rules which has been approved by a
meeting of all the Queen’s Bench Judges.

‘The judges contro] the conduct of trials and the admission of evidence against persons
on trial before them they do not control or in any way initiate or supervise police
activities or conduct, As stated in paragraph (०) of the introduction to the new rules,
it is the Jaw, that answers and statements made are only admissible ia evidence if they
have been voluntary in the sense that they have not been obtained by fear of prejudice
or hope of advantage, exercised or held out by a person in authority, or by oppression.
The new rules, do not purport, any more than the old rules, to envisage or deal with
the many varieties of conduct which might render answers and statements involuntary and
therefore inadmissible. ‘The rules merely deal with particular aspects of the matter.
Other matters such as affording reasonably comfortable conditions, adequate breake for
test and refreshment, special procedures in the case of a eereons unfamiliar with the
English language or of immature age or feeble understanding, are proper subjects for

administrative directions to the police.
JUDGES’ RULES

These rules do not affect the principles :
ta) That citizens have a duty to help a police officer to discover and apprehend

(७) That police officers, otherwise than by arrest, cannot compel any person
against his will to come to or remain in any police station;

(०) That every person at any stage of an investigation should be abie to commu-
nicate and to consult privately with a solicitor. This is so even if he is in
custody provided that in such a case no unreasonable delay or hinderance is
Caused to the processes of investigation or the administration of justice by his
doing so; . ; दि वि
That when a police officer who is making inquiries of any person about an

© offence fas enough evidence to prefer a charge against that person for the

ofience, fe should without delay cause that person to be charged or inform-
ed that he may be prosecuted for the offence; है

That it is a fundamental condition of the admissibility in evidence against any

person, equally of any oral answer given by that person to a question put by

a police officer and of any statement made by that person. that it shall have

‘been voluntary, in the scnse that it has not been obtained from him by fear

of prejudice or hope of advantage, exercised or held out by a person in

authority, or by oppression. _ _ _
1udges’ Rules as revised in England; (1964) 1 Weekly Law Reports, 152 under Prac-
fice Note.
14-131 LAD/ND/77

(e)

Origin.

Control by Judges,

Rules,


200

The principle set out in paragraph (९) above is overriding and applicable in all cases,
Within that principle the following rules are pui forward as a guide to police officers
conducting investigations. Non-conformity with these rules may render answers and state-
ments liable to be excluded from evidence in subsequent criminal proceedings.

RULES

1. When a police officer is trying to discover whether, or by whom, an oifence bas
been committed be is entitled to question any person, whether suspected or aot, from
whom he thinks that useful information may be oblained. This is so whether or not
the person in question has been taken into custody so long as he has not been charged
with the offence or informed that he may be prosecuted for it.

Il, As soon as a police officer has evidence which would afford reasonable grounds
for suspecting that a person has committed an offence he shall caulion that person or cause
him 10 be cautioned before putting to him any questions, or further questions, relating

to that offence.
The caution shail be in the following terms:

“You ate not obliged to say anything unless you wish to do so bul what you
say may be put into writing and given in evidence.”

When after being cautioned, a person is being questioned, or elects to make a state-
ment, a record shall be kept of the Gime and place at which any such questioning of

statement began and ended and of the persons present.

ILL. (a) Where a person is charged with or informed that he may be prosecuted for
an offence he shali be cautioned in the following terms:

“Do you wish to say anything? You are not obliged to say anything unless you
wish to do so but whatever you say will be taken dowa in writing and may be given

in evidence,”

(0) It is oniy in exceptional cases that questions relating to the offence should be put
to the accused person after he has been charged or informed that he may be prosecuied,
Such questions may be put where they are necessary for the purpose of preventing or
minimising harm or loss to some other person or io the public or for clearing up an
ambiguity in a previous answer or stalemeal.

Before any such questions are put the accused shouid be cautioned in these terms :

“{ wish to put some questions to you aboui the offence with which you have
been charged (or about the offence for which you may be prosecuted). “You are
not obliged to answer any of these questions, but if you do the questions and
answers will be taken down in writing and may be given in evidence.”

Any questions put and answers given relating lo the offence must be contemporane-
ously recorded in full and the record signed oy that person or it he refused by ihe
unterrogating officer,

(c) When such a person is being questioned, or elects to make a statement, a record
shall be kept of the lime and piace at which any questioning or statement began and
ended and of the persons present,

IV. Ali written statements made after caution shall be taken in the following manner:

(a) if a person says that he wants to make a Statement he shail be told that it is
intended to make a written record of what he says. He shall always be asked
whether he wishes 10 write down himselt what he wants to say; if he says that
he cannot wnte or that he should like someone to write it tor him, a police
officer may offer to write the statement ior tum. Lf he accepts the offer the
police officer shall, before starting, ask the person making the statement to
sign, or make his mark 10, the following :--

oe + Wish to make a statement, 1 want sumeone

to write down what I say. 1 have been told that 1 need not say anything unless
{ wish to do so and that whatever I say may be given in evidence,”

(०) Any person writing his own statement shall be allowed to do so without any
prompting as distinct from indicating to him what matlers are material,
(० The person making the statement, if he is going to write it himself, shall be
asked to write out and sign before writing what he wants to say, the following:
“{ make this statement of my own free will, I have been tojd that 1 need
not say anything unless I wish to do so and that whatever 1 say be given in
evidence.”
(9) Whenever a police officer writes the statement, he shali take down the exact

words spoken by the person making the statement. without putting any ques-
tions other than such as may be to make the statement coherent, intel-

ligible and relevant to the materia] matters; he shall aot prompt him.



201

(०) When the writing of a statement by a police officer is finished the person
making it sball be asked to read it and to make any corrections, alterations
or additions he wishes. When he has finished reading it he shali be asked to
write and sign or make his mark on the following certificate at the end of the
statement:

“I have read the above statement and I have been told that I can correct, alter
or add anything i wish. This statement is true. I have made it of my own
free will.”

(© If the person who has made a statement refuses to cead it or to write the
above mentioned certificate at the end of it or to sign it, the senior police
officer present shall record on the statement itself and in the presence of the
person making it, what has happened. If the person making the statement
cannot read, or refuses to read it, the officer who has taken it dows shall read
it over to him and ask him whether he would jike to correct, alter or add
anything and to put his signature or make his mark at the end. The police
ollicer shal! then certify on the statement ilself what he bas done.

V. If at any time after a person has been informed that he may be prosecuted for
an offence a police officer wishes to bring to the notice of that person any written state-
ment made by another person who in respect of the same offence 185 also been charged
or informed that he may be prosecuted, he shail hand to that person a true copy of such
written statement, but nothing shall be said or done to invite any reply or comment. If
that person says that he would like to make a statement in reply, or starts to say some
thing, he shall at once be cautioned or further cautioned as prescribed by rule l(a).

VIL Persons other than police officers charged with the duty of investigating offences
or chafging offenders shall, so far as may be practicable, comply with these rules,

[His Lordship added:] i: will be seen that these rules, which apply in England and
Wales, and which will come into force on Monday, January 27, 1964, are designed to
secure that only answers and statements which are voiuntary ate admitted in evidence
against their makers and to provide guidance to police officers in the performance of their
duties. The admissibility of answers and statements obtained before next Monday will
continue to be governed by the old rules.

Copies of these rules are being sent to ali judges, recorders, chairman and deputy
chairmen of quarter sessions and the clerks of all criminal courts.’ It is understood that
Her Majesty's Secretary of State for Home Affairs is sending copies together with admi-
nistrative directions, to the police. These rules and the administrative directions will be
on sale at the Stationery Office from 11.45 AM. today.”


Section 24,

Conditions.

Burden of proof
under section 24.

CuapTer 11
CONFESSIONS AND ADMISSIONS — SECTIONS 24 TO 31

11.1. In this Chapter, we shall consider in detail the provisions as to con-
fessions, and also section 31.

Under section 24, a confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in
@ criminal proceeding, if certain conditions are salisfied. The conditions are
as follows:

(1) The confession appears to the court to have been caused by any induce-
meot, threat or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person;

(2) The inducement, threat or promise proceeds from a person in authority;
and

(3) The court is of the opinion that the inducement, threat or promise is
sufficient to give the accused person grounds which would appear to him rea-
sonable for supposing that he would gain an advantage or avoid any evil of a
temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.

11.2. The first condition deals with subject matter of the inducement,
threat or promise. It must have reference to the charge.

The crucial word in this ingredient is the expression “appears”. The appro-
priate meaning of the word “appears” is “seems”. Jt imports a lesser degree
of probability than proof.’ Even so, the laxity of proof permitted does not war-
rant a court’s opinion based on pure surmise. A prima facie opinion based on
evidence and circumstances may be adopted as the standatd laid down. This
deviation from the normal standard of proof has been designedly accepted by the
Legislature with a view to excluding forced or induced confessions which some-
times are extorted and put in when there is a lack of direct evidence?

Secondly, the threat, inducement or promise must proceed from a person in
authority. It is a question of fact in each case whether the person concerned
is a person of authority or not.

Thirdly, the mere existence of the threat, inducement or promise is not
enough, but, in the opinion of the court, the threat, inducement or promise should
be sufficient to cause a reasonable belief in the mind of the accused that by con-
fessing he would get an advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in re-
ference to the proceedings against him: “while the opinion is that of the Court,
the criterion is the reasonable belief of the accused.*

11.3. The terms in which section 24 is couched, seem to indicate that in
the case of an ordinary confession, there is no initial butden on the prosecu-
tion to make out the negative, viz., that the confession sought to be proved or
admitted is no vitiated by the circumstances stated in the section. However,
where the suspicion of the Court is aroused, the standard of proof required to
Tender it irrelevant is indicated by the word “appears” and not by the usual word
“proved”. Subject to this, the burden of proving that the confession is involun-
tary is on the accused, though the burden is light.

‘Pyare Lal v. State of Rajasthan, A..R. 1963 S.C. 1094, 1095,

*Pyare Lal v. State of Rajasthan A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1094, 1095.
'pyare Lal v. State of Rajasthan A1.R. 1963 S.C. 1094, 1095.

202



203

11.4, The position as to burden of proof is different in England. The
question of voluntariness of a confession is for the Judge; and it is now settled
that it fies upon the prosecution to establish, and not upon the accused to Dega-
tive this element, it being the duty of the prosecution to satisfy itself thereon be-
fore putting the statement in evidence.

115. One of the conditions of the applicability of section 24 is that the
inducement, threat or promise should--to put the matter in non-legal words—
persuade the accused that he would gain an advantage or avoid any evil in “re-
ference to the proceeding against him.” In England, the restriction that the
inducement should have reference to the proceedings, does not apply. If pres-
sure is put upon an accused person which affects his freedom of will, such pres-
sure is a ground for making the confession inadmissible even where the threat
is of harm otherwise than in relation to the proceeding.

In England, it is not necessary that the threat or inducement must threaten
harm or promise benefit with reference to the particular proceedings or contem-
plated proceedings. Of course, a promise suggesting that the outcome of a con-
fession will procure some beneficial result in connection with the prosecution
will certainly render the confession inadmissible. But it is not, as a matter of
law, necessary that the improper inducement or threat must relate to that pro-
secution. This was laid down by the House of Lords? holding that on a pra-
secution under the Purchase Tax Act, a confession ought to have been excluded
as having been made on account of a threat to prosecute for failure to answer
questions 8६ an interrogation which the customs officers 10 whom the confession

was made were not authorised to conduct.

Even apart from this case, the Judges’ Rules* also lay down that “it is a
fundamental condition of the admissibility in evidence against any person, equal-
ly of any oral answer given by that person to a question put by a police officer
and of any statement made by that person, that it should have been voluntary,
in the sense that it has not been obtained from him by fear of prejudice or hope
of advantage exercised or held out by a person in authority, or by oppression.”

11.6. The above brief discussion does not indicate any need for amending
the section,

SECTION 25

11.7. Section 25 bars the proof of a confession made 40 a police officer as
against a person accused of any offence.

This section creates an absolute bar against the admission of such confes-
sions. We are separately making certain recommendations’ to exclude, from
this bar, confessions made after informing the accused of his right to counsel
and after complying with cettain other safeguards. No textual amendment of

section 25 is involved.

IR, v. Thompson, (1893) 2 0.8. 12.
Customs & Excise Commissioner v. Harg., (1961) 1 All. BR.

Journal 15.
‘Judges’ Rules, 1964, Principle (०, quoted with approval in Customs & Excise Com

missioner v. Harz., (1967) 1 A.C. 760, 818, 821.
‘See section 26-A (proposed, infra).

177; 111 Solicitors

Burdea of proof
in England,

Inducement _ hav-
ing reference to
charge,

No chan; -
ed. ge need:

Introductory,


204

History of section 11.8. Tt would be useful to deal with the history of the section having
. regatd to its importance. The following extract' from the First Report of the
Indian Law Commission is of interest, in this connection:

“The police in the Province of Bengal are armed with very extensive
powers, They ate prohibited from inquiring into cases of a petty nature,
but complaints in cases of more serious offences are usually laid before the
police darogah, who is authorised to-examine the complainant, to issue pro-
cess of arrests; to summon witnesses, to examine the accused and to forward
the case to the Magistrate or submit a report of his proceedings. according
as the evidence may, in his judement, warrant the one or the other course.
The evidence taken by the Parliamentary Committees on Indian Affairs,
during the Sessions of 1852 and 1853 and other papers, which have been
brought to our notice, abundantly show that the powers of the Police are
often abused for purposes of extortion ard oppression; and we have consi-
dered whether the powers now exercised by the police might not be greatly
abridged. हु

“We have arrived at the conclusion that. considering the extensive furis-
diction of the Magistrate, the facilities which exist for the escape of the pat-
ties concerned in serious crimes, and the necessity for the immediate adop-
tion in many cases of the most prompt and energetic measures, it is Tequi-
site to arm the police with some such powers as they now possess; and we
have accordingly adopted many of the provisions in the Bengal Code on
this head.

“In one material point, we propose a change in the duties of the Police.

“By the existing law, the darogah or other police officer presiding at
any inquiry into a crime committed within his division is required, upon
apprehension of the accused, to “question him fully regarding the whole of
the circumstances of the case and the persops concened in the commis-
sion of the crime and if any property may have been stolen or plundered,
the person in possession of such property, or the place where it has been
deposited. In the event of the accused making free and voluntary confes-
sion, it is to be immediately written down.”

“Then follow other provisions for preventing any species of compulsion
or maltreatment with a view to extort a confession or procure information.
But we are informed, and this information is corroborated by the evidence
we have examined, that, inspite of this qualification. confessions are fre-
quently extorted or fabricated. A police officer, on receiving intimation
of the occurrence of a dacoity or other offence of a serious character, fail-
ing to discover the perpetrators of the offence, often endeavours to secure
himself against any charge of supineness or neglect by getting up a case
against parties whose circumstances or characters are such as are likely
to obtain credit for an accusation of the kind against them. This is not
intrequently done by extorting or fabricating false confession: and, when
this step is once taken, there is of course impunity for real offenders, and a
great encoufagement to crime. The darogah is henceforth committed to
the direction he has given to the case; and it is his object to prevent a dis-
covery of the truth, and the apprehension of the guilty parties, who, as far
as the police are concerned, are now perfectly safe. We are pursuaded that
any pfovision to correct the exercise of this power by the police will be
futile; and we accordingly propose to remedy the evil, as far as possible,

JExtract from the Indian Law Commissicn’s First Report.



205

by the adoption of 4 rule prohibiting any examination whatever of any ac-
cused party by the police, the result of which is to constitute a written docu-
ment. This, of course, will not prevent a police officer from receiving any
information which any one may voluntarily offer to him; “but the police will
not be permitted to put upon tecord any statement made by a party accus-
ed of an offence.”

14.9, This shows the background in which the section came to be enacted.
After careful consideration. we do not think it necessaty to disturb the section,
except to the extent indicated above.

11.10. Section 26 provides that no confession made by any person whilst
he is in the custody of a police officer, unless it be made in the immediate pre-
sence of a Magistrate. shall be proved as against such person.

The Explanation to the section, provides that “Magistrate” does not include
the head of a village discharging magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort
St. George or efsewhere. unless such headman is a Magistrate exercising the
powers of a Magistrate. under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882.

11.1. It is to be noticed that section 26 is in negative terms. It does not
provide that every confession made in the immediate presence of a magistrate
can be proved as against the accused. There is onlv a saving for such confes-
sions. Since there is a special statutory provision’ prescribing how a magistrate
is to record the confession, it is only a confession so taken that can be proved
and received and admitted in evidence. if the bar under the section is dispensed

with.

11.12. Tt has been stated that confessions made in the immediate presence
of a Magistrate may be of two kinds: the confession may be recorded by a com-
petent Magistrate in accordance with the procedure provided in section 164 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; or it may not be so recorded. It would
seem to follow from the decision of the Privy Council in Nazir Ahmad v. Em-
peror; that Magistrates should not associate themselves with the police as re-
gatds confessions, unless they record the confession after observing the provi-
sions of section 164 of that Code. Otherwise, the provisions of that section
would be rendered nugatory, and a confession not recorded under that section
would become admissible by virtue of a wider interpretation of section 26 of
the, Evidence Act.

11.13. To give effect to the above view, it is desirable to narrow down
section 26, by making it clear that only 2 confession made to a competent Magis-
trate and recorded by him under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
would fall within the section. For this purpose, it would be necessary to re-
place the words “unless it be made in the presence of a Magistrate’, by the words
“unless it is recorded by a Magistrate under section 164 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973”. We recommend accordingly.

11.14. The Explanation to the section 26 speaks of the “Presidency of
Fort St. George”. These words are obsolete. Tn fact, if our recommendation’
to mention section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is carried out. the Ex-
planation can be safely deleted. as under the new Criminal Procedure Code, the
power to record confessions is vested only in Judicial Magistrate, or. in metro-

politan areas, in Metropolitan Magistrates.

‘Para, 11.7, supra.
Section 164, Cr. P. C., 1973.
8Nazir Ahmad v. Emperor, 1.L.R. t7 Lahore 629 (P.C.).

‘Para. 11.13, supra. .

No change,

Section 26.

Negative Form.

Confessions in
presence ot
lagistrate.

Recommendation
regarding _confes-
sions before Ma-
gistrate.

Recommendation
fegarding the Ex-
planation.


206

11.15. For the above reasons, we recommend that section 26 should be
tevised as follows—

REVISED SECTION 26

“26. No confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody
of a police officer, shall be proved as against such person, unless it ts re-
corded by a magistrate under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973.”

(Explanation to be omitted)

Section 26A (New) 11.16. At this stage we should deal with one point on which a new section
ution मे one requires to be inserted. A suggestion has been made in the 14th Repoft of the
cers, Law Commission’ that as the superior officers of the police are today recruited
from the same social strata as officers of other departments, a confession made
to the officer of the status of the Deputy Superintendent of Police and above
should be acceptable in evidence. This relaxation was to be restricted to cases
in which such officers themselves investigate and was to be introduced as an ex-
perimental measure only in the Presidency towns or places of like importance
where investigations can be conducted by superior police officers and where the
average citizen would be more educated and conscious of his rights. The change,
it was suggested, should be introduced in the three Presidency towns,
because the magistracy there is directly under the control of the High Court; as
regards the introduction of the change in other areas, it was observed that it
should be preceded by the separation of the judiciary from the executive.

Recommendations, 11,17. In a later Report of the Law Commission, on the Cr. P. C* the
in an earlier Re question of confessions made to the police was considered at length, and the re-

port. commendations as to confessions were thus stated in the form of propositions.—-

“(1) Yn the case of a confession recorded by a Superintendent of Police
or higher officer, the confession should be admissible in the sense that the
bar under sections 25-26, Evidence Act, should not apply if the following
conditions are satisfied :—

{a) the said police officer must be concerned in investigation of the off-
ence;

(b) he must inform the accused of his right to consult a legal practitioner
of his choice, and he must further give the accused an opportunity
to consult such legal practitioner before the confession is recorded;

(c) at the time of the making and recording of the confession, the coun-
sel for the accused, if he has a counsel, must be allowed to remain
Present. If the accused has no counsel or if his counsel does not
wish to remain present, this requiremert will not apply;

(d) the police officer must follow all the safeguards as are now provided
for by section 164, Cr. P. C. in relation to confessions recorded by
Magistrates. These must be followed whether or not a counsel is
present;

©) the police officer must record that he has followed the safeguards
at (8), (2) and (d) above.

414th Report, Reform of Judiciat Administration, Vol. 2, Page 748, paragraphs 36
and 39,

"48th Report on the Cr. P. C. Bill, pages 6-7, Para, 21-22.

‘Member, Sh. 5. P. Sen Verma has 3 reservation.


207

(2) In the case of a confession recorded by an officer lower than a
Superintendent of Police, the confession should be admissible in the above
sense if the following conditions are satisfied: —

(a) the police officer must be concefned in investigation of the offence;

(9) he must inform the accused of his right to consult a legal practi-
tioner of his choice, and he must further give the accused an opportu-
nity to consult such legal practitioner before the confession is re-
corded;

(©) at the time of the making and recoding of the confession, the coun-
se] for the accused must be present. If the accused has no counsel
or if his counsel does not wish to remain present, the confession
should not be recorded;

{d) the police officer must follow ail the safeguards as are now provid-
ed for by section 164, Cr. P. C. im relation to confessions recorded
by Magistrates;

{e) the police officer must record that he has followed the safeguards at
(0), (c) and (d) above.”

It was stated in that Report that the above amendments should apply to
the whole of India, and an amendment of the Evidence Act and of sections 162
and 164; Cr. P. C. on the above lines was recommended,

11.18, tm so far as these recommendations concern the Evidence Act, a
suitable amendment should be made by inserting a new section—say, as sec-
tion 26A. We recommend that such a section should be inserted?

I. INTRODUCTORY

11.19. Under section 27, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in
consequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, in
the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts
to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may
be proved.

11.20. Before we proceed to consider the problems that have arisen in
regard to the section, we would like to discuss the scheme of the section. For
this purpose, the discussion in a judgment* of the Supreme Court, to which we
have already referred’, is helpful. In that case—State of U.P. v. Deoman Upa-
dhaya'—Shah J. (as he then was,) after analysing the scheme of the Act,
observed:

“Section 27 renders provable certain statements made by him while he
was in the custody of a police officer; section 27 is founded on the principle
that even though the evidence relating to confessional or ‘other statements’
made by a person, whilst he is in the custody of a police officer, is tainted
and therefore inadmissible, if the truth of the information given by him
is assured by the discovery of a fact, it may be presumed to be untainted
and is therefore declared provable in so far as it distinctly relates to the
fact thereby discovered. Even though section 27 is in the form of a pro-
viso to sedtion 26°, the two sections do not necessarily deal with evidence

3Section not drafted.

ख़बर of U. P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya, ALR. 1960 SC. 1125 (1961) 1 SCR. 14.
8See general discussion, Supra.

‘State of U. P. ¥. Deoman Upadhyaya, ALR. 1960 5.0, 1125 (1961) 1 SCR. 14.
‘Emphasis supplied.

Recommendation.

Section 27,

Scheme of the
section.


Problems —_ stated
in brief.

Confirmation

by

subsequent facts.

208

of the same character. The ban imposed by section 26 is against the proof
of confessional statements. Section 27 is concerned with the proof of in-
formation whether it amounts to a confession or not, which leads to dis-
covery of facts. By section 27, even if a fact is deposed to as discovered
in consequence of information received. only that much of the information
is admissible as distinctly relates to the fact discovered. By section 26
a confession made in the presence of a Magistrate is made provable in its
entirety.”

11.21. Later, in the same judgment, Shah J. observed:

“Sections 25 and 26 were enacted not because the law presumed the
statements to be untrue, but having regard to the tainted nature of the source
of the evidence. prohibited them from being received in evidence.”

And still fater, Shah J, observed:

“When a person not in custody approaches a police officer investizat-
ing an offence and offers to give information leading to the discovery of a
fact. having a bearing on the charge which may be made against him. he
may appropriately be deemed to have surtendered himself to the police.
Section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure docs not contemplate any
formality before a person can be said to be taken in custody: submission
to the custody by word or action by a person is sufficient. A person direct-
ly giving to a police officer by word of mouth information which may be
used as evidence against him. may be deemed to have submitted himself
to the ‘custody’ of the police officer within the meaning of section 27 of
the Indian Evidence Act*. Exceptional cases may certainly he imagined
in which a person may give information without presenting himself before
a police officer who is investigating an office. For instance, he may write
a letter and give such information or may send a telephonic or other
message to the police officer.”

11.22. These observations explain the broad scheme of the section. We
may now mention, in brief, the problems arising on the section.

The section begins with the words—“Provided that”. There were no such
words in the corfesponding section 150, as it stood, in the Code of Criminal Pro-
cedure, 1861 {as originafly enacted). But these words were introduced (in that
Code) by the Amending Act of 1869. Since the ‘proviso’ is not attached to any
other section, difficult problems of interpretation have arisen, The constita-
tional privilege against self-inctimination has also necessitated an examination
of some aspects of the section, We shall deal with all these points at the pro-

per place.
Tl. DOCTRINE OF CONFIRMATION

11.23. The section is based on what is usually called the doctrine of
confirmation by subsequent facts. This doctrine might be more felicitously caii-
ed the doctrine of confirmation by subsequently discovered facts. It is as old
as the modern confession rule was first clearly enunciated in Warickshal?s case’.
That case also raised the problem of the admissibility of facts discovered in con-
sequence of an inadmissible confession. n that case, as the result of a confes-
sion otherwise inadmissible, stolen property concealed in the prisoner’s lodgings

YZeeal Remembrancer v. Lalit Mohan Singh, VR. 49 Cal. 167; ALR. 1922 P. C. 342;
Santokhi Beldar v. Emperor \LR. 12 Pat, 241: AJR, 1933 Pat. 149 (SB)

*Warrickshall's case (1783) 1 Leach C. C. 283, 284.


209

was found, Tt was contended that as the property was discovered as the result
of an inadmissible confession, the evidence of the actual discovery ought also to
be excluded. The contention was rejected by the court, which observed—

“This ptinciple respecting confessions has no application whatever as
to the admission or rejection of facts, whether the knowledge of them be ob-
tained in consequence of an extorted confession or whether it arises from any
othen source? for a fact, if it exists at all, must exist invariably in the same
manner whether the confession from which it is derived be in other respects
true or false. Facts thus obtained, however, must be fully and satisfactori-
ly proved without calling in the aid of any part of the confession from
which they may have been derived; and the impossibility of admitting any
part of the confession as a proof of the fact clearly shows that the fact may
be admitted on other evidence; for, as no part of an improper confession can
be heard, it can never be legally known whether the fact was derived through
the means of such confession or not”.

11.24. It should be noted, however. that in Warickshall’s case* it was
held that no part of the otherwise inadmissible evidence could be let in by reason
of the discovery of the property. This particular point has given rise to an un-
certain body of case law in England, In R. v. Mosey*, it was held) -as in करे
v. Warrickshall—that no part of the confession was admissible, although facts
discovered in consequence were admissible. There is a comment in Leach’s
Criminal cases’, following his note on R. y. Mosey,’ in which he states <hat it
would seem that so much of the confession as relates strictly fo the fact discover-
ed should be admitted, as the reason why improperly induced confessions are
exchided is the danger of falsity, and the fact that property or some other mate-
rial fact is discovered shows that so much of the confession as immediately re-
lates to that property ‘or fact is true.

HI. HISTORY

11.25. The section, like the preceding sections, is derived from the Code
of Criminal! Procedure, Act 25 of 1861. We have already traced in detail the
history of all the sections.‘ But it will be convenient to reproduce the carlier
section again. We therefore cite below sections 148, 149 and 150 of Act 25
of 1861, Section 150 of Act 8 of 1869, and sections 25, 26 and 27 of Act 1 of
1872 in juxtaposition.

Act 25 of 1861 Act 8 of 1869 Act 1 of 1872
(Evidence Act)

8, 148, No confession or admission of 5.25. No confession made
guilt made to police officer shall to a police officer shall be
be used as evidenceagalnsta person used as evidence against
accused of any offence. a person accused of any

offence.

$.149. No confession or admission of 5.26 No. confession made
guilt mady by 809 person whilsthe by any person whilst he
isincustody of a police officer, un- is in the custody of
less it be made in the immedlate police officer, unless it be
presence of a Magistrate shail be made ip the immediate
used as evidence against such Presence of a Magistrate
person. shgil be proved as. against

Such person.

1The underlined words will be discussed later.
®para. 11.23 supra.

हर, v. Mosey, (1783) 1 Leach 0. ८. 265 n.
'See General discussion.

Comment of the
Reporter and
difficulty of ap
plying the test.


Section 27— Vali-
dity with _ refer-
ence to Article 14,

Section 27 consi-
dered with refer-
ence to Article 20
(3) of the Consti-
tution.

210

Act 25 of 1861 Act 8 of 1869 Ast.1 of 1872
{Evidence Act)

$.150. When any fact{s deposed to $.150. Provided that any 8.27. Provided thar
by a police officer asdiscovered by fact that is deposed to any factisto depose
him in consequence ofinformation inevidence as discovered discovered in con-
received from 9 p2rsonaccused of inzonsequenceofinforma- sequence of infos-
any offence,so much of suchin- tion received froma per- mation received from
formation. whether it amounts to son accusedof any offen- a person accused of
azo nfessionor admission of guilt or ce, or in the custedy.of any Offence inthe custo-
not, aS relates distinctly to the facta police officer, so much dy of @ police office’
discovered by it, may bereceivedin ofsuch information, whe- so much of such ig”
evidence. ther it amounts to a formation, whether its
confession or admission amountsto a confes_
of guilt ornot,asrelates slonornot, aS relates
distinctly to the fact distinctlsto the fact
thereby disco ered, may thereby disco ered

betecei ed in evidence. may be proved.

TV. CONSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS

11.26. We may now consider the constitutional aspects of the section. So
far, section 27 has come up for consideration with teference to two of the arti-
cles of the Constitution dealing with fundamental rights—Articles 14 and 203).
Article 14, deals with equality; Article 20(3) deals with the privilege against self-
incrimination As regards Article 14 of the Constitution, the validity of sec-
tion 27 was attacked on the ground that the section makes an arbitraty distinc-
tion between persons in custody and persons not in custody. However, ita vali-
dity on this point was upheld by the Supreme Court", on the ground that a per-
son who is not in custody, but has committed an offence, would not normally
give information to the police without surtendering himself to the police, and
that the possibility of an offender who is not in custody (because the police has
not been able to get at any evidence against him), giving information to the
police leading to the discovery of an important fact, but without surrendering

himself, would be rate.

41.27. We may next refer to the provision in Article 20(3) of the Constitu-
tion, It provides, “No person accused of an offence shall be compelled to be a

witness against himself”.

11.28. The most important ingredient required for the application of this
article is of compulsion, denoted by the word “compelled”. The other import-
ant ingredient is that indicated by the words “to be a witness against himself”.
There is a third ingredient—“person accused of an offence”.

11.29. Now, as to the ingredient indicated by the word “compelled”, it is
to be pointed out that section 27, if taken literally, would cover even confessions
obfained by compulsion, because,—at least on one interpfetation’,—section 27

overrides section 24. है
11.30. As regards the words “to be a witness against himself”, Article 203)

applies at the stage of investigation also,—as is shown by the discussion in State
of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu +. It would, therefore, be a reasonable view to take,

1 U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya ALR, 1960 5. 0. 1125, (1960) 2 S.C.A. 371, 381;
961) SEK 4 Gas, Kapur, Hidayatullah and Shah JJ, Subba Rao J. dissenting),

See infra.
3$8tate of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu, ATR. 1961 S.C. 1808.

‘See infra pata. 11.324. o


211

that the validity of section 27 is maintainable only as regards confessions not
obtained by compulsion, and that confessions obtained by compulsion would be
hit by Article 20(3). Even “Statements” of the accused (not confessions} obtain-
ed by compulsion would be hit by Article 20(3). The case law which we dis-
cuss below, though not conclusive on this point, can be said to indicate this with
reasonable certainty.

11.31. The question obviously could not have arisen in this form before
the commencement of the Constitution. Discoveries could, then, prove the truth
of a confession, and to admit an involuntary statement violating the standards of
section 24 could not raise any question of unconstitutional action. The ques-
ticn could only be one of construction of the scope of section 27 and its fela-
tionship with other sections.

The constitutional guarantee, however, made a difference.

11.32. In 1958, the High Court of Allahabad held that the Constitution
prohibited the use of a coerced confession even though the confirmation require-
ments of section 27 had been met’.

11.32A. The issue was raised in the Supreme Court for the first time in
1961, in the State of Bombay vy. Kathi Kalu’. One of the accused in that case
had revealed, under interrogation; the location of several stolen rifles, and after
finding the rifles, the prosecution uSed section 27 to introduce, the state-
ment at the trial. The Supreme Court held. on the facts that the
use of section 27 in the particular case was not unconstitutional, since the
interrogation alone had not rendered the statement #rvoluntary. The Court took
the view, that if the self-incriminatory information by an accused had been given
without any threat, that would not be hit by the provisions of Article 20(3), as
there was no ‘compulsion’. It observed—

“Thus, the provisions of section 27 of the Evidence Act are not with-
in the prohibition aforesaid, unless compulsion had been used’ in obtaining
the information.”

41.33. We shall now refer to decisions of the High Courts relevant to
Article 20(3} and section 27. In an Allahabad case’, it was pointed out that the
phrase used in Article 20(3) is “to be a witness”, and not “to appear as a wit-
ness”. It follows that the protection aforded to an accused, in so far as it re-
lates to the phrase “to be a witness”, is not merely in respect of testimonial com-
pulsion in the Court room, but may well extend to compelled testimony previous-
ly obtained from him. For this conclusion, the High Court relied on an earlier
Supreme Court case’, construing Article 20(3). The High Court, therefore, held
that Article 20(3) does apply to discoveties under section 27, Evidence Act, if
these discoveries are the results of compulsion. The scope of section 27 is,
thus, restricted by Article 20(3) of the Constitution, and the discoveries which
follow a confession brought about by compelling an accused person® cannot be
used against him.

‘Amin v. The State, U.L-R. (1957) 2 Allahabad 110, ALR. 1958 Ail. 293, 302 (Chatur-
vedi & A. N. Mulla, JJ.) (see infra).

"See e.g. —
(a) Neharoo Mangtu Satnami v. Emperor, A1.R. 1937 Nagpur 220;
(b) Emperor v. Misri (1909) LL-R. 31 Allahabad 592.
’State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu AIR. 1961 S.C. 1803.
‘Emphasis supplied.
*Amin v. The State, AAR. 1958 All 290, 302, 303, pata. 47, 48 (Chaturvedi & A. N
Muila JJ}.
‘Emphasis supplied.
Sharma ¥. Satish, ALR. 1954 5.0. 300.

*Emphasis supplied.

Allahabad case.

Supreme Court
case,

High Court deci-
sions relevant to
article 20(3).


Accused _ entitled
to give informa-
tion,

Accused,

Point under Arti-
cle 20(3)  consi-
dered.

212
11.34, In a Gujarat case’ also, it was observed that proof of the confession

under section 27 would be barred by the Constitution, if coercion were proved.
On the facts, however, coercion was not proved.

11.35. In most of the cases decided by the other High Courts, the state-
ments were considered voluntary on the facts. Nevertheless, it was recognised
that in some situations, section 27 may conflict with article 20(3).

11.36. Thus, the principle that, after the coming into force of the Constitu-
tion, the evidence which may otherwise be admissible under section 27 of the
Eviderice Act may be inadmissible by virtue of Article 20(3) of the Constitution,
if it could be established that such evidence was obtained under compulsion, ap-
pears now to be accepted.

11.37. Of course, there must be evidence of compulsion. Mere police
custody in the absence of further evidence fo show that force or compulsion
was used, will not suffice to show that the statement was made under compulsion*
so as to attract Article 200).

11.38 Also, it is not disputed that an accused is certainly entitled to give
any information or evidence against himself. Article 20(3) only lays down that
he shall not be compelied to do so, and if he has given the information voluntati-
ly and has not actually been compelled to give the same, the provisions of Arti-
cle 20(3) are not infringed. Where there is no evidence at all of any compulsion
having been resorted to, for the purpose of obtaining an information from the
accused leading to discovery, the information given by the accused is not hit by
Article 203.

11.39. Article 20(3) does not contemplate the suppression of truth simply
because the information is given by the accused. Information given by the ac-
cused under section 27 is, not in every case, compelled testimony.

11.40. Again, where the person making the confession does not stand in
the character of an accused person, Article 20(3) does not apply‘—for example,
where a person is examined under the general provision in section 108, Sea Cus-
toms Act, 1879, conferring power* on a gazetted officer of customs to summon
and examine persons in connection with an inquiry into smuggling. But, where
the ingredients of Article 20(3) are satisfied, section 27 cannot be availed of.
This is clear from the discussion in the various rulings cited above.

11.41. In view of the position discussed above, a suggestion was made to
us that it is advisable to exclude, from section 27, cases of coerced confessions
by an express amendment. It was stated that Article 20(3) bars statements other
than confessions also, and even as regards statements (other than confessions)
obtained by compulsion, Article 20(3) could be relevant.

We have, however, come to the conclusion that no such express provision
is required. Section 27 will, after the Constitution, be construed in conformity
with the Constitution.

\Ahmedmiyan v. The State ALR. 1963 Gujarat 159.

2Ramamurthy v. Pani ALR. 1959 Orissa 22, 36, 37 para, (0.8).

8Radha Kishan v. The State AIR. 1960 Punj. 294, 295.

MJethiya v. The State ALR. 1955 Raj. 147, 150, 151.

‘Ramesh Chandra v. State of West Bengal (1969) 2 S.C.R. 461 ; (1970) 72 Bom, E.R, 787.
*See now the Customs Act, 1962.


213
V. RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER SECTIONS

11.42, The next question to be considered under section 27 concerns the
inter-relationship of this section with others. Is section 27 an cxception to sec-
tions 25 and 26, or is it an exception to sections 24, 25 and 26, or to section 24
only, or to sections 24 and 26? This question has been troubling the courts
for years. Several views have been expressed on the subject.

(i) According to one view, the section, being. placed in Juxtaposition to
section 26, is an exception only to that section.' The words “in the custody of
a police officer”, which appear both in section 26 and in section 27, also lend
support to this view.

A similar view had been expressed by Mahmood J. in his dissenting judg-
ment in an Allahabad case, with some plausible reasoning.

11.43. From the observation made by the Privy Council in Pakala
Naruyanaswami’s case’, it appears that the Privy Council was inclined to that
view,

In Pakala Narayanaswami's case,' the main question was whether section 27
of the Act overrides section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In the
course of the discussion of the question, the Privy Council observed—

“Tt would appear that one of the difficulties that has been felt in some
of the Courts in India in giving the words (of section 162) their natural con-
struction has been the supposed effect on sections 25, 26 and 27, Evidence
Act, 1872. Section 25 provides that no confession made to a police officer
shall be proved against an accused. Section 26—No confession made by
any person whilst he is in the custody of a police officer shall be proved
as against such person. Section 27 is a proviso that when any fact is dis-
covered in consequence of information received from a person accused of
any offence whilst in the custody of a police officer, so much of such informa-
tion whether it amounts to a confession or not, may be proved. It is said
that to “give section 162 of the Code, the construction contended for, would
be to repeal section 27, Evidence Act, for a statement giving rise to a dis-
covery could not then be proved, It is obvious that the two sections can,
in some circumstances, stand together,

“Section 162 is confined to statements made to a police officer in course
of an investigation. Section 25 covers a confession made to a police ofti-
cer before any investigation has begun or otherwise not in the course of an
investigation, Section 27 seems to be intended to be a_ proviso to sec-
tion 26 which includes’ any statement made by a person whilst in custody
of the police and appears to apply to such statements to whomsoever made,
e.g., to a fellow prisoner, a doctor or a visitor. Such statements are not
vovered by section 162. Whether to give to section 162 the plain mean-
ing of the words is to leave the statement still inadmissible even though a
discovery of fact is made such as is contemplated by section 27 it does not
seem necessary to decide,”

11.44, In the case before the Privy Council, the declarant was not in the
custody of the police, and no alleged discovery was made in consequence of his
statement. Hence no final opinion as to section 27 and section 162 was ex-
pressed,

Devi Ram y. The State ALR. 1962 Punj. 70, 72 pata. 6 (Khosla 0. J. and Shamaher
Bahadur J).

"Queen Empress v. Babulal, 1.L.R. 6 All. 509 (per Mahmood J. dissenting),

°Pakala Narayanaswami, A.1.R. 1939 P, C. 47.

‘Pukala Naranaswami v. Emperor, A.LR. 1939 P. 0. 47, 52,

‘Emphasis supplied,

Section 27—
Exception to
which section.

Various views—

Relationship of
Section 27 and
section 26, (i)
Section 27 an ex-
Seption to section


Relationship _of
section 27 ‘and
sections 25-26.

(iii) section 27
and sections 24-

214

11.45. In Udai Bhan’s case; the Supreme Court observed that section 27
is in the nature of a proviso to section 26, which interdicts the admission of con-
fessional statements made by a person in custody of the police. Section 27 par-
tially removes the ban placed on the reception of confessional statements under
sectiva 26. But the removal of the ban is not of such an extent as to absolute-
ly undo the object of section 26. So much of the statement made by a person
accused of offence and in custody of a police officer, wnether it is confessional
or not, as relates distinctly to the fact discovered, is provable. This was the
proposition emphasised in that case. It was held, that, the evidence in regard
to the discovery of the key as well as the box which the accused handed over
to the police, was admissible in evidence under section 277. The “confession”
lay in the fact that with the key, the shop of the complainant was opened and,
therefore, that portion was inadmissible in evidence and only that portion which
distinctly related to the fact discovered, i.e., the finding of the key, was admissible.
Similarly. the recovery of the box was provable because there was no statement
of a confessional nature in the recovery memo relating to it.

11.46. Another view on the subject is that section 27 can be regarded as
ail exception to both sections 25 and 26.* In one case* the Supreme Court
observed’ that section 27 is a proviso to sections 25-26.

11.47, The third view is that the section is a proviso to all the three
sections preceding वन

The point was touched, but not decided, in one case in the Supreme Court’
Shah J. (as he then was) though not specifically dealing with the point, observed
that even though section 27 is in the form of a proviso to section 26, the two
sections do not necessarily deal with evidence of the same character. Section 27
is concerned with the proof of information feading to the discovery of facts,
whether it amounts to a confession or not. Moreover, only that much of the
information is admissible as distinctly relates to the facts discovered.

11.48. Hidayatullah J., however. observed in that case, as follows": —

“Section 27, which is framed as an exception, has rightly been held
कर an exception to sections 24—46 and not only to section 26. The words
of the section were taken bodily from Lockhart’s case’ and foot-note to
(1783) 1 Cr. Cases, 283, where it was stated :

“But jt would seem that so much of the confession as relates directly
to the fact discovered by it may be given in evidence, for the risk of 16५
jecting (an) extorted confession is the apprehension that the prisoner may
have been thereby induced to say what is false; but the fact discovered shows
that so much of the confession as immediately relates to it is true.”

\Wdai Bhan v. State of U.P.. (1962) Suppl. S.C.R. 830; ALR, 1962 S.C. 1116, 1118,

para. 7 and 11-
*Mst. Jamunia Partap v. Emperor ALR. 1936 Nag, 200; LR. (1936) Nag. 78,

8Chinnaswami v. Andhra Pradesh ALR. 1962 S.C. 1788, 1793 {(Wanchoo J).

‘See also Delhi Admn. v. Balkrishnan ALR. 1972 5.0. 3.

Sa) Emperor v. Remis, ALR. 1947 Punj. 152;

{b) Mathura v. Emperor A.LR. 1946 Punj. 210;

(©) In re Kataru China Papiah, AR, 1940 Mad. 136.

(व) @.E.v. Babulal, LR. 6 41. 609 (F.B.) (Majority view).

SState of A. P. v. Nagesu ALR. 1966 S.C. 119, 123 Para, 9; (1965) 2 S.CA. 967,

371.
1State of U.P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya (1961) SCR. 14; ALR. 1960 SC. 125.

State of UP. v. Deoman Upadhyaya AIR. 1960 S. C. 1125; 1146; para 65,
*Lackhart's case, 1 Leach 386; 168 E.R.


215

11.4% We need not consider the question which of ihese views is correct.
But, as a matter of policy, the question arises whether a confession rsnsed by ८
undesirable inducement, threat or promises,—and hence inadmissible under
tion 24.—should become admissible under section 27, because a faci wus dis-
covered in consequence thereof. We are of the view that the paramount iule of
policy embodied in section 24 must override section 27. In this connection
we would state that the position regarding confessions dealt with in section 24
differs from that under sections 25—26. Section 24 enacts a rule which should
have universal application. That rule is not based on any artificial or peculiar
considerations relatable to the supposed excesses of the police. It is intended
to discourage the tendering of hopes or promises or the exercise of coercion, in
order to induce or compel the making of confessions, These considstations
weigh against section 27 overriding section 24, Section 24 is not based merely
on the criterion of truth. It is intended to discourage coercion in the wide
sense for securing confessions.

11.50. In this connection, we may refer to the obscrvations made by
Rankin C. J. in Durlay y. Emperor’, which point out how a paradox would arise
on the contrary view.

“But, though it is now well held that it is an exception fo sections 24
and 25, there are elements of paradox in that connection.

“The first consequence is that a part of the statement may be siven in
evidence, although it is under section 24 induced by threat or promise. if
something has been discovered in consequence of that part of the statement”,

11.51, It is necessary to go to the root of the matter, namely, what is the
fundamental policy on which section 24, is based. The Privy Council observed

in Ibrahim’s case*—

“The rule excluding evidence of statements made by a prisoner when
induced by hope held out or fear inspired by a person in authority is व rule

or policy”.
These observations apply with great force to section 24.

11.52. The subjective pressure referred to in section 24, which operates
on the mind of the person making the confession, may not lead to the creation
of facts discovered under section 27. But, in view of the policy underlying
section 24, no valid reason remains for admitting in evidence confessions exchud»
¢d from section 24 even where they fall under section 27. a

The facts of an Allahabad case* may be utilised, to illustrate the
effect of the view which is taken on the question of the inter-relationship of sec-
tions 24 and 27. In that case, a girl named Misri was murdered, and certain
ernaments which she was wearing were not found on her dead body, ‘The ac-
cused woman, whose name was also Misri, was suspected and arrested, and kept
in custody for 24 hours. Sbe then took the police to a certain place, #
out a spot where certain ornaments were found, The Sessions Judge found
that while she was in police custody, an inducement was held out to her by a
police officer that she would be let off if she produced the ornaments. The Ses-
sjons Judge found her guilty, and sentenced her to death. The appeal to the

High Court came up before the two Judges, who made a reference to the Full
Bench for deciding the question whether evidence was admissible to show that

11.53.

1purlay v. Emperor A.LR 1932 Cal, 297, 300; LL.R. 59 Cal. 1040, 1045.

Ubrahim vy. King Emperor A.LR. 1914 P.C. 155, 160.
“Emperor v. Misrt (1909) LL.R. 31 Allahabad 592, 597, 598.

1-91 LAD/ND/T7

and pointed.

Section 27--Why

it should
override

not
section

Policy of ‘sect
24 y ion

Allahabad case as

itlustrating
mattc:,

the



‘Recommendation
Yegarding bec
tion 27.

Section 2,—- “so
arch of in-
formation”.

216

the accused woman, as a matter of fact, did go to a certain place and there pro-
duced the omaments in question. Counsel for the accused appellant argued,
that section 27 could not override section 24, while counsel for the State argued
to the contrary. The Full Bench held, that section 27 qualified sections 24 and
25 also; and, on this view, the evidence in question was admissible. With this
expression of opinion on the reference, they sent the case back to the Division
Bench, which then dismissed the appeal and confirmed the conviction and sen-
tence. No detailed reasons are given by the Ful] Bench for the view that sec-
tion 27 qualifies sections 24 and 25 also, except that it rejected the argument of
the appellant that in construing section 27, recourse should also be had to sec-
tion 163 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Prohibition against torture).

11.54, For the reasons already stated? we take a different view, namely,
that section 27 cannot override section 24.

In brief—
@ on the merits, section 24 should override section 27; and

(i) whenever external pressure of the nature mentioned in section 24
operates, the whole statement should be excluded.

No amendment of section 24 is required on this point, but the position is as
stated above.

11544. There is, however, one point on which section 27 should be
revised, It is desirable to make it clear that the section is an exception to sec-
tions 25—26. This aspect is not now brought out clearly. We recommend that
section 27 should be re-drafted so as to provide that it constitutes an exception
to sections 25 and 26.

Section 27 also overrides the provisions of sections 162, code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, under which certain statements made to the police during in-
vestigation are excluded. But that is already provided in that code.

We may note that, as section 27 now stands, it leaves scope for the view
that it overrides only section 26. This is because it is placed immediately after
section 26, and uses words reminiscent of that section. However, for practical
Teasons, it should override section 25 also, because, in practice, statements made
under section 27 are always made to police officers, and if section 25, which re-
lates to confessions made to police officers, is not over-ridden, section 27 will
dhave very little to operate on.

11.55. It should also be provided that information given to a police officer
is also within the section.

VI. OTHER POINTS

11.55A. A few other points arising out of the section may now be dealt
with. The words “so much of such information” in section 27 occasionally
present problems of application. But the principle underlying those words is
clear enough. The words “relates” and “distinctly”, which occur in the section,
avoid undue vagueness. No verbal formula will, so far as can be seen, succeed
im improving the position in this regard.

‘Para 11.50 supra,


217

11.56. It was pointed out in the 14th Report of the Law Commission
that, consequential on the recommendation made in that Report to admit con-
fessions made to superior police officers in the presidency towns and other speci-
fied local areas, there will be no room for the application of the exception eni-
bodied in section 27 in such cases. The recommendation in that Report was
to exclude such cases, ie. confessions to senior police officers, in the specified

areas,

11.57. We are now recommending a different section’ for admitting con-
fessions made to certain police officers. Geographically, our scheme has a wider
application than that recommended in the 14th Report, inasmuch as the amend-
ment will not be confined to specified areas. But our proposal! visualises certain
other requirements, relating to the right to consult a lawyer and, in some situa-
tions, his presence at the time when the confession is recorded by the police offi-
cer. Where those requirements are complied with, the confessions will become
admissible irrespective of section 27. But, where those requirements are not
complied with, the confession made to a police officer or while in police custody
will not become admissible, and the present bar under sections 25—26 will
continue to apply. To override that bar, section 27 will be needed. We do not,
therefore, propose to modify section 27 in this regard.

शा. RECOMMENDATION

11.58. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 27
should be revised as follows:

REVISED SECTION 27

27. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sections 25
and 26, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from 2 petson accused of any offence. being informa-
tion given to a police officer or given whilst such person is in the custody
of a police officer, so much of such information whether it amounts to a
confession or not, and relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may

be proved.

11.59. According te section 28, if such 8 confession as is referred to in
section 24 is made after the impression caused by any such inducement, threat
or promise has, in the opinion of the court, been fully removed, it is relevant.

11.60. This section, thus, forms an exception to the law laid down in
section 24.* ‘Since section 28 is a qualification of section 24, its proper position
in the Act should have been immediately after that section. We, therefore, re~
commend that section 28 should be renumbered as section 24A and placed after

section 24.
SECTION 29
I. INTRODUCTORY
—

13.61. According to section 29, if ‘such a confession’ is otherwise relevant,
jt does not become irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of
secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practised on the accused person for
the purpose of obtaining jt. or when he was drunk, or because it was made in
answer to questions which he need not have answered, whatever may have been

1866 section 26-A (proposed).
2Empress of India v. Pancham ULR. 4 All. 198, 201 (per Stuart, 2. 3).

* aSee also Queen Empress y. Babu Lal LLR. 6 All. 509, 539 (per Mahmood, 53.

Section 27—to be
excluded for. con-
fessions made to
high police offi-
cers.

Recommendation
to modify  sec-
tion 27 in conse-
quence of recom-
mendation regar-
ding __ confessions
to high _ police
officers,

Section 28.

Recommendation
to renumber sec
tion 28 as section
24-A.

Tatroductory.


218

the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he was not
bound to make such confession, and that the evidence of it might be given
against him.

II. MEANING OF “SUCH CONFESSION”

11.62. The section begins with the words
‘if such a confession is othetwise relevant; it does not become irrelevant.
These words raise an important question, because they are capable of different
interpretations :—

(@ They might be taken as referrmg to the confession referred to in
section 24, This is on the reasoning that the preceding section,
section 28 contains the words “such a confession as is referred to
in section 24.”

(ii) In the alternative, they may be taken as referring to confessions, not
contemplated in sections 24, to_28, that is to say, extra-judicial con-
fessions not made to the police or other person in authority.

11.63. It has been observed in a Patna case,’ that the section is meant to
dispel doubts with regard to extra-judicial confessions made under circumstances
similar to those which make judicial confessions inadmissible. According to
this view, repugnancy between sections 24 to 28 on the one hand, and section 29
on the other hand, has to be avoided, and such repugnancy “can be avoided only
if section 29 is construed not so as to cover the field occupied by sections 24 to
28 of the Act. Section 29 must, therefore, refer to such confessions only as are
not governed by or contemplated in the preceding sections, i.e., confessions made
not to Magistrates or police officers, or to persons in authority having some rela-
tion to the charge against him.”

11.64. This view, which was elaborated in detail by Ray, J. in the Patna
case, cites in ils support the following discussion contained in the Law of Evi-
dence by Chamberlain ;*

“The rule (rejecting confessions induced by threats and promises by
those in authority) assumes that those in authority over legal proceedings
ought, in the public interest, to refrain from placing pressure upon the free
will of their prisouers, What injury he may suffer at the hands of private
persons’ is none of its concern. So long as the accused is not influenced by
@ person in authority in certain specified ways, he may be deceived, flattered,
whittled, tricked’ or betrayed into a perfectly admissible confession”,

11.65. In a Bombay case,‘ it was observed that the opening clause ‘if such
a confession’, refers to confessions which have been dealt with in the preceding
sections. The clause ‘postulates that they are admissible under the said sections
and that it is with such confessions that section 29 deals’.

It was also observed that before the provisions of section 29 could be invok-
ed, it must appear that the confession in question is admissible under the pre-
ceding sections. In other words, it must not have been caused by inducement,
threat or promise. The confession, if made by a person while in police cus-
tody, must have been made in the immediate presence of the Magisttate, and if

Emperor v. Jamuna Singh A1.R. 1947 Pat. 305; 11.1९, 25 Pat. 612, 635, 636, 637
Ray. J).

*Chamberlain, Law of Evidence.

SEmphasis added.

‘Rangappa ९. State AIR. 1954 Bom. 285, 289, righthand column (Gajendragadkar, J.)



219

any inducement, threat or promise was held to the confessor, the confession
must have been made after the impression has been removed, Section 29, there-
fore, assumes that there is no bar to the admissibility of the confession in ques-
tion arising from the earlier provisions, and the section then proceeds to nega-
tive other possible objections and bars that may be raised against its admissibi-
lity. This, in effect, means that section 29 applies only to confessions which have
not become irrelevant under sections 24 to 28.

11.66. In view of the different shades of view expressed on the subject,
two questions arise for our consideration—

(a) what is the correct interpretation of the section? and

(0) How should that interpretation be incorporated, in the opening words
of the section, which seem to have caused difficulty ?

11.67. It is considered that the approach in the Bombay case, just now
referred to, is the correct one, namely, that section 29 comes into operation only
in respect of a confession which is ‘otherwise relevant’ that is to say, which is
not excluded by sections 24 to 27 or by any other provisions of law, and which
is made by an accused person, This interpretation gives accurate and full mean-
img to the words “such a confession” (which are the equivalent of “a confes-
sion,made by an accused person”), and to the words “otherwise relevant” (which
are the equivalent of “a confession not excluded by sections 24 to 27 or by any
other provision of law”), It is in harmony with the policy of the exclusionary
rules contained in the other sections. At the same time, it tells us what are
the non-vitiating factors of a confession, in general. Apart from the special
situation of confessions made before Magistrates,” this view helps us to bear in
mind that the factors enumerated in the section are not to be considered as vitiat-
ing factors in themselves.

11.68. In conformity with the interpretation for which we have indicated
our preference above.’ the words ‘if such a confession is otherwise relevant’
should be replaced by some such words as—“If a confession made by an accus-
ed person is not irrelevant or incapable of being proved under sections 24 to 27",
Or, a simpler course would be to omit the word ‘such’. We recommend that
the section should be suitably amended, by adopting either of the two alterna-
tives just now mentioned. We prefer the second alternative, being the simpler
of the two,

I. RELATIONSHIP WITH SECTION 164 CODE OF CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE

11.69. It remains now to deal with the latter half of section 29, which
possesses certain special features. The latter half provides that a confession,
otherwise relevant, does not cease to be so merely because. .. “the accused
was not warned that he was not bound to make such confession and that the
evidence of it might be given against him”.

At the first reading, this part of the section would seem to conflict with
section’ 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898—now section 164, Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. Section 164 lays down, inter alia, an elaborate proce-
dure for warning the accused where the confession is recorded by the Magistrate.

ARangappa v. The State ALR. 1954 Bom. 285 Para. 11.65, supra,
'See discussion as to section 164, Cr. P.C. infra.

‘Para, 11.67 supra.
‘The conflicting decisions are collected in Rangappa v. The State AIR. 1954 Bom.
285, 291, 292.

Questions
consideratio:

for
ce

Bombay view
ferred. mre

as to carlior half,


Diverse views,

Reason for giving

question whether 5
Cr.P.C. The decisions were rendeted with reference to section 164 of the Code
of 1898, but, in this respect, the section in the Code of 1973 makes no difference.

220

The material part of section 164 of the Code reads—

*{2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, ex-
plain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a confession and
that if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him, and no Magis-
trate shall record any such confession unless, upon questioning the person
making it, he has reasoa to believe that it is being made voluntarily”.

11.70. In judicial decisions, different views have been expressed on the
ection 29 of the Evidence Act over-rides section 164 of the

{i} The first view on the subject is that section 29 is an overriding provision.

This is the Bombay view की was observed in the Bombay case that the Legisla-
ture, fully aware of the clear and unambiguous words used in section 29 of the
Evidence Act, while introducing section 164(3) in the Criminal Procedure Code
(by amendment Act 18 of 1923), did not think it necessary to provide for the
supersession or modification of section 29. According to the Bombay view,
therefore, non-compliance with section 1643) [now section 164(2)] does not
exclude the confession, and the court is free to accept or reject the confession, if
it is voluntary or involuntary, as the case may be.

To the same effect are decisions of the Madras* and Rajasthan' High Courts,

and also of the Aliahabad High Courts.‘

(ii) The opposite view was taken by Ray C. J. and Narasimham J. (as he

then was}. in the Orissa High Court,’ The judgment of the Orissa High Court
contains a full discussion of all aspects.

(iii) The Mysore High Court’ takes a middle view, treating the confession re-

corded without the statutory warning as inadmissible only if the accused is pre-
fudiced thereby.

Tt is desirable that the matter should be clarified, one way or the other.

We are of the view that as a matter of policy, section 164 of the Code of Crimi-
nal Procedure must prevail, because it embodies a rule inherently good, and it
should not be open to a trial court to distegard non-compliance therewith and
admit, a confession recorded in circumstances; showing such non-compliance.
Hence an exceplion saving section 1642, Cr. P.C.* should be introduced in

section 29.

1L71. We have come to this conclusion for the reason that while the

overriding | effect absence of a warning by itself may not, in general, be treated as a non-

to sec. 16

yitiating factor (in regard to a confession which is extra-judicial), the case of 2
confession purporting 10 be recorded under section 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is different, The confession is recorded judicially. We have in this
section, a statulory provisions specifically providing for warning. The whole
object of the section is to ensure, as far as is practicable, the voluntariness, or

"ection 164 (2), Cr. PC. 1973.

2Ranguppa V. The State A.LR. 1954 Bom. 285, 290, 292, para. 14, 21.

"Re Vellamoonji Goundan, A.LR, 1932 Mad. 431.

4Dhuuda v. The State ATR. 1957 Raj. 141, 143, Para, 9.

SEmp. v. Nanua, A.LR. 1941 AIL 145, 147.

°Bala Majhi v. The State of Orissa, ALR. 1951 Orissa 168, 169, 175, 177, Para. 1 and

para 26, 34.

In te Madegowden A.LR. 1957 Mys. 50, 52, para. 8 (section 29, however, was not

considered).

*Para 11.69 supra.


Se

221

at least circumstances conducive to voluntariness, in the making of confessions
and of these circumstances, the requisite warning is an integral part. Izregulari-
lies in the record of compliance with the statutory requirements will, no doubt,
be taken care of by the provision in this regard in the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure.’ But the broad requirement of warning under section 164 is no idle forma-
lity. It symbolises the dis-interestedness which one has come to associate with
the judicial Magistracy.

11.72, We, are therefore, of the view that it would be better to amend
section 29, so as to provide that it will be subject to section 164(2), Cr. P. ८.
which deals with the requirement of warning. Such an amendment will be
faithful to the proper import of section 164 as interpreted by the Privy Coun-
cil. The Privy Council in Nazim Ahmed v. K. E.? observed —

“Where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the
thing must be done in that way or not at all.
Other methods are necessarily forbidden. .
“Although the Magistrate acting under this group of sections is

not acting as a court, yet he is a judicial Magistrate and both as a
matter of construction and of good sense there are strong reasons for
applying the rule in question to section 164. Upon the construction ad-
opted by the Crown, the only effect of section 164 is to allow evidence
to be put in a form in which it can prove itself under sections 74 and 80
of the Evidence Act, Their Lordships are satisfied that the scope and
extent of the section is far other than this and that it is a section cone
fetring powers on Magistrates and delimiting them. It is also to be ob-
served that if the construction contended for by the Crown be correct, all
the precautions and safeguards laid down by sections 164 and 364 would
be of such trifling value as to be almost idle. . The range of Magistrate
confessions would be so enlarged by this process that the provisions of
section 164 would almost inevitably be widely disregarded in the same
manner as they were disregarded in the present case”.

11.73. Tt may be noted that the actual judgment in the Privy Council
case cited above was delivered by Lord Roche, and the other members of
the Judicial Committee in this case were Sir John Wallis, Ex-Chief Justice of
the Madras High Court, Sir Lancelot Sanderson, Ex-Chief Justice of the Cal-
cutta High Court, Sir Shadi Lal, Ex-Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court,
and Sir George Rankin, Ex-Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court.

REVISED SECTION 29

11.74. In consonance with the above approach, we recommend that a
suitable amendment should be made in section 29, so as to ensure that the
section does not render relevant a confession which is recorded by a Magis-
trate which is inadmissible by virtue of non-compliance with section 164(2) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure.

We, therefore, recommend that section 29 should be revised as follows: —

REVISED SECTION 29

४29. एु..............---००-०००० a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not
become irrelevant merely because—~

(a) it was made—~

G) under a promise of secrecy.
Wection 463, Cr. P.C. 1973 (see infra).
Nazir Ahmed v. K. E. ALR. 1936 PC. 253.

Section 29 should
64.

override sec.


Recommendation

222

Gi) in consequence of a deception practised on the accused person
for the purpose of obtaining it, or
when he was drunk, or

(i) in answer to questions which he need not have answered, or

tbl the accused person was not warned that he was not bound to make
such confession and that the evidence of it might be given against
him.
ixception.- Nothing in this section shalt affect the provisions of sub-
section (2) ef section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as to
the recording of confessions by Magistrates.”

11.75 & 11.76. Ii is now necessary to refer to a recommendation made in

in 14th Report, as the I4ih Report’ of the Law Commission, to the effect that the mile of prac-

to retracted com

fession.

Introductory.

Principle.

and prudence which requires corroboration of a retracted confession,
should be given statutory recognition, since the rule has achieved the status
of a principle of law and has been universally recognised and acted upon. We
quote below the relevant passage from that Report.

“41. There is no statutory requirement that the confession of an ac-
cused person, later retracted should be corroborated before it is acted
upon. In a large number of cases, prisoners who have made lengthy and
detailed confessions duly recorded under section 164, Criminal Procedure
Code, and have reiterated them in the committing magistrate’s court, resile
from these confessions in the court of session. The task of the Judges
in such cases is made very difficult. Judicial decisions have therefore laid
down the rule that while a conviction on a retracted. confession is not
itlegal, yet prudence dictates that a conviction should be “based on such
a confession, only if it is corroborated by independent testimony. The
rule of practice and prudence requiring corroboration of a retracted con-
fession has achieved the status of a principle of law and has been uni-
verstliy recognised and acted upon. We would suggest that this rule
might be given statutory recognition”.

11.77. We have, however after careful consideration, come to the conclu-
sion that it is better to leave the matter as it is, so that the court may decide
the matters on a consideration of all evidence before it, giving such credence
to the confession as it thinks fit in the circumstances of the case.

SECTION 30

11.78, Section 30 provides that, when more persons than one are jointly
tried for the same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons affect-
ing himself and some other of such persons is ‘proved’, the court may
“take into consideration” such confession against such other person also.
The section is obviously a departure from the general rule {section 21) appli-
cable to all admissions, whereunder an admission is evidence only against the
person who makes it. The reason which is said to have justified this depar-
ture, is that, if a person implicates himself (while implicating others), there is
same guarantee that the implication js true. It is also said that it is difficult
in such a situation to require the court to exclude the statement altogether
from its mind, when it comes to consider the case against the other accused.

11.79 The theory is thal when a person admits his guilt and exposes him-
scif to the pains and penalties provided for it, there is a guarantee for his
truth.

‘14th Report (Reform of Judicial Administration), Vol. 2, Page 751, paragraph 41.


223

Thus, the assumption underlying the section is, that self-implication takes
the place of the sanction of oath, and serves as a guarantee of the truth of the
accusation against the other.

३1.80, We do not, however, find this reasoning convincing. ‘The present
provision, in our view, suffers from several major defects. In the first place,
self-implication may be a substitute for oath, but it is not an adequate substi-
tute for cross-examination. \t is to be remembered that when A and B are
tried together and a confession by A implicating both of them is admitted
under section, B has no opportunity of cross-examining A on so much of his
confession as implicates B also. It is impossible for B to effectively rebut
what A has said, because most of the rebuttal evidence will have to be in the
negative, and it is difficult to prove the negative without cross-examination.
The difficulty of proving the negative has been the main foundation for the
importance which the law has attached to cross-examination. Since B can-
not compel A to enter the witness box (A being an accused person himself),
cross-examination is ruled out. Thus, the present section practically leaves
B in the hands of A so far as A’s confession is concerned.

Moreover, a confession may be true as regards the maker, but untrue as
far as it affects others, Such untruth may arise from malice, or tevenge or
from other circumsiances, which one cannot readily catalogue or recount.

IL8I. It may be noted that with reference to section 30, a number of
suggestions have been received from time to time for its deletion. One of the
High Courts made such a suggestion,” a few years ago. The High Court point-
ed out that as the law now stands, there can be no conviction under sec-
tion 30 without the fullest and strongest corroboration on material particulars.?

A suggestion for the repeal of section 30 was made by a Bar Association?
Such a suggestion was also made long ago by a Chief Presidency Magistrate’, a
District and Session Judge.° and a State Law Commission." The suggestion by the
Chief Presidency Magistrate refers to the fact that section 30 has been described
as a needless tampering with the wholesome rule of English Law.

11.82, It may be of interest to note that the Ministry of Law itself for-
warded to the Law Commission a note by one of its officers for the repeal of
section 307. The note quotes judicial criticism describing the evidence as
dangerous material and as needless tampering with the wholesome rule of the
English law. i criticises the principle in section 30 as “extraordinary” and
as only prejudicing fair trial.

11.83. It may be noted that judicially also, the section has not escaped
criticism. It has been described as “a needless tampering with the wholesome rule
of the English !aw”,’ and as a “most unsatisfactory section’? by Courts Troutter
C.J. In an Oudh case", such evidence was described as “xceptionally dangerous”.

IF, 3(1)/55-L. C. Serial No. 56 (High Court of Andbra Pradesh).

2Ram Prakash v. State of Punjab (1959) S.C.A. 524 referred to.

3Serial No, 29, File Ne. ३(1)/55 LC, Collection No. 1 page 78 (Tripura Bar Associa-
tion).
‘Sr, No. 8 File No. 3(1)/35 L.C. Part |, page 76 Col, No. 2 (Chief Presidency Magis-
trate, Madras).

Sr, No. 8 File No. 3(1)/55 L, C. Part 1, page 103, Col. No. 2 (District Judge, Coim-
batore).

Sr. No. 22, File No, 3(I)/S5-L.C. Part 1, page 153, Col. No. 2 (State Law Commis-
jon, West Bengal).

Pile 3(4)/55-L-C. Part [, Sr. No. 6, Copy of the Notes by Shri S, P. Chatterjee, Attache,
@ated 23rd June, 1958 received through the Min. of Law, File No. 80/52/54L.

{In re : Lilaram A.I.R. 1925 Mad. 805, 807 (Coutts Troutter C. J).

‘Jn re; Lilaram ALR. 1925 Mad. 805, 807.

wBaboo Singh v. Emperor AJR. 1936 Oudb. 156, 159 (King 0. J, and Nanavatty 3.

Reasoning not
convincing.

Suggestions —_ie-
ceived onthe
point,

Judicial criticism,


Logical basis not
sound,

Position in
England.

Position in the
USA.

224
Reilly J. observed in a Madras case!—

“Section 30, Evidence Act, is a very exceptional, indeed an extraordi-
nary, provision, by which something which is not evidence may be used
against an accused person at his trial. Such a provision must be used with
the greatest caution and with care to make sure that we do not stretch it
one line beyond its necessary intention”.

31.84, We have already pointed out? that the logical basis on which the
section is based is not sound. Apart from this defect, the section, in practice,
creates a complication, namely, while the confession covered by the section can be
“taken into consideration”, it is not technically regarded as “evidence’’, and the
section does not declare it to be relevant within the meaning of section 5, although
it is one of the factors which fall within the definition of ‘proof. In view of
this weakness, courts have insisted on independent evidence against the accused,
and have held that a conviction based merely on the confession of a co-accused
would be bad in law’. The confession of the co-accused is regarded merely as a
material for corroborating other evidence,—and that too a weak material. As has
been explained by thc Supreme Court, if the other evidence is capable of belief
independently of the confession, then, of course, it is not necessary to call the con-
fession for aid; but where the judge is not prepared to act on the other evidence
as it stands (even though, if believed, it would be sufficient to sustain a confession),
hhe may call in aid the confession and use it “to lend assurance to the other
evidence” and thus fortify himself in believing that which he would not accept
without such aid.

11.85. In England, unless there is some common object or conspiracy
between them, there is no privity between co-defendants’, nor between prisoners
jointly indicted’. And, the confession of a co-accused is not admissible against
the other accused.

11.86. The question has been discussed in the U.S.A..Where two or more
of the co-criminals are tried jointly as co-defendants, and the statement of one
of them is offered against the maker, even though its contents implicate others
than the maker, is it admissible? The question was discussed in Delhi Paoli case’,
where the Supreme Court beld that there was no objection to this, as long as the
jury was given a precautionary instruction to consider the confession as evidence
only against the defendant who made it.

11.87. However, in 1968, the Supreme Court took a different view in
Bruton vy. United States’ even on this narrow usc. The basic constitutional
doctrine invoked in this case was the right to confrontation. The court held that
if the precautionary instructions referred to in the earlier judgment Delhi Paoli
case are ignored by the jury, the result is that evidence against the second
defendant is offered in the form of the first defendant's confession, and this is
so even though, because of the privilege against self-incrimination, the second
defendant cannot call the first defendant to the stand. Therefore unless the jury

\Periyaswami v. Emperor A.I.R. 1931 Mad. 177, 178.
*Bhuboni Sahu v. King (1949) 76 LA. 147, 155; ALR. 1949, P.C. 257.

२७७७ the judgment of Jenkins, C. J. in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan, (1911)
Cal. 559.

‘Kashmira Singh v. The State ALR. 1952 SC. (1952) SCR. 526, 530 (Fazl Ali,
Mukherjea and Bose, JJ.)

SDaniels v. Potter (1830) 4 C&P. 262.

पर, ५, Gunewardene, (1951) 2 K.B. 600, 610; (1951) 2 All, E.R. 290 overruled on
another point in Toohey (1965) A.C. 595.

tDethi Paoli v. United States (1957) 352, U.S. 232.

"Bruton v. United States (1968) 391, U.S. 123.

LLR. 38,


225

could be expected to abide by the precautionary instructions, the receipt of one
defendant’s confession would impair the right of confrontation and cross-examina-
tion on the part of others who are implicated in that confession. This was the
basis of the later decision.

11.88. As was pointed out in Barber पर. Page? one of the important objects
of the right of confrontation was to guarantee that the fact finder had an adequate
opportunity to assess the credibility of witnesses.

11,89, Having taken into account all aspects of the matter, we have come
to the conclusion that section 30 should be repealed. Soundness of the principle on
which it is based is debatable. The supposed substitute for oath is self-implica-
tion. Assuming that self-implication is an acceptable substitute for oath, it is, in
our view, no substitute for effective cross-examination. And, as we have dis-
cussed above, the co-accused can hardly rebut the inctimination against him
effectively. This position is a potential source of great injustice in many cases,
and practically amounts to a violation of the principle that no man ought to be
condemned unheard. The person incriminated by the confession of a co-accused
is in a dilemma. If he enters the witness box, he does so at the risk of Josing
his privilege against self-incrimination by being exposed to cross-examination
without restrictions. If he does not enter the witness box, there will be injustice.
He may be unable to rebut the allegations made by the confessing accused, since
the latter (unless he enters the witness box) would not be available for cross-
examination.

11.90 and 11.91. We are, therefore, of the view that even the limited use to
which the confession can be put under the section is not justifiable, and we
recommend that the section should be repealed.

41.92, One of the requirements of section 30 is that a confession made
by one accused affecting himself and some other accused should be ‘proved’, Some
controversy appears to exist on the point whether a confession in the course of the
trial would come under the section. The word ‘proved’ would seem to indicate a
contrary position and justify a narrow view. This narrow view is, in fact, sup-
ported by the decisions of some High Courts*,

A contrary view has, however, been taken in some decisions’.

11.93. On the present language, the narrower view is correct, that is to
say, the section does not apply to a confession made in the course of the trial.
However, the point will be academic after reference.

, 11.94, In short, our recommendation as to section 30 is that it should be
Repealed, for the reasons given above'.

‘Barber v. Page; 39) U.S. at 721 20 L Ed, 2d, at 758.
29) Emp. v. Mahadev VLR, 45 All. 323; A.LR. 1923 All. 322, 325 (Walsh 7).
(b) R. ४, Ashootosh (1878) LL.R. 4 Cal. 483 (F.B).

(ce) a, Te Maharumathy A.LR, 1931 Mad. 820, 821 (Beasley C. J. and Sundaram
hetty J.).

44) Mrs. V. Sumitra v. Emp, ALR. 1940 Nagpur 287, 288, 291 (Niyogi and Grover
3H).

(e) Kunwar Sen v. Emp. AJ.R. 1933 Oudh 86; LL.R. 8 Luck. 286.
(f) Des Raj v. State A.LR. 1951 Punjab 14, 17 Paragraph 21 (Harnam Singh 1).

a) Cooper v. Emperor I.L.R. 54 Bom, 531; A.J.R, 1930 Bom. 354; 358 (Mirza &
Broomfield, J).).

(b) Emperor v. Valu ALR, 1939 Mad. 737 (Burn & Stoddart, 11).
(©) Dial Singh v. Emperor ALR. 1936 Lah. 337 (Yung C. J. & Rangilai J),
(a) Rijhumal v. Emperor ALR. 1937 Sind 218 (Davis, J. C).

“Para. 11.91, supra.

Recommendation
to repeal the sec-
tion.

Expression
‘proved’,

Recommenda-
tion,


Section 31— Ad-
missions not con-

clusive proof,
may estop.

Recording

of

confessions = and

‘statements.

Non-compliance
with provisions
section 164
section 281,

of
or

226
SECTION 31

11.95. Section 31 provides that admissions are not conclusive proof of the
matters admitted, but they may operate as estoppel under the provisions herein-
after contained. {1 follows that an admission may be rebutted in appropriate cir-
cumstances.

Tn allowing such rebuttal, the law favours the investigation of truth by all
expedient methods’. The doctrine of estoppels, by which further investigation is
precluded, being an exception to the general rule, and being adopted only for the
sake of general convenience, and for the prevention of fraud, will not be extended
beyond the reasons on which it is founded. Therefore, admissions, whether written
or oral, which do not operate by way of estoppel, constitute only prima facie and
rebuttable evidence against their makers and those claiming under them, as bet-
ween tbem and others.

No change is needed in the section.
APPENDIX I

Section 164, Cr. ९, C. 1973.

16401). . Any Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate may, whether or not he has juris-
diction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an
investigation under’ this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, of
at any time atterwards before the commencement of the inquiry or trial;

Provided that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power
of a Magistrate has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.

(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person
making it that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be
used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such confession
unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that is is being
made voluntarily.

(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the
Magistrate states that he is not willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not
authorise the detention of such person in police custody.

(4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 281 for
recording the examination of an accused person and shall be signed by the Peron mak-
ing the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the tt of such
record to the following effect: —

“I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that,
if he does so, any confession he may make may be used as evidence against him and
I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It was taken in गा] i, Presence
and hearing and was read over to the person making it and admitted by to be
correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him,

(Signed) A. B.
Magistrate”.
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be
recorded in such manner hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the

opinion of the Magistrate, best fitted to the circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate
shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is so recorded,

(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward
it to the Magistrate by whom, the case is to be inquired into or tried.

APPENDIX ता

Section 463 Cr. P.C. 1973.

463(1). If any Court before which a confession or other statement of an accused person
recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 164 or section 281, is tendered, or
has been ceceived, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections
have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwith-
standing anything contained in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, take evidenoe
in regard to such non-compliance, and may if satisfied that such non-compliance has not
injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly made the statement
recorded, admit such statement.

(2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision.

‘See woodroffe.


CuaprTer 12

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES BY PERSONS
WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES

I. INTRODUCTORY

12.1. Admissions (including confessions) which we have discussed so far,
constitute a species of exceptions to the rule against hearsay. We shall now deal
with statements made under certain special circumstances by persons who cannot
be called as witnesses, these being another species of exceptions to the rule against
hearsay. These statements form the subject-matter of sections 32 and 33.

12.2. It is a general rule of evidence that a witness cannot give evidence

based on what some other person told him. To this general rule, the Act (as does 4,

the English common law of evidence}, makes certain exceptions. We are, in this
chapter, concerned with an important group of sections embodying such exceptions.

12.3: In general, oral evidence must be direct!, in other words, if the evidence
refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who
says he saw it; if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence
of a witness who says be heard it: and if it refers to a fact which could be per-
ceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must be evidence of a wit-
ness who says he perceived it by that sense i.e. the organ of sense or in that manner.

12.4, It may happen, however, that a witness who has to be present before
the Court to give this direct evidence, is dead, or cannot be found or has become
incapable of giving evidence by reason of physical or mental injury or disease; or
it may be that his attendance cannot be procuretl without an amount of delay or
expense, which, having regard to the circumstances of the case. would be
unreasonable.

12.5. The existence of one or the other of such circumstances — briefly,
the non-availability of the witness--is a condition precedent for the admission of
what could be technically hearsay—a statement made out of court.

12.6. Tt is, however, also necessary that one other condition should be
fulfilled before such statement made out of court can be testified to; and that
condition requirés the existence of one or the other of certain circumstances, from
which the truth of the statement made by the person who is unavailable may rea-
sonably be presumed. When these two conditions co-exist, the law dispenses with
direct oral evidence of the fact. That is the rationale of sections 32 and 33—In
some form or other, these two conditions are satisfied in most of the 8 cases dealt
with in section 32%, and also in the case dealt with in section 33.

These two sections contain the most important exceptions to the rule against
hearsay. Statements made by persons who cannot be called as witness fall into

the following categories:
(1) those made as to the cause of death ;
(2) those made in the course of business ;
(3) those against the interest of the maker +

See section 60.
4As to section 32(1), see infra.

227

Introductory.

General rule—
Oral evidence to
direct.

Exce; eptions when
justified.

Two conditions,


Section 32 and

33— independent
provisions.

228
(4) those giving an opinion as to a public right or custom or matters of
general interest ;

15) and (6) those relating to the existence of relationship, or those made in
a will or deed relating to family affairs ;

those relating to any transaction by which a right or custom in ques-
tion was created, modified, denied, etc ;

(8) those made by several persons expressing feelings or impressions ;

(7

Section 33 adds another category—
(9) those given as evidence in earlier judicial proceedings.
We are not concerned in the present Chapter with sections 34 and 35.

12.7. Of course, the two sections {sections 32 and 33) are independent
provisions, and it has been specifically held* that section 32 is not controlled by
section 33, For the present, however, it will suffice to say that circumstantial pro-
bability of trustworthiness of the statement made out of court, coupled with the
consideration of necessity, would seem to constitute the two principal considera-
tions on which sections 32 and 33 are based. The first condition removes, to a
reasonable degree, the possible source of untrustworthiness and inaccuracy that
may normally lie underneath the bare untested assertion of a person nof in court.
The second condition recognises the fact that the usual guarantees of truth—the
tests of cross-examination and oath—are impossible of being. applied, where the
declarant is dead or otherwise not available.

If. SECTION 32(1), OPENING PARAGRAPH—VARIOUS SITUATIONS

32.8. After this introductory discussion, we shall examine some salient
points commen to all clauses of section 32. The eight classes of hearsay,? written
or verbal, falling under this section, are relevant, when made by a person (a) who
is dead, or (0) who cannot be found, or (०) who has become incapable of giving
evidence, or (d) whose attendance cannot be procured without unreasonable delay
or expense. These alternative situations may be considered ;

{a) Death —Death must be strictly proved*.
(0) Statement by persons who cannot be found.

12.9. As regards a statement: made ‘by a person who cannot be found, it
must be shown that the person cannot be found after reasonable exertion has been
made to find him’. Where all that is known is that the witness has failed to
attend, it cannot be said that the witness cannot be found’, Where a person sud-
denly disappeared and the summons could not be personally served, and an en-
quiry was made in his native village, and it had been found impossible to serve
him with the summons, it may be held that he cannot be found’.

(c) Incapacity of the person—Nature of.

12.10. The third alternative situation relates to incapacity. The incapacity
must be of a permanent character, and not of a temporary character—it was 80
held in an early Calcutta case’. But this case has been dissented from in In re

1Shyama Nand v. Ramakant, (1904) LLB. 32, Cal. 6.
See para. 12.6, supra.

3Queen v. Gozalao, 12 W.R. Cr. 80 (Cal).

‘Queen v. Luckhy Narain, 24 W.R. (Cr) 18, Cal.

5. v. Nanhe Khan, 2 Cr. L3. 518 (All).

कर. v. Rochia Mohato. (1880) ULR. 7, Cal.

tin re. Pyare Lal. 4 CLR, 504, cited in Woodroffe.


229

Asgur Hossain‘, where it has been held that the incapacity need not be of a per-
manent character, and something short of permanent incapacity might satisfy the
words of the section. However, the fact that 2 person was ill and was confined
to his house, does not make him incapable to give evidence within the meaning
of this section. This view is supported by the wide wording of the section, and
no change is recommended on this point.

(9) Expenses and delay in securing presence of witness.

12.11. Where the last alternative situation — expense and delay — is relied
upon, it ought to appear that the presence of the witness could not be obtained
without an amount of delay or expense which the Court considers Unreasonable.
To consider a delay and expense as simply useless, is not enough, it must further
be found that it is reasonable’. In 2 case in Madras*, it was held that the mere
fact that a witness happens to live at Rangoon is not a sufficient ground.

42.12, In enumerating the persons whose statement becomes admissible under
section 32, the opening paragraph of the section 32 mentions persons who are—

(i) dead; or
(ii) who cannot be found ; or
(iii) incapable of giving evidence ; or

(iv) whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or
expense which appears to the court unreasonable.

12.13. The section, however, omits to include the case of a person who Ri

is kept out of the way by the adverse party. We may, in this connection, con-
trast section 33 (dealing with the relevancy of evidence given by a witness in a pre-
vious judicial proceeding) ; that section specifically includes such a case. There
is no reason why such a statement should not be included under section 32 also.
We, therefore, recommend that the opening paragraph of section 32 should be
amended for the purpose, so as to include such cases.

12.14, There is one other difference in the wording of the two sections,
which should also be noted. Section 32 speaks of a person “whose attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay and expense, which, under the
circumstances of the case, appears to the court unreasonable”. Section 33 speaks
of a person whose “presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or
expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court considers unreason-
able”. There is no reason why the language of the two sections should differ on
this point. We, therefore, recommend that section 32, opening para. should be
brought into line with section 33, on this point also.

Ii. SECTION 32(1)--OPENING PARAGRAPH — OTHER POINTS

12.15. So far, we have dealt with the situations in which the opening
paragraph of section 32 applies, or should apply. We shall now deal with
certain other points arising out of the opening paragraph. The first point
relates to the kind of statements made admissible by the section. The opening
paragraph classifies them by using the terms “written” and “verbal”. Strictly
speaking, the contrast with “written” is more accurately indicated by the word

Un re. Asgur Hossain, LLR. 6, 774.

Xa) Queen v, Kukhan Santhal, 21 WR. (Cr) 56 (Cal).
(b) Noshai Mistri v. E., LL.R, 5, Cal.

*Kadappa v. Thirpathi, 86, 110. (Mad).

Section 32
opening —_para—
who is kept out

of the way by the
adverse party,

Section. 32 Oyen-

ing perewarh—


Section 32 Open.
ing paragraph—
“Relevant Facts”.

not

230

“oral” rather than by the word “verbal”. In fact, the Act itself uses the word
“oral” at various places,’ e.g. in section 59 (which allows all facts except the
contents of documents to be proved by oral evidence), section 63(5) (which says
that secondary evidence means and includes oral accounts of the contents of
the documents), and section 92 (which provides that if the terms of any contract
etc., are proved under section 91, no evidence of any “oral agreement” or “state~
ment” shall be admitted).

12,16. However, it should be noted that the word “verbal”, as used in
this context, has received judicial interpretation. The Privy Council has, in a
case? which arose under section 32 of the Ceylon Evidence Ordinance (14 of
1895), which section was identical with section 32 of the Indian Act,—held
that where a woman with her throat half cut, answers questions put to her
by signs and nods, such signs are “verbal” statements. The Privy Council
observed that the case resembled that of a person who is dumb and is able to
converse by means of finger alphabet. The Privy Council pointed out that the
section used the word “verbal”, and not the word “oral”, observing that it was
unnecessary to decide whether the nods of assent would have constituted an
“oral” statement.

In this position, the wording of the section need not be altered on this

point.

12.17, Yet another point arises out of the opening paragraph of section 32,
The point is common to all clauses, but, since it has arisen in connection with
clause (4), we shall first refer to that clause. Clause (4) provides that the state-
ment of a person not available as a witness may be admitted in evidence, if
the statement gives the opinion of the person concemed as to the existence of
any public right or customs or matter of public or general interest of the exist-
ence of which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware and when
such statement was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or
matter has arisen.

12.18. In relation to this clause, a controversy exists as to the meaning
of the expression “all relevant facts”, which is used in the opening paragraph
of section 32. The precise question is, whether the expression “relevant facts”
includes facts in issue.

12.19. To this question, a negative answer was given in a Bombay case*.
The point at issue was whether, by custom, a widow could adopt a son without
the express authority of her husband. A statement by the widow to the effect
that she could do so under a custom, was held to be inadmissible, the reason
of the court being that the very fact in issue was the alleged custom. and the
section applied only to statements of relevant facts.

12.20, It appears to us, with due respect, that this is not a satisfactory
position, for several reasons. In the first place. such a view will lead to an
anomaly, as the very function of a court is to decide questions about facts im
issue; relevant facts are used merely as supplying the material for the decisiom
of facts in issue. Secondly, many of the illustrations to the section— for example,
illustrations (a), 0) and (k)}—dJcal with facts in issue, and those illustrations
suggest wider rather than a narrower construction on the point under discussion.
Thirdly, it may be noted that the Bombay case referred to above has been

‘Section 59, 63(5), 92, etc.
4A. P. Chandrasekhara v. The King, A..R. 1937 PC. 24; 26.
*Patel Vandravan vy. Patel Manilal, (1891) LL-R. 15 Bom. 565. 579.


231

doubted in a later Bombay case.' where Chagla J., {as he then was) raised a
query on the point. He pointed out that the Privy Council, in Biro v. Auna Ram,"
admitted 4 statement of fact in issue under section 32.

12.21. In view of the consistent usage of the Act in spccifically mentioning
“facts in issue” and “relevant” facis, it is desirable that the language of sec-
tion 32 should also be made clearer on this point. The more specific language
of sections 7 to 9, 1101), 17, 35, 36 etc., may be compared.

All these sections speak of facts in issue and relevant facts. An amendment
of section 321) for this purpose will also secure harmony with the scheme of
the Act. as contained in section 5.—the basic section of the Act,— which provides
that evidence can be given of facts in issue and of such other facts as are declared
to be relevant. Section 5 would seem to indicate a dichotomy between facts in
issue and relevant facts; and, in order to prevent a controversy from arising, it
is desirable to widen the wording of section 32(1), opening paragraph so as to
cover facts in issue as well as relevant facts.) We recommend that the paragraph
should be amended accordingly.

12.22. Section 32 (1) does not provide that the person whose decjaration
becomes relevant under this section, should be a person who would have been

competent as a witness.

In English law, the declarant (in the case of a dying declaration) must have
been competent as a witness; thus, tender age or imbacility will exclude a dying
declaration in England’. Jn India, however, it is doubtful whether this rule is
applicable’. We do not propose any amendment on this point.

12,23. As a result of the above discussion, it will be necessary to amend
the opening paragraph of section 32, so as to incorporate the following points:

(0) addition of the case where the witness is kept out of way*—
compare section 33: and

(ii) verbal change regarding that portion of the opening paragraph which
deals with the case of a witness whose “attendance” cannot be ob-
tained;—compare the wording of section 33.

Gii) facts in issue should be added*®.

12.24, The following revised draft of the opening paragraph of section 32
is therefore recommended.

IV. REVISED SECTION 32—OPENING PARAGRAPH

32, Statements, written or verbal, of facts in issue or relevant facts made
by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable
of giving evidence, or whose presence cannot be procured. without an amount
of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the court consi-
ders unreasonable, or who is kept out of the way by the adverse party, we
themselves relevant facts in the following cases.

Yadav Kumar v. Pushpa Bai, A.LR. 1944 Bom. 29, 30 (Chagla 3).

°Mst. Biro v. Atma Ram, ALR. 1937 P.C. 101.

कर, v. Pike (1829) C & 598.

‘Cunningham. Law of Evidence. page 161-162. cited in Monir, Evidence, (4th Edition),
para. 220.

SPara 12.13, supra.

"Para. 12.20, supra.

16—{31 LAD/ND/77

@ompetence as
witness,

Summary of re-
commendations
as to opening
paragraph,

Redraft of sec-
tion 32, Opening
paragraph.


Section 321.

Rationale.

Conditions ~ in
England.

Cases in which
statements under
sub-section qa
admissible.

232

V. SECTION 32 (1

12.25. Having disposed of the opening paragraph of section 32, we are
now in a posifion to consider the various clauses of the section.

12.26. Under section 32(1), statements made by a person as lo the cause
of his death, or as to the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in
his death, are relevant, where the cause of the person's death comes into ques-
tion. This is the first exception to the rule against hearsay created by the
section. Where a legal system, in its law of evidence, recognises the rule against
hearsay, any exception to that rule must be based on some rationale.

12.27. Suristically, the justification in a legal system for admitting such
statements is the assumption that a dying man does not dic with a falsehood
on his lips. Shakespeare had occasion to allude to this aspect. In King John!,
when the wounded Melun finds himself disbelieved while announcing the intend-
ed treachery of the Dauplin Lewis, he exclaims:—

“Have T not hideous death within my view, retaining but a quantity
of life, which bleeds away. even as a form of wax, Resolveth from his
figure, ‘gainst the fire? What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must lose the use of all deceit? Why should व then be false, since
it is true, That I must die here, and live hence by truth?”

12.28. We shall revert to this aspect later.*
Tt should be stated, however, that a person may Jose bis mental faculty
when death is approaching. Thus, in King John’ Prince Henry is made to say:
“Deaih’s siege is now
against the mind, which he picks and wounds,
With many legions of strange fantasies :
Which, in their throng and press to the last hold.
Confound themselves.”

12.29, It is, apparently, for this reason that the statements are made relevant
only for certain purposes.
We now proceed to consider the clause in detail.

12.30. to 12.33. In England, the conditions on which dying declarations are
admitted in evidence* are—({i) the death of ihe declarant, (ii) that the trial should
be for his murder or manslaughter, (iii) that his statement should relate to the cause
of his death, (iv) that he should have been under a settled hopeless expectation
of death, and (v) that he could have been a competent witness.

12.34. It has been pointed out with® reference to the second condition re-
quired in England that the first clause of section 32 is widely different from
the English law upon the subject of “dying declaration”, according 10 which,
this description of evidence is not admissible in a civil case; and even in criminal
cases, it is admissible only in the single instance of homicide, that is, murder
or manslaughter’, where the death of the deceased is the subject of the charge
and the circumstances of the death are the subject of the dying declaration.

‘King John, Act 5, Scene 4.

*See “Expectation of death” infra.
‘King John, Act 5, Scene 7.

*Cross on Evidence.

‘See Shivabhai vy. R., (1926) 1.L.R. 50 Bom. 683.
®There is no English authority as to causing @eath 0५ reckless driving,


233

३2.35. In India, however. the declaration is admissible even where the case
is not one of Romicide.' Moreover, under the Indian Act. the statement is rel
vat whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of the
death of the person who made the statement comes inte question, Ulustration
(4) to section 32(1) gives an example of a civil, as well as of a criminal case,
and, as an example of the latter, it mentions a charge of rape. Even under
the previous law, as contained in section 371 of Act 25 of 1861. (The Code of
Criminal Procedure), and section 20, Act 2 of i855. it was field that’ the rule
of English law restricting the admission of this evidencz to cases of homicide
had no application in India; and that the dying declaration of a deceased person
was admissible in evidence on a charge of rape. We do not suggest any change
in this regard.

12.36. The statement under clause (2) may relate sol only to the cause of
death, but also to the circumstances of the transaction which resulled in death.
The words “circumstances of the transaction” are wide, and have been consider-
ed by the courts on a number of occasions. This was decided in Pakata Narayan
sweani ५. Emperor?

12.37. That the words “circumstances of the transaction” are not very
precise, is illustrated by several controversies that have arisen. Thus, there is
some controversy as to how far a statement as to the motive of the perso who
caused the death can be given in evidence under section 32(1), which allows
evidence of a statement as to the “cause of death” or “circumstances of the
transaction which resulted in death”. One view on the subject is that such
statcments are admissible: this view has been taken by the High Court of Patnat
and by the erstwhile courts of Judicial Commissioners of Nagpur and Himachal
Pradesh.’ In the PATNA case,’ it was observed : —

“What he has said regarding motive is at two places: firstly in his
first information report and secondly in the dying declaration. In the first
information report (Ex. 4/1) he says—

“Somra Bhuian is a wizard and cultivator. Nagwa and Sukna are his
comrades. They did not want that T should act as a wizard there. This
was the cause of the dispute: and in the dying declaration (Fx. 3) he says,
“The assaulted me on account of enmity caused by my acting as a wizard.”
T do not see how any reasoning can make these statements to be anything
other than statements as to the circumstances of the transaction which ended
in Kudrat’s death.”. हे

12.38. and 12.39. The High Court of Madras has taken a different view.”
The facts were thus stated :

“The appellant who is the Karnam of the village of Gangachollapentha
was charged before the learned Sessions Judge of Visagapatam together
with three other persons for murde: one Thalada Ramaswami on the
night of 2nd August last. The murder must have taken place cn the main
road between Gajapatinagaram and Mentada very near to Mentada. There

pany Bissoreminan, (1866) 6 WR. Cr. 75 (866), followed in Lali v. हे, (1927) LR.
6 Pat. 747.

ZR. v. Bissoortnjtin (1866) 6 W.R. (1... 75 (1866).

*Pakala Naravanaswami vy. Emperor (1939) 1 All E.R. 396 (PC).

‘Emperor v. Somra, AUR. 1938 Pat. 52.

4a) Chunilal v. कर... ALR. 1924 Nag. 11520:

fb) Findal v. The State, AAR. 1954 HELP. 11.

"ATR 1938 Pat, 52 (Rowland and Varma JJ.).

Hn re. Beggam Appatanarassayya, ALR. 1941 Mad. 101 (Burn & Mockett JJ).

Circumstances

the transaction.

Statements
motive,

as

of

to


Whether amend-
ment needed.

Section 3261)
How far  State-
ments can be
ased in respect
of death of other
persons,

234

is ample evidence on the record to show that the appellant and the deccased
were on terms of friendship. That has been proved by the village Munsif
and there afe circumstances in this case which strongly bear that out. But
the learned Sessions Judge has relied on certain evidence in this case as
proving motive on the part of the appellant to murder the deceased. That
motive is derived from statements made by the deceased to his wife and
to his wife’s sister to the effect that in relation to a Jaw suit in which the
deceased’s wife’s sister, one Pydithalli was concerned. the appellant had
accepted a bribe from the plaintiff one Narayanamma in the suit against
Pydithalli. The motive is thus entirely derived from statements made by
the deceased. These statements are wholly inadmissible. There is nothing
im section 32. Evidence Act, which makes them admissible. They are not
statements made by the deceased as to the cause of his death or to circum-
stances of the transaction which resulted in his death. The Judicial Com-
mittee in (1939) 1 M.L.J. 756" has considered the provisions of section 32(1).
Evidence Act. in relation to statements of deceased persons who fave been
murdered. Lord Atkin at p. 763, (1939) 1 M_L.J. points out that the
circumstances must be circumstances of the transaction, general expressions
indicating fear or suspicion whether of @ particular individual or otherwise
and not directly related to the occasion of death will not he admissible.

In this appeal, the deceased's statemients provide nothing more than
grounds for supposing that the deceased suspected the accused of having
betrayed his wife’s sister in a civil case. They in no wav are to be asso-
ciated with the actual murder. Evidence of these statements should have
been excluded.

12.40, In the second Madras case the statement that was sought to be
tendered in evidence was that the accused was on intimate terms with the de-
ceased’s sister and the deceased wanted to arrange the sister's marriage to some
other person. This was held to be inadmissible.

12.41. We do not propose an amendment on this point, leaving it to be
dealt with by the case law.

12,42, te 12.44, Another controversy, traceabje to the words “circumstances
of the transaction”, may be noted. The precise question is whether a dying
declaration made by A can be used for the proof of facts relating to the death
of B. The controversy has assumed practical importance, and an illustration
may be drawn from the facts of a case which was decided by the Ranguon
High Court’ Simplying the facts, we may state the main circumstances in the
case as follows :—

12.45. A, a husband, and B, his wife, were both murdered at the same time,
and it was said that accused X murdered the husband and accused Y murdered
the wife. A dying declaration made by the wife was put in evidence against
the accused, who were charged with being concerned in the murder of both
the persons. The objection taken on behalf of the accused was that the dying
declaration which was to the effect that accused X murdered the husband A, and
accused Y murdered the wife B, was admissible only against the accused Y, who
actually attacked the wife, as it can only be admissible in a case where the cause
of the wife’s death is in question. This argument was rejected by the court, hold-
ing that as both the accused were charged with being concerned in the murder of

'Pakala Narayanaswami v. Emperor. AIR. 1939 PC. 47.
*Public Prosecutor v. Munigan, A.LR. 1941 Mad. 359. 360.
*Nga Hla Din v. Emperor. A.1.R. 1936 Rangoon 187 (D.B).


235

both the persons, the fact (if it be true) that accused X attacked the husband,
A, was part of the transaction which resulted in the deah of wife B. The court
observed— “it could naturally be said. for example, that had the husband not
been attacked. he would have gone to his wife’s assistance”. Apart from this,
and cven if the accused had not been charged under section 34, Penal Code
(acts done in furtherance of a common intention), the Court thought that the
evidence would have been admissible against both. The Court distinguished a
mumber of cases cited on behalf of the accused, the first being a case where
in a faction fight two men were tried at the same trial for murdering two men
of the opposite side, there being no other connection between the two. The
second case cited was one in which a police informer was killed by the
in the course of a dacoity, and the informer made a statement incriminating
certain persons as his companions. It was held that the cause of the death
of the informer wus only indirectly in question between the two and that his
dying declaration was not admissible against the other dacoits so as to convict
them.

12.46. Kernan and Brandi JJ., observed: “As to its not being admissible
except as against the person who actually caused the deponent’s death, we are
of opinion that this is not so in the case before us. The wording of section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act is comprehensive............. Here one of the ques-
tions was whether the accused. other than P, could be convicted of having been
concemed in committing a dacolty in the committing of which murder was
caused. and we have no doubt that statement as to what was done by those
concerned in the dacoily in which the murder was caused was relevant against
those concerned in the dacoity”.

12.47. This wide view of the section is shared by the Patna High Court also?!

12.48. The Lahore High Court* has refused to admit a dying declaration
of 4 person in evidence against members of his own party, in cross-cases for
the death of persons of cither party, even though the question was which party
was the aggressor and who acted in self-defence. This case can, however, be
distinguished on the ground that the two cases were tried separately and, there-
fore, the “cause of that person’s death” did not come into question within
the meaning of section 32(1). That is to say, a declaration made by A cannot
be used in a case in which the issue is not regarding the declarant A’s death,
but regarding the death of B, a member of the opposite party.

To the same effect is an earlier decision of the Allahabad High 0006:

42.49. An earlier Punjab case, holding that a dying declaration is admissible
only where the death of the deceased is the subject of the charge and the circum-
stances of the death are the subject of the dying declaration, decided that the
statement of the deccased person, to the effect that another person who had
died was stabbed by the accused, is inadmissible under section 326), If the
death of the declarant is not in issue, the declaration cannot be admitted.

12.50, The controversy, however, becomes acute in a later case of the
Allahabad High Court’.

'State v. Ramprasad, AAR. 1953 Pat, 354.
“Saudagar Singh v. Emperor, A.LR. 1944 Lah. 377, (Din Mohammad and Sale Js).
8Dhanu Singh v. Emperor, ALR. 1925, All. 227.

‘Fak "as Empress, 17 Punjab Reports 1901 discussed, in Woodroffe, Evidence (1957),

Vol. [, P. 461
‘Kunwar Pal Singh v. Emperor, A.1.R. 1948 All. 122.

Punjab case.

Allahabad case.


Questions to
considered.

English cases.

be

236

In thal case it was held that the statement of one dead person is not a relevant
fact with respect to the question about the death of another. This view has
been dissented from by the erstwhile Travancore-Cochin High Court,’ on the
ground that this would limit the word of the section (transaction”) in an un-
juslified we fi may be noted that in the Allahabad case already cited?,
Raghbur Dayal |... reiectcd the dying declaration of one brother, Girwar Singh,
with respect fo the attack on Megh Singh, his brother, though the transaction
in which both the persons were killed. was, one, as is evident from the follow-
ing extracts of the dying declaration :

..f was siceping in my field. Megh Singh went and
slept in the ficld (to keep watch over) Bajra crops. K. R. and B. came and
pressed down my younger brother, Megh Singh. When he cried vut, 1
started... 0.00... the aforesaid feur persuns surrounded me and attacked
गाछ...........- thereafter I got unconscious. ... they murdered my younger
brother, Megh Singh.”

12.51. The case related to the murder of both the brothers, The
Court observed that section 32 makes a statement of a person relevant only
when the statement is made as to the cause of his death or as to any of the
circumstances of the transaction etc., and that “it follows that the statement of
one dead person is noi 2 relevant fact with respect to the question about the
death of another person”.

12.52. In view of the above state of the case-law, two questions arise — first,
what is the true position and secondly. does the section require any clarification
to embody the true position.

12.53. As to the first qucstion, it is suggested that the language of the
section is comprehensive enough to justify a wider interpretation. H is true
that the procceding must be one in which the death of the decla-
fant 3s a matter in issue. But, once this condition is satisfied, the
statement is admissible not only for one purpose (cause of his death),
bui also for another and wider purpose, namely, proof of  circum-
stances of the fransaction which resulted in his death. It is weli-known that
the word “transaction” has always been interpreied widely, not only in general
legal phraseology, but also in the parallel language of section 235 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1898 {section 220 of the Code of 1973). The word “circum-
stances” has the effect of widening, and not narrowing, the scope of the section.
Therefore, undue emphasis should not be laid on the words “his death’, in
connection with the transaction. As was pointed out in a Lahore case’, the
word “transaction” does not mean merely the fact of death, but al} the circum-
stances connected with it.

12.54. The English cases that are ciled in this connection did not actually
lay down a narrower view. in one of (he cases’, a person was accused of perjury.
and what was sought to be given in evidence was a dying declaration by a
person who was shot by the accused afler conviction. The deciaration gave
an account of the shooling, and then proceeded to state certain facts relevant
to the charge of perjury. This was sought to be given in evidence, in opposition
to the order for new पांचों obtained by the Attorney General The court held
it to be inadmissible, becuuse evidence of this declaration is admis.ible only
where the death of the deceased is subject of the charge, and the circumstances

‘Wukka ¥. Pravancore-Cochin Siac, ALR. 1955 Trav. Cochin 104.
“Kanwar Pal Singh's case, ALR. 1948 All. 170 supra.

‘Ravperor v. Faiz, ALR. (916 Lah. 106.

5Kis g v. Mead, (1824) 2 B.C. 605.


237

of the death are the subject of the dying declaration. This case does aot neces-
sarily mean that the dying declaration can be used only in so far as it deals

with the central fact of the death of the declarant. It only means that the dying

declaration is admissible only in a trial for murder or manslaughter,—where

death is the subject of the charge.

12.55. In another English case, A was charged for procuring the miscarriage
of a woman B. A dying declaration by the woman B as to the circumstances

of the case was held to be inadmissiole.

declarant, the dying declaration is not admissible.

12,56. Apart from this aspect, namely, that the English case law is
conclusive, the matter could be approached from the point of view of logic

also.

12.57. Now, logically speaking, there is no reason why the section should
be confined in the manner suggested by the narrower view. Sense of impending
death and the necessities of the case, which are the principal reasons for admitting
dying declarations, apply as much to the death of the declarant as to the death

of any other person,

12.58. Though jt would appear that the language of the section is even now
capable of a wider construction yet, in order to resolve the controversy, it is
desirable to make the necessary clarification on the above point.

be achicved by adding a suitable Explanation.
We recommend that the section should be so amended.

12,59. Under the Act, the statement is admissible whether or not the
person who made it was under expectation of death*. This is expressly provided

in the clause.

In this case, also, the rule laid down
in simple, namely, that where the charge does not involve the homicide of the

12.60. It may be noted that under the law which was in force prior to the

Evidence Act} it was held that

This requirement is not found in the section.

12.61 to 12.63. While recording* that the various restrictions imposed by the
English law, inter alia. On dying declarations had not been adopted, the Select
Committee on the Indian Evidence Bill gave the reason that these restrictions
should rather go to the weight of the evidence in question than to its admis-
As to English law, we may refer to the case of R. v. Woodcock".
man was charged with the murder of his wifc, and her statement Concerning
the cause of her injuries, given on oath to a magistrate, was received in evidence
against the accused. The deceased said nothing of her impending death, but
the court was satisfied that she must have known that she was on the point of

sibility.

dying. Eyre, C.B., said :

before a dying declaration could be received
in evidence, it must be distinclly found that the declarant knew, or believed,
at the time be made the declaration, that he was dying, or was likely to die.‘

1R. ५. Hind (1860) 8 Cox Criminal Cases 300.
4a) हि. २. Premananda, (1925) 11.6, 52 Cal. 9871;
(७) R. ४. Degumber, (१673) 19 WR. Cr. (Cal).

‘Section 371, Act 25 of 186], and section 29, Act 2 of 3855.

Ma) In the mater of Tenco, (871) 1S WAR, Cr. 1 (Cal.

(0) R. २. Bissorinjun, (1868) 6 W.R., Cr. 75, 76 (Cal.).

(०) R. ४. Svamber, (1868) 9 W.R., Cr. 2 (Cal).

SGazette of India. Extraordinary Ist Jnly, 1871, Part 1, page 253,
Relevancy of facts,

कर, v, Waodcock, (1789), 1 Leach 500,

Report, Under Il.

nol

This could

A

Logical approach,

Recommenda-
tion.

Expectation of
Jeath.

Previous jaw as
to expectation of
death.

Reasons_ given bi
Select Committes,


Redraft

Declarations in
course of  busi-
ness,

Different phra-
seology of dusi-
ness,

Doty not Neces-
sary.

English rule,

238

“The principte on which this species of evidence is admitted is, that
they are declarations made in extremity, when the party is at the point of
death, and when every hope of this world is gone; when every motive to
falschood is silenced, and the mind is induced by the most powerful con-
siderations to speak the truth; a situation so solemn and so awful is consi-
dered by law as creating an obligation equal to that which is imposed by
a positive oath adminisicred in a court of justice”.

12.64. As a resuli of the above discussion, it will be necessary to revise
clause (1) as follows :—

VI. REVISED SECTION 321)

(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death,
or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death,
in cases in which the cause of that person’s death comes into question.

Explanation 1.—Such statements are relevant whatever may be the nature
of the proceedings in which the cause of death of the person who made them
comes into question.

Explanation 2.—The circumstances of the transaction which resulted in the
death may inciude facts relating to the death of another person,-

12.65, Declarations made in the course of business are dealt with by
Section 32(2) in these terms.

“When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course
of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum
made by him in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the
discharge of professional duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed
by him of the receipt of money goods, securities or property of any kind
or of a document used in commerce, written or signed by him, or of the
date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or signed by him.”

12.66. It may be noied that expressions referring to the “course of business”
occur also in sections 16, 34, 47, 114 and in the illustrations to section 114.
Section 16 speaks of a “course of business” according to which “naturally an
act would have been done”; section 34 speaks of books regularly kept in the
“ordinary course of business”. Section 114 speaks merely of “common course
of, public and private business”. The phraseology, thus, differs in the
various sections. The difference in phraseology does noi appeat to have caused
any difficulty. The applicability of clause (2) depends entirely on the exact
meaning of the words “course of business”?

12.66A. Clause (2) does not, in terms require that it must be the duty
of the person who made the statement to make that statement, The broad Cate-
gory with which the clause begins is expressed by the words——“in the ordinary
course of business”. What follows is an enumeration of particular situations,
of which one relates to statements made “in the discharge of professtonal duty”.
This may be described as the illustrative part of the clause. The object of this
illustrative part, in reciting the particular cases, is obviously not to restrict the
general applicability of the clause.

12.67. The English rule of evidence, of which the case of Brain v. Preece*
is the best illustration, is briefly anti Clearly stated in Stephen's Digest of the

‘Emphasis supplied.
“Hingava ¥. Bhoramappa, i1.R. 23 Bombay 63.
°Brain v. Preece, 11 and W. 773,


239
Law of Evidence. “A declaration is relevant when it was made by the decla-

rant in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty,
at or near the time when ihe matter stated occurred, and of his own knowledge.”

The word “or” should now be read* as, - “and”

12.68. The subject is usually dealt with, in England, (under the correspond-
ing rule of the common Jaw}— under “Declarations in course of duty”. A
declaration is relevant when it was made-- (i) by a declarant who is dead, and
Gi) in the discharge of his professional duty, (iii) at or near the time when the
matter stated occurred, (iv) on personal knowledge, and (v) there was no motive
to misrepresent.

12.69. 1( now seems to be accepted in England that the existence of a duty
is necessary. The statement of the law, by Stephen“, requires modification on
this point

12.70. Thus, in an English case, a certain entry ran thus‘: “April 4th 1825,
W. Worsell came as farm-hand, and to have for the half-year 40 5. “Lord Den-
man, C.J. observed :

“The book here does not show any entry operating against the interest
of the party. The memorandum could only fix upon him a fiability on
proof that the Services had been performed,”

32.71, Again, under English jaw, as already stated’ entries in the course
of business must be shown to have been made contemporaneously’ with the facts
to which they relate. Amid the hurry and distraction of business, it is argued,
the particulars of matters not entered at the time may be forgotien or misstated.
The provisions of the Indian Act contain no similar restriction as to the admis-
sibility of this kind of evidence. However, in determining the weight to be
allowed to it in particular Cases, it will always be important to consider how
far the statement or entry was contemporaneous with the fact to which it relates.
“The sale of a valuable Cashmere shawl might be entered a day or two after,
without any risk of error, while a retail shopkeeper would have some difficulty
in remembering on the following morning the particulars of a couple of dozen
articles sold at different prices—this single transaction being one or fifty of
a hundred similar sales made on the same day?”

12.72. With reference to the second requirement of English Jaw, — the
requirement of duly—it has been said’ that the duty must not be a general one,
involving a yariety of acts that may change from time to time, but specific and
two-fold— i.e. to do a particular act and to record or report it when done. There
must have been a duty to record or otherwise report the very thing”. The duty
must also be to do the very thing to which entry relates, and then to make a
report or record of it.

Finally, the duty must have been actually performed

‘Stephen's Digest. quoted in Reg. v. Hanmamta. 1A.R. | Bom. at 9. 616.

*See “English law—-- Declarations in the course of duty” infra.

Stephen's Digest. quoted supra.

‘nhablants of Rv. North, 4 QB. 132. 134.

"See supra.

"The Henry Coxon 3 FID 156 (2 days’ delay fatal). है

Woodroffe.

Ha) Sturla v. Preecia, 5 App. Cas. 347. (Lord Blackburn);

(क) Marcer ४. Denna, (1905) 2 Ch, 538, 558, (C.A).

giiambers v. Bernasconi. (834) 1 6. छा. & R. 347; Trotter v. Me. Lean. 13 Ch.

“Smith भर. Blackey, (1867) 1.R. 2 0.8. 326, 332 (per Blackburn, J.

English iaw—De-

clarations in
course of duty.

the

English ‘aw  re-
quirement of
contemporaneity.
Nature of _ the
duty required in
England.


English law—
Exclusion of col-
lateral matters.

Personal know-
“ledge necessary in
English kaw,

‘Whether state-
ments sufficient to
charge with liabi-
lity.

240

12.73. In English law, as already stated, entries made in the course of
are evidence only of those things which, according to the course of
it was the duty of the person to enter, they are no evidence of indepen-
dent collateral matters. In the case of Chambers v. Bernasconi', Lord Denman.
delivering the unanimous opinion of the Exchequer Chamber, said: “We ae all
of opinion that whatever effect may be due to an entry made in the course of
any office, reporting facts necessary to the performance of a duty, the statements
of other circumstances, however naturally they maye be thought to find a place
in the narrative, is no proof of those circumstances.”

12.74. Th's restriction on admissibilit also not to be found in the Indian
Evidence Act. The statement or entry, in order to be admissible under the
Act, must relate to a relevant fact. But it is immaterial whether this fact is
connected with the performance of a duty, or is merely an independent collatera!
matter.

12.75. Under English Iaw,’ it is essential that the declarant should have had
personal knowledge of the matters stated. The Indian section simply requires
that entries in accounts should, in order to be relevant, be regularly xept in
the course of business; and although it may, no doubt, be important to show
that the person making or dictating the entrics had, or had not, a personal
knowledge of the facts slated, this is a question which, according to the Indian
tule of Evidence, affects the value and not the admissibility, of the entries’.

12.76, It may be of interest to consider the question whether, under
section 32(2), the statements in books of account kept in the ordinary course
of business are sufficient evidence to charge any person with liability. In this
respect, section 34 may be contrasted; that section specifically provides that
while entries in books of account regularly kept in the ordinary Course of busi-
ness are relevant, such entries “shall not alone be sufficient evidence to charge
any person with liability.” Under that section, thus, there has to be evidence
to prove the transactions which may appear in the books of account‘.

12.77. Of course, the testimoney of the plaintiff himself on oath in support
of the entries could corroborate the entries, and suffice to fix the defendant
with liability under section 34. In fact, it has been held + that such corroboration
as is required by section 34, would be best afforded by the evidence of the person
who knows the books of account and in whose presence the transaction tuok
place,

12.78. This difference between section 32(2), on the one hand, and section 34.
on the other hand, has been noticed by the courts’ which have, in general, held
that while the entries under section 32(2) do not suffer from any statutory dis-
ability such as is provided in section 34, the court is not bound to accept them
without corroboration, that being a matler on which it must exercise a discre-
tion as a fact. © *

‘Chambers v. Bernasconi (1834), Crompton, Meeson and Rescoe’s Reports, 347, 368.
2See Stephen—quoted supra.

‘Reg. v. Hanmanta, (1877) 1.L.R. 1 Bom, 610, 616, 617

*Chandradhar v. Gauhati Bank, A.1.R. 1967 S.C. 1058.

“Kaka Ram v. Thakur Das Mathra Das A.LR. 1962 Punjab 27.

“Ram Gobind y. Gulab Chand, (1940) LL.R. 20 Pat. 273.

"See also Duverka Dass v. Babu Jankidass, (1855) 6 Moore Indian Appeals 88.98.
*Ramuvari Bai v. Balaji, 1.L-R. 28 Bom, 294.

“Kachrulal v. Nand Lal, LL.R. (1955) Nag. 618.


241

12.79. Having regard to the fact that the person who made the entry under
section 32(2) is not available as a witness at the final. We wouid not like to
disturb the present position in Uhis regard by inserting any such disabitity as
attaches to entries under section.

$2.80. In this connection. we have taken note of the learned and illuminating
discussion by Mukerji J. in Gopeswar’s case’. He observed--

“Section 43 of Act If of 1855 was as follows: “Books” proved to have
been kept in the course of business “shall be admissible us corroborative and not
as “independent proof of the facts therein stated”. In section 34 ज Act I of
1872, the words “regularly kept” are substituted for ihe words “proved to have
been regularly kept” and in the illustration to the section the word used in
“shows” and “proves”. It is apparent, therefore, that the law embodied in sec-
tion 34 of Act I of 1872 is not quite the same as was contained in section 43
of Act IT 18 and this secms to be conceded on all hands. The expressions
“corroborative evidence”, “independent evidence” and “substantive evideace” that
are found in many of the reported decisions bearing upon section 34 of Act 1
of 1872 are somewhat oui of place in view of the wording of that scction and
have been handed down to us from the words “corroborative” and “indepen-
dent” that appewred in section 43 of the old Act and those words as weil as the
ward “subsisniive™ that were used in the decisions thereunder. The present Act
deals, amongst gihers, with the relevancy of evidence and in some instances with
the probative value. The plain words of section 34 indicate that the section
deals with all entries in hooks of accounts regularly kept in the course of
business; in the first place, making them relevant whenever they refer to a matter
into which the Court has to enuuire, and next, providing that when such entries
are sought to be used as statements for a particular purpose, namely, to charge
any person with Jiability, they shall not alone be sufficient evidence for that
purpose. Section 32 clause (2), makes relevant a statement, consisting of an
entry, made by a person, who is not a witness before the Court, in books,—-not
necessarily books of accoum but--kept in the ordinary course of business. A
book of accounts may be one of such books, and where an enlry appears in a
book of accounts it comes both under section 32, clause (2), and scetion 34. The
iflustration to section 34 makes it plain that, if the book of accounts is regularly
kept in the course of business, the entry will be relevant notwithstanding that
the person who made the entry has not been examined to prove the iruth of the
transaction to which the entry relates and notwithstanding that he is available as
a witness. The only material difference as between an entry relevant under
section 34 and one relevant under section 32 clause (2), is that in the former
case the person who made the entry may be available as a witness, while in the
later case he is now f find if very difficult to appreciate on whan ground the
levistature could intend tv exempt entries relevant under section 32, clause (2)
from the disability that i: imposes on entries relevant under section 34 by the
second part of that section, and personally 1 have always fett inclined to take the
view that such entries, no maiter whether they are relevant under one section or
under the other, are not to be considered as alone sufficient to charge any person
with liability. The other view, however, namely that the letter part of section 34
applies only 10 such entrics which are relevant only under section 34 and not
under section 32, clause (2) is backed by the high authority of Sir Lawrence
Jenkins C. J. in the case Rumpyarabai v. Balaji Shridhar’ and has been accept-
ed as correct in other cases (e.g. Daji Abaji Khare vy. Gobind Narayan’ Bapar

}Gopeswar Sen v. Bejoy Chand Mahatar (1928) LE.R. 55 Cal. at p. 1175:
phasis added

sRampyarabhai y. Balaji, (1904) 13. २, 28 Bom. 294.

‘Daji Abaji 5. Gobind Narayan, (1908) 10 Bom, LL.R. 81.

Change not need-
ed to declare the
entries to be insu-
fficient.

Suggestion of
Mookerjee, J.


Section 32(2)—
“Ordinary course
of business” —
Controversy.

Case law.

242

Kukha Mandal v. W. N. Grant!, Aktowli v. Tarak Nath Ghose*) and it is perhaps
too late tc contest it. If this other view is adopted, it should be held that it was
intended by the Legislature that where the maker of the entry is available as a
witness the entry alone will not be sufficient proof to charge a person with liability
but, where the maker is net available as a witness but the entry is relevant by
reason of one or other of the conditions mentioned in the opening paragraph of
seclion 32 being present, there is no statutory obligation to look for anything
else to find the liability.

“Personally, I entertain grave doubts as to whether this couid have
been the intention of the Legislature or, if it was, it would not have been
declared in much clearer terms. Fortunately, however, in practice we sel-
dom come across a case in which the entry which comes under section 32
clause (2) is really sought to be used alone to charge any person with
liability.”

12.81 to 12.83. Though we recognise the weight of this comment of
Mukerjee J, we think that section 32(2} was iniended to leave the matter to the
discretion of the trial Judge and, having regard to all aspects of the matter, it
is not in our view desirable to amend it by inserting a provision such as is to be
found in section 34.

12.84, In regard to the question whether the requirement of the statement
having been made “in the ordinary course of business” must be fulfilled even as
regards the species of statements which are specifically enumerated in clause (2),
there is some obscurity.

12.85. A little analysis will show that the clause is not well-constructed on
this point. Entries in books kept in the discharge of “professional duty” are,
for example, specifically referred to in the clause. Do they add to “ordinary
course of business”, or do they not? Tt ts also not clear whether an acknowledge-
ment etc, (specifically mentioned in the latter part of the clause), must be in
the ordinary course of business.

12.86. Most of the cases approach the problem by interpreting the words
“ordinary course of business”. They do not analyse the structure of the clause.
In an Oudh case? for example, a receipt executed by a deceased person, and
stating that the disputed property formed the boundery to an adjacent plot, was,
without specific discussion, described as a “statement made by a deceased person
in the ordinary Course of business”, and it was stated that though it was week
type of evidence, yet it was admissible. The person who made this statement
was a cousin of the parties. The document was admitted to prove the “reputed

ownership” of a certain property.

12.87, In a Madras case.‘ this approach finds a more positive illustration.
A person wrote a letter to his wife, making a reference to a family settlement,
sueh as, to tell his uncle that he would execute a mortgage deed in favour of
the uncle. This letter was filed to prove the family settlement. 11 was held that
section 3203) did not apply, because the admissions of liability were only parts
or a larger statement asserting a settlement, but section 32 clause (2) would
apply, because the statement was made to his wife “in the ordinary course of
business”. The point was described as difficult, but the view taken was that the

'Kukha Mandal v. W. N. Grani, (1912) 16 C.L.J. 24.

*ARtowli v. Tarak Nath, (1912) 17 C.W.N. 774: 16 C.L.J. 328.
°Ahmed Shaji v. Zaii Ahmed, A.LR. 1928 Oudh 248 (Fulton, J).
‘Ramamurthi v, Subbarao, ALR, 1937 Mad. 19, 20.


243

expression “in the ordinary course of business” means “in the way that business,
which may be even private or of a trivial nature, is conducted”, and has no
connection with a course of business which suggests a series of acts of business.

12.88. The view expressed in a Bombay case’, that the exception extends
onty to statements made during the course not of any particular transaction of
an exceptional kind such as execution of a deed of mortgage. but to transactions
of business or professional employment in which the declarant was ordinarily or
habitually engaged, was dissented from in the Madras case.

12.89. The clause. it may be noted, also mentions entries ctc. made in

books kept in the discharge of professional duty. The significance of this portion a

is obscure.

12,96. In a case decided by the Supreme Court®, Panaji’s registers maintained
by professional generalogists and containing tables of pedigree, were held to fall
within section 32. But the question of “duty” was not involved, and it would
appear that the court emphasised the fact that “it is the business of these
‘panjikars’ to Collect this evidence about pedigrees”.

12.91. Rejecting the contention that the entry should have been made before
a controvarsy arose, the Supreme Court pointed out that section 32(2) did not
contain any such limitation. “Tt is enough if it was made in the ordinary course

of business”.

12.92, An Allahabad case" is more specific on this point. In that case, an
entry in a diary made by a Sub-Inspector of Police then dead. was regarded as
falling within section 32(2), and the High Court observed that “there could be no
doubt that the Sub-Inspector made these entries in the discharge of his profes-

sional duties”.

12.93, In a case decided by the Privy Council,‘ an entry made by a Muslim
priest in the Marriage register was regarded as relevant under section 32 (precise
clause of the section was not referred to), as having been made by the Murtzad
in the discharge of his professional duty (the point at issue related to the amount

of the dower).

12,94, Theoretically, the clause is capable of various interpretations, so far as
the requirement of ordinary course of business is concerned. The first possible
interpretation is that these words are not applicable to the specifically enumerated
cases. A textual approach to the clause would support this interpretation,
because the requirement is not expressely mentioned in those enumerated cases,
and also because the specific mention of an entry or memorandum made in a
book kept in the discharge of professional duties, in addition to such entry etc.
made in books kept in the ordinary course of business, would suggest that at
least that part of the clause is intended to travel beyond documents in the

ordinary course of business.

12.95. The second possible interpretation of the clause is that (a) the whole
clause is subject to the opening portion, which emphasises the necessity of
“ordinary course of business,” but (b) that expression is to be given a wide

\Ningamma, (1898) LL.R, 23 Bom. 53, 63, 65, 66, 70 (Candy and Fulton, JJ.) follow-
ed in Soney Lai! v. Darbdeo, A.I.R. 1935 Pat. 167, 168.

*Sitaji v. Vijendra Narain, A.LR. 1954 5. C. 601, 604, paragraph 18.

*Abdul Aziz v. Emperor, ALR. 1932 All. 442, 443 (Young and Bajpai, JJ.).

‘Zakir Begum v. Sakhina Begum. (1892) LR. 19 Cal. 689, 693 (PC).

Entries made in
the discharge of
uty.


Need for
cation.

clarifi-

244

meaning, so as to cover not only commercial activities, but all transactions which
a person ssuaily enters into. This was the view taken in the Oudh and Madras
cases. Above referred to.

12.96. While the first and the second interpretalions have both the effect
of giving a wide scope to the section, their mode of operation varies.

Besides these two interpretations, there is a third possible interpretation,
namely, {a) thal the whole clause is subject to the opening portion and only
statements made in the ordinary course of business are admissible, and further,
(b) that the transactions must not be an isolated one, and must be a mercantile
one. This was, in substance, the view aken in the Bombay case, already referred
to. Under this interpretation, the cxpression “ordinary Course of business”
receives a narrow construction.

12.97, The illustrations to section 32 seem to support the first interpreta-
tien. as also section 21, illustration (c).

12.98. It is obvious that apart from the fact that there is a veiled conflict
between the Bombay and Madras views. there is a reasonable possibility of further
conflict developing on the point discussed above. Therefore, a clarification of
the position is desirable.

12,99. The question now to be considered is, whether the clarification should
be by way of adopting the first interpretation, or whether it should be by way of
adopting the second interpretation, or whether it should be by way of adopting
the third interpretation. Much can be said on all sides. The first interpreta-
tion has the merit of stating the position in fairly clear terms, and avoiding the
rather artificial approach which has to be adopted under the second interpretation
as to the expression “ordinary course of business”. In normal parlance, one
does not think of private transactions in family matters as undertaken in the
“course of business”.

12.100. The second interpretation has the merit of introducing onc common
thread, so that the specifically enumerated cases will still be subject to the
requirements of “course of business”.

12.101. The third interpretation has the meril of simplicity, inasmuch as
the expression “ordinary course of business” would be used in the natural
sense commonly understood.

12.102. It is desirable to remove the obscurity on the subject discussed
above, by suitable amendment. But, before suggesting the precise amendment,
we have to decide which of the possible interpretations, as listed above, should
be adopted. We prefer the first alternative which has the merit of clarity and

avoiding artificiality.

12.103. If, it is decided to adopt the first interpretation —- and we re-
commend its adoption--it would be conveniant to confine clause (2) to statements
made in the ordinary course of business, and to carve out a mew clause (2A) to
deat with the statements {enumerated in the present clause) which are to be
regarded as relevant whether or not they are in the ordinary course of business.!

The following is a rough re-draft for the purpose of implementing the first
aHernative:

Hf necessars. corresponding clarifications may be made in illustratioas (०), (४) and (h).


245

{Proposed re-draft of s. 322),

“(2) Whea the statement was made by such a person in the ordinary
course of business: and, in particular, and without prejudice to the xenera-
lity of the foregoing provisions of this cduse, when it consists of any entry
or memorandum made by him in books kept in the ordinary course of
business;

“(2A} When the statement consists of an entry or memorandum made
by such person in the discharge of professional duty or of an acknowledge-
ment written or signed by such person of the receipt of money, gueds,
sceuritics or property of any kind, or of a document used in commerce,
written or signed by him or of the date of a letter or other document usually
dated, written or signed by him.”

VII. SECTION 32(3)
A. INTRODUCTORY

12.104, to 12.107. Section 32(3) makes a statement relevant --- when the
statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making it,
or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to a criminal
prosecution or to a suit for damages.

The basis of this clause is the principle that a statement asserting a fact
distinctly against one’s intercst is unlikely to be deliberately false or needlessly
incorrect, and carries its own sanction, even though the other usual sanctions of
truth are wanting.

12,108. While English law also recognises this principle, the clause in the
Act is wider than the English law, inasmuch as it also incorporates a proposi-
tion which English Courts have refused to adopt, namely, the inclusion of
statements which would haye exposed the maker to a criminal prosecxtion or to
a suit for damages. At common law, the rule on the subject is narrow, and
dose not include statements which would have exposed the maker to a prosecu-
tion or penalty. It was held in the Sussex Peerage case’ that a declaration by
a deceased clergyman, concerning a marriage at which he had officiated.—a
marriage where the person celebrating would be liable to punishment under the
Royal Marriage Act, 1772--was inadmissible as evidence of the marriage. Lord
Brougham, who is otherwise known to have been an advocate of a liberal
approach in the law of evidence, said, “The rule as understood now is that the
only declarations of deceased persons receivable in evidence are those made
against the proprietary or pecuniary interest of the maker.”

12.109. The ground on which a statement made by a witness who is dead
or otherwise not available, which would have exposed him to a criminal prosecu-
tion, is admitted, is that a man is not likely to accuse himself falsely of a crime.
Of course, it is not possible to state that in every case the statement is more
likely to be truce then false. This is shown by the conduct of approvers in
criminal cases, who, while charging themselves with complicity in a crime, take
care to ensure that the major blame is thrown on the other alleged co-partici-
pents. However, these are matters which can be taken into account by the court
in considering the weight 10 be given to the particular statement.

12.110, There is, of course, no restriction either in England or in India
that the declaration is admissible only where it is against the maker’s interest.
Tf admissible, the declaration is admissible as evidence for all purposes." The
principle underlying the clause is, as already, stated, the improbability of a
statement against intcrest being false.

'Sussex Peerage case, (1844) 11 Cl. & Fin. 85 (House of Lords).
*Taylor रू Witham (8176) 3 Chancery Division 605. ~

Section —_32(3)-~
Declarations
against interest,

Declarations
against interest in
English law.

Grounds of admis-
sihility.

Admissible for all
Purposes.


Section 3203)
Recitals of boun-
daries in docu-
ments between
thied parties.

246

B. RECITALS OF BOUNDARIES
12.113. So much as regards the principle of the clause. we shall now proceed

to consider certain matters of detail, arising out of the clause.

There exists 2 controversy as to whether recitals of boundaries in documents

not inter partas would be admissibie under section 32(3) as slatemen:s “against
the proprietary interest” of the declarant. One view on the subject is that such
recitals are admissible, because ~

(a) Tf the deed is one of mortgage of conveyance, the deed amounts to
a statement against the pecuniary interests of the mortgagor (being
an admission that he is indebted in a certain sum of money and that
money is charged on his property} or against the proprietary
interests, of the vendor (being an admission that he is extinguishing
his interest in the property sold); the argument being that the whole
document, and not merely the precisc fact being against interest
becomes relevant, on the principle applied in the English case of
Higham v, Ridgway. The leading case based on such a reasoning
is a Bombay one-Ningava vy. Bharmappa®

(b) A statement by a person that his land is limited by certain boundaries
is an admission that his proprietary interest does not exiend over
any land beyond the boundaries in the deed. The undermentioned
cases support this view.>

12.112. A contrary view has been taken in some cases, on the ground that —

Gi) Under section 32(3), it is not the document, bur the statement that
must be against the interest of the maker.‘

Gi) A statement that the declaraat’s properly is bounded in certain direc-
tions with certain other man’s property is not against the declarants
interest, unless one assumes that every person is presumed to own
the whole universe in the absence of a statement circumscribing his
title’ A person may really be presumed to own nothing until he
has evidence to show his ownership.

‘Higham v. Ridgway (1863) 10 East 109 (sec infra).
*Ninguva vy. Bharmappa (1899) LL.R, 23 Bom. 63, followed पा. Hajt Bibi 5. HW. H. Sir

Sultan Mohomed Shah, (1909) 11 Bom. LR. 409.

ta) Tika Ram v. Moti Lal, ALR. 1938. All. 299: 307, 302 (Recognition of another's
title is against interest);

(b) Hait Bibi v. Aga Kian (1909) il Bom. Law Rep. 409, (following Ningava v.
Bharmappa, LL.R. 23 Bom. 63).

(c) Katabuddin v. Nafar Chandra AUR. 1927 Cal. 230. 231. 232 (8. B. Ghose &
Panton JJ. This was an obitor since the declarants were examined in the

cases);

(9) Thyagarajan v. Narayan, A.LR. 1948 Mad. 450 (Wadsworth J.) (Obiter and no
conclusive discussion);

fe} Rangayyan v. Innesimuthu, ALR. 1956 Mad, 226, 228, Para. 7. 229, Para Uf
(reviews cases) ;

8) Trimbak v. Ganesh, AJR. 1923 Nag. 22 (Prideau A, J. C);

18) Ramnaddan v. Jelay Tilakdhari. AJ.R. 1933 Pat, 636, 638 (Dhavie J.) (other).

मं) Karupanna v. Rangaswami, A..R. 1928 Mad. 10S. 106 Gackson, J);

(b) Re. Paddagam, (1910) M.WN. 668:

(c) S. Venkataraja v. Narasayya, (1914) M.W.N. 779, there cited.

SSee the observations of Krishnaswami Iyer J. in In re. Daddapanali Narayansuna, है

Indian cases 228 cited in woodroffe and Amir Ali. Law of Evidence. (1937) Vol. 1. page
492. and the observations of Jackson J. in A.LR. 1928 Mad. 105. 106 and the discussion
in ALR. 1935 (Patna 167, 168 65.8).


247

C. SELECTED CASES AS TO RECITALS OF BOUNDARIES

12,113. We do not propose to summarise all decisions; a few cases which
teveal the nature of controversy may be mentioned. Thus. in Abdullah v. Kunj
Behari Lal.’ it was decided that recitals of boundaries in deeds of sales and
mortgages executed by owners of adjoining plots of land, and describing the
disputed land as the tenanted land of the defendents or their predecessors, were
relevant under section 32(3), though not under section 32{2) or section J1 or
section 13.

‘With this we could contrast In re Daddapeneni Narayenappa! A single
Judge of the Madras High Court held that erecital in a document dealing with
neighbouring land, that the Iand in question belonged to the plaintiff, was not
admissible.

And two Iudges of the Madras High Court differed in Saripalli Venkata-
rayagopala Rain v. Foto Narasayya!

12.114. Tn a Calcutta case. jt was observed—

“The question to be decided is whether the statement by the grantor
in the schedule to the lease. that on the boundary of the land demised was
the holding of the ptedecessor of the present plaintiff can be used in evidence
against the Defendents although thev were not parties to the transaction
evidenced by that document. Ta our opinion the document रैंक admissible
in evidence on the principle exolained by this Court in the case of Abdullah
v. Kunj Beheri’. In fact the case before us is stronger than the case then
before the Court. because it is alleged here that the statement was made by
the landlord of the Plantiff who might be expected to know who was in
occupation of the land as his tenant. The case is, therefore. completely
covered by the decision in these cases of Ningava v. Bharmappa’ Abdul
Aziz Mollah v. Ebrahim Molla and Burba Mandari Meghanath”™

12.215. In Abdul Ali v. Syed Hajan Ali$—Another Calcutta case. it was
held that such recitals were tnadmissible in evidence against a party who was
stranger to them, and that the ruling as to the admissibility of the documents in
one earlier case—Dwarka Nath v. Mukundu Laf*—was obiter.

Tn another Calcutta case" again, it was decided that recitals of boundaries
of other lands in documents between their parties were not admissible in
evidence.

Tt was held in the Allahabad case of Natwar v. Alkhu,® that such a docu-
ment is admissible in evidence under section 32(b).

12.116, These reported cases will suffice to show the conflict of decisions.
Tt may also be noted that the controversy exists not only amongst the several
High Courts, but also within each individual High Court. Thus, the Calcutta

tAbdullah v. Kunj Behari Lal. (1911) 14 C. L. 1. 467 (Cad.
4M re Daddapeneni Narayanappa, (1910) M.W.N. 268.
3Saripallt Venkatarayagopala Raju v. Foto Narasayya, (1914) M.W.N. 779.
ry Welt Chamar एज Fibothary Pandev, 17 O.WN. 108, 110 (Mookerjee & Cornduff,
SAbdullah, 14 CLI. 467: 6910 16 OWN. 108.
'Ninomen, 1897 TLR, 21 Bam. 62
tAbdul Aziz Mollah v. Ebrahim Molla. (1904), LLR. 31 etal. 965.
"Burha Mandari v. Meehnath. (1905) 2 CLI. 4n.
*4hdul AW v. Sved Hralan Al, (1914) 19 CW.N. 468.
“Dwarka Nath v. Mukunda Lal. (ON 5 Col. 1.1. 5
*Suroi Kumar Acharit Chowdhuri v. Umed Ali Uowaldar, AAR, 1922 Cal. 251
UNatwar v. Alkha, (913) 11 ALS. 139.
17131 LAD/ND/77


Recitals of boun-
daries.

248

High Court, has, in some decisions, excluded such statements, but, in other
cases, it has held them to be admissible: The Madras High Court has express-
ed different views on different occasions."

The Patna High Court admitted such statements in some cases, but ex-
cluded them in other cases."

D. COMMENTS ON THE CASE LAW

12117. We shall later indicate our own view in the matter. But we may
first refer to some important points relevant to an appreciation of the value of
the judicial decisions. If the ancestry of the judicial decisions taking a view in
favour of the admissibility of recitals of houndaries under scction 32(3) is care-
fully analysed. it will be found that almost all the decisions can be traced
either to the Bombav case of Nineaya, or to the Calcutta case of Leela Nand.

For example, the Bombay case of Ningava was followed. In the Calcutta
case of Abdullah v. Kuni Behari Lal’ The Calentta case of Leela Nand and
the Bombay case Ninsava were followed in the Allahahad case of Natwar v.
AlkkuS. All these cases were subsequently followed in Calcutta in Tis Chamar
v. Sirdhari Pandev! and in Ambar Ali v lufa Alf and in certain other cases,
some of which will be referred to.

12.118, Now, the Calcutta and Bombay cases (Leela Nand and Ninsava) are
themselves subject to comment on the ground of principle? and we shall later
give our comments as to the principle. But without meaning any disrespect to
the other Hich Courts. we may state that some of the decisions of the other
High Courts. are based on a misconception of what was in issue in
Leela Nand’s case and what was decided in Nineava's case. Thus, in one of the
Caleutta cases*, it was stated that documents which dealt with land tying on
different boundaries of the land in dispute were admissible under section 32
After noting the uncertainty on the subject in English law. it was stated—-
“whether such evidence is admissible under the Fvidence Act was considered in
favour of its admissibility in several cases, the earliest was Leela Nand’s case”.
The Court with respect overlooked the fact thal Leela Nand’s case was not
directly concerned with recitals of boundaries at all. The statement in issue in
Leela Nand related to the amount of rent.

12.119. In another Calcutta case!” the High Court observed—

“The statement, though not relevant as on admission may, hewever, be
relevant under section 32{3) as a statement against interest which has been
held as evidence against strangers. It was so held in the case of Leela
Nand......”. Here also, it was not noted that Leela Nand was a case con-
cerning the amount of rent.

‘Contrast Katabuddin’s case, AYR. 1927 Cal. 230, (Cuming & M. N. Mokheriee 33)
with Ambica Charan’s case, ATR. 1928 Cal. 893 and Kumnud Kumari, AVR. 1927 Col.
918 (Duval and Mitter JJ.).—

*Contrast_Karuppanna’s Case. AR. 1928 Mad. 105. with Rangaysan’s case, AIR.
1956 Mad. 226.

See Sonev Lalfs case, AJR. 1935 Pat. 167, 168 (F. B} and Hart Ahtr’s case, ALR.
1934 Pat. 6172) 619 (Wort, 1).

‘Abdullah v. Kunj Behar? Lal, (1911) 16 CWN. 252.

'Natwar v. Alkhu, (1913) 1 ALJ, 139; 18 LS. 752.

*Imrit Chamar v. Sirdhart Pandey, (1911) 17 C.W.N. 108.

tAmbar Ali v. Lutfa Alt, (1918) ULR. 45 Cal. 159.

"See, “Mater discussed on the basis of principle”, infra.

*Qutabuddin v. Nafre Chandra, AX.R. 1937 Cal. 230. 231

“Kanjali Mala vy. Beni Madhava, AI.R. 1916 Cal. 278,


249

In a Madras case,’ it was stated

“Another ground on which recitals of boundaries of the land are held
to be against, is that a statement by the vendor that his land is limited by
certain boundaries is an admission that his proprietary interest does not
extend over any land beyond the boundaries mentioned in the deed.”

Now, in so far as this observation refers to the Bombay Case {the case of
Ningawa), it may be stated that the Bombay case is not based on the reasoning
that a statement limiting boundaries is an admission that the proprietary interest
docs not extend over other lands. The Bombay case is based on the reasoning
that since 4 mortgage-deed. as a whole, is against proprietary interest, a state-
ment about boundarics, which is a part of the mortgage-deed, is also against
interest The observation in the Madras case, in so far as it seeks to summarise
the Bombay case, is, therefore, debatable, with respect.

12.120. In some of the judicial decisions, there is a misconception about the
general trend of previous cases. This is illustrated by a Nagpur case," where, after
referring to some of the earlier cascs, it is stated, “the weight of authority, there-
fore, seems, to be that such admissions containing recital as to boundaries are
admissible under section 32, clause (3) of that Act”.

12.121. Now. It should be pointed out with respect, that out of the nine
cases referred to in the judgment as to recital were held to he not relevant: in
five they were held to be relevant, and in one, two judges of the same High Court
differed."

Further, the discussion in the Nagpur judgment itself notes that the later
Madras and Calcutta cases were against the admissibility of such recitals. The
only other High Courts taking a view in favour of admissibility were Bombay and
Allahabad.

12.122, This view was criticised in a later Madras case’ wherc Ramaswami J
observed— हे

“But, with respect to Jackson J. his observation seems to miss the real
point. Section 32(3) states that when the statement is against the pecuniary or
proprietary interest of the person making it, it is relevant when the person
making it js dead, or cannot be found or has become incapable of giving
evidence or whose attendence cannot be procured without an amount of delay
or expense which under the circumstances of the case, appears to the court
unreasonable.

“First of all, recitals of boundaries of property, contained in deeds not
“inter partes’ have been held to be adm’ssible to prove the ownership or
possession of adjoining property, on the ground that. when the deed is a
mortgage deed. it amounts to a statement against the pecuniary or proprietary
interest of the mortgagor, inasmuch as he admits therein that he is indebted
ina certain sum of money and that this money is a charge on his property
(cases cited) and when the deed is a deed of conveyance, on the ground that
it amounts to a statement against the vendor’s interest, inasmuch as he admits
therein that he is extinguishing his interest in the property conveyed.

'Rajayon ¥. Injui Muthu, A..R. 1956 Mad. 226, 229, Para. 11
tNingawa, 1.L.R. 23 Bom. 63.
3A TR. 1923 Nagpur 23.

‘The judgment as printed in the ALR. mentions clause (2). which is a misprint for
clause

‘This was the case reported in 1914 Madras Weekly Notes 179
SRangayan v. Innasimuthin, AIR. 1956 Mad. 224 (Ramaswami J.).


Question of
“relevant fact”
should be consi-
dered.

250

“The mortgage deed or the deed of conveyance having thus been held to
be a statement against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the executant
of the deed, on the authority of —‘Rieham v. Pidgway’, (1508) 10 East 109
(7), the document is made evidence not only of the precise fact against interest,
but of all the collateral facts mentioned therein, and consequently of the
possession or ownership of persons who are mentioned in the deed as posses-
sing or owning the Jand adjoining the property mortgaged or conveyed
‘Rajabaddi Sarkar v. Ganga Charan’ ALR. 1919 Cal. 499 ALR. 1918 Cal.
971; 12 Ind Cas 149 (Cal) — ‘Ramsarup v, Bhagwat Prosad’, A.1.R. 1920
Pat 696.

Another ground on which recitals of boundaries of the land conveyed
is held to be against interest is that a statement by the vendor that his land
is limited by certain boundaries is an admission that his proprietary interest
does not extend over any land beyond the boundaries mentioned in the deed.”
(Cases cited).

12.123, We have quoted in full fhe passage in the judgment, for convenience
of reference. We may. however, state. with respect to Ramaswami J. that we
are unable to sce how he has answered Jackson J.’s point’. The point made by
Jackson J., was, that unless one assumes that every one claims the whole world,
recitals of boundaries are not apainst the interest of the maker. This point has
not been answered by Ramaswami J. Rather, the point missed in the exposition
by Ramaswami J. is that a mortace of land A is not a relevant fact at all, when
the question is as to land B. In order that any clause of section 32 may apply.
the first condition to be satisfied is that that statement must be of a relevant बिल
Tt is only when that condition is satisfied* that an occasion for considering the
applicability of a particular clause arises.

B. STATEMENT OF BOUNDARY NOT AGAINST INTEREST

12.124, Not only in a recital of boundary not against interest. but it would
also appear that a statement by 2 person that there is a certain boundary of his
land 18 in his favour, if at all, rather than against his proprietary interest, becanse
he is thereby limiting the amount of land which he is selling. This aspect was
referred to by Wort J. in the Patna Full Bench Case! where he said:

“Im coming to the decision on the question. anart from the authorities to
which T have referred. T think T can do no better than to repeat the lancnage
of Jackson J. of the Madras High Court when he says that such a statement
can be construed as acainst the proprietary interest only on the assumption
that there are no boundaries to the property of the person who is the maker
of the deed and he is the owner of the universe. There must of necessity be
some boundary to a man’s land: and the statement that there is a certain
boundary of the land which is the subject-matter of the deed. namety. circum-
scribes the interest which he is selling and therefore circumseribes the interest
which the purchaser obtains in a sense that the vendor savs : “T sold you this
much and no more” and that #f that is a true stafement of the boundaries. ft
seems to me it is rather in favour of the person who makes it than against
his proprietary interest.”

Or, — to approach the matter in a different tight. — when 8 person says that
a certain other person has got land north or south or east or west of his land. he

IKaruppanna v. Raneaswami, A.LR. (1928) Mad. 105 (ackson J.) (suprab.
Section 32, opening parasraph.

‘See farther discussion. Infra

‘Soney Lall v. Darbden, ALR. 1935 Patna 167. 170 (full Bench).


2351

does not more than describe his own land. As Mohammad Noor J. observed in
the Patna case.’ “Every man’s land is circumscribed by some boundary. Every
mau has a limit to his Jand.” The same Judge pointed out, with reference to the
English Case of Higham v. Ridgway, that the statement of the date of birth would,
in India, be admissible under section 32(2) as a statement made in the ordinary
course of business in books of account, but not necessarily under section 32(3).

F, STATEMENT MUST BE OF KELEVANT FACT — CRITICISM OF
BOMBAY CASE

12.125. Apart from’ our comments on the case law, and apart from the
principle, we would state that on the terms of the section also, the narrower view
appears to be correct, because it is only statements of relevang facts, (which state-
ments themselves. are against the pecuniary interest etc. of the maker), that are
admissible under the section. To regard a mortgage deed, which is not, in itself,
relevant, as admissible under the section, would not, with respect, be consistent
with the terms of the section,

G. ENGLISH LAW

12.126, It should be pointed out that some of the reporicd cases seem to
have been under a mis-conception as to the English law. The general rule of
English Jaw is that a statement made by a third person is not relevant. We are
not d.scussing the admissibility of a statement against the maker or his representa-
tive-in-interest; but a statement as to boundaries made not inter partes is not
relevant in England asa statement against interest.

In fact, in English law, it is an essential ingredient of the relevancy of state-
ments against proprietary interest that the statement must be known to be ugainst
the interest of the person who made’ it, at the time when he made il. A recital
of boundaries would secm to fail to satisfy this requirement.

12.127, We cannot help observing that this aspect of the matter seems to
have been overlooked in the Bombay case of Ningawa.* In that case, the deed
was one of mortgage, and contained certain recitals as to boundaries. The deed
was construed as amounting to a statement against the proprietary or pecuniary
interest of the mortgagor, and it was held that the statement of boundary, which
was @ part uf that deed, was admissible under section 32(3). But, as we have
pointed out in the above discussion, before clause (3) of section 32 can be invoked
— or, for that matter, before any other clause of section 32 can be invoked it
must first be established that the statement sought to be admitted is a stalement of
a relevant fact,

Now, the mortgage deed as a whole was not a statement of a relevant fact at
all, and, for that reason, the fact that the deed was against the proprietary interest
of the executant, became of no consequence in attracting section 32(3).

Assuming that the mortgage deed was a document against the proprietary
intercst of the maker, what requires to be pointed out is that the deed (as a whole)
did not constitute a statement as to a relevant fact. The general rule thay if a
part is relevant, the whole is relevant, was not really applicable. The part, in this
case, was a statement ot boundaries. We may assume that if a statement in a
deed is a statement of a relevant fact, then cettain other portions of the deed, which
are necessary for understanding that statement, may be brought into evidence, ~~
on the principle that the part renders the rest admissible.

oney Lall v. Darbdeo, AJR. 1935 Patna 167, 172 (FB).
'Tucker भर, Urban District Council, (1912) 2 K.B. 317.
‘Ningawa v. Bhermappa, (1899) LL.R. 23 Bom. 63.

Comment
Bombay cass.


252

But, in this case, the whole, that is to say, the document of mortgage itself,
did not relate to a relevant fact and, with respect to ihe Bombay High Court, it
is not possible to apply a diffcrent rule, namely, that if the whole is against the
pecuniary interest though not about a relevant fact, then the part thereby becomes
a statement against proprietary interest and so becomes admissible.

12.128. In other words, in the Bombay case, that which was regarded
udmussible as a statement against the interess — the mortgage deed — was
not a statement about a relevant fact. The statement as to relevant fact -— the
recital of boundaries in the mortgage deed — was not {in itself) a statement
against interest. Thus, an important condition of section 32 was not satisfied in
the Bombay case,

This aspect will be further evident from the facts of the case, which we may
now state in detail. The facts were as follows :

in 1893, the plaintiff brought this suit to recover possession of certain land.
The defendants denied the plaintiff's title. The plaintiff tendered, as evidence of
his ownership, a registered mortgage — deed relating to adjacent land, execu-ed
in 1877 by one Ninga Talwar to one Govind, in which the land now in question
was mentioned as one of the boundaries of the iuand comprised in the mortgage
and was described as the property of the plantff. Ninga Talwar was dead at the
date of this suit. 1t was admitied that in 1877 there was no litigation between the
plaintiff and defendants, and it did not appear that there was any motive on the
part of the adjacent owner Ninga to make this staiement in the deed on the
plainuffs’ bebalf.

On appeal the question was, whether the siatement in the mortgage deed was
rightly admitted in evidence. The High Court answered the question in the affirma-
tive, for reasons already stated.

12.129, So much as regards the Bombay case. As regards the Calcutta
case of Leelunund', the question before the Court was whether the ient payabic
to the zamindar by the Ghatwa) during a certain period was Rs. 75 or Rs. 175.
‘The zamindar relied upon a slatcment, prepared by the then zamindar many years
previously, of the Ghatwali villages in the mahal, in which there was a recital
against the name of the property in question that the original reat was so much
and the increased rent so much, Mr. Justice Markby held that this statement was
inadmissible, he said:

“I cannot bring it under any of the rules of evidence which allow a
statement of a deceased person to be put in evidence. It does not appear to
me to be a statement in any way detrimental to his interest: on the contrary
so far as regards the rate of rent, of course, it would be his interest to state
it to be as high as possible.”
in appeal, Couch CJ., and Ainalie, J., said:

“We cannot concur in the opinion of the learned Judge that this state-
ment was not admissible in evidence. It is a statement by which the interest
in the mahal of the person making it is reduced or affected; it is against his
interest and against his proprietary right. The effect of ir is to cut down the
proprietary right, to subject it to the tenure or incumbrance which is imention-
ed. It is true that in one part of it there is what may be said to be not
against his interest but in his favour, namely, the amount of the original rent
and increased rent payable to him. But when a document of this kind is
tendered in evidence, it is not to be divided into parts, and the part which is

Rajah Leelanand Singh v. Mst. Lakhputse Thakvorain, (1874) 22 Cal. W.R. 231.


253

in favour of the person making it rejected, and that which is against his
interest accepted. The question, is whether, taking the document as a whole
it is against the interest of the proprictary right of the person making it. In
estimating the value of any particular part of it, that may be looked at; but
the principle upon which the admissibility of it is determined is whether it
has been made under such circumstances as makes it reasonable to suppose
that it was done bonaiide, and the statements are true.”

This case thus, did not relate to recitals of boundaries at all. Moreover, if
we may say, with respect, this reasoning also suffers from one infirmity, The
entire document was not ५ statement of a relevant fact, even if it be assumed that
it was against the interest of the maker.

12.430. Some of the Indian cases rely on the English case of Higham.
illustration (b) 10 section 32, whose facts recall Highani’s case; is really an
illustration under section 32(2), and not under section 32(3), because the illustra-
lion does not make any mention of payment of charges, and expressly mentions
the requirement of “regularly kept in the course of business”, Tie question in
Higham's case was whether one Willian Fowden Jr. was born before or after the
16th April, 1768. To prove that he was bora after that date, che plaintiff tendered
im evidence entries from the day book and ledger of a man-midwife who had
attended the mother of Fowden on his birth and who was since deceased. The
entries under 22nd April, £768 in the day book detailed the charges which were
due, and in the ledger entry under 25th October, 1768 the payment of the charges
was recorded.

The Court rejected the argument that the word “paid” only shouid be admit-
ted without the context which explained the circumstances to which it refers. The
court, therefore, looked to the rest of the entry including the entry on 22nd April,
1768 to see what demand was discharged by the entry in account. The case does
not relate to recitais of boundaries at all.

12.131. It would be interesting to note that even in England, for proving
that a ceriain sport was not within the “waste” of a manor, a declaration by the
deceased lord (third person) that he was entitled to the waste up to a certain
point (which did not include the place in question) but no further, was regarded
‘as inadmissible,’ for two reasons, viz., the lord was not ia possession of the
place and the declaration was not against proprietary intcrest because, though
disclaiming as to one part, he affirmed as to the other.

H. OTHER POINTS

12,132. It is often found that a particular statement bears a dual character,
inasmuch as, in one respect, the statement is against the interest of the maker,
but, in another respect, it is in his favour, as likely to advance his proprietary

or pecubiary interest.

12,133. In this connection, we may refer to statements recording payment
of interest or of part of a debt as a siatement against interest. Previously,
part payment of interest ot principal did not, under the Indian Law of Limita-
tion,’ revive the right to sue for the remainder of a debt. The consideration of
the present question was, therefore, of importance only in connection with one
class of cascs, namely, where a moncy-bond contained a stipulation—{i) that the

Higham y. Ridgway, (1808) 12 East 109.
*Crease V. Burrett (1935) 1 CM.L.R. 919 cited by Phipson (1963), para 9.22 40 RR

779.
‘Indian Limitation Act, 1859.

English case _of
Higham how fat
relevant.

Statements _por-
sessing a dnal
character,

Part payment as
a __ statement
against interest.


254

sum secured thereby shall be payable by instalments, and (ii) that, on default
being made in the payment of any one instalment, the whole amount or the
aggregate of all the instalments shall become due and payable. Where default
was made in the payment of one instalment, the cause of action in respect of
the whole amount accrued, and limitation therefore began to run, The obligee
of a bond (the creditor), which had become barred by limitation in consequence
of the whole amount having become payable on default, might attempt to evade
limitation by endorsing the payment of one or more instalments.

Such endorsement had the semblance of being against interest, but was, in
reality, quite the contrary. In cases of this nature, if the endorsement was offered
as an entry against interest, it ought not io be admitted unless and until it is shown
to bave been made at a time when it was against the interest of the obligee to
make it,

12,134. According to the provisions of the later Limitation Acts; and also
under the present Act,’ the period of limitation for a suit on a promissory note
or bond payable by instalments, which provides that if default be made in pay-
ment of one instalment the whole shall be due, begins to run when the first default
is made, except where the payee or obligee waives the benefit of the provision, in
which case limitation begins to run when fresh default is made in respect of which
there is no such waiver. Even under* these Acts, therefore, it may be often
to the interest of the obligee to offer proof of such endorsements (recording pay-
ment), so as 10 make it appear that a debt in regard to which limitation has begun
to run, is not barred.

12.135. There is another rule of the law of limitation, relevant to the present
tupic. Part-payment of interest or of principal revives the right to sue fot
the remainder of the debt. This rule was first inicoduced in India by the
Limitation Act of 1871.4. The existing law is in section 19 of the Limitation Act
of 1963, which enacts as follows :—

“19. When interest on a debt or legacy is bejure the expiration of the
prescribed period, paid as such by the person liable to pay the debt or legacy,
or by his agent duly authorised in this behalf, or when part of the principal
of a debt is, before the expiration of the prescribed period, paid by the debtor
or his agent duly authorised in this behalf, a new period of limitation,
according to the nature of the original liabiiity, shall be computed trom the
time when the payment was made:

Provided that in the case of part-payment of the principal of a debt, the
fact of the payment appears in the handwriting of the person making the same.”

12.136. To adopt what Lawton J. said with refcrence to the corresponding
English provision, the sub-section does not change the nature of the right; “it
provides that, in the specific circumstances of an acknowledgement or payment,
the right shall be given a notional birthday and on that day, like the Phoenix of
the fable, it rises again in renewed youth — and aiso like the phoenix, it is still
itself.”

tLimitation Acts of 1871, 1877, 1908.

4Article 37, Limitation Act, 1963.

a) Sethu v. Navana, 1L.R. 7 Mad. 577;

(b) Gapala v. Paramma, LL.R. 7 Mad. 383;

(©) Chani Bash Shah v. Kadam Mandal 1108, 5 Cal. 97:

(@) Nobodin Chandra Saha तर. Ram Krishna Rai Chowdhri, VLR. 14 Cal. 397.
‘Section 21, Limitation Act, 1871 (9 of 1871.

‘Section 19, Limitation Act, 1963.


255

The express provision that the payment, whether of interest or of principal,
must, in order 10 create a new period of limitation, have been made before ihe
right to sue had become barred. Appears to requite proof of the time of payment.
Where the payment is of part of the principal, the proviso to the section of the
Limitation Act’ (regarding handwriting of the debtor), will, in most cases, afford
a security against fraud. But, where the payment is of intcrest only, the endorse-
ment could be made fraudulently.

12,137. 1६ would, from the above discussion, appear that such statements
would become relevant under clause (3), though, in another respect, they help the
maker, Presumably, the court will look to the substance of the matter, in deciding
whether they fall within clause (3).

12,138. Another illustration of a statement having a dual character may be
considered. The question before the Court in Rajah Leelanund Singh v. Mst.
Tuisamal Luckpattee Thakoorain' was whether the rent payable to the zamindar
by the Ghatwal during a certain period was Rs. 75 or Rs. 175. The zamindar
relied upon a statement, prepared by the then zamindar many years previously, of
the Ghaiwali villages in the mahal, in which there was a recital against the name
of the property in question that the original rent was so much and the increased
rent so much. Markby J. held, that this statement was inadmissible. He said:
1 cannot bring it under any of the rules of evidence which allow a statement of a
deceased person to be put into evidence.

“It does not appear to me to be a statement in any way detrimental to his
interest; on the contrary so far as regards the rate of rent, of course, it would
be his interest to state it to be as high as possible.” In appeal, however,
Couch, CJ., and Ainslie, J., said: “We cannot concur in the opinion of the
Jearaed Judge that this statement was not admissible in evidence. It is a
statcment by which the intcrest in the mahal of the person making it is
reduced or affected; it is against his interest and against his proprietary
right. The effect of its is to cut down the proprietary right, to subject it to
the teaute or incumbrance which is mentioned. dt is irue that in one part of
it there is what may be said to be not against his interest but in his favour,
namely, the amount of the original rent and increased rent payable to him.
But when a document of this kind is tendered in evidence, it is not to be
divided into parts, and the part wh:ch is in favour of the persoa making it
rejecied, and that which is against his interest accepted. The question is,
whether, taking the document as a whole, it is against the interest of the
proprietary right of the person making it. In estimating the value of any
particular part of it, that may be looked at; but the principle upon which the
admissibility of it is determined is whether it has been made under such
circumslances as makes it reasonable to suppose that it was done bona fide,
and the statements are true.”

12.139. Just before this passage, there is mentioned of the provisions of the
Evidence Act. The judgment of Markby J. was given in April, 1874, and though
the evidence had been recorded in or before 1869, it appears that the admissibility
of the statement in question was considered with reference to the Act of 1872.
And even if Act 2 of 1855 ७6 taken as the Ev.dence Act then applicable, there is
no difference in the principle to be applied. Act I of 1872 made no change in the
Jaw in this respect.

iSection 19, Limitation Act, 1963 (supra).
*Rajah Leelanund Singh v. Mst. Tulsamal Luckpatiee Thakoorain, 1874, 22 wR.
231 (Calcutta).

Statements as to
rent.


Amendment
needed.

Recommendation
to. make  inad-
missible recitals
as to boundaries
in documents not
imter partes.

Section 3214) —
Statements as to
public right etc,

Common Jaw as
to public and
general rights,

256

12.140, In the result, the only change needed is an amendment to the effect
that recitals as to boundaries should not be admissible under section 32(3). The
clause should be amended for the purpose,

I. RECOMMENDATION

12,141. The above discussion shows that a clarification is needed on the
question whether recitals of boundaries arc adm.ssible. We are of the view that
recitals of boundaries should not be admissible under section 32(3). Such recitals
cannot, without straining the natural meanings of words, be said to be “against
interest”. They are inserted merely as descriptions.

Morevver, they are not, at the lime when they are made, known to be adverse
to the maker’s interest. This consideration, even if it is not implicit in the section,
should not be disregarded when taking a dec'sion as to what the law ought to be.

We, therefore, recommend that the following Explanation should be inserted
below section 32(3).

“aplanation. Recitals of boundaries containing statements as to the nature
or ownership of adjoining lands of third persons are not statements against pecu-
niary or proprietary interest within the meaning of this clause.”

VIII. SECTION 32(4)

12.142. Section 32(4), makes relevant a statement which gives the opinion
of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom or matter of
public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed, he would have
been likely to be aware, when such statement was made before any controversy
as to such right, custom or matter had arisen.

12.143. The section broadly follows the common law rule on the subject;
though not in every detail. At common law, an oral or written declaration by a
deceased person concerning the reputed existence of a public or general right is
admissible as evidence of the existence of such right, provided the declaration was
made before the dispute in which it is tendered, and, in the case of a statement
concerning the reputed existence of a general right, provided the declarant had
competent knowledge. The requirement of competent knowledge, as stated in the
ubove proposition, concerning the reputed existence of a general right, was laid
down in a case decided in 18357.

12.144, In this context, a “public right” is one affecting the entire population,
while a “general right” is one that affects classes of persons, such as the inhabitants
of a particular distr.ct, the tenants of a manor or the owners of certain plots of

land.
Examples of public rights are — a claim to tolls on a public highway’, a right
of ferry’ or the right to treat a part of a river bank as a public landing place‘.

Examples of a general right are —rights of common’, and customs of mining

for a particular district’.

Irease vy. Barrett, (1835) 1 Cr. M. & R. 919.

2prett v. Beales, (1830) 10 B. & C. 508.

3pim v. Gurell, 6 M. & W. 234.

SDrinkwater y. Porter, (1835) 7 ८. & P. 181.

SEvans vy. Merthyr, Tydfil Urban District Council, (1899) 1 Chancery 241.

“Crease ¥. Barrett, (1835) All E.R. Reprint 30.


257

The distinction between public or general rights on the one hand, and private
rights on the other hand, becomes crucial in this context, because private rights
cannot be proved by evidence of reputation. This was established long ago’, and
has been re-stated recently”.

12.148. Both section 32(4) and section 48 admit evidence of opinion in
matters of usage. So does section 49. There are, however, slight difference of
phraseology in the various sections. Thus, section 32(4) speaks of a “public right
or custom or matter of public or general interest”; section 48 speaks of “general
custom or right” (which has been defined in the Explanation to the section); and
section 49 speaks of “usages and tenets of any body of men or family”. We shall
deal with this aspect when we come to section 48°.

12,146. Decided cases in India on clause (4) do not furnish many examples
of public rights or customs; but one instance of the admission of such statements
is to be found in the case of Sivasubramanye v. Secretary of State for India’ That
was a suit brought by a zamindar to recover cerlain forest tracts from the Govern-
ment, on the ground that the tracts were included within the limits of his Zamin-
dari. Both the plaintiff and the defendast relied on certain ayakut accounts, as
containing statements of boundaries and furnishing proof of the inclusion of the
disputed tracts in the Zamindari limits or in the hmits of Government villages
respectively.

These accounts were made for revenue purposes to show the sources of
revenue in each village. Inasmuch as they were, from time to time, prepared for
administrative purposes by village officers, they were said to be admissible as
evidence of reputation, provided they are produced from proper custody and other-
wis: sufficiently proved to be genuine.

12.147. However, a letter of the Collector containing a summary of the
statements by zamindars as fo the right of inheritance to a zamindari in the
district, was rejected as inadmissible* as it did not relate to a public right.

The order of the Government or of the executive head of a disirict is ofien
accepted as conclusive concerning public rights or customs. In large zamindaries,
however, questions occasionally did arise somewhat analogous to those which
occur in manors in England — for example, as to the zamindar’s right to take
dues on the sale of trees’ or to receive one-fourth of the sale proceeds in cases of
involuntary sale, as in execution’; or in case of a house sale privately’. With
the abolition of zamindaries, such questions have lost their importance.

12.148. The Bombay High Court has held’ that evidence of the nature
referred to in clause (4) is admissible to prove only a fact in issue and not a merely
relevant fact. Io the Bombay case, the question at issue was whether there was
a custom amongst a certain caste of Hindus prohibiting the widow from adopting
a son, and a statement signed by several members of this caste to the effect that
the widow cannot adopt, was sought to be given in evidence. It was held that
the statement cannot be admitted.

1Falbot v. Lewis, (1834) 4 Law Joumal Exchequer 9.

White v. Taylor, (1969) 3 All. E.R. 349.

*To be considered under section 48.

‘Sivasubramanya v. Secretary of State for India, LL.R. 9 Mad. 285.

5Ramalakshmi Ammal v. Sivananatha Perrumal Sethurayer, 14 Moo. LA. 570; 12
BLR. 396; 17 WR. 553 (P.C).

‘Paul Rai v. Ram Hit Panday, t N.W.P. Rep. 139, cited in Woodroffe,

‘Baijnath Pershad v. Mahomed Fazul Hossain, 3 N.WP. Rep. 204, cited in Wood-
roffe.
iKalian Das y. Bhagirathi, LLR. 6 All 47.
'Patel Vandravan v. Patel Manilal Chunilall, LR. 15 Bom. 565.

- Different phra-

seology used in
sections 32(4), 48
and 49.

indian cases

Evidence to prove
a fact in issue.


No change

needed,

Section 32(5).

Section 32(6).

Matters
Pedigree.

Distinction
ween the
sub-sections,

‘Altustrative
ments and
sials.

of

bet-
two

docu-
mate-

258
This case was dissenied from by the Madras High Court in Raghubhushena
vy. Vidiavaridihi!, where it was heid that a fact in issue is always a relevant fact,

and statements of deceased persons, relating to a fact in issue are admissible under
section 32, clause (4).

We have already dealt with this point? while discussing the opening para-
graph of section 32. The amendment recommended in the opening paragraph
will take care of the matter.

12.149. In the above position, no changes are needed in clause (4).

IX. SECTION 32(5) AND 32(6)

12.150. Section 32(5) makes a statement relevant when the statement relates
to the existence of any relationship by blcod, marriage or adoption between
persons as to whose relationship by blood, marriage or adoption, the person
making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when the statement
was made before the question in dispute was raised,

12.151. Section 32(6) makes a statement relevant when the statement relates
to the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between
persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed relating to the affairs of the
family to which any such deceased person belunged, or in any family pedigree,
or upon apy tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which such statements
are usually made, and when such statement was made before the question in
dispute was raised.

12.152. The two clauses deal with the relevancy of two classes of statements.
These are usually treated by English text-writers under a single head, in discus-
sing the admissibility of certain kinds of evidence in “matters of pedigree”.
There is however, a distinction between the kinds of evidence to which cach
clause refers,

(i) The statement declared relevant by clause (5) is a statement delating to
the existence of any relationship between persons, alive or dead The statement
declared relevant by clause (6) is a statement relating to the existence of rela-
tionship between deceased persons only.

(ii) Under clause (5), special means of knowledge is a requisite. Under
clause (6), it is not necessary that the statement should have been made by @
person who had special means of knowledge.

(iii) But it is necessary under clause (6), that the statement must be con-
tained in a will or deed relating to the affairs of the tamily to which any such
deceased person belonged, or in a family pedigree, or upon a tombstone, family
portrait or other thing on which such statements are usually made. This is not
necessary under clause (5).

12.153. Thus, in some respects, clause (6) is narrower than clause (5) while,
in some respects, it is wider. Both the statements, in order to be relevant, must
have been made before the question in dispute was raised.

12,154. Besides the documents and other material things specifically
mentioned in clause (6), family bibles, coffin-plates, mural tablets, hatchments,
rings armorial bearings and the like, amongst Christians, and books kept up by

'Raghubhushan v. Vidiavaridhi, 34 1.C. 875 (Mad,).
2See discussion a8 tosection 32, opening paragraph.
"The language of clause (5) imposes no restriction in this respect.


259

family bonds of domestic events in the families to which they are attached,! and
horoscopes among Hindus” are examples of other documents and things on
which such statements are usually made.*

12.155. There seems to be some obscurity with reference to the precise
position under section 32 as to horoscopes. Some of the cases seem to Jay down
that the maker of the horoscope must be called in court‘ but such a view would
seem to overlook the fact that section 32 applies only where the maker is not
available as a witness.

12.156. It has been held by the Madras High Court’ that a horoscope is
inadmissible where the witness producing it was not its writer or a person with
special means of knowledge of its correctness. With respect, this reasoning
overlooks the fact that what section 32(5) postulates is merely that the maker
must have special means of knowledge.

12.157. Tt will, in no way, affect the admissibility of evidence under
section 32(5) and (6) that there are living witnesses who can depose to the same
fact : nor is it necessary that the statements should have been contemporaneous
with the events to which they relate. On this latter point, Lord Brougham
remarked that such a restriction would defeat the purpose for which hearsay
in pedierce is let in, by preventing it from going back beyond the life time of the
person whose declaration is to be adduced in evidence.

12.158. Of course, the non-availability of the maker must be proved. In a
Calentta case’ the chief ground of rejection of the horoscope was the facy that
it was not shown that the attendance of the writer was not procurable. In
another Calcutta case’ which was a suit to set aside a decree on the ground of
minority. the horoscope was held to be inadmissible, because it was not shown
that the maker could not be called. This reasoning, with respect, is sound’.

Tn a later Calcutta case. a horoscope was admitted under section 22, the
other conditions of section 32 being satisfied.

12.159, Tt appears that sometimes courts do not seem to have noticed the
distinction between clauses (९) and (6), namely, that under clause (6), it is not
requisite that the maker of the statement should have any special means of
knowledge.

12.166. Finally. it may be noted that a horoscope which is not admissible
under clauses (5) and (6) of section 32 may be admissible under section 17. if
it contains an admission (as defined in section 17) by the parent of the child.
which is recorded in the horoscope.

12.161. As to the expression “relationship by blood”. occurring in section
32(5), it is well-established by the decision of the privy Council in Mohamed
Svedol Ariffin bin Mohamed Ariff v. Yeoh Ooi Gark,® that the time of one’s

\Ananda v. Nand, (1924) 11.7, 46 All. 665.

2As to horoscopes, see infra.

Swondroffe.

4A TR. 1957 Kerala 103, 105.

5Krishnamacharier v. Krishnamacharler, (1915) TLR. 38 Mad. 166, 171; ALR. 1915
Mad. 815 (White C.J.).

6Ram Narain v. Monee (1883) LL.B. 9 Cal. 613.

Satish Chandra v. Mohendra, (t890) LL.R. 17 Cal. 849 (No special means of know-
edge}.
%See Raja Goundan v. Raja Goundam, (1894) LLR. 17 Mad. 134.

*Nirmala Nalin’? Devt v. Kamla Bala Dasi, A.1.R. 1933 Cal. 41, 51, 52 (Mitter and
Bartlev. JJ.).

ltAfohamed Syedol Arifin Bin Mohamed Ariff ¥. Yeoh Oot Gark, AUR. 1916 PC.
242 (Decision from the Straits Settlements on 4 similar provision).

Horoscopes,

Section 325) —
Statements as to
age.


Section 326) —
Restriction im-
sed on admis-
sibility by Eng-
lish law.

‘Declarations
onder English
law — scope.

- Personal know-
ledge not neces-
gary under  sec-
tion 32(5).

No change need-
in sub-sections
45) and (6).

260

birth relates to the commencement of one’s “relationship by blood”, and,
therefore, a statement of one’s age, made by a person having special means of
knowledge. relates to the existence of such relationship as is referred to in
section 32(5). Clearly, therefore, the entry of date of birth in the schoot register,
made on the statement of the mother of a boy, would be admissible’ under
clause (5) of section 32.

12.162, With reference to section 32(5), it may be noted that there is one
important restriction on the admissib‘lity of this kind of evidence imposed by
English law, which finds no place in the Indian Evidence Act. In England, the
evidence is net admitted in every case in which the birth, marriage, or death of a
person forms the subject of controversy, but ouly in those cases which directly or
indirectly involve some guestion of relationship, and in which the fact sought to be
established is required to be proved for some genealogical purpose. Under the
Indian Act, however, the statement is admissible, provided it relates to a fact
relevant to the case.

12.163. Under English law, the declaration of an ilfegitimate member of the
family would be inadmissible. In India, it would seem to be admissible, since
section 32 contains no such restriction. Section 47 of the Act 2 of 1855 rescinded
the English rule? on this subject. and admitted the declarations, not only cf illegiti-
mate members of the family, but also of persons who, though not related by
blood or marriage, were yet intimately acquainted with the members and state
of the family. Finally, section 32(5) would include servants, friends, and
neighbours, who are excluded under English law.

12.164. The propriety of the cxtension of the rule at least to illegitimate
members of the family cannot be doubted", and the whole section was a strong
instance of the tendency of modern reform, which, making admission the rule
and exclusion the exception, leaves it to the Court to estimate the weight to be
allowed 10 particular kinds of evidence in individual cases. The rule now laid
down in the Evidence Act is still more general in its terms than the section of
the Act of 1855, which was directed merely to modify the strict rule of English

law.

12.165. The Section renders admissible the statements not merely of persons
deceased (whose statements only are admitted in England), but also of persons
who cannot be found, or who have become incapable of giving evidence, or
whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay and expense
which, under the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable,
if such persons had special means of knowledge of the relationship ta which the

statement relates,

12.166. It has, with reference to section 32(5), been held‘ thay a member of
the family can swear in the witness box of what he has been told and what he

has learnt about his own ancestors, provided that what he says is an expression
of his own opinion, (even though it is based on hearsay derived from dead [धन
sens), and is not merely a repetition of the hearsay opinion of others: and
provided further, the opinion is expressed by conduct.

12.167. The above discussion does not disclose any need for a change ir
clauses (5) and (6). a -

1Bhim Mandal v. Magaram Corain, ALR. 1961 Pat. 21, 26
%Section 47. Act 2 of 1855.

3See Woodroffe. . 7
‘Sitaii_v. Vijendra Narain. ALR. 1954 SC. 601 followed in S. M. Daud Bibi y.

A. B, Puravar, ALR. 1972 Madras 228, 229, paragraph 7


261
X. SECTION 327)

रे 12,168, Under section 3207), when the statement is contained in any deed, Section 32(7)
will or other document which relates to any such transaction as is mentioned in
section 13, clause (a), it becomes relevant.

Section 13(a) refers to “any transaction by which the right or custom in
question was created, claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied or which
was inconsistent with its existence”. Under the opening paragraph of that sec-
tion, evidence of such transaction js relevant where the question is as to the
existence of any right or custom.

12.169. For facilitating an understanding of the various points, it will be Section 13 ana-

convenient to split up section 13. Section 13, opening paragraph, provides for
the situation in which the section applies, namely, when the question is as to the
existence of any right or custom. Clause (a) of that section deals with the
evidence which is admissible if the opening paragraph applies, and admits evi-
dence as to transaction of the nature in question. The question that may arise
is whether, for the purposes of section 32(7), the opening paragraph of section 13
— dealing with the situation in which evidence of the transaction becomes
admissible is also to be satisfied. Clause (a) of section 13 is referred to in sec-
tion 32(7). But the question as to the position in this respect, 1.९., the applicabi-
lity or non-applicab'lity of section 13, opening paragraph, has created contro-
versy. im view of the case-law on the subject. which we shall discuss in due

course:

pli
opening Dara-
graph.

12.170, There have been several decisions where section 32. clause (7), has
been in issue. Thus, in a Madras case’, a recital made in a will that the pro-
perty dealt with thereunder was the property of the testator, was treated as
relevant against third parties.

In a Calcutta case*, the plaintiffs claimed recovery of possession of certain
lands as their niskar brahmoatter, and also by tight of adverse possession. They
relied, inter alia. wpon a recital of brahmoatter title in the will of their father.
and a recital in a judgment in a previous case which was not inter partes. It
was held that the recital in the will was not admissible in evidence under sec-
tion 32(7) read with section 13(a), and that the recital in the judgment not
inter partes was also not evidence. There is no detailed discussion, but apparent-
ly what weighed with the Court was the fact that it was sought to be used against

a third party.
Jn another Calcutta case’, a statement made by an arbitrator in a previous

criminal case between the parties, was held to be relevant under section 32(7).
In that case, the previous case also related to the same property.

In yet another Calcutta case‘, the nature of the tenancy mentioned in a will
of the claimant’s predecessor was regarded as falling under section 32(7). This
Calcutta case does not refer to an earlier one’, which seems to take a different

view on the point.

\Periasami v. Verandappa, ALR. 1950 Mad. 486 (Ragav Rao J), dissenting from

ALR. 1915 Mad. 740, 747,
4Satindra Kumar Choudhary v. Krishna Kumari Choudarani, AR. 1917 Cal. 805.

3Keshav Prasad v. Secretary of State, AIR. 1938 Cal. 150, 151 (M. C. Ghosh 9).
‘Pramatha y. Champa Dasi, ALR. 1929 Cal. 473, 475 (D. N. Mitter & 5. C. Mallik,
).

3. Satindra Kumar v. Krishna Kumari, ATR. 1917 Cal. 805 (Chatterjee & Newbould,


262

In a Madras case’, a statement of fact made in a will, to the effect that the
Property was self-acquired, was held to be relevant, although, it was pointed out,
that the evidence of this kind required scrutiny in the light of other evidence.

Patna case 12.171, At this stage. we should refer to a Patna case* where several aspects
of section 32(7) were dealt with. In a document extending the terms of an
usufructuary mortgage, M, the mortgagor, stated that the money under the mort-
gage was required for the purpose of shraddha of S. The mortgagee was already
in possession. The statement of M was held to be adm'ssible in evidence under
section 32(7). in order to prove that $ was dead by the time that the document
was executed. The proceeding now before the Court was not between the same
parties, and did not involve the right to mortgage. It is not clear from the
judgment whether the same property was involved.

An objection was taken to the admission of this evidence, on the ground
that the pla‘ntiffs, against whom the document was not sought to be used as
evidence, were not parties, to the transaction. The argument was rejected by
the High Court. in these words “.. so far as clause (7) of section 32 is con-
cerned, it only takes the help of section 13(a) in order to indicate the nature of
the transaction to which the document containing the statement refates. Not
that it (the proceed'ng) will necessarily be in relation to what can be called to be
a transaction as between the parties for the purpose of its admissibility without
the help of section 32.”

12.172. The High Court further observed :

“The whole of section 13 is never intended to be real for the purpose
of interpretation of this clause'. Had that been so, then the legislature could
have s'mply stated section 13 which would have necessarily included sec-
tion 13(b) as well. There is certainly a point in referring to clause (a), but
not to (b).”

Conditions to be 12.173. If the above judgment of the Patna High Court is analysed, it will

fulfilled bef. . ५
1112 0 ing section be found that it requires that a statement admissible under section 32(7), should
10 | १००० क० (जि the following conditions :

to the
cae (a) the statement is contained in a document;
(b) the statement is made by 8 person who is not available by reason of
death, etc.

{c) the document relates to what can be regarded as a transaction within
the meaning of section 13(a).
These three conditions have been actually enunciated in the judgment of the
Patna High Court.
ge Points laid 12.174, The Patna judgment* can be regarded as also laying down the
case, following points—
(i) the transaction need not be one to which the present parties were
patties;
Th’s point has been explicitly discussed and decided in the judgment.
1937 Mad. 539, S47 (Varadachariar and

\Wenkataramavya v. Sesharmml, AIR.

King, 13.
2Khudiram vy. Amodebala, AR. 1948 Pat, 426, 427, 428 (Ray. J.).

3Emphasis supplied.
4Khudiram v, Amodebala, ALR. 1948 Pat. 426. 427, 428 (Ray. 1»


263

(ii) the right or custom to which the transaction relates need not be in
issue in the proceeding. In other words, section 13, opening para-
graph is not attracted.

This point follows from the facts of the case.

Gii) if the document relates to a transaction governed by section 13(a),
then any statement, being a statement of a relevant fact, is admissible,
even if the statement does not relate to a custom or right etc.

This point follows from the Patna judgment, because the fact sought to be

proved by the document in question was the date of the death of S, and the
existence of the right or custom was not sought to be proved by the document.

12,175. It should also be noted, in this context, that the opening paragraph
of section 32 provides that statements about “relevant facts” are relevant under
the section, and no further limitation is laid down.

12.176, The observations of the Madras High Cour, in another case.' which
seem to imply a wider view of section 32(7), may also be compared, though they
were obiter.

12.177. As against this wide view, there is an Oudh decision? which seems
to limit section 32(7) to statements directly relating to the right or custom. In
the Oudh case, a statement, in a deed of family settlement. to the effect that
partition had been effected among brothers, was rejected, on the ground that the
statement did not fall within section 13(a). The Court also added that, “the
statement is obviously in the interest of the person who made it. R, if alive,
could not have made use of such an admission in his favour, nor could his sons
so do.”

12.178. It appears to us that as a matter. of policy. some restrictions need
to-be placed on the relevance of statements under clause (7). In the first place,
the tight must be in issue and the statement should relate thereto, in order that
the statement may be relevant. To this extent. our recommendation takes an
approach contrary to what was held in the Patna case’.

Secondly, we think that recitals as to boundaries ought to be excluded* from
admissibility under this clause, if they are not ‘between the parties. Thirdly, the
statements should have been made before the controversy afose. Fourthly,
however, the proceedings need not be between the parties to the documtent.

12.179. We, therefore, recommend that section 32, clause (7). should be
revised as betow :—

Revised section 32{7).

(7) When the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document,
being a deed. will or other document which relates to any transaction by which
a right or custom was created claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied,
or which was inconsistent with its existence.

Explanation—Such statement is relevant ‘where the question in the proce-
eding now before the court is as to the existence of the right or custom: but
it is not necessary that the parties to the documént must be the same as the
parties to the proceeding or their privies.

'Subbarayulu v. Vengama, AIR. 1930 Mad. 742 (Curgenven 3.) (Obiter).
smi पका ¥. Maharaj Narayan, ALR. 1937 Oudh 133, 137, 138 (Nenavatty and

पान * ~upra.
‘Ct a8 fo section 13 and section 323)

Case law
point (iii).

on

Amendment = in
which direction.

Recommends-
tion.


Introductory.

Number of per-
sons required,

Ulustration (0).

Marky's
comment,

264

Exception--Nothing in this clause shall render relevant—

{a} a recital as to boundaries containing a statement as to the nature or
ownership of adioining lands of third persons; or

(0) any statement made after the question in dispule was raised.

XI. SECTION 32 (8)

12.186, Section 32(8) renders relevant a statement made by a number of
persons, which expressed feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the
matter in question.

12.181. Illustration (0) to the section illustrates this clause. The relevancy
of individual feelings is dealt with by sections 6, 8 and 14, and the relevance of
individual opinions by sections 45-51. Section 32(8) on the other hand, relates
10 statements expressing feelings or impressions, not of an ‘nd'vidual, but of an
axgrecate of individuals --- as the exclamations of a crowd.

12.182, The exception to hearsay embodied in this clause is justified on the
hypothesis that what a number of people said, may be true, if spontaneous and
contemporaneous. The word “statement”, as used in the singular, — though not
grammetically accurate, — implies that a number of persons must have reacted

simultaneously.

It has been observed’ that “when a number of persons assemble together to
give vent to one common statement, which statement expresses the feelings or
impressions made in their mind at the time of making it, that statement may be
repeated by the witnesses, and is evidence.” Moreover, the expression must be of
feelings or impressions 08 their part. which means that the expression is more in
the nature of conduct rather than in the nature of a statement of fact.

12.183, Besides the Sponteniety of the declaration, there is another consi-
deration—the practical difficulty or impossibility of procuring the attendance
of all the individuals who composed such crowd or aggregate of persons’.

42.184. Tllustartion-(n} is based on the leading English case on the subject
of Dué Boz v. Beresford.. Tn that case, the plaintiff painted a picture. which he
designated, “The Beauty and the Beast”, and caused it to be exhibited for money
in a public gallery, upon which crowds went-to see it. The defendant went and
hacked the picture to pieces. The plaintiff sued to recover the full value of the
picture as a work of art, and compensation for the loss of the exh‘bition. The
defendant alleged that the picture was a scandalcus libel upon his sister and her
husband, and, in order to show whether the painting was made to represent these
persons, the declarations of the spectators, made while looking at the picture in
the exhibition; were adm‘tted: in evidence.

12.185. Markby. has, with regard to illustration (n) to section 32, observed*
that the case does not belong to section 32 at all. The evidence, he says, would
be equally admissible, whether the by-standers could be called or not as wit-
nesses. When the by-standers, on seeing a caricature, call out “there’s X.” and
evidence is given Of their words, what is relied on is, not their statements, but
the fact of recognition: the fact, that is that the caricature at once recalls the
person X to the minds of those who see it. This is Markby’s comment.

IR, v. Ram, (1874) 23 W.R., Cr. 35, 38 (per Jackson. 5.).

2Norton, Ev., 193, cited by Woodroffe.
396 Bost v. Beresford, (1810) 2 Cam bell’s Reports 511, 512: 11 TTR 782.

‘Markby's Evidence, page 34, quoted by Field.


265

12.186. With reference to this comment, we would like to state that though
what the by-standers said may amount to recognition, yct their statements re-
present their impressions, and in that sense, the illustration is connected with
section 32. What is referred to is a statement of opinion (though collective), out
of court, and this s:tuation had to be provided for expressly as an exception to
hearsay - - which is the topic dealt with in section 32. No doubt, the statements
or cries expressing recognition may also become relevant as part of the same’
\ransaction or on the question of identify... But their appropriateness under sec-
tion 32 is not thereby affected.

12,187. Incidentally, we note that in the English cases, it does not seem to
have been proved that the persons who make the observations could not be

called®.

12.188. Doubtless, the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of ascertaining the
names of all the persons who expressed their feelings or impressions, and of
calling them all as witnesses, will, in the great majority of cases, be held to
occasion an amount of delay or expense, which under the circumstances of the
case, will appear to the ccurt to be unreasonable‘.

12.189. The above discussion does not disclose any need for amending the
clause.

12.190. Another exception to the rule against hearsay is to be found in
section 33. That section makes the evidence given by a person as a witness in
a previous judicial proceeding admissible, if the person who gave the evidence
is not now available as a witness. This is the gist of this part of the section, not
its exact terms. We have no comments on this part. We may note that we
have referred to it earlier’, while discussing section 32. The admissibility of
such evidence is subject to certain important conditions.

12.191, The first condition requires that the parties must be the same. This
is enacted on the grounds of reciprocity, because the right to use evidence, other
than admissions, is co-extensive with the liability to be bound thereby. The
adversary in the second suit had no power to offer evidence in his own favour in
the first suit, and the evidence shou'd not, therefore, be used against him.

12.192 and 12.193. The second condition requires an opportunity to cross
examine.

It is the right of every fitigant, unless he waives it, to have the opportunity
of cross-examining witnesses, whose testimony is to be used against him: it
follows that evidence given when the party never had the opportunity to cross-
examine is not legally admissible as evidence for or against him, unless (in civil
cases) he consents that it should be so used®.

12.194. The principle involved in the third condition in requiring identity of
the matter in issue; is to secure that in the former proceeding the parties were
not without the opportunity of examining and cross-examining as to the very
point upon which their evidence is adduced in the subsequent proceedings.”

WSee section 6.
Section 9.

sCunningham’s Evidence, 11th Edn. page 95, cited by Field.
‘Field.

See discussion as to section 32, opening pata.

%a) Gorachand vy. Ram. (1968) 9 W.B. 587 (Cal.);

(b) Gregory y. Dooley, (870) 14 W.R. 17 (Cal).

Ma) R. v. Rani, (1881) LL.R. 3 Mad. 48. 52.

(b) Bal ¥. Shriniwas, (1915) LR. 39 Bom. 441

Change not
needed.

Evidence given
in previous pro-
ceeding where
witness not avail-
al

Other conditions.


Evidence

not

taken according

to law.

Change not
necessary,

Competent court.

Heading of
deposition.

the

266

12.195. We may now consider a few points arising out of the section. While
making evidence given by a witness in a previous proceeding relevant, the sec-
tion does not provide that the evidence should have been taken in accordance
with law. This requirement has, however, been implied by judicial decisions.

Thus, in a Patna Case!, a deposition sought to be put in evidence under
section 33 was excluded, because—

(i) it was not read over in the manner required under section 360 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898: and

Gi) the accused had no liberty to cross-examine the witness.

12.196. The case related to a statement made in the court of the Inquiring
Magistrate, and was governed by section 350 read with section 360 of the Crimi-
nal Procedure Code, 1898, and section 208 read with Chapter 25 of that Code.

12.197. As has been held in a Calcutta case*, the intention underlying
section 360 of the Criminal Procedure Code is that evidence should be recorded
in suck a manner that the accused can hear what is being read and take objec-
tion to it.

12.198. The question is, whether it is necessary to add this requirement
expressly in section 33. We have come to the conclusion that it is not necessary.
Primatily, the section is aimed at “the evidence” ie. the statement, —- and con-
centrates on the simple proposition that, in certain circumstances, the previous
statement of a dead, etc. witness is admissible. The section need not be compli-
cated by bringing in procedural matters as to the recording of the evidence.

12.199. It has been held’ that a proceeding before a Judge or a Magistrate
who has no jurisdiction is coram non judice, and evidence given in such a pro-
ceeding cannot, on a retrial before a competent court, be used under section 33.
This is also a principle well-recognised in respect of all proceedings, and need
not be given statutory effect.

12,200. It is well-known that the heading of a deposition given by a witness
usually gives the name, parentage, age, residence and occupation of the witness.
The question has arisen whether the particulars so given in the heading can be
regarded as a part of the evidence so as to be capable of being used in subse-
quent judicial proceedings under this section.

This question has received the attention of the Privy Council in one case‘,
where the description of the female witness, containing the name of her hushand,
which appeared at the head of the deposition, was excluded, for reasons which
are stated as follows :—

“As regards the description of the witness in the heading of the deposi-
tion, their Lordships agree with the subordinate Judge that it is no part of
the deposition proper’, that is, no patt of evidence given by the witness in
solemn affirmation. It may have been elicited by questions put by the
Magistrate. It is just as likely that it was filled in by a subordinate official

and on the paper when put into the hands of the Magistrate for him to take

‘Emperor v. Phagunia, AIR. 1926, Patna 58, 60.

2Dargahi v. Emperor, AIR. 1925, Calcutta 831.

a) Buta Singh v. Emperor, ULR. 7 Lahore 396; ALR. 1926 Lahore 582
(0) Rami Reddy, LL.R. 3 Madras 48, 51.

‘Macbulan v. Ahmad Hussain, (1904) LLR. 26 All, 108, 118 (PC)
"Emphasis added,


267

down the evidence of the witness. Again, it may have been read over to the
witness by the Magistrate when the evidence of the witness was completed
or the Magistrate may have contented himself with reading over the narra-
tive embodying the evidence, which was all he was bound to do under the

Act.”

“In these circumstances, even assuming that there was no slip or
accidental omission in the heading of the document, and that there was 10
confusion between the two husbands in the mind of the person who took
down the heading and assuming that the document is admissible ......, their
Lordships are of the opinion that it is not entitled to any weight.”

12,201, Now, it would have been noticed that the reasoning underlying the
above decision is that the heading of the deposition is not on affirmation and, in
fact, it does not represent any statement on a matter usually contained in the
heading, there is no reason why such a statement cannot be taken as part of the

evidence,

12.262, An analysis of the language of the section would also seem to
yield the same result, What the section provides is that “evidence” given by a
witness (in a judicial procecding) is relevant. Now, “evidence” as defined in sec-
tion 3, means and includes all statements which the Court permits or requires to
be made before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry.
Though the age of a witness may be a matter of fact directly under an enquiry,
it is indirectly a matter under enquiry, because a court would be very much
interested in knowing these particulars, otherwise, the court would not record
them at all. If the oath is administered before the particulars are recorded, they
can be reasonably regarded as part of the “evidence”. The answer, therefore,
seems to depend on the time when the oath is administered.

12.203. In the above position, no change is recommended in the language
ed

of the section on this point.

12.204. Under the proviso to section 33, one of the conditions to be satisfied
before the section can be applied, is that “the proceeding was between the same
parties or their representatives-in-interest”. The expression “proceeding”, in this
part of the proviso, refers to the first proceeding, as has been settled by the Privy
Council’, वी is advisable to give effect to this interpretation, by adding the word
“first” before the word “proceeding”. This will make the language uniform with
the second and the third conditions in the proviso, which use ihe specific expres-
sion “first proceeding”.

12.205. It may be noted that the proviso to section 33 inverts the require-
ment of English law, which requires that the parties to the second proceeding
should legally represent the parties to the first proceeding or by their privies in
estate. As observed by the Privy Council’, this inversion is not accidental.

Instead of saying that the parties to the second proceeding should represent-

in-interest the parties to the first proceeding, the proviso cmploys different

language.
12.206. As the departure from the English law has been held to be deliberate
by the Privy Council, the language of the proviso should be altered for bringing
jnto line with the English rule, on this point.
iKrishnayya ¥ “Raja of Pitrapur, LLR. $7 Mad. 11 AER. 1933 Privy Council 202,

which reversed 1.L.R. 51 Madras 893; ALR. 1928 Madras 994.
'Krisknayya y. Rajah of Pittapur, UL.R. 57 Mad. 11 ALR. 1933 PC. 202, 60 LA.

importance of
oath.

No change need-
ed on the ques-
tion of heading
of the definition.

Section 33 —
proviso — “re~
presentatives in
interest.”
Amendment —re-
commended,


Recommenda-
tion.

Section 33 ex-,
plained.

268

12.207. In the result, the only change recommended is in the proviso, on
ihe point discussed above.

12.208. The Explanation to section 33 is intended to do away with the
objection that, in criminal cases, the State is the prosecutor’, The effect of the
Explanation is that the deposition taken in criminal proceedings may be used in
a civil suit, and rice verse, if the specified conditions are satisfied.

42.209. In this connection it is to be noted that the general theory of English
Jaw, which is followed in India also, is that a prosecution is always on behalf of
the Crown or State, and, in that sense, the Crown or State is a party to every
criminal trial or inquiry into an offence. Jt is on this theory that the Attorney-
Geteral’s power to enter a nolle prosegui rests. Of course, public officials are
not the only persons conducting prosecutions. But all prosecutions are theoreti-
cally on behalf of the State.

The general rule in England is that where the statute provides that there
shall be no prosecution as to particular classes of offences created by statute
without the consent of the Attorney-General or the Director of Public Prosecu-
tion*, then only the specified officer can sanction the prosecution. But, in the
absence of such provisicns, any private citizen can set the criminal law in
motion’,

While the initiation of prosecution is governed by the rules stated above,
the position that all prosecutions are theoretically at the suit of the Crown re-
mains unaffected. In this respect, the position is different in Scotland where a
private person cannot institute proceeding unless he has a personal and peculiar
interest and gets the permission of the High Court—which is the reason why,
when a private person sought to prosecute seliers of the book “Lady Chatterley’s
Lover”, the court refused, saying “No private complainer can be the keeper of
the public conscience’. That the Crown is the nominal prosecutor becomes a
matier of practical importance, since the Attorney-General can stop a criminal
case by entering a nolle prosequit*

Therefore, if the Explanation is 7९७४४ as meaning that a criminal trial or an
inquiry into an offence is a proceeding between the State and the accused, it
would be superfluous, since there has never been any doubt about that theory
for a long time. The real purport of the Explanation is to deal with cases where
the prosecution is conducted by a private person, who has instituted the criminal

proceedings.

The Explanation is intended to obviate any argument to the effect that even
in such a case the State is a party and not the private person mentioned above,
Vhough the utility of the Explanation can be contemplated even in relation to
cases where the later proceeding is also a criminal one, its more frequent appli-
cation would be found where the later case is a civil one. Fer example, where
a complainant who was permitted to conduct the prosecution of an accused per-
son is now the plaintiff or defendant, and the accused in the previous prosecution
is now the defendant or plaintiff, the Explanation would be useful. Of course,
the other conditions mentioned in the section, including the proviso thereto, have
to be satisfied in this case, as in every other case.

\Suojan Bibee v. Achmut Ali, (1874) 14 Beng. L.R. (Appx.) 3.

2Norton, Fvidence 197, 198, cited by Woodroffe,

“For example, section 2, Official Secrets Act. 1911.

‘Statement by Sir Hartley Shawcross, Attorney-General, in House of Commons
Debates Vol. 483, 5th Series, Column 681, dated 29-1-1951.

*The Times 4th February 1961, cited in Jackson Machinery of Justice (1972), page
155, footnote I.

SR. v. Allen, (1862) 121 English Reports 929


269

42.210. The point to be noted is that the system of prosecution thay is
followed, in general, is “‘public prosecution”. Though the Code of Criminal
procedure’ has a provision which empowers the Court to permit a private person
to conduct the prosecution, that provision is an exceptional one. and resort
thereto is comparatively infrequent. Apart from that, even a private complainant,
where he is permitted to conduct the case, is not ordinarily described as the
“prosecutor”. For this reason, the expression “prosecutor” is not very happy in
this coniexi?, It would, therefore, be desirable to substitute some other expression
in its place.

12.211, Moreover, the expression “prosecutor” is a vague one. We have,
for example, to decide whether the benefit of the Explanation to section 33 should
be confined to “complainants’”—i.c. persons who make a “complaint” as detined
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, —- or whether it should also extend to other
persons who set the law in motion -- e.g. the person who filed the First Informa-
tion Report.

It is suggested that first informant, as such, has no locus standi in the Court.
He is a witness, like any other person, even though he is a very important witness.
He cannot be raised to the status of a party, for the purposes of section 33. The
fact that he may, in certain cases*, be liable for malicious prosecution (civil
fiability) or for instituting false proceedings under section 211, LP.C. (criminal
liability), is immaterial for the present ‘purpose. Even in a suit for malicious
prosecution, a mere informant is not regarded as a prosecutor. He must have
specifically named the present plaintiff in the previous prosecution.

12.212, Let us see the legislative usage on this point. Under the Code of
Criminal Procedure‘, evidence is produced by the “prosecution—a neutral word.
Under the same Code, the® absence of the complainant (in proceedings instituted
upon complaint) on the day fixed for hearing, may lead to certain consequences.
Further under the same Code*, in a summons case instituted upon a complaint,
the complainani has, with the Magistrate’s permission, power to withdraw the
complaint. These provisions should not be considered as material for the pur-
poses of section 33, Under the same Code’, a Magistrate inquiring into and trying
@ case may permit the prosecution 40 be conducted by any person (other than
certain excluded persons). But, so far as section 33 of the Evidence Act is con-
cemed, even mere permission to conduct the prosecution should not suffice, and
it is suggested that it is also necessary that that person must have instituted
the proceedings’. Then only the expression “prosecutor” would be apt in the
context of section 33.

12,213. The position as 10 the conduct of prosecution may be briefly stated.
Under the code’ of Criminal Procedure, where a private person instructs a
pleader to prosecute a person in any court, the conduct of the prosecution is,
nevertheless, by the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge
of the case, and the Pleader has to act under his directions, although he is given
power (with the permission of the Court), to submit written arguments after the

Weeliors 301 and 302, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2As to malicious prosecution, see Mohammad Amin v. Jogendra, AAR. 1947 P.C.
108.

See discussion in Gaya Prasad vy. Bhagat Singh, (1908) 1.1.R. 30 AIL 525, 533 (P.C)
and case law reviewed in S. 7, Sahib v. Hasan Gani, AJR. 1957 Mad. 640, 653.

‘Sections 244 and 254, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
‘Sections 249 and 256, Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973
Section 257, Code of Criminai Procedure, 1973.

ection 392(1), Code of Criminai Procedure. 1973.

°Cf. section 211, LPC.

Section 301(2). Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

Conduct of Pro-
secution,


Recommendation
to. substitute
“complainant”,

Redraft.

Relevancy of cer-
tain evidence | for
proving in subse-
quent proceeding,
the truth of facts
therein stated,

270

tlose of the evidence. This provision is also not material for the purposes of
section 33, because the private pleader has to act subject to the control of the
Public Prosecutor.

Jt would, therefore, appear thar the only material provision is that empower-
ing the court (o permit a private person to conduct the prosecution ; and, here
also, so far as section 33 is concerned, it should be necessary that he instituted
the procecdings*.

12.214. In our view, the test for the purpose of section 33 should be the
fact that the private person has instituted the proceedings plus the fact that he
has the potential capacity of conducting the prosecution. In view of what is stated
above, we recommend that for the expression “prosecutor”, in section 33, Ex-
planation, suitable words indicating the above test should be substituted.

12.215. A rough revised draft of section 33 is recommended below, in the
light of what is stated above.

REVISED SECTION 33
33. tn a judicial proceeding before a court, cvidence given by a witness—
(a) in a previous judicial proceeding, o1
(b) in an earlier stage of the same judicial proceeding, or

(c) in any proceeding before any person authorised by law to take evi-
dence.

js relevant for the purpose of proving the truth of the facts which it states, when
the witness is dead or cantot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence, or
is kept oul of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be ob-
tained without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstarices
of the case, the Court considers unreasonable ;

Provided—

ti) that the first procceding was between the same parties or their reprt-
sentatives in interest;

(ii) that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and oppor-
tunity to cross-examine;

ii) that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first 4s
in the second proceeding.

Explanation —A criminal trial or inquiry shall,

(a) Where the criminal proceedings are instituted by a private person, be
deemed to be proceeding between that person and the accused within the meaning
of this section, if that person is permitted by the court to conduct the prosecution
under section 302 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;

(b) in other cases, be deemed to be a proceeding between the State and the
avcused,

"Section 3020), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
ZAs to the expression ‘institute’ criminal proceedings, see section 211 1.P.C.



CHAPTER 13
ENTRIES IN BOOKS OF ACCOUNT
1. INTRODUCTORY

13.1. We propose to devote this chapter to an examination of section 34,
which deals with entries in certain books of account.

13.2. Section 34 provides that entries in books of account, made regularly
in the course of business, are relevant, whenever they refer to a matter into which
the court has to inquire; but “such statements” shall not alone be sufficient
evidence w charge any person with liability. There is only one illustration to
this section, which is as follows :—

“A sues B for Rs. 1,000/- and shows entries in his accounts books,

showing B to be indebted to him to this amount, The entries are relevant,

but are not sufficient, without other evidence, to prove the debt.”

13.3. Examining this section in the context of the general scheme of the Section examined

Act, we may state that, in a sense, it qualifies the rule in section 21 to the with reference to
effect that admissions are not selevant in favour of the persons making them. Act.
It may also be pointed out that this section is one of the very small number of
sections in the Act which specifically provide for the insufficiency of a particular
type of evidence. This safeguard seems to have been introduced 10 view of the
consideration that sometimes a patty may impose a liability on the other by
entries made fraudulently.

43.4. As a general zule, a man’s own statement is not evidence for him,
though, in certain cases, it may be used as corroborative evidence.' The section
is an exception to this rule, — an exception created on the basis of 4 principle
discussed below.

13.5. The principle of admissibility of these entries is the same as the Principle,
the principle underlying the various exceptions contained in section 32,7 namely,
the principle of necessity and the principle of circumstantial _trust-werthiness,
The principle of necessity, in this context, could be explained by stating that it
would be inconvenient if, 1o begin with, proof in another form was insisted
upon, because, in many cascs, the maker of the entry, or the person who
witnessed the transaction, may not be available, or it may be that different
persons witnessed the different transactions — all recorded in one book, — and
it would be inconvenient to summon them all for proving the facts recorded in
each individual entry. Toe principle of circumstantial trustworthiness can be
explained by referring to two aspects, namely, the difficulty of committing fraud
and the ease with which the fraud, if committed would be detected, and the
improbability of inaccuracies in such entries.

43.6. As regards fraud, where the books are regularly kept in the course of busi-
ness, the system of making such entries in the account books with regularity
counter-acts the casual tempiation to commit a fraud. Moreover, without a
systematic and comprehensive plan of false manipulations, it is difficult to make
false statements in such vooks, As regards inaccuracies, the influence of
habit prevents inaccuracies. Moreover, often the person making the entry is

“shan ४. Haran (1869) 11 W.R., 526 (Cal)
7566 discussion as to section 32

271


Othe: provisions.

Previous law in

India.

Comparison
Previous law.

with

272

under a duty to an employer or some other person. so that mistakes would nor-
mally be detected. As Tindal C. J. observed in Poole v. Dicas.) “It is easy to
state what is true than what is false; the process of invention implies trouble.”

The entries being acts of the party himself, must be received with caution.

13.7, Where it was said that “an account-book is nothing : it is one’s private
affair and he may prepare it as he likes: the Privy Council remarked3— “It is
true that there may be accounts to which that description would apply. Other
accounts may be so kept, and may so tally with external circumstances, as to
carry conviction that they are true.”

13.8. Jt will be noted that such entries could be relevant under certain othei
provisions of the Act also, — for example, section 32(2) as statements made by
a person in the ordinary course of business, — or under section 159, to refres'
the memory of a witness, if the entry has been made by that witness himself and
relates to some transaction concerning which he is now giving evidence,

प्‌. PREVIOUS LAW

43.9. The previous law on the subject was contained in section 43 of Act
2 of 1855. which was as foilows :—

“43. Books proved to have been regularly kept in the course of business
shall be admissible as corroborative, but not as independent, proof of the

fact stated therein.”

13.10. It has been stated* that the present provision in section 34, which
declares that the entries shall not alone be sufficient to charge any person with
liability, fotlows the Roman Law under which such entries were deemed semi-
plena probatio and the suppletory oath of the party was admitted to make it the
full proof necessary to obiain a decree.

13.41. We have, while discussing’ section 32, already referred to this
section of the Act of 1855. In section 34 of the present Act, the words “regularly
kept” have been substituted for the words “proved to have been regularly kept”
which occurred in the Act of 1855. It is evident that the Law embodied in
section 34 of the present Act is not quite the same as was contained in section
43 of Act 2 of 1855. The expressions “cortoborative evidence”, “independent
evidence” and “substantive evidence”, which are found in many of the reported
decisions bearing upon section 34 of the present Act, are somewhat out of place
in view of the wording of that section, and have been handed down from the
words “corroborative” and “independent” that appeared in section 43 of the Old
Act (1855) and from those words as well as the word “substantive” that were
used in the decisions thereunder. The plain words of section 34 indicate that
the section deals with all entries in bocks of accounts regularly kept in the course
of business; in the first place, making them relevant whenever they refer to a
matter into which the court has to enquire, and secondly, providing that, when
such entries are sought to be used as statements for a particular purpose, namely,
to charge any person with liability. then they shalt not alone be sufficient evidence

for that purpose.

‘Poole v. Dicas, 1 Bingam N.C. 649.

*Eheero v. Bejoy (1867) 7 W.R. 533 (Cal)

3Jaswant Singh v. Sheo Narain (1894) LLR. 16 All. 157, 16t (PC).
‘Field, Commentary on the Evidence Act, (1966) Vol. 3, page 1926.

‘See discussion as to section 32(2).


273

13.12. Under the previous Act, account-books would not have been admissible
to prove a fact, unless some other evidence tending to establish the same fact
had also been given. “But the language” of that Act, as Markby has said,’
“differs very materially from that of the present Act. That languege has not been
adopted in the present Act. The only limitation in section 34 is that statements
contained in documents of this kind shail not alone be sufficient to charge any
one with liability. It appears to me that this change of expression has made
substantial altcration in the law.”

का. ENGLISH LAW AND ROMAN LAW

13.13. As a general rute, in English common Jaw, books of account:are not
admissible?, except when the entrics are (a) against the interests of the maker,
or (b) are made in the course of business, and in the discharge of duty. The
further condition in both cases is that the maker of the entry must be dead.
The Courts of Equity, however, used to act upon such entries, and. in 1852, the
Chancery Practice Amendment Act’ empowered courts of Equity to direct, in
eases where they should think fit. in taking accounts, that the books of account
in which the accounts required to be taken had been kept, or any of them,
“shall be taken as prima facie cvidence of the truth of the matter therein contain-
ed, with liberty to the parties interested to take such objections thereto as they
may be advised.”

13.14. Thus, in England, if A sues B for the price of goods sold, an entry
in A’s shop-books, debiting B with the goods, is not evidence for A to provet
the debt. But an entry debiting C and not B with the goods, is evidence against
A to disprove the debt®, as an admission.

43.15, It may be noted that, under Roman law, the production of the
account books of a merchant or tradesman, provided the account books were
regularly and fairly kept in the usual manner, was deemed to afford evidence of
the justice of the claim. (A similar principle was followed in France and in
Scotland). The evidence was supplemented by the “Suppletory oath.”

Under the Roman “Suppletory oath”, the Judge. in his discretion. may
tender this oath es-officio te either party- -usvally the one in whom the judge
has greater confidence — on the theory that when the evidence thus for submitted
is entitled [0 some weight, but is insufficient 10 form a judicial persuation, the
cath will afford the missing portion of proof.

IV. CORROBORATION

13.16. We may now consider the aspect of corroboration required under the
section. Books of account when not used to charge a person with liability (civil
or criminal)’ may be used as independent evidence requiring no corroboration.
But, when sought to be 50 used, they must be corroborated by other substantive
evidence’.

'Belact v. Rash, (1874) 22 W.R. 549 (Per Markby 1).
4a} Price v. Torrington, (1703) 1 Salk 283;

(b) Brackle-bank v. Thompson. (1933) 2 Ch. 344, 352,

§Section 54, Chancery Practice Amendment Act, 1852 (Statute 15 and 16 Victoria).
‘Savth v. Anderson, (1889) 7 C.B. 21. Best on Evidence (1922) page 79, para 91,
Starr v. Scott, (1833) 6 C&P 241.

*pr. Code Civil, art. 1367, Ital Codice Civile, art. 2736, No. 2

फू, v. Hurdeep, (1875) 23 WR. Cr. 27 (Cal).

"Dwarka v. Sant, (1895) LLR. 18 All. 92.

Position under
5 Act.

English law.

Corroboration.


Corroborative
evidence —requir-
ed.

Evidence of
Plaintiff.

Caselaw as to
important _ingre+
dients,

Proper procedure.

274
13.17. And in this sense, books of accounts under the present Act, us under
the repealed Aci, — cannot be used as sufficient evidence of the payment or
other items to which the entry refers. Section 34 only Jays down that a plain-
uff cannot obtain a decree by merely proving the existence of certain entries in
his books of account, even though those books are shown to be kept in the regular

course of business. He will have to show further, by some evidence, that the
entries represent real and honest transactions.

13.18. As to the nature of the evidence required to corroborate the entries
that beceme relevant under section 34, decided cases furnish some illustrations.
It would appear on a study of those cases that there is hardly any scope for
laying down hard and fast rules on the subject. Although, in some of the cases,
the expression “independent evidence” is met with in this context, that does not
seem (0 be the intention of the section, and all that can be said with reference
to the present section is that no presumption of correctness attaches to the
entries taken by themselves.

13.19. Thus, no particular form or kind of evidence in addition to the
entries is required. Any relevant facts which can be treated as evidence within
the meaning of the Evidence Act would be sufficient corroboration, of the evidence
furnished in the books of account, if true’,

13.20. It has been held by several High Courts—e.g., Allahabad’, Rajasthan’
and Andhra Pradesh‘ and Punjab’ — that the evidence of the plaintiff himself
on oath can suffice to corroborate the entries relevant under section 34. Of
course, 10 categorical rules can be Jaid down, and regard has to be had to the
circumstances of each case when determining the sufficiency of the plaintiff's
statement — or, for that matter, the sufficiency of any other relevant fact — as
corroborative evidence under section 34. But the point to be made is that the
plaintiff's evidence can also qualify and suffice as corroborative evidence.

५. INTERPRETATION AND PROCEDURE

13.21, Case law on the section illustrates and elaborates what is meant dy
some of the important ingredients of the section, — such as, “books of account”,
“regularly”, and so on. These judicial decisions do not, however, seem to re-
quire any modification in the form or substance of the section.

13.22. There seems to be a misconception in some of the subordinate courts
as regards the procedure for utilising the entries to which section 34 applies.
In this connection, we may refer to a Nagpur judgment*, where it is pointed
out that if the witness producing the entry cannot supplement it with his persoaal
knowledge, then it is a waste of time to have its contents repeated out of his
mouth. On the other hand, if, after refreshing himself with an entry, the witness
is able to remember the details of the transaction, he may certainly read the entry
for the purpose of refreshing his memoty; but this is not a case of evidence under
section 34; it would fall under section 159, so far as his oral evidence is
concerned.

'Yesuvadivan v. Subba, 52 1.0... 704 (Mad).

a) Narain Das v. Firm Ghasi Ram, A.LR. 1938 All. 353.

(b) Mt. Kar Dei v. Sri Kishan, ALR. 1932 All. 60 (D.B).

sBalmukand v. Jagannath, ALR. 1963 Raj 212, 216, para 13.

4D. K. Aswathanarayana v. Md. Hussain, 1965 AP. 33, 36, pare 36.
*Kaka Ram भर. Firm Thakar Das, A..R. 1962 Punj. 27, 30, para 11.
‘Mukunda Ram v. Daya Ram, A.LR. 1914 Nagpur 44, 47.


275

13.23. The question of absence of entries may be discussed. It has been held
in Calcutta in R. v. Grees Chunder' that though the actual entries in books of
account are relevant to the extent provided by the section, such a book is not
by itself relevant to raise an inference from the absence of any entry relating to
a ‘particular matter.

13.24. With respect, it is suggested that this decision, if it is to be taken
to have ruled that rhe fact of the absence of an entry is not evidence at all under
any section of the Act, is not correct. It has not, in such sense, been followed*.

13.25. In Ram Persad v. Lakpati Koer; during arguments. Lord Davey
referred to the above case — R. v. Grees Chunder', — and Lord Robertson
said: “The Act applies to entries in books of account, but no inference can be
drawn from the absence of an entry relating to any particular matter.” But this
remark of Lord Robertson must be taken to have been made with reference to
the preceding argument of Counsel, where Counsel was discussing section 32(2)
and section 34.

13.26. Obviously, section 34 does not apply where there is no entry in the
books. Evidence that there is no entry is not, therefore, admissible under this
section. However, such evidence may be admissible under other sections of the
Act, — as for instance, sections 9 and 11. Thus, in a Calcutta case*, evidence
having been given of the visit of M to Calcutta, which he denied, the latter's
son was called by the other party to corroborate M’s statement. He deposed
that it was usual when a partner of his firm (to which both he and M belonged)
made a journey on the firm’s business, to enter in the account-book the expenses
of such journey, and he was allowed io produce the account-books of his firm
and to state that there was no entry of expenses relative to such alleged visit.

VI. CONCLUSION

13.27, In view of the position discussed above, it is not necessary to amend
section 34 in substance. However, a verbal change is required in the section.

Where the section contains the words “such statement”, the proper words
are “such entries”, and we recommend that this drafting change should be made.

IR. v. Grees Chunder Banerjee, (1883) LL.R. 10 Cal. 1024

*Sagurmull v. Manraj, (1900) 4 C_\W.N. cevii.

3Ram Persad v. Lakpati Koer, census (1903) LL.R. 30 Cal. 231, 247 (P.C).
4R. v. Gress Chunder, (1883) LL.R. 10 Cal. 1024.

SSagurmull v. Manraj, (1900) 4 C.W.N., cevii.

Absence of entry.

Absence of entry
— effect of,

Only verbal
change needed.


CHaPrer 14

ENTRIES IN PUBLIC RECORDS AND OTHER PUBLISHED WRITINGS
1. INTRODUCTORY

14.1, An entry in any public or other official book, register, or record,
stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the dis-
charge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty
specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register, or
record is kept. is itself a relevant fact. under section 35

14.2, The principle upon which the entries mentioned in section, 35 are
received in evidence is the official or statutory duty of the person who keeps the
book, register or record to make such entries after satisfying himself of their truth.

14.3. lt is not that the writer makes the entries contemporancously, or of
his own knowledge’. The entry is admissible irrespective of knowledge. In
Saraswati Dasi vy. Dhanpat Singh*, it was obscrved by the Calcutta High Court
(Garth C.J.) that the section is confined to the class of cases where the
public officer has to enter in a register or other book some actual fact which is
known to him, but this view has not been approved of in Shoshi Bhooshan Bose
v. Girish Chander Mitter‘, where it was held that entries in a register kept by
a public servant under a statute are admissible irrespective of personal knowledge.

14.4, The real reason for admitting these entries is that no person in a
private capacity can make such entries. They are admissible, though not एणा-
firmed by oath or cross-examination, partly because, in some cases, they ate re-
quired by law to be kept, and in alf cases they are made by authorised and
accredited persons appointed for the purpose and under the sanction of the official
duty, partly on account of the publicity of the subject matter, and, in some
instances, of their antiquity. Where it is not shown that it is so made, the entry
is in admissible. Moreover, though the facts stated in these entries are of a public
nature, it would often be difficult to prove them by means of sworn witnesses.

14.5. With reference to public documents J.ord Blackburn said in Sturla
v. Freecid’.—

“I understand a public document to mean a document that is made
for the purpose of the public making use of it and being able to refer to it.

I think the very object of it must be that it should be made for the purpose

of being kept public. so that the persons concerned in it may have access

to it afterwards.”

14,6. Records, says Lord Chief Baron Gilbert’, “are the memorials of the
jegislature, and of the King’s courts of justice, and are authentic beyond all

Doe v, Andrews, 15 0.8. 756 (Erle J).
°Wraham vy. Phanindra Nath, (1915) 19 C.W.N. 1038 (copy of another entry).
*Saraswati Dasi v. Dhanpat Singh, (1882) LL.R. 9 Cal. 434,
‘Shoshi Bhooshun Bose v. Girish Chunder Mitter, 1.LR. 20 Cal. 940.
‘See—
(a) Remarks of the Privy Council in Raja Bommarauze v. Rangassamy, (1885) 6
MLA. at page 249;
tb) Samar Dasadh v. Jugal Kishore, (1897) LL.R. 23 Cal. 370, 371.
SSturla v. Freccia, LR. 5 App. Cas. 623.
iGilbert, Evidence 7, 4th Ed.

276


277

manner of contradiction”. they are said to be “monuments veritatis ar vetustatis
vestigia’” as also “the treasure of the king?-*”.

14.7. It may be noted that these rules of evidence are not confined to a
particular country. Indian registers of baptism have been admitted as evidence
in English Courts‘. Indian registers of marriages and deaths, kept under the
authority of the East India Company, have been admitted in English Courts*.
Registers of marriages compiled by the Secretary of State for India, from
periodical reports transmitted to him by the various religious denominations in
India, have also been admitted in the English Courts*.

वा. ENGLISH LAW

14.8. We may now refer to a few points of difference between English and
Indian law on the subject.

(a) In England, it is essential to the admissibility of this evidence that
the entries should have been made promptly, or at least without
such long delay as to impair their credibility. and in the mode re-
quired by law, if any mode has been prescribed’.

The Evidence Act contains no such rule, although these points may
be of importance in estimating the value of the evidence.

(9) In India, as weil as in England, the entry must have been made by a
person whose duty it was to make it. The entry will be none the less
admissible, even though the person who made it, being alive and
capable of giving evidence, is not called as a witness.

(c) The English Jaw speaks only of “official” registers or books. To
render any document admissible in evidence as an official register
in England, it must be one which the law requires to be kept for
public benefit. In India, the book or register might be either a
public or an official one, under section 35.

149, The Indian Act does not contain any definition of the “public or ofher
official book”. But reference may be made to section 74 of the Act, which states
what are public documents’.

A “public document” has been defined in England’ to be a document that
is made for the purpose of the public making use of it — especially where there
is a judicial or quasi-judicial duty to inquire. Its very object must be that the
public or ail persons concerned in it, may have access to it. Registers kept
under private authority for the benefit or information of private individuals are
therefore inadmissible”.

. Litt. 118 a; 293 9.

"11 Edw. TV. I.

‘Best, Evidence (1922), page 202, paragraph 218.

‘Queen’s Proctor पर. Fry, 4 9.9. 230.

‘Ratcliffe vy. Ratcliffe. (1859) 1 Sw. & Tr. 467.

*Regan v. Regan. 69 L.T. 720.

Taylor's Evidence, 10 Ed. Sec. 1594; Whitley Stokes, Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol 2,
page 829.

‘Samar Dosadh v. Jugal Kishore Singh, (1897) LL.R. 23 Cal. 366, 369,

'Sturla v. Freccia, 5 App. Cases 643.

“See Baji Nath v. Sukhu Mahton, (1891) LL.R. 18 Cal, 534,

Indian Registers
admitted in Eng-

land.

English
Indian law
Difference,

and


Register of the
school — date of
birth.

Matriculation
Certificate.

278
Ill. TWO CLASSES OF ENTRIES

14,10. Reverting to section 35, two classes of entries are contemplated by
this section. (9) entries by public servants, (b) entries by persons other than
Public servants. In the case of the latter, the duty to make the entry must
be specially enjoined by the law of the country in which the book, register, or
record is kept (the section thus includes British, foreign or colonial registers’),
in the case of entries by the former, it is sufficient for their admissibility that
they have been made in the discharge of official duty.

But, in either case, the entry must have been made by a@ person whose duty
it was to make it.

14.11. In England, it has been held? that the entries should be made
promptly. or at least without such long delay as to impair their credibility. Thus,
an entry made more than a year after the event has been rejected. In India,
such delays will go to the weight of the evidence.

IV. ILLUSTRATIONS

It may be useful to take a few illustrations from decided cases.

14.12, The Education Code in various States requires the Headmaster of
each recognised school to prepare and maintain an admission register of the
pupils admitted to that particular school. Of the several particulars to be
entered in such a register, the date of birth of the pupils, as stated by the
parent or guardian, is an important item. Thus, the admission register is a
public record, maintained by the head of the institution, who is in duty bound
to maintain such a register containing certain particulars relating to each pupil
as required by the Education Code. In making such entries in the admission
register the head of the institution, who is a public servant, is merely discharging
his official duty. Such entries, therefore, made by a public servant in a public
or official register in the discharge of his official duty would be relevant under
section 35. The date of birth as entered in such an official record is, therefore,
a relevant fact, and can be proved by production of that record. It has been
so held in a Patna case*.

A similar view was taken by the Kerala High Court’.

14.13. Certified copies from a school register, showing that on 20th Tune,
1960, K was under-17 years of age, and the affidavit of the father stating the
date of her birth,-and the statement of K to the police with regard to her own
age, all amount to evidence under the Evidence Act. An extract from the
register of the school is admissible in evidence to prove the age®.

14.14, Entries in the school registers as to age are admissible under section
35, as entries made by व public servant in a public or official register in the
discharge of his official duty. When he had any special means of knowledge so

With regard to the books recognised as official registers public documents in
England, see Rateliffe v. Rateliff, (1819) 1 ‘Sw. & Tr. 467; Queen's Proctor ¥. Fry. ¢ P.D.
230.

Doe v. Bray, है 8,&0., 813.

2Bhim Mandal v. Magaram Gosain, ALR. 1961 Pat. 21, 24, 26, para 13 and 41.
‘Vishnu Maheswaran Nampoothiri v. Kuravilla Kochitry Kuruvilla, ALR. 1957 Ker.
}. 104.

103.
a) Maharaj Bhanudas v. Krishna Bai, AUR. 1927 Bom. 11, 99;
(b) Indian Cotton Company Lid. तर. Raghunath Hari Deshpande, ALR, 1931 Bom.
178, 183.


279

as to make the entry relevant itself does not affect the admissibility of the entry,
though it may affeci tts value. Section 35 stands itself independently of section
32(5}."

On the question of age. a Matriculation Certificates is also clearly admissible?
under section 35.

14,15. Entries in a death register kept at a police station in accordance
with the police Regulations made under section 12 of the Police Act (5 of 1861)
are also relevant, even though the entries are made in chronological order and
not in the prescribed form” A register of death kept by police officers at thanas,
under the rules made by the loca} Government, is a public document within the
meaning of section 74 and under section 114, a court is entitled to presume that
an entry made in such regisier was properly madc, and a certified copy of such
entry is admissible in evidence.’

14,16. In the English case of Ratcliffe v. Radcliff and Anderson, it was
pointed out that a register of births and deaths kept under the orders of the
East India Company was a public document. Lord Campbell in that judgment
speaks of the register having been kept in obedience fo directions given hy the
East India Company in its sovereign capacity. No legislation of the company
is referred to us having authorised the keeping of such a register‘

V. OTHER PROVISIONS

14.17. Sometimes, special statutory provisions confer a presumptive value
on certain entries. Entries in records-of-rights, for example, are covered by
specific provisions. The decision of Sir Dinshah Mulla, in Mahant Krishna
Dayal v. Rani Bhubaneswari? may be seen, which has laid down that the entry
in the records-of-rights is presumed to be correct until it is proved to be in-
correct by evidence. Such a presumption would arise only as to the entries
recorded as authorised by some Act or the rules framed thereunder, and not

otherwise.

14,18. The same principle would apply in regard to the presumption of
correctness of the records-of-rights finally prepared under West Bengal Estates
Acquisition Act, 1953, because of a specific statutory provision.”

VI. RECOMMENDATION

14.19. The section requires modification only in one point of form. The
requirement that the entry must be made in performance of a statutory duty is
applicable only to the latter-half of the section. Under the earlier half, the
emphasis is on public or official character of the entry and not on its statutory
character. We recommend that the section should be suitably split up to bring
out this difference between the first-half of the section and the Jatter-half.

‘Aga Jan Khan Rahimkhan v, Kesho Rao Nathuram Maratha, A..R. 1940 Nag. 217.
8Havishkesh v. Sushil Chandre Maulik, AIR, 1957 Cal. 211. 214: 60 C.W.N. 1053.
3Shib Deo Misra v. Ram Prasad, 1.L.R. 46 All. 637.

‘Tamijuddin Sarkar v. Taju, LL.R. 46 Cal. 152.

SRatcliffe v. Radcliffe and Anderson, (1859) | Sw. & Tr. 467.

See—
(a) Secretary of State v. Kasturi Reddi, (1908) I.L.R, 26 Mad. 268:

(b) Devarapaili Ramalinga Reddi v. Srigiriraju Kotayya, ALR. 1918 Mad, 451,
452.

TMahant Krishna Dayal v. Rani Bhubaneswari, ALR. 1931 P.C. 221.
8Jatindra Nath Malik vy. Sushilendra Nath Palit, ATR. 1965 Cal. 328, 331.

19-131 LAD/ND/77

Birth and death
Tegister is a pub-
lic document.


Introductory.

Maps compar-

able to
ments.

Classes of
maps.

Section 83
presumption
accuracy,

state-

and
of

280

14.20, The revised section should be as follows:

“35. Relevancy of entry in public record, made in performance of duty.—
An entry in any public or other official book, register, or record stating a
fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by—

(a) a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or

(b) any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the
jaw of the country in which such book, register, or record is kept.

is itself a relevant fact.”

जा. OTHER PUBLISHED WRITINGS —SECTION 36

14.21, While section 35 was concerned with statements in public records
and reports, the next three sections are devoted to certain other documentary
materials. These materials are of various speices. but they all share one feature
in common, the feature of publicity and of official authority.

14.22, The subject of relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans is
dealt with by section 36, in these terms—

“36, Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published
maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made
under the authority of the Central Government or any State Government, as
to matters usually represented or stated in such maps. charts or plans, are
themselves relevant facts.”

14.23. Maps are really statements. In Dwijesh Chandra Roy v. Naresh
Chandra Gupta, it was observed by $. R. Das, J—

“A map by itself is nothing but statement made by the maker by
means of lines and pictorial representations instead of by word of mouth
as to the state or configuration of a particular site and the objects standing
thereon. To admit in evidence a map without calling the maker thereof is
the same as admitting in evidence statements made by a third party who
is not called as a witness. In other words, it amounts to admitting hearsay.”

14.24. The section deals with two classes of documents: (a) published
maps or charts generally offered for public sale: and (b) maps or plans made
under the authority of Government. The admissibility of the first class of docu-
ments is justified on the ground that the publication being accessible to the
whole community and open to the criticism of all, the probabilities are in favour
of any inaccuracy being challenged and exposed. These are similar to dictionaries
etc.. to which the court may refer under another provision.*

The admissibility of the second class of documents depends on the ground
that, being made and published under the authority of Government, they must
be taken 10 have been made by and to be the result of, the study or inquiries
ef competent persons: and further (in the case of surveys and the like}, they
contain or concern matters in which the public are interested.

4.25. It may be noted that under section 83,’ there is a statutory presump-
tion of the accuracy, authority and authenticity in favour of the maps or plans

1Dwijesh Chandra Roy v. Naresh Chandra Gupta, ALR,
& 5. 1२. Das, JJ).

Section 57, penultimate paragraph-

Charts are left out by section 83.

1945 Cal. 492, 494 (Biswas



281

purporated to be made under the authority of the Central Government or the
State Ciovernment, unless they are made far a particular cause.

14,26. We shall now deal with a few points on which an amendment may
be required. Section 36, in its first half, does not mention “charts”. We have
not becn able to understand why there should be a distinction in this respect
between maps, charts and plans. No doubt, one can make a distinctioin, for
other purposes, amongst the three: but the principle on which their relevance is
justified, under section 36, namely, that they are published and generally offered
for public sale (the first half) or that they are made under the authority of the
Government {ihe second halN, should apply equally whether the document is a
map or a chart or a plan. Dealing more particularly with “chart”, we may state
that 8 chart is of various kinds. Originally, this expression was used more fre-
quently in marine navigation, to denote navigational charts which were used for
guiding marines.

14,27. Such a chart was in issue in fz re S. 5. Drachenfels', a case relating
to a chart issued under the authority of the Government. The chart was of the
tiver Hooghly. and the court said that the notes thereon may be zeferred to as
“authoritative”. In this case, the note which was material relating to the
dangers 10 be avoided by vessels awaiting orders at the “Sandhcads”, between
the months of April and December, both inclusive.

14.28. The nautical chart, essential to marine navigation. informs the
mariner of the nature and form of the sea bottom, and gives the location of
channels, aids to navigation, reefs and shoals and sand bars. ft affords an
accutale graphical guide to hidden dangers and safe channels—knowledge which
is necessary for efficient and safe ship navigation. The nautical chart is usually
supplemented by official publications called coast pilots or by other types of
sailing directions which provide pertinent descriptive details that cannot be shown
conveniently on the chart itself.

14.29. Much more recent than the nautical chart is the aeronautical chart?
which is essential to air navigation. Whereas a nautical chart is a graphic
representation of an area consisting chiefly of water, the aeronautical chart, like
a map, most often represents an area that is predominantly land.

14.30. Marine charts mainly indicated under-water conditions, and were
similar to what are known as weather charts. Later usage, however, has given
a wide meaning to the expression “chart”, The expression now indicates mary
representations, for example, (a) aeronautical charts,’ (b) a record by curves etc.
of fluctuations in temperature etc. (one of the meanings referred to in some of
the dictionaries)’, and, in fact (2) any tabulated information’.

14.31. If the important requirement of publicity or authority, indicated by
the first, or second half of the section (whichever is applicable), and also the
further important requirement that the statement should have been made as to
matters usually represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans, are both
satisfied, we do not see any reason why, for the purposes of section 36, it

In re S. S. Drachenjels, (1900) LL.R. 27 Cal. 860, 867, 871 (Ameer Ali, J).
*Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 5, page 329.

“Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 5, page 329.

‘Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 5, page 329.

556९, for example, Concise Oxford English Dictionary.

*These are mere illustrations.

Maps, charts and
-plans ~- No need

to make a
tinction,

dis-


Recommendation
to amend Section
36 to cover charts
and plans.

Matters _usuaily
represented = —
Change —recom-
mended,

Introductory.

Scope of the sec-
tion,

Position in Eng-

Jand.

282

should meatier wheiher the document is a map or a chart or a plan—and, if it
is a ch shether jt is a marine navigation chart or aerial navigation chart or
a weather chart or other tabulated informet

|!)

14.32, We. therefore, recommend that in both the parts of section 36,
there should be an amendment so as to ensure that all these three clauses of
documents ere covered. This aspect will aiso require consideration under sec-
tioas 83 and 87, which deal with maps, ete?

14.33, An important condition is indicated by the words “as to matters
usually represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans”. This condition
app2ars to be applicable whether the docunients दिए under the first half of the
section, (७ schether it falls under the szcond half of वार section. Tn our view,
it is desirebie to brine this aspect out more clearly. by a splitting up of the
sevtion, and we recommend a sulteble amendment.

14.34, Then. there is 8 verbal change sled to bring out more clearly
the connection between the orenite words “statements” and the words “as to
matters cte.”. Phe principal obiec! in inserting the requirement expressed by “as
to matters usually represented”. etc. is to indicate that a statement made
gratuitously by the drafisman of the map etc. as to a matter which does not
nornvilly or ordinarily fall to be dealt with while preparing the map etc. in
question. shuld not be admitted by virtue of section 36. This should be brought

out.

VIE SECTION 37

14.38, Another class of public facts is dealt with in section 37, which is
concerned with the relevancy of statements as to facts of a public nature, con-
tained in certain Acts or notifications. It reads—

“27. When the court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any
fact of a public nature, any statement of it made in a recital contained in
any Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or in any Central Act,
Provincial Act, or 2 State Act or in a Government notification or a notifica-
tien by the Crown Representative appearing in the Official Gazette or in
any printed paper purporting to be the London Gazette or the Government
Gazetle of any Dominion, colony or possession of His Majesty is a relevant
fact.”

14.36, It may be stated, at the outset, that this section does not deal with
the proof of the Acts and orders referred to in the section. It deals with their
relevance for establishing a fact (of a public nature as mentioned in the section).

14.37, In England? statements contained in any public statute. speech from
the throne.* roval prociamation, p-rliamentary journal.’ government gazette,® or
state paper. are admissible, even against strangers. to prove facts of a public,
but not of a private, nature.

उप be considered under sections $3 and 87 also.
2Halsbury, Laws of England. (3rd 86), Vel. 15, page 367, para. 658.
मर, v. Francklin, (1731) 17 State Tr. 625, 636, 639.

Ma) R. v. Sutton, (1816) 4 M. & 5. 53
(b) R. v. De Berenger, (1814) M, & 5. 67.

Sa) A. 6. v, Bradlaugh, (1885) 14 QB.D. 667 (C.A).

tb) Forbes v. Samuel. (1913) 3 K.B. 706. 721.

Sa) R. ४. Hol, (1793) 5 Ter. Rep. 436;

tb) 4. G. v. Theakstone, (1820) 8 Price 89.

7E.G. an official despatch; see Thelluson v. Cosline. (1803) 4 Ep. 266



283

14,38, Such statements. however, are only prima facie evidence of the facts
R iclusive.

asserted unless it is enacted wnat they

© concerning the section. But
Tt may be pointed out that amongst
op, are: (i) “any act of Parliament
lative appear-

14.39. We have no points
a few changes are required tie Ue 5:
the Acts and notifications memioned im t
of the Uniied Kingdom.” (i) ne its
ing in the ONictai Gazeite ete
appearing मा]
Gasette or the Governmeni
His Muies'y’.

overmment notification
paper purporting to be the J.ondon
ny Dominion, colony er possession of

1 changes ihat have taken place in the
the United Kingdom Parliament should
th August, 1947,

14.40. In view of the cou
country, the provision rekag io
be confined to Acis- passed before

14.41, As regards netiticalions issued by the Crown Representative, il
appears desirable io counting it similariy to notifications issued before that date.

appearing in the London
Dominion, colony or possession of

14.42, As regards Goverameut soiificaté
Gazette o7 in the Government Gazcue of ay
His Majesiy also, the provision should be si:ilariy confined.

14.43. 10 the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 37

should be revised as tuiloxs:

REVISED SECILON 37

7. (1). When the court nas to form an opinion, as io the existence
of any fact of a public nature, any statemeni of it made in a recital con-

tained—
(a} in any Cenuai Aci, Provincial Act, or a State Aci, or

(9) in a Government aolificution appearing ia the Official Gazette, or
{c) as respeciy the periud bejvre the i3th day oj August, 1947—

@ > in any Aci ul Parliament of the United Kingdom, or

(i) in a Governnieni notificaliou appearing in any printed paper pur-
porting to be ihe London Gazette or the Gevsrament Gazetie of any
Dominion, culony cr possesrion of His Majesty, or

Gi) in a notilicaioa by Ue Crown Representative appearing in the
all Gazet 2, is a relevant fact.”
1X. SECTION 38
14.44. Vohile ‘ection 37 was concerned with published Jegisfation and

Government: acts. scclivg 38 is concerned with the relevancy of statements as lo
“a law”, any Jaw, -contained in certain officially published law-books.
Under the section, when the Court has to form an opinion as to “a law of any
country”, any siatement of such kw contained in a book purporting to be
prinied or published under the authority of the Government of such country and
jo contain any such law, and any report of a ruling of the courts of such
country i a book purporting to be a renort of such rulings, is relevant.

Wa) Riv. Greene, USI 6 AG RE
(0) Rev. Franchlin 1b 17
2This is not a draft.

Acts and Noti-
fications of the
छू, ete, Amend-
ment needed.

Change required
in view of con-
stitutional _posi-
tion.

Recommendation,

Introductory.


Amendment

need-

ed as to Indian

law.

Indian law. not a

matter of
dence.

evi-

Duty of judge ia
deciding questions

of the law.

Judge and Jury,

Judicial evidence
not including

questions of

Jaw.

284

£4.45. So far as laws of foreign countries aré concerned, the section needs
no comments. But, so far as Indian law is concerned, the section, in our opinion,
is not appropriate. We shall presently set out our reasons for this comment.

“14.46. The first observation which we would like to make is, that a question
of Indian law is not a matter of evidence, and therefore the terminology of
“relevant fact” is not appropriate for such questions. It is well established that
evidence cannot be given of the general law, although evidence can be given of
customs which derogate from the general law. Even if ig be assumed, for the
sake of argument, that what has been stated officially on a matter of law can
be used for persuading the court, it is obvious that official expression of views on
a matter of Indian jaw can have no binding effect.

14.47, Foreign law is a question of fact, and therefore, a matter for
evidence. We are not, at the moment, concerned with the mechanics of proof
of foreign law, nor with the question as to the materials to be used for proof of
foreign law.’ But it cannot be denied that a question of Indian faw is a question
to be decided by the judge, “Jura novit curia” (The Judge knows the law).

14.48. For deciding questions of Indian law, the Judge must refer to the
materials thal are recognised in the Indian legal system as the source of law.
These materials—except in the case of custom—cannot be the subject-matter of
proof. A book published under official authority is not, according 10 the Indian
jegal sysiem, a source of law.

14.49. A question of law is, thus, for the judge and is not subject to
evidence. This is precisely the reasoning on which juries in England, which
are final judges of fact, are not empowered to determine questions of law. The
judge sums up the evidence, spells out the main issues and explains the relevant
rules of law which the jury is to apply. In fact, in India, the Code of Criminal
Procedure* made express provision for such a demarcation of the functions of
the judge and the jury, the former being exclusively vested with jurisdiction to
determine questions of law.

14.50, Generally speaking, matters of law are determinable by the Judge,
and matters of fact by the jury. According to Phipson,' in English Courts,
although the existence of English law is a question of law to be determined by
authorities and argument, the existence of Scots. colonial or foreign law is
treated as a question of fact, to be determined by evidence.’

14.51. In this connection, we may also refer to the analysis of “judicial
as given by Best. He says’ --

evidenc
~ ‘judicial evidence’ may be defined as the evidence received by courts

of justice in proof or dis-proof of facts, the existence of which comes in
question before them. By fact, here, must be understood the res gestae

of some suit, or other matters, to which when ascertained, the law is to be
applied: for, although, in logical accuracy, the existence or non-existence of

law is 4 question of fact, it is rarely spoken of as such, either by jurists

‘See Nussbaum, “The Problem of Proving Poreign Law” 50 Yale Law Journal,
“Section 292, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (repealed).

“Mechanical Inventions v. Austin, (1935) A.C. 346.

‘Phipson, Evidence (1963), paragraph 29.

3See also Hartman v. Kong, 50 Times Law Reports 114.

“Best, principies of Evidence (1922), page 22, para. 33



285

or practitioners. By ‘law’ here, we mean the general law of each country,
which its tribunals are bound to know without proof; for they are not bound,
at least in general, to take judicial cognisance of local customs, or the laws
of foreign nations,—the existence of both of which must be proved as
facts.”

Best has pointed out that courts are bound to know the ‘general law’ without

proof.

14,52. Secondly, as was pointed out in Aziz Banu’s case? by Sulaiman J.—
whose observations were approved in a later case’ by the Privy Council,—it is
the duty of the courts themselves to find the law of the land and apply it, and
not to depend on the opinion of the witnesses, however reliable they may be.
Foreign law, on the other hand, is a question of fact, with which the courts in
India are not supposed to be conversant.

14,53. We may also point out, in this context,‘ that under section 57(1), a
court is bound to take judicial notice of all laws in force in the territory of
India’. The Judge can on matters of which he can take judicial notice; consult
certain materials. But an Indian law cannot be the subject-matter of “evidence”.
Expert evidence may be given’ of foreign law, but not of Indian law.

14.54, We may add that for some time, there was a practice of consulting
pundits in matters relating to Hindu law. But this practice was discontinued
long ago, and has never been revived. In fact, when a particular subordinate
court resorted to any such practice, the higher courts came down upon it, and
this was for the reason that Hindu law, being the law of the country, could
not be a matter of evidence or of expert opinion.

44.85. In the Shahid Ganj case,’ Sit George Rankin, sitting in the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council, obseryed—

“But it would not be tolerable that a Hindu or a Muslim in a British
Indian Court should be put to the expense of proving by expert witnesses
the legal principles applicable to his case and it would introduce great con-
fusion into the practice of the Courts if decisions upon Hindu or Muslim
Jaw were to depend on the evidence given in a particular case, the credibility
of the expert witnesses and so forth.”

14.56. Thirdly, coming to the latter half of the section, we may slate that so
far as the rulings of Indian Courts are concerned, that, again, is a matter not
of evidence. Jt is a question of authority. The Indian Law Reports Act’,
section 3, provides that no court shall be bound to hear cited, or shall receive
or treat as an authority binding on it, the report of any case decided by any High
Court for any State, other than a report published under the authority of any
State Government. We are not, in the present context, concerned with mnon-
official reports. But the use of official Indian law Reports is impliedly dealt
with by this provision in the Indian Law Reports Act,—if a provision were at all
needed on the subject.

‘Emphasis added.

24ziz Banu v. Mahomed Ibrahim Hussaia. (1925) LL.R. 47 Ajl. 823, 835 (Sulaiman,
I).

‘Shahid Ganj case, infra.

‘See S.P.P. ९, Thipayya, ALR. 1949 Mad. 459, 460 (Subba Rao, J.)

अब) Mazhar Ali, ALR. 1965 Pat. 489, 490 para. 3.

‘Section 45.

Shahid Garj v. S.G.P. Committee, ALR. 1940 P.C. 116, 120.

®Section 3, Indian Law Reports Act, 1875 (18 of 1875).

Duty of the
Court to decide
questions of law.

Judicial notice to

be taken of

Indian law.

Rulings of Indian
Courts,


Calcutta case.

Recommendation.

286

14.57. The view taken above may be regarded as obvious, but it appears
that the proper scope of the scu:iom requires to be clarified. In a Calcutta case,!
for example, the question arose whether a newspaper report ef a judgment of
the Supreme Court could be relied upon for deciding a poimi of law. The
High Court held that the report would not be referent grader section 38,
because the newspaper could not be regarded as book published under the
authority of Government”. However, the High Court relied on it on the
basis of a precedent, in which a report in the “Statesman” has been relied
upon in an earlier cass.

14.58. Tt should be pointed out, that in the Calculta case cited ebove, the
ion 38 is appropriate in relation to Indian 149, was not
is a reterence to section 38 in the judgment.

question wh

exunit But the

14.49, In the ciscumsiances. u clear statement of the scope of the section
is needed, and it is desirable that the section is narrowed down, so as to exclude
ladian law irom its application, To achieve this object, we recommend that in
section 38, after the words “any country”, the words “other than India” should
be added.

‘State v.

AER. 1969 Cal 451, 457,



CuapTer 15
HOW MUCH OF 4 STATEMENT TO BE PROVED
SECTION 39

15.1. Section 39 reads —

“When any siatement of which evidence is givea forms part of a longer
statement. or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is con-
tained in a docunieat which forms part of a book, or of a connected series

of ietlers or paper. evidence shall be given of so much and no mere of
the statement, conversation, document, book, or series of letters or papers
as the Court considers necessary in that particular case to the full under-
standing of the nature and cflect of the statement, and of the circumstances
under which it was made.~

15,2, The principle on which this section is based is that, it would nat be
just to take a part of a conversation, letters, etc. as evidence against a parly.
without giving to the party at the same time the benefit of the entire residue
of what he said or wrote on the same occasion.’

15,3, It can also be stated that since the Court expect a witness making a
statement not only to slate the truth but the whole truth, some such principle
is implicit in the obligation undertaken by the witness.

15.4. Distitici matiers, of course, cannot be so introduced,
relevant to the case as a whole, if they are not connected with the part given in
evidence.

even though

15.5. The priocipic in English law is that when an admission is tendered
against a party. he is entitled to have proved, as a part of his adversary's cuse,
so much of the whole statement, document or correspondence coniaining or
referred to in the admission, and, this is so although such other parts may be
favourable ic himself:* but the jury may attach different degrees of credit to the
different paris In particular. ia relation to interrogatories, the rule is that any
party may, al the iial of a cause, matter or issuc, use in evidence any one or
more of ihe answers ता any part of an answer of the opposite parly to intcrro-
gatorics, without putting in the others or the whole of such answers; provided,
always, thai, in such a case. the Judge may look at the whole of the answers,
and if he siil be of opinion that any others of them are so connected with
those put in, that the last-mentioncd answers ought not to be used without them,
lhe may direct them to be put in.'

18,6, The reason for the admission of evidence explaining the part of the
statement was luciily explaiied in the American case of Com vy. Keyes. in
these words

The Queen's case, 11820) 2 7: & B 297 (per Abbot, C. 13.

a) Prince v. Santo, TA & E. 627;

{b} Davies v. Morgan, 11831) ॥ Cr, & J. 587.

a) Thomson v. Austen, 1823) 2 Dowe & Ry. 35%, 361.

(0) कर. ४. Gray, (1911) 6 Cr. App. Rep. 242

(0) Burnell v. BoP... (1955) 3 Alb ER. 822,

‘Lyell ५. Kennedy, (1883) 27 Ch, 19. 1, 15, 29.

Com. v. Keyes, 1] Gray 323,325 के. (Merrick, 1), Wigmore’s Evidence 1905 Ed.,
section 2113. page 2861. ciled in Field.

287

Introductory.

Principle.

English law.

Reasons as ex-
plained in Ameri-
can case.


288

“Every remark or observation made upon those topics is to be received
as competent evidence, because they may essentially modify the character
and purport’ of the whole conversation, and vitally affect what might other-
wise appear to be explicitly asserted or denied.”

Limitation. 15.64. Of course, the rule has limitations. As has been observed in another
American case,’—

©Ten subjects may be talked about in one conversation. When one

of the ten is the subject of litigation, it is not competent to put in evidence

the conversation about the other nine.

15.7, Again, as Merrick, J in Com v. Keyes, observed :*

“There is an important limitation to the rule in giving evidence of
conversations or of oral statements and declarations. The proof in such case
is to be confined to what was said upon or concerning those matters which
are made subjects of enquiry or investigation. Every remark or observation
made upon those topics to be received as competent evidence, because they
may essentially modify the character and purport of the whole conversation,
and vitally affect what might otherwise appear to be explicitly asserted or
denied. But, if, during the same interview between the witnesses and the
party, other subjects of conversation or discussion are introduced, remote
and distinct from that which is the object of enquiry or investigation, it is
obvious that whatever may be said concerning them can have no tendency
to illustrate, vary or explain it. Everything pertaining to these additional
and extraneous matters should therefore be rejected as irrelevant and
useless.”

Wigmore’s view 15.8. According to Wigmore,‘ three general corollaries may be deduced from
abet , 90 the principle referred to above—
हु (i) No utterance irrelevant to the issue is receivable.
(ii) No more of the remainder of the utterance than concerns the same
subject and is explanatory of the first part, is receivable.

(1) The remainder thus received merely aids in the construction of the
utterance, as a whole, and is not in itself testimony.

Mode of proof 15.9. The aspect of relevance of the utterance is discussed in the American

‘of oral conversa- है ict ‘, Cowen, J. observed—
fons, statements S4S° of Garay v. Nicholson’, where Cowen, J. 0

and declarations, “The rule about the whole being admissible must obviously mean that
the additionat conversation called for should be relevant to the matter in
issue. All evidence is reccived under the qualification (mentioned above),
and, if not so restrained, might operate as a waste of time; other subjects
might be introduced having no connection with the subject-matter of the

suit.”

Scope for  im- 15.10, While the principle has been adequately reflected in section 39, the
Provement. section could be improved in one respect, namely, by an express provision spelling

out the rights of the opposite party.

‘Emphasis supplied.

tAntherton v. Defreeze, 129 Mich. 364; 88 N.W. 886, Wigmore’s Evidence, 1905
Ed.. section 2113, page 2860, cited in Field. :

3Com. v. Keyes, 11 Gray 323, 325 (Merrick, J.); Wigmore’s Evidence, 1905 80., sec-

tion 2113, page 2861, cited in Field.
‘See Wigmore’s Evidence, 1905 Ed., Section 2113. page 2860, cited in Field.
’Garay V Nicholson 24 Wend 350, 351 (Cowen. 33; Wigmore’s Evidence. 1905 Ed.
Section 2113, page 2860, cited in Field.


289

15.11. It may be mentioned in this connection that in some American Statutory,

States, there are interesting statutory provisions which deal with the procedure
somewhat elaborately. For example, the provision on the subject in California
says
“When part of an act, declaration, conversation or writing is given in
evidence by one party, the whole on the same subject may be enquired into
by the cther; thus, when a letter is read, the answer may be given, and when
a detached act, declaration, conversation, or writing is given in evidence.
any other act, declaration, conversation or writing which is necessary to
make it understood may also be given in evidence.”

Then, the Georgia Code’ provides—

“Where cither parly introduces part of a document or a record, the
opposite parly may read se much of the balance as is relevant.” “When an
admission is given in evidence, it is the right of the other party to have the
whole admission and all the conversation connected therewith.”

The Louisiana Code provides that the opponent using a party's confessions
“must noi divide them; they must be taken entire.”

According to the Montana law, -

“When part of an act, declaration, conversation or writing is given in
evidence by one party, the whole on the same subject may be enquired into
by the other: thus, when a letter is read, afl other letters on the same
subject between the saine parties may be given.”

The need for the proposed provision could be discussed from several points
of view.

15.12. In the first place, the fact that no difficulty has been found in practice
is not conclusive, because the suggestion for amendmen: is not made for meeting
any difficulty pointed out in any case law, but because of the obscurity of the
position as regards the right of the adverse party. This obscurity is primarily due
to the fact thai in the present section, there is no mention of the adverse party.

15.13. Secondly, the proposed amendment is essential ia the interest, of
justice, because, if one party uses a statement without referring to the other
portions which explain or qualify it, justice requires that the opposite party
should have a right to insist that the remainder, in so far as it is necessary for
the purpose mentioned above (elucidating the statement already used), should be

given in evidence.

15.14. Thirdly, it is not as if the present section gives a discretion to the
court which the proposed section takes away. The word “discretion” in this
context is not quile appropriate. When the present section provides in effect
that the remainder of the statement shali be given in evidence, the use of the
words “the court considers necessary” does not indicate an unfettered discretion.
If it is a case of unfettered discretion, that is all the more reason, why discretion

“tal, Code of Civil Procedure (18722, Section 1854; Wigmore’s Evidence, 1905 Ed
Section 2113, page 2859, cited in Field
°Georgia Code, (1895), Section 5241; Wigmose’s Evidence, 1905 Ed., Section 2113,

page 2859, cited in Field.
sGeorgia Code, (1895), Section S196; Wigmore’s Evidence, 1905 Ed., Section 2113.

page 2859, cited in Field.
‘Louisiana Code Pr.. (1894), Section 356; Wigmore’s Evidence 1905 Ed. Section 2113,

page 2859. cited in Field.
5Montana CPC. (1895), Section 3130; Wigmore’s Evidence. 1905 Ed., Section 2113.

page 2859, cited in Field.

sions
US.A.

Need.

Obscurit

in

ty.

Essential

interest
tice,

Point
cretion.

as

provi-
the

in the
of 1७8

to dis-


Police diaries
used for refresh-
ing memory.

290

should not be continued. However, the proper view is that the power of the
court under the present section is to decide not as a matter of interpretation
—how much of the remainder of the statement is necessary for understanding

what is admitted.

15.15, Fourthly. we may examine the special situation of police diaries.
Under the Code of Criminal Procedure’ {reference will be made to the old Code
singe most of the reported decisions relate to the old Code), a special diary is, in
general, privileged, and it tay be used by the court nut as evidence in the case.
bur to aid the court in the inquiry of trial. Neither the accused nor his agent
is entitled to call for such diaries or to see them. But, if the police diary is
used by the court to contradict the witness or if the police officer uses it for
refreshing his memory. then the provisions of certain ‘sections of the Indian
Evidence Act apply. Those sections are {a} section 161, which provides that
such writing must be produced and shown to the adverse party who may cross-
examine the witness on it, and (9) section 145, which provides that a witness
may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in writing or
reduced into writing without such writing being shown to him or being proved;
but if it is intended to contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before
the writing can be proved, be called to those parts which are to be used for the
purpose of contradicting him.

15.16. Thus, police diaries cannot be used for contradicting. (for example), a
defence witness, and it is precisely because they were sought to be so used that
the Privy Council had to criticise the lower courts in 1917, This judgment of
the Privy Council approves the proposition jaid down in an Allahabad Case‘,
to the cffect that police diaries cannot be used as evidence (except to the extent
indicated in section 172, Cr. P.C).

15.17, What is to happen if the police otlicer does use the police diary to
refresh his memory? Section 172, Criminal Procedure Code, provides that the

provisions of the Evidence Act shall apply in such a case. The provisions of
the Evidence Act as to refreshing memory are to be found in sections 159 to

161.

15.18. For our purpose, the material section is 161. which is quoted as

follows :- -

“lél. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory-—
Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding
sections must be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it;
such party may, if he pleases, cross-cxamine the witness thereupon.”

15.49. It is obvious that neither section 172, Code of Criminal Procedure.
nor section 161 of the Evidence Act. contemplates that the court should delegate
to the counsel for the accused the power to decide how much of the diary shall
be seen or used by the defence‘. The defence is entitled to inspect only that
portion of the diary from which the witness refreshed his memory, and not the
entire diary. This w2s proposition laid down in an Allahabad case*

‘Section 172, Code of Criminal Procedure. 1898.

“Dar Singh v. Emperor, A.LR. 1917 PC. 25.

2Queen Empress v. Manna, (1897) 1.1... 19 All, 390 (६.8.).
‘Queen Empress v. Mannu, (1897) LI..R. 19 All. 396, 393, 394.

SA.LR. 1933 Lahore 498, 500.


291

15.20. With these propositions one can hardly have any reason to disagree.
Tt would seem, however. that in discussing the law on the subject, Edge C.J. in
the Allahabad High Court. spoke of the “discretion” of the court. Now, with
respect, the use of the expression “discretion”, in this context, is not intelligible.
None of the sections in the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Evidence Act
gives an unfettered discretion. The combined efiect of section 172, Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898 and section 161 Evidence Act is. that the accused
person is entitled to see the “writing”. Whatever that expression may mean,
so much of the special diary vs is necessary to the full understanding of the
portion used, should certainiy be allowed to be seen. These sections, in any
case, do not contemplate any discretion in the unfettered sense.

15.21. On the question of discretion. it may be pointed out that section 161
of the Evidence Act is couched in mandatory terms. The section provides that
the writing referred to “imust be produced and shown to the adverse party, if he
required it: such party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.”
Thus, the adverse party has the right to inspect the document. The discretion
is not of the court but of the party. as is indicated by the words “if he requires it”.

15.22. In fact, literally speaking. section 39 of the Evidence Act is not
applicable to documents used to refresh the memory, because the document
used for refreshing memory is not “evidence”. at least in so far as the cross-
examination in respect of the portions referred to by the witness is concerned.

15.23. The position in England on this point is as follows :—
(a) The opponent may inspect the document in order to check it, without
making it evidence.

{b) Moreover, he may cross-examine upon it without making it evidence,
provided his cross-examination goes no further than the parts which
are used for refreshing the memory of the witness’.

{c) But, if he cross-examines on other parts, he makes them part of tis
evidence, the docment becomes an exhibit which may be inspected
by the jury’, and any statement in the document is admissible as
evidence of any fact of which direct oral evidence by the witness
would be admissible. As to civil cases, this rule is confirmed by Civil
Fvidence Act, 1968. section 3(2).

15.24. It should be pointed out that the document used by a witness for
refreshing his memory is not evidence in the strict sense, even in the scheme
of the Evidence Act. Thus. for example, where a medical witness refreshes his
memory by the postmortem examination report, the substantive evidence is the
oral testimony given by him before the court on oath ard in giving such evidence,
he refers to the report which he had made*.

15.25. If there is any difficulty as regards the use of police diaries by the
defence consequential on the use by the prosecution for refreshing the memory
of the police, the difficulty arises not from section 39 (or its proposed amendment),
but from section 161.

1Gregory v. Tavernor (1853) 6 C. & P. 230-281.

'Senat v. Senat, (1965) Probate 172 {1965} 2 All, E.R. 505, 51.

*Wareham v. Routledge, (1805) 5 Esp. 235.

“State v. Jawahar Singh, (1971) Criminal Law Journal 1656, 1661 (Rajasthan), follow-
ing ALR. 1938 Mad. 336.

No discretion

under
161.

Document
evidence,

section

net


Practical utility.

Comment on the
Allahabad case,

292

15.26. Fifthly, it may be stated that the practical utility of the proposed
provision lies in this. that it will make it clear that if the party relying on a
statement does not use the whole thereof (1.6. what is relevant for explaining
what js ured), the adverse party is not left at its mercy.

15.27, We would with great respect to the Allahabad High Court Full Bench
decision, offer the following comments on that judgment 5

(i) The discussion in the judgment about section 39 of the Evidence Act
was obiter. The principal question at issue in the case was", whether the accused
was entitled to copies of statements recorded by the police, which were recorded
in the police diary, or whether the fact that the statements happened to be
recorded in the police diaries, made them confidential. The question at issue
was not whether a police officer could refresh his memory (or, if he did so,
what are the legal consequences). The question at issue was as to production
of statements recorded under section 161, Code of Criminal Procedure, but
contained in the police diary. Refreshing the memory was not a matter in
issue.

(ii) Edge C.J. in the majority judgment. when discussing section 39,
observed'—-

“From section 39 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, may be inferred
how much—how much only—of the police diary may be seen by the accused,
or his agent when the diary is used to refresh the memory by the officer
who made 1......... ००० ०ब०>न्‍्न

He said that the accused is entitled to see only the particular entry and so much
of the said diary as is, in the opinion, of the court, necessary in that particular
matter to the understanding of the matter so used and no more. He added,
“in such cases, the court must be careful to see that the discretion entrusted to
it in deciding what may or may not be seen by the accused or his agent is not
abused.” Unfortunately, no detailed reasons were given by way of analysing the
phraseology of section 39, nor was there any discussion of the English law as
10 the extent of inspection and cross-examination on the basis of a document
used to refresh memory‘

(iii) In particular. the view taken as to whether a document is “admitted
in evidence” merely because it is used for refreshing memory, was not referred
to, There are specific English rulings’ holding that the document thereby does
not become evidence.

(iv) It would also appear that the full implications of section 161 of the
Evidence Act, were also not discussed in the judgment. Section 161 of the Evi-
dence Act is not even mentioned in that part of the judgment where section 39
is discussed.

(v) The reasons for applying section 39 of the Evidence Act are not set out
in detail.

(vi) It may be noted that in holding that section 39 could be taken as a
basis of inference for construing section 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
Edge C.J. unfortunately did not consider the aspect, namely, that section 162

1Queen Empress v. Mannu, (1897) LR. 19 All. 390, 405 (F.B).

"The main question in issue is so described in the dissenting judgments of Aikman J.
at page 416 and Bannerji J. at page 424 in the ILLR.

SJudgment, page 405.

‘In England, whole document is open to inspection,

*Burgess, (1872) 20 W.R. 20 (Eng,).


293

of the Criminal Procedure Code (even as it stood then,—that is in the 1882 Code)
expressly prohibited statements to the police from being “used as evidence
against the accused”, subject to section 27 of the Evidence Act. Section 172,
second paragraph, did not make any change in so far as statements under section
162 were concerned. Use of the statements in favour of the accused was, of
course, not prohibited by section 162, but, then, section 172 second paragraph,
provided then (as it provides now) that the police diaries may not be used as
“evidence in the case”. This aspect could at least have been considered before
regarding section 39 as applicable.

(vii) Unfortunately, it was also not noticed that in England, when a docu-
ment is used to refresh the memory, the whole was allowed to be seen by the
opposite party. No doubt, the English law did not contain a provision prohi-
biting the use of police diaries. But, on this point, once the police officer uses
the diary to refresh his memory. the law ia India would not be different, because
all that is to be construed is section 161 of the Evidence Act, the construction
whereof cannot be controlled by section 172, Criminal Procedure Code. Once
the legislature has, in section 172, Cr. P.C., referred us to section 161 of the
Evidence Act, it is section 162, -and only that section—that will govern the
right of the opposite party te see and use the document. Such limitations as
flow as regards the area of inspection and cross-examination under section 161,
Evidence Act would flow from that section only, and not from section 172 of
the Code.

It is in this respect that ‘the use of the word “discretion” in the Allahabad
case was, at least, avoidable, because section 161 of the Evidence Act gives no
discretion to the court. It gives a right to the party, which he may exercise if
he chooses. It is the party’s discretion. This point was missed—perhaps because
section 161 was not analysed in the judgment.

(viii) The reasons for the view that the court has a “discretion”, are not given
in brief or in detail. This may be because this part of the judgment is abiter.

(ix) Incidentally, it may be noted that in so far as the judgment holds that
the statements recorded under section 161 become priviledged. if they happen
to be recorded in the police diaries, it suffers from a weakness. The majority
judgment faiis 6 discuss a series of Calcutta cases‘—all to the contrary and
cited before it. It says that it prefers an earlier Calcutta case’. But that case
merely decided that a witness cannot be compelled to refresh his memory.

On this point. the minority view of P. C. Banerji, J. that such a statement
does not legitimately form part of the diary and is not entitled to privilege under
section 172, agrees with the Calcutta view’.

In one of the Calcutia cases’, Trevelyan J., in arguendo observed

“I do not know of anything more disastrous to the administration of
criminal jaw than that the accused should be debarred from having access
to information to which he has a right, and to which he is not absolutely
debarred from having access, by some express provision of the Legislature.”

The actual decision was also the effect that the accused was not debarred.

WSheru Sha, VLR. 20 Cal. 642 (reviews cases).
*Emp. v. Kali Churun, LLR. 8 Cal. 154.
3For legislative developments, see—
fa) ALR. 1928 Pat. 215.
(0) ALR. 1935 Rang. 370.
(०) LL.R. 33 Cal. 1023.
(d) ALR. 1935 Sind. 145.
‘Sheru Sha, (1893) TLR. 20 Cal. 642, 644, (Trevelyan and Rampini, 3J.).



Recommendation.

294

15.28. Having considered all aspects of the matter, we recommend that
section 39 should be revised as under:

REVISED SECTION 39
(1) When any statement of which evidence is given-

(a) forms part of a longer statement or of a conversation or of an
isulated document, or

{b) is contained in a document which forms part of a book or of a con-
nected series of letters or papers,

then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the party giving evidence of the
statement shal! give in evidence so much, and no more, of the statement, conver-
sation document, book or series of leliers or papers as is necessary in that
particular case (5 the full understanding of the nature and cffect of the statement
and of the circumstances under which it was made.

(2) Where such party has failed to give in evidence any part of the State-
meat, conversation, document, book or series of letters or papers which is neces-
sary as aforesaid, the other party may give that part in evidence.


CHAPTER 16
JUDGEMENTS—SECTION 40

16.1, We shall now proceed to consider the provisions relaling to judgments.
These ate contained in sections 40 to 44.

16.2. The basic principles underlying these sections are as follows :

(1) It is a matter of public policy that subject to statutory rights of appeal
and the like, the judgments of a competent court of law, acting within the
scope of its jurisdiction, should be final and conclusive as between the parties
concerned?

(2) A judgment, besides being conclusive, may bar fresh procecdings on the
same matter’,

(3) While the first proposition is concerned with the parties, certain types of
judgments which pronounce upon status are conclusive agains! all perso:
Briefly, these are judgments in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty
or insolvency jurisdiction.

(4) Other judgments, orders and decrees selating to matters of public nature
are admissible, but they are not conclusive proof of what they state’.

(5) In other cases, the judgments, orders and decrees are inadmissible’,
except where the existence of such judgment, order or decrees is a fact in issue
or is relevant under some other specific provision of the Evidence 0०४,

As regards the “other provisions” of the Act, the provision most often
discussed in this context is section 13 of the Evidence Act, but that is aiso
confined to “transactions” showing the exercise of a right and the like.

(6) Certain vitiating factors can, however, be proved to destroy the effect
of judgments which are conclusive or relevant’.

16.3, We shall now discuss the individual sections in this group. Under
section 40—

“The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents
any Court from taking cognisance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant
fact when the question is whether such Court ought to take cognisance of
such suit, or to hold such trial.”

16.4. The section has a two-fold application. In civil cases, it becomes

applicable usually when a specific statutory provision precludes the Court from 40.

trying a suit. This could be for a variety of reasons, ¢.g.—res judicata, and
numerous procedural provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure relatable to
previous judgments. In criminal cases, the pleas of previous conviction, previous

ection 11, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
"Section 40, Evidence Act.

Section 41, Evidence Act.

‘Section 42, Evidence Act.

Section 43, Evidence Act, earlier half.
‘Section 43, Evidence Act, later half.
Section 44, Evidence Act,

295
20-131 LAD/ND/77

Introductory

Basic principles

Section 40,

Two-fold applica-

tion

of

section


fssue estoppel in
criminal cases.

Section 40 —
“holding a trial”.
Trial of issues.

accuummendation.

296

acquitial, and other pleas in bar, contained in th Code of Criminal Procedure or
Special Acts, may bring the section into play.

16.5. It may be noted that even in criminal cases there may be judgments
which bar the trial not of the whole case, but of a particular issue. known as
issue estoppel.

16.6. The principle of the section does not need further comments, and we
shall now proceed to deal with a point of detail. While providing that the
existence of any judgment. order or decree, which, by law. prevents any court
from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial is a relevant fact when the
question is whether such court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold
such trial, section 40 does not, in terms, deal with the case where a subsequent
court, though not precluded from trying a suit, is precluded from trying @
particular issue. But, obviously, the section should be construed widely, so as
to cover such cases also. The section has to be read along with the provisions
relating to res judicata, as embodied in the Code of Civil Procedure.’ and other
provisions where relevant. That Code bars the trial. not only of suits, but also
of issues which have been previously decided between the same parties. We have
also referred above to “issue stoppel” in criminal cases.?

16.7 to 16.11. In view of what is stated above, it appears desirable to make
the language of section 40 clear on this point, by providing that “suit” and “trial”
in the section include part of a trial or part of a suit. In Gujju Lel v Fateh Lal},
arth C.J. gave an extended meaning to the words “holding a trial”, and made
these observations: “But 1 cannot doubt that it was intended to include all
judgments which by law operate to prevent a court. whether civi) or criminal
from taking cognizance of suit or trying any particular issue. The words
“holding a trial” are amply large to admit of this construction At
the same time, he criticised the language of the section in these words: “It is
true, that section 40 might have been clearly worded*. It has, in fact, much the
same defect as section 2 of Act VIIT of 1859, which was pointed out by the
Privy Council in the case of Soorjo Monee v. Saddanund’.

16.12. In view of this judicial criticism of the language of the section it is
desirable that the section should be widened by suitable amendment on the above
point. Accordingly, we recommend that section 40 should be suitably revised.
The following is a rough redraft.

REVISED SECTION 40
“The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents
any Court from taking cognizance of a suit or issue or holding a trial or
determining a question, is a relevant fact when the question is whether such
Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or isswe, or to bold such ttiat or
determine such question, as the case may be.”

SECTION 41
I. INTRODUCTORY
16.13. Section 41 reads—

“A final judgment, order ता decree of a competent Court. in the exer-
cise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which

Section 11, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
25६९ Discussion as to “issue estoppel” supra.

°Gujju Lal पर. Fateh Lat, (1890) 1L.R. 6 Calcutta 171, 190.
‘Emphasis added.

"Soorio Monee v. Saddanund, 12 B.L.R. 304 (P.C.).


297

confers upon or takes away from any person aay legai character, or which
declares any person to be entitled to any such character, or to be entitled
to any specific thing, not as against any specified person but absolutely,
is relevant when the existence of any such legal character, or the title of
any such person to any such thing, is relevant.

16.14. Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof—

that any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when
such judgment, order or decree came into operation.

that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be
entitled, accrued to that person at the time when such judgment, order or
decree declares it to have accrued 10 that person;

that any Segal character which it takes away from any such person
ceased at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declared that
व had cezsed or should cease;

and that anything to which jt declares any person to be so entitled was
the property of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or
decree declares that it had been or should be property.”

16.15, The topic to which this section relates is dealt with under the head
of “judgments in rem” in many text books and commentaries, but that expression,
which is even otherwise not very appropriate, has been deliberaicly avoided by
the legislature.

16.16, In an early Madras case,’ Holloway J., and in a Calcutta case,’ Barnes
C.h, elaborately reviewed the law regarding judgments in rem and how far they
were admissible in evidence. Peacock, C.J. observed-~

“\... the effect of a decree in a suit for a divorce, vincwlo matrimoni
is to cause the relationship of husband and wife to cease. It is conclusive
upon afl persons that the parties have been divorced, and that the parties are
no longer husband and wife; but it is not conclusive or even prima facie
evidence against strangers that the cause for which the decree was pro-
nounced existed. for instance, if a decree between A arid B were granted
upon the ground of adultery of B with C, it would be conclusive as to the
divorce, but it would not be even prima facie evidence against C that he was
guilty of adultery with B, unless he were a party to the suit.”

16.17. The Calcutta case’ was followed with approval in a Madras case.‘
Stone f., as he then was, observed:

“Though it be necessary as a step to making a declaration which will
operate in rem to find a fact, that finding will not bind third parties in subse-
quent proceedings,”

“This statement bas my respectful concurrence. Applying the princi-
ple siated therein, tt follows that the order of adjudication of a debtor as
insolvent operates in rem, but the finding on which it is based is not binding
on third parties in subsequent proceedings even though that finding was
necessary and formed the basis of the order.”

'Yarakalamma Nagamma v. A. Naromma, (1864-65) 2 M.HLCR. 276.

*Kanyalal v. Radha Churn, (1867) 7 W.R. 338. 344 Beng, L.R. Sup, Vol. 662 (F.B)
“Kanyya Lal v. Radha Churn, (1867) 7 W.R, 338, Beng. L.R. Supp. Vol. 662 (F.B).
“In re an Advocate, A.LR. 1931 Mad, 441.

Expression “judg-
ment” in rem
why not used.