LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTH REPORT

ON
PARTNERSHIP ACT, 1932

1957


CONTENTS
Paragraphs
Part I—General
1—2 History of the Legislation . . . . . .
3 Scope of the proposed revision. . : . .
4--9 Whether a firm should be recognised as a legal entity.

10—11 Whether partnership agreements should be required to be
in writing . - .

12—15 Whether firms should be compulsorily registered . .
16 Whether there should be limited liability parmerships .

Part II—Sections
17—£9 Examination of the provisions of the Act, indicating the

Changes proposed. soe . . .
APPENDIX

Propogals shown in the form of draft amendments to the

existing Act . oe

Note By Dr. N.C. SeN Gueta . es

1—1M of Law/67

68

18-23
24-27


CHAIRMAN,

LAW COMMISSION,
BOMBAY,

July 13, 195%

Shri A. K Sen,
Minister of Law,
New Delhi.

My Dear MINISTER,

I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Seventh Report
of the Commission on the Partnership Act.

2. At the first meeting of the Law Commission held on the 17th
September, 1955, the Commission decided to take up the revision of
the Parinership Act and entrusted the task to a sub-committee
consisting of Shri G. $. Pathak and Shri 0. N. Joshi. The consideration
of the subject was initiated by Shri Joshi who in consultation with
Shri Pathak prepared a draft report which was circulated to all
members of the Commission and their views invited thereon, The
views together with the draft report were discussed at meetings of the
Statute Revision Section of the Commission held on the 17th November,
28th December, 1956 and the 7th February, 1957. Important suggestions
made by the Mcmbers at these mectings were accepted and a revised
draft prepared by Shri Joshi in the light of the discussions was
circulated to the Members of the Commission. The draft report as
revised was discussed at a meeting of the Statute Revision Section
of the Commission held on the 9th March, 1957 and it was ‘eft to
the Chairman and Shri Joshi to finally settle the report in the light
of the discussion.

3. Dr. Sen Gupta has signed the report subject to a separate note
which is appended to the report.

4, The Commission wishes to acknowledge the services rendered
by its Joint Secretary, Shri 10, Basu in the preparation of the report.

Yours sincerely,
M. C. SETALVAD.


REPORT OF THE LAW COMMISSION ON THE
PARTNERSHIP ACT

Part I—GENERAL

Prior to 1932, Chapter XI (Sections 239 to 266) of the History of
Indian Contract Act. 1872 (Act IX of 1872) contained the fhe legia-
jaw relating to partnership in India. As these provisions were ”
not exhaustive, it was considered expedient and necessary
to separate the law relating to partnership and to embody
it in a separate enactment; hence, the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932 {Act IX of 1932). This Act is based mainly on
the English Partnership Act, 1890 (53 and 54 Vict. c. 39}
which codified the common law relating to partnership. The
English Partnership Act, 1890 has been the basis of the law
of partnership in all countries which have adopted the
English common law as the basis of their law, for example,
some of the countries constituting the Commonwealth and
the United States of America.

2, Before the enactment of the Indian Partnership Act,
1932, the whole subject was carefully examined by 2 Special
Committee! which scrutinised the English Partnership Act
and the judicial decisions in England and in India with a
view to adapting the English provisions to the needs and
conditions of India. Apart from minor differences necessilat-
ed by the peculiar conditions of India, the basic principles
embodied in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 are the same
as those contained in the English Partnership Act. 1890 and
in the Uniform Partnership Act prepared in the United
States of America.” The difficulties felt and the defects dis.
closed in the working of the English Partnership Act from
1890 to 1931 were considered by the Special Committee!
which drafted the Indian Partnership Bill and provisions were
made in the Act so as to avoid these difficulties and defects.

3. We have examined the provisions of the Indian Scape of
Partnership Act, 1932, in the light of the judicial decisions the revision
in India and in England and we find that, apart from the Proposed.

‘Gazette of India, 1931, Part V, pp. 31 ef seg.
“A mode! code drawn up amd approved by the Conference, of
sCommissioners on Uniform State Laws on the 1405 October, 1914
and adopted in some of the States of the United States of America.


Suggestion
that a firm
should be
recognised
asalegal

entity, not
accepted.

2

alterations which are set out hereinafter, it is not necessary
to make any other radical changes. In our opinion, on the
whole, the Act is comprehensive and adequate enough to
meet the growing needs and requirements of Indian trade,
commerce and industry and facilitates varied relationships
between individuals who intend 1o associate themselves for
the purpose of carrying on trade and commerce.

4. Jt has been suggested to us that the fundamental
principle on which the Indian Partnership Act is based, wz.,
that a “firm” is not a legal person or a legal eatity, should
be replaced by the contrary principle which recognises a
firm as a legal person or a lega! entity, on the ground that
such a change would be useful to the business and commer-
cial community as well as to those who deal with a firm
and that it would also simplify proceedings by and against
a firm. This question has for a long time engaged the atten-
tion of jurists, lawyers and text-book writers in India,
England and the United States of America. In England, it
has been suggested that the English law of Partnership
should in this respect be assimilated to that of Scotland
which recognises a firm as a legal or juristic person. Lindley,
in the Introduction to his book on “Partnership”, regretted
that a firm was not recognised as a juristic erson and
stated'—

“This non-recognition of the firm was a defect in the
Jaw of Partnership; and it is to be regretted that
the Partnership Act did not go further than it did
in the direction of assimilating English Law to the
Scotch”.

However, notwithstanding a considerable body of opi-
pion in England being in favour of the recognition of a firm
as a legal person, the British Parliament has not so far
accepted that principle.

5. In the United States of America, before the Uniform
Partnership Act was drawn up, it was vehemently advocated
that the principle recognising a firm as a legal person should
be adopted as the basis of the law of partnership and at
one stage the general opinion was in favour of the adoption

‘Lindley on Partnership, Eleventh Edition, 1950, p. 4.


3

of this principle. But ultimately, “The Theory was not ac-
cepted, as it was felt that it was in tbe fast analysis based
on an assumption which did not accord with busificss
practice”?

6. The difficuldes which result from the nen-recognition
of a firm as a legal person. were carefully examined by the
Special Committee’ which drafted the Indian Partnership
Bill and the Committee tried to meet these difficulties by
appropriate modifications of some of its provisions, without
altering the basic conception {hat a firm is not a legal entity.

7. The non-recognition of a frm as a Jegal person.
renders possible elasticity of relationship between the persons
who enter into a partnership. This is a great adsantage to
the business community, as it facilitaies the association of
persons with varying means and diverse abilities te carry on.
business on the collective credit of all the partners. The
common law theory of partnership {knowa in the United
States of America as the “aggregate” theory), as bas been
worked out in the Lodian Partnership Act meets the require-
ments and néeds of the business community, Usder this
theory, the partners own ip, common the partnership pro-
perty and they are joint principals in parmership transuc-
tions. The activities carried on by the partners are not
regarded as being carried on by a legal personality distinc:
from their individual personalities. The practical difficulties
which have been experienced in the administration of the law
of partnership have been to a large extent overcome by the
modification of the procedure applicable to a firm.

8. It is true that merchants and lawyers have different
notions respecting the nature of a firm. Commercial men
and accountants are apt to look upon a firm in the tight iu
which the iawyers [ook upon a corporation, ie. as a body
distinct from the members composing il. Thus, in keeping
accounts ‘merchants’ habitually show a firm as a debtor to
each partiner for what he brings into the common stock and
each prattwer is shown as a debtor to the firm for all that
he takes out of this stock. But this is a business point of

“The Uniform Partrership Act—-A reply fo Mr. Crane's
Criticism” by William Draper Lewis, (1915-16) 24 Harvard Law
Review, 9. 167.

*Gazette of India, 1931, Part V,p. 33.



4

view and not a legal conception. Mercantile usage relating
to a firm has, however, been adopted in the law of partner-
ship, to a certain extent. Thus, a firm, not, being a legal
ently , could not, either in England or in India, sue or be
sued in the firm name or sue or be sued by its own part-
ners, for one cannot sue oneself. This difficulty with regard
to the law of procedure has, however, been removed both
im England and in India under the pressure of considerations
of commercial convenience and a firm is now allewed to
sue or be sued in the firm name as if it were a corporate
body. (See Rules of the English Supreme Court, Order
XLVIII-A and Order KXX of our Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (Act V of 1908)]. The law of procedure has gone to
the length of allowing a firm to sue and be sued by another
firm having som¢ common partfer or even to sue or he
sued by any one or more of its owr partners (see order
XXX, rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure), as if a firm
were an efitity distinct from its partners. Again, in taking
partsership accounts and administering partnership assets
the law has, to some extent, adopted the mercantile view
inasmuch as the liabilities of a firm are regarded as the
liabilities of the partners: only in case they cannot be met
and discharged by the firm out of ils own assets, Further,
when there are joint debts due from any firm as weil as
separate debts due from any partner, the creditors of the
firm are ir the first place to satisfy their claims out of the
partaership assets and if there is any surplus, then the share
of each partner in such surplus is applied in payment of
his separate debts, if any, or paid to him. Conversely, the
separate property of a partner is applied first in payment
of his separate debts and the surplus, if any, is utilised in
taeeting the debts of the firm (see section 49 of the Indian
Partnership Act), Thus it is clear that the law, English as
well as Indian, has for some specific purposes, relaxed its
rigid application of the aggregate theory and given, to a
jimited extent, a Jegal personality to a firm. Nonetheless, the
general concept of partnership is that a firm is not an entity
or a person in law but is merely an association of persons
and the firm name is only a cellective name for individuals
who constitute the firm ण only a compendious mode of des-
cribing the persons who have agreed. to carry on business in
partnership. It is in this view of the matter that a firm is
not entitled as such 10 enter into partnership with another
firm or individual and the firm is not a person in the strict
sense of the term. This legal position of a partnership is’
succinctly stated by Das C. J. in a recent decision of the


5

Supreme Court: Dulichand Laxminarayan rom. Commis-
sioner of Income-tax, Nagpur’ and we do not consider it
necessary to alter it.

9. Upon a consideration of the judicial decisions and
of the defects disclosed in the administration of the existing
Jaw relating to partnership in India, we have reached the
conclusion that there are no cogent and compelling reasons
to justify the alteration of the basic principle of our law of
partnership and to disturb Jong-settled notions as regards
the true nature and character of a parinership and the
relations of the partners inter se and with the outside world.
No serious inconvenience or embarrassment hus been experi-
enced by the business community by the non-recognition of
a firm as a legal person, and the practical difficulties ex-
perienced in the administration of the law have, to a large
extent, been eliminated.

10. It has been suggested that a provision should be Suggestion
made in the Act requiring a partnership agreement to be in for requir
writing, as it would have the obvious advantage of enabling 9% pare.
the Courts to ascertain the terms of the agreement and the mente te
tights of the partners with greater certainty than at present. be in
Since there are a large variety of partnerships in India, writine—
many of which are of a very short duration or relate to a Pat! ted
single venture or involve only a small capital, and the 10766:
existing law allows the terms of a partnership to be proved
by oral evidence or even by conduct of parties, we cannot
introduce a comprehensive provision requiring all partner-
ships to be in writing, without causing hardships to the
trading community as well as serious administrative difficul-
ties. But as the suggestion has come from a_ substantial
section of the business community itself and as, in practice,
partnership agreements are reduced to writing whenever the
partnerships are substantial. we consider that the suggestion
should be accepted partially.

11. We are of the opinion that partnerships in particu-
lar adventures or undertakings which are completed within
a period of six months from their commencement should
not be required to be in writing. We recommend that a con-
tract determining the rights and duties of partners shoul¢e

‘AIR. 1956 S.C, 354; (1952) 29 1
v, Alembic Chemical Works, ALR.
Bom, 293; Commissioner of LT. v. Figgis, ALR. 1953 5.0.
(1953) 24 LTR. 405.

2_4 M, of Law/6?

535. [See also Bhagwanii
PC. 100: 11.8. (1948)
455:



Suggestion
as to com-
pulsory re-
gistration

of firms—

partially
accepted.

6

be in writing in the case of every partnership at will and
every partnership whose duration is to be for six zaonths or
more. except in cases where the capital of the partnership
is less than rupees fie hundred. We further recommend that
in cases where the contract of partnership is required to be
in writing, the partnership shall not be recognised for the
enforcement of rights and obligations of the firm and its
partners unless the requirement of a contract in writing is
uy ed,

12. Te bas been suggested that a provision should be
made in the Partnership Act for the compulsory registration
of every firm. The question of compulsory registration of a
firm has engaged the attention of the Government and the
Legislature for a long time as, on account of want of reeis-
tration. difficulties have been experienced in the decision of
questions relating 10 the existence, and terms of partnerships
and cognate matters. The question was carefully considered,
by the Special Committee’ which drafted the Indian Partner-
ship Act. bat the Committee did not recommend compulsory,
registration, for the following reasons—

“Jt has been pointed out repeatedly with muc’ force
that to reduire small or ephemeral joint venturcs 10
he registered would produce littie public benefit aad
would act as a clog to petty enterprise ; and such
yentures aré so numerous that any small benefit
to be derived from registration would be counter-
halanced by the clerical labour involved........
The English precedent in so far as it makes regis-
tration compulsory and imposes a penalty for non-
registration has not been followed. as. it 35 con-
sidered that this step would be too drastic for a
beginning in India, and would introduce all the
difficulties connected with small and ephemeral
undertakings.”

Hence, the Indian Act made registration aptional but
provided inducement to register. The provisions contained
in the Act as regards registration and the consequences of
flon-segistration have been commented upon unfavourably.
Tt has been urged that it would be more satisfactory to make
registration of all partnerships compulsory and that if this
is done, separate registration of firms under the Tncome-tax
Act may be dispensed with.

4Gazette of India, 1931, Bart V, p. 35.



7

13. Having regard to the advattages which would
generally follow from the registration of firms and to the
fact that the business community has already become fami-
Jiar with registration, under the existing Act, we have come
to the conclusion that it is time that a bold step is taken
and compulsory registration of firms is introduced. At the
same time we cannot overlook the hardships and the adminis
trative difficulties which are likely to arise if the provision
for compulsory registration is extended to smull and epheme-
sal undertakings, a large number of which take place in
villages and small towns. Having weighed these considera-
tions we have reached the conclusion that the proposed pro-
vision for compulsory registration should be confined to
those classes of partnerships which, we have already recom-
mended, may be created only by agreements in writing.

14, It has been brought to our notice that under the
existing law, after the firms are registered, the Registrar of
Firms is not kept informed whether the registered firms
continue to exist or are dissolved or have become defunct.
Generally speaking, parties do not send to the Registrar the
information referred to in sections 6001), 61. 62. 6301) and
(2) of the Partnership Act’ unless they are compelled by Iiti-
gation or other urgent necessity to do so, as the furnishing
of such information is optional. In order to enable the
Registrar to keep his register up-to-date as far as possibie
we recommend that a new provision be inserted making it
obligatory on the part of every registered firm whose dura-
tion is more than three years to send to the Registrar within
‘six months after the expiry of every three years from the
date of its registration an intimation that it is functionirg
and has not become defunct or dissolved and providing,
further. that if no intimation is received by the Registrar
within the prescribed time he may, after issuing a notice.
make a note in the register that the firm has ceased to exist.

15. Tt has further been suggested that legislation on the
lines of the Registration of Business Names Act. 1916 in
England should be enacted in India, either separately or as
a part of the Partnership Act. We are not inclined to accept
this suggestion for the same reasons which moved the Civil
Justice Committee to reject it in their Report. The Com-
mittee said:

“We consider that it would be impracticable in India
to insist upon the registration of business names
on the analogy of the English Act of 1916. in


Suggestion
for intro-
ducing
fimited
Bartner-
ship—not
accepted,

8

india the names of firms are very frequently
changed. No reasonable person puts much faith in
the assumption that names appearing in the styles
of a firm are the names of the individual partners.
The names of relatives, sometimes relatives long
deceased, sometimes minors, are used because
they are thought to be auspicious. There are other
obvious difficulties connected with Indian names.”

16, It has been suggested that partnerships with limited
fiability should be recognised in India either by a special
enactment or as a part of the Partnership Act. A concrete
suggestion made by the Iron, Steel and Hardware Mer-
chants’ Chamber of India in this respect may be noted :

“Considering the recent amendment in the Indian Com-

panies Act, we fee] that a provision should be made
in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 by which limit-
ed liability partnerships can be entered into on the
lines of the Limited Partnership Act.’ The Indian
Companies Act has become so cumbersome that
for a small business it is impossible to comply
with ail the provisions unless a full-time Secretary
is engaged. Before the amendment was introduced
in the Indian Companies Act, two or three partners
used to find it convenient to register a Private
Limited Company and carry on the work. Now
there are so many restrictions on taking louns by
the directors or shareholders even in private limit-
ed companies, that people will prefer to enter into
a partnership instead of forming a limited liability
company, That risk can only be minimised by in-
troducing limited liability partnership.”

We have carefully considered this suggestion and haye
come to the conclusion that having regard to the conditions
prevailing in India, the inherent shortcomings of limited
liability partnerships, and the fact that even in England,
notwithstanding legislation permitting such artnerships, not
many such partnerships have been actually formed, it is
acither ecessary mor expedient to make provision
for limited liability partnerships in India. The suggestion,
af accepted, is also likely to result in rendering ineffective
ihe provisions of the Indian Companies Act which have been
recently made stricter.

‘Report of the Civil Justice Committee, 9. 455.
"Edw. 7 Vil, ० 24. :


9
Part 1I—Secrions

17, We have so far dealt with questions relating to the Examination
alteration of the basic principles embodied in the Indian of the ere
Partnership Act, in the light of the suggestions received ‘att indica
from individuals and commercial bodies. We now proceed ting the
to an examination of the sections of the Act seriarin: in order changes
10 indicate the changes which will become necessary in the proposed.
light of our foregoing conclusions. We shall also indicate
other changes which in our opinion. are needed by reason
of judicial decisions and otherwise. These changes are em-
bodied in the draft sections shown in the Appendix.

18. In conformity with our recommendation regarding Sec. |.
other Acts, the word ‘Indian’ should be deleted from the
title of the Act [sub-section (1) of section 1].

19. No alteration is needed in sections 2 and 3. Sees. 2-3.

20. It has been suggested that the words ‘in writing’ Se. 4
should be inserted after the word ‘agreed’ in section 4, in
order to provide thai # parinership agreement must be in
writing. We have already examined this suggestion in Part I
and we think that oar recommendations made in paragraphs
10 and 11 can be more appropriately carried out by enacting
a new section instead of amending section 4.

21. In section 5, the words “or a Burmese Budhist किए +
husband and wife carrying on business as stich” should be
deleted, as Burma has ceased to be a part of India.

22. It has been suggested by the Bombay State Bar
Association that the Act should be altered so as to make
it applicable to a joint Hindu family business. This question
wus considered by the Special Commitlee’ which dzaftecl
the Indian Partnership Bill and the Committee rejected the
suggestion on the ground that the question related to a purely
domestic matter of Hindy Law and that it was unwise to
complicate: the provisions of the Partnership Act by intro-
ducing therein rules of law which appropriately constituted
a branch of the personal law of the Hindus only. We entirely
agree with the conclusion reached by the Committee and the
Teasons given by it. The capacity of a Karta of a joint
Hindu family to enter into a partnership with an individual

‘Gazette of India, 1931, Part V, pp. 34-39.


Seo. 6.

Secs. 7-8.

Sees. 9-11.
Sec. 12,

Sec. 13.

Secs, 14-17.

1०9

or with the Karta of another joint Hindu family has bee
settled by judicial decisions and does not require any special
provisions.

23. In view of our recommendation that certain kinds
of partnerships can be created only by an agreement in
writing it is necessary to exclude the application of section
6 in those cases and the section will have to be amended
accordingly.

24, No aiteration is required in sections 7 and 8.

25. We have added a aew section 8A to give effect 12
our recommendation in paragraph 11.

26. No alteration is necessary in sections 9 to LI.

27. The existing Act says nothing about the custody of
the books of the firm. The Indian Partnership Bill) as
drafted by the Special Committee,’ followed the English
‘Act in providing that the books of a firm shall be kept at
jts place of business or the principal place of business, if
there are more than oue, But the Select Committee’ rejected.
the clause relating to the custody of books and inserted
clause (a) as it now stands. on the ground that the principal
place of business might well be in an Indian State where the
‘Act could not be directly enforced and that the principal
place of business could be defined only by the partners
themselves. Having regard to the fact that the Indian States
have become a part of India and the fact that the Act
applies to the whole of India. the first ground relied upon
by the Select Committee no longer holds good. The second
ground given by the Committee does not appear to be con-
yincing. We therefore consider it desirable to redraft clause
fa), incorporating the provision relating to the custody of
books as suggested by the Special Committee.

28. The official rate which is now allowed by the Courts
is 4 per cent. We think, therefore, that the zate of interest in
clause (वो of section 13 should also be fixed at 4 per cent.
per annum and the clause be amended accordingly

29, No alteration is considered necessary in sections 14
to 17.

Gazette of India, 1931, Part, V, 9. 40.
Ibid, 1932, Past, Vy p. 3.



11]
30. No alteration is necessary in section 18. Sec, 18,

31. The Bombay State Bar Association has suggested Sec. 19.
that “subject to section 22, a parincr should have implied
authority as regards itecis (a) (ch, (d} and (९) in sub-section
(2) of section 19.” In other words, the scope of the implied
authority of a partner on behalf of the firm should, subject
to section 22, be enlarged by including therein authority to—

i. Refer disputes to arbitration;
2. Compromise or relinquish any claim of the firm;

3. Withdraw a suit or proceeding filed on behalf of
the firm:

4. Admit any lability in a suit or proceeding against
the firm,

We are unable to accept this suggestion as the clauses
limiting the implied authority of a partner in section 19(2)
are based upon long experience and have given rise to no
difficulties. it is not necessary to enlarge the scope of the
implied authority of a partner beyond what is slated in the
section, as it is open to the partners by an agreement either
to enlarge or to restrict the implied authority under section
20 of the Act

32. No alteration is necessary in sections 20 to 29, Secs. 20-29.

33. There has been some controversy as to the construc- Sec. 30.
tion of an instrement which purports to admit a minor to a
partnecship without making it clear that hz is admitted oaly
to the benefits of the partnership. We think that when the
major partners seek to admit into the partnership a person
known to them to be a minor, it may be assumed that they
intended fo admit the minor only to the benefits of the
partnership and that, had they known the law. they wonid
have made that clear in the instrument of partnership. In
order to remove doubts, this rule of construction, may be
introduced into sub-section (1) of section 30.

34. No alteration is necessary in sections 31 and 32. Secs, 31-32.
~

35. Expulsion being penaf in its nature. it should not Sec. 33.
be allowed to be imposed in violation of the principles of


Secs. 34-36.
Sec, 37.

Sec. 38.
Secs, 39-43,

Sec. 44,

12

natural justice. We recommend that at the end of sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 33, appropriate words should be added
providing for an opportunity to be given to the partner to
give an explanation.

36. No change is necessary in sections 34 to 36.

37. In section 37, the rate of interest should be reduced
from six to four per cent. per annum, in conformity with our
recommendation in paragraph 28.

38. No change is required in section 38.
39, No alteration is necessary in sections 39 to 43.

40. There is a difference of opinion between the Allaha-
bad and Madras’ High Courts as to whether the right of
dissolution given by section 44 could be curtailed by agree-
ment between the partners. The Allahabad’ High Court is
of the opinion that the provision in section 44 is subject to
the overall provision in section 11(1) te the effect that the
mutual rights and duties of the partners may be determined
by contract between them. But the Madras® High Court has
pointed out that the provision in section 10) is itself
“subject to the provisions of this Act”

We are of the opinion that the Madras view is to be
preferred. The opening words “subject io the provisions of
this Act” in section 11) mean not only that a contract, in
order to be binding between the partners. must not be in
contravention of any of the provisions of the Act but also
that if there is any provision in the Act relating to a parti-
cular matter, such a provision will override any agreement
between the partners relating to the same matter, This view,
as has been pointed out in the Madras decision. is support-
ed by various provisions of the Act itself which expressly
use the words “subject to contract between the partners”,
wherever the Legislature intended the stalutery provision to
be controlled by the agreement of the parties. Sections 12 to
17 and section 42 are instances of this character. A compari-
son of the provisions of sections 42 and 44. prima facie, de-
™monstrates that the omission of the words “subject to con-
tract between the partners”, in section 44 was deliberate and
the reason is not far to seek. While under section 42, the

‘Dropadi v. Bankeylal, 1.L.R. (1939) All. 577. हा

*Venkataswami v, Venkataswami, ALR. 1954 Mad, 9,



13

dissolution takes place by operation of Jaw unless there is
4 contract to the contrary, section 44 entitles a partner to
invoke the discretionary jurisdiction of the court which, as
explained by the Judicial Commitice in Rehmarunnissa v.
Price,’ is in the nature of an equitable protection from which
“no man can exclude himself”. In our opinion. the discre-
tionary jurisdiction of the court under section 44 is not, and
should not, be liable to be fettered by any agreement bet-
ween the partners and this should be made clear by insert-
ing the following words at the beginning of section 44—

“Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary”.

41. No alteration is considered necessary in sections 45 Secs. 45-53.
to 55

42. We ate of the opinion that this section should be geo, 56,
deleted. While section 1(2) of the Act provides that the Act
extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, section 56 empowers a State Government to direct,
by notification. that the provisions of Chapter VIL shall not
apply to the State or to any part thereof. Action under the
Section by a State Government may result in the provisions
regarding registration of firms in the Act nat applying to
that State or a part thereof. All the States are. under the
recent amendment of the Consiilution. placed on a footing
of equality and it is desirable to have 4 uniform law as
regards the registration of firms in all the States which enjoy
the same status. Whatever may have been the position in
1932. the conditions then existing are now so changed as to
justify a uniform provision for all the States as regards
registration of firms.

43. No alteraticn is considered necessary in section 57. Sec. 57.

44. Our recommendations as to compulsory registration Sec, 578.
(in_paragraph 13) should be embodied in a separate section,
and a time-limit should also be prescribed for obtain ig
such registration. as shown in section 574 in the Appendix.

45. As we have prescribed a definite time-limit for sec. 58,
registration in section 57A. it is necessary to make a refe-
rence thereto. in sub-section (1) of section 58. We also re-
commend that it should be provided in sub-section (2), that
the authorisation of an agent shall be by a special power of
attorney.

*Rehmatunnissa v. Price, TL.R. (1917) 42 Bom. 380. 1388).


Sec. 59.

Sec, 59-A.

Secs, 60-63-

Sec. 632.

Secs. 64-68.

Sec, 69.

i4

In sub-section (3) of section 58, yerbal alterations have
to be made in view of the constitutional changes that have
taken place since the enactment of the Act.

46. Considering that we have recommended compulsory
registration of firms, it is necessary that those who intended
to deal with a firm should have knowledge whether the firm
is registered under the Act. We, therefore, recommend the
insertion of a provision in section 59 to the effect that a
firm which is registered under the Act shall use the word
“registered” after the name of the ficm.

We have added a new section 59A to make provision
for penalties for failure to use or for the improper use of
the word “registered” after the name of a firm.

47, No alteration is necessary in sections 60 to 63.

48. Our recommendations in paragraph 13 relating to
intimation to the Registrar as regards the continuing exis-
tence of a firm should be incorporated in a new section.

49, No alteration is necessary in sections 64 to 68.

50. Commentators’ have referred to the conflict of deci-
sions on the question whether registration of a partnership
jis a condition precedent to the filing of a suit and whether
in case an unregistered firm files a suit the defect could
be remedied by the registration of the firm after the insti-
tation of the suit. The earlier decisions which held that a
suit by an unregistered firm could be maintained if there
was a subsequent registration after the filing of the suit
but before its disposal, have been overruled by subsequent
decisions.* All the High Courts are now agreed that registra-
tion of a firm under section 59 is a condition precedent to
the maintainability of the suit and that registration of a firm
after the institution of the suit cannot cure the defect arising
from want of registration. It has. however, been suggested

3520, for instance. pp. 425-426 of the Indian Partnership
Act by Pollock ‘and Mulla (1950 Edition) and pages 235-236 of
“The Law of Partnership in India and Pakistan” by S, T. Desai
(1956 Edition).

*Ponnuchami Gounder ५. Muthusami Goundar, TLR. (1942):
Mad, 335: Dwijendranait v. Govinehandra, A. 1. हि. 1५09 Cal,
597; Abdul Karim v. Ramdas Narayandas, 1.L.R. 95) Neg:



15

that provision should be made in the Act to the effect that
if a suit is filed by a firm which is not registered, the suit
should be treated as competent and maintainable, if the
firm obtains registration before the decree is passed. In
our opinion, it is not necessary to make such a provision.
as it would defeat the very object which is sought to be
achieved by the provisions contained im sections 59 to 69
of the Act.

51. The existing Act is anomalous in that though it
does not provide for compulsory registration of firms, it
visits with serious consequences firms which do not register
themselves. This has been commented upon.’ As we have’
provided for compulsory registration except in regard to
firms of short duration or with a small capital it is appro-
priate that the operation of section 69 should be restricted to-
parinerships which, according to our recommendations. re-
quire to be compulsorily registered under the Act. It is,
accordingly recommended that the words “In the case of
firms required to be registered under this Act” be inserted:
at the commencement of section 69.

52. As section 69 is to be made applicable only to such
partnerships as are required to be compulsorily registered,
there is no need for a provision like that contained in sub-
section (3) (a) of Section 69. Having regard to our recommen-
dations in regard to the requirements of a writing and regis--
tration, a firm which, though required to be registered by
the Act, is not registered will not be a ‘firm’ in the eye of
law and no question of its dissolution under the Act could
arise. We therefore recommend that clause (at of sub-section
(3) of section 69 be omitted.

53. In view of the proposed deletion of section 56. the
second part of clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 69.
begitining with the words “or whose places.
will hase to be deleted.

54. We are of the opinion that as a partnership which.
has not complied with the requirement of registration shall
not be a partnership under the Act, it is necessary to ensure
that’ persons who have induced third parties to deal with
them on the representation that they are partners should not
be entitled to take advantage of their own default. It should

Poflock & Mulla, Partnership Act, 1950 Ed., p. 424,


Sec. 71.

Secs, 72-73,

Sec. 74,

16

therefore be provided that such persons should be stopped
as against such third persons from pleading that there ts
no partnership at Jaw, by reason of their non-compliance
with the statute. A sub-section io this effect has been added
to section 69.

55. No alteration is necessary in section 70.

56. In sub-section (2)(b) of section 71, a reference to
the new section 63A has been inserted.

Some officials concerned with the administration of the
Act have suggested a modification of the Schedule referred
to in this section so as to increase the fees mentioned jn it.
We are not, however, satisfied that an increase is necessary.

57. No change is suggested in sections 72 and 73.

58. There is a conflict of decisions between the Calcutta,
Lahore and Patna' High Courts. on the one hand. and the
Madras. Bombay. Nagpur and Allahabad High Courts’, on
the other, on. the question whether section 69 bars suits even
in cases where the cause of action arese befere the com-
mencement of the Act.”.

One view’ is that section 69 does not prevail over sec-
tion 74(b} and that a suit filed by a firm to enforce rights
which had accrued before the commencement of the Act
would be maintained in spite of non-registration of the firm
as the rights had already accrued and they are not taken
away expressly by the Act. The other view’ is that the pro-
visions of section 74 of the Act are intended to apply to
substantive rights and pot to matters of procedure. and that
section 69 being a procedural provision must be considered
as retrospective im its operation. Consequently, the procedure
Jaid down in section 69 must be complied with in he case

Surendra Nath v. Manohar De, (1935) 11.8. 62 Cal. 213:
Firm Krishen Lal v. Abdul Ghajur, AJR. 1935 Lab. 893: Shah-
zedkhan ४, Darbar Rabe Keppi, J.L.R, (1936) 15 Pat. 810.

"Syed Ibrahim Sehih v. Guralinga (yer, LL.R. (1929) Mad.
980; Ramappe v, Babu Sidappa, 14.R. (3939) Bom. 194; Rum-
gopal v. Net Ram, ALR, 1941, Al. 378: Syed Fakir Hussain हे.

“Chandra Bai, A.LR. 1940 Nag. 367.

‘Section 69 of the Act came into force on the Ist October,
1933.


17

of every suit filed after the commencement of the Act,
whether it is based on a cause of action which arose before
or after the commencement of the Act.

As a long time has elapsed since the Partnership Act
1932 came into force, this question would have had no
practical importance now, but for the fact that the Partnership
Act, 1932, has been extended to what were Part B States
only in 1951, by the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951 (IIL of
1951). The question as to the retrospective operation of sec-
tion 69 is, accordingly, bound to arise in these territories
and some provision has to be made to remove uncertainty in
the law. In our opinion, the proper view is to give restros-
pective operation to section 69, and to achieve that object
we recommend the insertion of a new sub-section in section
74

59, In order to give a concrete shape 1o our proposals,
we have, in the Appendix, put them into the shape of draft
amendments to the relevant sections of the Act. The Appen-
di is not. however, to be treated as a draft Amendment

LL,

M. C. SETALVAD
(Chairman)
M. C. CHAGLA,
K. N. WANCHOO.
P. SATYANARAYANA RAO,
N. C. SEN GUPTA‘,
9. K. T. CHARI,
D. NARASA RAJU.
S. M. SIKRI.
G. S. PATHAK,
6. N. JOSHI.
N. A. PALKHIVALA.
(Members)
K. SRINIVASAN,
DURGA DAS BASU,
Joint Secretaries.
Bomaay:
The 13th July, 1957.

*Dr, Sen Gupta has signed the Report, subject to the note
appended at the end.



APPENDIX
Proposals shown in the form of draft amendments to the existing
Act.

Changes made in the text of the existing sections have been shown
in italics wherever possible,
Section I.

In sub-section (1) of section 1, the word “Indian” shall be omitted.
Section 5.

In section 5, the words “or a Burmese Budhist husband and wife
cafrying on business as such” shall be omitted.
Section 6.

Tn section 6, the words “Except in cases in which a contract of
partnership is required to be in writing” shall be added before the words
“In determining whether a group of persons is of is not a firm. ”

Section 8A.

After section 8, the following section shall be inserted :

“CHAPTER TI-A.
ForMATION OF A PARTNERSHIP

Section 8A.

(1) Every contract of partnership shall except in cases where the
partnership is to be for a term of less than six months be in writing :

Provided that nothing in the foregoing sub-section shall apply to
the following cases, namely :—

को where, irrespective of the duration of the partnership, the
capital of the partnership is less than five hundred rupees;

, (@) where, irrespective of the capital of the partnership, the pariner-
ship 4s in particular adventutes or undertakings which are completed
wit a period of six months from the commencement of the partner-

ip.

(20 When a contract of partnership is required to be in writing.
‘any yafiation of such contract shall also be in writing.”

18


19

Section 12.

In section 12, for clause (d), the following clause shall be substitut-
ed, namely :—

“The books of the firm shall be kept at the place of business of the
firm (or) the principal place of business (if there is more than
one such place} and every partner has a right to have access
to and to inspect and copy any of the books of the firms.”

Section 13.

Jn clause (d) of section 13, for the words “six per cent. per annum”,
the words “four per cent. per annum” shall be substituted.
Section 30.

In sub-section (1) of section 30. the following shall be inserted
at the end, namely :—

“Explanation : When by the terms of an instrument of parinership
@ person is a partner in a firm and such person is known to
the other parties to the instrument to be a minor, such person
shall be deemed to have only been admitted to the benefits
of the partnership.”
Section 33.

In sub-section (1) of section 33, the following shall be inserted at
the end, namely :—

“and ofter giving the partner a reasonable opportunity of showing
cause why he should not be expelled”.
Section 37.

Jn section 37, for the words “six per cent. per annum,” the words
“four per cent. per annum” shall be substituted.

Section 44.

In section 44, for the words “At the suit of a partner, the court
may” the words “Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, the
court may, at the suit of a partner” shall be substituted.

Section 56.

Section 56 shall be omitted.


20

Section 57A. (New).
After section 57, the following section shall be inserted, naraely :—

“S7A.

(1)

(2)

@)

@

Regisiration of firms.

Every firm in respect of which the contract between the
partners determining their mutual rights and duties is re-
quired by this Act to be in writing shall be registered in
accordance with this Act.

Except as otherwise provided by sub-section (3), every firm
required to be registered under sub-section (1) shall
tered within one year from the commencement of tie pcrt-
nership. .

Every firm required to be registered as aforesaid and carry-
ing on business at the commencement of the Indian Partner-
ship (Amendment) Act, ...... shall, if it has not been already
registered, be registered within six months from the com-
mencement of the said Act.

The Registrar may register a firm after the expiry of the
period Specified in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the
case may be, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not presenting the application for registration within
that period.”

Section 58.
For section 58, the following section shall be substituted, namely :—
“58. Application for registration.

(wD

The registration of a firm may subject to section 57A be
effected at any time within the period prescribed by sub-
sections (2) and (3) of section 57A by sending by post or
delivering to the Registrar of the area in which any place
of business of the firm is situated or proposed to be situat-
ed, a copy of the instrument of partnership and a statement
in the prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed
fee, stating—
(a) the firm’s name,
(b) the place or principal place of business of the tirm,
{c) the names of any other places where the firm carries
on the business,
(व) the date when each partner joined the firm,
(e) the names in full and permanent addresses of the
partners,
(f) the duration of the firm.


21

(2) Each partner or his agent duly authorised by a special power
of attorney in this behalf shall sign and verify the statement
in the manner prescribed.

(3) A firm’s name shall not contain any of the following words,
namely:—

“Bharat”, “India’, “Indian Republic’, “President of India’, or
words expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patro-
nage of Government, except when the Union Government
or the State Government signifies its consent to the use of
such words as part of the firm’s name by order in writing”.

Section 59,

Section 59 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and
after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely :—

“(2) A firm which is registered under sub-section (1) shall use the
word “registered” immediately after its name.”

Section 63A (New).

(3) If any firm fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section
(2) every one of its partners shall be punishable with a fine which may
extend to rupees ten for cvery day of such non-compliance unless he
proves that he had no knowledge of such non-compliance or that he
exercised due diligence to prevent such non-compliance.

(4) Every person who trades or carries on business under any
flame with the word “Registered” or any abbreviation thereof added
to it shall, unless the trade or business is that of a firm of that name
which has been registered under sub-section (1) be punishable with a
fine which may extend to rupees fifty for every day of such use.

After section 63, the following section shall be inserted, namely :--

“63A. Intimation to the Registrar of the continuing existence of
the firm.

(7) Every registered firm which has been in existence for a
Period of three years shall send to the Registrar, within six
months from the expiry of every period of three years after
the registration of the firm, an intimation (in the prescribed
form), stating that the firm is continuing and also con-
taining, as on the date of the intimation, the particulars
referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 58.


22

(2) On receipt of such intimation the Registrar shall make a
record of such intimation in the entry relating to the firm
in the Register of Firms and shall file the intimation along
with the staement relating to the firm filed under section 59.

(3) Lhe Registrar may accept the intimation referred to in sub
section (2) after the expiry of the period specified therein,
if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
sending the intimation within that period.

(4) If व registered firm makes default in sending intimation
under sub-section (1), the Registrar sholl send a notice 10
the fier of his intention tg reat the firm as defunct, andl
if no intimation in accordanwe with that sub-section is
received by the Regisirar within @ month after the notice
is served on the fam, the firm shall be treated av defunct
and the Registrar may make « note in the Register of Firms
that the firm has ceased ta exist,

(9) On the making of such a note the firm shall from the date
thereof be deemed to be a firm not registered under this
Act.”

Section 69.

(a) At the beginning of section 69, the following words be insert-
ed—

“In the case of firms required to be registered under this Act’;

(0) in sub-section (3), clause (a) shall be omitted ;
(टी in clause (a) of sub-section (4), the words and figures “or
whose place of business in the said territories are situated in ateas 10

which, by notification under section 56, this Chapier does not apply”
shall be omitted.

(@) After sub-section (4), a new sub-section (5) shall be inserted
as follows :—

“Nothing in section 11 or this section shall entitle persons who
have induced third partics to have dealings with them on
the representation that they are partners, to plead as
against such third parties that there was no partnership in
law between them.”

Section 71.

In clause (6) of sub-section (2) of section 71, for the words “62
and 63”, the words “62, 63 and section 634” shall be substituted.


23

Section 74.

Scction 74 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof. and
after sub-section (1) so renumbered, the following sub-tection shall be
inserted, namely :—

“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (da),
the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of séction 69
shall apply to all suits instituted in the territories which
immediately before the Ist day of November, 1956, formed
part of any Part B State (other than the State of Jammue
and Kashmir), even if the cause of action with respect 10
the said suits had arisen before the date on which this
‘Act had been extended to Part B States by the Part B
States (Laws) Act, 1951 (Act UE of 1951)”



NOTE BY DR. 1४. C. SEN GUPTA

I regret to have to disagree with the opinion of the majority on
a few points.

The proposed Section 11 and Section 57-A are large innovations.
I feel that the necessity, utility, and above ali, their practicability
have not been duly considered.

The majority report at page 4 recognises the hardship to the
people as well as the serious administrative difficulties involved in
a written contract being compulsory for a partnership. What over-
tiding public advantage is to be derived from it is not however so
clear.

Mt cannot be denied that it would be advantageous to the
partners themselves to have the terms reduced to writing and it is
teue thai it would give relief to Courts in determining the exact
terms of the contract when the matter comes to Court. But it must
be remembered that unlike Memoranda and Articles of Associa-
tion of Companies, a Partnership Agreement is a purely private
agreement between the partners and ixs ferms do not bind any
stranger dealing with them, No public interest is likely to be
served by enforcing such a writing instead of leaving it to partners
to decide the question on consideration of their convenience and
advantage,

The principal consideration which. according to the report, weigh-
ed with my cClleagues seems to have been that the suggestion has
come from a substantial section of the business community.

T have not seen the suggestions from the business community and
am not aware what reasons have been put forward by them for it.
It is the reasons we have to consider and not their bare opinions.
And, I greatly doubt that those who have made it voice the opinion
or reflect the feelings of the huge mass of traders of the entire
country.

The only persons who would be interested in the writing or
benefit by it are the partners. But they may have their own. difficulties,
considering probably the innumerable partnership businesses which
are cartied on in remote villages of this vast country and we
cannot hope to assess the difficulties or solve them by an ex-cathedra
‘opinion.

24


25
That it would cause hardship to myriads of existing partnership

is recognised. It is not so clearly visible why they should have a
writing, nevertheless. The hardship would be particularly on old

existing firms who have been catrying on for years without a deed.

A very pertinent question to ask would be what would happen
if there is no writing. The result would be to make it impossible
under Section 91 of the Evidence Act to prove a partnership. Now,
suppose two ons are carrying on a business as partners, and
their books ८ Pearly show how they have been sharing profits for
years. This provision would enable the partner who is bossing the
show to deny the partnership and make it impossible for the other
partners to prove the partnership in the absence of a deed. This
provision would therefore be of real benefit to fraudulent partners
to defeat the rights of a partner. As was found, in the case of the
Statute of Frauds, the statute could be used to perpetrate a fraud
without the benefit of the equitable principle which enabled English
Courts to get round the Statute in such cases.

1 shall presently deal with the “hardships and administrative
difficulties” referred to in the report, only to be brushed aside.

SECTION 57-A

The proposals not only make a writing compulsory, they also
make registration compulsory under Clause 57-A.

Here again the first question to ask is what would happen if the
firm is not registered. The proper logical conclusion would be to say.
as it has been said in respect of companies by Scction 11 of the
Companies Act that trading by such firms would be illegal and
forbidden under penalties. My colleagues realise the impossi-
bility of such a provision and Jeave the consequences virtually as
they are under Section 69 of the existing Act, though my colleagues
are of the opinion, contrary to decided cases, that subsequent
registration after suit should not get over the bar in Section 69,
because as they point out at page 12, an unregistered firm whose
registration is compulsory, is not a firm in the eye of law.

It is pertinent to note that the proposals nowhere provide that an
unregistered firm is not a firm at all in the eye of law. The diffi-
culties of such a view would appear on examination. If it is not a
firm, what is it?

Section 4 of the Partnership Act which has not been sought to
be altered gives definitions of ‘Partnership’ and ‘firm’ which would
certainly include a business of this character, even though
‘unregistered.


26

There is no law even in these proposals which forbids joint
trading by two or more. persons. Such. trading will lawfully go.on.
What are such businesses if not a firm according to the definition of
Section 4?

At will be remembered that not only joint businesses of this nature
but also joint family businesses exist in any number. It is not proposed
to iouch them. If joint family business as also other joint ventures can
go on without registration, what reason of public interest is ther: in
requiring partnerships to be registered ?

The considerations of administrative difficulties in insisting on
writing and registration have been referred to in the report but we
are asked, nevertheless, to take this bold step having regard to the
advantages which have net however been elucidated.

As I have indicated, in connection with the requirements of
writing, there is no advantage to the public in making the registra-
vion compulsory. For whatever is contained in the Partnership
Deed is a matter between the partners oly which does not bind any
one except the partners. Further, a partnership, unlike a Company,
makes the partners jointly and severally liable—so that any person
dealing with the firm is amply protected if only he takes the ordi-
nary care of ascertaining beforehand who are the partners. In the
Companies Act not only regisiration, but numerous other things are
necessary,—reports are to be filed from time to time which give the
public an exact idea as far as possible of the assets and the solvency
of the company. That is a matter of great importance. Because
the liability of the company is limited to the value of the shares.
The same reason docs not exist in the case of partnership. As I
have pointed out before, the compulsory registration might, on the
other hand, become an instrument of fraud. Considcring that the
existing partnerships are also required to be registered within 2
limited time, it would put a serious pressure upon the existing part-
ners and enable a fraudulent partner to deny his obligation arising
out of the contract of partnership by a plea simply that the
partnership has not been registered. I do not visualise any other
benelit to the public from this clause.

No doubt one might say that registration of every contractual
legal relation between the persons is desirable so that they should be
placed on an absolutely unchallengeable footing, But that is obviously
a counsel of perfection.

On the other hand, the administrative difficulties recognised by
the Report are that there are not merely ephemeral partnerships
but fairly substantial partnerships spread all over the length and


27

breadth of the country in remote villages which have been carrying
on without registration. To require ali of them to be registered
would place an impossible burden on the thousands of business
undertakings in the villages.

The administrative difficulties are enormous. At present the
only thing mentioned in the Partnership Act is that it may be
registered. It is obvious that mere registration does noi carry us
very far, unless returns are made keeping the Registers uptodate
hot only in respect of the matters which the Report provides but
also in respect of other matters. It must be remembered that at
present, at any rate in West Bengal, partnerships are registered by
the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies who has his office in Calcutta
and there is no sort of agency in the Mufassil. To make registration
of village partnerships compulsory, there must be at least one full-
fledged registration office in each district if not in smaller areas and
there must also be provisions such as we have in the Registration
Act for the copies of the registers and partuership deeds to be sent
to other registration offices. A huge lot of paper work will have
to be done. The Registrar of Partnerships would become a different
official from the present Registrar. One can visualise the vast
amount of expenditure and the enormous staff which will be requir-
ed for the purpose of an efficient organisation for compu.sory regis-
tration of Partnership initially and for the registration of other
reports and other things in the course of years. The expenditure of
public fund upon this must necessarily be enormous and the organi-
sation will take time, In the absence of any public benefit from
incurring this expenditure and complexity, I cannot agree that
compulsory registration of partnership should be introduced now.
In my opinion, therefore, the amendments sought in Sections 11
and 57-A_ of the Draft as well as the consequential provisions in
Sections 58, 59, 63 (a) and 69, except ihe addition suggested after
sub-section (4) of Section 69, should be omitted.

With regard to Section 59, sub-section (2), also I consider this
amendment superfluous. In the case of companies the use of the
word ‘Limited’ and now the word ‘Private’ is necessary i1 order to
give the persons dealing with the companies the exact idea of the
status of the company which is material, because the liability of the
company is limited to the capital and does not extend to the mem-
bers personally. There is not the same necessity for the use of the
word ‘registered’ beyond encumbering the business name of the
firm.

N. C. SEN GUPTA.
GIPN—SI—1 M. of Law/67—27-2.68—450