LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTIETH REPORT

ON

The Transfer of Property Act, 1882

AUGUST, 1977


P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR

CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION.
Government cf India.

12, TUGHLAK ROAD,
New Devui--11
August 25, 1977

My dear Law Minister,

} have great pleasure in forwardi
Report of the Commission on the Trans

Revision of the Act was taken by the Commissiga on Hs own,
having regard to the fa of generat
application and importance which has not been the subject-matter
of review for about half a century.

रु

Since this is the last Report of the
would like to describe briefly the procedt:
mission in making all its Report after | becume its
October, 1971,

The study of different Acts for revision was unde
the Commission either at the request of the Govern

by
OF SHO
motu. When the Act was thus taken up for study and report,
each one of us examined the different provisions of the Act indi-

vidually and consulted relevant 16४७ literature. This हि
study enables us to formulate provisionally cur views as io the
points on which the Act in question needed fo be amended.

Meanwhile, Mr. P. M. Bakshi. Member-Secretary, abso studied
the Act and examined critically the relevant Jegal literature bear-
ing on the points which needed consideration. This literature
consisted of the standard text-books on the subject and judicial
decisions of the Indian High Courts and the Supreme Court of
India as well as the material English. American हे
lian decisions. As a result of this pretimjna om
study, Mr. Bakshi prepared a draft for the considera
Commission and the same was circulated.

hensive
of the



ii

This draft was read at the meetings of the Commission and
‘was examined carefully paragraph by paragraph. Naturally,
during the course of discussion, different points emerged on
several isstes and as a result of the detailed and careful examina-
tion of most of the points, the Commission was able to reach
unanimity. When, however, difference of opinion was of a radical
nature and it was not found possible to evolve unanimity, minutes
of dissent were written by those Members who differed from the
majority view. But such occasions fortunately were not many.

The detailed discussion of the Report disclosed that some
changes may have 10 be made in the drafi Report and they were
accordingly made by the Member-Secretary, Mr. Bak There-
after, a Questionnaire containing the broad issues involved in the
study of the Report was framed whenever necessary and was cir-
culated to the persons, bodies and institutions interested in the
study of the subject.

After replies were received to the Questionnaire, they were
analysed by Mr. Bakshi and in the light of the replies received and
their analysis made by Mr. Bakshi, if the Commission felt that
some changes were required to be made, they were made and as
a result of this process, the draft was finalised.

Since this is the last Report of the Commission, 1 wish to put
on record that ducing the entire period of my Chairmanship, all
my colleagues have given me their fullest cooperation, It is true
that in our discussion, several points of view were expressed with
emphasis by different Members, but the atmosphere of the discus-
sion was always cordial and conformed to the best traditions of
academic debates. I wish to express my grateful appreciation for
the cooperation which my colleagues have consistently given me
in the work of the Commission.

As would be evident, in the method adopted by the Com-
mission in making its recommendations, Mr. Bakshi has plaved
a pivotal role in making the initial draft, and in all further discus-
sions. He has shown remarkable legal acuemen and a profound
knowledge, of the principles of law which were relevant 10. the
debate. His industry. his devotion to his work and his intensive
study of all problems have helped the Commission to a very large
extent, I would like to place on record the Commission’s sincere
appreciation of the assistance which it received from Mr. Bakshi
throughout this period.


it

The same procedure has been followed in making this Report.
All relevant questions have been exhaustively considered and
some significant recommendations have been made. In conse-
quence, the Report has been an exhaustive document and it spreads
over more than 1800 pages.

Jn this connection, I may be permitted to point out that dur-
ing October 1971 to August, 1977, the Commission has forward-
ed to the Government twenty-six Reports including the present
one. All the Reports have not yet been printed; but such of them
as have been printed extend to 1609 printed pages and those not
yet printed, including the present one, cover 5830 typed pages.

Tt is a matter of regret that the Reports forwarded by the Com-
iission to the Union Government have not been implemented as
the Commission hoped they would be. I ought to add that, in
my covering letters to ine Law Minister, I, several times, recom-
mended that the Reports, after they were forwarded to the Gov-
ernment, should be immediately published and opinions of differ-
ent Bar Associations of the country, including the Bar Council of
India and the State Bar Councils should be called for to enable
the Government to decide which of the recommendations should
be accepted. It would also have been worthwhile to hold some
All-India Seminars to consider recommendations of the Commis-
sion and that would have involved a real dialogue between the
academics of the country. 1 trust the present Government will
consider this aspect of the matter.

In our Report on the Civil Procedure Code, we have delibe-
tately added the last Chapter and have observed that the discus-
sion in that Chapter was strictly outside the terms of reference,
because we thought that the discussion in the Chapter and the
recommendations made in it would contribute to improve the
quality of the subordinate Judiciary in the country; but. unfortu-
nately, that part of our Report does not appear to have received
due consideration from the Government. If the present Govern-
ment feels that the recommendations made by the Commission
in that part of the Report should be considered on the merits, T
weuld suggest that the Government should do so an early date.

In conclusion, the Commission wishes to say in all humility
that it tried its best to discharge the onerous responsibilities


lv

placed on its shoulders during the time that it has functioned under
my Chairmanship.

With warm personal regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(P. B. Gajendragadkar)

Hon'ble Shri Shanti Bhushan,

Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs,
Government of India,

Shastri Bhavan,

New Delhi.


Cuarrer Supsect
1. Introductory . - . पु पु .
2, History . . : . . . .
3. Sources and Scheme of Provisions . . .
4. Prelimiaary matters : Scope and Application
5. Scope and Application and Rule of Damdupat
6. Definition of Immovable Property .
7. Definitions pertaining to Instruments
3. Definition of ‘Actionable Claim’
9. Definitionof Notice 2. |
10. Relationship with Contracts Act and Registration Act
il. Definition of Transfer of Property .
12. Property which cannot be transferred.
13. Persons competent to transfer .
14. Acquisition of Property of Homicide
15. Operation of Transfer . न
16. Oral transfers . . . .
17. Conditions restraining Alienation . .
48. Restraint on Enjoyment . + . . : .
9. Condition making interest Determinable on Inschence ei Avcrpid
Alienation . . . . . . . : .
20. Transfers to Unborn Persons . . .
21, Restrictions as te Laterests for Unborn Persons
22, The Rule Against Perpetuities
23. Transfer to a Class . .
24. Dependent Transfers. . . . .
25. Direction for Accumulation . . .
26. Transfer for Benefit of Public . .
27, Vested Interest. . . . न .
28. Contingent Interests. . . पु
29, Conditions Subsequent . . .
30. Conditions of Defeagance  . पु पु
31. Time for Performance . . पु न .
32, Election. se . .
33. Apportionment . . न न . .

Pace

104

204
217
220
224
227
232


Cree

34.
35.
35.

37.
33.
39.

40.

69.

Vi

Ee Susyect

Transfer by Limited Owners ५ . . . . . .
Miiatzari:2 and othor Rig'tts to receiv: moaey out_of Profits . .

Rots Corziavs ari Odliguioas ataexsd to Owaership | of
Land . . पु पु . : oe . . न
Transfer by Ostensible Owner oe eee +
Transfe¢ after Revocable Transfer . . . . . . .

Treuter by Urreiois2d Person subsequently Acquired Interest
Transfers by Co-owners . . . .

Transfers to more than one person + .

Transfers by persons having Distinct Interests .

Priority of Rights created by Transfer. . .
Transferee’s Right under Policy. . . .

Rent Bona Fide paid to Holder under defective Title .
Improvements made in Good Faith 9. 6

Transfer pending litigation. . . . . . .
Fraudulent Transfers. . पु . : - पु .
Part performance as a defence . पु . . .
Sale of Immovable Property . . . . .

Rights and Liabilitics of Seller and Purchaser . . . .
Marshelling beuween Mortgage and Purchaser woe
Discharge of [ncumbrancesonSale . .

Mortgages of Immovable Property. 5 ss

Mode of creating Mortgages . . . . .

Persoas deiving Tele fron Mocigigoss aad Mortgagees . . .
Redemption . . . . . . . . .
Re-transfer on Redemption . . . . पु . .

Rede mption—Two or more Mortgages. . : . .
Right to recover possession. wee
Accessions to mortgaged property . . . .
Improvements. . . . . . . . .
Renewal of lease under mortgage. . . . .

Contracts by the Mortgagor . : . . .

Mort gagor’s enjoyment of property oe oe .

Right to foreclosure on sale. . . . . . .
Mortgagor’s duty to bring one suit . ° . . .
Persoaal liability . . . . . . . पु .
Power of sale without intervention of Court. .

Pace
235
237

239

247
250
284
263
272
275
283
290
295
302
309
343
329
343
375
378
382
424
430
432
4st
452
454

480
485


Vil

‘CHAPTER ‘Supect Pace
70, Accessions . न - . . . . . : . 496
71. Renewal of mortgagedlease. 6 ss 01
72. Right to re-imbursement for necessary expenses . . : . 503
73. Right to proceeds of revenue sale or acquisition . . . . 510
74. Liabilities of mortgagee in possession. . . . . . 31S
75. Receipts taken in fieu of interest. . . . . + : 524
76. Priority of mortgage 2 7 we 526
77. Mortgage to secure uncertain amount when maximum is expressed. 53)
78. Marshalling of securities . . . . . . . . 532
79, Contribution . . न पु . . . . . पु 5335
80. Deposit in Court . . . . . . . . . 536
81. Persons who may sue for Redemption. . पु पु . 540
82. Subrogation Soe . oo. $43
83. Prior and subsequent mortgages 2 so. . 549
84. Mortgage by deposit of title deeds . . . : : . 550
85, Anomalousmorigages . ै9. ७... . ,. 551
86. Charge पु . . पु . . . पु पु 552
87. Merger . . पु . . पु . पु पु 561
88, Provisions as to service of notice and tender. पु . . . 563
89. Rules . . पु . + . . . . 567
90. Definition of lease पु . : : . . . 569
91. Leases for indefinite duration . . + . . 577
92, Formalities for Leases . . . पु . . . 591
93. Rights and liabilities + . . . . मु . . 595
94, Transfer of Lessor’s interest . . पु . . . 608
95. Commencement of leases . पु . : oe 610
96. Determination of lease . . पु पं . . . . 613
97. Waiver of Forfeiture. . . . . . . . )21
98. Waiver of Notice . . . . . . . . . 624
99. Compensation for harassment of Lessee . . पु . . 625

100. Forfeiture for non-payment of Rent . . पु . . : 627

101. Forfeiture for breach of other convenants . पु . . . 629

102, Effect of Surrender and Forfeiture . पु . मु पु . 637

103. Holding over . . . . . . . पु . पु 639

104, Agricultural Leases . . . . . . . . 644

105. Exchange... ek, 647

106. Gifts : Genera! observations . . . . . . : + 652

107, Form, Validity and Effect of Gifts . पु . : : . 656

108, Donatio Mortis Causa and Muslim Law . पु . पु पु 664

109. Actionable Claims Be ३ -+- «4. <- 668

110. Conclusion . . . . . . . . पु 691


REPORT ON THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882
CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1 Reasons for taking up—The Transfer of Property Act, 1882, with
which this Report is concerned, has been taken up by the Law Commission
on its own, having regard to the fact that the Act is a Central Aci cf general
application and importance which has not been the subject-matter of revision
for about half a century.

1.2 Importance—Although, as will be seen later, the Act dees not pur-
port to codify the whole law of property or of transfer of properiy, and ul-
though its apolication in regard to territories, persons and subjects has certein
limitations, yet the fact that a law dealing with the transfer of property affects
almost every citizen, renders it desirable that legislation on the subject showd
be reviewed from time to time. It is not only men of property who are
governed by the Act or by rules of law analogous to its provisions. The
Prov'stons cf the Act, cr analogous rules, are of importance for almost every
citizen. Every individual may not, during his life-span, have occasion to buy
or sell or mortgage land or other immovable property, but elmost everyone
who has a shelter on his head, is either a landlord or a tenant. or a person
who may becomie a tenant by succession. Again, while every one may not
have occasion to be a transferor of immovable property almost every one
is affected by the law relating to what property can or cannot be transferred,
For example, the proposition that future maintenance cannot be transferred
is one which has becn enacted’ by legislation or judicially recognised for
the protection of those who are entitled to maintenance because, without
the right to maintenance, life itself would be imposs ble.

1.3 Social Aim--A prohibit'or against the transier of | his right. and
many other sim prohibitions, have » wider social aim to achieve; and
their importance is not confined 10 the rich. Though they speak the language
a the Jaw and may have a flavour of the court room. their rots lie much

leper.

That. indeed, was the rationale of the legislation pussed in several coun-
tries recognising a compulsory share out of the estates of decendents for
those who were. in fact, economically dependent on them?—a movement? in
which New Zealand seems to have been a pioneer in the Commonwesith.4

1 Section 6(dd).

2 Note. “Decendents Family Maintenance Legistation” (1955) 69 Harvard Law
ev.

3.N. 7. Family Protection Act. 1908 (Part IL). re-enacting the Testators Family
Maintenance Act, 1908. See Allardice v. dice, (1911) A.C, 730,

4 Now the (New Zealand) Family Protection Act, 1955.



2

1.4. Case of gifts—Again, take a transaction that almost every one
enters into—a‘ gift. How a gift can be made is laid down in the Act in a
specific provision’ which applies not only to immovable property, but to
movables as well. That a gift can be made by delivery in the case of tangible
movable property—we are not referring to gifts of debts etc.—is an assump-
tion on which every citizen acts; but if a legal basis for it is to be sought, it
could be sought only in the Transfer of Property Act—at least, in regard to
territories, persons or maiters not excluded from the operation of the Act. It
is well established that if a gift is, for any reason, imperfect, the court will
not approve it by construing it as a trust,—which shows the importance
of the relevant provision in the Act.

1.5. In this connection, it will be of interest to refer to a Bombay
case? in which judgment was delivered by Mulla J. It was held that the
gratuity payable to retired servants of a Railway Company being in the
nature of a gift, it must be completed either by a registered document or
by actual payment as required by section 123 of the Transfer of Property
Act. The delivery of the cheque by the Railway Company to the Mer-
cantile Bank, though coupled with the request to send the amount fo their
London Office to be paid to the defendants, was not equivalent to delivery
to the defendant and section 123 which requires delivery was not satisfied.

A transfer intended to operate as a gift, but invalid as such, will not
constitute the donor a trustee of the property for the intended donee. In
other words, an imperfect gift will not be construed as a declaration of trust.

1.6 Law of Properiy a pre-requisite of social order—Transfer of a right,
of course, pre-supposes the existence of that right. Any society must, as a
pre-requisite of sccial order, allocate rights of contro} over the Jand and
goods existing in its territory. The pattern of allocation may vary, but there
must be some allocation of its resources. Once “proprietorship”— ownership
of the resources—is recognised, there must also be a provision for recogni-
sing subsequent dispositions of the rights as recognised in their origin. This
shows the significance of a law relating to the transfer of property.

The rights may be allocated according to the norms of the particular
society, but there must be some form of allocation. The transition from the
natural state to civil society, according to Rousseau’, “changes usurpation
into a true right and enjoyment into proprietorship”. Civilised society thus
postulates the transformation of de facto acts into legal doctrines in the ficld
of property. Once the rights are recognised by society—setting its seal of
approval—their transfer must also be provided for. The provisions for
transfer could also vary according to the norms of the particular society,
but the provisions must be there.

1.7. Transferability not an essential feature—Of course, transferability
or assignability cannot be considered to be a Sine quad Non or a necessary
and indispensable incident of every kind of property. For example, it has

1 Section 123. a
2 Natha Gulab & Co. v. W. C. Shaller, A..R. 1924 Rom. 88.
3 Rousseau, Social Contract.

4 Mrs. 5. 6. P. Athaide v. The Charity C issic » (1974) 77 न wR.
16 हैं. rity Commissioner, ( ) Bom. LR.



3

been held‘ that the word “property” used in section 55(1) and 56 of the
Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, is wide enough to include a statutory
tenancy created under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates
Control Act, 1947, even though such a tenancy is not transferable.

Property-—Range of

1.75 The term “property” covers a very wide range of rights. Pro-
fessor Tawney’ has pointed out that property is the most ambiguous cate-
gory. It covers a multitude of rights which have nothing in common except
that they are exercised by persons and enforced by the State. Apart from
these formal characteristics, he says, those multitude of rights operate inde-
finitely in economic character, in social effect and in moral justification.
They may be conditional, like the grant of patent rights, or absolute like
the ownership of ground rent. They may be permanent like a frechold
land-—to borrow an expression used in English law previously—or they
may be terminable like copyright. They may be intimate and personal, as
the ownership of clothes and books, or intangible, as shares in a gold mine.

1.8. Concepts of properiy changing from time to time—Legal concepts
of what is property differ from time to time and place to place. What is
property in one legal system may not be so according to another legal system.
inasmuch as the law may fail to provide that the particular assertion deserves
to be recognised or protected by law. This is partly due to the differences
in the social order in which a legal system operates, and partly due to the
state of juristic thinking in the particular country.

1.9. Species of property—Legal literature as well as actual instances
would show that concepts ¢f property and ownership have come up for con-
sideration in situations that are sometimes unusal. For example, the question
whether bees settling on another's land became his property has been the
subject-matter of debate”, and actually arose in England.

In Kearry v. Pattinson", title in bees settling on another’s land was
directly in issue. Some of the plaintiff's bees swarmed in the garden of the
defendant, a neighbour, who re fused the plaintiff permission to enter. When
the defendant subsequently gave permission, the bees had gone. ‘The plain-
iff ap pealed from an adverse judgment in action for conversion based on
the defendant's refusal to allow him to enter. It was held that the title in
the bees persisted only so long as the plaintiff was able to pursue them with-
out trespassing, at which time they reverted to ferae naturae.

The basis of this decision is that bees are ferae naturae, (so that only
a qualified title can be obtained in them). In contrast, it may be noted
that the civil Jaw* provides that an owner’s title is not lost’ because his bees
settle on another's Jand.

1 R. H. Tawney, The Acar € Society (1921) Chapter 5.

2 Note “Bees settling on another's land", 52 Harvard Law Review 335.
3 Kearry v. Pattinson, (1939) 1 All Eng. Rep, 65, 834.

4 Note, 52 Harvard Law Rev. 834.

5 France : “Law of Aj 4, 1889; 1889 Bulletin des Lois Pt. 1, 554; Cf. Code
Napoleon (1804) s. 564; La. Civ. Code Ann, (Dart, 1932) art. $19.



1,10, Wild Animals—incidentally, it may be stated that the mode of
sacquisition of ownership over wild animals in the Western legal system,
-alluded to above, is analogous to the ancient juristic principle of parigraha.
That word literally means appropriation, and is explained in the Virmitro-
daya' as signifying the appropriation of previously unappropriated property,
such as, straw, water, logs cf wood etc. from a forest which is open to the
public as not being under the ownership of any particular individual.

In the famous text of Manu? dealing with the acquisition of fields, the
case of wild animals is specifically mentioned.

1.11. Change in modes of transfer—Modes of transfer permitted by law
also change from time to time. English legislation favouring case of dis-
position furnishes an example of the effect of changing conditions of time
and place*. At the same time, changing social conditions may render neces-
sary new restrictions on the freedom of disposition’, not previously known.

law of the medieval period was dominated by the law of feudal
tenures. With the grow.h of equitable interests in land, the property aspect
and aspect of rendering aid to the government declined. The emergence
of importance of the family and the “family settlement” gave rise to the ela-
borate apparatus of life interest, legal and equitable interests and rules of
Yemoteness and limitations. New claims arising from the changing econo-
mic process, and new forms of incorporeal interests seeking recognition
create problems, for solving which the law must step in at some stage of
another.

1.12. Effect of practical development—That the emergence of new com-
mercial practices in real life may necessitate certain minor re-adjustments is
strikingly illustrated by what took place in England in relation to negotiable
instruments. In the Eustern world, the same process is illustrated by an
interesting institution of Japanese commercial law—Jato Tampo (security
by assignments), which was developed by the courts without any clear
statutory basis’. This transaction permits a debtor to take possession of
goods while vesting the title in the creditor, and has been described as the
Japanese equivalent of “chattel mortage”, conditional sale and similar secu-
rity devices. There is no general provision for public registration even
though registration is separately provided for many particular types of security
‘transactions. ‘The device referred to above permits fiexibility and, to a
certain extent, secrecy. Of course, it seems to postulate that the debtor will
not be able to deal with the assets to the prejudice of third parties.

1 P.N, Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1918), page 55.
2 Many, I, 44.
पुथोरयामा प्थिकीं भार्या पूर्व विदो fag : ।
स्थाण्‌ च्छेंदस्थ केदारमाहु : शल्यवतों मृगम It
३ Dicey, Law and Public Opinion in the 19th Century, pages 202, 203.
4 Simpson Stone, Law and Society, Vol. 1, pages 606-620.

5 Von Mehren, Japanese Legal Order (1963) 76 Harvard Law Review 1170.
1202. 1203.


5

1.13. Personal property as securitv—Since we propose to discuss, at
some length, the question of transfer of future property under the appropriate
sections, we may quote certain observations of a leading authority on the
Subject of personal property security. He has pointed out’ that we have
passed from the whole-hearted acceptance of the self-evident proposition
that a man cannot transfer Property का which he does not own, “to a somewhat
grudging acceptance of the much evident sition that a_ business
enterprise should be allowed to make an mevecable le commitment, to pass
the benefit to its present creditors of all its future property.” He was writing
of the impact of article 9 of the Uniform Commercial code, but the ovserva-
tion is, in substance, true of the device known as the floating charge. It has
been observed?-* with reference to floating charges that although the ficating
charge appears in many ways to be a second-rate security, its wide use
would in Greate that creditors find it a useful device despite its risks.

1.14 Instance of ownership Flats—The emergence of what ate popularly
known as “ownership flats” in multi-storeyed apartments offers another
interesting example of the adjustment of the law to new developments,—
this time in private housing. The traditional legal concepts which assume
that land is in its oweership divided only on the surface, would not obviously
be appropriate for resolving legal issues arising from such flats. Such co-
operat eRe apartments involve many legal problems, foreign to the day-to-day
practice of the law and necessitate changing attitudes towards ownership of
property. The owner of the flat is not the owner of the land below in an
un vata ted form. His control over his own apartment is also restricted,—in
so far as he lacks the freedom of the ordinary home-owner in deciding what
services could be had in the building, what expenses can be undertaken and
so on. The title to the entire land might vest in the co-operative society
or company which has organised the flats, or as may be provided in the
relative documents; the point to be made is that growing urbanisation
renders necessary 2 modification of traditional legal concepts*. These flats
also necessitate? the imposition of restrictions on alienation, not met with
in ordinary conveyances. This is not to say that restrictions are not otherwise
known. The point is that social and economic forces may give a fresh
direction to the law of property.

1.15 Law and social notions—Of course, these forces take time to put
their imprint on the law. It is obvious that in a developed society, the de-
tails of law are brought out by the lawyers and while legal details come

1 Grant Gilmore, “The Purchase Money Priority” (1962) 76 Harvard Law Review

2 Coogan and Bark, “The Impact of Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code
on the Corporate Indenture” (1959) 69 Yale Law Journal 203, 251.

3 See also Pennington, “The Genesis of the Floating Charge” (1956) 23 Modera
Law Review, 630.

4 Lelyser, “The Ownership of Flats—a Comparative Study” (1958) 7 LC.L.Q.

5 Mauning, “The Development of Restraints om Alienation since Grey” (1935) 48
Harvard Law Review 373.


6

from the common consciousness of the people in their essence, the details
themselves would be worked out by the law. The law might, in this process,
become complex and artificial, since it becomes a special science in the hands
of the jurist. Nevertheless, the rights which it recognises and the modes of
transfer to which it lends its sanction, would, speaking broadly and in the
ultimate analysis, correspond with the generally accepted social notions. If
they do not so correspond, it is the business of law reform to consider how
fer such harmony should be brought about.

1.16. Borrowing from other system—Since it is the common conscious-
ness that supplies the ultimate nourishment to legal developments in this field,
another interesting feature exhibits itself. When alien juristic notions are
borrowed by one country from another country, they do not necessarily
operate in their full force or in an unmodified form in the borrowing country,
To a certain extent, an alien principle can be successfully integrated into a
different system—this is what happened in India whexe the notion of trust,
borrowed from English law, has been adopted. But this very instance shows
how, in the process of borrowing, a modification was considered necessary,
and the fragmentation of ownership which was an essential aspect of the
English doctrine of trust, was not adopted in India. The theory of dual
ownership in its full technical minutae would not have thrived in the Indian
soil.

Those rules of Hindu lew which are still in force—for example, that
property can be dedicated to an idol without the formalities required for a
transfer of property to a living person—also furnish an example of the sur-
vival ct our own institutions along with legal provisions borrowed from
elsewhere.

1.17. Roman law of slaves as modifted in Egypt—Another illustration
of this process is furnished by the Roman law as it travelled into 5; 07
While Roman law as Administered in Italy—its home—did not allow slaves
to hold property, Roman slaves living in Egypt were treated as capable of
owning property’.

Again, the standard Roman contract of sale—emptio venditio—was
consensual, and transfer of ownership under it was separate and required
physical delivery—traditio. But, in Egypt, the Romans accepted a diffe-
rent mode which was both a formal written contract (drawn up by a public
official) and a conveyance’.

1.18 Property and recognition in society—Hindu juristic thinking—
That property and its recognition depend on social recognition was an aspect
well-known to Hindu jurist. According to some Hindu jusists, the idea of
property is exclusively indicated by the Sastras and onwership can be acquir-
ed only in the modes recognised’ by them. This view is favoured by Dhares-
wara, Jimutayahana and their followers. On the other hand, Vijnaneswara
and his followers maintain that the idea of property has its basis on popular
recognition without any dependence on Sastras, the modes of acquisition of

1 Alan Watson, Legal Transplants (1973), page 32.
2 Alan Watson, Legal Transplants (1973), page 33.
3. ए, N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1918), page 42.


7

ownership being to collect and prescribe those means of acquisition recog-
nised by popular usage that are regarded as commendable aad as such worthy
of being pursued, ‘This latter view represents the doctrine that property has
dts basis in popular recognition’.

We are not concerned with the merits of the controversy. In its
essence, this controversy resolves itself into this: there are certain modes
of acquiring onwership recognised by the people on all-hands; they are also
the modes laid down in the Sastras as leading to the acquisition of owner-
ship; now, the question is, which is prior 2? So far as the merits are con-
cerned, one would say that public opinion and law act and react. The
Sastras do not merely summarise the modes of acquisition cf ownership
which they find already recognised in popular usage. Nor does the popular
usage merely follow and give effect to the Sastric rules laying dcwn the con-
ditions for the acquisition of ownership*.

A lawyer would always feel inclined to give preference to the former
view as more consonant with reason and common sense, but that is not the
point sought to be made. The point is that the controversy amongst Hindu
jusistic presents the question in a form surprisingly modera.

1.19. Meaning of property under the Act—Reverting to the Act, it is to
be noted that Transfer of Property, Act does not profess to give any compre-
hensive idea of the concept of “property”. Although the Law Commissioners
of 1879 were in favour of adding definitions of “ownership” and “property”*,
those definitions’ were never added. Section 5 of the Act, which defines what
is meant by “transfer”, but dees not define what is meant by “property”. It is
clear from the sections relating to the sale of property—section 54 in particular
—that the word “property” in the Act is not confined to tangible property.

It would appear that the term “property” is, in the Act, used in its
most generic sense®. It means not only the actual physical object, but also
all interest comprised therein which may be the subject of ownership, When,
for example, the Act speaks of property which “can be transferred”, (section
6), it does not confine itself to tangible property. The exceptions enumerated
in section 6 make this amply clear. On the other hand, when we speak
of general property and special property, we refer not tothe subject matter
of ownership but to the interest recognised by law therein.

According to Lord Langdale’, “property is the most comprehensive of
all terms which can be used inasmuch as it is indicative and descriptive of
every possible interest, which the party can have.” The “common of tur-
vary”, or the right of cutting turf in another person’s land and “common of
pasture”, or the right of depasturing cattle on the land of another, are
appendant incorporeal hereditaments, which are regarded in England as

1 P.N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprodence (1918), page 42.
2 P.N, Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1918), Page 42.
3 PLN. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1918), Page 42.
4 Gour, Transfer of Property Act, Topical Introduction to Chapter IL.
5 Para, t.20 infra.
& Gour (1948), page 53, para. 68.
7 Jones v. Skinner, (835) % 1.1. Ch. 90.
2--8851.3७/77


8

failing into the category of real property’, They would be recognised in
this country as rights.

1.20. Definition in draft Bill—In the draft Transfer of Property Bill, the
following definition was proposed in regard to “ownership” and “property”.

“The ownership of a thing is the right of one or more persons to
possess and use it to the exclusion of others. Such ownership is either
absolute or qualified, The thing of which there may be ownership is
called ‘property’.”

In an Allahabad case*, Mahmood 5. stated that section 6, in making
exceptions to transferability, must be understood to use the term “property”
in its widest and most generic legal sense, for otherwise the exceptions would
be wholly unnecessary.

The definition given in the then edition of Wharton's Law Lexicon—
“The highest right a man can haye to anything, being used for that right—
as to lands or tenements, goods or chattels, which does not depend on
another’s courtesy”, was quoted with approval by Mahmood J. in the
Allahabad case*,

1.24. Bentham’s view—The idea of property, Bentham observed, consists
in an established expectation, in the persuasion of being able to draw such
or such an advantage from the thing possessed, according to the nature of the
vase®, Now, this expectation, this persuasion, added Bentham, can only be the
work of law, “I canaot count upon the enjoyment of that which 1 regard
It is this law alone which permits me to forget my natural weakness. ft is
as mine, except through the promise of the law which guarantees it to me.
only through the protection of law that 1 am able te enclose a ficld and to
give mysel£ up to its cultivation with the sure though distant hope of hatvest.”

1.22. Kinds of transfer reguiated by the Act—The Act does not now define
“property” nor does it lay down any criteria for the purpose. Ik pre-supposes
the existence of property recognised by law. It is to be noted that the Act
does not profess to deal exhaustively with all kinds of transfers. Certain pro-
visions of the Act apply to all kinds of transfers between living pessoas (in
particular, the earlier half of Chapter 2). Some of its provisions are meant
only for transfers of immovable property (Chapter 2, latter half). In so far
as the Act deals with the modes of transfer, it mainly deals with——

(a) sale (of immovable property) ;

{b) lease and mortgage (of immovable property) ;

{c) exchange (of both kinds of property);

(d) gift (of immovable as well as movable property); and

(e) transfer of actionable claims—in this case, however, every mode
of transfer is regulated if it is by act of parties,

§ WiH Laws, R.P. (18th Ed.) 395.

2 Clause 3 of the Bilt of 1879 (following New York Code, para. 159).

3 Mohiyuddin v. Kazim Hussain, LR. 13 All. 432 (F.B.)

4 Mohiyuddin v. Kezim Hussain, UL.R, 13 All. 432.

3 Bentham Theory of Legislation (Hilderath Bd.), Chapter 8, page 111,



9

1.23. The Act does not specifically deal with settlements, partitions or
trusts as modes of creation of interests in property. Settlements and parti-
tions were proposed to be included in the draft Bill of 1877, clauses 49 to
53 and clause 93 to clause 98 respectively, but were later omitted as unsuit-
able, This does not, of course, mean that the Transfer of Property Act is
entirely irrelevant to the creation of a trust, because, under the Trusts Act,
the creation of a trust itself requires the transfer of property’, unless the
author is his own trustee’. Where there is no transfer and the author is
not the trustee, a irust cannot arise. This is precisely the reason why spe-
cial statutory provisions, such as section 6 of the Married Women’s Pro-
perty Act, 1882, were needed to deal with the situation where, though there
was no transfer within the framework of the law and no trust in accordance
with the statutory provisions, the legislature desired, as a matter of polic a
to confer on certain persons—-the wife and children of the insured—benel
cial rights in regard to moneys payable under the fife insurance poticy®.

1.23A. Matters outside the Act—There is yet another aspect which shows
that the Act is not exhaustive even in regard to transfers by act of parties. Since
the Act in most of its provisions is confined to transfers between Siving persons,
it does not affect dispositions of property which do not partake of that
character. In particular, ir does not govern transfers to an idol otherwise
than by the medium of a trust in favour of a living person. This is for the
reason that section 5 of the Act, which defines—so far as is material—a
transfer of property as an act by which a living person conveys property
to another living person, is not attracted, since a gift to an idol is nota gift
to a living person. “A juristic person is not necessarily a living person, and
the fact that for some purposes the law by a fiction invests the non-animate
bodies with the fights of persons would not make juristic persons living
persons for all purposes‘, Similarly. a declaration of trust in relation to
immovable property for a public religious purpose, not being governed by
the Trusts Act, is also not governed by the Transfer of Property Act in
regard to its provisions as to the formalities®, Section 123 of the Act (Gifts)
has also no application to dedication of 1880 to the public, since the section
applies only where the donee is an ascertainable person by whom or on
whose behalf a gift can be accepted or refused’. :

1.24. Lines of revision—So much by way of introduction. We need not,
at this stage, anticipate all that we are going to recommend in this Report.
In the American case of Arndt v, Grigg®, the following observations were
made with regard to the law of property which lucidly bring out the im-
portance of the law of property :-~—

“The well-being of every community requires that the title of real
estate therein be secure, and that there be convenient and certain

1 Section 6, Indian Trusts Act. 1882.

2 Bai Mahakore v. Bai Mongla, LL.R. 35 Bom. 403, 407.

3 Cleaver v. Middle Reserve Fund Life Association. (1892) 1 0.8. 147.

4 कि कक y. Venkatalingam, (1927), 53 Madras Law Journal 213, 208
(FB.).

5 Palfiayya v. Ramavadhanulu, (1903) 13 Madras Law Journal 364.

6 Arndt v. Griff, (1890) 134 U.S. 316, 321. ,


10

methods of detgrmining any unsettled questions respecting it. The
duty of accomplishing this is local in nature.... and is this duty is
one of the State, the manner of discharging it must be determined by
the State, and no proceeding which it provides can be declared invalid,
unless in conflict with some special inhibitions of the Constitution or
against natural justice.”

This basic principle will apply whether the property is private or public.
If the property belongs to the State or public authority, the title of the State
or public authority has also to be made secure.

Our approach, therefore, will be to bear the importance of the law of
property in mind in making our recommendations. At the present stage
it will be sufficient to state that the present Act has worked with remarkable
smoothness, and the careful and competent revision undertaken in 1929
solved many of the problems that had arisen up to that period. However,
as our further discussion will show, some problems still remain. Some of
the provisions of the Act have created difficult problems in interpretation—
for example, section 5. Some of them have been found to be obscure—
e.g. section 6. Some have revealed lacuna or incompleteness—e.g. section
10. Some, while appearing to be clear in themselves are found, when read
with others, to disclose internal inconsistency in the Act which requires
attention—e.g. sections 5, 6 and 43, when read together. The sociological
or commercial importance of some of the provisions—e.g. section 120 to 123
and the last Chapter—is now far greater than in 1882. 1 will therefore, be
our concern to remove defects in all these provisions. .


CHAPTER 2
HISTORY

2.1. Policy of codification—The Transfer of Property Act was pre~
pared in pursuance of the policy of the Government to prepare a self-
contained Civil Code for India. “The Commission appointed for the pur-
pose prepared the draft of the Succession Act, which according to their
‘fecommendation was to be enacted as the first chapter of the Civil Code.
When the draft was submitted for the approval of the Secretary of State,
ig was returned with instructions that that Act should be enacted without
teference to the projected Civil Code. It was so enacted and became
Act 5 of 1865. The draft of the Transfer of Property Act which the
Third Law Commission prepared was submitted with the following note :
“It is probable that several of these rules will eventually find a different
place whenever a final distribution and rearrangement of the whole law
shall have been effected; but some blending of subjects is unavoidable
jn a work which the Government has, for sufficient reasons, instructed
us to submit to it in portions, as each portion is completed.” The Govern-
ment had agreed to scientifically arrange at a later stage the various chap-
aers of the Civil Code thus produced. But as this was never done, the
Select Committee had to make the present Act, as far as possible, self-
contained. Hence the reference in section 4 to the Contract and the
Registration Acts. Referring to that section, the Law Commissioners
wrote : “We would declare that al} chapters and sections of the Bill which
relate to contracts should be taken as part of the Contract Act, 1872.”

2.2. Previous law.—Prior to the passing of the Act, the state of law
relating to transfers was in a chaotic state? One of the earliest Madras
cases illustrates this chaos. The law on the subject was, for the most part,
fragmentary, The enactments mentioned in the Schedule to the Act, now
superseded and repealed,‘ covered only a part of the field,

2.3. Situation in 1850.—The background in which the Act was enacted
could be best illustrated by taking up first the question of applicability of
English law. The situation which presented itself during the fifties of the
yineteenth century as regards the law applicable to those parts of the
country which were under British rule was not a very happy one. On the
one hand, it was not clear how far the English law app! Red, even in the
Presidency Towns. In the celebrated case of Mayor of Lyons v. East
India’ Company, Lord Brougham expressed the opinion that the Indian
inhabitants were governed by their own laws and that English Jaw applied
enly to British subjects and other foreigners who sought the protection of
the factories, but even in their case good many parts of English 19७ which
from the nature were unsuited to the conditions of the colonies could not
be taken to have been so introduced. It was on this reasoning that he
held that the Mortmain Act and the statutes which incapacitated aliens
from holding land, did not apply to Calcutta.

1 34 Law Commission (1879) 6th Report.
2 Gour, Comment on Section 1.
3 Ekumusgamy v. Hossain Rowthen, LL-R. 1 Mad. 1 (P.C.) See para. 2.3 infra
ection 2.
5 Mavor of Lyons v. East India Company (1837) 1 Moore Indian Appeals 135.
i



12

2.4. So far as the mofussil courts were concerned, Bengal Regulation
वा of 1793—subsequently re-enacted in the Bengal Civil Courts Act,
1887, Bombay Regulation IV of 1827, section 26, and similar provisions
in Civil courts Acts directed, in substance, that where no specific rule exis-
ted, the court shall decide according to justice, equity and good conscience.
Although this direction was generally construed as authorising the courts
to apply rules cf English law, that position was subject to the important
qualification that the rules of English law must be found appropriate to
Indian circumstances.* This qualification became of importance in the
ficld of law of property. How far the English law would apply became
a subject of debate in almost every instance. In a case of 1874, for
example,’ the question whether the rule against perpetuities applied to
charitable trusts was considered at length by the Privy Council. ‘The
appeal was from the Settlement of Penang, but the observations made by
Six Montague Smith apply also to the territories in India then under the
British rule. The observations were as follows :—

“Whilst English Statutes relating to superstitious uses and to
mortmain ought not to be imported into the law of colony, the mule
against perpetuities was to be considered to be part of it. This rule
which certainly has been recognised as existing in the law of England
independently of any Statute, is founded upon considerations of public
policy, which seem to be applicable to the conditions of such a place
as Penang as to England, viz. to prevent the mischief of making
property inalienable unless for objects which are in some way useful
or beneficial to the community. It would obviously be injurious to the
interests of the island if convenient for the purposes of trade or for
the enlargement of town or a port could be dedicated to a purpose
which would for ever prevent such a beneficial use of it. The law
of England has, however, made an exception also on grounds of
public policy in favour of gifts for purposes useful and beneficial to
the public and which in a wide sense of the term are called charit-
able uses and this exception may properly be assumed to have passed
with the rule into the law of the colony.”

2.5 In a case decided in 1879—this time on appeal from Calcuttas—
the Privy Council made these general observation which are relevant to
the subject—“If the principle invoked depends on any technical rule of
English law, it would, of course, be inapplicable to a case determinable
like this on broad principles of equity and good conscience. It is only
applicable because it is agreeable to general equity and good conscience.
And again, if it possesses that character, the limits of its applicability are
not to be taken as rigidly defined by the course of English decisions,
although these decisions are undoubtedly valuable in so far as they recog-
nize the general equity of the principle and show how it has been applied
by the courts of this country”. Thus, in each case it became obligatery
to consider how far the English rule was appropriate fer the physical,
social and historical conditions in India.

2.6 Necessity for codified law—tt was in this background that it
was considered necessary to have a codified law on the subject. The

1 Warden Seth Sam v. Luckpathy Royjee Lallah, (1862) 9 Moors Tndian Appeals

2 Prap Chash Neo v. Ong Cheng Neo (1874) Law Reports 6 P.C. 381, 394.
3 Raia Kishendatta Ram y. Raja Mumtaz Ali Khan (1879) LLR. 5 Cal. 198,



13

Act was first drafted as far back as 1868-1870. Macaulay had, in 1833,
written “that no country ever stood so much in need of a Code of faw as
India, and I believe also that never was a country in which the want
might be so easily supplied.” The British Parliament accepted this view
and at one time intended to draft an Indian Code, for which several
efforts were made, but ultimately given up. The Transfer of Property
Act itself passed through numerous hands, and was revised by several
Commissions, with the result that its final draft remained ia suspense for
twelve years from 1870.

2.7 The Act was passed in 1882. In the same period were enacted
the Negotiable Instruments Act (in 1881), and the Acts on Trusts and
Basements (in 1882). History of the drafting of the Act is represented
by the following stages—

(a) The Third Law Commission -This Commission drafted the
First Bill on the subject.

{b) Despatch of 1877-—A body of substantive civil law had long
been in course of formation for India. In 1877, whitely Stokes,
who had for Jong been the Legislative Secretary, became the
Law Member in succession to Lord Hobhouse. The Govern-
ment’s despatch of 1877 contained Whitely Stockes’s programme
of work and plan of operations.’ It laid stress on reduction to
a clear, compact and scientific form, of the uncodified branches
of the substantive law. This, it was said, was preferable io
ascertaining the jaw “only from English text-books written
solely with reference to the system of English law, and from a
crowd of decisions, often obscure and sometimes contradictory,
to be found in the English and Indian law reports.” The
Government, therefore, proposed the codification, besides others,
of the following branches of substantive law—Trusts, Easements,
Alluvion and Dituvion, Master and Servant, Negotiable Tnstru-
ments, and Transfer of Immovable Property, in the order men-
tioned. This despatch was the genesis of further work on the
subject.

(c) Work subsequent to the despatch —The Secretary of State accept-
ed these proposals of the Government of India. Dr. Whitley
Stokes was appointed to remodel the Bills relating to the Trans-
fer of Property and Negotiable Instruments and to  prevare
Bills on other subjects, The work took about two years.”

(d) Fourth Law Commission.—On the 11th February, 1879, through
3 notification issued by the Governor-General-in-Council a
Commission was appointed to enquire into and consider the
provisions of the draft Bills mentioned above and to report
thercon, and to make such suggestions as to the codification of
the substantive law of British India as might seem desirable.
The members of the Commission which came to be kaown as

the Fourth law Commission—were :
Whitley Stokes, Sir Charles Turner, Chief Justice of the Madras
High Court, and Raymond West, a Judge of the Bombay High Court.
For our purposes it is enough to state that the Fourth Law Commission

1 Ubert, Government of India, page 357.
2 Stokes, The Angto-Indian Codes, Vol. 1. para. xix


14

recommended that the law relating to the subject dealt with by the Trans-
fer of Property Bill should be codified, and the Bill already drawn for the
Purpose by the Commission should be passed into law.

2.8 Objective of Civil Code-—The intention was that when the body
of subs‘antive civil law enaced for India is te-arranged in a more compact
and convenient form than that of a series of fragmentary portions from
time to time passed by the Legislature, the chapters on sale, Mortgage,
Lease and Exchange (contained in the Present Act), will probably be
Placed in close connection with the rules contained in the Contract Act.
But, till then, they may fitly be left in a law containing what the contract
Act does not coniain, namely, general rules regulating the transmission
of property between living persons.

2.9 Amendiments.—It may be convenient to mention briefly the im-
Porlaat amendmenis that have taken place since the Act was enacted. The
first important amending Act was Act 6 of 1904, which amended sections
1, 59, 69, 107 and 117. The Cede of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)
fepealed sections 85 to 90, 92, to 94, 96 and 97 and amended section 100.
The amendments were mainly consequential on the inclusion, in. the Code,
of certain provisions as to mortgages. Act 11 of 1915 amended sections
59 and 69. In 1920, 1925, 1926 and 1927, the Act was amended in
certain points of detail.

The most important amendment was, however, made by Act 20 of 1929,
which was passed to implement the recommendations made by a special
Committee. The special Committee consisted of distinguished lawyers and
forwarded its report in 1927.

The Act of 1929 made extensive amendments. It amended sections
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 15, 39, 40, 43, 52, 55, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 67, 69,
71, 72, 76, 82, 83, 84, 98, 100, 102, 103, 106, 107, 108, 111, 128, 129
and 130, It revised sections 16, 17, 18, 53, 56, 61, 68, 73, 81, 91, 95,
96, 101 and 119.

16 also inserted new section—53-A( 59-A, 60-A, 60-B, 63-A, 65-A,
67-A, 69-A, 92. 93, 94 and I14-A. It also omitted sections 74, 75 and 80.

2.10 Principally, the Amendment Act was concerned with the doct-
tine, of notice, the doctrine of part-performance, sale of immovable pro-
petty, the law relating to mortgages and actionable claims. If it is not
pedantic to say so, one would like to state that many of the amendments
effected in 1929 brought the statute law nearer to some of the important
doctrines of equity. The fusion of law and equity that took place in
England in the latter half of the nineteenth century has a striking parajlel
in the amendment Act of 1929. The device adopted was <lifferent; the
very doctrines were being given legislative recognition. But the result
was to bring the statutory law in harmony with the dictates of equity.
We shall later deal in detail with the amendments effected by this Act.

Act 4 of 1938 and Act 6 of 1944 effected certain amendments con-
cerning poiicies of insurance—an instance of the impact of increasing
commercialisation, The other amendments as well as the adaptations
made by various Adaptation Orders need not be mentioned in the present
Yapid survey.


15

2.11 Equity—Incidentally, the above resume of the important
amendments would show how intimate is the connection between the law
-of property and equity jurisprudence. Hardly any important section of
the Act can be understood in its irue sense without a background of the
relevant principle of equity.

Another feature that stands out on a study cf the amendents is the
over-whelmingly large number of amendments that touched the provisious
relating to mortgages in the amending Acts of 1904, 1908, 1915 and
1929. This is understandable, because about one-third of the sections
in the Act are concerned with mortgages. Apart from this purely numeri-
al aspect, it should be mentioned that vital amendments were made in the
fasciculus of sections which constitute the basic provisions on mortgages
sections 59 to 63.

2.12 Gist of amendments made in 1929.—It is desirable now to give
in detail the gist of important amendments made in 1929. The Act made
important amendments in the doctrine of notice. in particular, it ex-
tended the category of constructive notice. It also removed the exception
regarding Hindus, in section 2, Taking note of the revision of the law of
registration that had taken place, it provided that the registration of do-
cuments by which a transaction relating to immovable property is effected,
is deemed to be notice.

As regards the property that can be transferred, the amendment
inserted a prohibition against the transfer of the right to maintenance. in
whatsoever manner arising or secured or determined. This amendment
was rendered necessary by the pre existing conflict of decisions on the sub-
ject. In regard to gifts to a class (sections 13 and i4), a welcome change
was made by abolition of the English} Common law rule in Leake v.
Robinson’, and by adopting a suggestion made by Wilson J. in an carlier
Calcutta case. In substance, the new provision enacted that where a giit
to a class fails, the failure is not to be in respect of the whole class, but
only so far as the gift relates to those persons who fall within sec‘ions 13
and 14, i.e., those members who ia regard to whom the gift becomes in-
valid, ‘

2.13 The law regarding the validity of clauses directing accumula-
tion was also sought to be modified. The doctrine of it Hs penden
(section 52} was the subject matter of an omcndment which removed
certain difficulties arising from the case law?, The law relating to fraudu-
lent transfers (section 53) was modified by revising the section on the
lines of sections 172 and 173 of the Law of Property Act, 1925. A cer-
tain amount of reatness was introduced by splitting up the section so as
to deal separately with transfers with and without consideration.

2.14 One of the mest important amendmzots made by the Act was
by way of statutory rec: on of the well-known dactrine of part-per-
formance. There had been an acute conflict of 2 ions on the suviect.

2.14A Sate of immovable property or of ai 8६ मी it was now
to be made only by a registered instrument, i of the value of
ithe property. This amendment represents a movement in the direction

1 Leake v. Robinson (1817) 35 English Report 2979.
2 Ram Lal v. Konya Lal, (1886) LL-R. 12 (७, 663.


of formalisation of the procedure for transfer—a contrast with the amend~
ment pertaining te the doctrine of part performance (section 53A) which
was, in substance, aimed at reducing the importance of formalities.

2.15 A pretty large number of amendments made in 1929 related to
the law of mortgages. The class of mortgage known as mortgage by
conditional sale had been a source of trouble to the courts, as it was often
very difficult to decide whether the transaction was a sale (with condition
of repurchase) or merely a mortgage by conditional sale. It was provided
that no transaction can be a mortgage by conditional sale unless the whole
arrangement (sale and the usual conditions) was embodied in one single:
document. The governing test was still the intention of the parties, sin =
the new statutory proviso was of a negative character. It did not provide
that wherever there is oniy one document evidencing the sale and the ccn-
dition, the transaction is to be deemed only a mortgage by conditional sale
irrespective of the intention of the parties. We are mentioning this since
there arose a controversy on the subject even after the amendment, The
definition of usufructuary mortgage was amended in order to get over a
Madras ruling dealing with the case! where possession has not actually
been given. The principal remedy of the mortgagee in such a case would
be to demand possession, failing which he could demand the mortgage
money—this was separately provided by amending section 68.

2.16 A new definition of “anomalous mortgage” was also added in
section 58(g). Rights of mortgagees under such mortgages were to be
governed by revised section 98—principally by the contract as evidenced
in the mortgage deed, and. so far as such contract does not extend, by
local usage.

2.17 The policy of compulsory registration was sought to be imple-
mented by providing, in section 59, second paragraph, that even where the
principal money secured is Jess than one hundred rupees, the mortgage
must be effected by a registered and attested instrument or (except in the
case of a simple mortgage) by delivery of the property. The question
whether attestation should continue to be insisted upon in the case of mert-
gages does not seem to have been discussed.

2.18 The prohibition of consolidation of mortgages—section 61—
underwent a far-reaching change. The right to redeem separately or
simultaneously two or more mortgages executed by a mortgagor in favour
of the same mortgagee (in the absence of a contract to the contrary) was
strengthened. Consolidation at the instance of the mortgagee was not to
be allowed, even when the same property was mortgaged more than once,

A new section—Section 63-A—was inserted to deal with improve-
ments to a mortgaged property. Curiously, the case where an improve-
ment is effected by the mortgagee with the consent of the morigagor—ex-

ress or implied—is net expressly covered in section 63A(2). This could
| been achieved by adding, after the words “public authority”, the
words “or with the consent express oc implied of the mortgagor”.

2.19 A new section—Section 65A—permitted the mortgagor, while
in possession to grant a lease which would be binding en the mortgagee-
Certain conditions were imposed cs to the kind of leases which the mort-
gagor can grant. The conditicn in section 65A (2)(e) as to the dura-
tion of the lease (maximum three years) may not be practicable. though

हि, 41 Mad, 259.

“Subammah v. Narayya (1917)


17

of course, these conditions can be varied under section 65A(3). But,
then a specific provision in the mortgage deed and careful conveyancing
would be required.

By amending section 67 (cight to foreclosure and sale), certain rest-
tictons were imposed as to the right of fore-closure in certain kinds of
mortgages.

2.20 A new Section—Section 67A—was added to compel a mort-
gagee who holds more than one mortgage executed by the same mortga-
gor to bring a suit on all his mortgages in certain cases. The object was.
te prevent a sale of mortgaged property in execution of a decree for sale
in respect of one mortgage, reserving the rights of the same person as.
mortgagee under other mortgages in his favour, whether prior or sub-
sequent.

As regards the right of the mortgagee to bring a suit for the mortgage
money under section 68, certain changes were made, of which the most
important was the addition of sub section (2), to compel the mortgagee
to exhaust all his available remedies against the mortgaged property be-
fore obtaining a money decree unless he abandoned the security.

The mortgagee’s power cf sale without intervention of the court was.
also clarified. The amendment allowed the same powers of private sale
sin the case of English mortgages, whether the mortgage deed conferred
a power or not. An amendment was also made to allow the appointment
of a receiver in cases where the right te exercise the power of private sale
had arisen. This was on the analogy of the English law. These matters
were dealt with in sections 69 and 69-A.

2

1 Certain amendments were made concerning marshalling and
subrogation. The main rules of the law of subrogation were recognised
in the new section.'

2.22 As regards charges governed by section 100, it was made clear’
that the charge-holder has the same rights, as far as the case may be, as
a simple mortgage. It was also provided that the charge as such cannot
be enforced against property in the hands of a transferee for considera-
tion without notice. Incidentally, the last mentioned amendment is an
instance of the influence of equitable doctrines.

2.23 In regard to leases, service of notice to quit by post was pro-
vided for, (Section 106). Registration of all leases, from year to year or
for any {erm exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent was made com-
pulsory. The instrument of lease must be executed by both the parties.
In so far as registration was made compulsery of a lease for a term ex-
ceeding on year say. even two years—certain practical difficulties may
arise. Also, the amendment requiring both the parties to sign the lease-
seems to be contrary to the then existing usage,’ perhaps even to the cur-
Tent practice is to the contrary.

These, in brief, are the important amendment of 1929.

1 Sections 91-92.
2 fer the ofd law, see Syed Alam Sahib v, Ananthnayam (1910) LL.R. 35 Mad.
5.


CHAPTER 3
SOURCES AND SCHEME OF PROVISIONS

_ 3-1 Introductory—Before proceeding to consider the Act section by
‘section, it will be useful to deal briefly with the sources of its provisions
and with its general scheme.

3.2 Previous statute law—There was not much of statute law in
India on the subject of transfer of Property, and, in drafting the present
Act, the framers do not seem to have drawn much on the pre-existing
Central Acts. The Act caanot, therefore, be described as a mere re-enact
ment of pre-existing statutory provisions. It drew upon English rules.
While English terminology and conveyancing practice have left their mark
on many of the general provisions—particularly, Chapter 2—and on the
specific provisions relating, for example, to mortgages. it is net to be over-
looked that the Act has, in the content of many of its provisions, deliberte-
ly departed from the English law.

For example, in England, at the time when the Act was drafted. loss
arising from destruction by fire of leased immevable property was to be
borne by the lessee, while in India, under section 108, it is not 50... Simi-
larly, in England, at the time when the Act was enacted, an alien could
not hold immovable property except in certain cases. This was also the
position int ancient Rome’. But it was not the law in India even before
the Act’, and is not the law under section 7. That section, so far as is
material, provides that every person competent to contract and entitled to
transferable property is competent to transfer such property. It may be
Stated that an adult alient is competent to contract.

3.2A English law followed only to a limited extent—It is apparent
from the above that it is only to a limited extent that the Act is based
upon the English law of real Property’. It would, therefore, be correct
to say that the general scheme adopted in the Act in Tegard to the pre-
existing law is to lay down settled rules where there was a conflict. to add
certain rules where there was obscurity, and to abrogate rules which were
found to be unjust or inappropriate, and to regulate the transfer of pro-
perty in its general principles and, to a limited extent, in its modes of
transfer.

3.3 Equity—It would be of interest to note that equity supplied the
source of material for some of the rules. and was also the guiding spirit

in many others. This has both a positive and a negative 85020. Tt
would net be improper to mention that when certain provisions of the Act
based on corresponding rules of equity recognise the overriding richts of a
bone fide purchaser for value without notice, the ultimate rationale is

an undiluted sense*, It

that an equitable right cannot be a jus in rem
“LHonter. introduction to Roman Law, Chapter on Law of Property.
2 Mavor of Lyons v. East India Company, 1 Moores’ Indian Appeals 175.

3 Taljo Bibi v. Bhagwan Prasad. VLR. 16 All, 295.

4 Maitland, quoted by H. 6. Hanbury, “Field of Modern Equity” (Ap-il 1929)
Law Quarterly Review. oe

18


19

is the very key-note of equitable jurisdiction that equity acts in personam..
Hence, equity will not act against a person who is innocent and has given:
value.

3.4 It was pointed out by Matland! that equity has added to our
legal system, together with a number of detached doctrines, “one novel and.
fertile institution, namely, the trust, and three novel and fertile institutions,
namely, specific performance, injunction and judicial administration of
estates”. Indian statute law has made full use of all these creations of
equity. The topics just now mentioned did'not find a place in the Act
{as originally enacted), but it may be noted that part-performance is a
part of its provisions after the amendment of 1929.

3.5 Sale of wife—That there were certain antiquated practices which.
were, fortunately, not given legislative sanction in express terms is worth
illustrating. In England, as late as the 18th century, the wife was treated
as a chattel. The following extract from a short article? by Mr. Courtney
Kenny published in the Law Quarterly Review makes interesting reading.
After recording some early instances including an aristocratic instance as
old as the reign of Edward 1, of the transfer of a wife, the writer tells.
us—

“The great majority of those who took part in wife-selling seem to
have had no doubt that what they did was lawful, and even conferred
legal rights and exemptions. They were far from realising that their trans-
action was an utter nullity; still less that it was an actual crime and made
them indictable for a conspiracy to bring about an adultery.

“Lord Mansfield could recall (3 Burross 1438) ‘a cause in
the Court of Chancery wherein it appeared that a man had formerly”
(formally) ‘assigned his wife over to another man. And Lord
Hardwicke directed a prosecution for that transaction, as being noto-
tiously and grossly against public decency and good manners.

“From the beginning of the last quarter of the eighteenth century
until nearly the end of the nineteenth one, journalists frequently re~
corded instances of wife-selling. The last that I have noticed was
in 1887 at Sheffield. That town and also Manchester and the metro-
politan market of Smithfield and a market of the same name at
Birmingham—appear to have been conspicuous for the practice.
Had it not penetrated into Wessex too, Hardy would scarcely have
ventured to make it the starting point of his ‘Mayor of Casterbridge’.

“In no instance of which I have read does the wife appear to
have exhibited any reluctance to be alienated. Nor is this surpris-
ing; for she might well think that by any average Englishman she
would likely to be better treated than by a husband who had so con-
spicuousty shown his disregard for her.

“The prices paid differed very markedly from a pint of beer to
a handful of guineas. For there would be corresponding differences
in the attractiveness of the ladies themselves; and also in the zeal of
their purchasers, for the buyer might be merely a casual stranger or,
on the other hand, an attached paramour.

1 Maitland, quoted by H. G. Hanbury, “Field of Modern Equity” (April 1929)
Law Quarterly Review.
2 Kenny “Wife Selling in England” (October 1929) 1.08, 57 MLJ. 182, 183.


20

“Customary solemnity required that the husband should lead
the wife into the market by a halter—usually of rope but sometimes
of ribbon—and that the purchaser should take his halter and lead
her away by it—-Cf. The Times of Match 30, 1796, and July 18,

“But the strongest proof of the high current estimate of the
efficacy of these transactions is the trouble sometimes taken to create
formal evidence of them. A striking instance of this is preserved in
the British Museum (Additional Mas. 32,084). It is a bill of sale
of a wife, couched in such full technical form as to suggest that it
may have feliowed some accustomed precedent.”

3.6 The Act, though the first of its kind introduced in India, does
not entirely create new rights, or impose new obligations. It docs net
professedly do more than “define and amend” the law relating to the
transfer of property by act cf the parties. It is not, therefore, exhaus-
tive. However, it is self-contaied,'~ in so far as it goes. The Act re-
fates to the transfer of property iter vivos, as the Indian Succession Act
relates to the devolution of property after death. In the words of the
framers, “read with the Contract Act, this Bill covers almost the whole
of the ground which could be profitably occupied by law relating to the
transfer inter vivos of interests in property, and for the convenience of the
practitioner it could hardly be enacted in a more accessible form”™.’

3.7 Scheme—This, then. is a general description of the sources of
the provisions of the Act. The scheme of the Act may’ he briefly des-
cribed at this stage. After certain preliminary matters dealt with in the
first few sections, the Act proceeds to indicate a few genera! principles re-
lating to the transfer of property by act of parties. These are first dealt
with in relation to transfers of all property, whether movable or immov-
able, and the sections concerned contain important provisions. enacted as
matters of legal policy. in regard to what property may be transferred. whe
are'the persons competent to transfer, the mode of transfer. the operation
of a transfer and similar matters (sections 5 to 9). The acteal cont:nt
of the transfer is sought to be governed by detailed provision in sections
10 to 34; these principally deal with the conditions on which interests of
various classes may be created.

It is in this context that the difficult but unavoidable subject of con-
tingent and vested interests comes up for consideration. While simple and
absolute transfers do not create many legal problems, conditional transfer
raises the question how far the condition is valid, what happens if the con-
dition is fulfilled and what happens if the condition is not fulfilled. A dis-
cussion of the nature and effect of the conditions is a necessary concomi-
tant of the two kinds of interests—-vested and contingent—contemplated
by the Act, to which reference has been already made above. Since the
draftsmen of conveyances are not always precise or exhaustive in their
description or anticipation of the possible events, it is desirable that the
Jegislature should give a clear indication as to what happens when a trans-
fer is conditional on the performance of an act but the time for perfor-

1 Choreshav. Mt. Maklum bi, A.1.R, 1928 Nag. 223.

2 Ghasi Ram v. Kundan Bai, A.LR, 1940 Nag. 163.

3 Corporation of Cal. v. Arun Chandra, ALR. 1934 Cal. 862.
4 Report ‘1879.



24

amance is not specified, or the time is specified but the performance is pre-
vented by fraud. All these matters take up sections 10 to 34. The in-
ituence of English legal concepts is clearly seen in the structure and _ter-
aminology of these sections. Many of the illustrations are drawa from

reported English cases. Some of them echo arguments addressed at the
bar in Chancery.

3.8 These sections have their counterparts in the Succession Act.
Occasionally, implementation of the terms of a transfer creates difficulties
where a person professes to transier property which he has no right to
transfer and, at the same time, confers a benefit on the owner of the pro-
perty. This situation is dealt with in the interesting doctrine of “elec-
tion” (section 35), which concerns the obligation imposed upon a party—
originally by the courts of equity—to choose between two inconsistant or
alternative tights!. After this provision of considerable theoretical interest
involving ethical issues, the Act goes on to enact two sections of a more
prosaic character, dealing with apportionment of periodical payments and.
apportionment of the benefit of an obligation on severance—sections 36
and 37.

3.9 These general principles ate intended to apply to ail kinds of
transfers between living persons by act of parties, In regard to tcansfers
of immovable property, certain principles required to be dealt with in de-
tail, These provisions, contained in section 38 to 53A, and confired to
transfers of immovable property, do not, of course, indicate that if a simi-
Jar problem arose in regard to a transfer of movable property, the legis-
lative approach would have been necessarily different. The need for
making detailed provisions as to transfers of immovable property arose
not because of any radically different approach as a matter of policy, but
decause certain kinds of problems either arise more frequently from trans-
fers of immovable property or assume greater practical importance be-
cause of the value which immovable property generally possesses. It may
also be observed that while the general principles as to transfer of pro-
perty apply whether the land is agricultural or not, and while the Act (in
sections 106 and 107) expressly or impliedly recognises the special posi-
tion of agricultural tenancies, yet sections 38 to 534 were enacted as part
of a scheme that was intended to apply, in general, to agricultural land
as well as to other immovable property. Having regard to the tremendous
importance of agricultural land in the economy of the country, detailed
and elaborate provisions to dea) with situations frequently recurring o¢
possessing practical importance seem to have becn considered necessary.
Perhaps, the sections may not retain their present importance in the coming
century.

3.10 After enunciating general principles governing transfer of pro-
perty, the Act (in sections 54 to 57) deals more pacticalarly with sales
‘of immovable property; in sections 58 to 104 with mortgages of immovable
‘property and charge; and in sections 105 to 117 with leases of immovable
property. Sections 118 to 121, not confined to immovable property, deal
with exchange. ‘The logic of dealing first with sales needs to comment.
Sale represents a transfer of all the rights absolutely. A mortgage, even
where expressed in the form of a transfer of cwnership, operates only as
a security, A lease does not transfer all the interest of the transferor.

1 Bapathamma v. Shankaranarayan, ALR. 1965 $c. —TBapaihammav. Shankaranarayan, AUR. एक 8C. MS


22

Next are dealt with transfers without consideration made voluntarily,
that is to say, gifts—in sections 122 to 129: A peculiar species of non-
tangible property, which is described in the Act by the name of action-
able claims, comes up for consideration in sections 130 to 137.

3.11 Differentia—At this stage it may be useful to mention some of
the important concepts which form the basis of distinction in the scheme
of the Act. These differentia could be usefully emphasised, since on them
depends the answer to the question whether a particular provision applies
to a particular transfer or pot.

First, we may take up the kind of transfer. In general—the only
exception seems to be the case of a charge—the Act is not concerned
with the transfer by operation of law er with a transfer operative on
death. It is confined to transier by acts of parties between living per-
sons, as distinct from transier by operation of law and transfers operative
on death.

3.12 Transfers with or without consideration—Assuming that the
transfer is by an act of parties between living persens, then, for the pur-
poses of ceriain sections, it still remains important to consider whether the
transfer is without consideration or whether it is with consideration. This
is particularly so in the case of the transfers mentioned in the sections
contained in’ the fatter-half of Chapter 2, dealing with certain general
principles applicable to transfers of immovable property. Either the
rights of the transferee or the rights of third persons or the rights of a
subsequent transferee are, in many cases, made to depend on the presence
or absence of consideration.

In this category, for example," fall section 35 (election), section 38
(Transfer by persons authorised only under certain circumstances to trans-
fer), section 39 (Transfer where a third person is entitled to maintenance),
scction 40 (Burden of obligation imposing restriction on use of land or
of obligation annexed to ownership but not amounting to interest or
easement), section 41 (Transfer by ostensible owner), section 42 (Transfer
by person having authority to revoke former transfer), section 43 (Trans-
fer by unauthorised person who subsequently acquires interest in property
transferred), section 45 (Joint transfer for consideration), section 46
(Transfer for consideration by persons having distinct interest), section
49 (Transferce’s right under policy), section 53 (Fraudulent transfer) and
section 53A (Part-performance). And, of course, the absence of con~
sideration is one of the essential ingredients of gift as defined in section

3.13 Meaning of expressions “consideration” and “price”—Since the
expression “consideration” is not defined in the Act, though used in seve-
ral sections, one may presume that it will have the same meaning as in the
Indian Contract Act. 1872. Section 4 of the ‘Transfer of Property Act.
1882 in fact, provides that the chapters and sections of the Act “which
relate to contracts” shall be taken as part of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Tf not on a literal interpretation of this section, at least by analogy, one
can refer to the definition in the Indian Contract Act.

The expression “price” used in the definition of sale in section 54—
a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid or premised or part-
paid and part-promised—is also not defined in the Act, and here again

1 The list is not exhaustive.


23

we may presume that the meaning given to that expression in the Sale of
Goods Act can be drawn upon. It may incidentally be noted that section 4
of the Transfer of Property Act, under which the Indian Contract Act,
1872 is attracted, was enacted at a time when the topic of sale of goods
also formed a part of the Indian Contract Act.

3.14 Tangible and intangible—Immovable and movable—Apart from the
distinction! based on consideration, in the scheme of the Act, the distinction
between tangible and other property is important with reference to sale
under section 54. The distinction between immovable and movable pro-
perty is important for the purposes of several sections of the Act, including
the datter half of Chapter 2, which is confined to immovable property, and
including the sections dealing with specific modes of transfer such as sale,
Tease, gift and exchange, where the that property is movable property
either renders the relevant provision inapplicable, or leads to the application
of a rule different from that applicable to immovable property.

3.15 Hindu andi Mohamedan rule—The expression “tangible” reminds
one of certain texts of Hindu law. A mortgage of future Property is, per-
haps, strictly speaking, contrary to Hindu law?, as being a mortgage of that
wi mich was not “visible” or in existence*, and it was so thrown out by West-
ropp, J., in a Bombay case,

According to Colebrooke, in 2 Strange’s Hindu Law, 467, 469, a mort-
gage (bandhaka) is defined to be “or real, substantial, visible (drisha) pro-
perty, under which the mortgagor remains in possession till the stipulated
time arives*”,

It will be noted that the Act does not maintain the distinction between
real and personal property on the technical lines of English law. As to the
distinction between tangible and intangible property, it may be that this dis-
tinction was suggested by the Roman law classification between Res Corpo-
rales and Res incorporales. In Roman law, the former category comprises
lands, clothes, money and all things which can be touched. The latter cate-
gory included servitudes, contractual rights and things which cannot be
touched and exist only as legal conceptions®.

3.16 Immovable and movable property—As to the distinction between
immovable property and movable property, it is to be noted that in England
this distinction has not much importance so far as the law of property is con-
cerned. The distinction was, however of considerable significance, in
Roman Jaw. In that legal system, things were classified as immovables and
movables (res immobiles and mobiles). A similar division exists in modern
times in most continental systems of law*, though there is no uniformity.
Fmmovables in Roman law comprise land and things attached to the land,
while movables comprise all other forms of property which do not have
essentially a permanent location. Immovable property could not, in Roman

1 Para 3.13.

2 Drishtadi, Drishtabandhak, Wilson’s Gi 7» 148; cited 11 dari v. rant,
3 BHCR. (A.C.) 11, ii. है Glossary ted in Ke Aimara

3. Kedari v. Atmaram, 9 BH.C.R. (A.C.) 11, 17.

4 Venkatay v. Parvati, 1 M.H.C.R. 460 (464 note).

5 Vaines, Personal Property, page 14.

6 Clarence Smith, “Classification by site” (1963) 26 Modern Law Review 16.

3—885Law/77



24

Law, be stolen—a distinction which had great practical importance. Io
Indian law also, under section 378 of the Indian Penal Code, theft can be
committed only in respect of movable property. Again, in Roman law,
special rules apply as to the period of acquisition of title by long possession
in the case of immovable property.

The distinction has considerable importance in the field of conflict of
Jaws, even as administered in England. We shall revert to this aspect later.


CHAPTER 4
PRELIMINARY MATTERS : SCOPE AND APPLICATION
SEcTION 1

4.1. The short title of the Act, as given in section 1, is the Transfer of
Property Act. It will be seen from the various sections that the Act does
not deal with all property, or, indeed, with any but the topics comprised
therein. Nor does it deal with all kinds of transfer, limited as it is only to
transfers inter vivos, nor in dealing with such transfers does it more ihaa
“amend certain parts of the law”. In short, the Act merely professes to
crystallize some leading principles of the law of Transfer. ‘These are to be
supplemented by other laws and by final recourse to the principle of “justice,
equity and good conscience!”,

4.2. The Act, for example, is not exhaustive even on the law of mort-
gages*. Thus, an award can create a mortgage. In a case not covered by
the Act, the Court is entitled to apply rules of equity, justice and good cons-
cience which are not inconsistent with the Act. Thus, the holder of a
statutory charge is entitled to a decree for sale, even though the charge arises
by an act of the legislature and not by “transfer” as defined in section 5.
This was the position even when section 100 did not cover statutory charges.

4.3. The preamble to the Act makes it clear that the law codified is by
no means exhaustive, and that the Act does not purport to consolidate, but
only defines and amends certain parts of the law* relating to transfers by act
of parties. The expression “by act of parties” is used to distinguish transfer
by operation of law, e.g., in case of insolvency, forfeiture or sale in execu-
tion of a decree*, Even as to transfers by act of parties, it does not profess
to be exhausiive®.

For instance, it does not deal with pledges of tangible movable property
and transfer of Government promissory notes’. In such cases, the matter
is governed partly by statutory law and partly by the rules of justice, equity
and good conscience. The Courts will have to act upon the principle of
justice, equity and good conscience, in enforcing the contracts in accordance
with their tenort where ‘there is no statutory provision.

4.4, Extent—Section 1 provides that the Act extends to the whole of
India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November,
1956, were comprised in Part B States or in the States of Bombay, Punjab
and Delhi. Thus, the initial extent of the Act was very limited.

1 Gour.

2 Hotchand ९. Krishanchand, A..R. 1924 Sind 23, 24.

3 Jotindra v. Rangpoor Tobacco Co., ALR. 1974 Cal, 990.

4 Golak Nath v. Mathura Nath, ULR. 20 Cal. 273, 278; Krishnan v. Perachan,
LLR 15 Mad 383,

5 Kalvan Das ४. Jan Bibi, AJ.R. 1929 All. 12,

6 Subbaraya v. Kuppuswamy, (1909) 1 LC. 535, 538; Kiskori Lal v. Krishna
Kamini, (1910) 5 1.2, 500, 502; Bunsee Dass ४. Gena Lal, 14 CLJ. 530, 536.

7 Subbaraya v. Kuppuswamy, (1909)1 LC. 535, 538.

25


26

But the same section enacts that this Act or any part thereof may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, be extended to the whole or any part of
the said territories by the State Government concerned. Notifications have
been issued from time to time in exercise of this power by several State
Gcvernments. We need not go into details of such notifications, it being.
unnecessary for the present purpose.

4.5. Exemption—Section 1 further provides that any State Government
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, either
retrospectively or prospectively, any part of the territories administered by
such State Government from all or any of the following provisions, namely :

Sections 54, paragraphs 2 and 3, 59, 107 and 123.

The sections listed relate to the formalities requisite for effecting a sale,
mortgage, lease and gifts respectively.

4.6. Territories excluded from Registration Act—Finally, the last para-
graph of section 1 provides that notwithstanding anything in the foregoing.
past of this section, section 54, paragraphs 2 and 3 and sections 59, 107 and
123 shall not extend or be extended to district or tract of country for the
time being excluded from the operation of the Indian Registration Act
(1908), under the power conferred by the first section of that Act or other-
wise.

4.7. Other sections relating to exemption—There are other sections in
the Act which have the effect of exempting or extending the operation of एश-
tain provisions. For example, section 69 empowers the State Government
to specify the classes of persons whose participation in an English mortgage
excludes the operation of certain provisions mentioned therein. Section
57(e) further empowers the State Government to extend the jurisdiction of
courts for the purposes of that section. Section 104 empowers the High
Ccurt to make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act relating to mort-
gages or charges on immovable property. ‘That the legislature can empower
State Governments to remove a district from the jurisdiction of the High
Court or extend the operation of the law to any district is now authoritatively
ruled by the Privy Council!. Section 2(d) also enacts that “nothing in the
second chapter of this Act shall be deemed to affect any rule of Muhamma-

lan Law”.

In relation to gifts governed by Muhammadan law, a similar provision is
contained in the Chapter on gifts—section 129.

4.8. Power 10 extend—Regarding the er of the State Gove
extend the provisions of certain sections MO any area within there jonedicn
tion, it has been held that this power does not entail the abrogation of the
general scheme of the Act, to which they might be subject. For instance.
under the general provisions of section 129 all rules of Muhammadan Law
relating to gifts remain unaffected by any of the provisions of Chapter 7,—
which includes section 123. Consequently, when the Government “of
Burma extended the provisions of that section to the district of Pegu, it
could not, by such extension, rescind the general exception in favour of

1. Emperor v. Burah, L.L.R. 4 Cal. 180 (P.C.).


27
Muhammadan gifts which would still be complete if accompanied by mere
delivery without being compulsorily registrable under that section’.

4.9. We shall deal later with the position regarding Government Grants
and Rent Acts?,

eS . TLRS Rane 3 (PQDT
1 Mami y. Kallander, LR. 5 Rang. 5 (PC),
2 Chapter 4, infra.


CHAPTER 5
SCOPE AND APPLICATION AND RULE OF DAMDUPAT
SECTION 2 AND PROPOSED SECTION 2A

5.1. Section 2(a)—The first part of section 2 deals with cnactments
mentioned in the schedule which are repealed. It does mot have much
practical importance. In the second part of the section, there is a saving
net only in respect of certain enactments, but also in respect of certain inci-
dents, rights and liabilities. Under clause (a), the provisions of any enact-
ment not hereby expressly repealed are saved.

5.2. Section 2(b)—Under clause (0), the section saves any terms or
incidents of any contract or constitution of property which are consistent
with the provisions of this Act and are allowed by the law for the time being
in force. In practice, this clause assumes the greatest importance. In the
very nature of things, its scope cannot be exhaustively indicated. However,
by way of illustration, it may be stated that the right to partition of property
is definitely saved by this clause. In addition, terms which can be imposed
by a partition, being the terms of a “constitution of property”, would also
be saved by this clause.

In its comment on this clause, the Select Committee observed! :—-

“We have also saved all incidents of contracts not inconsistent with
the provisions of the Bill. Besides the Malabar mortgagee’s option
which the Bill, as introduced, expressly preserved, there must be many
other incidents of native contracts with which it is desirable not to
interfere.”

5.3. Section 2(c)—~Clause (c) of section 2 saves rights and liabilities
arising out of legal relations constituted before the Act came into force and
feliefs in respect of any such rights or liabilities. This may have been con-
sidered necessary either because section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1868,
which was in force at the relevant time, was not considered comprehensive
enough, or because the Transfer of Property Act was taken as affecting or
abrogating not merely statutory rights but also others, for which the General
Clauses Act could not have proved sufficient, the case not being one of
“repeal” in regard to the ‘sources of such cights.

5.4. Rights under rules of Hindu Law—In this connection, it may be of
interest to note that the Hindu and Muslim Jaw had a fairly well developed ed
system of rules regulating the creation of mortgages, liens and pledges. ny
rights which would have been created under such mortgages and pledges
that were executed prior to the Act were not intended to be affected. Since
there were certain points of difference between the present Act and Hindu
and Muslim law as it was administered prior to the Act, such a saving was
obviously necessary. In Hindu law, for example, a mortgagor who had
ence mortgaged the property could not mortgage it to another, since such a
conduct was regarded as criminal and worthy of punishment. Muslim law
did not so penalise the mortgagor, but the purchaser after the mortgage
could be compelled to redeem the property.

1 Report of the Select Committee (1878), paragraph
28


“29

5.5. Prior to the Regulations of 1798, in Bengal and the United Pro-
vinces, and for a long time subsequently in the other provinces, the law
administered was according to the personal laws of the Hindus and Muslims.
These laws recognised no distinction between mortgages of land and pledges
of movable property!. In both, the pledge might be for a period specified
or not, and either usufructuary or simple possession was considered _ essen-
tial to its validity, but it was by no means the invariable rule. When no
date was fixed by the parties for redemption, the mortgagor could redeem
it at any distance of time from the mortgagee, who acquired no title as
against him by prescription or possession, however long. Under the Muslim
Jaw, taking of interest was forbidden, but the property pledged was always
Presumed to be, in value, equivalent to the debt due?.

5.6. Features of Hindu & Muslim mortgages—The salient features of the
Hindu and Mohamedan mortgages have been thus describedt by Turner
८.3. :+-

“The form of Hindu mortgage under the names of Katkabala,
f Maoddatakriyam, and Gahanlahan obtains commonly throughout British
India, though its incidents may vary. It is generally, though not uni-
versalty, accompanied by the delivery of possession to the mortgagee
with permission to enjoy the usufruct either in lieu or part-payment of
the interest. Although there is no precise form of words necessary to
constitute such a morigage, it ordinarily differs from the bye-ul-wafa of
the Mahomedans in this, that, in the Hindu form there is a preliminary
mortgage with a condition for future sale, while in the Mahomedan
form there is at once no absolute sale with a counter-agreement for
re-sale which may be contained in the original sale-deed, or in a sepa-
rate contemporaneous instrument. The origin and nature of this form
of mortgage among “the Mohamedans is explained in Baillie’s Mahome-
dan Law of 54165,

“It was introduced or adopted in order to defeat the Precept of the
Mahomedan Law prohibiting usury. The lender, by supulating for
the usufruct, or for the payment of a price on the re-sale higher than he
paid, secured the same advantage as would have accrued to him from
Placing his money at interest, while the transaction in form did not
violate the law.”

The abrogation of all these rules by the Act was not a case of Tepeal of
an “enactment”. Hence the need for a widely-worded savings.

5.7. Section 2(d)—This takes us to section 2, clause (०), which saves
transfers by operation of law or transfers by or in execution of a decree or
order of a court of competent jurisdiction, —“exce | as provided by section 57
and chapter 4. Section 57 relates to sale by a Court. Chapter 4 relates to
mortgages and charges. The intention is that mortgages and charges, even
if created by operation of law, would be governed by the Act.

1 Cole, Dig., Vol. I, Ch. 3 Tit. ५ "5

Mani. Ch Vi, 38 1014 oe

Macnaghten’s Mohamedan Law, page 74, all cited by Gour.

2 See Lakshmandes ४. Dasrat, 1.L.R. 6 Bom. 168 (F.B.) Sobhagchand v. Bhaichand,

LL.R. 6 Bom. 490 (F.B.) reviewing and commenting on all the previous cases.

3 Macnagthen’s Mahomedan Law, page 74,
4 Ramasami v. Samiyappanayakan, LL.R. 4 Mad, 179, 183,
5 Baillie’s Mahomedan Law of Sale, page 303.



38

5.8. Section 2, last paragraph—The last paragraph of section 2 pr 0५065
that nothing in the second chapter of the Act shall be deemed to affect any
rule of Mohamedan Law. There was also a saving for Hindus and Budhusts,
which has not been repealed. The saving regarding Hindus, it is stated, was
inserted at the instance of Maharaja Jyotiandra Mohan Tagore’.

5.9. Governments grants—This disposes of the savings expressly provid-
ed for. Let us now turn to a few other matters. It is to be noted that
though there is no express savings in the Act as regards grants made by the
Government, such grants are subject to a special law, namely, the Govern-
ment Grants Act, [895, which—to state the position in broad terms
empowers the Government to make grants of property and to impose condi-
tions which may not be otherwise valid under the Transfer of Property Act.
In other words, in making such a grant, the Government has a wider dis-
cretion than an ordinary citizen and can burden the grant with conditions on
the non-fulfilment of which the grant may be forfeited.

5.10. Gist of section 3, Act of 1895—By the Government Grants Act,
1895, section 3, grants and gifts by or on behalf of the Government are
subject to special rules. The Bill was originally framed as an amendment
ef the Transfer of Property Act. But since its object was to also over-ride
limitations supposed to be imposed otherwise than by that Act, it was con-
sidered desirable to introduce it as a separate self-contained Bill. Section 3,
in particular, provides that all provisions, restrictions, conditions and limita-
tions whatever contained in any such grant or transfer (grants and gifts made
by or on behalf of the Government), shall be valid and take effect according
to their tenor, any rule of law, statute or enactment of the legislature to the
contrary notwithstanding. The Act was expressly made retrospective.

The effect of the Act—to give a few important illustrations—is to
empower the Government to create estates unknown to the Hindu law’ or the
Muslim 189३.

5.10A. Construction of 1895 Act—General rules of construction will,
of course, apply. Thus, the question whether a grant is permanent or pet-
sonal must, in a great measure, depend upon its terms. But it would appear
that in the construction of terms of a Government grant, recourse can be had
to the surrounding circumstances and the object for which the grant was
madet.

5.11. A restriction or limitation, if clearly intended to be for a special
Purpose, would nevertheless be enforceable by the Government, though it
could not be availed of by a third party.

5.12. So, where the grant was resumable if 1: equine for government pur-
poses, and the Government had reserved ownership therein, the Court held®
that the propriety of resumption could not be questioned, as it fell within the
terms of the grant. By a sanad of 1862, the ment granted to one A
in consideration of his personal military services, a village revenue—free “to
remain in the family of the grantee—on his demise subject to assessment,”

1 Gour, Commentary on section 2.

2 Sheo Singh v. Raghubansh Kunwar, 1.L.R. 23 All. 634, 653.

3 Hapi Mohd. v. Egambara, (1907) 2 Mad. Law Times 55.

4 Krishna Rao v. Rangarao, 4 Bom. H. C. Reports App. Cases 1, 24.
5 Sapurlo v. Secretary of State, 1.L.R. 36 Bom. 438,



31

and the question turned upon what was intended to be conveyed by term
“family”, and the Court held that it must be taken to be employed in its
restricted sense, as meaning “the wife and children” of the grantee, and not
a the more extended sense of a household comprising all the blood relations
of the man’,

5.13. It would appear that in England Crown” grants must be in writing.
There is no such restriction in India, since no form is prescribed by the
Government Grants Act, 1895. The Transfer of Property Act, does not
apply to Government grants—which is the reason why in a Calcutta case? it
was held that a grant can be made even by a letter from the Agent to the
Governor General to the grantee.

5.14. So, again, in the absence of any procedure prescribed by law for
the resumption of government grants, it is manifestly proper and convenient
that a notice should be given, even though it be not Strictly necessary*,

5.15. Equitable principles and Government Grants—This does not mean
that equitable principles generally governing the transfer of property—even
those codified in the Transfer of Property Act—would not apply to such
grants. When there is nothing in the Government Grants Act or in the
grant made thereunder to the contrary, such principles can appropriately be
applied. Thus, where a man spends money on the improvement of 900
granted by the Government under an expectation of an interest therein created
or encouraged by the grantors, he would be no worse off than if his grantors
had not been the Government. Moreover, as regards situations governed
by statute, sometimes particular Act itself may provide that it applies to the
Government*.

5.16. Rent Acts—Another important modification of the rights which
would otherwise flow under the Act should be noticed at this stage. With
the emergency of the problem of scarcity of accommodation, it became

after the first world war to pass legislation for the control of rents
and eviction of tenants. While such legislation does not, in terms, Tepeal
the Transfer of Property Act, the effect of the material provisions is to
impose restrictions on the right of the landlord in respect of a tenancy
governed by the Act, both as regards the quantum of the rent and as regards
eviction of the tenant, Consequently, the legislature also considered it neces-
sary to make detailed Provisions as to the enforcement of the statutory rights
80 created in favour of the tenant and other matters.

5.17. The direct impact of such legislation is to modify the provisions of
the Transfer of Property Act relating to leases. But, since what has come to

known as a “statutory tenancy” comes into being under the Act for the
control of rents and eviction, the question how far such statutory tenancy is
itself property would naturally arise*. In this sense, the juristic importance
of such legislation transcends the narrow sphere of leases and could embrace
Ye whole of the law of property.

1 Jaimal Singh v. Gurmukh Singh, (1910) P.R. No. 20.

2 Coke, 3 Inst. 71, cited by Gour.

3 Hassan Ali v. Chutterput, (1892) LL.R. 23 Cal. 742.

4 Thomas v. Sherwood, LR. 9 P.C. 142, 148.

5 Municipal Corporation y. Secretary of State, L.L.R. 29 Bom. 588. Secretary of
State v. Datratraya, 1.L.R. 26 Bom. 271.

6 See Chapter 1, supra.



32

While the Transfer of Property Act is the general law, the Rent Control
Act is a special and local enactment overriding the provisions of the general
Jaw so far as it is in conflict therewith. A lease may be terminated — under
section 106 read with section 111 of the Transfer of Property Act, but the
lessee is still not liable to ejectment unless the conditions laid down in the
Rent Control Act are satisfied.

5.17A. Damdupat—There remains to be discussed yet another matter
pertaining to the scope of the Act. It relates to a matter arising out of Hindu
Jaw. It is not very clear whether the rule of Hindu law prohibiting a credi-
tor from recovering, at one and the same time, as interest, an amount more
than the principal—the rule popularly known as Damdupat—is still opera-
tive in respect of mortgages. The matter is not governed by the Civil Pra-
cedure Code in a direct manner, since that Code does not deal with the subs-
tantive law of interest for the period prior to the institution of the suit. The
Interest Act, 1839 also gives no specific guidance on the subject. It is,
therefore, a matter of investigation whether any such rule exists.

5.18. Section 4 of the Transfer of Property Act provides that the chap-
ters and sections of that Act which relate to contracts shall be taken as part
of the Indian Contract Act. From this section, it would appear that the
tule would not apply to mortgages. In its essence, a mortgage debt, or for
thai matter, any debt, is a pecuniary obligation arising under a contract,
express or implied,—leaving aside debts arising by operation of law. Under
the Hindu law of contract, the rule did apply to debts under mortgages and
pledges and other loans,

5.19. Damdupat—Rationale—In a Bombay case!, West J. had occasion
to consider the rationale of the rule. The precise question related to its
applicability to proceedings in execution. West J. held that there is no
authority for limiting the amount recoverable in execution of a decree by any
such rule. The following observations explain the rationale of the rule :—

“As regards purely private transactions, the law for the protection of
the weaker party controls his freedom of contract in the way to which
we have referred, or, at least, refuses to enforce the debtor’s engagement
by means of a duty imposed on the Courts of exercising their powers of
coercion to give effect to what it presumes to be an extortionate or un-
duly rigorous bargain. But the same reason, it is obvious, does not
apply to the execution of a decree of a Civil Court. In making such a
decree the Judge is not liable, as the debtor is supposed to be, to undue
pressure on the part of the creditor.”

5.20. On the question with which we are immediately concerned, the
High Court of Bombay has taken the view that the rule applies as much to
secured debts as to non-secured debts, Thus, in a Bombay case’, while
holding that the rule applies in all cases as between the Hindu debtors and
creditors in respect of simple debts as also in respect of mortgage debts, it
was also held that it does not apply where the mortgagee has been placed in
Possession and is accountable for profits received by him as against the interest
due. But, where those profits are, by the terms of the mortgage, received
for only a portion of the mortgage debt, the general rule of damdupat will
govern the mortgage accounts.

1 Batkrishna vy, Gopal, (1875) LL.R. 1 Bom. 72, 73.

2 Sundarabai v. Jayavant Bhikaji Nadgowda, (1899) L.L.R. 24 Bom. 114, 119
(Parsons & Ranade, JJ.).



33

5.21. In a Calcutta case!, it was held that the rule applies until the matter
travels from the region of contract to that of decree. On this point, an
eatlier judgment of Woodroffe 1.3 was followed.

In Madras®, it has been held that the rule does not apply to mortgages
governed by the Transfer of Property Act. The judgment does not discuss
the position taken in Bombay. There seems to be some disparity between
the Bombay view and the Madras view.

5.22. Recommendation to abrogate the rule of Damdupat in relation to
mortgages governed by the Act—Having regard to the fact that the true
position is not evident from the Transfer of Property Act, it is, in our view,
desirable to make a specific provision. It could be to the effect that the Act
shall not affect the operation of the rule of Hindu law known as Damdupat
in regard to areas and persons to which or to whom that rule applies.

Or, in the alternative, the reverse provision should be made, namely, the
rule of Hindu law known as the rule of Damdupat shall not apply to. mort-
gages to which the Act applies. We prefer the latter alternative, for the sake
of uniformity, and also having regard to the fact that cases where, as @
matter of policy, interest should be restricted are, in modern times, amply
taken care of by legislation for the relief of indebtedness or the Usurious
Loans Act or the Money-lenders Act. We recommend that a suitable
amendment implementing this approach should be incorporated as section
2A, somewhat on the following lines :—

“2A. The rule of Hindu law known as the rule of Damdupat shall
not apply to mortgages of immovable Property to which this Act applies.”
As to money-lenders, we give below an illustrative list :-—

Act or Regulation Ne. Year

Is Money Lenders Act (Assam) 4 1934
2, Money-Lenders Act (Bihar) 3 1938
3. Money-Lenders Act (Bombay) 31 1947
4, Money Lenders Act (Kerala) 35 1958
5, Money Lenders Act (Madhya Pradesh) 13 1934
6, Money Lenders Act (Madras) 26 1957
7, Mones Lenders Act (Mysore) 12 1939
8, Money Lenders Act (Orissa) 3 1939

Ee
1 Nanda Lal Roy v. Dhirendra Nath, (1913) LLR. 40 Cal, 710, LL.R. 24 Bom.
114, 119 (Parsons & Ranade, JJ.).
2 In the matter of Hari Lal Mullick (1906) LLL.R. 33 Calcutta 1269, 1276.
3 Madineg Stdhania Onahini Nidhi v, Venkataramanjulu Naidu, (1903) LL.R. 26


CHAPTER 6
DEFINITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY
SECTION 3
6.1. Introductory—Section 3 contains a definition of the terms “immov-

able property”, “instrument”, “attested”, “registered”, “attached to the
earth”, “actionable claim” and “notice”.’ The definitions should have been

atranged in alphabetical order, which is not the case at present.

6.2. Immovable property—Section 3 begins with the meaning of “immov-
able Property”. It does not define “immovable property”, but only inter-
Prets and limits it by excluding from the definition occurring in the General
Clauses Act, certain things, namely, “standing timber, growing crops or
&rass” which would otherwise be included in the category!.

6.3. Real property—The term “immovable property” does not occur in
English internal law, where the distinction is between real Property and
personal property, This distinction is not synonymous with immovable and
movable property. It is based upon no juristic conception of property, but
is associated with an early form of action called actio realis'. The terms
“real” and “personal” were originally applied to actions in which a decree
for restitution might or might not issue against the thing in suit (in rem).

A successful party in a real action obtained the King's writ command-
ing the Sheriff to put him in possession of the identical holding in respect of
which the action had been brought, whilst personal actions were brought to
enforce an obligation imposed on a man personally to make satisfaction for
a breach of contract or a wrong, in short, to pay damages’, And, since
specific recovery could only be obtained in tespect of immovable property,
the other suits being only relieved in damages, the distinction between real
property and personal property began to be made according to the appro-
priate reliefs granted in each case. Now, as frecholds were the only things
specifically recoverable at common Jaw, the term “realty” came to be used as
denoting the freehold.

Thus, a lease for years, however long, was not regarded as real property
at all; and even now it is classed as a chattel real. But in India, a reversioner
‘who has a lease in a property, for however long a Period it may be, has an
interest which arises out of land and so it is immoval property*,

6.3A. Scientific position—The law, unlike engineering, deals with rights,
and not with things‘. In making a classification of property into movable
and immovable, the legal system really classifies rights for the particular
purpose in hand. It may be noted that the law of one of the early European
principalities—the Custom of Artois—considered even houses to be movable,
‘on the ground that an enemy might pull them down’. It is also to be noted

1. Gour.
2 Williams, Real Property (J8th Ed.), pages 24, 25.
3 Matilal Raga v. Ishwar Radha Damodar, A.1.R. 1936 Cal. 727, 736.
4 Cook, Logical and Legal basis of Conflict of Laws, page 301.
3 Clarence Smith, “Classification by Site on Conflict of Laws" (1963) 26 Modern
Law Review, pages 16, 22,
34


35

that even now, on another man’s land, the house is regarded as moveable
Property’.

not nae iilect matter, of नमक classified as movable or immovable

falty or personal (तो पका categories of movable and immovable pro-
perty could, thus, possibly di from country to country. Thus, a smi
permanent pavillion is classified as movable Property in several American

As a matter of internal law, even common law jurisdictions cannot
agree whether some kinds of property are movable or immovable’, For
example, take the case of the right of a mortgagee. England* and Ontaio®
consider it to be immovable. New Zealand® and Australia? tegard it as
movable.

Jt will be of interest to note that even as late as 1834, the question arose
whether an equitable mortgage of land in Antiqua included the slaves on the
land as “affixed to the free-hold” by a local Act of 1692 or whether slaves
were personalty within the reputed ownership of the mortgagor and were
available to the unsecured creditor®. Again, it seems obvious at first sight
that a building erected for the purposes of an exhibition, which cannot be
removed without losing its identity, must be in the same category as normal
buildings, yet in some of the American State® and in Germany” its owner is
deemed to hold an interest in a movable.

6.5. Tangible physical objects may be classified“ as either ‘land’ or
‘chattels’, and as such, ‘immovable’ or ‘movable’. Like all classificatory
terms, these develop ambiguities in use, and whether some physical object is
to be regarded as part of the ‘land’ or as a ‘chattel’ must always be decided
in the light of the purpose of the classification. The problem is not merely
one of physics : the classification is being made by lawyers for legal pur-
poses,—that is, in order to reach useful decisions in particular types of cases.
One type of case is concerned with the law of ‘fixtures’ (between land and
chattels) .

The decision involves” in doubtful cases a problem somewhat like that.
of deciding whether when one sells an automobile, the tyres which, of course
are easily detachable, are a ‘part’ of the automobile. Much depends upon-
the customary use of terms: in the 1500’s it seems that window glass in a
house was regarded as not part of the house, and so not part of the ‘land’.

1 Clarence Smith. “Classification by Site on Conflict of Laws” (1963) 26 Modern
Law Rev. 16, 22.

2 Cook, Logical & Legal Basis of Conflict of Laws, page 306.

3 Cheshire, Private International Law (1970) page 269.

4 Re Hoyles (1911) 1 Ch. 179.

5 Re Ritchie, (1942) 3 D.L.R. 330 (Ontario).

6 Re Q'Neill (1922) N.Z.L.R. 468.

7 Haque v. Haque (No. 2) (1965), 114 CLR.

8 Ex pare Rucker, (1834) 1 Mont & Ayr 480 referred to by Clarance Smith, “Clas-
sified bv site in the conflict of laws’ (1963) 26 (Modern law review 16,
footnote 2.

9 Cook, Logical basis of Conflict of Laws, page 306 at seq.

10 Wolff, Private International Law, p. 502.

Mt aank “Immovable Property and the Law of Situs”, 52 Harvard Law Rev, 1246,

12 Bingham, “Some Suggestions Concerning the Law of Fixtures” (1907) 7 Col. L. .
ve 1.



36

Later, as the use of window glasses in hous:3 became customary, whe
meaning of the word ‘house’ came to include the glass in the windows. No
one of course doubts that when bricks, shingles, and nails for example, have
been used in building an ordinary dwelling house, they have become part of
the ‘land’, even though they may easily be physically detached. At the other
extreme, we all recognise that cattle horses, threshing machines, etc., are
‘chattels’ or ‘movables’ and are not to be regarded as ‘improvements’ to the
‘Jand’. Between these two classes lies a third which includes objects which
are not so easily classified. That is to say, the members of this class are
not, according to prevailing usage, always regarded as part of the ‘land’, and
yet may be, and often are, thought of as so used in connection with the ‘land’
that they are treated as part of it for many purposes. In spite of this, they
are, to quote Professor Bingham', “not actually merged into the land or some
‘improvement’ on it in such a way as to prohibit regarding them as separate
objects of property.” Under this group Bingham puts the key to a house.

6.6. Definition in General Clauses Act and other Acts—So much by
way of introduction. Let us now compare a few Indian precedents.
“Immovable property” is thus defined in the General Clauses Act—

“Immoveable property shall include land, benefits to arise out of
land, and things attached to the earth’.”

This applies to the Transfer of Property Act also. The expression has
been, however, used in varying senses in the different Acts of the Legislature.
In the Indian Trustees Act*, for example, it was defined thus : “Immovable
property shall extend to and include messuages, tenements and hereditaments,
corporeal and incorporeal, of every tenure or description, whatever may be
the estate or interest therein.” In the Registration Act*, “Immovable pro-

'y” includes land, buildings, hereditary allowances, rights to ways, lights,
ee, fisheries, or any other benefit to arise “out of land and things attached
to the earth, or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to the
earth, but not standing timber, growing crops nor grass.” Similar definitions
occur in other Acts, where, however, the term has been given more or less
different meanings. ‘Thus, within the meaning of the Limitation Act?,
standing crops are immovable property; growing crops and trees are held
not to be moveable property* within the meaning also of the Small Causes
Courts Act’, and they are likewise treated as immovable property within
the meaning of the Civil Procedure Code and the Provincial Small Causes
Courts Act, 1887’. All these are, however, expressly declared to be move-
able property by this clause®.
1 Bingham, “Some suggestions concerning the law of fixtures” (1907) 7 Columbia
Law Rew. 1.
2 3. 3(25), General clauses Act, 1897. The same definitino occurs in section 2,
Act I of 1868.
2a Section 3(26) and section 4. General Clauses Act, 1897.
3 Section 2, Act 28 of 1866, Trustees Act, 1866 (28 of 1866) Repesl.
4 Act 16 of 1908, section 2(6).
5 Pandah Gazi v. Jennuddi, LL-R. 4 Cal. 665;

Nattu Miah v. Nandrani, 8 B.L.R. 509;
Tajait Ahmad v. Banee Madhub Mukeriee, 24 WR. 394.
6 Gopal Chandra v. Ramjan, 5 B.L.R. 194;
In re Hormasji Irani. L.L.R. 13 Bom. 87.
7 Act 11 of 1865.
8 Madaya v. Venkata, LLR. 11 Mad. 193;
Cheda Lal vy. Mulchand, LL. 14 All. 30.
9 Raj Chandra Bose v. Dharmo Chandra Bose, 8 B.LR. 510.



37

6.7. Calcutta case—Letters Patent—In a calcutta case’, the combined
effect of the two Acts was considered for the purpose of the Letters Patent.
According to the General Clauses Act, “immovable property” includes lands,
benefits to arise out of land and things attached to the earth, or permanently
fastened to anything attached to the earth, and “movable property” means
Property of every description except immovable property,

As land or immovable property has not been defined in the Letters
Patent, one has, in order to find out whether there has been a transfer of an
interest in immovable property, to refer to the Transfer of Property Act. If
the definition of “immovable property” in the Transfer of Property Act had
been self-sufficient, no other piece of legislation need have been examined.
Looking at section 4 of the General Clauses Act, one finds that the definition
of “immovable property” in section 3 of that Act will apply to the Trausfer
of Property Act, which is a Central Act made after 3-1-1868, unless there
is any thing tepugnant in the subject or context,

The following observations then follow in the judgment :—

“The effect therefore is that by virtue of the combined operation
of section 2 of the Transfer of Property Act and sections 3 and 4 of the
General Clauses Act, 2 “immovable property” includes land, benefits to
arise out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently fasten-
ed to anything attached to the earth, but does not include Standing tim-
ber, growing crops or grass. So far as the expression “attached to the
earth” is concerned, it occurs only in two sections of the Transfer of
Property Act, namely, sections 8 and 108, clause (h). But as a result
of the above amalgamation the meaning of the expression “attached to
the earth” given in section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act is attracted
to all immovable property referred to in the said Act. “Immovable
property”, therefore, for the purpose of the Transfer of Property Act
includes things attached to the earth or things permanently fastened to
anything attached to the earth within the meaning of the expression
“attached to the earth” given in the Transfer of Property Act. “So
interpreted, the definition of immovable property for the purpose of the
Transfer of Property Act becomes almost the same as that given in the
Registration Act except that the incidents such as “hereditary allowances,
rights to ways, lights, ferries, fisheries” expressly mentioned in the
Registration Act are absent in the Transfer of Property Act. But these
incidents are probably also brought in by virtue of section 8 of the
Transfer of Property Act.”

6.8. Incorporeal rights—“Immovable property” as defined is not con-
fined to tangible property. It may be generally premised that the term
includes all that would be rea! property according to English Law, and po: S-
sibly more®; toda giras hak‘, being a right to receive an annual payment which
attaches to the inamdar into whose hands the village may pass, is an “interest

1 Inan Chand y. Jugal Kishore, AIR. 1960 Cal. 331, 334, 335 (GK. Mitter J.).

2 The portion relating to combined effect is underlined for emphasis.

3 Futtehsangji v. Desai, 13 BILR. 254 (P.C.); overruling Fattehsangji ९, Desai.
4BHCR. 189.

4 “A right of levying a cash com, in lieu of other claims, or of plunder,

“The Collector v. Pestonjee, (18: (मच शय SDAA, 291; Sumbhoolall ५, The Collect
tor, 8 MLA, 1, cited in Gour,



38

inimmovable property”, and would fall into that category. Similarly, haq-
i-chabarum or liability to pay customary dues is an incident attaching to land
and may be enforced against the vendee, unless it is limited to a right avail-
able only as against the vendor*, Varshasans or annual allowances, cl

on immovable property, are also included within the definition of immov-
able property®.

6.9. Hindu law—Certain rights are classified as immovable property in
Hindu law. A right to officiate as priest at the funeral ceremonies of Hindus
is in the nature of immovable property’. But an allowance, payable
periodically, which is not incidental to a hereditary office, is not, unless it is
a charge on such property. A hereditary office is regarded as by itself
immovable property’-", and so is a right to worship an idol’. A claim to
maintenance is a familiar example of this species of property’. A nibanoha
‘or corody involves generally the idea of a connection with immovable pro-
perty and ranks with it. The chance of acquiring a right to light and air is
both incapable of valuation and is wholly outside the term”.

6.9A. Share—A share in a registered company is by law declared to be
moveable property*. And so, under the Hindu law, Government Promissory
Notes are classed as movable property’.

6.10. Standing timber—The Act excludes standing timber from
immovable property. The definition is Protessedly not one of general appli-
cation, but is limited only to this Act, from which it follows that the term
“standing timber” is not to be classed as movable property for all purposes.
It is so regarded under the Provincial Small Causes Courts 2071-75 and the
Indian Registration Act’, but it is treated as immovable property for the pur-

1 Dhandai Bibi v. Abdur Rehman, LLR. 23 All. 20 210; following Heera Ram v.
Raja Narain Singh Agra, (F.B.) 63.

2 Futtehsangji v. Desai, 13 B.L.R. 254 (P.C.); overruling Fatteshangji v. Desai.
4 BHR. 189.

3 Keshav v. Vinayak, LL.R. 23 Bom. 25.

4-5 Krishnabhat v. Napabhat, 6 B.H.C.R. 137 Balvantrav vy. Pushotam, 9 B.H.CR.
99; The Collector of Thana v. Krishnanath, 5 B. 322; Appanna v. Nagia, K.
6 Bom. 542; Fusteshsangji, v. Desai, 13 B.L.R. 254, (P.C.) Raghoo v. Kassy,
TLR. 10 Cal. 73; Sukhlal v. Bishambhar, LL.R. 39 All. 196.

6 The Government of Bombay v. Goswami, 9 BH.C.R. 222, 225; following
Bharatsangji v. Navanidharaya, 1 B.H.C.R. 186; Fattesangji v. Desai, 4 B.H.C.R.
189; Raiji v. Desai, 4 BH.C.R. 56.

7 Government of Bombay x. Desai, 9 B.H.C.R. 228; (P.C.); Vishnu v. Yeshwant-
rao (1895) B.PJ. 453.

8 Eshan Chander‘v. Manmohini LL.R. 4 Cal. 683; following in Jetikar v. Mukunda
Bastia, 1.1.R. 39 Cal. 227, 230.

9 Vishnu Ganesh Joshi v. Yeshvantrao, LL.R. 21, Bom, 387.

10 Government of Bombay v. Gosvami, 9 B.H.C.R. 222, 226; Krishnaji v. Gajanan,
11 Bom. L.R. 352; The Government of Bombay v. Kalianrai, 14 M.I.A. 551.

1t Sultan Nawaz Jung v. Rustamji, LL.R. 20 Bom. 704; Munappa v. Subramania,
LL.R. 18 Mad. 437.

12 Companies Act.

13 Doorga v. Pooreen, 5 W.R. 141.

14 Gour.

15 Umed Ram v. Daulat Ram, 1.L.R. 5 All. 564, 566 (F.B.). .

16 Ram Ghulam v. Manohar Das, (1887) A.W.N. 50, Mangal Sen v. Naoli, O.LC



39

pose of the Limitation Act and the Code of Civil Procedure, and would
be so regarded under the General Clauses Act*-*,

6.11. Growing crops—Under the English law, where the owner of the
acil sells what is growing on land, whether natural produce or fructus indus
wiales, (the fruit of human industry), on the terms that he is to sever them
from irs wand and deliver them to the purchaser, the latter acquires no interest
in the soil'. The section in our Act would yield the same result,

But the Indian law makes no distinction between what are known as
“embiements” in English law, 1-०, crops which are the annual resulis of
agricullural labour, and other crops, i.¢., grass and clover which do not
repay Within the year the iabour by which they are produced®, Consequenily,
“growing crops” would, in India, include not only the seeds or products of
the harvest in corp, but also all vegetable growths, whether in the form of
fruit, leaf, bark or roots, which have ao existence apart from their produce,
as distinguished from trees aud shrubs which have a recognised exislence
apart tom any produce which they may bear. As such, pan creepers would
de included in the term, though the creepers are uprooted not annually but
at the end of the third year’,

6.12. Fixtures—Since the expression “attached to the earth” is an
important element of the concept of immovable property, it may be consider-
ed in some detail. The position as to fixtures has been discussed at some
jengih in a Madras case’. It was pointed out that ‘immovable property is
defined at least in three Indian enactments,—the General Clauses Act, the
Registeation Act and the Transfer of Propert Act. The first two are not of
tnuch assistance, for they merely say that ‘immovable property includes
things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to
carih. They give no guidance as co what is meant by ‘attached’ or ‘perma-
ently fastened’. The Transfer of Property Act, by section 3, describes what
is meant by ‘attached to the earth’, namely, (a) rooted in the earth, as in the
case ७1 trees and shrubs; (b} imbedded in the earth, as in the case of walls
or buildings; or (c) attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent bene-
ficial enjoyment of that to which it is attached. Broadly speaking, the degree,
manner, extent and strength of attachment of the chattel to the earth or
building, are the main features to be regarded. The attachment should be
such as to partake of the character of the attachment of the trees or shrubs
rooted to the earth, or walls or buildings jnbedded in that sense, the further
test is whether, such an attachment is for the permanent beneficial enjoyment
of the immovable property to which it is attached. Even here, although there
may be an attachment to the earth, as contemplated by the first two aspects
in the description of ‘attached’, still, if the attachment is a necessary requisite
and that is the manner by which the movable property is or can be enjoyed
or worked, it may be open to question whether because of its fixture, though

1 Ca) Sakharam vy. Vishram, LER, 19 Bom. 207; (b) Madayya v. Venkata, LLB
Tt Mad. 198; (c} Jaimat Singh v. Ladha, (1884) PR. No. 112.

2 Section 3(25). General Clauses Act, 1897.

3 ६8) Jaimal Singh v. Ladha, (1884) P.R. No. 112; (b) Abdullah 5, Ashraf Ali,
7 CLI. 152, 166.

4 Washbourne v. Burrows (1847) 10 LJ, Bx. 266; 1 Exch. 107, cited in Gour.

3 Gour. r

6 Atmaram y. Doma, 11 C.P.LR. 87, cited by Gour,

पर Perumal v. Ramaswami, AR, 1969 Mad. 346.

4—885Law/77



40

permanently, in the qualified sense, it can ipso, facto or ipso jure be regarded
as immoveable property’.

6.13. Incidental Fixtures—Besides the erections imbedded in the earth,
the clause would not exclude other fixtures such as machinery and the build-
ing accessory thereto, being erected to cover and protect it’, With regard to
buildings and irade-fixtures, the general rule is in respect of whatever
has been annexed to the land, for the purpose of its better enjoyment, the
intention must clearly be presumed to be to annex the erection to the pro-
perty in the land, but the nature of the annexation may be such as to show
that the intention was to annex it only temporarily, in which case, it may be
detached and removed from the corpus*. The question, again, is a question
cf intention’, but the degree and nature of the annexation is an important
clement for consideration; for, where a chattel is so annexed that it cannot
be removed without great damage to the land, it affords a strong
ground for thinking that it was intended to be annexed in perpetuity to the
land. Of course, no such presumption is possible where the value of the
fixture is far in excess of the land upon which it was erected, or where by
custom or contract a different intention is indicated.

6.13A. Comparison with English law—The English law as to fixtures
is based on the maxis guicquid plantatur solo, solo credit°-* as to trees, and
quicquid inaedificatur solo, solo credit as to buildings, and the applica-
tion of these maxims is varied by a mass of exceptions in favour of a ten-
ant and in a favour of trade fixtures. The term fixture has no precise
meaning in English Law, and is not found in Termes de la Ley’ but it is
generally applied to something annexed to the freehold.

The classification in the Act as immoveable property of things attach-
ed to the earth bears some analogy to the English Law of fixtures, but the

masims on which the English law is founded do not generally apply in
India.

Long before the Transfer of Property Act was enacted Para Manisk’s
case*(s) settled that it was the common law of India that buildings and
other improvements do not by the mere accident of their attachment to the
soil become the property of the owner of the soil. The general rule laid

1 Gour,

2 See per Lord Fitzgerald in Wako v. Hall, 8 App. Cas. 195, 216; 0.8. from Wake
v. ‘Hall, 7 QB.D. 295.

3 Per Lord Blackburn in Wake v. Hall, 8 App. Cas. 195, 204 0.0. from Wake Vv.
Hall, 7 Q.B.D. 295.

4 Lancaster v. Eve, L.R. 3 ex. 257, 260, The intention may be rebutted by cir-

cumstencer pointing to the contrary—ib., 260. Subramaniam Chettiar Vv.
Chidambaram Servai, A.J.R. 1950 Mad. 5: al

5 Le., whatever is planted in the soil falls into, or becomes part of the soil.

-6 Le., whatever is built in the soit falls into, or becomes part of the soil. An-
other reading substitutes fixtures (is fixed to} for inaedi fictor (is built in).

7 Per Campbell, 0. J. Wiltshear v, Cottrell, (1853) 1 El. & 81, 674, 682.

8 Thakoor Chunder vy. Ramdhone (1866) 6 W. R. 228; Beng. L. R. Su

. Vol.
595; [22३2 ह॥ and followed in Narayan Das Khettry v. Jatindranatit (1987) 54
Cal. 669,54 1. A. 218, 102, 1. C. 198, AILR. 1927 P.C. 135: A.I.R. 1933
Oudh 468; A.LR. 1967 Kerala—22.



4t

Some by 3 Full Bench of the Caleutta High Court in that ०852 was a

“We think it should be laid down as a general rule thal, if he
who makes the improvement is not a mere trespasser, but is in pos-
session under any bona fide title or claim of title, he is entitled either
to remove the materials restoring the land to the state in which it was
before the improvement was made, or to obtain compensation or
the value of the building if it is allowed to remain for the benefit of
the owner of the soil—the option of taking the building, or allowing
the removal of the material remaining with the owner of the land in
those cases in which the building is not taken done by the builder
during the continuance of any state he may possess.”

6.13B. The Mohomedan Law is the same,’

Our Legislature has departed from the English Law of fixtures in
section 2 of the Mesne Profits and Improvements Act 11 of 1855, corres-
ponding to section 51 of this Act? and again in section L08(h) of this
Act dealing with the lessee’s right to remove fixtures? The Act inclines
rather to the law recognised by Hindu and Mahomedan Jurisprudence.*

6.14. Considerations applied by English Courts in regard to fixtures—
As is clear from the above, different considerations have been applied by
English Courts in deciding whether given things amounted to fixtures, in
the sense in which he term is understood in the law relating to real pro-
perty.5 Nevertheless, reference may be made to two of the English cases.
In Leigh v. Taylors the House of Lords held that valuable tapestries
affixed by a tenant for life to the walls of a house for the purpose of orna-
ment and the better enjoyment of them, were not fixtures and therefore
did not pass with the freehold to the remainder-man. The House of
Lords was of the view that the tapestries formed part of the personal
estate of the tenant for life. The speech of Lord Halsbury shows that ques-
tions like this cannot always be answered, in the nature of things with
arithmetical accuracy, but certain discernible tests, as aids in deciding the
question, are well-established, as, for instance, if something is made part
of the house, it must necessarily go to the heir, because the house goes to
the heir and it is part of the house. So, where something is attached in
some form to the walls of a house, nevertheless, having regard to the
nature of the thing itself, and the purpose of its being placed there, it is
not intended to form part of the reality, but is only a mode of enjoyment
of the thing while the person is temporarily there, and is there for the pur-
pose of his or her enjoyment, Though these observations were in the
context of fixtures, and we are conscious that English law relating to fix-
tures cannot be applied without qualifications and in their entirety to
conditions in this country, the observations of Lord Halsbury certainly
are of weight and point to the correct approach to questions of this kind,

1 Secretary of the State v. Charlesworth Pilling & Co., (1902) Bom. 1; I. A. 121
2 Ismail Kani Rowthan v. Hazarali Sahib, (1903) 27 Mad, 211.
3 Charurbluj v. Bonnett, (1905) 29 Bom. 323.
Beni Ram y. Kundal Lal, (189) 21 All, 496,
Sitabai v. Sambhu, (1914) 38 Bom. 716; 28 LC. 796.
4 Hafiz Shaikh v. Rashik Lal Ghose (1910) 37 Cal. 815; 6 L.C. 796
5 Perumal v, Ramaswami, A.1.R. 1969 Mad. 346, 349.
6 Leigh v. Taylor, (1902) A.C, 187,


42

The House of Lord, again, had to consider in Reynolds ए. Ashby &
Son; whether machinery attached to freehold was a fixture. There the
machines affixed to concrete beds ia the floor of the factory by bolts and
nuts, could have been removed without injury to the building or the beds.
Yn this case too Lord Haisbury was 016 of the Law Lords who decided
it, but with this difference, here the House considered that as the machines
were part of a factory, which was the subject-matter of a lease, the attach-
पाला of the machines to the earth in that manner should be regarded as &

ture.

6.15. English conflict of laws and movable property—We have
mentioned above that the distinction between immovable and movable
property is not important in England in internal law. But even in England,
the distinction becomes material when a question of conflict of laws
arises. When English courts have to determine rights between comeciled
Englishmen and persons domiciled in other countries which co not adopt
the English division into real and personal property, the division into im-
movable and movable property becomes relevant because, in such case,’
out of international comity and in order to arrive at a common basis on
which to determine questions between the inhabitants of two countries
living under different systems of jurisprudence, English courts recognise
and act on a division otherwise unknown to English law into movable and
immovable property.

It is for this reason that a lease hold interest in English land, though
classified as personal property for the purposes of English internal law, is
regarded as immovable property for the purposes of private international
law in England.*-*

6.16. tmmovables some-times regarded as movable:—Rights over
jmmovable are determined by the lex situs. Rights over movables are not
necessarily governed by that law, If, therefore, the subject-matter of owner-
ship is regarded as an immovable by one system of law but as a movable
by another, to which law is the decision left? This question must also
arise. The answer given by English law and by most foreign legal systems -
is the lex situs. If the lex situs attributes the quality of movability or of
immovability to the object in question, the English court which is seised
of the matter must also proceed on that basis.*

6.17. The first task of the’ court in conflict of laws case, when _re-
quired to decide some question of a proprietary or possesory nature, is to
decided whether the res litigiese is a movable or an immovable. Upon this
preliminary decision depends the legal system that will be applicable to the
case. Rights over immovables are determined by the lex situs: tights
over movables are not necessarily governed by that law, as already stated.
The classic situation is the transfer of property by succession, land going

1 Revnolds v. Ashby & Son (1904) AC. 466.

2 Re Hoyles (1911) 1 Chancery 179, 185 (Farwell LJ.),

3 Greke vy. Lord Carbery (1873) L. R. 16 Equity 461.

4 Duncan v. Lawson (1889) 41 Ch. D. 394.

5 Johnstone v. Baker (1817) 4 Mad. 474, note Re Hoyles (1910) 2 Ch. 333, 341,
(1911) 1 Cr. 179.

6 Cheshite Private International Law (1970) p. 269.


43

to the heirs selected by the law of the site while goods go according to
the law of the domicile of the deceased".

6.18. In one article? pertaining to the conflict of laws, it is stated that
immovable right means any right of ownership, occupation or drawing
profit from any site, the site being taken as one with all things regarded
by the law of that site as annexed to it for the purpose in hand, and it
has been added that this expression probably means also any right which
is creature of positive law and is so classified (classified as an immovable
tight) by its creator. Movable right could then mean other right.

6.19. Recommendation—Reverting to the Act, we may state that the
definition of “immovable property” in the Act, merely provides that it does
not inchide standing timber, grown crops or grass. ‘This definition is ob-
viously not self-contained, and mus: be read with the definition in the
General Clauses Act, 1897, which®, by virtue of section 3(26) of that
Act read with section 4, applies to the Transfer of Property Act. In our
opinion, it would be convenient if the definition is made self-contained,
by combining! what is cnacted in the General Clauses Act with what is
enacted in the Transfer of Property Act-—at least to the extent to which the
two can stand together.

6.20. Recommendation—This does not, of course, mean that such
combination will avoid all disputes for the foture. But the citizen will,
at least, be able to locate from one place the scope of the expression. It
will alzo lend some utility to the elaborate definition of the expression
“attached to the earth” given in the Transfer of Property Act. At present,
the importance of the expression “attached to the earth” is not readily
perceived, since the fact that the expression occurs in the definition of
‘immovable property’ in the General Clauses Act—-Which also applies to
the Transfer of Property Act—does not appear in the forefront. It will,
therefore, be an improvement if the definition of ‘immovable property’ is
made self-contained as suggested above. We recommend accordingly.

1 Clarence Smit, “Classification by Site in Conflict of Laws" (1963) 26 Modern
Law Review 16.

2 Clarence Smit, “Classification by Site in Conflict of Laws” (1963) 26 Modern
Law Review 16, 23.

3 See para 6.6, supra.

4 Compare para 6.7, supra.


CHAPTER 7
DEFINITIONS PERTAINING TO INSTRUMENTS

Section 3

7.1, Introductory—Three definitions concerned with instruments may
now be dealt with. These definitions are needed because several sections
require “instruments” for carrying out certain modes of transfer, and some
of them require that the instrument should be attested or registered. Having
inserted these requirements, the legislature considered it necessary that the
essentials thereof should be indicated.

72. Instrument—“Instruments is defined as meaning a non-testa-
mentary instrument. It hardly needs any comments or change. It re-
inforces the position flowing from section 2 to the effect that the Act does
not apply to transfers operative on death. The definition may be left as
it is.

73. Attested—Analysis—The definition of “attested” can be broken
up into several parts :
(a) There must be attestation—an ingredient whose importance
is often not realised;

(b) The attestation must be by two or more “witnesses” —
again, an ingredient which seems to have raised problems in
regard to seribee, registration officers and the like;

(c) Each of the two witnesses must have seen the executant
sign or affix his mark to the instrument or must have seen
some other person sign the instrument in the presence and
by the direction of the executant or must have received
from the executant a personal acknowledgment of his sig-
ature or mark or of his signature by such other person;

We shall have a few comments on “personal acknowledg-
ment”,

(d) Each of the two or more attesting witnesses must have sign-
ed the instrument in the presence of the executant;

(७) It shall not be necessary that more than one of such wit-
nesses shall have been present at the same time;

(0) No particular form of attestation shall be necessary.

7.4. Complexity—The definition of “attested” may appear to be a
comy plicated one; but this complexity is primarily due to the fact thats
number of situations had to be dealt with, several points that had
arison in the case law prior to the insertion of the definition Tad 8 be
clarified. The most im nt clarification is that to the effect that for
the purposes of the vali aay of attestation it is not necessary that both the
attesting witnesses must be present at the same time. It is, of course,
requisite that each of them must have either witnessed the execution थ
received an acknowledgment of execution from the executant of the instre-
ment.

“4


as

lt may be noted that the dehnition of “attested” was added _at the
instance of Dr. Hari Singh Gour’. The specific provision in fhe defini-
tion of “attested”, to the effect that the two witnesses need uot have simul-
taneously witnessed the execution, was inserted in view of the fact that
the previous position led to a lot of perjury, and was seen to be unrealis-
tic. Moreover, in view of the requirement of registration which is now
compulsory for all gifts and most mortgages, the additional precaution
that both witnesses must have witnessed the execution simultaneously was
considered unnecessary.

7.5. Common law and history of the definition—At common law, an.
attesting witness must be present a. the execution’. In ihe Indian Sucses-
sion Act, attestation included an attestation of an admission of &xécution,
Since the Transfer of Property Act contained no such definition, contro-
versy afose on the subject, till that Privy Council gave the expression a
restricted meaning*.

This position was allowed by the Legislature to continue for the
future, though a Validating Act was passed in 1917 to validate past instru-
meats which had been attested on admission of execution. In 1926, a
specific definition was inserted, overriding the Privy Council rulling. In
1927, it was clarified that the amendment of 1926 was retrospective.

Post—1927 decisions do not reveal any serious controversy that can
be appropriately remedied by an amendment, But a look at the im-
Portant points that have been discussed in the judicial decisions Would be
worthwhile.

7.6. Animus to attest—Although not so expressly stated in the defi-
nition, it is an important ingredient of the concept of attestation that there
must be an animus to attest‘. This is implicit in the word “attest”. This
ingredient is often lost sight of so that unfortunately controversies arise
whether a scribe can be an attesting witness, or whether the registering
officer's signature can be regarded as an attestation, or whether an identi-

fring ng witness can also be regarded as an attesting witness. In general,
answer would be affirmative only if the animus to attest is proved.

7.7, Since intention to attest is a question of fact, the answer to
be given in a particular case as to whether the test mentioned above is or
is not satisfied must, in general, depend on the facts of the case. Many of
the apparently conflicting decisions on the subject can be reconciled on
this ground.

Once the matier is seen in this light, there does not seem to be much
ecope for improving the form or content of the definition on the question
of animus.

7.8. Personal acknowledgment—The portion of the definition re-
lating to Personal acknowledgment requires some discussion. It should
be noted that personal acknowledgment need not be in a particular form,

1 Legislative Assembly Debates, 3rd February, 1925, pages 716, 77.
2 Freshfield ४. Reed, (1842) 9 M & W 404, followed in Seal v. Claridge, (1861)
7 QBD. 516, 519.

3 Shamu Potter v. Abdul Kader, (1912) LLR. 35 Mad. 697 (P.C.).

4. Abdul Jabhar v. Venkata Sastri, AI.R..1969 S.C. 1147; (1969) 2 S.C.R. 513.
affirming Venkata Sastri, ALR. 1962 Mad. 11.



46

and it need not be express. An acknowledgment of signature may well
be inferred from the conduct of the executant at the time when the deed
is attested by the witnesses. In fact, many cases of attestation by admis-
sion would be of this nature, since it is hardly .ikely that th, executant of
a will, mortgage, gift—or for that matter, any other document,—would
go Uircugh toe ceremonial or perferm the ritual of solemnly announcing
to those present as attesting witnesses in so many words that he has signed
the instrument. Of course, we recommend no amendment oa this point.

Jt may be noted that according to the English rulings, it is not neces-
sary that the acknowledgment should be expressed or should have been
made verbally by the cxecutant. In several cases where the executant
was present and the attesting witnesses signed the document in his pre-
sence on being assured that he had executed the will, it was held that there
had been suilicient acknowledgment. In Ingiesant v. Inglesant’, the de-
ceased had signed her will in the presence of one witness; on the entry of
the second witness a person present dirceted him to sign his name under
the testatrix’s signature. He did so and the second witness also subscribed
the will. The deceased was in the room, but said no word during the
proceeding. The will was lying on the table open and had a heading ia
large characters that that was the last will and testament, etc. It was
held that the deceased “acknowledged” her signature in the presence of
two witnesses. So far as the attestation of a will is concerned, it is, in
India, governed by the Succession Act, which uses the expressivn “pez-
sonal acknowledgment” which occurs in Section 3 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act also. In the English Wills Act (1 Vict. Ch. 26, S. 9), the
section is similar, except that the word “personal” does not occur therein.

7.9. As regards the form of attestation, it is now well established that
it can be by affixing marks.?-*

7.10. The definition of “registered” merely refers to the law for the
fegistration of documents—the Indian Registration Act, 1908. The defi-
nition assumes importance not only for the purposes of those sections
which require registration for the validity of certain modes of transfer, but
also for the section relating to part performance—section 53A—which
cures the absence of, or defects in, registration, subject to the conditions
mentioned therein.

1 ALR. 1935 Mad. 176 (2).

2 Bishwanath v. Babu Ram ALR. 1957 Patna 485, following Maiko Lal v.Sanni,
ALR. 1936 All. 576 (F.B.3.)


CHAPTER &
DEFINITION OF “ACTIONABLE CLAIM”
SECTION 3

8.1. Anaiysis—The definition of “actionable claim” comprises several
items which may be broadly cnumerated as (i) debt and Gi) 8 beneficial
interest in movable property which is not in the actual or constructive pesses-
sion of the claim. Of course, in both the cases, the defin'tion is {tamed
in terms of a “claims” and in both the cases, the claim must be une recognised
by the Civil Courts as afording grounds for relief, There are other zequire-
ments which we shali keep aside for the presence.

8.2. In the case of a debt, the further condition is that the debt must
wot be secured by a mortgage of immovable property or by a hypothecation
or pledge of movable property. In both the cases, it is immaterial whe:her
the debt or interest is ex'stent or accruing or conditional or ccntingent.

8.3. Essence—The essence of an actionable claim is the concept of
action coupled with the element of incorporeal personal property. Pre-
viously the definition was as follows :

“A claim which the civil courts recognise as affording grounds for
telief is actionable, whether a suit for its enforcement is or is not
actually pending or likely to become necessary.”

This definition led to certain conflicts of decisions and obscurity, chief
amongst which were questicns pertaining to secured debts, questions relating
to mere right to sue and questions relating to cases where the cause of action
had accrued before the assignment of the actionable claim. Although it
it often assumed that all the difficulties have been removed by the ded
definition which was transferred to section 3 and re-modelled in 1900, cer-
tain questions do still survive. In particular, the Position regarding benefits
under contract is not evident from the definition as it now stands. We dis-
cuss this aspect in some detail below*. Statements® that “all claims under
contract are excluded except claims to the payment of a liquidated sum of
money or debt or price” may require qualification in certain respects,

8.3A. English concept—It would be noted that in English law all per-
sonal property may be either in possession or in action. The former is
¢alled chose in possession, while the latter is called chose in action, Things
of which the owner has the present possession and enjoyment and which he
can deliver over to another are choses in possession. Things of which be
has no actual possession or enjoyment to which he has only a right enforce-
able by suit are designated choses in action’. The latter includes, in England
a debt, the benefit of a contract or damages for a wrong.

8.4. About the transferability of damages, the Indian Iaw is different,
but it is clear that in England, the benefit of contract is included in a chose

1 Mulla (1973), pages 804 and 805.

2 Sce Infra.

3 Mulla (1973), page 805.

4 Colonial Bank v. Whinney, 30 Chancery Division 261, 285 (cited by 0०७).

a



48

in action. Whatever be the position as regards shares and patents, ०
right and trade marks in England—a matter into which we ted not port
has never been doubted that the phrase “chose in action” includes many
things whether a contract or not and contracts of every nature except con-
tract for the sale of goods**.

8.5. English law—-A brief but helpful statement of the English law is
given as follows in a work on Mercantile law* :—

“Rights under a contract are called choses in action which is a
legal expression used to denote all personal rights in property which
can only be claimed or enfcrced by an action at law e.g. contract debts,
shares in companies and nego‘iable instruments. They may be con-
trasted with choses in possession which are things capable of actual
physical assignment, e.g. a watch, a piece of furniture and so on.

The common law does not recognise assignments of choses in
action, but equity does and so does statute.”

8.6. As common iaw® choses in action could only be assigned with the
assent of the debtor, or in accordance with the law merchant. So, unless
the contract were one of a negotiable character, the rights given by it could
not be assigned; to transfer these rights; a new contract of a trilateral nature,
“a novation” was required, ie. the creditor A agreed to release the debtor
B from his liability to A in return for B agreeing to pay the debt to C. C
could only enforce B’s promise if he gave consideration for it.

‘The common law rule was altered by the Judicature Act, 1873, section
25(6), which was repealed and re-enacted by section 136 of the Law of
Property Act, 1925. ‘These Acts provided that a debt or other legal chose in
action may be assigned so as to entitle the assignee to suc in his own name
without joining the assignor as a party if :

(i the assignment is absolute, and not by way of charge;
(ii) the assignment is in writing;
(iii) notice in writing of the assignment has been given to the per-
son bound—the notice must actually reach the person
bound’.

8.7. English law as to benefits of contract~Thus, in English law, a
chose in action includes, inter alia, benefits of contract®. Under the Trans-
fer of Property Act, it would appear that the right to claim the benefit of a
contract is a beneficial interest in movable property not in possession’. That
the benefit of a contract is assignable unless the contract is personal in its
nature or the rights are incapable of assignment either under the law or under

1 Siphinston, “Ghose in action", 9 L.Q.R. 311.

2 Sweet, “Ghose in Action” 10 L.Q.R, 303, 317.

3 T. C. Wiltiams, “Ghose in Action”. 10 L.Q.R. 143.

4 Smith & Koenan, Mercantile Law (1965), page 57.

5 Stevens, Mercantile Law (1969), page 69.

6 nt remarks of Martin, B., in Liversidge v. Brosdbent, (1859), 4 H & M 603,

4 Holt v. Hoatherfield Trust, Ltd, (1942) 2 K.B. 1; (1942); All F.R, 404.

% Mulla (1973), page 804. Also para 8.4 supra.

> Joh er Mehar Ali v. Budge Budge Jute Mills Co., (1906) LL.R, 33 Cal, 702,
med in (1907) LR. 34 Cal. 289.



49

an agreement between the parties is also now fairly weil settled’, Of course,
this assignment of rights under a contract is quite distinct from assignment of
4 claim for compensation which one party has against the other for breach
of contract. The latter is a mere claim for damages which cannot be assign-
ed in law; the former is a benefit under an agreement, which is capable of
assignment. This much is clear from the discussion in the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Khardah Company Ltd. v. Raymon & Co. Lid.”.

_ 8.8. The discussion in the Supreme Court judgment cited above* was,
in a sense, obiter, because in that case there was a statutory prohibition
against assignment of the benefit of the contract. The contract in issue was
for the purchase of foreign jute. Since the goods had to be imported under
a non-transferrable licence, and since the licence contained an express con~
dition requiring the utilisation of the imported raw material only by the Bill
in question, an assignment was regarded as prohibited. But the discussion
is fairly exhaustive, with respect, illuminating. The assignment of the
benefit of a contract was a subject specifically discussed, the court observing
that ordinarily, there is nothing personal about a contract for the sale of

It even referred to an English case* holding that an arbitration
clause does not take away the right of a party to assign the benefit if it is
otherwise assignable.

8.9. Apart from the cases already cited, it may be mentioned that in a
Privy Council case’, it seems to have been assumed that the benefit of a con-
tsaci of repurchase or resale of property could be assigned. In the Calcutta
ease of Champarun Sugar Co. v. Haridas®, the question at issue was whether
the right to purchase shares or option to do so could be attached, but the dis-
cussion is exhaustive and the court specifically held that such a right is a
beneficial interest for movable property and is an actionable claim where the
movable property is not in possession and that it was assignable and trans-
‘eraole,

In the Bombay case of Vishweshwar v. Durgappa’, the question was
whether the option to purchase property is assignable. Beaumont CJ.
observed :

“There can be no doubt that both under tHe common law and under
section 23(b), Specified Relief Act, an option to repurchase property is prima
facie assignable though it may be so worded as to show that it was to be

al to the guarantee and not assignable. Under section 2360), Specific
Rett. Act, 1877, it is provided that a specific performance of a contract: may
be obtained by the representative-in-interest of the principal, or any party
thereto; provided that, where the learning, skill, solvency of any personal
quality of such party is a material ingredient in the contract, or where the

1 Khardah Company Lid. v. Rayman & Co. Lid, ALR. 1962 S.C, 1810; (1963)
3.S.C.R. 183, 202.

2 Khardah Company Lid. ५. Raymon Co. Lid, AJR. 1962 S.C. 1810, 1817,
1819; (1963) 3 SCR. 183, 202, covering ALR. 1960 Cai, 86.

3 Khardah Company Led. v, Raymon & Co, Ltd., ALR. 1962 $.C. 1810, 1817,
para 19; (1963) 3 S.C. 189 202.

4 Shaytor v. Woolf, (1964) 2 Al E.R. 54.

5 Sakateguna v. Munnuswamy, ALR, 1928 P.C, 174, 175, on appeal from
ALR. 1926 Mad, 699.

& Champarun Sugar Co. v. Haridas ALR. 1966 Cal. (34, 136, 137 (0. M. Sinha &
A.C. Sen JU).

7 Vishweshwar y. Durgappa, A.LR. 1940 Bom. 339.


50

contract provides that his interest shall not be assigned, his representative-im-
interest or his principal shall not be entitled to specific performance of the
contract, unless where his part thereof has already been performed.”

8.10. Contract Act—The Indian Contract Act has no section dealing
generally with the assignability of contracts. A contract which, under sec-
tion 40, is such that the prom must perform it in person is not assignable
by virtue of section 40—the sec.ion which deals with the burden of ihe con-
tract, Judicial decisions have applied the same principle to the benefit of
the coniract’. But there is no specific provision ia chat regard, Insertion
of it would be useful.

The utility of the proposed clarification? would be seen when one takes
the case of contracts for the return of specific goods. The interest cf che
buyer of goods in a contract for future delivery, would be property within
the meaning of the Transier of Property Act and an actionable claim, It
was so held in a Bombay case*. ३16 following observations of Jeakins
C.J. are pertinent :

“What was transferred was, in my opinion, property, and under
section 6 of the Transfer of Property Act property of any kind may
be transferred except as therein provided. Nene of the specified
exception would have ‘ncuded what Shariffbhoy (buyer) purgorted
to transfer and I further hold that the subject cf the transfer was an
actionable claim, and so Chapter VHI of the Transfer of Property Act
applies. That this view of the Transfer of Property Act does not
involve any material change in the law as previously understood in
Bombay is apparent from what was said by Westropp C.J. in Dayabhat
Dipchand v. Bullabhram Davaram.”

It may be noted that the decision was rendered after the extension of
the Transfer of Property Act, to the then existing province of Bombay by &
notification of Ist January, 1393.

8.11. Position under the Contract Act—We are not, at the moment,
concerned with the modes of assignment of the benefit of a contract*. But
the broad and general propgsition that a benefit of a contract is a species of
an actionable claim shoul he in our opinion, find a place in the definition of

that expression in the Transfer of Property Act, to make it more expressive
and self-contained.

8.12. Such an amendment would not, of course, mean that contractual
or statutory restrictions on assignment, or non-assignability arising by reason
of the nature of the subject-mat‘er, would thereby be rendered nugatory*.
What actionable claims can be assigned is a matter which is dealt with not
by the definition but mainly by the provisions of section 6 and, though
indirectiy, by section 130 and succeeding sections. This is true even of those
items of property which are undoubtedly actionable claims under the preseat
definition. For example, the salary of an employee® and also his pension is
an actionable claim. But this proposition is subject to section 6 &) prohi-
biting the transfer of certain pensions—a prohibition which does not apply

2 See para 6.13, infra.
3 Hans Raj v, Nathu, (1907) 9 Bom. Law Reporter 838.

4 Ibrahim ९. Union of India, ALR. 1966 Guj. 6, 13, paras 7 and 8.
5 Section 6.


St

to pensions payable by a foreign State remitied to pensioner in India...
Then, an insurance policy creates an actionable claim, but there are special

provisions relating to its assignment—for example, in the Marine Insurance
Act’,

8.13, Recommendation—On the above reasoning, we recommend that
in the definition of “actionable claim”, after the words “not in the posses~
sion, either actual or constructive, of the claimant”, the words “including
the benefit of a coniract otherwise than one relating to immovable property”
should be added. After this amendment, the last portion of the definition
which reads——“whether such debt or beneficial interest be existent, accruing,
conditional or contingent” will still apply to the benefit of a contract; as also
the restrictions indicated by the words “which the civil courts recognise a8
affording grounds जग हर,

8.14. Mere right to sue—A question often arises whether a particular
claim is an actionable claim or a mere right to sue which cannot be ‘rans-
ferred by reason of section 6(e). Much depends on the manner in which

the instrument of assignment is drafted. In a Nagpur case?, these were the
facts—

On the 25th of March 1920, the defendant Mst. Nakhela executed a
document in favour of one Raoji, which had been described as a chitti, in
which it was recited that she had borrowed a cart, bullocks, a siik dupata
and a sari, the total value of which things was Rs. 200, to use in the marriage
of her gon. In the chitti, Mst, Ma! promised to return the article when
done with, when she would be entitled to get back her chitti. On the 2nd
of June, 1921, according to the case of the plaintiffs, Raoji executed in their
favour a sale deed by which he trausferred to the plaintiffs Kokaya and

Durga the chitti with all the rights thereunder. The folowing are extracts
from the deed of sale :

“You are at liberty to recover the amount of these articles from
Nakhela, either “privately or through the Civil Court. It also stipulat-
ed that if you do not recover this amount from Nakhela, I shail be
liable to pay it to you.”

It was held that this was a transfer -of a mere right to sue—a personal
claim which could not be wansferred. A claim for damages for breach of
Contract, after breach, is not an actionable claim. The aciual decision,
wil respect, is correct on the language of the instruments, But the follow-

ing discussion of the law, as found in the judgment, seems to be wider than
is the correct position :

“For the applicant it is contended that all that Raoji could recover
was either the original articles lent or damages for breach of contract to
return them and I have no doubt that this contention is @ correct one.
So far as Reoj?s right to recover the goods lent is concerned, that is @
personal claim and there is ample authority for holding that such a per-
sonal claim is a right which cannot be transferred. It is also cleat that,
failing the recovery of the original goods, what was recoverable was
money in the form of damages “and that this money was not a debt.

1 Bishamber Nath v. Imdad Ali, (1891) LLR. 18 Cal. 216 (P.C.).

2 Sections 17, $2, and 79 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1963.

3 Union of India v. Alliance Insurance Company, A..R. 1964, Cal, 31.
4 Mt. Nakhela +. Kokava, AJR. 1923 Nag. 67(2).



52

No doubt, the value of the article was specified in the chitti but the
chitti would only be the evidence of the value of the articles and there
is no promise in the chitti to pay Rs. 200. It would be open to the
defendent to prove that the goods were in reality worth jess than
Rs. 200. What was transferred therefore by Raoji to the plaintiff was
a mere right to sue for damages and there is ample authority for holding
that such a transfer is against the provisions of section 6 of the Transfer
of Property Act.”

&.14A, We may comment that if the right to recover the goods is trans-
ferred, it would be transfer of a claim to beneficial interest in movable pro-
perty not in possesssion, actual or constructive.

8.15, Debt—We have discussed at length the latter part of the defini-
tion of actionable claim in view of the fact that the statutory provision does
not mention it specifically. This does not mean that the earlier half of the
defintion relating to “debt” is not important. In practice, questions do arise
with reference to this part of the definition also, namely, whether a particular
demand is within this part. The answer must depend largely on what may
be understood to be comprehended by “debt”, since a claim to a debt is an
actionable claim. “Debt” in its primary sense, means a liquidated monetary
obligation which is usually recoverable by a suit. There is a series of rulings
to that effect in India’.

This also seems to be the English law, where the aspect of certainly
(liquidated amount), the aspect of money and the aspect of recoverability in
Jaw, have been emphasised in the judicial decisions, In English law, it is
an essential feature of an action for debt that it should be for a liquidated or
cerlain sum of money. “In general”, says Blackstone’, “whenever a con-
tract is such as to give one of the parties a right to receive a certain and
liquidated sum of money from the other (as in the case of a bond for pay-
ment of money, or an implied promise to pay for goods supplied so much 2s
they shall be reasonably worth), a debt is then said to exist between these
parties; while, on the other hand, if the demand be ९९ an uncertain amount,
a3 when an action is brought against a bailee for injury done through his
negligence to an article committed to his care, it is described not as a debt,
but as a claim for damages.”

1 Moti Lat v, Radhey Lal, WLR. 55 All, 814.
2 Ram Charan Das v. Naseeran, AIR. 1935 All. 342.
3 Blackstone, cited by Cour.


CHAPTER 9

DEFINITION OF NOTICE
SECTION 3

9.1, Introductory—The last of the definitions contained in section 3 is
concerned with notice. A person is said to have notice of a fact when be
actually knows that fact, or when, but for wilful abstention from an equity
of search which he ought to have made, or gross negligence, he wou ve
known it.

This is the gist of the main part of the definition. But the Explanations
are equally important, or perhaps more important than the main part.

9.2. Scheme—In the scheme of the clause, notice falls into three sepa-
rate sub-divisions—(a) actual notice—this is called, in the English law,
express notice; (0) constructive or “implied” notice, when, bat for wilful
abstention from an inquiry or search which he ought to have made, or gross.
negligence, he would have known; (०) imputed notice, when notice is
acquired by an agent. The last mentioned category is sometimes described
as a species of constructive notice, but deserves special treatment.

9.3. Some important sections—In order that the importance of the
definition of ‘notice’ may be appreciated, It would be useful to refer to a
few important sections wherein the expression occurs. Under section 39,
where a third person has a right to receive maintenance or a provision for
advancement or marriage from the profits of immovable property and such

ig transferred, the right to receive such maintenance or provision
may be enforced against the transferee if the transferee has notice of the
right or if the transfer is gratuitous. But the right cannot be enforcéd
against a transferee for consideration and without notice of the right, nor
against such property in his hands. Again, under section 40, when one
person has, for the more beneficial enjoyment of his own immovable pro-
perty, a right to restrain the enjoyment in a particular maser of the im-
movable property of another person or where a third person is entitled to
the benefit of an obligation arising out of contract and annexed to the
ownership of immovable property, such tight or obligation may be enforced
against a transferee with notice, but not against a transferee for considera-
tion and without notice of the right or obligation, nor against such propeity
in his hands. A familiar example is the case where there is a coutcact for
the sale of immovable property and the prospective vendor, in breach of
the contract, sells the property to a third person who has a notice of the
contract. The prospective purchaser may enforce the contract against a
transferee with notice to the same extent as he could have enforced against
the prospective vendor. Then, under section 43, where there is a transfér
of immovable property by an unauthorised person who subsequently acquires
an interest in the property which he professes to transfer and the transfer
is for consideration, such transfer shall, at the option of the transferee,
operate on such subsequently acquired interest while the contract of transfer
subsists, but this shall not impair the rights of transferees in good faith for
consideration without notice of the existence of the said option.

GD


54

Alf these provisions illustrate the importance attached to notice or its
absence. We need not give an exhaustive list. Many of the provisions,
as we have pointed ont in the first chapter, are derived from rules of equity.

9.4. Principle of notice—The doctrine of notice as affecting priorities
is founded upon the rule which discountenances laches and frauds of alt
Kinds.’ As such, its principle is widely applicable, and stated generally,
it is an exception io the general maxim qui prior est tempore, potior est jure
(He who is first in poimt of time is more powerful in law). Correctly
understcod, however, it is rather an explanation than an exception to it,
for the true meaning of the maxim is that, as belwcen persons having only
equitable interests, if such equities are in all other respects equal, then only
would the rule apply.*

9.5. Hixtory—-The definition of the word ‘notice’ in the Act correctly
codifies the jaw which exisicd prior to the passing of the Act so far as
notice io the principal is concerncd.§ Thus, it was held in a case decided
in 1881* that when a person is proved to have had knowledge of certain
facts, or to have been in a position, the reasonable coasequences of which
knowledge or position would be, that he would have been led to make
further enquiry, which would have disclosed a particular fact, the law fixes
him with having himself had notice of that particuiar fact.

9.6. It is to be noted that the definition of ‘notice’ was adopted by the
Law Commissioners of 18795 from Bill which led to the Indian Trusts Act,
1882, section 3. In the Act as subsequently passed, however, the words
“or search” were added after the words “from an enquiry”, at the instance
of the Select Committee,* in order to make the definition? apply expressly to
23 case where a person wilfully abstains from a search in a register, which
he ought to have made.

This raised the question whether registration should, of itself, be
deemed to be legal notice. On this point, the High Courts of Bombay and
Allahubad had been, for some time, at variance with those of Calcutta and
Madras, where registration was held to be no notice—a view afterwards
confirmed by the Privy Council.¢

The law was altered in 1929. The Amending Act has not accepted
the ruling of the Privy Council, on the ground that it inevitably led to sech
prejury and litigation. In America®, registration of conveyance is held ta
operate as constructive notice to a'l subsequent purchasers of any estate,
legal or equitable, in the same property.” “The reasoning, upon which
this doctrine is founded, is the obvious policy of the Registry Acts, the duty

1 Gour
2 Rice v. Rice, 2 Drew. 73;
Cordon ९. James, 30 Ch, ७9. 249;
National Provincial Ban’ v. Jackson, 33 Ch. ७, 1;
Farrand v, The Yorkshire Bank, 40 Ch. D. 182.
3 Churaman y, Baili, LL.R. 9 Al 591.
4. Doorga Narain ४. Boney Madhud, (1881) LL.R. 7 Cal. 199.
5 Report, dated 15th Noy. 1879, section 29.
6 Third Report, dated tith March, 1881, section 3,
7 Gour.
है Tilakdhari ९. Kheden Lat, (1921) LLR. 48 Cal. $2 (P.C.}.
9 Notes om clauses,
20. Gour.


55

of the party purchasing under such circumstances to search for prior encum-
brances, the means of which search are within his power, and the danger
of letting in parol proof of notice or want of notice of the actual existence
of the conveyance.”

9.7, First Explanation—Actual notice does not raise problems. Con-
structive notice requires to be discussed at length. According to the first
Explanation, where any transaction relating to immovable property is re-
quired by law to be and has been effected by a registered instrument, any
Person acquiring such property or any part of, or siiar> or interest, in, such
property shall be deemed to have notice of such instrument as from the
date of registration or, where the property is not all situated in one sub-
district, or where the registered insteument has been registered u:der sub-
section (2) of section 30 of the Indian Registration Act. 1908. from the
earliest date on which any memorandum of such regis: irstrument has.
been filed by any Sub-Registrar within whose sub-disirict any part of the
property which is being acquired, or of the proper:y wherein a share or
interest is being acquired, is situated.

This Explanation, however, applies only if three conditions mentioned
in the Proviso thereto are fulfilled, namely,—

(1) the instrument has been registered and its registration com-
pleted in the manner prescribed by the Indian Registration
Act, 1908, and the rules made thereunder,

(2) the instrument or memorandum has been duly entercd or filed,
as the case may be, in books kept under s2ction 51 of that
Act, and

(3) the particulars regarding the transaction to which the instru-
ment relates have been correctly entered in the indexes kept
under section 55 of that Act.

If these conditions are satisfied, registration is given the effect of notice
by & construction of law.

It is aptly described in the text books as constructive notice.

9.8. In England, under section 197 of the Law ef Property Act, 1925,
registration is notice in the two counties of Middle sex and Yorkshire where
the system of local deed Registries prevails, and, under section 198, in the
case_ of instruments which are registered under the Land Charges Act.
1925, it is provided that registration shall be deemed to constitute actual
notice of such instrument to all persons and for all purposés connected with
the land affected,

9.9. Second Explanation—The solemnity of legal transactions has been
given recognition in the First Explanation. The reality of de facto enjoy-
ment is next dealt with in the Second Explanation which is concerned with
actual possession as a source of constructive notice. Any person acquiring
any immovable property or any share or interest in any such property shall
be deemed to have notice of the title, if any, of the person who is for the
time being in actual possession thereof.

—_. ८5. _7_पठर््ेनप्-ऊ->__--_-_---े 1
1 Story’s Equity, section 534, 510, 511, cited in Now

Ata 155 4६70 Edition sage in Notes on clauses (not
5—885Law/77



56

9.10. Third Explanation—The third Explanation deals with agency
as a source of notice. This category of notice is usually described as
imputed notice. A person shall be deemed to have had 10108 of any fact
if his agent cequircs notice thereof whilst acting on his behalf in the course
cf business to which that fact is material. This is, however, subject to a
qualification contained in the proviso. Under the proviso, if the agent
fraudulently conceals the fact, the principal shail not be charged with notice
thereof as against any person who was a party to, or otherwise cognizant
of, the fraud.

9.11. Whether constructive notice attributable to principal—Does the
notice of the agent, that could be fictionally attributed to the principal under
the third Explanation, have to be actual notice, or it is enough if it is
constructive notice ? The use of the word “acquires” would, at first sight,
seem to support the first view, since “acquisition”, in ordinary language,
implies something positive and actual, or at least some effort. However, it
should be noted that there is at least one judicial decision taking the opposite
view.’ This also seems to bz the English concept of notice." It would,
thus, appeac that when the constructive notice of an agent is imputed to
the principal, there is a double fiction.

9.12. In other words, the principal is liable not only on the actual
notice reccived by the agent, but also on the basis of constructive notice
received by the agent. Of course, in every case, the important condition
must be satisfied, namely, that the agent was acting on behalf of the princi-
pal in the course of business to which the fact is material and that there
was no frauduleat concealment on the part of the agent,

9.13, Lintits—The discussion so far has dealt with width of the
definition of notice as read with the Explanations. The limits of the
definition must also be noted, There may be such wilful negligence in
abstaining from inquiry into facts which would convey actual notice, as may
preperty be held to have the consequences of notice actually obtained. But
if there is no actual notice, and no wilful or fraudulent turning away from
an inquiry into, and consequent knowledge, of facts which the circumstances
would suggest to a prudent mind, then the doctrine of constructive notice
ought not to be applied.¢

9.14, The above discussion calls for no amendment of the definition.

3 Renukabai v. Bheoson, ALR. 1931 Nag. 132.

2 आला, Equiry (1966). page 60, para 3(a).

3 Doorga Narain v. Baney Madhab LLR. 7 Cal. 199;
following Agra Bank २. Burry, LR. 7 AL, 135; and
Ramcoomar v. MeQueen, 11 B.L.R, 53, See, alto
Khushalchand x, Trimbak, 48. Bom. LB, 586.



CHAPTER 10
RELATIONSHIP WITH CONTRACTS ACT AND REGISTRATION ACT

SECTION 4

10.1. We have already stated* that the Transfer of Property Bill was
originally conceived as a part of a wider project forming part of a draft Civil
Code. That plan did not materialise. But the unity of the project finds
some reflection in section 4.

Section 4 provides that the Chapters and sections of this Act which
relate to contracts shall be taken as part of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.

Further, it provides that section 54, paragraphs 2 and 3, 59, 107 and
123 shall be read as supplemental to the Indian Registration Act, 1908.

The first part of the section does not merely mean that transfers by
act of parties are subject to the general principles of the law of Contracts.
That did not require an express provision. Its practical importance could
be more concretely indicated by stating that definitions and explanations
in the Contract Act can be invoked for construing the Transfer of Property

ct,

We have no further comments on section 4.

1 Chapter 1.
57


CHAPTER 11
DEFINITION OF TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
SECTION 5

11.1, “Transfer of Property” defined Introductory—Section 5 defines
the expression “transfer of property” as meaning an act by which a living
person conveys property, in present or in future, to one or more other
living persons, or to himself, or to himself and one or more other living
persons. It also defines the expression “to transfer property” as meaning
to perform such act.

The section further clarifies that ‘living person’ includes a company or
association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, but nothing
herein contained shall affect any law for the time being in force relating
to transfer of property to or by companies, associations or bodies of indivi-
duals. This clarification was inserted in 1929.

11.2. Analysis—Living person—Let us analyse the section. The first
important ingredient is that there must be a living person. This is ex-
plained in the second part of the section which expands its scope. But
apart from that, it may be noted that the section,—and therefore the Act
in general—does not apply to the conveyance of property to an entity
which is recognised by law as having a personality in law but which does
not have life. It is for this reason that a gift to God Almighty does not
fall within the frame-work of the Act.’

For the same reason, a transfer of property to an idol is not a trans-
fer? within the meaning of section 5. Those judicial decisions,’ thére-
fore, which take the view that a living person includes a juristic person, do
not, with respect, appear to be correct. The very fact that in 1929 a para~
graph had to be added to define a living person as including a company or
association or body of individuals whether incorporated or not, would seem
to show that artificial legal persons do not otherwise fall within section 5.

Of course, the position in regard to idols or other juristic persons may
be different if the mode of conveyance is so adopted that the transferor
executes the instrument in favour of living persons designated as trustees.®
Such a transfer must satisfy the requirements of the Act.

11.3, Conveyance—The next important ingredient of section 5 is that
indicated by the word “conveys”. ‘This expression is not defined in the
Act, but it postulates on act by which a change of proprietory right is
sought to be effected. Where there is no transmutation of a proprietory
interest, but only a re-distribution thereof, there is no act “conveying”

roperty within the meaning of this section. It js fo rthis reason that a
family arrangement is not a transfert, Again, it is for the same reason
that an arrangement by way of dissolution of partnership is not, speaking

1a. AJR. 1946 Audh 256.

2 9. ALR. 1926 Nag. 469.

3 (1975) 16 Guj. Law Rep. 289.
4 ALR. 1966 S.C. 432.



59

ordinarily, a transfer, though the case could be different where, after the
dissolution. 2 specific conveyance of property is the device adopted. For
the same reason. the contribution of immovable property by a partner as
his share of partncrship does not require a written document or registra-
tion.

11.4 It has been held* that an arrangement by which, on the dissolu-
tion of a partnership, certain partners are paid off and, in return, give up
or assign their interests in the assets of the partnership by way of debts,
which were due to the firm is a “transfer of Property” as defined by sec-
tion 5. This, with respect, must be taken as confined to actionable claims
{section 130).

11.5. Transferee—The third important ingredient of section 5 is
indicated by the words which relate to the transferee. The transferee
आप be (i) one or more orher living person, or (ii) the transferor himself,
or (iii) the wansferor himself and one or more other living persons. In
the case (1) mentioned above, the transferor, when he becomes the
transferee, does so as a trustee.

11.6. Property—Property’, of course, is a wide term, Thus, it in-
cludes an interest of the lessor. The interest of a lessor is a reversion, 2
future estate capable of being reduced to Possession on the termination of
the existing lease, and can be validly transferred’ under section 5, while the
lease is subsisting.

11.7. Property in existence—The subject matter should be property in
existence. Where the section uses the words ‘conveys property’, in pre-
sent or in future (to one or more other living persons), one should read
the words ‘in present or in future’ with the word ‘convey’, and not with
the word ‘property’. In other words, in the contemplation of the section,
the property must exist before the transfer can be effected.>-°

11.8. Effect of transfer of future property—This does not, of course,
mean that it is illegal to transfer property to be acquired in future. Such
a transfer is not prohibited by the Act in general terms, and all that can
be said with reference to such a transfer is that it does not fall within the
terms of this section. It may not be effective as an immediate transfer,
but this is quite a different thing from saying that it is totally devoid of
any legal effect. Section 5 does not cover it, but such an instrument relat-
ing to property to be acquired in future may yet have certain legal conse-
quences. It could, for example, bring into being contractual liabilities
‘or rights similar to those recognised in England as equitable rights—same
principles apply to property not in existence. This aspect of the matter

1 Cf. AAR. 1970 Mad. 111.
2 ALR. 1963 Pat. 221;
ALR. 1965 Pat. 144.
3 ALR. 1939 Sind 288,
4 ALR. 1957 Andbra Pradesh 619.
5 Jugal Kishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co., ALR. 1955 S.C. 376 (1955) 1 S.C.R.

6 Sheet 0५७७४ Revenue Authority v. Sudarsanam Picture A.LR. 1968 Mad.

7 Moti Ram v. Khyali Ram, ALR. 1967 All. 484.
8 ALR, 1955 Pat. 402.



is often overlooked by reason of the juxtaposition of the words in section
5, but the correct positions seems to as above.

While section 5 cannot be invoked to validate a transfer of future
property, such transfer can create certain rights depending on the nature
of the property, the relations between the parties and various other circum-
stances relevant to the application of doctrines originating in equity. For
example, the principle of section 43,—if not the literal text _thereof,—
could be invoked for giving effect to the instrument purporting to incor-
porate such a transfer.’

11.9. In an Allahabad case,? section 18 of the Specific Relief Act,
1877—now section 13, 1963 Act—- was also discussed. The old section
18 and the new section 13 are based on the well-known rule of estoppel.
sometimes referred to as feeding the grant by estoppel. The effect of
section 13, so far as is material, is to confer on the transferee, from a
person having no title, certain rights if the transferor acquires any interest
subsequently.

The Calcutta High Court in the case of Prem Sukh Gulgulia v. Habib
Ullah,’ held that transfers of non-existent or, as it is conveniently called,
after-acquired property, provided they are not of the nature contemplated in
section 6(a)—transfer of a mere chance—are perfectly valid. The trans-
fer would be regarded in court of justice as a contract to transfer after
the vendor had acquired title, and would fasten upon the property as soon
as the vendor acquired it. A contract of sale of property which is not
of the vendor’s at the time of the contract, but which the vendor thinks
ef acquiring by purchase later on, is not bad in law.

11.10. Sale of Goods Act—It may also be noted that section 6 of
the Sale of Goods Act has a detailed provision? as to transfer of goods
not in existence—

“6. (1) The goods which form the subject of a contract of sale
may be either existing goods, owned? or possessed by the seller, or
future goods.

(2) There may be a contract for the sale of goods the acquisi-
tion of which by the seller depends upon a contingency which may
or may not happen.

“(3) Where by a contract of sale the seller purports to effect a
present sale of future goods, the contract operates an agreement to
sell the goods.”

11.11. Recommendations for amendment—The only amendment that
we recommend in section 5 is transportation of the words “in present or
in future” after the word “convey” and before the word “property”.
ES

1 ALR. 1960 Cal. 609.

2 Ehsanul Haq. ४. Mohd. Umar, AIR. 1973 All. 425, 426 (S. Malik, J.).
3 Prem Sukh Gulgulia v. Habib Ullah, A.LR. 1945 Cal. 355.

4 Section 6, Sale of Goods Act, 1930,

5 8. G. shares.

6 Para 11.7 supra.



CHAPTER 12
PROPERTY WHICH CANNOT BE TRANSFERRED
SECTION 6

12.1. Section 6—Introductory—Several items which cannot be trers-
ferred have been enumerated in section 6, after laying down the abstract
general proposition that property of any kind may be transferred, except
as otherwise provided by the Act or by any other law for the time being
in force. Transferability is, then, the general rule, and the right to pro-
perty includes the right to transfer that property to another person. We
need not concern ourselves with restrictions on the trazsier of property
which arise by reason of —

(a) Hindu law;

(6) Muslim law;

(c) Special or local laws;
(4) Custom.

12.2. Rationale—-Concentrating on those prohibitions which are ex-
pressly provided in section 6, one may note that these prohibitions owe
their rationale either to the nature of the property, or to certain considera-
tions of policy, or to the need for enforcing the provisions of other legis-
lative enactments. Sometimes, more than one of those considerations
operate together. The prohibition in clause (१) against the transfer of
an interest in property restricted in its enjoyment to ihe owner personally
is based on the nature of the interest. The prohibition in clause (c) relat-
ing to the transfer of an easement apart from the dominant heritage, is
also similarly explained, namely, by reason of the nature of the righ:.

The prohibition in clause (f) relating to the transfer of a public office
or the salary of a public officer is obviously based on considerations of
public policy easily apparent, and the prohibitions in clauses (dd) and
(8) are also based on similar considerations. Clause (h). in sub-clause
(2) and sub-clause (3), is intended to re-inforce prohibitions flowing from
other statutory provisions. Clauses (h) and (i) are bascd on mixed con-
siderations.

12.3. Section 6(a)—Under section 6(a), “the chance of an heir
apparent succeeding to an estate, the chance of a relation obtaining a legacy
on the death of kinsman or any other mere possibility of a 16 nature”
cannot be transferred,

The words “of a like nature” in this clause should of course, be con-
trued, as ejusdem generis with the two kinds of “chance” mentioned in
the clause.’ However, that does not lead to a very precise position, For
example, docs it mean that only a possibility dependent on death is ex-
cluded? _Reported!-* cases donot take such a very narrow view,

1-2 Mulla.

2 Lala Baidnath v. Chandrapaul, AIR. 1924 AM. 793.
3 ALR. 1919 Mad. 718.

4 ALR. 1938 Mad. 881.

SLLR. 43 Cal. 28,

61


62

12.4, Meaning of “chance”—What is meant by these “chances” or
“possibilities”? Lord Westbury referred, in Davis v. Angel,’ to the dis-
tinction between an interest that has arisen and is represented, and an in-
terest that has not arisen and that never may arise, but with regard to
which there is a remote possibility that the event which has not occurred
and upon which it is made to hand may hereafter occur. The latter is
not an interest; it is not a right; it is nothing more than a bare expectation
of a future right. The expectation of a future interest, or rather, of a
future event which may give an interest, is not a thing which would justify a
court of equity in “entertaining a suit at the instance of a party having
that and nothing more.”

12.5. Comparison with Code of Civil Procedure—Thus, a bare ex-
pectation of a iuture right is contrasted with an interest. It would be of
interest to compare and contrast the language of the corresponding pro-
vision? in be Code of Civil Procedure—section (60)m. What is exclud-
ed from liability to attachment under the Code is “an expectancy of succes-
sion by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or inter-
est”. The earlier half of this clause in the Code is better expressed than
section 6(a) of the Transfer of Property Act. The latter half is wider
than section 6(a),—-an aspect to which we shall revert fater.

12.6. Muslint law—There is a corresponding rule in Mustim law.
Sir Roland Wilson, in his ‘Anglo Mohammadan Law”® states the position
thus :

“For the sake of those readers who are familiar with joint owner-
ship of father and son according to the most widely prevalent school
of Hindu Law, it is perhaps desirable “to state explicitly that in
Muhammaden, as in Roman and English Law. nemo est heres viventis
a living person has no heir. An heir apparent or presumptive has
no such reversionary interest as would enable him to object to any
sale or vift made by the owner in possession; see Abdul Wahid.
(1885) 12 Ind. App. 91 (?,0.) and (1885) LL.R. 11 Cal. 597
which was followed in Hasan Ali, (1889) ILL.R. 11 All. 456.

“The converse is also true; a renunciation by an expectant heir
in the lifetime of his ancestor is not valid, or enforceable against him
after the vesting of the inheritance.”

There is, however, no prohibition as such in Muslim law against a
renunciation for consideration of the claim to succeed. Such renuncia-
tion may at least operate as an estoppel.

12.7. Possibility coupled with interest—Reverting to section 6(a), we
should note that a mere possibility must be distinguished from a possibility
coupled with interest. A contingent interest can be transferred,5-° though

1 Davis v. Angel, (1862) 4 De. GF. & J. 524 8 Jur. (ns. 4; मे ८
हि eK Ang jur. (9.3.) 1024; 6 L.T. 880;

2 Section 60(m), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
3 Wilson Anglo Muhammadan Law 280, pa 208, cited in 6;
507 Kessam i ATR: 1973 SC 886, 580 (para Ty tam Abbas
4 Section 19.
1967 Guj. 16 (con‘ingent interest),
. 1930 P.C. 17 (contingent interest)



63

it cannot be attached. This Position has come to be established after con-
siderable litigation in the Courts. The principal section of the Act relat-
ing to contingent interests is section 19. A contingent interest depends
on the happening or non-happening of an event which is not certain, The
Jaw is that until the event happens, or is rendered impossible, as the case
may be, the interest does not vest, But it is still an interest. In this
sense, it is not a ‘mere’ possibility.

in view of the fact that the Present wording might lead to a misconception,
and also since the matter seems to have come up before the Courts for
determination.’

12.9. Need for clarification regarding “chance’—Apart from this
clarification regarding contingent interests, it is also, as a matter of draft-
ing, desirable to amend section 6(a) in so far as it deals with ‘chance’,
The present wording in section 6(a) is not very appropriate. The earlier
half of section 60(m), Code of Civil Procedure, is better expressed as al-
teady stated.?_ The term ‘heir apparent”®—itself not very happy in the
Indian context—is restricted, and gives the wrong impression that an
heir presumptivet can transfer his Spes successionis—which is not the
intention.

It is teue that the non-transferability of the interest of an heir pre-
sumptive is deducible from the general prohibition as to “mere possibility”.
But that is true of the interest of the heir apparent also. This part of sec-
tion 6(a) is certainly capable of improvement and advantage can be
taken of the more appropriate wording in the earlier part of section 60
{1)(m), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

12.10 Recommendation to revise section 6(a)—We, therefore, re-
commend that section 6(a) should be revised as under =

“(a) an expectancy of succession by survivorship or any other
mere possibility of a like nature.

Explanation—A_ contingent interest in Property is not a mere possi-
bility within the meaning of this clause.”

12.11 Section 6(b)—This takes us to section 6(b) which provides
that a mere right of re-entry for breach of a condition subsequent cannot
be transferred to any one except the owner of the Property affected
thereby. This clause has in mind Tight of lessor as against the leassee
for breach of an express condition which Provides that on its breach
the lessor may re-enter. The “condition subsequent” referred to in
section 6(b) is defined in section 31 as a condition which divests an
estate that hag already vested. Where the reversion of the lease ig it-
self assigned, the assignee certainly is entitled to enforcement of the con-
dition; but the mere right of re-entry cannot be assigned. Being an

1 See case-law as to contingent interests, para 12.7, supra.
2 Para 12.5, supra.

3 The person first in tine of succession.

4 The person second in line of succession,



64

incident of the land, it may not be severed from the land for the benefit
of another person unconcerned with the reversion.! This is the principle.

12.12 It has been pointed out? that the principle is succeptible of
extension to other cases. For instance, in a hire-purchase transaction of
a movable property, the right to take possession by force of the property
which is the subject matter of the hire-purchase-for example, a reftigerator
or a motor-vehicle cr furniture—is analogous to the right of re-entry.
Or rather, it is an extra udicial rjemedy which cannot be transferred.

_,, 10 quote what has usually been stated in regard to easement, the
tight is a parasitical one.3-5

12.13 No change—The points discussed above do not call for any
amendment of section 6(b).

12.14, Section 6(c)—Under section 6(c), an easerneat cannot be
transferred apart from the dominant heirtage. The expressions employed
in this clause must be understood in the light of the definitions given in
the Indian Easements Act. 1882. Since an easement appended to a
dominant heritage is, by its very nature, intended for the enjoyment of
the dominant heritage, it is exiomatic that it cannot be divorced from the
dominant heritage. Conversely, where the dominant heritage is  trans-
ferred, the easement is, ipso factor, transferred without a specific provision
for transfer of the easement. This is expressly provided* in the Act.
Section 6(c) merely expresses the rule that there cannot be an easement
in gross.7-§

The clause needs no change.

12.15. Section 6(d)—Then, under section 6(d), an interest in property
restricted in its enjoyment to the owner personally cannot be transferred
by him. The example usually given is that of the right of the head cf
a Hindu religious institution such as a Math. Offices connected with
such institutions are, in general, restricted in their enjoyment to the ‘owner’
personally—the word ‘owner’ is used in a wide sense as indicating the per-
son entitled to the interest.

There is also axiomatic. If enjoyment of property is restricted by
law to the owner personally, it is obvious that it cannot be parted with.
All these exceptions became necessary because section 6 opens with the
abstract general rule that property ‘of any kind’ may be transferred and
tirat general rule had to be qualified.

The precise question that usually falls to be considered under _ this
clause is whether the particular interest in question is restricted person-
ally to a particular person. This question cannot be answered without 8
study of that field of law which regulates the creation of the interest. 1६

1 Gour.

2 Gour.

3 Ammutool v. Jamach Singh, 24 Weekly Reports 345 Calcutta.
4 Gale, Easement, 6th Edition, pages 65 and 492.

5 Also see section 19, Easements Act, 1882.

6 Section 8, second paragraph, Transfer of Property Act.

7 AIR. 1919 Nag. 62.

8 ALR. 1917 Cal. 681.


65

has its own reasons of policy for restricting the enjoyment. The consi-
derations that give rise to restrictions on enjoyment automatically justify
restrictions on transfer also.

12.16. Temples—The ager of a temple is by virtue of his office
administrator of the property attached to it. 45 regards the property
the manager is in the position of a trustee. But as regards the service
of the temple and the duties that appertain to it, he is rather in the position
of the holder of an office or dignity which may have been originally con-
ferred on a single individual but which in course of time has become vested
by descent in more than one person.*

Thus, the shebait performs a dual role, namely, he has duties io dis-
charge in connection with the endowment and at the same time has a
beneficial interest in the debutter property. It was so laid down by
B. K. Mukerjea, J. while considering the question whether the office of
shebiatship was property for the purpose of Hindu Women’s Rights to
Property Act, 1937.2

12.17. In the case of all Hindu endowments, the inalienability is based
upen the principle that no stranger shall be permitted to intrude into the
management of the endowment. The reason usually given is that if such an
alienation were permitted. the purchaser may be a person belonging to
another religion who would be unwilling and unable to perform the wor-
ship and thus the object of the endowment may be defeated."

In general, as regards the inalienability of religious offices, it is a
dominant consideration whether the right is merely of a proprietary nature,
or whether it is primarily based on religious sentiments. It was for this
reason that the right of administering ‘purohitum’ to pilgrims resorting to
the temple of Rameshwaram was held to be capable of alienation or dele-
gation.*

12.18. No change—This clause also needs no change.

12.19. Section 6(dd)—Section 6(dd) prohibits transfer of a right to
future maintenance, in whatsoever manner accruing, arising, secured or
determined. The rationale of the prohibition is the princi ple that the
Tight to maintenance is recognised for the sustenance of the beneficiary, It
the beneficiary parts with it, he or she parts with a benefit which the law
regards as essential for his or her sustenance. No man or woman is allow-
ed to deal even with his or her affairs and transfer a right in a manner
which defeats the basic Purpose of the legal rule conferring the right. The
very raison d'etre of the rule is defeated by such a transfer.

12.20. Basis—All this may sound elementary, but seems to be worth
emphasising. The philosophical basis on which section 6(dd) rests is to
@ great extent similar to that on which the law prohibits a person from
taking his own life, or at least contained such a prohibition before certain
other considerations, regarded as of over-riding importance, modified the
ctiminal law in this regard. Sustenance of human life is the dominant

1 Ramanathan Chitty v. Murruguppa Chitty, (1905) LL.R. 28 Mad, 283 (P.C.)..
2 Angoorbala ५४, Debabrata, AIR. 1951 S.C. 293, 296.

3 Raja Verma v. Ravi Verma, ULR. 1 Mad, 235 (P.C.).

4 Ramaswamy v. Venkeita, 9 Moore Indian Appeals 344.


66

consideration that overrides the liberty of the individual to arrange his own
affairs—including the freedom of disposition of property.’

12.21. Object—The insertion of clause (dd) by the Amending Act
was intended to settle the conflict of views amongst certain previous deci-
sions of the Calcutta,? Bombay? and Madras‘ High Courts. It is some-
times stated that the amendment is in accordance with the policy which
discourages all transfers of an expectancy.5 This may be so, but there
appears to be a broader ground of public policy. A number of consider-
ations support the prohibition against transfer of the right to future main-
tenance, namely, sustenance of the person entitled, personal nature of
the right, and the aspect of future interest. The principal one, however,
is the aspect of sustenance.

._, 12.22. Sum accrued—The prohibition against the assignment of the
right to future maintenance does not seem to disallow the transfer of a
sum of money which has accrued due. The sum accrued due is a debt;
there is nothing personal about it and the very fact that the amount has
been allowed to fall in arrears would seem to indicate that the purpose of
sustenance would not be defeated by its assignment.

That arrears of maintenance can be attached or assigned like any other
debt, was the position established long before the 82.९ This posi:ion was
not intended to be disturbed.

Tt may be noted that in the Civil Procedure Code, exemption from
attachment is conferred in respect of a right to future maintenance by sec-
tion 60(n}. Under that Code, it has been held that it does not apply to
arrears of maintenance.? It has also been held that a right to future main-
tenance which is heritable and not personal is not cxempt frora sitach-
ment.* Moreover, anything which is in excess of maintenance, pure and
simple, is not exemp: from attachment.? As early as 1900, it was held
that arrears of maintenance could be attached.”

12.23, It was held in a Madras case of 1919" that the right of 8
member of Malabar Tarwad to maintenance is property, and can be assign-
ed. The right to receive future maintenance cannot be alienated—though
the position might be different in equity in England. An annuity by
way of maintenance is transferable.*

12.24. No change—No change in clause (dd) is required as a result
of the above discussion.

1 Section 6, opening sentence.

2 Asad Ali v. Hyder Ali, (1911) LL.R. 38 Cal. 13, 20.

3 Diwali v. Appaji 1.L.R. 10 Bom. 342, 345. (doubt expressed).

4 Ranee Annapurna vy. Swaminath, 1.L.R. 34 Mad. 7, cited in Raja of Kathati v.
Venketappa, Aj.R. 1928 Mad, 713 (F.B.). (Case before amendment).

5 Gour,

6 Kashees'.uree v. Greesh Chandra, (1866) 6 Weekly Reports Miscellaneous 65
(Calcutta), cited in Mulla (1973), page 68. footnote (9).

7 Palikandi v. Krishnan, 1.L.R. 50 Mad. 302.

8 Ashfac v. Nazir, AIR. 1942 Oudh 410.

9 Chittory v. Themana, A.1.R. 1954 Mad. 946, 947 (Mack J.)

10 Haridas v. Baroda 1900, 4 Cal. W.N. 87.

11 ALR. 1919 Mad, 538.

12 ALR. 1917 Mad. 79.


67

12.25. Section 6(e)—Section 6(e) provides that a mere tight to.

sue cannot be transferred. Though this is a rule of substantive law, it.

as an intimate connection with certain aspects of procedure. Maine, in
his Early Law & Custom,’ wrote as follows :—

“So great is the ascendancy of the Law of Actions in the infancy
of Courts of Justice, that substantive law has at first the look of be-
ing gradually secreted in the interstices of procedure; and the early
lawyer can only see the law through the envelope of its technical
rms”,

The evolution of the law Prohibiting the transfer of a mere right to
sue is an instance in point,

12.26. Comparison.—Under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
Section 60, “a mere sight to sue for damages” cannot be attached. In
section 6(e) of the Transfer of Property Act, the wording was “a mere right
to sue for compensation for a fraud or for harm illegally caused”. The
amendment of 1900 omitted the restrictive words. The present wording
is very brief—a mere right to sue.

12.27. Simplicity deceptive—The simplicity of this brief and cryptic
provision is deceptive. The word “mere” is crucial in the section. “The
Moment this word is overlocked, difficulty arises. It never was the law,
and it is not the law, that the transfer of a Tight to sue is totally prohibited.
What the law desired to discourage was trafficking in litigation. The
Jaw of mainteance and champerty are branches of law the discussion of
which is now considered of not much importance. But these are the topics
which form the basis of the prohibition against transfer of a mere right
to sue. Sf a person indulges in int termeddling with litigation in which he
has no legitimate interest, he ought to be discouraged. If a mere right to
sue is transferred to such a Person, it is not a permissible transfer. It is
an abuse of the right of transfer and would lead to an abuse of the right
to sue. Common law does not accept in its entirety the doctrine of abuse
of rights familiar to continental jurists. But, to the limited extent indicated
above, it takes note of the fact that even a legitimate right could be so dealt
with as to lead to abuse.

12.28. Difficulty—-The thesis of the law, taken as an abstract pro-
position, may be assumed to be productive of no serious difficulty. But
difficulty ariscs when the legislature seeks to give concrete shape to it, and
when, after such concrete shape is given to it, courts have to apply the
legislative mandate in concrete cases.

At the stage of legislation, the problem is how to distinguish bet-
ween legitimate and illegitimate dealings with ri ens. If the transfer of
a right of suit is totally disallowed, one would be overhitting the mark,
because certain kinds of property are of such a nature that their protec-
tion and enjoyment might require action on the part of a third person
(other than the transferor and the transferee). A thing in possession can,
within certain limits, be defended without going to a court of law. _ Things
not in possession cannot, however, be so defended. This distinction bet-
ween two kinds of property, and the special nature of things not in pos-
session, gave rise to the evolution of special rules.

12,29. Importance—It is in dealing with the transfer of actionable
claims that the question often assumes the greatest prominence,
actionable claim is not a corporeal thing which may change hands by de-
livery, but represents a right to performance of a duty by another person.
का Dut represent >y_anomer person.

1 Maine, Early Law and Custom (1901) page 389.



68

Assignment of a chose in action ready amounts to substituting a new duty
to the assignee in place of the duty ogiginally incurred.‘ Originally, choses
in action were, in England, not transferable and their assignability became
recognised only by slow degrees. Before such recognition, the same re-
sult was achieved by novation of the contract by a triangular agreement to
which the debtor was a party. or by means of the power af aitorney which
-enabled the assignee to sue in the name of the assignor for his own purpose.
These, however, were indirect modes, and were sometimes practically incon-
venient, and also involved risk. Direct transfer was recognised by equity
in the seventeenth century.’

12.30 It is well-knownth at with the growth of commerce, changes in
the law regarding property and transfer of property become désirable. The
emergence of rules permitting the transfer of actionable claims is really an
instance of the response of the law to changing economic conditions. “The
origin: of the prohibition against transfer was directed. against the multiplying,
of contentious suits,—briefly described as maintenance. As commerce
increased, the rigour of this original rule had to be modified. Equity first
gave its aid, and later, statute law gave effect to the doctrines of equity. It
now remains for the courts to apply to the law in its true spirit so as to dis-
courage, on the one hand, gambling in litigation or transactions intended to
injure or oppress third persons by encouraging unrighteous suits, at the same
time fostering the growith of commerce by recognising those transactions
which are entered into in the process of modernisation of commercial acti-
‘Vvities.

12,31. Legislative formulation—The problem, then for the legislature
was how to reconcile the desire of the law to discourage trafficking in
litigation with its equally keen desire to recognise the existence as well as
‘the transferability of things not in possession which could be the subject
matter of beneficial interest. In India, the legislature has dealt with the
matter by—(a) providing for the transfer of things not in possession—
which are, really speaking ‘claims’—provided the claims are recognised
by law—‘actionable’ according to Indian legislative phraseolegy, and (b)
disallowing the transfer of a “mere” right to sue.

The two have been sought to be harmonised by using the word ‘mere’.
The use of this word takes note of the fact that in certain circumstances
a transfer can be a transfer of a right to sue.

12.32, So much as regards the solution adopted by the legislature,
which indicates that the whole matter hinges upon the word ‘mere’. The
legislature having done its job by using that word, it remains for the courts
to apply the criterion in such a manner as to achieve both the objectives to
which reference has been made above, namely, prevention of trafficking
in litigation and, at the same time, leaving unaffected the right to transfer
those claims which are not in the nature of things in possession but are in
the nautre of claims enforceable by law. Both the aspects are important.

12.33. Case law under s. 6(e)—-What has been the attitude of the
Courts? Judicial decisions applying this clause fall into three categories —

(a) cases where there could be no doubt that the matter related
to actionable claims;
(b) cases where there could be no doubt that the matter related
to mere right to sue;
(c) border line cases.
1 Ames in 3 Harvard Law Review, 337, 339,

2 Fry v. Porter 1 Mod Report 300.
3 Wilson Anglo Muhammadan Law page 280, para 208, cited in Gulam Abhas


69

12.34. Madras cases—Thus,' where a sale is set aside, the right of
ahe purchaser to recover the purchase money is an actionable claim, as-
signable under section 130 and the assignment is not prohibited by section
6(e). It is on this principle, again, that rent which is due is assignable,
unlike mesne profits, which is a claim in tort.?

12.35. Calcutta cases—-As an example of a case where due attention
was paid to the two competing considerations which form the basis of the
jaw, we may refer to a Calcutta case.* Certain goods bocked by A for
carriage and delivered through railways were short delivered and a shortage
certificate was issued by the railways to him. The goods had been insured
by A, and having regard to the shortage certificate, the insurer paid the value
of the goods short delivered. A assigned to the insurer ail his rights against
the railway company arising by reason of the damage or loss and also granted
to the insurer power to take any steps in the insurer's own name and to
recover the damage or loss. It was held that such an assignment was not a
transfer of niere right to sue for damages. The court construed the assign-
ment as an assignment of the goods short delivered. together with the
actionable claims relating thereto?

Ii may also be noted that the contract of insurance is a contract of
indemnity. On payment of the amount of the loss, the assured has an
indemnity and the insurer has an equitable right of subrogation to the
claims of the assured against the carrier or other’ person insuring his in-
terest. This equitable doctrine does not, however, give the insurer the
right to sue third parties in his own name.‘ In the absence of an assign-
ment, the insurer though subrogated to the rights of the insured can suc
only in the name of the insured. But since the legal position is that any
damages that might be recovered by the assured would be held by him as
a trustee of the insurer to the extent of the payment received by the
assured from the insurer, the court would compel the assured to permit
the use of his name on the usual terms by the insurer. A subsequent
Assignment of the right to sue would not, for these reasons, be hit by se-
tion 6(e) since it is not a transfer of a ‘mere’ right to sue. The matter
depends primarily on the meaning of the word ‘mere’ which turns to be
crucial in such circumstances.

The assignment enables the assignee to sue in his own name and to
enforce the claim which was already held for his benefit by the assignor.*

12.36. In a Calcutta case™ 2 certified guardian sold some immovable
‘prope tty of the ward to the defendant without the sanction of the District
Judge. Subsequently, he sold the same property to the plaintiff with
sanction of the District Judge. The plaintiff instimted a suit for _re-
covery of possession on declaration that the previous sale to the defendant
was not valid.

It was held that what the plaintiff purchased was not a mere right to
sue within section 6, T.P, Act but the entire right of the minor in the pro-
petty. In a Bombay case,* plaintiff sold to defendant three sets of bales

1 Chinnappa Reddy v. Venketeramanappa, ALR. 1942 Madras 209.

2 Chidambaram v. Doraiswemy, AJR. 1916 Madras 974,

3 Union of india v. Alliance Insurance Company, ALR. 1964 Cal. 31 (R. &
Bachawat and A. K. Mukherjea, J7.).

4 66 Calcutta Weekly Notes 419 approved,

3K. M. Prinian Meryam v, Benyam & Co., ALR. 1926 Mad. 544, 550.

6 King v. Victoria Insurance Co, (1896) AC. 250.

7 ALR. 1931 Cal. 131; 34 CW.N. 948; LER 58 Cal. 128.

3 32 Bom. LR 894; ALR. 1930 Bom. 409 (DB.).



70

of yarn for three different vayadas at certain rates. Similarly the de-
fendant sold to plaintiff an equal number of bales for the same vayadas.
Chese were cross-transactions between plaintiff and defenant, and no
delivery remained to be given and taken, but only adjustments of the rates
were to be made. On such adjustments, a certain amouns was found
due to plaintiff in respect of the three transactions. Plaintiff assigned
his right to recover this amount to another person. It was held that the
subject of the assignment was a ‘debt’ and not a mere right to sue within
the meaning of section 6(e).

Where a person purchases a tank and brings a suit by virtue of a
covenant running with the land, it cannot be said that what was trans-
ferred was a mere right to sue.’

__ Where the pre-cmpior made a gift of his property, including the
right to continue the suit for pre-emption then pending, it was held that
the gift, so far as the righ: of pre-emption was concerned, was not a trans-
fer of a ‘mere right to sue”

. 12.37. Uncertain amount—Taking cases at the opposite extreme, the
right to recover an uncertain amount cannot be transferred. On this
principle, the right to damages accruing after a breach of contract is a
mere right to sue for damages-* Similarly, a mere right to sue for the
remainder of maintenance allowance that may fall due in future is not
transferable.

12.38. Border line cases—Difficulties, however, could arise in @
border-line case. For example, the transfer of a right of action in tort
could take place Ly the effect of a contract of insurance by which the
insurer who has paid for the total or partial destruction of the insured
goods is subrogated to the righ's of the insured. The insurer must sue
in the name of the assured, but if the right to sue has been properly
assigned to the insurer,® the insurer can sue in his own name and it woul
appear that in such circumstances the right to sue—even the right to sue
for damages—has been property assigned to the insurer.

On the other hand, the right to sue for damages on account of fraud
cannot be transferred. The right to complain of fraud is not a market-
able commodity and if it appears that an agreement for purchase has
been entered into for the purpose of acquiring such a right, the purchaser
cannot call upon the court to enforce specific performance of the agree-
ment. Such 2 transactien, if not in strictness amounting to maintenance,
savours of it too much for the court to give its aid to the enforcement of
the agreement.

12.39. No change in section 6(e)--The upshot of the above dis-
cussion is that the legislative formulation, though not capable of verbat
improvement, requires to be applied with some care and after bearing in
mind the historical and juristic background in which it was enacted. No
changes, are, of course, recommended.

12.39.a. Res extra commercium—Before we proceed to the next
clause, we may mention that apart from the specific prehibitions contained
jn the clauses of section 6, there may arise, in effect. a prohibition
against transfer because the item sought to be transferred is res extra
commercium. What can be transferred under the Act must be

1 ALR. 1929 Pat. 245.

2 ATR. 1922 Oudh 289.

3 ALR. 1937 All. 642. .
4 ALR. 1929 All. 281. i
5 King v. Victoria Insurance Company (1896) A.C. 258. 256.



7

‘property’—section 6, opening sentence only to that length, = It
sinst be subject matter in regard to whic! the law recognises proprietary
rights. If a right is not recognised by Jaw in its very existence, its trans-
ferability is out of question.

12.39.b. Sacred Bulls—Let us draw an example from Hindu law.
The ceremony of consecrating a bull {vtishotsarga) forms a part of the
staddha ceremony of the Hindus. This ceremony forms the subject of
separate treatises which give the fullest information upon all points. 18
will be sufficient for our present Purposes to state that the ceremony
seems to be a survival of the Vedic site of ‘gomedha’, where the bull is
set free instead of being slaughtered. The rationale of this consecration
is the use of the animal as a propagator of the breed. Manu? declared
“that no fine shall be paid for (damage done by) a cow within ten days
after her calving by bulis (kept for impregnation) and by cutile sacred to
the gods, whether they are attended by a herdsman or not.” The follow-
ing explanation occurs in Bubler’s Notes :—

“Bulls, “i.e. ‘those, set at fiberty (see VIL. LXXXVI) are meant”
(Nar., Kall)., which may be met with near many Indian villages and
in many towns. ‘Cattle sacred to the gods, ie., either such are set
apart for sacrifices,” or ‘such as are dedicated to temples’ (Medh.}-
The other commentators prefer the second application.”

The same text is quoted by Colebrooke,* but he gives the further ex-
planation by Kullukabhatta on the words “attended or unattended” of the
teat of manu :—

“Since even consecrated bulls are kept by herdsman among
cows for the sake of impregnating them, it is possible they may be
attended by a keeper.”

The marking of the consecrated bulls is an ancient practice, as will
be seen from a text of Usanas, quoted by* Colebrook : “for elephants and
horse, no fine is allowed. ...-Nor for bulls marked with the token
of consecration.” “Bulis marked” is explained by Ratnakara as “distin-
guished by the mark of a trident and the like.”

12.40. Rules of Hindu law—It may be noted that in regard to religi-
ous offices and things dedicated to religious purposes, the rules of Hindu
Law’ and Muslim Law® agreed with that. of the ancient Roman law in
tigidly classifying public trusts and Property and offices as extra com-
morciwn. Such offices were not transferable like other property, and
even where a transfer was allowed. that was within certain well defined
Timitations. Zz

1 Sce mame — Ashwalayana Grihya Sutra, pages 103, 108 and 109; also Cole-
brooke's Essays, Vol. I. pages 206, 207, Also see FIAT Ashwalayang
Grihya Sutra, pages 200, 20! and 209: YT, Ashwalayana Grihya Sutsa,
page 251. & ८... उत्सर्ग ; in page 260, See FW: Achwalayana Grika Pori-
sishtafi pages 331 to 333.

2 Manu VIII, 243, Sce Buhler. page 297 and note.

3 Colebrooke’s Digest, Vol. वा, page 104.

4 Colebrooke & s, Digest. Vol. TE. page 104.

हे Naravan v. Chintamani, LR. 5 Bom. 393, 396, 397 (Westcapp, CI.).

6 Shama Charun Roy v, Abdul Kabeer, 3 Calcutta Notes 158.

6—-885Law/77


72

12.41. Section 6({)~To revert to Section 6, under clause (f), 4
public office cannot be transferred, nor can the salary of a public officer,
whether before or after it has become payable. Public offices are made
non-transferable for reasons of public policy. As regards salary of public
officers also, the provision is based on obvious considerations “of public
policy, namely, (i) the salary of public officers is paid in order that they
may discharge their public functions efficiently and maintain their dignity.
and (ii) public functions, in contrast, with private functions, deserve special
treatment. Though salary is the property of the person entitled thereto
and therefore that person may, in general, have the freedom of disposition

thereof, yet, in the case of public servants, other considerations are mate-
rial,

12.42. Rationale—A rule that anyone may renounce and assign his
own benefits, applies only to private rights and benefits, and not to a right
created on the ground of public policy. Am individual cannot waive a
maiter in which the public have interest’ That is the rationale of the
prohibition. As the law stands now, this rationale has been considered
sufficient to invalidate the transfer of any part of the salary,— and this
irrespective of the circumstances which might have impelled the transfer.

12.43, Limitation—Though the above discussion shows the width of
the prohibition, it should. at the same time, be noted that the clause does
not prohibit the incurring of arty monetary obligation by a public servant.
An obligation undertaken by a public servant is not necessarily void merely
because it may result in 8 pecuniary liability. If it is not framed in terms
of assignment of salary, it can still be valid.

12.44. Madras case—A Madras case? must be taken note of at this
stage. A was the youngest brother and B the eldest brother. After their
father’s death, A who was only 10 or 11 years old was educated and
brought up by B out of his meagre income. When A had almost com-
pleted his college career, he executed an agreement in favour of B. In
consideration of the moneys spent by B from B’s earnings on account of
A and in consideration of the moneys that would be spent by B in future
and out of natural love and affection, A relinquished in favour of B, his
interest in the joint family properties and further agreed that A_ would
pay B, on account of the maintenance of B himself and the members of
his family after A began to earn a salary or income, sums which would
represent a percentage of his monthly income. When A was appointed
to a public office in the Public Works Department, he brought a suit for a
declaration that the agreement was void and unenforceable.

It was held (i) that the agreement did not purport to assign the
salary of a public officer. It related to the income which A might earn
after completing his education. The income might be earned either as sa-
lary attached to a public office. or as salary in private employment, or as
income in independent practice of the profession. The agreement by
itself had nothing directly to do with any public effice. Further. A was
not bound to pay the amonnt payable under the agreement out of the
salary or income that he earned every month. He could pav it out_of
his savings or out of any dowry that he might get or out of gifts of any

TALR. 1941 Bombay 389. 7
2 Ananthayya v. Subba Rao, ALR, 1960 Mad. 188, (Subrahmanyam, J.).



73

other kind. The agreement, therefore, did not of its own force assign,
or effect a transfer of any part of A’s salary and therefore it was not void
under section 6(f), Transfer of Property Act or on any ground of public
policy.

(ii) that the payment provided in the agreement was not in the nature
of penalty, nor was there anything unconscionable or inequitable in the
terms of the agreement so as to grant equitable relief. Nor was it a case
for the application of section 74, Contract Act. It appears that at the
time when the agreement was made, A was not yet in service.

We need not comment on this decision of the Madras High Court.
We may, however observe that the assignment of monthly income may, in
certain circumstances, operate practically as an assignment of the salary.
On the contrary view, the prohibition incorporated in section 6(f) might,
in practice, be defeated in a large number of cases. It is not in every
case that a provision for assignment of “income” can be saved. Since
the problem is one of correct application of the Jaw and not of any defect
in its formulation, we leave the matter at that.

12.45. Question of maintenance—The principle underlying | section
6(f) is sound, and it is not our intention to recommend any modification
of a radical nature. But it is necessary to consider one question which,
while preserving the priniciple, suggests itself, having regard to the need
to take into account certain realities of life. The precise question to be
considered is whether the present prohibition against the transfer of a
salary of a public officer should be retained in toto, or whether the law
should be amended so as to allow the transfer of a part of the salary in
certain special situations. The concrete situation which we have in mind
is a transfer of salary made by a public officer in favour of his wife or
children in order to provide for their maintenance, where the amount or
percentage transferred does not exceed the attachable portion of the salary.
The attachable portion of the salary is dealt with in section 60(1)(i) of
the Civil Procedure Code. Neczssity for recognising such a transfer as
is posed above might arise where there has been a separation between the
spouses, or where there have arisen other special circumstances, necessi-
tating the entering into of an agreement of maintenance. As a part of
such an agreement, it might become expedient to make provision for the
assignment of a portion of the salary, so as to secure to the transferee pay-
ment of the amount promised thereunder.

12.46. At this stage, a question may be raised whether the rules
relating to maintenance of spouses have purely Segal origin, or whether they
have also a sociological importance. In this connection, it is to be pointed
out that while, historically speaking, in the common law, these rules might
have been the inevitable consequence of the doctrine of unity of legal per-
sonality of the spouses,’ it is not to be forgotten that in modern times their
sociological justificaion is the necessity to sustain life, coupled, of course,
with the obligation undertaken by the spouses. The obligation to main-
tain spouses is, so far as England is concerned, now given statutory force.”
The statutory framework in which that provision is placed—the National
Assistance Act—is enough to indicate its sociological importance and we
may state that it is for the same sociological consideration that there is

1 Bromley, Family (1971), page 401.
2 Section 22(1), National Assistance Act, 1948.



74

contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure’ a special procedure regarding

proceedings for the maintenance of wife and legitimate 4nd _ iflegitimate
children.

12.47. Need for change—As the law now stands in India, not only
is an agreement for attachment and deduction of the non-attachable por-
tion illegal in case of a public servant, but also an agreement assigning the
attachzble portion becomes ineffective by virtue of section 6(f}. There
scems to be sonte justification for permitting the transfer of so much of the
salary of a public officer as is attachable in execution cf a decrce where the
assignment is bona fide for maintenance as stated above of the spouse or
child. In such cases, in the first place, there is no serious objection on
the ground of public policy—since the proposed amendment would relate
only to the attachable portion—and, in the secord piace, because we should
take into account the claims of the spouse as a particular overriding con-
sideration as against the general aspect of public policy, assuming that
such aspect can have much importance for the attachable portion

12.48. Provision in Civil Procedure Code—Under the Code of Civil
procedure, 1908, section 6009), as amended, four hundred rupees of the
salary of an employee and two-thirds of the remainder is exempt. In
addition, there is the following further proviso :—

“Provided that where any part of such portion of the salary as
is liable to attachment has been under attachment whether continuously
or intermittently, for a total period of twenty-four months, such por-
tion shall be exempt from attachment until the 2xpiry of a further period
of twelve months, and, where such attachment has been made in execu-
tion of one and the same decree, shall, after the attachment has con-
tinued for a total period of twenty-four months, be finally exerapt
from attachment in execution of that decree.”

It is not our intention that the restriction imposed by the Code on
the duration of the attachment should be applied to restrict the duration
of the assignment. Attachment is an immediate sanction and exerts a
certain amount of psychological pressure, which is absent in the case of
an assignment. In any case, the proposed provision is intended to benefit
the spouse or child, and for that reason, should be unrestricted as regards

ration.

12.49, Recommendation—Having regard to the considerations men-
tioned above, we recommend that in section 6(f), an exception should be
carved out—say, by adding a proviso’—permitting the assignment of the
attachable portion of the salary of a public officer for the maintenance of
his spouse or children or both.

12.50, Verbal point—Finally, verbal int. The expression
“public office” is defined in section 2(17) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
1908, and the expression “public servant” in section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code. There is no definition in the Transfer of Property Act of the ex-
pression “public office’. It may be presumed that for the purposes of
the Transfer of Property Act. it is legitimate to apply the definition in the
Code of Civil Procedure. This could be usefully provided for.

1 Section 125, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2 This is not a draft.



75

12.51. Recommendation—On the above reasoning, we recommend
that clause (6) should be followed by a proviso somewhat on the follow-
ing lines :—

“Provided that nothing in this clause shall prohibit the transfer
of so much of the salary ef the public officer as is not exempt from
attachment under the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, where the
transfer is intended to provide for the maintenance of the spoust oF
child of the transferor whom the transferor is bound to maintain b:
virtue of the provisicns of any law for the time being in force of
under a decree or order of a court or an agreement.”

Further, a suitable definition of “public officer” (applying the defi-
nition in the Code of Civil Procedure) be added?

12,52. Section 6(g)—Under section 6(g), stipends allowed to military,
naval, air force and civil pensioners of the Government and political pen-
sions cannot be transferred.

12.53. Provision in the Code—It may be noted that the corresponding
Provision in the Code of Civil Procedure® reads thus :

“(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the Gov-
ernment, or payable out of any service family pension fund notified
in the Official Gazette by the Central Government or the State Gov-
ernment in this behalf, and political pensions.”

It has been held that the gratuity, referred to in this provision of the
Code of Civil Procedure, is a bonus allowed by Government to its servants
in consideration of past service. It may be allowed to a pensioner in addi-
tion to his pension or it may be allowed to a person who is not a pen-
sioner. It is exempt in both cases.‘

12.54. Rationale—In the case of political pensions, two considera-
tions are operative, namely, they were granted in view of considerations
of @ political nature and those considerations were peculiar to the grantee.
lo the case of Government servants, the primary consideration of public
policy is also two-fold, namely, the pension is granted in order that the
Pensioner may not have to live in penury or discomfort, and secondly, the
ultimate object is that the prestige of the Government should also remain
untarnished. Considerations similar to the above have led to the enact-
ment of provisions for exemption from attachment in the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure and also appropriate provisions in the Pensions Act. Some points
relating thereto will be discussed at the appropriate place.

12.55. Pensions Act—The same policy that justifies the prohibition
enacted in section 6(g) equally renders invalid any assignment of all pen-
sions—whether political, Civil or military—under the Pensions Act. The
policy of prohibiting the transfer of a pension is to insure its enjoyment by
the pensioner in comfort. Being an offering made to the recipient in gtati-
tude for his past services, and being almost always less than the salary
which the pensioner was accustomed to draw, it is considered tight, that its
enjoyment shall be assured to the recipient.* But, being a limitation on

1 Para 12.49. sunra.
2 Para 12.50, supra.
3 Section 66/0), Code of Civil Procedure. 1908.
4 Bawan Das v. Mul Chand, (1884) LILR. 6 All. 173.
5 Sections 11 and 12, Pensions Act (23 of 1871).
our,



76

the rights of the creditor, the term should be constcued strictly so as to
include only a periodical allowance or stipend granted not in respect of a
tight, privilege, perquisite or office, but on account of past services or par-
ticular merits, or as compensation to dethroned princcs, their familities and
dependants."

12.56. Pensions Act--Sections 11-12 of the Pensions Act, 1871, prac-
tically cover the same ground as section 6(g), but there are certain differ-
ences, Both deal with pensions of ali kinds, but while scction 6(g) pro-
hibits their assignment generally, section 12 of the Pensions Act prohibits
only their assigninent before they are “psvable’—a tom understcod* to
mean “due and demandable by the person entitled”.

The feading case is a Madras one,* in which the Zamorin of Calicut,
who was entitled to a political pension of Rs. 6.000 a month payable quar-
terly, devised to the plaintifi whatever might be in arzears at the time of
his death. The Zamorin died on the 6th August, 1892 before the quarterly
instalment became payable. The plaintiff sued for its recovery. It was
contended that section 12 was not contravened since the transfer was after
accrual of a righé to receive payment, though not after the payment was
actually due.

The Court overruled the contention and held that the word “payable”
referred to the time when the payment was ripe and demandable. It then
went on to add that even if section 12 of the Pensions Act did not authorise
that construction, section 6(g) of the Transfer of Property Act was in
point, as it was more positively worded and prohibited all transfers of poli-
tical pensions. The Court applied the law in section 6 to the will. since
wills amongst Hindus had been treated as developments of gifts.

42.57. Meaning of pension—The term “pension” is a relative term
and while it is true that the character of non-transferability is not indelibly
impressed upon it even after it reaches the hands of the pensioner, still it
undoubiedly retains that character so long as it remains unpaid in the hands
of the Government, irrespective of whether the intended beneficiary is
alive or dead-*

12,58. Recommendation—It appears to us that the phraseology of sec-
tion 60(2), Code of Civil Procedure, which is wider, is also more precise
and should be adopted. We recommend accordingly’.

12.59. Section 6(h)(1)—Under section 6(h), there is a prohibition
against three kinds of transfers, namely, no transfer can be made (1) in
so far as it is opposed to the nature of the interest affected thereby, or (2) for
an unlawful obejct or consideration within the meaning of section 23 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, or (3) te a person legally disqualified to be
the transferee.

1 (a) Secretary of State v. Khemchand, LR. 4 Bom, 432:
(0) Lachmi Narain v. Mokund Singh, 1.L.R. 26 All. 617.

2 Gour.

3 Sridevi v. Krishnan, 1.L.R. 21 Mad. 105, 108.

4 Valia Thamburatt? v. Anjani, LR. 26 Mad. 67, 91.

$ Para 12.53.


77

The first sub-clause in clause (8), as is often pointed out, is Teally an
example of circumlocution, because all that it means is that if the nature
of the interest sought to be transferred is such that the interest is not trans-
ferable, then it may not be transferred. In this sense this clause tells us
nothing new. [n any case it cannot be applied without an unders.anding
of the nautre of the interest. Recourse, therefore, has necessarily to be
had to the nature of the interest, which is determined by the rules of law
tecognising or creating the particular interest. In illustration of this pro-
hibition, mention is usually made of things which are nobody’s property
and to the use of which all are equally entitled, such as air. light and water.
How far water can be appropriated—for example, water in a pooi or tank-~
is a matter dealt with not in, the Transfer of Property Act, but by the rele-
vant rules of other branches of law.' In particular, the owner of an arti-
ficial watercourse might come to have proprietary rights to the water, and
in such a case the water may be the subject matter of private dominion?.

12.60, Section 6(h)(2)—Unlawful object cr consideration—The
second sub-clause of clause (9) deals with an entirely different topic. The
prohibition hers does not depend on the nature of the interest, but on the
unlawfulness of the object or consideration pertaining to the transfer. What-
ever be the nature of the interest, this prohibition applies and in this sense
this prohibition is sui generis, unlike clauses (a) and {g). The expres-
sion “object” implies the purpose or intention in an overt act. For example,
a person hires a house for a lawful consideration, but with the unlawful
object of using it as a gambling house.? Here the object is unlawful.
Similarly, where money is borrowed for the purpose of marriage of a minor
which is prohibited by the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 19294 the consi-
deration may not be illegai—the consideration being the loan. But the
object is to defeat the provisions of the Child Marriage Restraint Act.

12.61. Dominant object of legislation to be concerned—Students of
the law of contracts are familiar with difficult questions concerning section
23 of the Contract Act that arise when it becomes necessary to determine
whether the object or consideration of an agreement is “unlawful” as defeat-
ing the provisions cf any law. The dominant purpose of the legislation is
to be taken into account in this context. Is the dominant purpose one of
imposin~ a prohibition as a matter of policv. or has the law been passed
primarily for facilitation of collection of revenue or for effecting other
adminis‘rative obiect 2? If the conduct. which is now challenged as illegal,
was forbidden as 4 matter of policy, the transaction would be void. If, on
the other hand, the legislation infringed was interded merely to prescribe
certain terms and conditions for administrative purooses, then a transaction
which infringes the law bv failing to comply with the statutory requirements
may not necessarily be void, although the transgression may be visited with
a statutory penalty.

The effect of a transfer in violation of the land ceilings law—a situa-
tion more likely to arise in modern times—is discussed in a judgment of
the Supreme Court.5

2 (a) Inderjit v. Lachme, 14 Weekly Reports 349;
(0) Debi Prasad v. Joynath, LLR. 24 Cal. 865 (P.C.).
3 Gour.
4 Chandrasrinivas Rao v. K. Rajaram Mohan Roy, 8.17, Mad. 579.
5 ALR, 1968 S.C., 1358; (1969) 1 S.CJ. 279.


78

12.62. Effect of illegality on parties—For the present purpose, it is not
Mecessary to discuss in detail the various situations in which object or con-
sideration becomes unlawful. From the practical point of view, the more
important question relates to the effect of the illegality on the rights of the
parties to the illegal transfer. The law on the subject is complex and not
very satisfactory. When one or other of the parties seeks to enforce or
Tepudiate such a transfer, the question bow far that party will succeed
depends on several factual elements—which is the reason why the law is
complex. These factual clements acquire relevance by reason of certain
tules of Iaw—some of them based on equitable doctrines—which we shall
discuss in due course.

The effect of the provisions relating to illegality in section 6 is not
completely stated in the section. Even though the section provides that
the transfer cannot be made, that does not mean that if possession has been
delivered, it can be recovered by the transferor. The transferee (except
in certain special situations) is allowed to retain the property transferred.
This is the effect of another rule of law, namely, that the court will not
assist a person taking advantage of his illegality. If possession has been
given, the transferor cannot recover back what he has transferred, except
in certain special cases which will be dealt with in due course.

12.63. Malaya case—Let us illustrate this. The Privy Council, in an
appeal from Malaya, held that where two persons agreed together to a
conspiracy to achieve a fraudulent or illegal purpose and one of them
transfers property to the other in pursuance of the conspiracy, then, so
soon as the contract is executed and the illegal purpose is achieved, the
property (be in general or special) that has been transferred by the one to
the other remains vested in the transferee, notwithstanding its illegal
origin." In that case the transfer of a lorry was made in Mallacca (Malaya)
in violation of legislation relating to road transport prohibiting the transfer
io question, that is to say, the transfer of a registered motor vehicle with-
out @ written permit from the Registrar.

Subsequently, the seller of the lorry had taken it back from the pur-
chaser and refused to return it and the action by the purchaser was against
the seller in detinue.

Title was held to have passed to the transferee. The reason is that
the transferor having fully achieved his unworthy end, cannot be allowed to
turn round and repudiate the object with which he did it and the transferee,
having got the property, can assert his title against all the world not be-
cause he has any merit of his own, but because there is no one who can
assert a better title. The court has no power to confiscate the property.
To quote Lord Eldon L.C., “Let the estate lie where it falls”?

While the matter, no doubt, is governed by statute in India, the
principle that the transferor cannot recover in the circumstances mentioneds
above, would be true of Indian law also.

1 Mutla (1973), Page 77.
2 Sajan Singh v. Sardara Ali, (1960) 1 All England Reports 269, 272 (P.C.).
3 Muckleston v. Brown, (1801) 31 English Report 19, 34,


79

12.64. Section 84, Trusts Act—The circumstances in which the trans-
feror can recover are dealt with in the Trusts Act. The general rufe under
section 84 of the Trusts Act’ is as follows :—

“84. Where the owner of property transfers it to another for
an illegal purpose and such purpose is not carried into execution,
or the transferor is not as guilty as the transferee, or the effect of
permitting the transferee to retain the property might be to defeat the
provisions of any law, the transferee must hold the property for the
benefit of the transferor.”

For the present, we shall not enter into the question whether section
84 is exhaustive of all the special situations. But it is fairly well settled
that it is not in every case that the transferor who is party to an iltegal
transfer can sue on the basis of illegality. That there are limitations is
not now doubted, even in India. हा

12.64A. We take up, for the present, the limitations contained in
section 84, Trusts Act.

In the first case, there is a docus poenitentiae until the fraud is carried
out and the transferor may suc to recover his property.". The second case
is where the transferor is not so guilty as the transferee. In the analag-
ous case of contract, section 27(1){b) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963,
allows a contract to be rescinded if the defendant is more to blame than
the plaintiff. As to the third case mentioned in section 84, Trusts Act,
its application again depends on the object underlying the legislative pro-
hibition.*

12.65. English law—Reason for bar—-In English law, ordinarily
speaking, a person cannot recover back money paid under an illegal con-
tract, or property transferred by him under such a contract. There may
be no strong reasons against recovery, but there are no strong reasons
justifying it. The principle seems to be that as there is no strong reason
to act, inertia prevails.

12.66. Exceptions—To this general rule, there are exceptions in
special cases. These may be enumerated as—

{a} class-protection “Statutes”;

(b) oppression;

(०) fraud;

(d) repudiation of illegal transaction in time by a voluntary act.

(७) cases where the plaintiff does not rely on the illegal transaction
as such for recovery, and the cause of action is based on any
other ground,

Examples of this are*—

(i) Expiry of the period of hire in case of goods tet out on hire
under illegal contra

1 Section 84, Indion Trusts Act, 1882.

2 Kedar Nath Motani v. Prahlad Rai, (1960) 1 S.CR. 861; ALR. 1960 S.C, 213;
(1960) S.CJ. 1072.

3 Qadir Ruksh v. Hakim, AIR. 1932 Lah, 503 (P.B.).

4 The categories are based on Troitol, Contracts (1966), pages 342 to 350.


80

Gi} Money deposited with a stake holder under an illegal wager;
(iii) Expiry of illegal tease;

(iv) Establishment of a title without reference to the contract or its
illegality.

12.67. The case where there has been fraud or oppression,’ on the
part of one person, is really an instance of a situation wliele the guilt is
not equal—not a case of par delictum. “It can never be predicated as
per delictum where one holds the rod and the other bows to it.”?

In particular, this aspect might become important in rent restriction
cases where the tenant is made to pay an illegal premium in order to obtain
a lease or sub-lease. This is so even where there is no provision in the rele-
vant legislation enabling the premium to be recovered back. Courts have
so held,? on the ground that the duty of observing the law being placed on

the shoulders oi the landlord for the protection of the tenant, the parties

were not in ;

As regards the case of repudiation,* the law encourages repentance and
therefore, assists a man who has paid money under an illegal contract, pro-
vided he repudiates the transaction before the illegal purpose is carried out.
Such repentance must be proved, and assistance is not given to a party who
is prevented from fulfilling the illegal purpose by the refusal of the other
party who refuses to co-operate.

12.68. Locus Poenitentixe—In a case in which the transaction is still
inchoate, or the grantor still retains a locus poenitentiae, the formal act
may be relieved against by reference to the real intention of the parties,
the reason being that in such cases the violation or infringement of the law
had not been completed.*

Hence, when an illegal purpose has been effected by a transfer of the
property, the transferee is not to be treated as holding it for the benefit of
the transferor.* and the transferor is ever afterwards precluded from proving
the real nature of the transaction.*

12.69. Incidentally, this aspect is not clearly brought out in section 84
of the Trusts Act.® where that section refers to the fact that such purposc
is not carried into execution apparently because the provision in the Trusts
Act might have been based on the observations of Mellish, L. J. in a
case®-* reported in 1876. His observations were as follows :—

1, Para 12.66 (b) and (०), supra. —
2 Smith y. Cuff, (1817) 6 M & 5 160, 165 (Lord Ellenborough).
3 Kirit Coton Co. Lid. v. Ronchordas Deweri, (1960) 1 All E.R. 179, 180

4 Para 12.66 (d). supra,
5 Bigos v. Bausied, (1951) 1 All E.R. 92.
6 Sham Lall vy, Amarendro Nath, V.L.R. 23 Cal. 460; and the cases therein cited.
7 (a) Chenvirappa v. Puttapa, L.L.R. 11 Bom. 708, 719;
(b) Tamarasherri v. Maranat Vasudevan, 1..R. 3 Mad. 21.
8 (a) Goberdhan v. Ritu Roy, LL-R. 28 Cal. 962;
(b) Kali Charan v. Basik Lal, 1.LR. 23 Cal. 962 note.
9 Para 12.64, supra.
9a Taylor v. Bowers, (1876) 1 Q.B.D. 291, 300.


si

“T€ money is paid for goods delivered for an illegal purpose, the
person who has so paid the money or delivered ” the
goods may recover them back before the illegal purpose is carried
out.”

These are too wide if divorced from the facts. The transferor in that
case took proceedings in time thus showing repentance.

12.70. Discretion—It would appear that where a person who has
transferred property for an unlawful object or consideration seeks to rescind
the transfer: ths courts have a discretion in the matter. This discretion
is not conferred in so many words by statutc, but can be inferred from
certain statutory provisions and judicial decisions. The statutory provisions
of principal relevance are sections 27, 31 and 34 of the Specific Relief Act,
1963 and section 84 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882". The judicial deci-
sions on. the subject emphasise the equitable principle which has been follow-
ed in cases where the plaintiff seeks the assistence of the court to regain
property after transferring it for purposes of ificgal activities

12.71. Although the provisions in the specific Relief Act. referred
to above, do not in so many words apply to transfers and are framed with
reference to agreements, courts seems to have applied them to transfer
either directly or by analogy.?

12.72. Other limitation—Calcutta case—We have so fer dealt with
certain special situations in which courts allow or refuse a transferor to
recover property illegally transferred.

Are there any other situations in which the transferor can recover ?
Where the owner of a house [ets out the property to the defendant for the
immoral purpose of running a brothel, the executors and trustees of the
will of the owner, who were not in pari delicto 07 in particeps criminis,
it has been held? can sue to eject the defendant on the basis that the
transfer is void and the court will accord relief to the claimants.

P. 8. Mukerji J. held that Averst v. Jinkins, (1874) 16 Eq. 275
had been misapplied and misunderstood in many cases in India.

It is elementary that property can be transferred only by a person
who owns it or who. thouch not owning it. is authorised te do so. A
transfer by any other person has no legal effect—that is, of course, a rule
subiect to certain qualifications. Tho general rule is (hat no man can
confer a better title than that which he himself has. However, occasion-
ally, by either accident or design, a testator or transferor gives his own
Property to a beneficiary and purports to give some of the beneficiary’s
property to a third party. I this case, the beneficiary becomes subject®
to a general principle that a perso cannot take under a will without con-
forming to all its provisions.* Tf, therefore. he is to take the testator’s
or transferor’s, it was held that the principle in that case should not be

1 Para 12,64, supra.

2 Kamarbai v, Radri Narain, (1976) 78 Bom. L.R. $79 (Vaidya and Shimpi, 35.).

3 Pranballav, ATR. 1958 Cal 713, para 44, 114, 117 (P. 8. Mutherji & R. 5.
Bachawat, JJ.).

4 Eg. see sections 35, 37, 38, 41, 43, Transfer of Property Act. and Certain
provisions in the Sale of Goods Act.

5 Metlows, Law of Succession (1973), page 485.

6 Corrington v. Codrington, (1875) L.R. 7 H.L. 854, 861, 862 (Lord Cairos).


82

understood as laying down an invariable and inflexible rule of disqualifi-
cation for a plaintiff seeking the aid of court. The principle of that case
should be understood with the limitation referred to by Lord Selborne
himself in that judgment. The true boundaries of Averst v. Jenkins, when
applied in India were rightly indicated by Sir Subramania Ayyar, J. in
1.L.R. 28 Mad. 413 and Lokur, J. in ALR. 1947 Bom. 198 Refusal by
the courts to ६ relief on the basis of such maxims as ex turpi cause
non oritur cetic ox pari delic to or particeps criminis is tused on grounds
of public pclicy and therefore if the इन्कार or higher public policy de-
mands in a particular context that relief should be given, then such maxims
should not be used any more as a bar and the ceurts should not deny
relief. The rule in Avers¢ v. Jenkins should never be used to (a) defeat
statutes like section 6(h)(2) of the Transfer of Property Act. (b) make
the plaintiff liable to prosecution, conviction and punishment under such
statute as the Bengal Suppression of Immoral Traffic Act. and (c) violate
the express prohibition of the Constitution such as Article 23 saying that
traffic in human being is prohibited. This rule in any event should not be
extended to the class of innocent trustees and executors who are admini-
stering the estates under orders of court.

12.73. Bachawat, J. agreed, but his reasoning was slighty different
In English law—(a) A completed transfer of property made under an un-
lawful agreement or for an unlawful purpose is valid at law. (b) The title
so acquired is protected and enforced and may be used by the transferec
both as a shield and as a weapon of offence. (c) In the absence of some
special ground of interference 2 Court of Equity will not on the ground of
illegality set aside a transfer valid at law and will let the estate lie where
it falis. (d) Averst v. Jenkins, (1874) 16 Eq. 275 laws down the prin-
ciples upon which a Court of Equity may or may not set aside such a
transfer,

The case of Averst v. Jenkins, (1874) 16 Eq. 275 has no application
where the transfer is void.

In Indian law a transfer for an unlawful object or consideration with-
in the meaning of section 23 of the Contract Act is prohibited by section
6(h), clause 2 of the Transfer of Property Act. Such a transfer is void
and need not be set aside.

In Indian law the transferep cannot recover the property on the
strength of such a transfer.

12.74. In Indian law, according to Bachawat, J., the transferor claim-
ing that the transfer is void may sue to recover the property on the strength
of his original title and in general he may be given relicf though he is
particeps criminis in the following cases :

(a) Where his case falls within one of the three exceptions re-
cognised by section 84 of the Indian Trusts Act, or

(b) (i) Where public interest or the interest of third parties re-
quires that the relief should be given. or (ii) where denial
of the relief may defeat a legal prohibition, or (iti) where the
transaction is such that it ought to be allowed to stand on
grounds of public policy.


83

Relief may be given upon such terms as the justice of the case may
require.

it is an open question whether the transferor should be given relief
under other circumstances also.

12.75. According to Bachawat, J., further when an instrument is
void on account of illegality not appearing on the face of it and the transac-
tion is such that it cannot stand on grounds of public policy, the Court
will decree its cancellation at the suit of the particeps criminis on equitable
terms. The power of the Court to decree cancellation of void instru-
ments of transfer must be exercised in accordance with sections 39 to 41
of the Specific Relief Act. The power of the Court to decree cancelk-
uon and rescission of unlawful contracts in writing is regulated by sections
35(b), 38 and 39 to 41 of the Specific Relief Act,

Reasons oi public policy allow the defendant to take the plea of
particeps criminis. Greater reasons of Public policy may allow the plain-
tiff to repel the plea.

12.76. It would appear that the decision in the Calcutta case should
be confined to the special facts of the case. There were several extraor-
dinary features. Ilegality in this case was Tepresented by conduct which,
if not rectificd, might have involved innocent parties in a criminal pro-
secution. There was also the constitutional directive and further the fact
that the executors did make their repudiation at the earliest possible oppor-
tunity available to them.

12.77, Section 24, Contract Act—It may be stated that the Transfer
of Property Act contains no provision corresponding to section 24 of the
Contract Act, and judicial decisions on the subject do not lead to a very
definite position,’ in this regard, Where, therefore, a transaction com-
prises two transfers for one consideration and the consideration is lawful
but the “object” of one of the transfers is void, it does not necessarily
follow that the transfers are all void.

In the Allahabad case, Mukherjee, J. has discussed at length the
applicability of section 24 of the Contract Act to section 6(h) of the
Transfer of Property Act and has taken the view that section 24 does not
apply. He has criticised the contrary view taken in an earlier case. In
the same case, Suleman. J. agreed with him.

12.78. No change—Having considered all aspects of the matter, we
have come to the conclusion that the clause does not need any amendment.
and it may be expected that the provisions of law—statutory and the non-
statutory—which should be read along with the section will be kept in
mind by those concerned with illegal transfers,

12.79. Section 6(h)(3)—This takes us to section 6(h)(3), under
which a person who is disqualified to be a transferee cannot be a trans-
feree—really a self evident proposition which has been enacted only in
order to make the section complete as far as Possible. The question who
can be a transferor is dealt with in section 7. The question who can be a
transferee is not dealt with in a general way in the Act, except that certain
persons are prohibited from purchasing actionable claims, The answer

1 Dip Nazoin v. Nageshar, ALR. 1930 All. 1. जाओ
2 Kanhai v. Tilak (1912) 16 Indian Cases 542.



84

to this question must therefore be sought elsewhere. Even other legis-
Jative measures do not comprehensively deal with the subject, though the
Code of Civil Procedure has certain provisions restricting purchases in
execution of a decree at the instance of specified persons.

Legal disqualifications in regard to being a transferee might be impos-
ed either in order to protect the interest of a transferee who is deemed
not to be competent enough to look after his interest, or in crder to pre-
vent a conflict of interest with duty, or in order to prevent trafficking in
litigation or for certain other reasons of policy.

12.80. Mincrs—The question has often been discussed how far a
minor can be a transferee. The correct position seems to be this— that
a minor, though he cannot transfer property, can receive benefits under
a transfer. Where therefore there is no contractual obligation undertaken
by the transferee, a minor can be a transferee. Cases. however, where the
transferee undertakes an obligation—e.g., the case of a lease—stand on
a different footing. A minor cannot sign such instruments. The position
is the same as regards other persons incompetent to contract.

12.81. Some of the statutory provisions prohibiting the purchase of
property by specific persons, contained in the Act" or in the Code of Civil
Procedure,” are based on specific reasons.

Chancellor Kent, adopting Blackstone’s definition says,’ that it is a
principle common to the laws of well governed countries that no encoura-
gement should be given to litigation by the introduction of parties to
enforce those rights which others are not disposed to enforce. It is
called “maintenance” because one man gives or delivers to another—plain-
tiff or defendant in an ac:ion—a sum of money or other things to main-
lain his plea, or takes great pains for him when he has nothing to do
therewith.‘

12.82. Section 6(h)(3)—Disqualified transferces.—The law against
the transferability of property to a person legally disqualified to be 2
transferee is, in part, a branch of the law against maintenance and cham-
perty. For it is to discourage the malpractices whici: arose out of the law
officers trafficking in questionable claims that the early statutes against
champerty were directed.‘ Thus, in England. it was provided by the
Statute of Westminster that “no officers of the King, by themselves nor by
others, shall maintain pleas. suits, or matters; having in the King’s Courts,
for lands, tenements or other things, for to have part or profit thereof by
covenant made between them; and he that shall be punished at the King’s
pleasure.”* Another statute passed in the same reign further extended
the scope of the prohibition by prescribing that “the Chancellor. treasurer,
justices, nor any of the King’s Council, no clerk of the chancery, nor of
the exchequer, nor of any iustice or other officer, nor any of the King’s
house, clerk ne-lay shall not receive any church, nor advowsen of a

1 Section 136.

2 Order 21, Rule 78.

3 Kent's Commentaries, Part VI, Lecture 76, quoted in Bradlaugh v. Newdegate,
(1883) 11 Q.B.D. 1, 5. 6.

4 Adapted from Terms de La Ley, as quoted in Bradlaugh v, Newdegate, (1883)
11 QB.D. 1, 5, 6.

5 Gour.
6 3 Edw. I, ५. 25.



BS

church, land, nor tenement in fee, by gift, nor by purchase, nor to far,
nor by champerty, nor otherwise so long as the thing is in plea before us,
or bejore any of our officers; nor shall take no reward thereof."

12.83. This statute was again extended by another which ordained
that “The King wills that no officer, nor any other (for to have part of the
thing in plea) shalf not take upon him the business that is in ‘Suit; Nor
fone upon any such convenant shali give up his right to another.” The
penalty of attainder was provided for disobedience “but it may not be
understood hereby that any person shall be prohibited to have counsel
of pleaders, or of learned men in the law for his fee, or of his parents, or
next friends.”

12.84. A similar prchibition is separately and more specifically enact-
ed by the Act? and the Cede of Civil Procedure,t Section 136 of the
Act enumerates the class of persons legally disqualified to be transferees
under which judges, legal practitioners, mukhtars, clerks, bailiffs and other
officers connected with courts of justices are disqualified from buying any
actionable claim.

Under Order 21, Rule 73 of the Code of C:il Procedure, 1908, no
officer or other person having any duty to perform in connection with any
sale shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to
acquire any interest in the property sold.

We have no further comments on section 6(h) (3).

12.85. Section 6(i)—Section 6(i) provides that nothing in this scc-
tion shall be deemed to authorise a tenant having an untransferable right
of occupancy, the farmer of an estate in respect of which default has been
made in paying revenue, or the lessee of an estate under the management
of a Court of Wards, to assign hig interest as such tenant, farmer or lessee.

This clause needs no comments.

12.86. Recommendation to add Explanation to section 6—In order
to avoid any misapprehension that every item enumerated in section 6 is
Property, we recommend that an Explanation (or other appropriate pro-
vision) should be added to section 6 to the effect that nothing in this
section shall be construed as implying that every thing mentioned in a
clause of the section is prepesiy.

1 13 Edw. I, ¢, 49. है
2 28 Edw. I, ८. 11; 1 Riok. IT, ¢. 4, extended the restriction to all persons.
3 Section 136.

4 Order 21, Rule 73, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.


CHAPTER 13

PERSONS COMPETENT TO TRANSFER

13.1. Persons competent tw transfer—-The subject of persons com-
petent to transfer is thus dealt with in section 7—

“7. Every person competent to contract and entitled to trans-
ferable 'y, or authorised to dispose of transferable property not
his own, is competent to transler such property either wholly or in
part and bvoluicly or conditionally, in the circumstances, to
the extent and in the manner allowed and prescribed by any law for
the time being in force.”

uw

13.2, Contract Act—Section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872
defines persons who are competent to enter into contracts. It provides
“Every petson is competent to contract who if of the age of majority ac-
cording to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, and
is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject.”
‘Thus, excepting persons who are of unsound mind, all adults may enter
into any lawful contracts, unless they are disqualified from contracting by
any law to which the contracting party may be subject. The disqualifica~
tion need not be explicit, but may be implied from'a reasonable construc-
tion of the law.t | One who is usually of unsound mind but occasionally
of sound mind, may enter into a contract when he is of sound mind, but
not when he is of unsound mind.

13.3. Majority Act—Under the Indian Majority Act,? which applies
to all persons domiciled in India, the period of minority lasts until the
completion of the eighteenth year. This holds good for persons of either
sex, and supersedes the personal and local laws by which the question
was formerly decided.*

13.4. Majority Act—Under section 3 of the Indian Majority Act,
1875, first paragraph, every person domiciled in India shall to deemed
to have attained his majority when he shall have completed the age of
eighteen years and not before. We do not quote the second paragraph
of the section relating to minors of whose person or property or both a
guardian has been appointed by the court or of whose property the super-
intendence is assumed by a court of wards. So far as the question of
capacity is concerned, it seems to be well-established that it is domicile
which governs capacity to contract.24
“YT Dhunput v. Shoobhudra, (1882) LLR, & Cal. 620.
2 Section 12, Indian Contract Act, 1872.

3 Indian Majority Act, 1975.
4 Reade y. Krishna, LER. 9 Mad. 391;

Sarat Chandra v. Foreman, LL.R. 12 All. 213.
$ Kashiba v. Siripat, (1895) 1.L.R. 19 Bom. 697.
6 Dhanraj Mult v. Shami, AIR. 1961 8.0, 1285.



87

13.5. Domicite-—In cases where the matter is governed by private
international law, special rules come into existence and domicile becomes
important, for the purpose of determining the capacity to contract,

For the present purpose, we shall leave aside contracts of immovable
property situated outside India as of no consequence for the purposes of
the Transfer of Property Act. In relation to other contracts, domicile
may assume great importance. This is by reason of the fact that accord-
ing to at least one theory,’ the law of demicile governs the capacity to
contract. In fact, it is this view that has been recognised in section 3 of
the Indian Majority Act, 1875.

13.6, Allahabad cuse—The importance of domicile is illustrated by
an Allahabad case? in which a European, not domiciled in India, but only
temporarily residing in India, was held not to be governed by the Indian
Majority Act.

13.7. Theories in English law—In English private international law,
the position is not settled beyond doubt, but one view currently accepted
is that the law of domicile governs the contractual capacity of a person.
In India, this view has been recognised in section 3 of the Majority Act.

According io another theory, the law of the place of contract may
govern the contractual capacity. According to yet another theory it is
“the proper law” which should be applied. The test of proper law here
is an object test and—speaking broadly—means the law of the country
with which the contract is most substantially connected. Whichever view
is correct, this controversy is not of much importance for the present pur-
pose, because it primarily pertains to the interpretation of the Indian Con-
tract Act, 1872, as read with the Indian Majority Act, 1875. So far as
section 7 of the Transfer of Property Act is concerned, the matter is suffi-
ciently stated by the requirement that there must be competence to con-
tract,

13.8. Importance—That the age of majority is determined by the law
of domicile is an aspect which becomes important where the contract is
entered into in India by a person not domiciled in India and the taw of the
country where that person is domiciled, prescribes an age of majority diff-
erent from that to which the Indian Majority Act applies. This aspect
was of particular importance in relation to Englishmen. since, in England,
unl the age of majority was lowered, the age was higher than in India--
21 years.

13.9. Artificial persons—That contractual capacity and the capacity
to transfer property is subject to any law for the time being in force is an
aspect of particular importance in relation to artificial persons, such as,

1 Cheshire. Private International Vaw 11970), page 221.

2 Rohilkand Bank v. Row, LL.R. 7 All. 490.

3 Cheshire. Private In‘ernational Law (1970), page 221.

4 For a comparative survey. see Hartwig in 15 1.C.L.Q. 780.

5 Section 1, Family Law Reform Act, 1969, (Eng.)
7—88SLaw/77



88

corporations, and also as regards the trustees of religious and charitable
endowments and, of course, the capacity of a person to transfer property
may be limited to certain circumstances in other cases, as, for example,
in the case of a Hindu widow under Hindu law as unmodified by statute’.

13.10. Trusts Act—Finally we may note that section 7 of the Transfer
of property Act is closely analogous to section 7 of the Indian Trusts Act?
The competence to transfer property under section 7 and the competence
to create a trust under the Trusts Act are both co-incident with the com-
Petence 10 contract.

13.11, No change-—The above discussion necessitates no change in
section 7.


CHAPTER 14

ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY OF HOMICIDE
SECTION 7A (PROPOSED)

14,1, Effect of death on transfer—One aspect of public policy which
is not dealt with expressly in the Act may now be discussed in view of _ its
ethical interest and juristic importance. The precise question for consider-
ation is this-can a person who has been guilty of the culpable homicide—
(whether amounting to murder or not) of another person acquire, (other-
wise than by succession), an interest in property where the acquisition of
such interest is, by the terms of a transfer, conditional on the death of the
pertsen who is the victim of the culpable homicide ? Acquisition of interest
(otherwise than by death) conditional on death could be envisaged in several
circumstances even apart from succession. Examples will be given later.’
For the present, let us consider a few theoretical and general aspects.

14,2. The principle Nullus commodum capers potest de injuria sus
propria (No man can take advantage of his own wrong?-*) is familiar to
wyers,

It is a well-established general principle that a person who kills an-
other is not entitled to enjoy any property which he would otherwise have
acquired as a result of that death We are now concerned with the
application of that principle to the law of transfer.

14.2A. Equity—“Equity does not demand that its suitors shall have
Jed blameless lives.”* What bars the claim is not a general depravity, but
one which has “an immediate and necessary relation to the equity sued
for”.? We are now dealing with the question whether there is aot ication
for applying this principle in the law of transfer.

14.3. This is not a mere question of abuse of existing rights. The
question is whether rights should be allowed to be acquired under a trans-
fer where their acquisition offends the deepest moral sentiments of the
community. No doubt, it is not possible to give effect in the legal system
to every norm of ethics. Law presents itself as an external regulation of
human conduct. Ethical theory is concerned with the question of the
content of a man’s own will, in whose heart there must be no opposition
of being and seeming.” Law is neither ethics nor religion, it is true. But
the law is not safe when it is totally diverced from ethics." Such ethical

1 Para 14.14, infra.
2 Chadwick, “Tostator's Bounty to his slayer” (1914) 30 L.Q.R, 211.
3 Toohey. “Killing the goose that 1998 the golden eggs” (1958) 23 Australian

4 T. 2. Youdan, “Acquisition of Property by Killing” 89 L.Q.R. 235.
5 Re Callaway, (1956) Ch. 559,
6 Loghran vy, Loughran, 292 U.S. 216, 229 (1934), per Brandeis, J.
7 Dering vy. Earl of Winchelsea, (1787) 1 Cox Eq. 318, 319, 320; 2 W. & T.L.C.
488 489, per Byre C. B.; Moody v. Cox, (1917) 2 Ch. 71, 87; 34 T.LR.
8 Rudolf Stammler, Justice, page 441.
9 Rudolf Stammier, Justice, page 441.
10 Dr. Nathniel Micklem, Law and the Yass (1952). page 59.
8:


Mandates as are univer:

e and as ure immediately relevant to
the subject, deserve consid

14.4, Position in law of Succession—Let us first refer to a few branches
of the law where the principle that a man shall not profit by killing has
been given concrete legal recognition. In the law of Succession it is well
tecognised that it is a rule of public policy that a person shail not be allowed
to benefit from his crime. If, therefore, A makes a will in favour of B,
and B shoots A dead. B is not allowed to claim the property to which
he would otherwise be entitled under the will. Likewise, he is not entiled
to claim under an intestacy in such circumstances.

In England, before the Forfeiture Act, 1870, the interest of «a mut-
derer was forfeited to the Crown, so that where a fellow was a beneficiary
under the will, the murderer’s interest was forfeited, by reason of this rule.
The Forefeiture Act, 1870 abolished the common law as to the property
of the felon and since then the basis of the rule has been altered. It was
in 1892 and Fry, L.J. formulated the ruiz thus’

“It appears to me that no system of jurisprudence can with reason
include among the rights which it enforces rights directly resulting to
the person asserting them from the crime of that person. If no actien
can arise from fraud, it seems impossible to suppose that it can arise
from felony or misdemeanour. In other words, the rule is expressed
in terms that the law will not lend its aid to assist a criminal to
vecover. It left open the question whether the executors could
nevertheless pay.”

14.5. The Indian Succession Act does not contain any specific pro-
vision on the subject. But it should be noted that the Act does not
embrace the whole fieid of intestate succession for persons of al! com-
Mmanities. In this sense, it does not deal exhaustively with the taw of
succession. In any case, such Acts should be read? as not intended to
affect paramount questions of public policy.

14.6. Position in Hindu law—In regard to Hindus, this was the posi-

tion? in respect of Hindus, even before the passing of the Hindu Succession
Act,

14.7 Tt was held by the Privy Council* even before the Act that the
“High Court has rightly decided that the principles of equity, justice and
good conscience exclude the murderer.” The Privy Council also laid
down that “statutes regulating heirship or descent, or giving force to wills
should be read as not intended to affect paramount questions of public
policy or depart from well settled principles of jurisprudence.”

Amongst the persons disqualified to succeed in Hindu law were those
criminally responsible for the death of the propositus.* This position was
not modified by the Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act,
1928. It was reinterated by the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. Section
25 of that Act expressly disqualifies a murderer,

1 Cleaver v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association, (1892), 1 0-8. 147,
2 Para 14.7 infra,
3 Kenchava ९. Gircmallappe, AJR. 1924 PLC. 209,

4 Kenchaya vy. Girimallappa, ALR. 1924 P.C. 209, 211.

5 Chanda ¥, Chanieti, ALR, 1962 Punjab 162, commenied upon ia ALR, 1903
Journal 5, 6,



got

14.8. According to Hindu 189७, then, even before the passing of the
Hindu Succession Act, no heirship to another can be claimed by or through
a person who has been a privy to his murder. This rule is one of public
Policy. It has been given effect to by the Privy Council, relying on an-
cient texts."

The Hindu Succession Act—-The Hindu Succession Act now provides as
follows ?:

“25. Murderer disqualified—A p2rson who commits murder

or abets the commission of murder, shall be disqualified from inherit-

ing the property of the person murdered, or any other property in

furtherance of the succession to which he or she committed or ‘abet-
ted the commission of the murder.”

14.9. The rule amongst Muslims is the same.* The rule of law is
that he who kills another carmot take a legacy from the deceased. in
Hanafi law this provision is applied with great severity, and the manslayer
is excluded whether the homicide is intentional or not. In Ithna “Ashari
Jaw, the more logical view is :aken and only intentional homicide leads
to exclusion, but the Fatimids have apparently adopted the Hanafi rule.4

Rule in England—The general rule’ in England is that a person may
hot recover a benefit resulting from his own crime®

As early as 1892,7 it was, in England, laid down that a murdered
forfeits all benefits under the will of his victim. In 1914, this principle
was extended from murder to man-slaughter.® In regard to intestacy, it
was decided in 1935 that the same rule of public policy applies.’°

14.10. View of Ames—Ames, in his famous study “Can a Murderer
acquires. Title by his Crime and keep it;" said that three results were
possible where a person acquires property by killing: (i) the legal title
does not pass to the killer; (ii) the legal title passes to the killer, and he
may retain it in spite of his crime; or (iii) the legal title passes to the
killer, but equity will treat him as a constructive trustee of the title be-
cause of the unconscionable mode of its acquisition.

1 Narada, 11-13, 31 cited in Mitakshara ILx.3 relied upon in Kenchava v. Giri-
mallappa, AIR. 1924 P.C, 209.
2 Section 25, Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
3 Tyabji, Mustim Law (1968), pages 762—820, 865.
4 [10% Outlines of Muhammadan Law (1974), citing 1५8०४, 682; Wilson 478;
Fitzgerald 170; Fat. Law 446.
5 Halsbury (3rd Edn.), Vol. 1, page 10, para 15.
6 (a) Boresford y. Royal Insurance Co. Ltd., (1936) 2 All. EB, R, 1052; recsd.
CA. (1937) 2 All E.R. 243; affd. HL., (1933) 2 All E.R, 602; (1938)
AC. 586, 107, LI.K.B. 464; 158 LT, 459
(b) Cleaver v. Mutual Reserve Fund Life Association, (1892) 1 QB. 147;
(c) In the Estate of Crippen, (1911) Probate page 108;
(4) Dixon v. Sutten Heath & Lea Green Colliery Lid, (No. 2) (1930) 23
B.W.CC. 135 (C.A.); Halsbury, 2nd Ed. Vol. 34,” page 86 (i).
7 Cleaver ९. Mutual Association, (1892) 1 0.8. 147,
8 Sce Ames, Lectures on Legal History, page 310,
9 Re Hall, (1914) Probate 1.
10 Re Sigsworth, (1935) Ch. 89.
11 Ames, Lectures on Legal History, pages 310-311,



92

14.11 No title passes—English courts' have rejected the second pos-
sibility and have generally considered that the killer does not gain legal
title. However, as to the theoretical basis for a deprivation, there are two
methods that have been used to justify this result in Anglo-American law.
Both methods are sometimes employed in the same judgment and the
difference between them is more superficial than real. The first approach
is to say that all laws—whether made by statute or judicial precedent—
must conform to a “higher law”. The second approach is to interpret
the Jaw so is to make it conform to the judge's conception of what it
should be. A case which is a good example of the former approach is
Riggs v. Palmert where the New York Court of Appeals held that a legatee
did not gain title 10 property which he would have received as the result
of murdering the testator.

Earl J. observed that there are certain principles that “have their
foundation in universal law administered in all civilised countries” and that
“ali laws, as well as all contracts, may be controlled in their operation
and effect by general, fundamental maxims of the common law.”

14.12. Position in Commonwealth—The same view is accepted in—
(b)  Australia,*
(b) Australia,*
(c) New Zealand.5

14.13. Position in U.S.A.—~In many states in the U.S.A. there is
legislation dealing with the question.® The restatement of Restitution pro-
vides that a person should not be allowed to acquire property by murder-
ing another.”

In some jurisdictions in the U.S.A. motive is materials before the
disqualification can attach.

14.13A. Need for change—Notwithstanding the absence of a statu-
tory or special provision regulating the consequences of such action on the
part of a transferee, it would appear that the established usages of the
community should be taken as furnishing a supplemetary criterion for
deciding the legal position, A recognition in an indiluted form of whos
wer to dispose of property an power to take interest in property
fnder a disposition, unrestrained by the considerations of ethics, would be
undesirbale in the particular situation which is now under consideration.
nn

1 T. 6. Youdan, “Acquistion of Property by Killing”, 89 L.Q.R. 235.

2 Riggs v. Palmer, (1889) 115 N. Y. $06, 22 N. E. 188, 190 (New York Court
of Appeals).

3 (a) Re Johnson (1950) 2 D.L.R. 69 (Manitoba);
(b) Re Pupkowaki, (1957) 6 DLR. 2d 519 (B.C.);
(०) Schobel! v. Barber, (1967) 59 D.LR. 26 519 (Ont.).

4 (a) Re Jane Ticker, (1920) 21 S.R. 176 (N.S.W.);
(b) Re Sangal, (1921) VLR. 355.

5 Re Cash, (1911) 30 N.Z.L.R. 577.

6 See Scott on Trusts (3rd Ed.), Section 492; Wade, “Acquisition of Property
by Wrongfully Killing Another—A Statutory Solution”.

7 Restatement of Restitution sections 187—189,

8 Case Comment (1914), 28 Harvard Law Rev. 426,


93

It is to be noted that in the case of a gift, Manu declared that a gift
induced by force, possession by force and document obtained by force, in
short, everything brought about by force should be regarded as null and void.’
No doubt, Manu was peaking of the immediate instrument of gift which was
obtained by force. But we are concerned, at the moment, with the moral
principle underlying this mandate- If force or fraud is regarded as nullifying
a transfer when such force or fraud has brought about an immediate trans-
fer, the approach ought not to be different where after the transfer heinous
crime ig committed with the intention of acquiring, or accelerating the acqui-
sition of, an interest in property. A clear case of acquisition of property
dependent on the death of another person is the gift wherein interest is con-
ferred on A provided he survives B. In such circumstances A has certainly
a self-interest in the death of B and if that self-interest takes the form of B’s
murder the law ought not to recognise the acquisition of interest by A.

14.14 Need for codification of the principle—So much as tegards. the
principle that can be recognised and the position elsewhere. The principle,
it would appear. is worth codification and since it is a universally accepted
‘one, there should be no objection to its incorporation in a suitable form in
the Act at all. The exact form in which it could be put in the Act will
be indicated later on.* But it may be weful to refer to a few typical
situations wherein a legislative provision would be useful.

The first situation is where the death converts an interest vested in
ownership into one in possession. This may arise where property is
given to A for life and after his death to B, the gift to B not being de-
pendent on his surviving A. B kills A.

The wrongdoer increases the value of property which he owned
before killing—when a person entitled to a remainder interest in property
_ kills a person whose death occasions the end of a prior life interest.*

Secondly, where the wrongdoer’s remainder interest is cOntigent on
surviving the prior life tenant (or is vested subject to divestment if the
former should predecease the latter), thent as the wrongdoer’s interest
might, in the ordinary course of events, have never vested in possession,
he should be deprived of his whole interest. A similar argument would
Be relevant where the wrongdoer is himself a life-tenant who kills a prior

‘tenant.

These are typical situations, and not of infrequent occurrence. There
could be many other permutations and combinations—the illustrations to
section 19 to 31 (vested and contingent interests) furnish ample hypo-
thetical material. It appears to be unnecessary multiply examples.

1 Manu, 8.168; quoted by P. N. Sen, Hindu Jurisprudence (1913), page 89.
2 Para 14.15, infra.

3 T. C. Youdan, “Acquisition of Property by Killing” 89 L.Q.R. 235,

4 Scott, Trusts. Vol. 3, section 493.1.


ga

14.15 Having considered the theoretical justification’ and the practical
need’ for a provision on the subject, we recommend the insertion of 8

new section on the following lines. It could be conveniently placed as
section 7A,

Recommendation to insert Section 1A. “TA. A person who
commits or abets the commission of culable homicide, whether
amounting to murder or not, shalt be disqualified from acquiring
under a transfer any property, in furtherance of the acquisition of
which he committed or abetted the commission of the homicide.”

1 14.13 to 14.14 supra,
2 For typical situations, see para 14.14, supra.


CHAPTER 15
OPERATION OR TRANSFER
SECTION 8

15.1. Introductory—Assuming that the property is one which can
be transferred and that the transferor and the transferee are competent
to make the transfer or take under the transfer respectively, the next
question to be considered is on what interest the transfer operates. Of
course, since a transfer is the result of a contract, the answer primarily
depends on the intention of the parties. But it is well known that the
parties do not always express their intention clearly in exhaustive terms,
and it is also well known that the words which they employ in effecting
the transfer may not be regarded as exhaustive. In aid of the presumed
intention of the parties the Act, in section 8, makes a specific provision
regarding the operation of the transfer. This provision is mainly intended
to do away with clumsy and prolific conveyancing and to guard against
the raising of frivolous pleas based on the supposed incompleteness of
the formula employed by the transferor.

Three important propositions are laid down in the first paragraph of
section 8. Unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily
implied, it provides, in the first place, that a transfer of property passes
all the interest which the transferor is then capable of passing in the pro
perty. In the second place, it provides that such passing of the interest
takes place forthwith. In the third place, it provides that the legal inci-
dents of the interest are also transferred forthwith.

15.2. Legal incidents—What the expression “legal incidents” com-
prises is dealt with in the remaining paragraphs, though not in an exhaus-
tive manner. Those paragraphs deal separately with five kinds of pro-
perty, namely,—(1) land, (2) machinery, (3) house, (4) debt or action-
able claim and (5) money or other property yielding income. Legal
incidents of cach are mentioned by an inclusive formula.

This part of section 8 reads—

“Such incidents include, where the property is land, the ease-
ments annexed thereto, the rents and profits thereof accruing after
the transfer and all things attached to the earth;

and where the property is machinery attached to the earth, the
movable parts thereof;

and, where the property is a house, the easements annexed
thereto, the rent thereof accruing after the transfer, and the locks,
keys, bars, doors, windows and alt other things provided for perma-
nent use therewith:

and, where the property is a debt or other actionable claim,
the securities therefor (except where they are also for other debt or
claims not transferred to the transferee), but not arrears of interest
accrued before the transfer;

and, where the property is money or other property yielding
income, the interest or income thereof accruing after the transfer
takes effect.” 9s


96

15.3. Previcus law—The provisions of section 8 closely conform to
the corresponding provisions of the English Conveyancing and Law
of Property Act, 1881 (section 63)—now the Law of Property Act, 1925
(section 163).

Before the English Conveyancing Act, it was necessary to insert in
each deed, under “general words” minute details of the property, ease-
ments and incidents intended to be conveyed. The prolix lengths to
which deeds in consequence used to run often rendered them as imper-
spicuous as inscnsible.' In Wood v. Saunders, Hall, V.C. observed :

“General words we all know are almost aiways, if not always,
unmeaning; and you can in fact only lay hold of them to sometimes
extend the operation of instruments; as, for example, to easements
which have become extinguished by unity cf seisin of enjoyment, or
in some other way. They have no operation, and the only wonder
is, that they have been allowed to remain so long in the pigeon-
holes to be put in every deed, when in truth they have no meaning
er effect at all.”

Its provisions therefore, had the effect of not only cutting down the length
of deeds, but of simplifying them by doing away with the “general words”
which have now become a thing of the past. But they are of great assis-
tance ini interpreting the corresponding provisions of the Indian law, as,
in drafting the Indian Act, the English Statute was before the Legislature
and its advisers? The marginal notes? appended to the Bill of 1879
show that the principles embodied in the section were recognised in this
country from before the Act.t-6

15.4. Privy Council—Referring to the law in force anterior to the
enactment of this section, the Privy Council said :

“It is not necessary to decide whether the Transfer of Property
Act enacts what was unquestionably the law before. The rule of
Jaw was that indefinite words of grant were calculated to convey al!
the interest of the grantor, but that it was necessary to read the whole
instrument togather the intention. It is a question to be decided
when it arises, whether the framers of the Act have not conciously
or otherwise so expressed themselves as to lay down a more positive
Tule in favour of absolute gifts.”¢

1 Wood v. Saunders, 44 L. J. Ch. 514, 520.

2 See Writley Stokes, Introduction to the Act, in his Anglo-Indian Codes and
Waurzler v. Sharp, 1.L.R. 5 All. 270, 285.

3 The marginal notes cite the following cases as authorities on the section
Ram Dhone v. Ishanee, 2 W.R. 123 (125); Kishen Gir ५, Busgeet Roy, 14 W.
R. 379; Faqueer v. St. Khuderun, 2 N.W.P.H. C. R. 251 2; Mahomed Ali v:
Bolakee, W. R. 330 (trees), “everything grown on it”, Morley N.S. 259.

4 Cour.

5 So a lease given in 1865 “with all rights” was held to comprise the roincrals
Sespite section 108(c) of this Act, which shows that the principle had even 8
ys का afrelication before its enactment here: Megh Lol ५. Rai Kuma, TUR.

6 Kalidas Mullick v. Kanhaya Lal. 11.R, 11 Cal. 121, 131, PC,


87

15.5. Principle—First maxim-—The principle embodied in the  sec-
tion is one of universal application and may be found in the ancient legal
maxims which have become a part of the common law of England. ‘These
maxims aye (i) Eujus est solum, ejus est usque ad coelum ad inferos,
Gi) Quicquid plantaur solo, solo cedit2

Under the rule embodied in the first maxim, it has been laid down
that, since land in its general signification has an indefinite extent both
upwards and downwards, a conveyance of land is sufficient to pass all
buildings, growing timber, emblements and water thereon as also mines
and minerals thereunder : from which it follows that the owner cannot
put erections on his own land so as to project on his neighbour’s land, or
throw the rain water from his roof on his neighbour’s land, or grow trees
so that their boughs overhand the adjoining land of another. ‘The right
of light and air is similarly traceable to the same rule. The owner of the
soil man a right to subterranean springs can maintain a suit for its di-
version under circumstances which would have given a right for action if
the stream had been above-ground.* On the other hand, he cannot dig on
his own land, so as to undermine the foundation of his neighbour's
building.®

15.6. The second maxim-—~The second maxim relates to accessories
and ‘things affixed to land. In a mortgage or lease of property, “a different
intention” is necessarily implied, inasmuch as the transferor does not
obviously intend to pass all his interest in the property, but only creates
a limited interest in the transferee, the extent and nature of which forms
the subject of two separate chapters of the Act. Where the nature of
the interest conveyed is defined by the transferor, the question depends
upon the construction to be placed upon the document, the terms of
which alone must then afford a basis for decision. But the relationship
of the parties may also be material. In the absence of an express agree-
ment to the contrary, the Act further provides rules for the construction
of the presumed intention which depends upon the nature of the interest
conveyed,*

15.7. Rule of censtruction--The section lays down a rule of cons-
truction, which must be applied to the case of a transfer which, ex
hypothesia, does not tell us whether any particular interest, possessed by
the transferee, was meant to pass, by the conveyance or not. The object

the section is, therefore, to stabilize title and to remove, from the region
of pure speculation, what passed in the mind of the transferor or the
transferee at the date of the transfer.”

1 “Whoever has the soil, has it even up to the firmament, and to the middle of
the earth.”

2 “Whatever is planted on (or fixed to) the soil follows the soil.”
3 Gour.

4 Section 17(d), India Easement Act (V of 1882), Action v, Blundell, 12 M &
W, 324; Chasemore v, Richards 7 H.L.C. 349.

5 Pindu v. Johnai, 1.7२, 24 Cal 260 CF. Balabhai v. Balakbidas, 2 B.L.R, 114;
Waman v. Parasharam, 2 B.L.R. 688: Deoki v. Dhian Singh, 1.LR. 8, All. 467.

6 Sale section 55, mortgage, section 65; leases, section 108; exchange, section 119.
7 Fazal Ahmed ९, Har Prasad, A.1.R. 1929 All. 465, 474.



93

SECTION 8

15.8. Effect of transfer of debts on decrees subsequently passed—
An important question with reference to section 8 concerns that part of
the section which relates to debts or other actionable claims. The fifth
paragraph of the section, so far as is material, provides that the incidents
of a property include, “where the Property is a debt or other actionable
claim, the securities therefor”. The main paragraph of the section—
fitst paragraph—so far as is material—provides that a transfer of pro-
Perty passes forthwith to the transferee the interest. which the transferor
is “then capable” of passing in the property and in the legal incidents
thereof. The precise question to be considered is whether the transfer
of a debt is to be construed (in the absence of a contrary intention) as
also a ‘transfer of a decree to be passed later in proceedings then pending
at the instance of the transferor.

15.9. Supreme Court case—In Jugal Kishore' a firm in the name of
M/s. Habib & Sons of Bembay had filed a suit in the yzar 1948 against
Jugal Kishore Saraf for the recovery of Rs. 7113/-. “When the suit was
still pending, the firm of M/s, Habib & Sons transferred their business to
Raw Cotton Co. Ltd. in the year 1949 along with all debts due to the
firm. In December 1949, a decree was passed in this suit for a total
sum of Rs. 8428/- in favour of M/s Habib & Sons. In April. 1951, the
Raw Cotton Co. Ltd. applied for the execution of the decree, which was
opposed by Jugal Kishore Saraf on various grounds. One of the grounds
was that the decree was not transferred to the respondent company (Raw
Cotton Co. Ltd.) as the suit was still Pending when the business of M/s
Habib & Sons was transferred to them and decree had been passed
subsequently. The executing court rejected this Plea of the judgement-
debtor and his appeal was also dismissed by the High Court. The matter
came up before the Supreme Court under Article 133(1) of the Consti-
tution of India.

Das J. held that under section 9 of the Transfer ef Property Act, the
true position is that at the date of the transfer of the debt to the respon-
dent company, the transferors could not transfer the decree, because the
decree did not exist. This section does Rot operate to pass any future
Property for the section passes all interest which the transferor can “then” ’
1.8. at the date of transfer pass. He also held that under the Transfer
of Property Act, there can be no transfer of property which is not in
existence at the date of the transfer. Therefore the purported transfer
of the decree that might be passed in future could only operate as a con-
tract to transfer the decree to be performed in future i.e. after passing
of the decree.

Bhagwati J., however, took a different view. He observed _ that
section 8 of the Transfer of Property Act provides that unless a different
intention is expressed or necessarily implied, a transfer of property passes
forthwith to the transferee ail the interest which the transferor is then
capable of passing in the property and in the legal incidents thereof.
These incidents include. where the Property is an actionable claim, the
“securities -.. but not arrears of interest accrucd before

1 Jugal Kishore Saraf v. Raw Cotton Co., A.LR. 1955 S.C. 376 (1955) 1 S.C.R. 1369
(Das, Bhagwati & tmam JJ.).



99

the transfer”, In case of transfer of debts or Property coming within
the definition of actionable claim, there is, therefore,
also a transfer of the tansferor’s right in a decree whicl il
his favour in a pending litigation and the moment a decree is passed in
his favour by the Court of Law, that decree is also automatically trans-
ferred in favour of the transferee by virtue of the written assignment al
ready executed by the transferor.

The debt which is the subject matter of the claim is merged in the
decree and the transferee of the actionable claim becomes entitied by
virtue of the assignment in writing in his favour, not only to the book
dent but also to the decree in which it has merged. The transferee is,
without anything more, entitled to the transfer of the decree passed by the
Court of Law in favour of the transferee.

15.10. Judgments summed up—Das J. took’ the view that the sub-
sequent decree is not transferred. Bhagwati J.. however, took the view
that the decree was transferred. He primarily based himself upon two
propositions, namely,—first, though there can be no transfer as such of
future property, yet the transfer should, on equitable principles, be given
effect as contract, and secondly, the decree merely represented the debt,

15.11, Need for change—The question to be considered by us is
not which of these views is correct, but which view is of practical benefit.
To take the narrow and strictly literal view, namely, that because of the
word “then” in section 8, first paragraph, the subsequent decree is not
transferred, leads to an anomaly. The transferor of the debt, having
transferred his rights, would not be interested in executing the decree,

On the narrow view, the transferee of the debt would not get any
right to execute the decree as an assignee. The result would be that the
transferee of the debt would be required to file a suit for specific per-
formance of the contract to transfer the decree and it is only when he
obtains a decree in that suit that he can apply for execution of the money
decree as an assignee. If this is the correct position, it should be re-
medied. The law should aim at shortening rather than lengthening
litieation—wnless, of course, there are any other considerations of justice
to the contrary. In this particular case, there appear to be none. Such
procedural formalities, if any, as are required under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, should, of course, be complied with by the purchaser
of the debt in his capacity as the transferee of the decree even after the
Proposed amendment. That applies to express transfers also. But
the expression “securities” in section 8 should, in this special case. be
widened so as (6 cover, in the situation where a suit has already been
instituted, the decree that may be passed in favour of the plaintiff.

15.12. Order 21, Rule 16—One of the maior points af difference
between Das & Bhaewati JJ. related to Order 21, Rule 16, of the Civil
Procedure Code. which is quoted below :

“16. Application for execution by transferee of decree—Where
a decree or, if a decree has been passed jointly in favour of two ot
more persons, the interest of any decree-holder in the decree is trans-
ferred by assignment in writing or by operation of law, the trans-
feree may apply for execution of the decree to the Court which

“Eber the view

of Imam 1., see para. 1545, infra,


100

passed it; and the decree may be executed in the same manner and
subject ta the same conditions as if the application were made by
such decree-holder.

Provided, that, were the decree, or such interest as aforesaid,
has been transferred by assignment, notice of such application shall
be given to the transferor and the judgement-debtor, and the decree
shall not be executed until the Court has heard their objections (if
any) to its execution;

Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of money
against two or more persons has been transferred to one of them, it
shall not be executed against the others.”

15.13. Propositions underlying each _judgment-—It would appear
from the judgements of the three Fudges—S- R. Das, J., Bhagwati, J., and
Iman, J.,—that while they all agreed that the purchaser of the debt could
avail itself of the provisions of section 146 of the Civil Procedure Code,
there was a sharp cleavage of opinion amongst them as the applicability
of Order 21, Rule 16, of the Civit Procedure Code and as to the exact
position of the purchaser company. S.R. Das, J. based his decision on
the following propositions.

{a) Section 8 does not operate to pass any future property and
the transfer of the book debts did not transfer the decree as
G legal incident.?

(b) If the document could be construed as a transfer of, or an agree-
ment to transfer, the decree to be passed in future, the beneficial
interest in the decree would, by operation of equity, have pass-
ed to the purchaser and the purchaser company would become
within the meaning of Order 21, Rule 16, transferee by opera-
tion of law.? In this case, however, there was no agreement
to transfer the decree. .

(c) But, in the eye of the law, the transferor of the debt, vis-a-
vis the purchaser of the debt was nothing more than a
benamidar for the purchaser and on this basis it was the
purchaser who was the real owner of the decree. Since the
purchaser was, after the transfer, the owner of the debt and
the legal incidents thereof, it was the real owner of the decree.4
This dictum, with respect, is in apparent eonflict with the
previous dictum.5

(d) Since the purchaser company became the owner of the decree
immediately on its passing in the above sense, it could
come under section 146.°

t Pora. 15.12, supra.

2 Pages 1379, 1380 of the S.C.R.
3 Pages 1401, 1402 of the S.C.R.

4 Pages 1405 of the S.C.R.

5 Pages 1379, 1380 of the S.C.R

6 Pages 1405 of the S.C.R.


101

15.14. The propositions, —so far as they are material, —enunciated
in the judgment of Bhagwati J. can be stated as follows :

(a) In cases of transfer of book debts or Property which is action-
able claim, there is necessarily involved also a transfer of the
transferor’s right in a decree which may be passed in his
favour in a pending litigation, and the moment a decree is
Passed in his favour by a court of law, that decree is also
automatically transferred in favour of the transferee by virtue
of the assignment in writing already executed by the trans-
feror.. This is by virtue of section 8.

(9) Of course, this transfer is subject to the provisions of section
132 of the Transfer of Property Act to the effect that the
transferee should take the actionable claim subject to all the
liabilities and equities to which the transferor was subject in
respect thereof at the date of the transfer.2-"

(०) So far as Order 21, Rule 16, C.P.C. is concerned, the trans-
feree in the above-mentioned circumstances is a transferee by
“assignment in writing” and not by operation of law.

(d) Of course, there is nothing in Order 21, Rule 16, prohibiting

the transferee from availing of section 146 of the Civil Proce-
dure Codz.¢

15.15. The propositions on which the judgment of Imam J. was
based may be stated as follows :—

(a) The purchaser should be Permitted under section 146 to
execute the decree as one claiming under the decree-holder.®

(b) While a transfer of, or an agreement to transfer, a decree
that may be passed in future may in equity entitle the trans-
feree to claim the beneficial interest of a decree after it is
passed, such equitable transfer does not render the transferee
a transferee of the decree by assignment in writing within
Order 21, Rule 16.%

(०) No opinion is expressed as to whether the expression “by
operation of law” in Order 21, Rule 16 can be given the
interpretation suggested by Das, J.7

15.16. Resultant uncertainty—It should be pointed out that while,.
for the particular purpose under consideration before the Supreme Court,
the applicability of section 146 enabled the alleged transferee of the debt
to execute the decree, the position resulting from the judgment on the
more material question, namely, whether there was Or was not an assign-
ment and, if so, whether it was by act of parties or by operation of law,
1 Page 1418 of the S.C.R.

2 Page 1418 of the S.C.R.
2a Para 15-12, supra.

3 Page 1418 of the S.C.R.
4 Page 1421 of the S.C.R,
5 Page 1425 of the S.C.R.
6 Page 1426 of the S.C.R.
7 Page 1427 of the S.C.R.



102

was not established with certainty. |The applicability or non-applica-
bility of Order 21, Rule 16 of the Civil Procedure Code to the situation
under coasideration remained indefinite, because while Das, J. excluded
its applicability on the ground that there was no agreement to transfer the
future decree, Baagwali J. included it by season cf his construction of
section 8 of the Transfer of Property Act, while Iruam, J. did not express
any opinion as to whether there was an assignment by operation of law.
It should also be stated that Order 21, Rule 16, makes a distinction (in
the proviso} between cases of assignment by act of parties and assign-
ment by operation of law. In the first case, notice is given to the trans-
feror and the judgment debtor, while, in che second case, notice is not
given. Again, the uncertainty in regard to the assignment by act of
parties or operation of law leads to uncertainty as to the application of
section 132 of the Transfer of Property Act. It is for these reasons that
a clarification is necessary.

45.17. It is also legitimate to point out that—High Court decisions
(some of them referred to in the Supreme Court judgement) also reveal
a difference of views. Bombay cases discussed in the judgment, the
Caleutta case in Purna Chandra Bhomik v. Barna Kumari Debi’ and the
Madras judgement in Kangati Mahanandi Reddi v. Panikalapati Venkat-
appa and another? are illustrations. The Madras judgement observed
that if the matter were res integra, much might perhaps b2 said for the
contention that the assignee under similar circumstances could excute the
decree under Order 21, Rule 16, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

15.19. Need for change—It is for these reasons that a clarification
is necessary. | Whatever be the correct position in theory under the present
section as it is worded, practical considerations justify an amendment to
the effect that in the situation under discussion, the transfer of a debt"
should operate so as to transfer the decree to be ultimately passed in
favour of the transferor subject to the following conditions* :

(a) The transfer was made after the institution of proceedings
for recovery of the debt.

{b) The provisions of Order 21, Rule 16, C.P.C. should apply as
they apply to an express assignment in writing.

(c) The provisions of section 132 of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882 should apply in relation to the assignment—this, in fact,
need not be expressly provided.

The merit of the proposed amendment is that :—
(0) it states the position with reasonable certainty;

(ii) it leads to shortening of litigation. since the purchaser of the
debt will not be required to institute a suit again calling upon
the seller of the debt to transfer the decree;

(iii) it brings into operation the safeguards provided in Order 21,
Rule 16, C.P.C. leaving no doubt in the matter;

1 Purna Chandra Bhowmik v. Borna Kumari Debi, LLR. (1939) 2 Cal. 341.
2 Kangat! Mahanandi Reddi v. Panikalapati Venkatappa and Another, AAR. 1942
jad, +

3 For brevity “debt” is used. Same rosition wi'l apply to “actionable claims”.
4 This is not a draft.


103

(iv) it potects the rights of the transferor, the transferee and the
judgment debtor by providing for application of Order 21,
Rule 16 C.P.C.
{¥) last, but not the least, it defines the position as between the
transferor and the transferee in express terms.

15.19. Recommendation—In the light of the above discussion, we
tecommend that to section 8, a suitable Explanation should be added on
the lines indicated above.

8—885 Law /77


CHAPTER 16
ORAL TRANSFERS
SgcTion 9

16.1. Oral Transfer—According to section 9, a transfer of property
may be made without writing in every case in which a writing is net ex-
pressly required by Jaw.

There are several cases in which the Transfer of Property Act re-
quires a written instrument, namely—

(1) Sale or exchange of immovable property of the value of one
hundred rupees and upwards;

(2) Sale of a reversion or other intangible interest in immovable
property irrespective of value;

(3) Simple mortgage;

(4) Other mortgages where the principal money is one hundred
rupees and upwards—but not including a mortgage by the
transfer of title deeds;

(5) Leases from year to year or for any term exceeding one year
or reserving a yearly rent;

(6) Gifts—but in certain cases delivery is sufficient;

(7) Assignment of actionable claims.

Besides this, there may be other laws requiring writing."

16.2. Reasons—The reasons for requiring a writing in these cases
are various, but in the case of most of the transactions, the law not noly
reflects a policy of ensuring accurate and permanent record to prevent
disputes, but also shows its anxiety that such transactions should not be
entered into without some deliberation, In the case of assignments of
actionable clams, there is the additional reason that an actionable claim
being incorporeal property, it cannot, by its very nature, be transferred by
delivery of possession because the transferor has no present possession to
deliver. Therefore, it can be transferred only by words. A writing
is required in preference to an oral grant, since tl interest of third
parties may be involved and also because the properties not being visible,
it is considered that some particularity describing the nature of the property
sought to be transferred may be useful.

16.3, Objects—Thus, the objects of requiring a written instrument
are manifold. A written instrument affords an indelible record of the
transfer—this is the aspect of evidence—but there is a more vital aspect
to it. namely, that it secures title by defining the nature of the interest
conveyed. In this sense, it is not only an immutable memorial of the
transaction. but also a more reliable source of the essence as well as the
details of the transaction.

“TY Sections $4, 59, 107, 118,
2 Eg. Section 5, Trusts Act,

» 130, 131.

104


105°

The object of the law in requiring writing is one of substance, even
though occasionally it may appear that such requirement assumes an over-
technical importance in practice. Domat, an eminent French jurist, bas
described the object of writing in words which cannot be bettered, as
follows : “4

“The force of written proofs consists in this, that men have

agreed together to preserve by writing the recollections of things past
and of which they were desirous to establish the remembrance,
either as rules for their guidance, or to have therein a lasting proof of
the truth of what they write. The agreements are written to pte
serve the remembrance of what the contracting parties have pres
ctibed for themselves, and erect that which has been agreed on into
a fix. and immutable law for them. So wills are written to
establish the recollection of what a person who had the right to dis-
pose of his property has ordained, and make thereof a rule for his
heirs and legatees. In like manner are written sentences, decrees,
edicts, ordinances and everything intended to have the effect of title or
of law, etc. The writing preserves unchangeably what is entrusted
to it, and expresses the intention of the parties by their own
testimony.”

16.4, Of Course, the fact that a document has been employed to
effectuate a transfer does not avoid controversy, but, in contrast with an
oral transfer, the controversy, if any, will now be as to the construction of
the document, and not as to the contents of the transfer.

16.5. Previous position—It would appear that before the passing of
the Act? no writing was necessary for the sale of immovable property.
This shows how the Act has altered the previous position.

16.6 Hindu law—-The marginal note appended to the Bills shows that
this section was adopted from the New York Code. By the Hindu law,
a verbal grant of immovable property is good, if followed by delivery of
possession to the grantee.t Indeed, in no case does the Hindu law
appear absolutely to require writing’ though, as evidence, it regards writ-
ing as of additional force and value.¢

16.7 Transfer at the time of marriage —It has been held? that _sec-
tion 9 is not applicable to the transfer of immovable property made at
the time of marriage by a Hindu. This decision can be explained only on
the special facts of the case relating to a family arrangement. 1n ‘this
connection it is to be remembered that the expression “transfer of pro-
perty” is to be construed with reference fo section 5, of which an essential
ingredient is the act of “conveying the property”. We have already

1 Domst, Civil Law. para, 13, Titles 6—Section 2, cited by Cour.

2 ALR. 1914 7.0, 27.

3.N. ¥, Code, 5. 453, 7 Exch. 581; Cour

4 Doed Seeb Kristo v. East india Co, 6 MLA, 267;
Hurrish Chunder v. Rajender 18 W. R. 293, Anonymous, 1 1.1, (O.S.) 135.

5 Mantena v. Chekuri, 1 MHCR. 100: Palanivappa v. Arumugam, 2 MELCR.
26: Criniva v. Vijayammal, 2 M.H.C.R. 37; Krishna v. Rayappa, 4 M.H.CR.
98: Hurpurshad v, Sheo Dyat, 26 W.R. 55 (PC).

6 Gour.

7 ALR, 1968 AP. 291.



106

explained, while discussing section 5, that where there is no “conveyance”
Of property, there is no transfer, and the transaction is outside the Trans-
fer of Property Act.

There was, strictly speaking, no need for a provision of the
nature contained in section 9, which seems to have been inserted out of
abundant caution.

16.8. Part-performance—To the rule that where a writing is re-
quired by the law there must be a writing, there seems to be no exception
—not even the doctrine of part performance, because that doctrine
does not apply unless the contract to transfer for consideration any um-
movable property is in writing, signed by the transferor. An oral agree-
meat wili not be sufficient for the purposes of the application of the
doctrine of part performance—which seems to be a departure from the
English law.*

16.9. Position in England as to Part-performance—tIn England, the
doctrine of part-performance which was evolved to mitigate the hardship
caused by the Statute of Frauds is not confined to written agreements.
Under this doctrine, a party who has partly performed the contract can
enforce it even though there is no written evidence of the contract. It
is certainly a requisite that there must be parol evidence of the contract
which is let in by the act of part-performance.? But the absence of
writing is immaterial.

16.10. Material alteraiion—We have, in the Report! on the Stamp
Act, discussed the question how far a material alteration in an instru-
ment alter its execution affects its validity. The general principles appli-
cable to the question, apart from the position for the purposes of the
étamp law, have also been discussed, and we do not consider it necessary
to go over the ground again.

16.11. Other formalities—Besides writing, there might be other for-
malities, such as attestation and registration and (under special laws) the
affixation of a seal. | Confining ourselves to writing. we might state that
80 far as the general rule is concerned, it is not necessary that the transfer
should be contained in a single document. The transfer might be made
out of several documents, so long as they can be connected together with-
out parol evidence. There are certain requirements of Stamp Law®

icularly applicable to such a case, but the provisions of that very law

Mrdicates that our legal system does not rule out the effectuation of a
transfer by more than one document.°

16.12. No Change—The above discussion discloses no need for
amending the section.

1 Section 53-A.

2 Bechar Dass v. Ahmedabad Municipality, AR. 1941 Bom. 346.

3 Fry, Specific Performance, 6th Ed., pages 276-277, cited by Treitel, Contracts
(1966), pages 119, 121.

4 Report on the Stamp Act.

5 Section 4. Indian Stamp Act, 1899.

6 Compare Pearce v. Gardener, (1897) 1 0. 8. 688.



CHAPTER 17
CONDITIONS RESTRAINING ALIENATION
Section 10
17.1. Introductory—The Act has so far deat with transferable

ransfer property on such terms as may be agreed upon between the
parties, or, in the case of a unilateral transaction, as may be decided by
the transferor and accepted by the transferee, In this sense, freedom
to dispose of property—section 7—may be said to include freedom to
choose the conditions upon which the transfer is to be operative (con-
ditions precedent), the conditions upon which it should cease to be opera.
tive conditions subsequent), the terms upon which the interest transferred
should be enjoyed and the terms upon which that interest should pass
from the immediate transferee to his successors. The terms upon which
the interest transferred may itself be transferred by the traasferee may
even be regulated. The imposition of these terms is & part of the power
to transfer property under section 7. But that section itself Jays down
that the power shall be subject to the provisions of any law for the time
being in force—this is the gist though not the precise text, Thus, that
section itself contemplates that the law may impose restrictions upon the
freedom of dispesition. The scope and content of those restrictions form
the subject matter of the next few sections. On the ground of public
policy, and primarily on the ground of the policy of the law favouring the
vesting of interests in property, and also on the ground of the policy of
favouring the circulation of Property rather than its being tied up within
3 particular group or to a particular person, the law has imposed certain
limits as to the terms of a transfer. Whether the breach of a particular
term renders the transfer void or whether it Keeps the transfer intact and
the term becomes invalid is a matter which we need not go into for the
present purpose. We are now primarily concerned with what are the
Permissible and what are the impermissible terms of a transfer,

17.2, Sections 10—18 —Common thread—The most important sec-
tions of immediate interest in this context are sections 10 to 18, which
principally, though not exclusively, deal with the invalidity of restraints
on alienation, accumulation of income and the rule against perpetuities,
Notwithstanding the complexity of these sections, a close analysis will
reveal that the golden thread connecting them is one salutary principle
that the law favours the freedom of transfer of property—the corpus as
well as the income—and Property should not be teansferred upon terms
which destroy or substantially impair this freedom. This is often pithily
expressed by saying that the freedom of disposition should not be allowed
to be so exercised as to lead to its own destruction. One could more
elaborately state the considerations of policy by saying that if a person is
free to dispose of his own 7 ‘onerty, he must so exercise the freedom that
those to whom he transfers :-n interest in property are not deprived of chat
very freedom. The connection of the rule against perpetuities with this
principle may appear to be tenuous, since that rule is often attributed to

107



108

another principle—the law favours the vesting of estates within a reaSon-
able time. But even this rule has, as its foundation, the broader princi-
ple that the tying of property for an unreasonably long period and the
postponement of its vesting defeats the enjoyment thereof by those who
derive their rights under a transfer burdened with such conditions. To

pene matter in different words, the law requires that a person trans-

ing property should not merely look to his own immediate interests,
‘but should also have regard to the interests of future generations. In this
sense, a balance is sought to be achieved between the immediate present
and the distant future—which is indeed a function of law as social
engineering.

17.3. Difficulty of formulation—These principles, sound as they are,
do not yield easily to legislative formulation. By reason of the very
fact that the immediate past and the distant future have both to be borne in
mind and reconciled, the issues that arise present difficult problems of
legal policy. So many alternatives present themselves, The choice
is not always easy. Opinions could veer from one extreme to another.
Persona! feelings and sentiments, not lightly to be brushed aside, have to
be reconciled with social and economic considerations. For example, a
person may very much wish that the property disposed of by him should
remain within the family. He may desire that the property should be
so enjoyed as to have regard to the welfare of certain other members of
the family also, particularly by providing for allocation of a certain part
of the income to them. These are personal sentiments. But those who
are to live in future generations may not necessarily share the same senti-
ments, or not to the same degree. Even if they do so, they may have
their own social or economic reasons of a compelling nature raising coun-
tervailing considerations, It is then the business of law to evolve a set
of rules that will reconcile sentiment with reason, the immediate and
visible past with the remote and invisible future. The exact content of
the set of rules to be so evolved must, in the very nature of things, be a
matter of opinion. Orthodoxy and modernism each have their say.

17.4. Section 10—With these aspects of policy in the background,
let us examine the first section concerned with the permissible terms of a
transfer of property. This is the text of section 10, which deals with a
condition restraining alienation—

“10. Where property is transferred subject to a condition or
limitation absolutely restraining the transferee or any person claiming
under him from parting with or disposing of his interest in the pro-
perty, the condition or limitation is void, except in the case of a lease
where the condition is for the benefit of the lessor or those claiming
under him : provided that property may be transferred to or for
the benefit of a woman (not being a Hindu. Mahammadan or
Buddhist). so that she shall not have power during her marriage to
transfer or charge the same or her beneficial interest therein.”

17.5. Analysis—The section thus consists of three parts—the general
prohibition, the exception and the proviso. The general prohibition is
against an absolute restraint on “parting with or disposing of” the interest.
The exception is in regard to a particular mode of transfer—lease—and
is confined to a condition for the benefit of the lessor or those claiming
under him. The proviso is in regard to a particular class of persons—-
Married women of certain communities. Although worded as a provision


109

permitting restraint on the rights of women, it originated In a desire to
protect the women. The restraint is thus for the benefit of the trans-
fferee. We shall advert later to the questiun how far such a restraint is
consistent with modern notions.

17.6. Absolute restraint—Rationale—So far as the general prohi-
bition in section 10 is concerned, the most important element, is that indi-
cated by the requirement of absolute restraint. The term in a deed of
transfer is void if it absolutely restrains the transferee from transferring
his interest. If the transferor in categorical and unqualified terms pro-
vides that the transferee shall not transfer his interest at all. there can
hardly be any difficulty in the application of the rule. The policy of the
law is clear enough. If there is freedom of disposition for the immediate
transferor. there ought to be a similar freedom for the transferee as well.
If he is absolutely restrained from transferring his interest, his freedom
of disposition is totally taken away, so that—if the condition were to be
recognised by law—in regard to that particular property, the freedom of

disposition would cease to exist at all. The freedom of disposition of
the transferor would then be exercised to its own destruction. As observed
by us in the introductory discussion in this Chapter’ this is against
the policy of the law. Such an absolute restraint on alienation would
hardly be favoured by any legislator, even if he is not a person introduced
to the learning of the law. ‘It may be of interest to note that article 19
of the Constitution is based on a similar principle, although, cf course,
its operation is against the State.

If the section were to be taken as confined to absolute restraints pure
and simple,. hardly any problems would have arisen and the section would
not require any elaborate discussion. But, in practice, limitations on
alienation are not so simple in their r langua ge or unqualified in their scope.
And the question naturally arises restraints not absolute in that
sense ate within the mischief of the section. Restraints limited to trans-
fers to particular persons, or transfers except to a particular person or
Timited to transfers with a certain period, have often been held to be
void. as will anear from a few cases discussed below. It would thus
appear that the word “absolute” is not to be taken in a literal sense, The
section has been construed to apply to all transfers repugnant to the
noture of the interest.

17.7. Restraints with reference to duration—First, as to restraints
limiting transfers in point of time. The section has been construed to
apply to restraints limited to last for only a limited time.? For example,

¢ seller cannot stipulate with the purchaser that the purchaser shall not
build a slaughter-house upon his land or that he shall not lease his land,
or sefl it for the next twenty years. or that he shall put it only to such
use 88 the seller sanctions; the condition is repugnant to the nature of the
interest created and is void under sections 10 or 11. Ag Jessel. MR.,
observed? :

“The test is whether the condition takes away the whole power
of alienation substantially; it is a question of substance and not Mere

“TY Para. 17.1, supra, 17.1, supra.

2 (a) Chamaru v. Sona Koer, 14 CLI. 303; 11 LC. 301;
(७) Naveshar v. Muta Prasad. ALR. 1922 0010 236, 244

3 In re Mackay, LR. 20 Eq. 186.


110

form. You may resitict alienation in many ways. Piss may re-
strict it by prohibiting it to a particular class of individuals or you
may restrict alienation by restricting it to a particular time.”

So Lard Eldon said :

“it is clear. generally speaking, that if property is given to a man
for his life, the donor cannot take away the incidents to a _life-
estate.”

17.8. Duration—Thete is, therefore, nothing in the bare fact that
the estate carved out is a life-estate, to bar the application of the rule of
tepugnancy. Nor is the restraint any less obnoxious to the rule because
it provides for alienation to a speecified class of persons.? The question
whether a condition or a limitation has the effect of absolutely restraining
a transfer so as to attract the prohibition in the section is to be answered
on a consideration of several factors. In judging of the validity of the
restraint. the court not only sees whether it is absolute, but also whether
the right to cancel the transfer is based upon some reason or upon a purely
capricious exercise of the transferor’s will, in the effectuation of which he
has no conceivable interest.

17.9. Restraints as to persons—Restraints concerned with the persons
to whom ile interest created may be transferred, may assume one of two
alternative forms. There may be a restraint on transfer to a particular
person—for example, that the property shall not be transferred to A or
8 or other specified person. In general such restraints would not be
regarded as absolute.

In practice however many cases present a situation of a different
Kind. The transferor seeks to prohibit alienation except to a specified
Person or group of persons. The transfer is then allowed to the specified
Persons or group only and every person is excluded from the range of
the permitted transferees. if the terms are to be recognised . 1६ is in
this situation that problems arise. In general, the matter is decided
after taking into account whether the restraint though not absolute, yet
practically operates so as to exclude a very large class of persons and if
so, whether in the circumstances of the case there is any justification.

17.9A. Restrictions as to price—Besides limitations as to persons and
time, there are sometimes to be found restrictions as to the price at which
property should be sold by the transferee. Such restrictions are often coupled
with restrictions as to the person to whom it can be transferred, Usually, this
situation is illustrated by restrictions to the effect that if the property is
transferred, it shall be first offered to a particular person who shall have
the option to purchase it at a particular price. A right of pre-emption
's thus crvated. but, in addition, considerable advantase is aiso secured to
the beneficiary of the right of pre-emption, since usually the amount of
price specified or the method for determining it is advantarous ag con-
tracted with the market price that is likely to prevail at the date of the in-
ended sale by the transferee, If, in regard to such clauses contained in

“I Bradon v. Robinson, 18 Ves. J. 429: 34 ER. 370, ~
2 (a) Teja Singh y. Moti Sineh, 80 1.0, 918;
(0) Asghari Begam v. Maula Baksh, AIR. 1929 Al. 381.



11r

instruments of transfer—we shall also deal later with instruments of parti-
tion—the section is construed literally and the expression “absolutely”
taken in its dictionary meaning and given a narrow scope, serious incon-
venience would arise in practice.

17.10. Appreciating this reality of life, courts have, in Many cases,
given a wide meaining to the word “absolutely”. They have weighed the
advantage conferred on the prospective pre-emptor—which 1s the obverse
of the restricticn placed on the immediate transferee—as against the effect
thereof upon the freedom of the immediate transferee. They have, in
other words, considered the needs of the Pre-emptor aud the sentiments
of the trarsferor in balance against the interests of the transferee. Any
such balancing is bound to involve an assessment of social and economic
realities, consciously or unconsciously undertaken by the Court.

17.11. English case—In iliustration of what is said above, let us
refer to the English case of Rosher v. Rosher*. It was a case of testa-
muentary disposition. but the principles would be the same as regards dispo-
sition inter vivos. A testator devised an estate to his son in fee, providing
that if the son, his heirs or devises should desire to sell the esiate during
the life-time of the testator’s wife, she should have the option to purchase
it at a fixed price named, which was one-fifth of the real purchasing value
of the estate at the date of the will and at the time of the testator’s death.
It was held that the prohibiion to sell at a fixed price much below its real
value, during a given period. was equivalent to an absolute prebibition,
and as such void.*

17.12 Position swnmed up—The question really is not how the
transfer was designed, but what was really its effect, the true test being
whether the condition takes away substantially the whole power of alien-
atic it is a question of substance and not of mere form? if the con-
dition substantially denrives the transferee of the power of alienation, it is
void. but if it only so restrains it that in effect he still has the power in
substance, it is valid'. So a prohibition on transfer in the father’s life-
time held to be valid in a Lahore case’,

The salient points could be thus summed up—
(a) A restraint which though apparently not absolute, has sub-
stantially that effect, would be regarded as repugnant.
{b) A cenditnon in restraint of alienation is none-the-less absolute
because its operation is limited to a particular period or to
a particular person.

(c) Such a condition may be regarded as an absolute restraint by
Teason of the price ‘at which the alienation is required to be
made.

1 Rosher ४. Rosher, 26 Ch. D. 801. हा,
2 See also Doe Singh v. Khub Chand, 19 A.LJ. 848.

3 In re Mackay, LR. 20 Eq. 186. 189, a part of whose juement was, however,
11 आधा upon by Pearson. J., in Rosher v. Rosher, 26 Ch. D. 801, 817,

4 KeLean v. McKav, LR. 5 P.C. 327;
London and 5. W. Ry, Co. v. Comm, 20 Ch. 0. 562,

5 Took Chand v. Radha Kishan, ALR. 1935 Lahore 503,


null and void, it was held that the agreement was valid.? So again, where
a house was conveyed to the transferee, subject to a covenant on his part
not to use it for any Purpose other than a private tesidence, and the transferee
conveyed it to another who converted it into a boarding house, the covenant
fot to use the house for any other purpose was held not Tepugnant to the
nature of an estate, and might be enforced by an injunction.*

17.14. Personal interest—Restraints may also be upheld where they mere-
ly emphasise the nature of the interest conveyed, The settlement of an
anauity with the direction that it should, from time to time, be paid to himself
only, and that a receipt under his own signature and no other shall be a
fhoiicient discharge, was construed to point to an intention on the part of
the testator that the annuity should cease if it is alienated, and it was held
to have ceased on the bankruptcy of annuitant A similar intention may
be gathered from the direction to pay a sum of money to an_ individual
named, but not to his assigns, for his natural life with a limitation over if the
devisee should alienate.*

17.15. A grant of any interest in land, whether limited or unlimited,
would be subject to this rule. But it must be the grant of jand and not
merely of its profits. The adopted son of a Hindu widow granted to her

her maintenance, the usufruct of certain land, she being expressly
forbidden by the terms of the grant “to mortgage, make a gift of, sell or
assign the land in any Way to any person”. Her judgment creditor sought
to attach the land, but his application was rejected on the ground that what
was granted to the widow was the usufruct and no interest in the co:
which, therefore, could not be attached. A will containing clear words of
inheritance, but containing a clause forbidding alienation, will take effect
as if the clause did not exist.7

17.16. Thea, it has been held in Allahabad? that a gift subject to the
Power of revocation is not repugnant to this section. In that case, A had
sold his village to B, whereupon B granted A some land for his maintenance,

stipulauing that it would be liable to resumption if A transferred it, A's

1 (a) Ramalinga v. Virupak, TLR. 7 Bom. 538. ai;
(0) Western १. Macdermott. LR. 6 Ch. A. 72;
(०) Maclean ५. Mackay, 1... R. 5 9.0. 327.
2 Kuldlp v, Khetrani, LR. 25 Cal. 869.
3 Hobson v. Tulloch, (1898) 1 Ch. 424,
4 Dommen ९. Bedford, 3 Ves, 149.
5 Cooper ४. Wyatt, LLR. 5 Mad. 482,
6 Diwali v. Apaii, LLR. 10 Bom. 342, 345; distinguished .
Mathura Nak व है 50 eae Ms, हु ४४0०4 in Golak Nock र
7 Kannu Pillay v. Challathamal, 10 M.LJ. 203,
हैं 17/17/0127 CAL oy or on
cont levi Vv. va Nar |, 1] 4 .
| eatlon Texerved for himsel and eae, 1939) alienation" Of TO¥O-



113

transferee sued for a declaration that he was a tenant of the land, but Banerji,

J., held the plaintiff's assignor’s gift to be subject to the power of revoca-

tion, and, therefore, not necessarily repugnant to the provisions of section

10. Reference was also made to section 126, but reference to section 6(d)

ould also have been apposite. Such grants are, necessarily, excluded from
@ rule,

17.17, Mortgages—tt is customary in Indian conveyancing for the mort-
eae or to insert a clause in his mortgage-deed to the effect that the mortgagor
ill not, pending the mortgage, execute another mortgage or otherwise alie-
nate, or charge the property with another incumbrance. Such a convenant,
standing by itself, does not amount to a martgage.! But what is its effect upon
the rights of the parties and of the subsequent alienee? Allahabad cases on
the subject are of interest. It has been held that a transfer of mortgaged pro-
perty made in contravention of a condition not to alienate is not absolutely
void, but veidable only in so far as it is in defeasance of the mortgagee’s rights,
Where in contravention of a condition not to alienate, the morgagor had trans-
ferred his proprietary right in the mortgaged proporty to a third person for
ब term of years, the Allahabad High Court declared that such transfer should
not be binding on a purchaser at the sale in execution of the decree obtained
by the mortgagee for the sale of the property in satisfaction of the mortgage-
debt unless he desired its continuance.? But it was again held® by the same
High Court that a transfer of mortgaged property in breach of a condition
against alienation is valid, except in so far as it encroaches upon the right of
mortgagee, and with this reservation, such a condition does not bind the
$0 as to prevent the acquisition of a valid title by the transferee,
specially if the transfer was made for the bona fide purpose of paying off the
mortgage,‘ in which case a condition not to alienate cannot operate to annul
10% but the debt must be at once discharged by the transfer.® Now, it has
been held? that a similar convenant on the part of the alienee is absolutely
void; then, why should it be otherwise in the case of the transferor ? The rule
thus laid down by the Alfahabad High Court has, in fact, been considerably
relaxed by that very High Court.

17.18, Leases—Lease deeds often contain conditions against alienation.

If they are not absolute or if they fall within the Exception to section 10, they
are valid. Assuming now, that the stipulation against alienation is valid, the
real question in such a case is, whether by reason of an alienation in breach
of such stipulation, the permanent lease is determined, where there is no ex-
press condition providing that, on breach of the stipulation against alienation,
lessor may re-inter, or that the lease shall become void. On this point,
the authorities are clear that in the absence of some such express condition,

1 Gunoo v. Latafut, U.L.R. 3 Cal. 336.
2 (a) Chuni v, Thakur Das, ULR. 1 All. 126;
(b) Mutchand v. Galeobind. UL.R. 1 All. 610;
(०) Lachmi v. Koteshar, LLR. 2 All 826.
3 Ali Hasa ov. Dhirja, U.LR. 4 All. 518.
4 Ram Saran v. Amrita, U.L.R. 3 All. 369.
5 Dookhchore v. Haiji Hidayatoolah, (1866-67) N.W.P.H.C.R. (F.B.) page 7.

6 Mahomad v. Banea, (1869) N.W.P.H.CR. 135, cited in Chunni v. Thakur Das,
LLR. 1 All. 126, 128, footnote.

7 Mohram v. Ajudhia, LL.R. 8 All. 452.


114

there can be no forfeiture of the lease.’ “Fhe lessor may enforce the convenant
by using for damages for its breach and by obtaining an injunction to res-
train the fessee from making an assignment, in breach of the same.* The case
would, however, be different where non-transferability is shown to be one
of the incidents of the lease, in which case ejectment would follew on trans-
fer a clause for re-entry being unnecessary.

17.19, Recommendation as to the word “absoluie’—It_ would be
apparent from the case law discussed above,‘ that the word “absolute” has
been construed by the Courts as including cases where the restraint is not
absolute in the literal sense, but is substantially so. It appears that the sense
of the section, the intention of the legislature and judicial construction there-
of would be better expressed if the word “absolutely” is suitably explained
as including cases where the restraint is substantially of an absolute character.
We recommend accordingly, so that the section may better reflect its true
scope. In such an important provision as section 10, the principle should
be more precisely expressed where practicable. Such an amendinent will
not, we know, avoid the tasks which the Courts have to perform of determin-
ing whether, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the restraint
is to be regarded as absolute in substance. But the amendment will have
the merit of drawing the attention of the citizens to the wide scope of an
important ingredient of the section.

17.20. Effect of void condition—Where a restraint on alienation is void
by reason of the principles discussed above, it is obvious that an alienation
made in violation thereof is as operative as if no such restraint existed
The transfer containing the restraint is valid, and is to be read as if no such
condition existed. This much is clear so far as the rights of subsequent trans-
ferees are concerned. But since the restraints are imposed usually in recip-
rocal transfers having a contractual element, the question naturally arises
whether as between the parties, the restraint possesses any vatidi
confer a cause of action on a party to the transfer against the d

17.21. On this point the authorities are not unanimons. Tt
held in Calcutta® that as between the immediate parties to it. the convenant
is binding. But « different note was strack by Phear, J.. ini case." since
affirmed,” in which he observed :

“Tt is not competent for the owners of property in this country by
any arrangement made in their own discretion to alter the ordinary inci-
dents of the property which they possess, for instance, in this particular

(a) Tamaya v, Timapa, 1L.R. 7 Bom, 262;
(b) Nilmadhub v. Naronam. VLR. 17 Cal, 826;
(c) Narayan v. Ali Saiba, VLR. 18 Bom. 603:
(व) Madar Sahih ४. Nahawa Guiranshah. VLR. 21 Bom, 195;
(९) Parameshri y. Vittanpa, VR. 26 Mad. 157:
(f) Basarat v. Vittappa, LLR. 36 Cal. 745.
(a) Mohan ४. Shel:h Sadoodi, 7 BH.CR. (A.C.) 69;
(0) Tamava v. Timapa, \.L.R. 7 Bom, 262. 265:
(०) McEachurn ४. Cotton, (1902) AC. 104:
(व) Parameshri v. Vitapo, TLR. 26 Mad. 157.
_ 3 Section 66) : Achura v. Sankaran, 13 1.0, 1007.

4 Paras 17.10 to 17.18, supra.

5 Ramdhun v. Arund, 2 Hyde 93; Raiendra v. Sham Chund, LLR. 6 Cal. 106;

follow in Muthuraman v. Ponnuswamy, 29 MLJ. 214,
6 Radhanath v. Tarrucknath. (1874) 3 Cal. 126, 128,
7 Krishnendra v. Debendra, (1883) 12 Cal. 793.

n


rs

case, to say that the joint-property shall remain the joint-property of
the joint—family in perpetuity but shalt not Possess the incidents which
the law of the country attaches to property in such condition, namely,
that every independent co-parcener is entitled, at any time, to his share
dividend of the rest. No doubt, any one member of the family and,
therefore, all, might, for sufficient consideration, bind themselves to
forego their rights for a specified time and definite purpose, by a con-
tract which could be enforced against them personal

The Bombay High Court has, similarly, held that
Ween co-parceners never to divide certain property is inv:
create a and ६ ue view has beer taken
Madras’ of a condition against a!
absolute in its terms has been declared to be equivatent i 3
exception of the very thing which is the essence of a.
parties to a division agree that the property of any one of the ni
agreement or their heirs dying issucless, should not be sold c+ 7
4 gift, but should, on his death, be divided by the other shareholders, and
where, subsequently, the property was sold in contravention of this agree-
ment and a party to the original agreement sued to recover, it was held that
the condition was void. A decision of the Privy Council* tends to the same
conclusion.

17.22, It seems that such stipulations, since they would, within the
meaning of section 23, Contract Act, be agreements whose object or considera-
tion is unlawful, could be regarded as void for that reason. In any case,
the matter is one of construction and application of section 23 of the Con-
tract Act, the question being whether the stipulation defeats section 10 of the
Transfer of Property Act.

17.23, Partition and family Grrangements—So far as the main para.
graph of the section is concerned. we have dealt with the existing position
above at some length, in view of the importance of the section. We have a
few points on which an amendment is required in the main paragraph
besides, of course, the amendment Tegarding the meaning of the word
“absolutely” which we have already discussed,? The question to be considered
is the 5p Plicability of the section to partitions and family arrangements. Since
the section opens with the words “where Property is transferred.......... ”,
it may not apply to partitions, if Tegard be had to the strict meaning of the

“T Radhanath v. Tarrucknaih, (1874) 3 Cal, 126, 128. Radhanath v. Tarrucknath, (1874) 3 Cal. 126, 128.
2 Ramalinga v. Virupakshi, LL.R. 7 Bom. 538; citing.
Raiendra y. Sham Chund. VLR. 6 Cat. 106;
Ananth v. Nagamuthu, VLR. 4 Mad. 200;
Asutosh ४, Doorga, LLR. 5 Cal. 438; PC;
Chimonroo v. Rambha, 4 Bom. LR. $08;
Chandar Shekhar ५. Kundan Lal, 1.1... 31 All. 3.
3 Chander Shekhar vy. Kundan Lal, LLR. 31 All.
4 (a) Anantha v. Nagamuthu, LL.R. 4 Mad. 200, 202;
(0) Wenkatarumanna v. Brammanna, 4 MHCR, 345;
६०) Promotho ५. Radhika, 14 BLR. 175;
(6) Parameshri ४. Vittapva, 12 MILI. 189. 193;
(e) McEacharn y. Cotton. (1902) A.C. 104.
5 Venkataramanna v. Brammanna, 4 MELCR. 345.
6 Padmanund v. Hayes, LL.R. 28 Cal. 720, 733 (P.C.).
7 See recommendation as to “absolutely”, supra—Para 17.19.



116

word “transfer”. Position in this regard is not, however, free from doubt, as
is apparent from the case law to be discussed presently.

17.24. Partition deed—It appears from reported decisions that parti-
tion deeds have contained conditions which provide that the share of a pat-
ticular person shall not be sold or that if it is sold, the other co-sharer would
have the right of pre-emption, and that too at a fixed price. Judicial decisions
also show that such conditions have raised controversy as to whether they are
valid, or whether they should be construed as substantially impos-
ing an absolute restraint on alienation. The last mention query,
in its turn, involves an examination of the question whether
section 10 applies to deeds of partition at all. This query arises
because under section 5 atransfer of property is defined as an
act by which a property is conveyed—and a partition is not, in terms, 2
transfer.

Recognising the hardships caused by such harsh provisions in partition
deeds, courts have, in general, tried to do substantial justice by refusing to
recognise them, but the reasons for the conclusions so arrived at have varied.
Some High Courts have taken section 10 as applicable. Some High Courts,
while not going to that length, have decided the matter on the ground of justice,
equity and good conscience. Since the situation is of frequent recurrence,
an examination of the case law is useful and this examination ,it is hoped, will
show the need for clarification in the matter.

17.25. Madras view—One shade of view is that the section applies to
a partition? A Madras decision of 1939 illustrates this approach :*

In a partition deed between the father and his sons in a Hindu family, it
was provided that certain houses (which had been used as the family resi-
dence) should be held by the members of the family as tenants in common,
that no member should have the right to dispose of his share to a_ stranger,
that if any of the sons chose to live in the houses mentioned, he shall not be
at liberty in any manner to let or lease, etc. his undivided share to a stranger
to the family but shall do so only to any of his brothers or his heirs for a sum
not exceeding Rs. 1,000 and it is found that the price of Rs. 1.000 fixed is
far below the real price of the share and that there is no corresponding obliga-
tion on the part of the other members to buy the share of the members wish-
ing to sell, the restriction against the alienation is void. The estate created
is a tenancy in common, and the restriction against alienation amounts to an
absolute restraint on alineation within the meaning of section 10, and, there-
fore, must be disrecarded as void; the sons take the property as tenants-in-
common without fetter.

It is not clear whether section 10 was regarded as applicable in terms.
Perhaps the principle was applied,

17.26. Bombay case—A term restraining alienation during the lifetime
of the widow in a partition deed was held by the Bombay High Court! to

I Comnare section 3 and para 17.24.
2 ALR. 1955 Mad. 350 (reviews case law).

3 7. V, Sangam v, Shanmukha Sundaram, A.LR. 1939 Mad. 769, distinguished
in ALR. 1957 Pat, 571.

4 Jarannathpuri, AIR. 1968 Bom. 25, 25, para 8 (Deshmukh, J.), (contra Sanafan,
ALR. 1946 Cal, 129—distinguished in ALR. 1951 Bom, 94).


117

be void, and it even held a partition to be a “transfer” for the purposes of
section 10, Transfer of Property Act.’

17.27. Family Seitlement—It may be noted that even in a family setile-
ment, an absolute restraint on alienation is void,? In contrast, a partiak
restraint on alienation in family settlement would be valid if otherwise reason-
able!

The principie underlying section 10 would be applied to a family setile-
ment if there is an absolute restraint on alienation.*

17.28. Calcutta case—A Calcutta case,’ however, Jeaves the matter
somewhat uncertain.

17.29. Price—Qn the question whether a provision compelling transfer
to a particular person on an artificially narrow price is an absolute restraint
or only a partial one, the position seems to be fairly clear.

In this context, it is pertinent to refer to an Allahabad case.° In that
case, the transfer was from X to Y, on the condition that Y shall have no
right to rtansfer the property except to the seller X and his heirs for a fixed
sum of money. This was held to be an absolute restraint, for all practical
purposes,?-® and was held to be void.

17.30. English case-—In the English case of In re Rosher,® a testator
devised an estate to his son in fee, subject to the proviso that if the son, his
heirs or devisee, or any person claiming through or under him or them, should
desire to sell the estate, or any part or parts theroof during the lifetime of the
testator’s wife, she (the testator’s wife) should be given the option to pur-
chase the estate at the price of £ 3000 for the whole, and at a proportionate
price for any part or parts thereof, The selling value of the estate at the
date of the will and at the time of the testator’s death was £ 15,000,

Tt was held that the proviso compelling the son to sell at such an under-
value amounted to an absolute restraint on alienation during the lifetime of
the widow, and was consequently void,

The same principle was applied by Eve, J. in In re Cockerill? In
that case, a testator by his will devised land subject to the proviso that
if within 20 years of his death the devisee should desire to sell the land,
he was to give the governors of a certain school the option of purchasing it
at the price of £ 300 an acre, The total area was about 22 acres, and

4 Compare also—
(a) Waman v. Ganpat, AIR, 1946 Bom, 10, 12;
(b) Rasagoundan, AIR. 1923 Mad, 577; 44 M.LJ. 513.
2% Nageshar Sahat v. Mata Prasad, ALR. 1925 P.C. 272, 280, affioning ALR.
1922 Oudh 236, 244 (case of compromise).
3 Mattonied Ruza v. Abbas Bandi, AJR. 1932 P.C. 158 affirming ALR. 1929
|:

4 Venkarachallum v, Kabalamurthi AJR. 1955 Mad. 350, 358.
5 Sanatan, ALR. 1946 Cal. 129,

6 Gayast Ram_y. Shahabuddin, ATR. 1935 All. 493, 494, 495 (Sulaiman, Cy.
and Bennet, J.)

7 To the s ame effect, Hari v. Jehomal, ALR. 1935 Sind 182, 184.

8 See also Dal Singh v. Khub Chand, AJ.R. 1921 All. 97 (Tudball & Lindsay, J¥.).
9 In re Rosher, (1884) 26 Ch. D. 801; 53 LJ. Ch. 722,

10 In re Cockerill; Mackaness v. Porchival, (1929) 2 Ch. 0. 131; 98 LJ. Ch, 281


118

the land was worth £ 670 an acre at the date of death. It was held that
the condition amounted to a restraint on alienation and was void for repug-
nancy.

It may be noted that these English cases were relied in the Sind
case’ for hoiding that a condition for pre-emption at an artificially small
price is void in a will.

17.31. Need for amendment—lt appears to us that the matter should
be dealt with specifically in section 10 by extending that section 10 parti-
tions and family arrangements.

In parti while in a partition deed, ii is permissible w create a
right of pre-emption. it should not be permissible to impose — stringent
conditions natrowing down the range of the price. and without any corres-
ponding obligation on the other party to sell bis or her share within the
family. Suck restrictions particuiarly partake of ih ure of an abso-
ulte restraint on future iransfer, and are thercfore st justice, equity
and good conscience. They are harsh and uncor able in so far as
they place an undue limit on the price. The freedom of transfer is
testricted in a manner which practically amounts to an absolute  prohi-
bition.

Even if a partition may not technically be called a transfer. the
principle underlying section 10 is so vital to the interests of society that by
express amendment it will be just and fair to extend it. This is not to say
that a pactition is to be construed as a transfer under all sections of the
Act. The ainendment will be framed so as to extend the provisions of
section 10 to partitions and family arrangements. So far as other sec-
tions of the Act are concerned the need for similar amendment should,
wherever necessary, be examined on the merits with ieference to the sub-
ject matter of each particular section.

17.32. Position in the Punjab—in this connection, it should be noted
that the principle of section 10 has been applied in the Punjab to trans-
fers, even though the Act has no application in the whole area of the
State.” This at east shows that the principle is one deserving of adop-
tion even where technically the section does not apply, since the mule
enacted in the section is one based on allowing the free circulation and
disposition of property. There is, therefore, sufficient justification—at
least prima facie—for applying the section to partitions.

17.33. Family settlements—As to family settlements? at present the
section does not apply, and the reasons for extending the section to such
transactions are the same as those in the case of partitions. It may be
aoted that in Hindu law even in the case of grants for maintenance, 2
xestraint on alienation was not encouraged‘ A family arrangement and
a compromise of dispute claims are not “transfers” and the section does
not in terms. apply to them. But the principle would be applicable
were the condition involves an absolute restraint on alienation.©

4 Hari न. Jathomal, A.1.R. 1935 Sind 182, 184 (case of Will).

2 ALR. 1924 Lak. 674.

1955 Travancore 231.

[2 38 Mad. 867.

5 (a) Rani Mewa Kuwar v. Rani Hulas Kuwar, 1 Ind. App. 157, 166 {(P.C.);
(b) Khunnilal v. Gobinda_ 33 Alt. 356 (P.C.);
(2) Kapura v. Madsodan Das, AYR. 1943 Lah. 168,

6 Pritami Chand v. Sundar Das, ALR. 1946 Pesh. 12.



119

17.34. Compromises—Where. however, the terms of a compromise
were embodied in a dectee, the legality of a convenant inseried tierein was
judged by the test of the rule in section 10. Wherc, therefore, in a parti-
tion-suit the parties entered into a compromise whereby the defendant
transferred a house to the plaintiff on the condition that though he should
be thenceforward its owner, he could not transfer it to another without
the defendant's consent, and the plaintiff afterwards sold the house with-
out his consent, it was held that the clause restraining alienation was re-
pugnant io the grant and was, therefore, void, though its terms had been
embodied in a decree.’

17.35. Recommendation «s to partitions and family arrangemenis—
Having regard to the various aspects discussed above, we are of the view
that section 10 should, by an express amendment, say, by adding a new
sub-section—be extended to partitions and family arrangements.

17.36. Exception for leases—Extention recommended to movable
Preperty—This disposes of the main paragraph of the section, and the
amendments relevant to that paragraph. There is, in the section, an
exception for leases, as (०0 which we have no cominznts. except that we
think that the principle of the exception should be the same as regards
hixe of movable property. We recommend that the exception should
be so extended.

17.37. Position as to married women—Recommendation—Next, we
come to the proviso. We have, in an earlier Repert,? referred to the
proviso te section 10 under which property can be transferred to a married
woman who not a Hindu or a Muslim, with a condition restraining
her absolutely from alienating during martiage.* We said in that Report
that “this proviso is in derogation of the general rule enacted by section
10 in its main paragraph, prohibiting the imposition cf an absolute restraint
on alienation. In our view, the proviso is not justified, in view of the
growing, social consciousness in the country. Christians ond  Parsis—
to whom the proviso primarily applies,—are not less cducated than cthers.
There is no such restriction for other communities. he proviso is
linked up with section 8, Married Women’s Property Act. In ove new
scheme, 15 deletion is unavoidable.”

Our recommendation in that Repert may be quoted—

“Having taken into account the social coaditions of the present
day and the considerations mentioned above, we are of the view that
in section 10 of the Transfer cf Property Act, the proviso relating to
restraint cn alienation should now be removed, and we recommend
accordingly.”

Ta conformity with that recommendation. we recommend again that
the proviso in section 10 relating to Married Women should be deleted.

Anotaer exception in favour of charities appears to have been over-
tooked in this section, but it is recognised* by section 18.

1 (a) Khiali Ram २. Raghunath, 3 A.LJ. 621;
(b) Gayadin v. Syed Mumtaz (1907) 10 OC. 136.
2 66th Report (Married Women’s Property Act), para 15.2.
3 Also see 66th Report, para 5.7.
4 As amended by Act 20 of 1929, formerly section 17 of the Act.

9—885Law /77



120

17.36. Ch ~~Recommendation-~There appears to be need for
expressly mentioning in this section an exception for charities. Tt is well~
recognised that where there is 4 gift in favour of a charity, a restraint can
be imposed upon the alienation cf the Property gifted. Not only can a
charity claini exemption: from the rule against perpetuities to the extent
allowed by iaw' but also it is permissible to yestrain alienation where the
object of the restraint is to preserve the Property for the charity and thus
to advance its charitable objects. Though not stated in so many words in
section 18, it is a well-recognised principle of law.’ In fact, wien section
18 exempis charities from the rule against accumulation of income, it gives
an indication of the policy of the law in this Teperd. For these reasons,
we recominend that a specific exception should be inserted in section 10,
saving the validity of absolute restraints where the beneficiary is a charity.*

17.37, ‘thal perpetuities and the restraint on alienation are connect-
ed with cach other in their spirit may be well substantiated by the foltow-
ing extract from Jarman on Wills.4

“The necessity of imposing some restraint on the power of post-
poning the acquis‘tion of the absolute interest in or dominion over
Property will be obvious if we consider, for a moment. what would
be the state of 2 community, in which a considerable proportion of
the Jand and capital was locked up. The free and active circulation
of property which is one of the springs as well as the consequences of
commerce, would be obstructed: the improvement of land checked,
its acquisition rendered difficult; the capital of a country withdrawn
from trade, and the incentives to exertion jn every branch of industry
diminished.”

17.38. Points for amendment summed up—tii is now time to sum up
the amendments that we have recommended in section 10-—~
(4) Addition of an Explanation regarding the meaning of “abso-
Tutely”.
(ii) Extension of the section to partition and family arrangements.
(iii) Extension of the proviso (leases) to hire of goods.
(iv) Addition of an exception for transfers in favour of charities,
(v) Deletion of the proviso relating (0 married women of certain
communities.
17.39. Revised draft—in the light of the above discussion, we re~
commend that section 10 should be revised as follows :

“tO. (1) Where property is transferred subject to a condition
or limitation absolutely restraining the transferee or any person claim-
ing under him from parting with or disposing of his interest in the

property, the condition or limitation is void except in the case of a
lease of immovable property or letting out of goods on hire where the

J Section 18.

2 (a) Mrs. Goudoin v. Venkatesan, LER.
tb} Babulat v. Ghansham. VLR. 44 AML.
ic) Nuizamuddin, UL.R. 19 Bom, 264,

3 This is not a draft.

4 Jarman on Wills, 4th Ed., pp. 250-251, cited by Gour.

30 Mad. 378, 379;
633;


121

condition is for the benefit of the lessor or the person letting out the

goods oii hire, or those claiming under him...........
(Proviso omitted)
Explanation. —

A condition or limitation which in the circumstances of the case
operates as a substantially absolute restraint shall, for the purposes of this

section, be consrtued as an absolute restraint.

“(2) Nothing in this section applies to any condition or limitation in
any such transfer of property as is mentioned’ in section 18.

(3) The provisions of this section apply as far as may be, to a parti~
tion or family arrangemeni, as they apply to a transfer and the expressions
“wansferred” and “transferee” shall be construed accordingly.

1 Section 18 applies to a lransfer हक Properly for 5 benefit a public in the
advancement of religion, WI commerce, health, safety 0 tl
object beneficial to mankind. 8० safety or any other


CHAPTER 18
SECTION 11
RESTRAINT OF ENJOYMENT

18.1. Introductory—We come to another topic dealing with another
type of restraint. This time, the law is concerned not with a condition or
a limitation imposing a restraint on alienation, but a restraint on enjoy-
Ment or a) pplication. The matter is dealt with in section 11. The section
Consists of two paragraphs. The first Paragraph contains the main pro-
vision, while the second Paragraph is really in the nature of an exception,
or at least in the nature of a saving.

Under the first paragraph, where, on 2 transfer of property, an inter-
est therein is created absolutely in favour of any person but the terms of
the transfer direct that such interest shail be applied or enjoyed by him in

a particular manner, he shall be entitled to receive and dispose of such in-
terest as if there were no such direction,

the beneficial enjoyment of another piece of such property, nothing in this
section shall be deemed to affect any right which the transferor may have
to enforce such direction or any remedy which he (the transferor) may have
in respect of a breach thereof. The second paragraph was modified by
the amendment of 1929 and is generally regarded as a codification of the
equitable doctrine of negative covenants, but it is wider than that.

In the case of a negative covenant,—for example, a covenant not
to build so as to obstruct a view or not to use a piece off land otherwise than
as a garden,—the court has Power to interfere and the covenant is enforce-
able. Of course, where specific relief is claimed, the grant thereof is sub-
ject to the general principles regulating the grant of specific relief.

18.2. First paragraph—The first paragraph raises no serious problems.
It is enough to point out that it applies only where an interest is created
absolutely on a transfer of Property. The general rule enacted is that a
direction for application or enjoyment is void.

18.3. Object of the grant—Where the main object of the grant is
clear, conditions clearly inconsistent with that object cannot be held to be
valid. In dealing with a question of this kind, there is sometimes a diffi-
culty. If one is to regard it as a question of construction, one asks one-
self the question what the Parties mean by first saying in the instrument that
ownership is to be transferred and then saying that what is transferred is
not ownership in the proper sense. In such a case every attempt to recon-
cile these statements should be made. But if no reconciliation is possible,
the courts give effect to the main object of the parties and the provisions
inconsistent therewith are treated as void. The court has to see whether

the clause so far detracts from the enjoyment conveyed that to uphold it
would be contrary to public policy.

18.4. Need to decide whether absolute interest created—It is, however,
a difficult question to decide whether the transfer in a particular


123

regarded as an interest “created absolutely” within the meaning of section
11. In the former case, the condition is void under section 11, but not
so in the latter case. The difficulty illustrated by two Calcutta cases. In a
case decided in 1954, a person conveyed certain property to another
person but reserved for himself a subordinate or tenancy right under the
transferee. The reservation was held to be valid. The transfer is to be
regarded not as a transfer of the entire interest of the owner, but only of
a portion—-actual possession of the property remaining with the transferor
on his undertaking to pay rent to the transferee, Reservation of a sub-
ordinate interest is in no way inconsistent with the proprietary interest.

In another Calcutta case,? property was transferred absolutely but a
clause in the sale-deed—the clause usually described in conveyancing prac-
tice as habendum—was so framed that the interest of the immediate trans-
force was, in substance, restricted to a life interest. The clause was as
joliows :---

“To have and to hold the said messuages tenements or dwelling
houses lands hereditaments and premises hereby granted or expressed
so to be free from all encumbrances upto and to the use of the said
purchaser Sreemati Kalidashi Devi to be held by her for the term of
her natural life as the estate of 4 Hindu widow and from and after her
death to her three sons Samaresh Chandra Mukherjee, Sikharesh
Chandra Mukherjee and Sunilesh Chandra Mukherjee to be held by
them as tenants in common during their respective _ lives
without power of anticipation and after their death unto and to the

use of their respective heirs absolutely and for ever.”

Tt was held that the transfer was of an absolute interest and no trans-
feror can, when executing an absolute transfer, restrict the nature of the
interest passing to the transferee in such a manner.

Jn the 198: mentioned case, unfortunately, the conveyancer seems to
have used a inconsistent language,—first describing the instrument as a
sale-deed and then inserting a restrictive clause in the terms quoted the
rule in section 11. This does not, however, mean that in every case such
a clause must be regarded as in operative. The first duty of the court,
when it is called upon to apply section 11, is to decide whether the trans-
fer creates an absolute interest. It is then only that occasion for applying
the operative portion in the section arises.

18.5. Gifts—In regard to gifts, a question would arise whether the
gift was conditional or absolute with a condition attached. If the gift is
conditional, the condition is valid; in the latter case, the condition is void.
Restrictions in an absolute grant that the grantee shall live at a particular
piace of that the property shall not pass to the grantee’s daughter, are
void. In an earlier case,4 where, by a trust-deed, it was provided that a
dwelling-house dedicated to the worship of the deities should not to alien-
ated for twenty years, the court gave effect to the prohibition.

1 Bejov Krishna v. Iswar Demodar, ALR. 1954 Cal. 400, 402 (R. P. Mookerjes
Benusengupta Mukherjee. JS.).

2 Manjusha Debi v. Sunil Chandra, ALR. 1972 Cal. HO (Amiya Kumar
Mookerii, 1.).

3 Saraju Bala v. Jyotirmoyee, MLR. 59 Cal. 142 (PC).

4 Ananth v. A, मे; Mackintosh, 8 BLR. 60.



124

This case was referred to and commented upon in another case’ in
which Wilson, J., observed :

“That case decided, I think, no more than this, that there was a
valid trust for the performance of certain worship in the dwelling-house
and as incidental to that trust. a restraint upon partition or alienation
during the period of the trust, and that a mortgagee with notice was
bound by it.”

18.6. Second paragraph—The second paragraph is primarily, though
not exclusively, meant for the convenient enjoyment of adjacent proper-
ties. The leading English case of Tulk v. Moxhay,? illustrates the principle.
Thus, a covenant between the vendor and the purchaser that the purchaser
and his assigns shall abstain from using the land in a particular way would
be enforceable in equity, not only against the immediate purchaser but
also against subsequent purchasers with notice*—and this is independently
of the question whether the covenant at-law runs with the land so as_ to
bind even purchasers without notice. We are not, at the moment, con-
cerned with the question how far subsequent purchasers should be bound
—a matter dealt with, to some extent, in section 40. For the present, it is
enough to state that the second paragraph takes out of the operation of the
first paragraph the case under consideration. In other words, the provi-
sion in the first paragraph that the transferee shall be entitled to receive and
dispose of such interest “as if there were no such directions” which, on its
text is absolute and unqualified, is modified to the extent mentioned in the
second paragraph, so far as the general validity of such a covenant is con-

18.7. First paragraph—It may be noted that the first paragraph of
the section broadly corresponds to section 138 of the Indian Succession

Act, 1925, quoted below :—

“138 Where a fund is bequeathed absolutely to or for the
benefit of any person but the will contains a direction that it shall be
applicd or enjoyed in a particular manner, the legatee shall be en-
titled to receive the fund as if the will had contained no such direc-
tion:

That section has an illustration as follows :

“A sum of money is bequeathed towards purchasing a country
residence for A, or to purchase a commission in the army for A, or
to place A in any business. A chooses to receive the legacy in money-
He is entitled to do so.”

18.8. Negative covenants—The second paragraph of section 11 is an
exposition of the equitable doctrine of negative vasements: such. for
instance, as a right to the access of light, which prevents the owner of
the servient tenement from building so as to obstruct it. Where there
is a negative convenant expressed or implied—as, for instance, a covenant
hot to build so as to obstruct a view. or not to use a piece of land other-
wise than as a garden,—the court interfers unless its hand is stayed on

1 Rajender v. Sham Chund, 1.L.R. 6 Cal. 106, 116, 117.
2 Tulk ४. Moxhay, (1848) 2 Phill 774.

3. Cf. section 40.

4 Section 138, Successoin Act.



the ground of greater inconvenience. Thus, a covenant between vendor
and purchaser, on the sale of land, that the purchaser and his assigns shalt
abstain from using the land in a particular way will be enforced in equity
against all subsequent purchasers with notice independently of the ques-
tion, whether it be one which runs with the land so as to be binding upon
subsequent purchasers at law.’ So, where the owner of a plot of land sold
a part of it to another and covenanted that the land “should never be
heteafter scid, but let for the common benefit of both parties and their
successors.” it was held that the agreement to keep the land
binding between the parties and their representatives. and w i
the person who might hold the vendee’s land, had tie right to enforce
the obligation against the person who might hold the vendor's jand’*

18.9. Thus, if the plaintiff sells one of his two neighbouring houses; a
stipulation in the sale-deed that the vendee should not construct windows
or doors to the southern side of the house but that there should be only
Zarcokas of 1%’ by 147 fer light is not void and is enforceable."

18.10. Second paragraph not confined to negative covenants—Of
course, the second paragraph of section 11 is not confined to negative
covenants. As between the transferor and the transferee. it would appear
that even affirmative covenants, if intended to secure the beneficial enjoy-
ment of a picce of immovable property are, in general, valid. Such
covenants arc distinguishable from easements which, if otherwise legally
created, woull bind the whole worfd irrespective of notice. The point
to be made :४ that as between the transferor and the transferee, even an
affirmative covenant would be saved by the section, whatever be the
position as regards enforcement by caliming specific relief and whatever be
the position as regards enforceability against subsequent transferees. The
grant of specific relief would, of course, depend on circumstances—in-
cluding even changed circumstance.

18.11. Importance of covenants—The emergence of multi-storeyed
buildings with what are popularly known as ownership flats usually neces-
sitates covenants binding the co-owners inter se. These covenanis are
absolutely necessary for the proper enjoyment of the property by each
owner of the flat according to the true purport of the scheme. Some
times the legislature intervenes by passing legislation relating to “condo-
tminium” titles.°-7

Tt has been recognised ever since the time of Coke that a man may
have an inueritance in an upper chamber, though the lower buildings and
soil be in another® But the situation is now of more frequent occur-
tence, thus increasing the importance of the subject.

1 Tulk v. Moxhay, (1848) 2 Phill. 774,

2 McLeun v. McKay, LR. $ PC. 327;
Dhanns Lat ५. Bansidhar, ALR. 1929 Pat. 349.

3 1962 Nag. L.I. (Notes) 40 cited in the Yearly Digest,

4 McLean v. McKay. UR. 5 P.C. 327, 337.

5 Condominium Act. 1970 (No. $4) (Newfourdlaind).

6 Act of respecting the co-ownership of immovables. Statutes of Quebec (1969),
7 Condominium Ordinance North-West Territories (1969).

8 Gate on Liteon. 48, See futher Surall कहा Propricory Li. v. B
Bros. Trading Co: Proprietary Lid, (1971) 45 ALAR. 50400 / ४ Bereer



126

18.12. Common instances—The most common instance of the rule
embedied in the second paragraph is to be found in these cases where a
person who owns a house and adjoining land and sells the land, enters
into a covenant with the purchaser that the latter shall keep a portion of
the land transferred vacant and free buildings, so as not to obstruct the air
aud Hight of tie vendor’s house. Such a covenant, being one intended for
the benefi enjoyment of the vender’s house, is enlorceable, as against
the purchuse

18-13. Arbiiary condition—A covenant which is not made for the
beneficial enjoyment of the transferor’s Property, but is merely an arbit-
rary condition imposed for its own sake. is not enforceable against the
transferee. and ie हटा May ignore it; e.g. a covenant to use the trans-
ferred land as 2 gurden, a covenant to build a second story, a covenant to
improve the transferred land. There ate affirmative covenants which
can be rarely enforced against the transferee,

law—In land. it was considered to be an impor=
of cquity that subject to certain conditions the burden of
id be igned. This is, of. course, confined to restrictive

18.14
tant contsi
covenants cou
covenants.

With the
Mants affecting the user of land has been developed. The cases range
themselves conveniently under one or other of (५० heads, but under
which the particular instance is to be classed is a matter of great difficulty,
depending as it does upon a consideration of al Ithe facts, Land may be
sold upon terms which make the restrictive stipulations a bargain between
the immediate contracting parties, who are at liberty to vary the terms
of the contract between them? and this they may do cither in cxpress
terms or by waiver or acquiscence will generally be limited in eficct to
the particular breach.’ And benefit of covenants of ihis description
may be made to run with the land at law and in equity,s altnough the
burden can only be made to run with the land sold in equity.5 On the
other hand. there may be what is known as a building scheme which con-
fers a right upon purchasers of lots to sue purchasers of other lots for
failure of observe restrictive stipulations relative to the use of land.° And
in this case the common vendor cannot dispense with the conditions or
refuse to observe them.?

rowth of population, the law relating to restrictive cove-

ge

18.15. History of the section—It may be noted that while affirmative
covenants, that is te say, covenants to compel the enjoyment in a parti-
cular manner. arc not, in general, enforceable against subsequent irans-

1 See Tulk v. Moxhav, (1848) 2 Phill. 774; Me-Lean v. McKay, LR. 5 PC. 327.
2 Rupala v. Cowlishaw, 11 Ch. D, 866;
Osborne ५. Bradley, (1903) 2 Ch. 446.
2 Sayers v. Collyer, 28 Ch. 0. 103:
Knight ५४. Simmonas, (1896) 2 Ch. 294.
3 Rogers ४. Hosegood, (1900) 2 Ch. 388.
% Haywood v. Burnswick Permanent Benefit Building Soc. 8 Q.B.D., 493,
6 Rowell v. Satchel, (1903) 2 Ch. 212,
% Spicer v. Martin, 14 App. Cas. 12;
In re Birmingham and District Land Co. y. Aliday, (1893) 1 Ch. 342,



127

ferees, they are still enforceable between the transferee and the transferor.
Bsicre 1929, ६ oad ae 203 41 roed as fellows :--

“Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the right to
Testtam, tor the Laciiciai cnjoyment of one piece of immovable
property, the enjoyment of another piece of such property, or to com-
pel the enjoyment thereof in a particular manner.”*

The amendment of 1929, although it mad: a verbat change in this
paragraph. did not restrict its scope and was not, in fact, intended to res-
trict Its scope. A chane> of substance was intended only in section 40, that
is to say? as regards enic :ceabitity against subsequen: transferees. —

The first paragraph of section 40, before its amendment in 1929, also
contained the words “comp-i its enjoyment”-—words which were wide
enough to apply to affirmative covenants. After the amendment which
omitfed these words, an aflirmative covenant cannot be enforced against a
purchaser from a transferee and only a negative covenant can be enferced,
provided that the other conditions in section 40 are satisficd.

18.16, Allahabad case—An Allahabad case*, though decided under the
pre-amendment section, supplies factual material which can be used in
illustration of the amendment. In that case, the purchaser entered into a
covenant to pull down. when required by the vendor, rooms for 2 passage
between the house of the vendor and the house purchased by the purchaser.
This covenant was held io be enforceable against the purchaser under sec-
tion 11, second paragraph, and against the transferee from the purchaser
under section 40. as it stood then. After the amendment of 1929. 23 Mulla
has pointed out’, the covenant can still be enforced against. thé inimediate
purchaser—no change is made by the amendment in section 11—but, "शाह
an affirmative covenant, it cannot be enforced against a purchaser from the
vendee.

18.17. Exceptions to the rule against restrictive enjoyment--There
are several exceptions to the general rule that conditions restrictive of the
enjoyment of the absolute interest are void. Covenants or other oblivations
annexed to the ownership of property may control the enjoyment of pro-
perty. They seem to fall under ‘the following principal categories,
mamely :--

(i) Easements;

(ii) Covenants running with the land;

(iii) Restrictive covenants,

(iv) Personal covenants;

(५) Contractual obligations annexed to the ownership of property.

18.18. Brief discussion—A brief discussion of each category follows :

(i) Where property is subject to an easement. the casement is enforce-
‘able against the purchaser. Creation cf easements and the general subject
pf easements are outside the province of the Transfer of Property Act,

(ii) Certain covenants run with the land.

1 Molla (1 + pag
2 Mulla (1973), p. 102.

3 Nandgopal y. Batuck Prasad, ALR. 1932 All. 778.
4 Mulla (1973), page 105.


128

The definition of this concept in England’, is as follows :-—

“A covenant runs with the land when the benetit or Sumter
of it, whether at iaw or in equity. passes to the successor:
of the covenantee or the covenantor. as the case may b2.

between law a

Although, in India
this provision is helpi पृ concep! of covenants runni
with the land. Many covenants of the lessee run with the land. ‘then
there are covenants for title created by statute in the case of sale cf land and
running with the fand in }

Gii) A restriclive cover:
property to certain specified rs:
enjoy the property in a specified
uncovered with building:
well on the fand for the 5
nantee is an example of the

restrains the covenantor fro
An affirmative coverant co
marner. A covenant to keep the land
rple of the forme covenant 10 dig
2 house of the cove-

putting his
him to

Ordinarily speaking, th: "गए 9 of an affirmative covenant does fot
run with the fand. In coniras.. tne burden of a restrictive covenant is trans-
ferred to the subsequent transferees, subject to certain requirements. Deve-
lopments in England in this field are represented by three leading cases,
namely :

(a) Tulk vy. Moxhay’,
(0) Austerberry v. Oldman Corporations:
(०) ‘Haywood’ case.

The pesition in equity under the rule in Tulk v. Moxhay, as moditied
and interpreted by later decisions. was thus stated by Maitland®

“Any one coming to the Jand with notice actual or construc-
tive of a covenant entered into by some previous owner of the
land restraining the use to be made of the land, will be prohibited
from doing anything in breach of that covenant.”

_ It is now well settled that affirmative covenants are not enforceable
against the transferees of the land, even where they have notice. But they
are binding on the covenators.*

.. __ (iv) Personal covenants cannot be enforced against transferees. This
is so even if they have notice.* However, this does not affect their validity
as between the immediate parties.

(२४) Contractual obligations annexed to ownership are illustrated by
an obligation undertaken under a contract of safe.

18.19. Covenants for supply of goods—Covenants in leases for the
sole supply of goods sold on the lease premises have often come up before

1 Section 80. Law of Property Act. 1925. ५
2 Section 5502) of the Act. t
3 Tulk v, Moxhay, (1848) 41 E.R. 1143.

4 Austerbarry v. Oldham Corporation. (1885) 28 29 Chancery Division 750.
5 Haywood v. Burnswick Permanent Building Society, (1881) 8 Q.B.D. 403.

6 Maitland, Equity (2nd Ed.). page 163.

7 Wolverhampton Corp. v. Emmons, (1901) 1 K.B. 151.

8 London Country Council ९. Allen, (1974) 3 K.B. 642,


129

Eaglish courts. In an English case decided in 1969,! Lord Denning M. R.
discussed the aspect of restraint of trade. If a person out of possession is
let into pessession by an Oil company on the terms that he has to tie him-
self to that ccmpany—in the sense that he has to take all his seppties from
that company——such a tie was described as good by Lord Denning. On
the other |, if an owner in possession ties himself for more than 5 years
to take oil supplies from the company, that is ar unreasonzbls restraint of
trade and is invalid.

The relationship between the restraint of trade doctrine ard the cove-
nant also cume up before a court in New South Wales, Austalia® An
action between covenantee and covenantor involved a covenant executed
by a purchaser of land not to use the property for the sale oi wine products
sold or produced under the name “Dalwood”. The covenant was mot cap-
able of benefitting the land of the covenantor, though the land was retained
by him. {i was held that only covenants in leases and covenants which
benefited ned land were excluded from the operation cf the doctrine
of restra trade,

18.20. Incompleteness-——There appears to be a certain amount of in-
completeness in the second paragraph of section 1]. Before the amend-
ment of 1929. it was clear that both the right to. restrain the enjoyment
and the right to compel the enjoyment in a particular manner were saved.
This does not appear very clearly in the section after its amendment. We
have gone through the Statement of Objects and Reasons‘ and the Report
of the Select Committce, relating to the amendment of 1929, but, with res-
pect, it does not give any adequate reasons why the benefit of this clarifica-
tion was sovght to be sacrificed.

Whatever difficulties might have been felt in section 10, there was
hardly any necessity to dispense with those words in the second paragraph
of section 11, which at least made it clear that both affirmative and nega-
tive covenants were intended to be covered. Having regard to the fact that
conveyancing in India is not in a very advanced stage of perfection and also
having regard to the fact that there is a likelihood that a controversy,—if
it has not arisen so far—might arise by reason of the terseness of the
language, it appears to be desirable to make it clear that an affirmative
covenant is not invalid as between a transferor and transferee under section
11, second paragraph. In fact, this was the object of the Select Committee,
namely, to make it clear that “although an affirmative covenant is not, by
itself, invalid as between a transferor or a transferee. negative or restrictive
covenants only can be specifically enforced against other parties”. In so
far as section 40 is concerned, the amendment of 1929, no doubt, follows
the trend of later English cases.5 But in so far as the amendment, as a
matter of language, makes it less clear than before that section 11. second

atagraph, was intended to cover both the types of covenants, it was not,
in our opinion, properly executed. It is not without some effort that one
is able to spell out rom the paragraph, as amended, that both the types of
covenants are covered. Readers might not immediately perceive the diffe-
renee between the phraseology of section 11 and section 40. Even if they

1 Cleveland Petroleam v. Dartatones, (1969) 1 AU. E.R. 211.

2 McGuigan Investment Proprietary Limited v. Dalwood, Wineyard Propriet
Tid, (1970) 1 New Southwates Reports 686. inenard BrOpngery

3 See “History of the section”, supra.

4 Para 18.21, infra,

5 Haywood ९. Burnswick Building Society, 8 Q.B.D. 403.



130

perceive the difference, they might not be readily able to spell out the effort
of that difference. In any case, there appears to be hardly any harm if the
position is made specific on the point discussed above. .

18.21. Statement of Objects and Reasons—In the Statement of Objects
and Reasons to the Amendment Bill it was stated—

“Sections 11 and 40 of the Act refer to affirmative and negative cove-
nants in a transfer, Section 11 refers to rights as between a transferor and
transferee, while section 40 relates to the rights of third parsies against
transferees. The words ‘to compel is enjoyment’, used in the second para-
graph of section 11 and in the first paragraph of section 40, indicare that
affmative covenants for the beneficial enjoyment of one piece cf the pro-
perty of which the other piece has been transferred cami in all coses be en-
forced. The paragraph seems to have been based on the observations ot
Lord Cottonham in 2 Ph. 774, a case decided in 1848. But in later Eng-
lish decisions such as 8 Y.B.D. 403, the observations in that case were not
approved, and it is now settled that except in certain special cases afirma-
tive covenants cannot be specifically enforced. Thus, in (1885) 29 Ch. D.
750, a covenant to spend money on the land was held as not binding on
the purchaser of the land, although he had notice of the sam2, Indian
Courts have followed the same principle.’ We propose that the sccond
paragraph of section 11 and the first paragraph of section 40 could be
amended as to make it clear that, although an affirmative covenants is not,
by itself, invalid as between a transferor and transferee (section 11
tive or restrictive covenants only can be specifically enforced
thir] person {section 40) .77

_ The amendment unfortunately does not improve the second paragraph
in point of precision. One cannot help observing that it makes it less pre-
cise than before.

18.22. Need for change—Having regard to what is stated above. we
are of the view that section 11, second paragraph, should be amplified so

as to make it clear that it applies to affirmative as well as to negative cove-
nants.

18.23. Charity—Further, there should be an exception for charities,
as in section 10, as proposed to be amended.?

18.24. Re-draft of section 11—In the light of the above discussion,
we recommend that section tt, should be revised on the following lines :

Revised section 11

(1) Where, on a transfer of property, an interest there tn 5 सर्प
absolutely in favour of any person but the terms of the transfer direct that
such interest shall be applied or enjoyed by him in a particular manner, he
shall be entitled to receive and dispose of such interest as if there were no
such direction.

(2) Where any such direction has been made in respect of one piece
of immovable property for the purpose. of securing the beneficial enjoyment

1 27 Bom. LR. 73: 1925 Bom, 183.
2 Statement of Objects and Reasons.
% See discussion as to section 10 supra.



131

of another piece of such property, nothing in this section shall be deemed
to affect any right which, the transferor may have to enforce such ditection
or any remedy which he may have in respect of a breach thereof; whether
such direction restrains the enjoyment of the first mentioned property ina
Particular manner or compels the enjoyment thereof in a particular
manner.

[Also add Exception for charity,” as in amended section 10].

T Para 1739, supras _/_+7०9७क ७. ककसस्‍मस्‍-+ऊ....0ह800हहक॥ह॥्
1 Para 17,39, supra.


CHAPTER 19

CONDITION MAKING INTERST DETERMINABLE ON
INSOLVENCY OR ATTEMPTED ALIENATION
SecTION 12

19.1. Sectiva 12, first paregraph—The power of th> trassteror io m=
pose conditions while making a wansfer of _ property 5 re-ricted by a
further provision contained in section 12 which invalidates iwo kinds of
conditions or linitations—(i) a condition or limitation which any
interest to cease on the person becoming insolvent; (ii) a condition or limi-
tation making any interest to cease on a person endeavour: nsfer
or dispose of the same. The reasons for invalidating the co each
case may be staied. In the first case, the consideration is not 2 purely egal
one, and the aspect of public policy involved is of greater imperiance than
in the second case.

The law does not consider it proper that while 2 person should, in
other respects, enjoy an interest in an unrestricted manner, that interest
should cease as soon as he becomes insolvent. Such a provision, if recog-
nised, would practically defeat the law relating to insolvency. ii it were
to be permitted in an unqualified form, a time would come when no pro-
perty would ever become available on insolvency to the creditors, because
every person would get such a condition inserted in a transfer. Tt may act
help the transferee directly, but at least it would defeat his potential cre-
ditors on insolvency.

19.2. Section 12, first paragraph—Interest terminuble on alienation—
The second condition sought to be invalidated by section 12, pertains to
alienation. An attempt to transfer or dispose of an interest reserved or
given to a person should not be made a ground for termination of the inte-
rest, the rationale here being that such a condition would be repugnant to
the nature of the interest. The law favours the circulation of property and
jf an interest is once transferred, the transferee should further have power
to transfer it. In any case, the transferor is not allowed to create, by pri-
vate contract, a non-transferable interest and thus add to the list of things
which cannot be transferred."

19.3. Section 12 compared with section 10—Since the subject of res-
traints on alienation has also figured in section 10, it would be useful to
point out that section 12, first paragraph, is in some respects wider than
section 10. Section 10 applies only to restraints which are absolute—as
the text goes,—or restraints which are substantially absolute—as inter-
preted by judicial decisions. In section 12, however, a partial restraints
also seems to be covered. It may also be stated that section 10 deals with
a condition against alienation in the abstract, while section 12 is confined to
conditions or limitations which expressly provide for cesser of an interest
on an endeavour to transfer or dispose of the same.

19.4. Section 12, first paragraph and English law—St may be noted
that section 12 enunciates an exception to the general rule enacted in sec-
tions 31 and 32, which provide that an interest “may be created” with the

“TH Section 6... as



133

condition super-added that it shall cease to exist on the हु happening of an
uncertain event. Out of the range of Permissible conditions, section 12,
first paragraph, takes out two kinds of conditions.

19.5. English law in regard to insolvency—It is to be noted that in
regard to insolvency, the section departs slightiy from the English rule, A
provision terminating the interest on bankruptcy is a common forfeiture
clause in English conveyances. But ८ man <annot settle propexty on him-
self, determinable on bankruptcy. A settlement so made is void, it being
fraudulent for a man so to deal with his pre erty as to disappoint the just
claims of his creditors.**.

19.6, Succession Act—The law is also different under the Indian Suc-
cession Act. Section 120 of that Act recognises the legality of a condition
terminating an interest on insolvency. If “an estate is bequeathed to A,

i shell take advantage of the Act for the relief of insolvent debtors,
and after that to B, B’s interest in the bequest is decluared to be contingent
until A takes advantage of such a law”. So says one of the illustrations of
section 120,

19.7. Problem arising on second paragraph—So much as regards the
first paragraph of section 11. We shail now deal with an important ques-
tion that is raised by the second Paragraph of the section. Operating as an
exception to the first paragraph, the second Paragraph saves conditions in
a lease which are inserted “for the benefit of the lessor or those claiming
under him”. It is well-known that conditions are often inserted in leases,
prohibiting or restricting the lessee from assigning the lease or subletting
the leased premises. While in the absence of such a condition, the assign-
ment or sub-lease would be permissible under the Act®, that position is
expressly made subject to a contrary provision in the lease. Now, when
such a condition is expressly inserted in a lease, the question arises whether
it is to be construed as one intended for “the benefit of the lessor” within
the meaning of the second paragraph of section 12. At first sight, it would
appear that? the answer should be in the affirmative and that there can
hardly be any doubt on the subject.

It would ap pear, however, that a Calcutta case throws some doubt on
the subject.* ough the observations in that case were, strictly speaking,
obiter, they have, with great Tespect, created some a पक आह created some confusion, ©

1 Brandon v. Robinson, 18 Ves. 429;
Nation v..Mav, 3 Ch. 0. 148, 152;
In te Machu, 21 Ch. D. 838;
In ve Bedasons’ Trusts, 28 Ch. D. 523;
Metcalfe y. Metcalfe, 43 Ch. D. 633, C.A. (1891) 1 Ch. 1, distinguishing
White v, Chitty, LR.’ 1 Eq. 372: Llyod v. Llyod, LR. 2 Eq. 722.
2 Compare the Presidency Towns Tnsolvency Act (3 of 1909), section 9, cl;
(0); Provincial Insolvency Act (5 of 1920), section 6, clause ib), 1056
3 Hormusji v. Dadabhoy (1895) L.L.R. 20 Bom. 310.
(Case decided on 300 September, 1895. after the act had been extewded to
the Bombay Presidency on Ist January, 1893).
4 Section 120, Indian Succession Act. 1925, Idustration (vii); Section 107 of the
Indian Succession Act (10 of 1865), paragraph LI].
5 Section 108(j).
6 Section 108, opening lines,
7 See para 19.29 (infra),
8 Nilmadhab v. Naruttam, LL.R. 17 Cal. 627 (See infra),



134

19.8. Effect of covenant on validity of assigument—Even if the point
just now mentioned is kept aside, there yet remains to be considered an-
other point also arising out of tie second paragraph on the same subject. If
such covenants against assignment of a lease are violated, and an assign-
ment or a sub-lease is made in violation thereof, is the assignment or sul
lease ineffective? In other words, assuming that a condition prohibit
an assignment or sub-lease is one for the benefit of the lessor and therefore
not invalidated by section 12, does it so operate as to render the assignment
or sub-lease void? One would have thought, that to this question also, the
answer should be in the affirmative. But it would appear from the reported
decisions, to be discussed presently, that while one view on the subject is
that the assignment is void, another view would merely recognise a right
to damages in favour of the lessor for breach of the covenant, at the same
time treating the assignment 2s vatid notwithstanding that it is in violation
of an express covenant.

19.9. Aspect of power of re-entry—-At this stage, it is also necessary
to refer to the law relating to forfeiture of leases. Under the Act,’ the
mere fact that the lessee commits breach of a covenant of the lease does
not, in general, suffice to confer a right on the fessor to forfeit the lease.
ic is further required in general that the covenant should state that the
lessor has a power to re-enter the premises for breach, This restriction
seems to have been inserted in view of the hardship that may be caused to
the lessee by a forfeiture. This general rule applies to covenants against
assigninents, as well as to other covenants.

The scope of this rule is restricted to cases where the lessor proposes
to forfeit the tease. It has, in the scheme of the Act, no express relevance
to—(i) the question whether the covenant in valid as between’ the lessor
and the lessee, or (ii) whether the covenant is to be regarded as for the
benefit of the lessor, or (iii) whether action taken in breach of the cove-,
nant would be legally recognised and what, if any, would be the legal 70085
dies for the breach—leaving aside forfeiture, for which, as already stated,
the covenant must contain an express power of re-entry.

Now, what has happened is that the requirement that there should be
a power of re-entry, which, according to the scheme of the Act, is relevant
only in the context ofa claim to forfeit the lease®, has somehow been con-
sidered to be relevant also for deciding the other queries listed in the
immediately preceding discussion. The view is sometimes taken-—expressly
or impliedly. that where there is no power of re-entry, then an assignment in
breach of a covenant to assion is valid, qua asignment, though the lessor can
sue the lessee for damages, This view has been taken in a later Calcutta case’,
holding that an assignment in breach of such a covenant is nevertheless
valid. There is no claborate discussion of the various aspects.

19.10. Three shades of view-—Tius, case law reveals three shades of
opinion—-
(i) the covenant is void;

1 Section 111 (5). Para 19.13 infra,
2 Para 199 supra.
3 Basarat All Khan ¥. Manirullaa, LLR. 26 Cal. 745, 746,


135

(ii) the covenant is valid, but the assignment is also valid even
though in breach of the covenant;

Gili} the assignment is void.

19.11. Later Calcutta case—The extreme view that the covenant is
void, which was taken in the earlier Calcutta case,* was not approved by the
same High Court in a judgment of a Division Bench consisting of Jenkins
C.J. and Mokherjee 1.2 That Bench at least held that the covenant was valid,
though it did not regard it as nullifying the assignment.

19.12. Madras view—In a Madras case,2_ Bhashyam Ayyangar, J.,
dealing with the question of forfeiture, expressed himself strongly against
the Calcutta view in these words—Moore J. concurred with him :

“The stipulation that the lessee shall have no right to transfer his
interest is clearly one intended for the benefit of the lessor and it would
i: ¢.. o:2le to hold, following the dictum in Nil Madhab Sikdar v.

larattam Sikdar* that the condition against alienation cannot be said
to be for the benefit of the lessor and hence it is void under the provi-
sions of section 10 of Act IV of 1882. The stipulation against aliena-
tion is not void “but valid (Vyankatrayya v. Shivrambhat)® and if the
plaintiffs had sued for an injunction to restrain the defendants’ assigner
from making the assignment or sued for damages for breach of the
stipulation, they would have been entitled to the remedy sought for (Jivan-
das Keshavji y. Framji Nanabhai*, Tamaya v. Timana Ganjaya,7. Mc-
Eacharan y. Colton,* and Foa on ‘Landlord and Tenant’ 2nd edition, page
211). It may also be that a transfer by the lessee, absolutely or by
way of mortgage or sub-lease, in breach of the covenant not to alienate,
will be void as against the lessor and he may realise arrears of rent due
by the lessee. by attaching and selling his interest in the lease as effectu-
ally as if there had been no transfer by the lessee and the transfer will
also be inoperative to secure to the transferee, as avainst the lessor, the
benefit of the lessor’s contract under section 108(c) of the Transfer of
Property Act.”

19.13. Other provisions in the Act--Under section 111 (2), so far as is
material, a lease of immovable property determines by forfeiture, that is to say,
in case the lessee breaks an express condition which provides that on breach
thereof a lesser may re-enter and the lessor or his transferee gives notice in
writing to the lessee of his intention to determine the lease.

Under section 108(j). so far as is material, in the absence of a contract
or 1002 usage to the contrary, the lessee may transfer absolutely or by way
of mortgage or sub-lease the whole or any part of his interest in the property

1 Nilmadhab v. Narattam, (1890) LLR. 17 Cal. 826,

2 Basarat Ali Khan v. Manirulla (1909) IL.R. 36 Cal. 745, 746, followed in
S. K, Roy Choudhury ४. A, L. Khan. (1960) 65 Cat. W. N- 1050, 1052.

3 Parameshri v. Vittappa, (1903) I.L.R. 26 Mad. 157, 161 (Bhashyam Ayyangar
& Moore, JJ.).

4 Nil Madhav Sikdar v. Narattam Sikdar 1.L.R. 17 Cal. 827.

5 Vyankatraya v. Shivrambhat, 1.L.R. 7 Bom. 256.

6 Jivandas Keshavii v. Framji Nanabhai, 7 Bom. H.C.R. (A.C.T.) 69.

7 Tamava v. Tienana Ganjaya ¥..R. 7 Bom, 262. 265.

है McEacharn y, Colton, (1902) A.C. 104 (P.C.).

10—885Law/77



136

and any transferee of such interest or part may again transfer it. The lessee
shall not, by reason of such transfer, cease to be subject to any of the liabilities
attaching to the lease.

19.14. Confusion between right of forfeiture and validity of assignment
—The cusc law discussed above 51०७५ tie uncertainty. it wouid seem tnat the
difficulty has arisen because a confusion has been made between the lessor’s
right to forfeit under section 111(g),—for which the Act requires an express
provision for re-entry—and the effect of the breach of the prohibition against
assignment on the validity of assignment—a matter on which section 111 has
no relevance. The point to be determined is the meaning of the words “for
the benefit of the lesser” in sections 10 and 12.

19.15. Calcutta case—The earlier Calcutta case is often cited in sup-
port of the narrow construction of “for the benefit”. But what that case decid-
ed was that the compulsory sale of the lessee’s interest in execution of a decree
obtained against the lessee was valid. The observation that since there was
no right of re-entry, the condition against alienation was not for “the benefit
of the lessor”, was obiter. From other points of view also, this observation
was obiter, because the lessor did not sue to declare the assignment as void,
but sued for a declaration that the lease was forfeited. That relief he obvi-
ously could not claim as there was no power of re-entry.

19.16. Position under case law in India—The position then seems to be
that while (i) the earlier Calcutta view would invalidate the very covenant,
(ii) the later Calcutta view would recognise it to the extent of permitting a
grant of damages, and (iii) observations in the Madras judgment would not
only permit the grant of damages, but also validate the covenant and nullify
the assignment—though, of course, forfeiture cannot be ordered in the absence
of a provision conferring a right of re-entry.?

19.17, Anomaly caused by Calcutta view—Apart from the position under
case law, the question should be examined on the score of principle. What-
ever be the reasons in equity for denying the right to forfeit a tenancy in the
absence of an express clause conferring a power of re-entry, is there suffi-
cient justification or juristic reason for recognising the assignment as valid,
where there is a valid covenant against it? The anomaly of taking such a
view could be illustrated by taking a hypothetical case. A lessor who is a
vegetarian creates a lease in favour of A, who is also a vegetarian;
the lessor inserts a covenant that the lessee shall not assign
the lease to a non-vegetarian. There is no express provision for re-entry.
The lessee attempts to assign the lease to a non-vegetarian. Is it adequate
justice if the lessor is merely given the right to compensation for the loss
caused ? In its very nature, such a loss cannot be adeauately estimated in
terms of money. It is true that before the assionment the lessor could have
sued for.an injunction, but what is to happen if the assignment has already
been executed by the lessee? To take the position that such an assignment
is valid notwithstanding the covenant and that the lessor can sue only for
damaves—even if such a position is supported hy a few cases—is not really
doing substantial justice. Substantial justice. it is urged. would he better
achieved if the lessor has a right to get the assienment set aside —without. of
course, forfeiting the lease. The assignee will not, under such a provision,

1 Nil Madhav v, Naratiam, (1890) LLR. 17 Cal. 827.
2 Section 111 (9).



137

get the right to occupy the premises, It may be that the lessee is not intezested

व्यण which gave birth fo te frowns og against forfeiture, does not nese
juity which gave birth to ‘isions agains' re, Sead

Sate the further position that ignment must also be recognised.

19.18. English law—It is usually stated in the commentarios on the Act
that in English law, in the absence of an express covenant providing for re-
entry, the assignment is valid. This does not, however, appear to be a
totally accurate statement of the position. The case of Commissioners of Works
v. HulP is one of the cases cited in support of the proposition. But actually
in that case the clause prohibiting assignment provided for forfeiture and
proceedings of the lessor against the assignee for ejectment were successful.
The case of Williams vy. Erle? was one relating 10 the question of damages.
Other cases also do not directly relate to the validity of the assignment.

19.19, The assumption that in English taw in the absence of a power of
re-entry an assignment is valid seems to be debatable. Of course, a lease
may contain an express proviso for re-entry or forfeiture by the landlord
00 specified events. Such a proviso leaves it optional to the landlord whet-
her he will exercise his right of determining the lease upon a cause of
forfeiture arising. The lease is not void but voidable, and only the landlord
can avoid 18,

19.20. Aspect of condition—But English law also recognises the rule
that the lease may be made determinable without an express proviso for re-
entry, if the event specified is a “condition” subject to which the term was
created‘ and the event happens.

In this context English law makes a distinction of much the same nature
found in the law relating to sale of goods between condition and warranty,
If the clause which is put forward constitutes only an “agreement” on the
part of the lessee to do or not to do a specific act, and if the clause is not
tantamount to a “condition”, the landlord cannot re-enter for breach of it
except under an express proviso for re-entry. It will thus be obvious that
even in the absence of a proviso for re-entry under English law, a stipulation
in a lease may amount to a condition and in that case the lesser is even allow-
ed to terminate the lease. Now, if the lessor is competent to terminate,
then it follows that in the case of a covenant against assignment being broken,
the covenant (if construed as a condition) gives the lessor the fel ht to nullify
the assignment. If he has got the Tight to forfeit the lease, it follows that he
is competent not to recognise the assignment. In fact, the true position in
English law seems to be “that since forfeiture is a matter stricti juris, an assign-
iment which is void does not give cause for forfeiture ipso facto’ Of course,
where a covenant against assignment or underletting with a proviso for re-
entry on breach of covenant is broken, the lessor can either re-enter for the
forfeiture or sue for damages for the breach. The option is his, subject to
the provisions as to relief against forfeiture. It is also true that an sO सम forfeiture. It is also true that an assignee

1 Commissioners of Works v. Hull, (1922) 1 King’s Bench 205; (1921) AT ER.
reprint $08; 3 Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 23, page 665.

2 Williams v. Erle, (1868).

3 Halsbury, 3rd Edition, Vol. 23 pa; 665-666, para 1389; Jardino v. 4, a
General for Newfoundland, ( 1999) AC 275 Pe) and ‘other cases. १४४

4 Halsbury, 3rd Edition, Vol. 23, page 666, para 1390.

5 Doed Lod ४. Powell, (1826) 5 8. & 2, 308, 313 Halsbury, 3rd Ed., Vol. 23,
Page 630, footnote (1).


138

in possession must comply with the stipulations of the lease notwithstanding.
the want of the landlord’s consent requisition under the clause against
assignment.

19.21. Injunction—But the very fact that the breach of a covenant
against assigament or underletting may be restrained by injunction? shows
the attitude of the law. It has been held ‘that the law will restrain the
breach of a covenant not to assign without the landlord’s consent. This is
in contrast with the refusal of the law to grant specific performance in some
cases such as breach of a covenant to repair or of a covenant to build, the
assumption being that in such cases damages would be, in general, an ade~
quate remedy. In short, the whole irend of the judicial attitude in England
would seem to be in the direction that there is no categorical rule that every
assignment in breach of a prohibition in nevertheless valid.

19.22. Equity—The jurisdiction of equity by way of grant of injunc-
tions, to restrain the alienation of property (in the largest sense of the word)
is certainly exercised where the grant of the injunction is indispensable to
secure the enjoyment of a specific property or to preserve the title to such
property or to prevent frauds and irremediable injustice. It is on the same
principle that courts of equility refuse to grant a relief against forfeiture for
the breach of a covenant not to assign a lease without the landlord’s con-
sent, because from such breaches it is not possible to make a clear estimate
of damages.+

19.23. Equity’s attitude towards forfeiture—It is to be noted that the
principle which governs the court in granting relief against the forfeiture of
Tease is that the court will grant relief only where the court can give compen-
sation in lieu of the forfeiture. Therefore, in general, equity granted relief
only when the forfeiture clause in substance was merely a security for the
payment of a monetary sum. Save in very exceptional circumstances, no
Telief was granted against forfeiture for breach of a covenant not to underlet
without consent.’

No doubt, forfeiture in England, as in India, is now governed by
statutory provisions,® but the point to be made is that equity did take into
account the aspect of compensability in exercising jurisdiction concerned with
the consequences of an assignment of leases.

19.24. Story’s view—The following exposition of the ition by
Story is instructive? : Pos ¥

“1324. Be this as it may, it is clearly established, that courts
of equity will not interfere, in cases of forfeiture for the breach of
covenants and conditions, where there cannot be any just compensa-
tion decreed for the breach. Thus, for example, in the case of a
forfeiture for the breach of a covenant, not to assign a 1९88९ without

1 McBacharn v. Colton, (1902) A.C. 104 (P.C.).

2 McBacharn ९. Colton, (1902) A.C. 104 (P.C.).

3 Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919), page 369, para 305.

4 Barrow v. Isacs & Sons. (1891) 1 0.8. 417.

5 Barrow ४, Isacs & Sons. (1891) 1 0.8. 417.

6 Section 146, Law of Property Act, 1925.

7 Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919), para 1324, 1324a, 1324b.



139

licence, or to keep leasehold premises insured, or to renew a lease
within a given, time no relief could until lately have been had; for
they admit of no just compensation or clear estimate of damages.’

“1324a. The power of courts of equity to relieve lessees from
forfeiture for breaches of covenants in leases was enlarged by the
22 & 23 Vict. ०.३5, 5.4, which gives the courts power (o celieve
against forfeiture for breach of a covenant to insure, where no loss
or damage has happened, and the breach has been committed through
accident or mistake, and an insurance has been duly effected at
time of application. But this relief can only be given once, nor can
it be given at all where a forfeiture shall have been already waived out
of court in favour of the person seeking the relief.

__ “1324b, Further, by the Conveyancing Act, 1881, s. 14, the
rights of re-entry or forfeiture for breaches of covenant are limited.
For it is provided by that Act that previously to enforcing these rights
by action or otherwise, the lessor must serve on the lessee a notice
specifying the particular breach complained of, and if the breach is
capable of remedy, requiring the lessee to remedy the breach, and, in
any case, requiring the lessee to make compensation in money. If the
lessee either remedies the breach, or makes compensation in money,
no right of re-entry or forfeiture will arise. Further, if the lesser pro-
ceeds to enforce his right of re-entry or forfeiture by action or other-
wise, the lessee may apply to the court for relief, which the court may,
having regard to ali the circumstances, grant or refuse at its discretion.
But the Act excludes from its operation : (1) Covenants or conditions
against the assigning, underletting, parting with the possession or dis-
posing of the land leased.”

19.25. Judicial attitude under section 146, L.P. Act—Even so far as
section 146 of the Law of Property Act is concerned, in England, it has
been pointed out? by Harman J. that the power to grant relief to an assignee,
where an assignee is in breach of a covenant not to assign, “remains a
jurisdiction to be exercised sparingly, because it thrust upon the landlord a
person whom he has never accepted as tenant”.

19.26, Need for change—Reverting to the topic of validity in India,
we do not see any reason why the assignment should be regarded as valid
merely because the conveyancer has not inserted a clause for re-entry. The
insistence of the law on such a clause may be understandable where the
question is of forfeiture. There is, however, no reason for such an insis-
tence where the question is as to the validity of the assignment in breach
of a covenant. Ordinarily, a covenant is intended to have legal effect. In
the absence of compelling considerations of policy, the covenant should be
given effect to.

Modern condition—Indian social conditions also necessiate the
approach suggested above.

Instead of insisting on a specific power of re-entry and then bringing
into play the provision for forfeiture and then the provision for relief against
forfeiture as a matter of discretion, it will be more consonant to Indian social

1 See Barrow v. Isacs & Sons. (1891) 1 QB. 417.

2 Cracry v. Barmersell, ete. Co. Ltd., (1949) Chancsey 741: Vol, 83, Solicitor
Journal, 357. oer J


140

conditions if the view is adopted that a covenant against assignment must
always be regarded as a covenant “for the benefit of the landlord” so as
to render the assignment void. We are using the expression “assign~
ment” for brevity in this discussion. It will include cases of sub-letting
and the like, also.

19.27. Mulla’s view—At one place, Mulla’ states that the words
“for the benefit of the lessor” refer to a condition giving the lessor a right
of re-entry. For this, he relies on the amendment made in 1929 in section
111(g). In his commentary on section 108(g}, however,? he has stated
that the covenant cannot be invalid, for such a covenant by itself will sup-
port a suit for injunction and damages.* He adds that the words of sec-
tion 10 (“benefit of the lessor”) seem to be words of explanation rather
than of limitation.

. 19.28. Reasons summed up—in our view, while in the absence of
a power of re-entry, forfeiture may not be ordered, the covenant should be
enforceable at least to the extent of nullifying the assignment. To sum
up the reasons in favour of such a view—

(a) such a construction has been favoured by the Madras High
Court, though not by the Calcutta High Court;

(b) it is, in general, what the parties intend, since any other view
res amount to thrusting an unwanted tenant on the Jand-
lord;

(०) it is, in consonance with justice;*

(4) it satisfies the wording of section 12.

Speaking realistically, one would think that when parties to a leasé
insert a stipulation against assignment, they intend that the stipulation is
for the benefit of the lessor; it certainly is not for the lessee’s benefit, and
if it is for neither’s benefit, there would hardly be any occasion for insert-
ing it—save in the exceptional cases where the covenant is intended to
assist a third party.

‘We may add that we consider it sufficient if the breach of condition
is made to render the assignment or subleting voidable at the instance of
the lessor. We recommend an amendment on these iines. This recom-
mendation is subject to reservation by Shri Dhavan.*

19.29. The reason in support of this approach may be summarised
again—

(i) textual—based on section 7, read with section 108(j);

(ii) textual again; but based on section 1080); which makes @
specific provision that the right to assign the lease is only con-
ferred in the absence of a contract to the contrary. Section
108 does not deal only with the contractual aspect. It deals
with the rights of property;

1 Mulla (1973), page 107, commentary on section 12.
2 Mulla (1973), page 712, comment on section 108(g).
3 Gurushantappa v. Mallaya, ALR. 1921 Bom. 27.

4 Para 19.18, supra.

3 Reservation by Shri Dhavan as to section 12.



141

iii) juristi approach property which is
(Now transferable करियर, "०४० ES rowerty

(iv) effect of the contrary view on section 10;

(र) sociological;

(vi) support afforded by the Madras view.

This recommendation is subject to reservation by Shri Dhavan.*

19.30, Forfeiture—As regards forfeiture, there is a distinction bet-
‘Ween cases where there is a covenant in the lease against alienation, but
no right of re-entry reserved in the landlord; and cases where there is a
covenant in the lease against alienation coupled with a clause for re-entry.
In the first class of cases,? the remedy is of the landlord is either by way
of injunction against an apprehended breach,?-* or by recovery of damages
for a breach already committed.*-»

In the second class of cases, the lessor can"? forfeit the lease. But this dis~
tinction is for purposes of forfeiture only. It need not be material in
regard to the validity of an assignment made in breach of a covenant.

19.31, Recommendation to amend section 12, and to insert section
108A—In the light of the above discussion, we recommend" that to section.
12, the following Explanation should be added :

“Explanation.—For the Purpose of section 10 and of this sec-
tion, a condition prohibiting or restraining the assignment of a lease
or subletting of the leased premises is a condition for the benefit of
the lessor or those claiming under him.”

A new section be inserted after section 108 to provide that the lease
shall be voidable in such cases.”

1 Reservation by Shri Dhavan.

2 Doe v. Godwin, (1815) 16 R.R. 463; 4 M & $ 205.

3 Bibi Sahodra v. Rai Jang Bahadur, (1882) 8 Cal. 224; 8 L.A. 210 (P.C.).
4 Governors of Bridewell Hospital v. Pawkner, (1892) 8 T.L.R. 637.

3 McRacharn v, Colton, (1902) A.C. 104,

6 Williams v. Earle, (1863) 3 0.8. 739; 9 8. & S. 740; 37 LJ.Q.B, 231.

7 Paul v. Nurse, (1828) 8 B & C 480; 2 Ma Ry, 525.

8 Weatherall ५, Geering, (1860) 12 Vos Jun 504; 8 RR. 369.

9 Basarat Ali Khan v. Manirulta (1909) 36 Cal. 745; 2 1.0, 416.

10 On the wording of section 108(j) cen be followed—para 19,13.

11 This recommendation is subject to reservation by Member, Shri Dhavaa,
12 See section 198A, infra.



CHAPTER 20
TRANSFERS TO UNBORN PERSONS
Section 13

20.1. Introductory—So far we were concerned with conditions or
limitations restraining the assignment or enjoyment of the interest created
by a transfer. The object of the provisions prohibiting or restricting the
insertion of such conditions is to encourage the free circulation of property.
In order to encourage the vesting of interests within a reasonable time,
certain provisions could be thought of. Based on this broad principle,
certain rales were evolved in England’—they are no longer in force in
their original form. The rules were adopted in India—though in a diff-
erent form, and perhaps with an unnecessary variation. The beneficiaries
whose interests ate the subject matter of the rules are unborn persons. The
object of the law is to determine the point of vesting—in England, or to
define the quantum of interest—in India.

20.2 Section 13—The freedom of disposition is, then, restricted by
the provision in section 13, which concentrates on unborn persons, or
rather persons “not in existence” at the date of the transfer. While ordi-
narily, it is open to the transferor to define the quantum of interest, yet
if the beneficiary is unborn or non-existent, certain restrictions have been
considered desirable.

Section 13 is 12 the following terms :—

“Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is created
for the benefit of a person not in existence at the date of the trans-
fer, subject to a prior interest created by the same transfer, the
interest created for the benefit of such person shall not take effect,
unless it extends to the whole of the remaining interest of the trans-
feror in the property.”

(There is an illustration which we are not quoting).

20.3. Scheme of discussion—This section is generally understood to
codity what is known in England as the rule against double possibitities
or the rule against remotences of limitation, though this is not strictly
accurate. We pr-pose to deal, in connection with this section, with a
few important questions, namely, the rationale of the rule, the English
law, the scope of the rule in relation to conditions which affect the certainty
of vesting, and the position of a child in the womb. We shall also deal
with the question whether the rule should be retained at all.

20.4, Rationale—tt is generally thought that section 13 was an attempt
to import into and adopt for use in India what was known in England as
the rule against double possibilities. However, the product, as was observ-
ed by Blagden J.,? might have suffered in transit. The proposition in
Whithy ९. Mitcheil—the English mile--was somewhat different. and as
will be noted later,? has been abolished in England.

1 Chapter 21, infra.
2 Ardeshir, R. 1945 Bom. 395.
3 Para 29.9, infra.

>

142



143

20.5. Future intrests—Section 13 assumes a grant to commence in
interest at a future time, or in other words, it relates to future estates. We
afe now concerned with contingent remainders. A contingent remaider may
be created by any mode of conveyance, but an executory interest can arise
only by the instrumentality of a will, or under the Statute of Uses. The subject
of contingent remainders has been dealt with in the Act. Ifa grant is made to
A for his life, and after his death to B for life and after B’s death to C for
his life, and so on; the estates of B and C are intended to be as immedia-
tely and effectually vested as the estate of A, so that B could take on deter-
mination of the estate of A, and C would take on the deter-
mination of the two prior estates. The future estates created in favour
of B and C are then spoken of as vested remainders, and their characteri-
stic is that they are always ready to come into possession the moment the
Prior to estate is determined." gift is immediate, but its enjoyment
tay be postponed till the determination of the prior estate.

20.6. Contingent remainder—As contra-distinguishd from such an
eslate, the contingent remainder is not teady from its commencement to its
end, to come into possession at any moment when the prior estate may
happen to deermine.2 As an example, suppose that a gift is made to
A, 4 bachelor, for his life, and after determination of that estate by for-
feiture or otherwise in his life time, to B and his heirs during the iifetime of
A, and after the decease of A to the eldest son of A, and after the decease
of A to the eldest son of A and the heirs of his body. Here B’s estate is
again a vested remainder, but the estate to A’s eldest son is a contingent
Temainder, for, while B’s estate is ready to come into possession whenever
A’s estate may happen to determine, the estate tail to the eldest son of A
is contingent, since A being a bachelor may never marry, or may never
have a son to take possession on determination of the estates of A and
B. But if A should marry and have a son, the contingent estate would
then immediately become vested, for then the estate is ready to come into
Possession on determination of the prior estate.

20.7. Propositions in the background—Transjer to unborn person—
The rationale of the rule can be best understood if certain fundamental
legal propositions—propositions not dealing with the policy of the rule
but relevant to an understanding of the significance and operation of the
tule—are borne in mind. In the scheme of the Act, a transfer of a
Property is a transfer made to a living person.* A transfer in favour of
an unborn person—“a person not in existence” at the date of the transfer—
cannot be made directly; this is true whether the intended transferee is an
unborn human being or a corporation not yet in existence. Though
this proposition is not expressly enacted in the Act—as in section 112 of
the Indian Succession Act—it is assumed. If: transfer is to be made
creating an interest for the benefit of an unborn person or a corporation
not yet created, there must: under the terms of the transfer, be created a
prior interest.

In this respect, the Act is more liberal than the Hindu law, which did
not contemplate transfer of property for the benefit of a person not yet in
existence,—if we leave aside those borderline cases where dedication was
to be made in favour of a deity whose image has not yet been EO OF 8 Ceity whose image has not yet been installed.

1 Sundar Bibi v. Lal Rajendra Narain Singh, ULR. 47 All. 496,
2 Section 20.
3 Section 4-5.



144

20.8. Dedication to deity—A Hindu deity is, in the contemy plation of
the Hindus, always in existence; the establishinent and consecration of
4 visible image is merely a manifestation, Hence the principle of Hindu
law which invalidates a gift other than to a sentient being capable of accep-
ting it does not apply to bequests to trustees for the establishment of an
image and a worship of a Hindu deity after the testator’s death.’

The principle of remoteness is not unknown to Hindus. It is in fact
one of the rules determined in the Tagore case? Two Hindu brothers,
subject to Dayabhaga Law. executed a deed by which they purported to
Provide for the permanent devolution of their respective properties in the
direct male line, including adopted sons, with the condition, that, in case
of failure of lineal male heirs in one branch, the properties belonging to
that branch should go to other, subject to the same rule, and, only in the
absence of male descendants in the direct line in either branch, the properties
were to go to female heirs or their descendants. Throughout
the deed there was no intention to make a gift to any person.
The Privy Council held that the deed was void. because it was an attempt
to alter the mode of succession prescribed by Hindu law, and that there
was no gift over at all, since the devised estate was, in every case, de-
feasible in the event of his death without male issue. It happened that
us the facts turned out, there was a gift over which could have taken effect,
but that did not save the deed, since “that question is not whether the gift
ever was good in the event which happened afterwards, but whether it
was good in its creation’.* A person cannot change the rule of succes-
sion under the colour of a fictitious endowment.*

1 (a) Bhupati ४. Ramlal, (1910) 14 C.W.N. 18; LL.R. 37 Cal. 128 (F.B.);
(b) Chaturbhuj vy. Chatarjit, LLL.R. 33 All. 253;
(c) Parmanandas v. Vinayak, I.L.R. 7 Bom. 19;
(4) Gekool ५, Issur, 1L.R. 14 Cal, 22;
(९) Monohar ५. Lakshmi, LL.R. 12 Bom. 267;
(f) Purna v. Kalipacda, A.I.R. 1942 Cal. 386; 46 C.W.N. 477.
2 Tagore ५. Tagore, 9 8.! 37 (P.C.).
3 Purno Shashi v, Kalidhan Rai, (1911) LLR., 38 Cal. 603 (P.C.).
4 Sitaram v, Jadunath, 10 LJ. 204; 26 LC. 72.



CHAPTER 21
RESTRICTIONS AS TO INTERESTS FOR UNBORN PERSONS
SecTION 13—Continued

21.1. Kind of interest created in favour of unborn person--Now, assum-
ing that after a prior interest is created in favour of an existing person, and
subject to such prior interest, a transfer can be made conferring the interest
for the benefit of the person not in existence, the next question to be consi-
dered is—what kind of interest may be created in favour of such a person?
To deal with this problem, English law evolved what is known as the “rule
against double possibilities. This was not a very expressive phrase. It
sacrificed clarity for brevity; but it came into vogue. Under this rule,
it was requisite that on the birth of an unborn person the estate must vest
in him within the proper period. | The emphasis in England was on the
date of commencement or first taking effect of the limitation, The estate
must vest within the proper period. It was also requisite that if tand
is limited to an unborn person during bis life, a remainder cannot be limited
80 as to convey an estate to that person’s children. In legal literature, the
matter is discussed conveniently under the head of the rule in Whitby v.
Mitcheil?, but the propositions enunciated above were evolved long before
the decision in Whitby ९. Mitchell.

21.2. English common law—The scope and direction of English
common law rules—whatever they were—was slightly different from the
provisions of section 13.3 To draw attention to a few major points of
difference, in England, it was not necessary that the interest conferred on
the unborn person must be the entire interest. It was permissible, for
example, to give the unborn person a life interest, provided it vested within
the requisite time and provided further that the later interest was not
limited to the issue of the unborn person to whom the fife interest was.
given.

21.3. The rule here, laid down was expressed in the old legal langu-
age, that you could not limit a possibility, (now abolished by  statute).t
It means, first, that there might never be such a person as an woborn per-
son. That was a possibility, not a certainty. Besides, there was another
possibility. There might never be issue of that person. Therefore, there was
double contingency or a double possibility.>

214, Rule in Whitby v. Mitcheli—The rule against double _ possibi-
lity, known as the rule in Whitby v. Mitchell,’ is actually older than the
case of Whitby v. Mitchell, as was pointed out by Farewell, 3.7 For
some time both the rule in Whitby v. Mitchell and the rule against per-
petuities operated together in Emgland. But, in 1925, when the law of

1 See criticism in Ardeshir A.LR. 1945 Bom. 395 (Biagden J.).
- 2 Whitby v. Mitchell (1890) 44 Ch. 9. 85.

3 Gour.

4 Chapter 21. jnfra,

5 Gour. .

6 Whitby v. Mitchell, (1890) 44 Cb. D. 85.

7 Re Nash, (1908) 1 Ch, 1.

145


146

Ploperty was revised, this rule was abolished in regard to instruments taking
effect after 1925, The policy of the law of restricting the period of time
during which an owner of property may control its future devolution was
regarded as sufficiently implemented by the residue of the rule against
perpetuitics. Section 161 of the Law of Property Act, 1925, which was
in these terms,’ the altered position :

if “161. (1) The rule of law prohibiting the limitation, after a
life interest to an unborn person, of an interest in land to the unborn
child or other issue of an unborn person is hereby abolished, but with-
out prejudice to any other rule relating to perpetuities.

(2) This section only applies to limitations or trusts created
by an instrument coming into operation after the commencement of
is Act.”

21.5, Perpetuities Act, 1964—Section 4(1) of the Act of 1964 (which
applies to gifts over, as well as to direct gifts), provides? that where there
is a gift to an unborn person, which vests at an age greater than twenty-
one, and the gift is not saved as a result of the procedure introduced by
section 3 of the Perpetuities and Accumulations Act, 1964, then the speci-
fied age must be reduced, not to twenty-one but to the age nearest the speci-
fied age, which will permit the gift to take effect. Section 4{2) makes a
similar provision for the saving of gifts where there are two or more speci-
fied ages (a case which was not provided for in section 163 of the Law of
Property Act, 1925).”

21.6. Section 113, Succession Act—The provisions of section 13 of
of the Transfer of Property Act broadly correspond to section 113 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925—with one difference which will be noted
later. Section 113 created certain serious problems by virtue of the
decision of the Privy Council in Sopher'st case. It was held in that case
that if under a bequest in the circumstances mentioned in section 113,
there is a possibility of the interest given to a beneficiary being defeated
either by a contingency or by a clause of defeasance, the beneficiary under
the later bequest does not receive the interest bequeathed in the same un-
fettered form as that in which the testator held it, and therefore the bequest
does not ‘comprise the whole of the remaining interest’ of the testator in
the thing bequeathed, within the meaning of section 113.

21.7 Difference with section 113, Succesion Act—The wording of
section 113 speaks of the later bequest ‘comprising’ the whole of the remain-
ing interest of the testator, while section 13 of the Transfer of Property Act
speaks of the later transfer ‘extending’ to the entire interest. Even so, it
can be argued that section 13 should be similarly construed. _ If so, the
Privy Council decision in Sopher’s case would apply (० the Transfer of
Property Act also. In fact, in a Calcutta case,‘ the decision in Sopher’s
case was applied to a settlement, and the High Court held that trusts in
favour of the grand-children, some of whom were unborn, were void as the
trusts were subject to their attaining a certain age and surviving their
“parents.

1 Section 161, Law of Property Act, 1925.

2 Section 4(1). Perpetuities and Acquisitions Act. 1964.

3 Sopher v. Administrator General of Bengal, A.1.R. 1944 P.C. 67.

‘4 Isaac Nissim v. Official Trustee of Bengal, A.I.R. 1957 Cal, 118 (Mallick, J.).


147

21.8 Effect of Sopher’s case—As bas been pointed out by a writer
on the Law of Succession,’ the decision in Sepher’s case upset the view of
the legal profession which upto then held that if to an unborn person the
whole of the remaining interest was given, that would be sufficient com-
pliance with the provisions of section 13 and section 113 respectively, and
the contingency of attaising majority or surviving a certain person or the
conditions attached to the gift or bequest or any provision reserving power
to revoke the trust, did not violate the law. Since this view was held to
be erroneous by the Privy Council in Sopher’s case, there was public
agitation and. in fact, a Bill was introduced in the Central_ Legislative
Assembly? proposing to omit section 13 and section 113. The Bill did
not become law, but the Bombay Legislature passed in 1947 an Act to
validate dispositions made previously on the basis of previous under-
standing, of the law.

21.9. The application of section 113 of Succession Act to certain
dispositions of property in the erstwhile State of Bombay is restricted by the
Dispositions of Property (Bombay) Validation Act, 54 of 1947 (an Act to
validate certain dipsositions of property in the Province of Bombay),
which came into force on 16th January 1948, as under :—

Application of Act forty-five—‘2. This Act shall apply to allt
trusts made and to all wills and other testamentary dispositions of
persons who have died, before the first day of January one Thousand
nine hundred and forty-five;

(a) Where such trusts, wills, or testamentary dispositions relate to
immovable property situate within the Province of Bombay;

(0) Where such trusts, wills or testamentary dispositions relate to
property of every description other than immovable property
and are declared, executed or made by a setilor or testator, as
the case may be, in the Province of Bombay, notwithstanding

anything to the contrary contained in Part U of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925.

3. (1). Validation cf certain dispositions—The following provi-
sions of law shall not apply and shall be deemed never to have applied
to the dispositions of property contained in or made by the instruments
mentioned in section 2, namely, (a) section 13 of the Transfer of

Property Act, 1882, and (b) section 113 of the Indian Succession
Act, 1925.

(2) the dispositions of property contained in or made by the
instruments mentioned in section 2, the enactments mentioned in the
first column of the Schedule to this Act shall apply, and be deemed
to have always applied, with the omissions and modifications specified
in the second column of the Schedule.

4, Saving—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect or pre-
judice in any way any right, title or interest accrued to any person
wader a final decree “or order of a competent court or acquired by
any person for valuable consideration before the coming into force
of this Act.

(Schedule not reproduced)”.

1 Paruck. Indian Succession Act (1966), page 238,

2 Transfer of Property and Successions (Amendment) Bill, 1946 (Gazette of India,
Part V, page 92, dated 16-2-1946).



148

21.10, Recommendation to repeal section 13—We are of the view
that having regard to the fact that there is also in force the rule against
ities, it is not necessary that the role in section 13 should be con-
tinued on the statute book. This section seems to have been suggested by
the corresponding section in the Succession Act, and the Report of the Law
Commissioners relating to the Succession Act, 1865, merely states that it
has been provided that the interest to be given to the unborn child must
extend to the whole of the interest. Having regard to the fact that the
object of the law to prevent provisions fettering the free circulation of
postponing the vesting of property is sufficiently achieved by section 14, we
think that section 13 should be deleted. Even if the unborn person is allowed
10 take a limited interest, the subsequent interest must vest within he period
allowed by section 14 and this, in our view, is enough as a safeguard.

21.11, Alternative recommendation—However, if it is decided not to
delete the section, it is, in our view, necessary to make it clear that condi-
‘tlons of the nature involved in Sopher’s case’ which, while not restricting

the quantum of interest of the unbom person, make it defeasible or affect
the certainty of its vesting? are not to be construed as violating section 13.

21.12. Child in the womb—It is also necessary—if the section is
retained—to add an Explanation to the effect that a child in the womb,
if born alive, is not deemed to be an unborn person. Such an addition
would be merely codifying the judicial construction.

21.13. Recommendations summed up—Our recommendation then is
that—

(a) Section 13 should be deleted;

(b) in the alternative, that is to say, if section 13 is retained, clari-
fication as suggested above? should be made on two points,
namely—

(i) the scope of the expression “extends to the whole of the
remaining interest” should be explained; and

(ii) the case of child in the womb should be dealt with
expressly.

ee 7  “इ ॒ैै++फफषकककफकककूममन
1 Sopher's case, supra,
2 This is not a draft.
3 Para 21.10 and 21.11, supra.


CHAPTER 22
THE RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES
Section 14

22.1. Introductory—The Policy of the law of favouring the free cir-
culation of property and its alienability within reasonable ‘mits has led
to the evoluiion of rules relating to the vesting of estates. Circulation is
thwarted if vesting is delayed unreasonably, hampered unduly or made un-
certain. The doctrine that property should not remain ownerless has given
Tise to several interesting rules of common law and equity. It explains, in
part, the doctrine under which the State takes Property as the ultimate heir.
It supplies, indirectly, the justification for the appointment of ‘curators’
in the law of intestate succession. It is the principal basis of the English
doctrine that on the death of a person, until the Administrators take charge
under Letters of Administration, the estate Vests ia the President of the
Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division, Now Family Division, There are
many other doctrines based wholly or in part upon a similar rationale. The
tule against perpetuities, to which we shall now direct our attention, could
‘be attributed to the anxiety of the law to ensure that vesting is not unreason-
ably. delayed —with the ultimate objective that its free circulation may be

tated.

22.2. Tensions—Since medieval times, English law has been subject
to the tension between two conflicting influences. Land and other pro-
perty owners have desired to tie up their property indefinitely, usually for
the benefit of their family or for some institution or cause, while the courts
and the legislature have always felt that it is in the interest of the aation
as a whole that wealth should circulate freely and that property should not
be made inalienable. The result has been a compromise. Property may
be tied up indefinitely for a purpose which the law wishes to advance,
namely, a charity. Otherwise, property may be tied up, but only for a
comparatively short period. The rule which governs this is known as the
tule against perpetuity.

22.3. Two aspects—This rule has two aspects.? First, that relatihg
to vesting. In its basic form, it provides that Property must vest in the
recipieat within the period of a life or lives in being at the time when the
gift is made, and twenty-one years thereafter (with allowance being made
where appropriate for the period of gestation).? The second aspect is that

roperty must not be limited in such a way that it is inalienable in the
fonds of the recipient.

22.4, Section 14.—Under section 14, no transfer of property can
Operate to create an interest which is to take effect after the life-time of
one or more persons living at the date of such transfer and the minority
of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period,
‘and to whom, if he attains full age, the interest created is to belong.

1 Parker & Mellows, Modern Law of Trusts (1966). nage 71.
2 fa) Cadell v, Palmer, (1833) 1 Cl. & Fin. 372;
(b) Re Wilmer's Trusts, (1903) 2 Ch. 41.
3 Parker & Melfows. Modern Law of Trusts (1966), page 71.
149



150

22.5. Succession Act—The corresponding section 114 Indi
Succession Act, 1925 is as follows :— iB a of the Indian

Rule against perpetuity—“114. No bequest is valid whereby the
vesting of the thing bequeathed may be delayed beyond the lifetime
of one or more persons, living at the testator’s decease, and the min-
ority of some persons who shall be in existence at the expiration of
that period, and to whom, if he attains full age, the thing bequeathed
is to belong.”

There are a few illustrations to the section

“(i) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life; and after his death
to B for his life; and after B’s death to such of the sons of B as shall
first attain the age of 25. A and B survive the testator.” Here “the
son of B who shail first attain the age of 25, may be a son born after
the death of the testator; such son may not attain 25 until more than
18 years have elapsed from the death of the longer liver of A and B
and the vesting of the fund may thus be delayed beyond the lifetime
of A and B and the minority of the sons of B. The bequest after B’s
death is void.

(ii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life and after his death
to B for his life and after B’s death to such of B’s sons as shall first
attain the age of 25. B dies in the lifetime of the testator, leaving
one or more sons. In this case the sons of B are persons living at
the time of-the testator’s decease and the time when either of them
will attain 25 necessarily falls within his own lifetime. The bequest
is valid.

(iii) A fund is bequeathed to A for his life, and after his death
to B for his life with a direction that after B’s death it shall be divided
amongst such of B’s children as shall attain the age of 18; but that if
no child of B shall attain the age. the fund shall go to C. Here the
time for the division of the fund must arrive at the latest at the expira-
tion of 18 years from the death of B, a person living at the testator’s
decease. All the bequests are valid.

(iv) A fund is bequeathed to trustees for the benefit of the
testator’s daughters with a direction that, if any of them marry under
age, her share of the fund shall be settled so as to devolve after her
death upon such of her children as shalt attain the ave of 18. Any
daughter of the testator to whom the direction applies must be in
existence at his decease and any portion of the fund, which may even-
tually be settled as directed must vest not later than 18 years’ from
the death of the daughters whose share it was. All these provisions
are valid.”

22.6. Genesis of the Rule—The rule in section 14 is borrowed. from
the English law, where? it has been from very early times.*
After property jn future estates had begun to be recognised, and the Timi-
tation of estates in remainder to unborn children, as well as the creation of
future estates by way of shifting use and executory devise began to be
permitted, it was felt that unless some rules restraining the creation of such

1 This is not accurate by giver as a TEE i nor avourate by giver as a reader.

2 Gour.
3 1 Rep. 84A, 88a. 131b.



151

estates were devised, property may, by a single transfer, be tied up in pez-
petuity. “In the case of future estates to arise by way of shifting use and
executory devise, these due bounds were gradually settled by successive
decisions. Such estates were allowed to take effect at first, within the com-
pass of an existing life,’ then within a reasonable time after.” This teason-
able time after an existing life was next extended to the period of the min-
ority of an infant actually entitled under the instrument, by which the
executory estate was conferred.* It was then held that any number of exist-
fing lives might be taken.* Finally, it was settled that the time allowed
after the duration of existing lives should be a term of twenty-one years
independently of the minority of any person, whether entitled or not, with
the possible addition of the period of gestation, but only where the gestation
actuafly existed.®

22.7. Applies to moveables—The rule applies to all property. In
England also, the rule extends to personal property as well, for, if it were
otherwise, trusts of an indefinite duration might have engendered and same
mischief which the rule is designed to guard against.*

The rule has been extended in India equally to moveable property.7
But, its application to personal contracts,? such as a contract for the sale of
Jand which creates no right in rem,® is a matter of doubt. A covenant to
do any act, as for example, to pay money, cannot it seems, be avo'Jed by
reason that the time of performance may not arise within the period 2 ‘lowed
by the rule." It would, however, be otherwise if the contract creited an
equitable interest in property." As a contract for the sale of lands or for
pre-emption does not create such an interest, it would not be void as
opposed to the rule, although there may be cases in which it may be void
for remoteness.”

22.8. Charities—As regards the application of the rule aguinst per-
petuities to charities, there seems to be some misconception. It is com-
monly stated that the property must vest within the specified period and
that the only relaxation is that a gift over to charity is valid even if the
previous gift to charity is contingent and is invalid under the rule against
perpetuities. Whatever may be the position in English law, this is not true
in India, As Mulla has pointed out,’* section 18 of the Transfer of Property
Act relaxes the rule against perpetuities embodied in secticn 14 in respect

1. Howard v. Duke of Norfolk. 2 Swanst. 454,
2. Marks v. Marks, 10 Mod. 419.
3. Stephens v. Stephens, 1 De. G. & J. 62.
4 Theiluson v. Woodford, 4 Ves. 227; 11 Ves. 112.
5. Will’s R. P. (18th Ed.). 379, 380; citing Cadell v. Peter, 7 Bingh. (N.S.), 202.
6. Gour.
Cf. Accomulatidns Act, 1892 (55 & 56 Vict. ०. 58).
7. Cowasji v. Rustomjis 1.L.R. Bom. 511.

8. London and South Western Ry. Co, v. Comm. 20 Ch. D. 562.
Borlands v. Steel Bros, & Co, (1901) 1 Ch. 279.

9. Southern Eastern Ry. v. Associated Portland etc. Lid. (1910) iC, 12. 33;
Charamudi v, Raghuvult, 39 Med. 462, 469; Ali Hossain vy. Rajkumar, ALR.
1943 Cal. 417.

10 Walsh v. Secretary of State for India 10 H.L.C. 367.

41. London & Suuth Western Ry. Co. ४. Comm. 20 Ch. D. 562.

12. Ramaswamy v. Chinnan, UL.R. 24 Mad. 449, 457, 469.

13. Mulla (1973), page 179.

U1—-S88SLaw /77


152

of the transfer for purposes mentioned in section 18. Therefore, the vesting
‘of such transfers may be delayed beyond the period mentioned in section 14
jn the case of charities. In contrast, in English law, charitable trusts in futuro
ave no exception to the modern English mule against perp etuities which deal
with estates i futuro. While charitable trusts, in England, can be valid even
though the property is tied up for an indefinite period, a gift to charity
upon a remote event is void in England except in the case of a gift over
from one charity to another, Whatever may be the position under the
Indian Succession Act; section 114, the Transfer of property Act has
relaxed) the rule against remoteness of vesting in the case of charities in
clear and positive terms in section 18.

22.9. This does not, of course, involve any amendment of section 14,
but the matter is mentioned here by way of anticipating the provisions of
section 18 which (inter alia) specifically provides that the restriction in
section 14 shall not apply in the case of a transfer of property for the
benefit of the public for the specified. purpose.

22,10. Two senses—We have referred above to the two senses of
‘Perpetuity’—inalienability and remoteness of vesting of future interest.
The first sense is concerned with present interest and the second sense is
concerned with future interest. Section 14 is concemed with the second
sense which pertains to the period upto which vesting of an interest can
be legitimately delayed.

22.11. Inalienability—Perpetuity in the sense of inatienability is out-
side the provisions of section 14, of course, as already stated, the policy of
making illegal, the undue postponement of vesting has, as its ultimate
objective, the end of promoting free alienation. But there is no direct
prohibition against alienation in section 14, That topic is, to some €x-
tent, dealt with in sections 10 to 12, concerned with conditions or limi-
tations prohibiting or restricting alienations- Apart from those sections,
the policy of the law to promote alienability is reflected in its attitude
towards restraints imposed in grants and gifts even where not governed by
the Act.

Irrespective of the provisions of the Act, it was held in Calcutta that
perpetuity is repugnant to Hindu law except in the case of religious and
charitable endowments? This position was reaffirmed in a Bombay case.*

22.12, Move for Reform-—During the last forty years or so, the Rule
against Perpetuities has come under fire in many parts of the world,
While the tule expresses a perfectly reasonably policy—a fair balance
between the desires of members of the present generation, and similar
desires of succeeding generations to do what they wish with the property
which they enjoy‘—yet it has inevitably become ‘encrusted with barnacies’.
The law will be improved, and the Rule itself simplified and strenghtened,
it has been though, by removing these barnacies.

22.13. Causes of dissatisfaction and some representative examples of
reform—The main causes of dissatisfaction with the Rule are two: | first,
the recuirement of absolute certainty that the interest will vest within the

1. Jones v. Adm. General. LLB. (1946) Cal. 485.

2. Sukhmai v. Monohari, (1885), LLR. 11 Cal 684.

4, Vallabh v. Goverdhan Das (1880) LLR. 14 Bom. 360.

4, Simes, Public Policy and the Dead Hand (1955), page 58. !



153

perpetuity period, and its consequent invalidity if any possible combination
of events, however, improbable or fantastic, could cause it to vest outside
the period; and, secondly, the harsh consequences of violating the Rule,
whereby the interest fails completely instead of being ‘cut down to size’.
There is widespread agreement today that some statutory reform of the
Rule is necessary. There is much less general agreement as to the form
which is such amending legislation ought to take. The various proposals
and experiments can be reduced to three main types :

(1) The first is legislation specifically directed against the well-
known ‘trade’ which so often cause a violation of the rule
when the age limit is exceeded. In England, section 163 of
the Law of Property Act, 1925, reduced age contingencies to
twentyone—when this is necessary to save the gift, similar
statutes were enacted in many other jurisdictions.” Difficulties
arising from ‘the unborn widow trap’ were sought to be re-
medied in New York, Western Australia and California.
Administrative powers of trustees were excepted from the Rule,
in Western Australia, Victoria and New South Wales.

(2) A second type of reform is to introduce a ‘wait and see’ rule,
whereby the validity of interests depends on actual, and not
on possible, events. Legislation to this effect was first intro-
duced in Pennsylvania in 1947, and, though in a somewhat
different from, later in Massachusetts, connecticut, Maine,
Maryland, Vermont, Kentucky, Washington and Western
Australia.

(3) A third method is to give the courts a general discretionary
power to reform limitations which would otherwise be void
so as to make them approximate most closely to the iestator’s
or settlor’s intention within. the limits of the Rule. This ‘cy-
pres method’, as it is called, has been enacted in varying forms
in Vermont, Kentucky, Washington, Idaho and California”

In England, an elaborate measure was passed by way of reform in
1964, which we shail deal with Jater.

22.14. No account of the reform of the rule against perpetuities in
England would be complete without a tribute to professor Leach of Har-
vard. It was his article published in 19523 which first attracted the atten-
tion of high authorities in England to the need for reform, and caused the

1. Eg. Victoria (1918), New South Wales (1919), Western Australia (1941), New

Zealand (1944). Massachusetts (1954). Maine (1955), Conmecticut (1955),
Maryland (1956) and New York (1960), (The dates are those in which the
reform was first enacted).

2, Information is compiled from various articles by Professor W., Barton Leach of
Harvard in the Law Quarterly Review, the Harvard Law Review aad by a few
others in the Yale Law Journal.

3. Leach, ‘Perpetuities : Staying the Slaughter of the Innocents’ (1952) 68 L.QR.
5.

4. Leach, ‘Perpetuities in Perspective : Ending the Rules Reign of Terror’ (1952)
65 Harv. 1. Rev. 721: Leach, “Perpetuities Reform by Legislation’ (1954) 70
LOR. 478; Leach, ‘Perpetuities Legislation, Massachussetls Style’ (1954) 67
Harv. L. Rev. 1349: Leach. “Pernetuities Reform by Legislation, Fngland’ (1957)
70 Harv. L.Rev, 1411: Leach, “perpetuities Legislation : Hail Pennsylvania” (1960)
108 U, of Penn. L. Rev. 3124; Teach, “Perpetuities Reform: London Proposes,
Perth Disposes’ (1963) 6 U. of WALL, Rev. 11.


154

Rule against Perpetuities to be referred to the Law Reform Committee.
It was his tireless advocacy of the ‘wait and see’ doctrine that made it seem
the obvious method of reform, despite some vigorous dissent.

In the second reading of the debate on the English Bill in the House
of Lords, Lord Evershed paid a graceful tribute both to Professor Leach’s
reforming zeai and to the draftsman’s skill*

22.15. Need for reform in India—Lest this should sound pedantic
and lest it should be thought that there is no need for reform in India and
that all is well with our statutory provisions, we would like to refer at this
stage to situations wherein difficulties could be experienced in India also.
A slight disregard of the stringent statutory provisions, or a misconception
about the age of majority, may lead to defeating the intention of the trans-
feror. In one of his famous articles published in the Harvard Law Review,
Professor Leach had this criticism to make of the rule—

“The Rule against Perpetuities is a technicality-ridden legal
nightmare, designed to meet problems of past centuries that are almost
nonexistent today. Most of the time it defeats reasonable disposi-
tions of teasonable property owners, and often it defeats itself. It
js a dangerous instrumentality in the hands of most members of the
bar. 11 ought to be substantially, “changed by statute, and the lawyers
ought to see that this is done.”*

Every word of it may not apply to Indian Codified law. Bur diffi-
culties could arise. In fact, difficulties have arisen. Let us take a re-
ported case.

22.16. Case of Soundararajan—The case of Soundarajan® illustrates
the anomaly resulting from the fact that a slight excess over the legally
permissible age may defeat the transfer. That case was, no doubt, a case
telating to succession on death, but the position would be the same in
respect of a transfer during lifetime. In that case, an estate was given.
to the testator’s daughters for their lives with the remainder for the child-
ren: on attaining the age of 2lyears. The age of majority in India is 18
years, unless guardians are appointed or a court of Wards takes charge.
it was held, that, as at the testator’s death, it could not be certain that in
the case of every child a guardian would necessarily be appuinted so as to
postpone the minority of the child till 21 years, there was a possibility that
the Bequest would be held beyond the lifetime of the daughters and
the minority of some of the children of the daughters. Hence by virtue
of section 102 of the Indian Succession Act, 1965. broadly corresponding
to section 114 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and section 14 of the
Transfer of Property Act, the whole bequest in favour of the children was
illegal.

Of course, this case involved also another complication, namely, that
of a bequest in favour of a class and the law on the subject has now been
altered in amended section 15 of the Transfer of Property Act. We are
not, however, concerned with that complication. but with the difficulty
created by the fact that an excess of 3 years (21 minus 18) destroyed the
vesting of the estate.

1. Hansard, Vol. 256, Col, 246.

2. Leach, in (1954) 67 HER. 1349.
3, Soundararajan v. Natarajan, A.LR. 1925 P.C. 244, 147.



155

22.17. There ate several Indian decision under the Succession Act
which iflustrate the problems that could arise under the present formulation
of the rule

Other decisions—In Puilibai v. Sorabjee, the testator devised his
house upon. trust to allow his daughter until her death or marriage and all
his sons and their respective families incliding widows to reside therein
until the youngest of his grandsons should attain the age of 18 years and
then for sale and conversion. It was held that during the sons’ lives their
wives took no independent gift, but the gift to the son entitled him to reside
there with his wife. As all the sons were alive, no question 8४058 as to
the title to reside that could be claimed for the widows of the sons and their
Lordships refrained from expressing an opinion on the ४४3 of the claim of
such a widow to reside if any son died. They, however, pointed out that
sections 99, 100, 101 (1.0., sections 112, 113 and 114 of the present Succes-
sion Act) might give rise to difficulty in the claim of a widow if she survived
the. son, as it was not clear that the whole ‘of the testator’s interest was
bequeathed.

22.18. Reform by judicial decisions~It is because of such difficulties
which defeat the intentions of the testator or the transferor that need for
reforming the law arises. We have briefly mentioned statutory reforms
effected elsewhere, and shail deal with them in detail later, It may, how-
ever, be mentioned incidentally that jn some countries, some of the anomalies
have been sought to be mitigated by judicial approach in respect of the
ingredients of the rule in common law.

22.19. Example from U.S.A—To borrow one example from the
US.A, in 1953, the New Hampshire Supreme Court in Merchants Nat.
Bank v. Curtis? determined the validity of future interests on the basis of
facts existing at the end of preceding estates. The Florida court has given
evidence of similar views.

22.20. English rule as to possible events—This is a modification of
the Enlgish rule. At common Jaw, if an interest is to satisfy the Rule
against Perpetuities, jt must be absolutely certain to vest, (if it even vests
at all) within the perpetuity period; and this certainty must exist at the
time when the perpetuity period starts to run or (in the case of appvint-
ments under special powers) at the time when the appointment is made.
Extreme probabitity of vesting within the period is not enough. Nor 18
it enough that the interest does. in fact vests within the period as events
actually occur. The result is that many perfectly reasonable dispositions
are held void because, on some outside chance (not foreseen by the testa~
tor or his draftsman) it is mathematically possible that the vesting might
occur at too remote a time. No reason for this strange rule has ever
been given, except the statement that it is undesirable in property Jaw that
the validity of interests should be allowed to remain in suspense too Jong.
This certainty is undoubtedly desirable; but it can bought at too high a
price.

rr ——

1 Putlibal v. Sorabjee, 25 . LR, 1099 (P.C.)

2 Merchants Nat, Bank v, Curtis, 98 NAH, 225; 97 A, 2d 207, 67 Harv. पु... Rev.
355. 1352, The court relied principally upon 6 American Law of Property, 8५
24,10 (1952),

3 Story ९, First Nat. Rank & Trust Co., (1934) 115 Fla. 436, 156 So. 101; 67 Har-
vard’ Law Rev, 1352. .



156

imi Statutory reform made in England now ensures that the validity of @
‘limitation under the rule should depend not on the facts which may
occur, but on the facts which do in, fact occur; the principle should be
‘wait and see’. Section 3(1). (2) and (3) of the 1964 Act gives effect
to this recommendation. Section 3(1) provides as follows :

“3(1). Where, apart from the provisions of this section and
sections 4 and 5 of this Act, a disposition would be void on the
ground that the interest disposed of might not become vested. until
too remote a time, the disposition shall be treated, until such time
(if any) as it becomes established that the vesting must occur, if at
all, after the end of the perpetuity period, as if the disposition were
not subject to the Rule against Perpetuities; and its becoming so
established shall not affect the validity of anything previously done in
relation to the interest disposed of by way of advancement, applica-
tion of intermediate income or otherwise.”

_ We are mentioning at this stage how courts in one country have
anticipated, by judicial law-making reforms which in another country had
to await legislation.

22.21. Comparison—In order that the points to be made hereafter
may be properly appreciated, it may be convenient to give, in a brief, a
comparison of the English common law rule and the Indian statutory law.

According to the English law, the vesting of property might be post-
poned for any number of lives in being and an additional term of 21 years,
and for as many months in addition as are equal to the ordinary period of
gestation, should gestation exist (Jee v. Audley); and the additional term
of 21 years might be independent of the minority of any person to be
entitled (ie. irrespective of the fact whether such person is a minor or
not). Indian law, however, allows the vesting to be delayed beyond the
life-time of persons in being. for the period only of the minority of some
person born in their life-time; the addition of an absolute period of 21
years has not been adopted by this section. So, whereas under the English
law the additional period allowed after lives in being is a term of twenty-
one years in gross. without reference to the infancy of any person, under
the Indian Statute the term is the pericd of minority of the person to
whom, if he attains full age, the thing bequeathed is to belong—at 21, if
he has a guardian appointed by the Court; at 18 in other cases.”

In short, at common law, property must best within the period of a
life or lives in being, or within twenty-one years after the end of that
life.

22.22. Life interest--This is perhaps a convenient point for dealing
with life interest. When some portion of the riehts of full ownership is
given to a person other than the owner to be exercised by such person to
the exclusion of the owner, such detached rights were called in Roman
law jura in re aliena. “Servitudes” were a familiar example. If the rights
of ownership are limited in duration—an estate for life in land is one
example—then there emerges a class that is differently described in different
systems of law.? In England, life interest is generally spoken of a limited

1. Jee v. Audley, 1 Cox. 324.
2. Mukhopadhyaya’s Law of Perpetuities, page 29.
. 3. Hunter, Introduction to Roman Law (1921), page 74,



157

interest. In Rome, a life interest was regarded not as a form of owner-
ship, but as the “antithesis” of ownership, a subtraction from the owner-
ship or a burden upon it—in a word, a servitude.’

Technically, then, this term was also applied to the indefinite use of
Yand—for example, the Roman usufruct or estate for life-

The usufruct in Roman law is the right of using something belong-
ing to another, coupled with the right of taking the fruits of that thing.
Unless a shorter period was expressed, it was understood fo be given for
the life of the receiver.’

22.23. Reform by legislation in England—Need for reform of the
tule against perpetuities—in the sense employed in the present discussion,
as dealing with the aspect of remoteness of vesting—was felt in England
for a long time but in general, such reforms have to wait until the legisla~
ture intervenes. The only noteworthy “amelioration” of the rule by
judicial action is the judgment in the famous Thelusson case wherein it
was specifically held that the ‘lives in being’ for the purposes of the com-
mon law formulation of the rule, need not be lives of persons who take
interest under the will or transfer. nor need they be lives of persons related
to the testator or transferor or his acquaintances. They must be persons
in existence at the date when the transfer takes effect. On this view,
theoretically, property could be tied up for a period specified with reference
to any number of lives in being at the date when the transfer takes effect.
It is not necessary to discuss in detail the repercussions of this doctrine in
the contemporary legal world. It is enough to state that major reforms in
the field had to await legislative action.

22.24, Act of 1925—The Law of property Act, 1925 represents the
first major step. Section 163(1) provided that? where the vesting of pro-
perty is made to depend on the attainment by the beneficiary of an age
greater than twenty-one and that by virtue of that condition the gift would
be void for remoteness, the age of twenty-one is to be substituted for the
age stated in the instrument. The section applies only when the gift would
have been void for remoteness.

It may be noted that so far as regards instruments coming into opera-
tion after July 15, 1964, section 163, Law of Property Act, 1925, has been
replaced by section 4 of the Act of 1964. By this section, there is not
substituted the age of twenty-one, but the age nearest to the age which
would have prevented the disposition from being void. Under the Act of
1964, therefore, the instrument is altered only to the extent necessary to
save the disposition from offending against the rule. This is because the
Act of 1964 reformulates the main rule in different terms. We shall deat
with that Act later.

22.25. Developments leading to Act of 1964—-While, thus, reform of
the rule in regard to the condition of age was effected in 1925, there still
remained a need for rectifying other anomalies, including, in particular, the
anomally that even possible events might defeat an interest violating the rule
though actual events showed that the property did not actually come to be
tied up for an unduly long period. This point received the attention of

1. Hunter, Introduction to Roman Law (1921), page 74.
2. Hunter, Introduction to Roman Law (1921), page 75.
3. Section 163(1), Law of Property Act, 1925.


158

courts and legislatures in other countries, and was the subject matter of
articles in learned journals in England as well as elsewhere. As we have
already stated,’ legislative measures on the subject were first enacted in some
parts of the Commonwealth and in some States of the U.S.A. In England,
it was in 1964 that the major legislative reform was effected by the Perpe-
tuities and Accumulations Act.

22.26. The Act of 1964—-The principal rule—The Act of 1964 came
into force on July 16, 1964, but, in general, applies only to instruments
taking effect after July 15, 1964. The common jaw rule is thus state—

“No interest is good unless it must vest, if at all, not more than
twenty-one years after some lift in being at the creation of the interest”*
A gift by deed is created on delivery of the deed; a gift by will is
created on the tesiator’s death.

In contrast, if the interest is created by an instrument taking effect after
July 15, 1964, the interest is good if, in fact, it vests within twenty-one years
after some life in being at the creation of the interest.®

In both cases, an interest is not vested until : (a) an ascertained bene-
ficiary stands 1eady to take on the determination of a prior interest, and (b)
the size of the beneficiary’s interest is ascertained. This later requirement
is in addition to the normai rules as to vesting, and has important conse-
quences in the field of class gifts.

22.27. The Act of 1964—The period——Let us deal in greater detail
with the permissible time limit. At common law, the perpetuity period is
the duration of any relevant fife or lives in being plus fventy-one years, Or,
if no life in being is applicable, a period in gross of twenty-one years. A
life in being is any person expressly chosen as a measuring life, or any
person impliedly mentioned in the gift and who is alive at the date of the
gift; for example, a living ancestor of a beneficiary.

Under the Act of 1964, a period in gross not exceeding eighty years
may (but need not) be chosen as the perpetuity period instead of the
common law period.

Section 1 of the Act reads—

1. (1) Subject to section 9(2)4 of this Act and sub-section (2)
below, where the instrament by which any disposition is made so pro-
vides, the perpetuity period applicable to the disposition under the rule
against perpetuities, instead of being of any other duration, shall be
of a duration equal to such number of years not exceeding eighty as
is specified in that behalf in the instrument,

(2) Sub-section (1) above shall not have effect where the dis-
position is made in exercise of a special power of appointment, but
where a period is specified under that Sub-section in the instrument
ereating such a power the period shall apply in relation to any dis-
position under the power as it applies in relation to the power itself.

1 Para 22.13 supra.

2. Gray, Rule Against Perpetuities, 4th ed., section 201.

3. Section 3, Perpetuities and Accumulations Act, 1964.

4. Section 9(2) relates to options in gross to purchase land.


153

This section creates an entirely new power to specify a perpetuity
period as a term not exceeding eighty years.

22.28. Act of 1964—Fertility—Another matter in respect of which
the English Act has made a change relates to what may be conveniently
called the presumption of fertility. The position at common law and apart
from the Act is illustrated by the leading English case on the subject which
Went upto the House of Lords. A’testator by his will left property in trust
for his wife for life and then for his children, but if he should have no child-
ren then for the children of his brothers and sisters. By a_ codicil, the
testator revoked the gift in the will and provided that after the death of his
wife, the property should be held on trust for the children of his brothers
and sisters, who being a son attained the age of twenty-one or being a
daughter attained that age of married. At the date of the will (1915), the
testator’s father and mother, both of whom survived him were both aged
sixty-six. The testator died without issue in 1916 and his father died in
1921. All the testator’s brothers and sisters were over thirty years of age
at the date of the testator’s will and all had children. The question arose
whether the gift in the codicil was void for perpetuity. If it was void, the
original gift took effect.

It was held that the fact that the testator’s mother was past the age of
child-bearing when the will took effect was inadmissible to prove that after
the date of the will (1915) and certainly after the date of death, no brother
or sister could be born subsequently so that every brether and sister who
could take under the will would necessarily constitute a life in being at the
date when the will took effect. The argument that the testator must have
intended to refer to his brothers and sisters already born and to no others,
was also rejected, since the phrase in the will described a class “general in
its extent and clear in its description”. This was the principal conclusion,
Lerd Blanesburgh, while reluctantly agreeing with this conclusion in view
of the past precedents observed that “it is the legislature alone which, main-
taining the salutary purpose of the rule in its proper application, can, if it
plcases, remove from it those incidents or excrescenses which, without assis-
Ung to achieve its legitimate object, have done must mischief in other direc-
tions.”

_ 22.29. Section 2(1)—Lord Blanesburgh’s prophetic observations"
came true in 1964 when section 2(1) of the Act*—1o state its terms in non-
technical language—provided, in paragraph (a), that, subject to paragraph
(b) below, it shall be presumed that a male can have a child at the age of
fourteen years or over, but not under that age, and that a female can have
a child at the age of twelve years or over but not under that age, or over the
age of fifty-five years.

___ According to paragraph (b) of section 2(1) of the Act of 1964, in the
case of a living person, evidence may be given to show that he or she will,
or will not, be able to have a child at the time in question.

It may be stated that the provision for admitting other evidence—this
will be mostly medical evidence—to prove infertility, inserted in the 1964
Act, is in conformity with the judicial view taken for other purposes in the

1 Ward v. Van Der Loeff, (1924) A.C. 653 (HLL).
2. Wards case, supra.
3. Section 2 is quoted in para 22.30, infra.



160

law of property. In a case Teported in 1963’, for example, a life tenant
under a protective trast, with discretionary trusts over to herself, her hus-
band and children, applied for an order under the Variation of Trusts Act,
1958 on the basis that she was past the age of child-bearing. That Act, inter
alia, empowers the court to vary the terms of the trust deed in certain
circumstances, even in the case of a Private trust. Medical evidence was
admitted in proof of infertility in this case. The solution adopted by the
1964 Act became necessary because in the field of law of Perpetuity, past
judicial decisions* had laid down a rigid rule that it is coaclusively presumed.
that any person however old, is capable of having children.

Conversely, there have been rare cases of girls below the age of 12
years becoming mothers. A case recorded in medical journals in 1939 would
seem to furnish an instance of an extraordinary character—fertility at the
age of six years. These very rare situations would, in any case, be taken
care of by section 2(1) (0) of the Act of 1964.

22.30, Section 2—The following is the text of section 2 of the English
Act of 1964—

“2. (1) Where in any proceedings there arises on the rule against per-
petuities a question which turns on the ability of a person to have a child at
some future time, then—

“(a) subject to Paragraph (b) below, it shall be presumed that a male
can have a child at the age of fourteen years or over, but not
under that age, and that a female can have a child at the age of
twelve years or over, but not under that age or over the age of
fifty-five years; but

(b) in the case of a living person evidence may be given to show that
he or she will or will not be able to have a child at the time in
question.

{2) Where any such question is decided by treating a person as unable
to have a child at a particular time, and he or she does so, the High Court

ropert:
Position they would have held if the question had not been so decided.

4 edited wet to sub-section (2) above, where any such question is
id telation to a disposition by treating a person as able or unable
to have a child at a particular time, then he or she shall be so treated for
the purpose of any question which may arise on the rule against perpe-
tuities in relation to the same disposition in any subsequent proceedings,

(4) In the foregoing provisions of this section references to having a
child are references to begetting or giving birth to a child, but those pro-
visions [except subsection (1) (] b)] shall a apply in relation to the Possibility
that a person will at any time have a chi by adoption, legitimation or
other means as they apply to his or her ability at that time to beget or
give birth to a child.”

1 Re Westminster Bank Lid.'s Declaration of Trust, (1963) 1 Weekly Law Reports,
820.

2 Jee ४. Audley, (1787) 1 Cox 324,
3 Discussed in 65 Harvard Law Review 725.



161

22.31. By way of further comment, it may be stated that section 2 re-
verses, as to the tuture, the decision in Ward v. Van der Loeff' by means of
rebuttable presumptions as to the minimum age of childbearing, and also,
in the case of a female, as to the maximum age. Evidence may, therefore,
be given for the purpose of rebutting these presumptions, or for the purpose
of showing that a person within the ages of childbearing is nevertheless in-
capable of having a child; for example, evidence of impotence.

Section 2 also applies to the right of a beneficiary to terminate accumw-
lations of income under the rule in Saunders v. Vautier’-

Section 2(2) empowers the court to grant a tracing crder ugainst a
beneficiary who, as events tum out, has been wrongly paid <n the statutory
presumptions, subject to the overriding requirement that such aa order is
just in all the circumstances. In practice, distriution on the statutory pre-
sumptions wilt probably be effected only after insuring against the risk of
the presumptions being rebutted by later even.

22.32. Act of 1964—Actual and possible events—The next important
reform effected by the Act of 1964 relates to actual and possible events.

22.33. Common law—At common law, the rule is concerned with
possible, not with actual, events. The slightest possibility of the period being
exceeded invalidates the interest.

Under the Act of 1964, one may await the outcome of actual events
within the period.

The standard perpetuities doctrine (as unmodified by legislation) does
not permit consideration of facts which occurred after the death of the
testator or the date on which the transfer takes effect. Nevertheless, in
Pfactice, it is often seen that the contingencies on which the testator or the
transferor insisted have happened well within the lives in being plus twenty-
one years (in England) or attainment of age of majority (in India).

In the U.S.A., this situation was dealt with by the Supreme Court of
Florida’ by holding that it will not invalidate an interest on the basis of
contingencies which never happened. In England, in order to modify the
common law position that the application of the rule has tegard not only to
actual events but to the possible events, the English Act of 1964 has made
several provisions, of which the ptincipal one dealing with this point appears
to be section 3(1). Under that sub-section,—-to state the matter in non-
technical terms*—if a disposition is void by reason of the rule against perpe-
tuities, even then, it is to be treated as valid until events have shown that the
interest must vest (if at all) after the end of the perpetuity period. For exam-
ple, the transferor or testator—T—gives property to the first daughter of A
who gets married. At common law, if A survived the testator und no
daughter of A was at that time married, then the gift is too remote, because
it is possible that a daughter who was born after the death of T might be
the first to marry and she might not do so until more than twenty-one years

1 Ward v. Van der Leoff, (1924) A.C. 653, supra.

2 Saunders v. Vautier, (1841) 4 8९३९, 115.

3 Section 13. Act of 1964,

4, Re Diplock, (1951) A.C. 251; (1948) Ch. 465.

5 Story * National Bank & Trust Company. (1934) 115 Florids 436; Leach.
“Perpetuities in Perspective” 65 Harvard Law Review 725, 730.

6. Section 3 is quoted later~para 22.34,



162

-after the death of A, A being the only available life in being. Under the
Act of 1964, section 3(1), the gift will be valid if a daughter marries before
the expiration of twenty-one years from the death of A. If necessary, we
must wait und see for that length of time.’ As to the situation where ulti-
mately the gift is found to be invalid by reason of perpetuity, a provision—
though a cryptic one—is to be found in section 3(1).

22.34. Section 3.—This is the text of section 3—

“3. (1) Where, apart from the provisions of this section and
sectior.s 4 and 5 of this Act, a disposition would be void on the ground
that the interest might not become vested until too remote a time, the
disposition shall be treated, until such time (if any) as it becomes es-
tablished that the vesting must occur, if at all, after the end of the
perpetuity period, as if the disposition were not subject to the rule
against perpetuities; and its becoming so established shall not affect the
validity of anything previously done in relation to the interest disposed
by wiy of advancement, application of intermediate income cr other-
wise.

(2) Where, apart from the said provisions, a disposition consist-
ing of the conferring of a general power of appointment weuld be void
on the ground that the power might not become exercisable until too
remote a time, the disposition shall be treated, until such time (if any)
as it becomes established that the power will not be exercisable within
the perpetuity period, as if the disposition were not subject to the rule
against perpetuities.

(3) Where, apart from the said provisions, a disposition consist-
ing of the conferring of any power, option or other right would be void
on the ground that the right might be exercised at too remote a time,
the disposition shall be treated as regards any exercise of the right
within the perpetuity period as if it were not subject to the rule against
perpetuities and, subject to the said provisions, shall be treated as void
for remoteness only if, and so far as, the right is not fully exercised
within that period.

(4) Where this section applies to a disposition and the duration
of the perpetuity period is not determined by vittue of section 1 or 9(2)
of this Act, it shall be determined as follows :—

(a) where any person falling within sub-section (3) below are indivi-
dual in being (or on ventre sa mere) and ascertainable at the
commencement of the perpetuity period the duration of the period
shall be determined by reference to their lives and no others, Sut 80
that the lives of any description of persons falling within paragraph
(09) or (c) of that subsection shall be disregarded if the number
of persons of that description is such as to render it impracticable
to ascertain the date of death of the survivor.

(0) where there are no lives under paragraph (a) above, the périod
shall be twenty-one years.

(5) The said persons are as follows :—
(a) the person by whom the disposition was made;
1 Text of section 3(1) of the Act of 1964 will be quoted later. Para 22.34.


163

(b) a person to whom or in whose favour the disposition was made,.
that is to say—

(i) in the case of a disposition to a class of persons, any member
or potential member of the class;

(ii) in the case of an individual disposition to a person taking only
on certain conditions being satisfied, any person as to whom
some of the conditions are satisfied and the remainder may in
time be satisfied;

Gii) in the case of a special power of appointment exercisable in
favour of members of a class, any member or potential mem-
ber of the class;

(iv) in the case of a special power of appointment exercisable in
favour of one person only, that person, or where the object
of the power is ascertainable only on certain conditions being
satisfied, any person as to whom some of the conditions are
satisfied and the remainder may in time be satisfied;

(०) 4 person having a child or grandchild within sub-paragraphs (i) to
(iv) of paragraph (b) above, or any of whose children or grand
children, if subsequently born, would by virtue of his or her des-
cent fail within those sub-paragraphs;

(d) any person on the failure or determination of whose prior interest
the disposition is limited to take effect.”

22.35. Effect—Sub-section (1) has the revolutionary effect of intro-
ducing the principle of “wait and sce” into the rule against perpetuities, and
sub-sections (2) and (3) extend the rule to general and special powers of
appointments, options and similar rights. “Wait and see” was impossible
under the old law which as a general rule concerned itself with possible, not
actual, events. Thus, in Re Wood,' the testator devised certain gravel pits
to his trustees on trust to work them until the pi its should be exhausted, and
then on trust for sale and to divide the pre is equally among the testator’s
issue then living. The pits were exhausted six years after the testator’s death
and before the litigation commenced, but the gift to the issue was held void,
since at the date of the gift and pits might not have been exhausted for more
than twenty-one years. A fortiori, if the contingency is unsatisfied at the
commencement of litigation, and might not be satisfied until after the per-
pertuity period.

Such absurdities will not arise under the Act of 1964, for the validity
of a gift is now determined by the outcome of actual events; if the contin-
gency is, in fact, satisfied within the perpetuity period, the gift is valid; if the
event has still not happened when that period ends, the gitt will then fail.

The question arises as to the destination of the intermediate income
during the wait and see period. This appears to have been dealt with by
the last sentence of sub-section (1). which provides that the ultimate in-
validity of the contingency shall not affect the validity of an intermediate deal-
ing “by way of advancement application of income or otherwise” on the
footing that ‘the interest is valid. This seems to imply that if the interest in
question carries the intermediate income, that income is payable to the
contingent beneficiary under section 31(1) (ii) of the Trustee Act, 1925,

1 Re Wood, (1894) 3 Ch. 381.



164

and that the statutory powers of maintenance and advancement under sections
31 and 32 of the Trustee Act, 1925, wili also be available. The powers were
not available before the Act of 1964, since an interest which infringed the
rule was void ab initio. But now, by virtue of the wait and see 101९, one
awaits the outcome of the events, and until the end of the perpetuity period
or earlier happening of the relevant event, the interest is merely contingent
and is presumptively valid.

22.36. Act of 1964 and maximum age—The common law rule was that
the interest must vest within 21 years of the death of the last of the lives
in being mentioned in the deed or will. This rule created difficulties where
the testator or settlor made the vesting conditional on an age higher than 21
years, because then there is a possil 01५ 1 that the interval between the ter-
mination of the life and the vesting in ultimate unborn beneficiary may
exceed twenty-one years. Reform was, by legislation, affected on the sub-
ject in England first in 1925,’

Sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the Act of 1964 now read—

“4, (1) Where a disposition is limited by reference to the attain-
ment by any person or persons of a specified age exceeding twenty-one
years, and it is apparent at the time the disposition is made or becomes
apparent at a subsequent time—

(a) that the disposition would, apart from this section, be void for
remoteness, but

(b) that it would not be so void if the specified age had been twenty-
one years,

the disposition shall be treated for all purposes as if, instead of being

limited by reference to the age in fact specified, it had been limited bv

reference to the age nearest to that age which would, if specified instead

have preverted the disposition from being so void.?

(2) Where in the case of any disposition different ages excceding
twenty-one years are specified in relation to different persons—

(a) the reference in paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) above to the
specified age shail be construed as a reference to all the specified
ages, ant

(0) that sub-section shall operate to reduce each such age so far as it
is necessary to save the disposition frdm being void for remote-
ness.”

22.37. It is important to notice that under section 4 the age can be
reduced only if the disposition would otherwise be void. For example, a
devise. “To such of my children as shall reach the age of twenty-gxe,” is
valid as it stands, since all the beneficiaries are lives in being. It is express-
ly provided in section 4(1) that the age may be reduced to the age which
is necessary in order to save the gift; this implies that the “wait and see”
rule enacted by section 3 must be applied first, since otherwise the only rele-
vant age would be twenty-one.

7 Section 163, Law of Property Act, 1925.
2. These replaced section 163, L.P. Act, 1925.



165

22.38. Bombay case on age.—Incidentally, it may be mentioned that
the provisions in India—section 14, Transfer of Property Act and section
114, Succession Act—are linked up with the attainment of majority by the
unborn beneficiary, and not with the length of the interval. However, prob-
dems of the nature that have arisen in England can arise in India also. A
Bombay case‘ furnishes illustration of the difficulty raised by the age-limit.
The will ran as follows :— .

“T give the pro; perty to my son and for life and I give the property
after his death to his sons in equal shares. In case he leaves ne 2 som
behind him, my mukhtiar shall a son adopted by his wife and thus
perpetuate his name and they give the property to him ( adopted
son) on his attaining the age of twenty-one.”

It was held that the bequest in favour of the adopted son who might be
adopted at any time after the date of the son’s death, was void under the
rule against perpetuities. No argument was considered as to whether theore-
tically adoption could have been regarded as having retrospective effect.

22.39. Act of 1964—Time of death The unborn widow—Then there is
the question of limitations dependent on the time of death of the survivor
of two persons—

(i) a person in being at the commencement of the transfer, and
(ii) his spouse.

Difficulty may arise because the spouse may not necessarily be a person
in existence when the transfer takes effect,

22.40. Unborn widow.—What has come to be known as the trap of
the “unborn widow” (or unborn widower) may be referred to at this stage.
Property is given to A for life, then to A’s widow who may survive him for
life and then to the children of a living at the death of the survivor of A
and his widow. Since A may marry a woman who was unborn at the time
of death of the testator, and since the woman so married may survive A by
more than 21 years, the gift to be children vest too remotely and such gifts
were held to be void in a number of cases decided at common law. Even
if, at the time of the death of the testator, A was married and his wife died
earlier while A remained alive and did not marry a gain, yet the gift to the
children as framed in the will would not be saved, ‘ause of the common
Jaw rule that possible and not actual events had to be considered,

In Re frost? the testator,, Frost, devised land on trust for his daughter,
Emma, for life, and then on trust for any husband whom she may hereafter
marry for life; and after the death of the survivor of Emma and her husband,
on trust for such of her children as she should appoint, and in default of
appointment on trust for all the children of Emma who should be living at
the death of the survivor of Her and her husband, or should have previously
died leaving issue then living.

Kay J. held: “The question is, whether the limitation in favour of the
children of Emma Frost ...... is good .... Emma Frost was unmarried
at the date of this will, She might have married after the death of the
testator a person who was not born in his lifetime, and it might therefore

1 Kashinath y. Chinnaji, LLR. 30 Bom. 437.
2. Re Frost, (1889) 43 Ch. D. 246,



166

have becn a limitation to Emma Frost for life, remainder to an unborn
person for his life, with a contingent remainder over to the children of Emma
Frost living at the death of that unborn person or such of them as should be
then dead leaving issue then living ....... That clearly would be a limi-
tation which would offend against the rule of perpetuity, because it would
tie up the estate, not merely during the life of Emma Frost, who was in
existence at the death of the testator; but during the life of Emma Frost’s hus-
band, who might possibiy not be living at the death of the testator. So that
it would not merely by tied up for a life in being and cwenty-one years after,
but for a fife in being, with remainder for a life not in being, with a contin-
gent given over ...... I think, therefore, .... that this limitation .... is
void, because it offends against the rule of perpetuity.”

22.41. In the case of Re Frost’ it was clear from the fact that Emma
Frost was unmarried ai the date of the will, and from the use of the
phrase “any husband she may hereafter marry,” that a possibly unborn hus-
band was included. Hi, however, Emma had been already married at the
date of the will, and the gift had been simply “to her husband for life,” that
gift would, it seems, have bcen construed as a gift fo her existing husband
alone, and the gift to their children would 4ave been valid.

If the gift is to A for life, remainder to any husband whom she may
marry for life, and who shall survive her, remainder to such of the children
of A as shall attain the age of twenty-one, the git एचश to the children is
valid, since all A’s children are ascertained at her death, and they must
reach the age of twenty-one, if at all, within twenty-one years of that
date.*

22.42. Section 5.—For cases of the nature involved in Re Frast, sec-
tion 5 of the Act of 1964 now provides—

“§. Where a disposition is limited by reference to the time of
death of the survivor of a person in being at the commencement of the
perpetuity period and any spouse of that person, and that time has not
arrived at the end of the perpetuity period, the disposition shall be
treated for all purposes, where to do so would save it from being void
for remoteness, as if it had instead been limited by reference to the

time immediately before the end of that period.”

22.43. Sctone 5 of the Act of 1964 reverses the effect of Re Frost’.
Take the case of a bequest to A for life, remainder to any widow A may
Jeave for a widow's life, remainder to such of the children of A as survive
A and the widow. The gifts to A and his widow are valid at common law.
So far as the rule against remoteness is concerned, this position will conti-
nue. Gift to children is not presumption valid under the “wait and see”
rule, if the question of survivorship is not settled within the perpetuity period.
The perpetuity period will normaily be the life of A plus twenty-one years.

22.44. If the widow dies within that period, the gift is valid under
Section 3 of the Act of 1964 (which substitutes the rule of actual events in
place of the rule which has regard to possibilities). If the widow is still

1 Para 22.40, supra.

2 Re Hancock, (1896) 2 Ch. 173.
3. Re Garnham. (1916) 2 Ch. 413.
4, Re Frost. (1889) 43 Ch. D, 246.


167

living twenty-one years from the death of A, the gift—which would bz void
under common law and not saved by section 3—will vest in the children
then living. The ameliorative provision in section 3 would not suffice to
cure the invalidity which require some other help. That help is turnished
by section 5.

22.45. Options.—Coming to the question of options to purchase land,
it is to be noted that in England it was held in 1882 in the case of Lundon &
South Western Railway Co.,' that the rule was applicable to options to
purchase land—in that case, a perpetual option. On this propesinca bzin;
established, specific performance was denied. In a suit in equi
a transferee of the person who gave the original option. an action for
damages is also denied, on the theory that the threat of money tess would
have the indirect effect of inducing compliance with the option which
(according to the hypothesis) is against public policy. Similar course has
not been denied in America, however, in regard to options to purchase which
are held by a lessee.

22.46. In England, the rules were, at common law, applied even to
options to purchase in a lease. One criticism of such an approach is that
it seeks to apply to commercial transactions a rule which was evolved in the
context of property in the limited sense—excessively long family settlements.
It was to meet the needs of public policy in regard to gifts in the family that
the period of perpetuities was tailored. The requirement of “lives in being”
has no significance in commercial transactions, nor has the period ef maju-
rity or similar period. Secondly, specific enforcement against a transferee
was denied in England against assigns of the lessor,” but it was granted
against the original person who gave the option if he still retained the
land.$

Thirdly, even where specific performance was refused. damages were
permitted? A corrective provision would be a provision exempting from
the rule real commercial options to purchase and placing upon such options,
if necessary, any time limitations which a study of the commercial dealings
in land may show to be desirable.

22.47. Not a rule of thumb.—Finally, it may be stated that the rule
Notungbare tuities, whose origins are usually traced to the opinion of Lord
Nottii |. is intended to express a y and not to oj perate as a rule
of thumb. The test, in the opinion ‘of Chancellor Nottingham. was whet-
her the challenged limitation produce a visible inconvenience. Hency any
aberrations that produce more inconvenience must require consideration,
since ० such an aberration would defeat rather than promote the objective of
the rule. .

22.47A. Options in India.—So far as Indian law is concerned. pre-
viously there was a conflict in Madras on this point.°-*

1 Lapeon & South Western Railway Co. 5. Gomim, (1882) 22 C rancery

. Woodall v. Clifion, (1905) 2 Chancery 257, 265, 179.

. Hunton v. Walsing (1948) 1 Chancery 26, 36 (Jenkins J.) (Review cases).
|. Worthing Corporasion v. Heather, (1906) 2 Chancery 532.

. Duke of Norjulk’s case, (1682) 22 English Reports 931, 960.

|. Avala Charamudi v. Marriboyina Raghavalu, (1915) 28 M.L.J. 471.

. Kolathu Ayvar v. Ranga Yadhyar, LL.R. 38 Mad. 114.

12—885Law,'77

NAAR YN


168

22.48. Possible argumenis.—All the arguments pro and con (except
one which we shall presently notice) have been considered in these two
cases. The question is one of election between what look like two equaliy
tenable contentions. Jt can also be argued that a contract which aims at the
creation of a iuture interest contrary to section 14 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act is “of such a nature” that if permitted, it would defeat the provi-
sions of that law.

An argument like this appears to have caught in Jagannatha Raju v.
Balasurya Prasada Rao,' where the High Court held, relying on section 23
of the Contract Act, that a contract which provided for the conveyance of a
property when the defendant inherited it, was bad.

22.49. Supreme Court decisions—Test of interest in property.—It has
now been settled by the Supreme Court? that the rule against perpetuity
does not apply to agreements which do no create an interest in property.
Thus, an agreement by a permanent lessee to surrender the lease whenever
the land should be required by the landlord is a personal agreement, not void
for remoteness. An agreement in a lease granting a perpetual option to
renew from time to time is not hit by the rule, as it does not create an
interest in property.*

22.50. Pre-emption.—As to a covenant for pre-emption, it has been
held’ that reading section 14 along with section 54 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act, it is manifest that a mere contract for sale of immovable property
does not create any interest in the immovable property and it, therefore,
follows that the rule of perpetuity cannot be ied to a covenant of pre-
emption even though there is no time limit within which the option has to be
exercised. It is true that the second paragraph of section 40 makes a subs-
tantial departure from the English law, for, an obligation under a contract
which creates no interest in Jand but which concems land is made enforee-
able against an assignee of the land who take from the promisor either gra-
tuitously or takes for value but with notice. A contract of this nature does
not stand on the same footing as a mere personal contract, for it can be
enforced against an assignee with notice. There is a superficial kind of re-
semblance between the personal obligation created by the contract of sale
described under section 40 of the Act which arises out of the contract, and
annexed to the ownership of irmmovable property, but not amounting to an
interest therein or easement thereon and the equitable interest of the person
purchasing under the English law, in that both these rights are liable to be
defeated by a purchaser for value without notice. But the analogy cannot
be carried further, and the rule against perpetuity, which applied to eanit-
able estates in English law, cannot be applied to a covenant of pre-emption,
‘because section 40 does not make the covenant enforceable against the as-
signee on the footing that it creates an interest in the land.

22.51. Need for reform in India—We have so far drawn attention to
the problems that have arisen in the application of the rule against perpetuity
in India and elsewhere and opportunity has been taken of referring to some

1 Jagannatha Raju. Balasurya Prasada Rao, (1915) 28 M.L.J. 630.

2 Rambaran v. Ram Mohit, (1967) 1 S.C.R. 293; A.LR. 1967 S.C. 744,

3 Rama Rao v. Thimmappa, (1925) 48 Med. 1.1. 463; ADR. 1925 Mad. 732;
Ganesh Sonar ५. Parendu Narayan, A.LR. 1962 A.P. 201.

4 88% vy. Barton Son & Co., (1970) 2 SC.R. 140; ALR. 1970 SC. 1872;
(1970) 1 S.C.J. 905.

3 Ram Baran v. Ram Mohit, ALR. 1967 S.C. 744.



169

of the judicial developments on the subject elsewhere as well as to the
reforms introduced by legislation. In the light of this material, the next
question to be considered is—how far and in what manner and to what
extent the statutory provisions in India on the subject should be amended ?
That there is need for amendment is obvious, not because other countries
have taken such a need for granted or experience difficulties, but because
difficulties can be experienced and have, in fact, been experienced in India,
though, perhaps, not on the same scale as elsewhere.

22.52. Apart from the fact that the present sketchy provision is cape-
ble of causing injustice, there is an—ethical aspect to it. Usually in the legal

m, when A violates a rule, only A suffers—unless, of course, the ques-
tion is of a detect in the title of A. But, under the rule against perpetuities,
when A violates the mle, property is taken away from B and given to C.
This is another reason for adopting the approach of “cutting it down to
size”.

The need for amendment requires no further elaboration. The ques-
tion then is, in what directions should the law be amended.

22.53. Aspect of unperfecting conveyancing to be taken into account—
In formulating the proposals for amendments we must take into account the
fact that deeds in India are not always drawn by expert conveyancers and
those who are consulted may not necessarily be experts in that art. We
may say so without meaning any disrespect to the members of the learned
profession. This position is not attributable to any deficiency in the intel-
lectual sphere or to any reluctance to learn the art or any inherent incompe-
tence. It is due to the fact that many practitioners in the mofussil do not
hhavé an opportunity of dealing with complicated transactions and, to some
extent, it 1s alsu due to the social reality that people who execute docu-
ments of transfer or wills either are not in a position to consult legal
Pptactitioners for financial reasons, or are unwilling to do so from a desire
to keep their affairs private, or have an insufficient appreciation of the fact
that if they can afford to do so, it would be better to consult a lawyer. The
point to be made is that in the interest of those who will be called upon
in future to understand and comply with the law either for the purpases of
their own property or as legal advisers to private parties, it is desirable that
the amendments should not be so cumbersome as to be practically unin-
telligible. It is because of this important consideration that a method cf
selection has necessarily to be employed.

Adopting this approach, it seems to us that not all the amendments
made in England could be adopted verbatim in India. Attention must be
confined to some of the important propositions which seem to be in need
of being introduced into our law, having regard to the problems ihat have
arisen or are likely to arise with some frequency in India.

It seems to us that two reforms could be usefully made in our law.
We are concerned only with transfers inter vivos, though, of course, section
114 of the Succession Act stands on the same footing. The two reforms
which we have in mind are—
(i) regard be had to actual events;
(४) mischief arising from conditions a8 to agé should be remedied.


170

22.54, Gist—We would set out the gist of the amendments needed in
regard to section 14 in the form of propositions which indicate the subs-
tance. The drafting device to be adopted to implement them could vary.
One possible drafting device would be to re-number present section 14 as
sub-section (1) and then to insert the new propositions as new sub-sections.
Another possible drafting device would be to imsert the new Propos itions
as Explanations to section 14. Yet another possible device w be to
insert these propositions as section 14A. This last mentioned device would
be useful in the sense that the readability of section 14 will then net be
burdened or encumbered.

22.55. Here, then, is a statement of the propositions. We give only
the gist thereof and not the exact legislative language. Also, as to the
precise legislative device, we leave it to the draftsman.

22.56. Proposition 1—Our first proposition deals with the date for
fixing the application of the rule.

Proposition 1

In applying section 14 to an interest in property limited to take effect
at or after the termination of one or more life interest of persons in being
when the period mentioned in section 14 commences to run or on or
the termination of lives of persons in being when such period commences to
run, the validity of the interest shall be determined on the basis of the facts
existing at the termination of such one or more life estates or lives.

+ - Explanation —For the purposes of this proposition, an interest which
must terminate not later than the death of one or more pessons is a life
interest, even though it may terminate at an earlier time.

22.57. Effect—If such a provision is enacted, the court will determine
the validity of the gift by examining the actual facts as they appear at the end
of the life interest. To take a simple case, if a fund is given in trust to pay
the income to A for life and then to pay the principal on various contingen-
cies to A’s son, not being attainment of majority, the amended section re-
quires that the validity be determined, as far as the son is concerned, on the
basis of the facts existing at the end of A’s life interest,

If, at that point of time, the contingencies have happened—even contin-
gencies which possibly may be postponed beyond majority, the gift is valid.
As to the Explanation, its utility lies in covering the following types of
provisions in deeds :
“(1) To my widow so long as she shall remain unmarriéd.
(2) To A until his age of 30.
(3) To B for 100 years terminable upon his death.”

In these cases, the facts upon which the future interest is adjudged under
the Exp Explanation to proposition 1, are those existing when, (1) widow
व ies or dies unmarried, (2) A reaches the age of 30 or dies under 30,
(3) 100 years pass or B dies, respectively.

22.58. Life in being.—It may be noted that the first proposition does
hot project itself beyond the end of the life estates of living persons or the
indeBniely fod out what events uldmstely Rapper of living persons, because there may be ical difficulties in waiting
indefinitely to tind out what events ultimately happen.

1 The significance of the Explanation is indicated 861.


171

22.59. Proposition 2.—-To deal with conditions as to age, we recom-
mend the following proposition.

Proposition 2

वाई an interest in property would be void under section 14 because it is
contingent upon any person attaining or failing to attain arf age in excess of
majority, the contingency shall be reduced to the age of majority, as regards
all persons subject to the same age contingency.

22.60. Illustrative cases—We have already "referred to some Indian
rulings as to age which show the desirability of such a reform.

The difficulty arising by reason of the present law which prescribes an
age-limit and which looks at the possibilities is furnished by a case which
went upto the Privy Council.2 That was, of course, a case of will, but the
position would be the same under the Transfer of Property Act. The testator
bequeathed his property to his sons for life and further directed that the share
of each son if he left a son or issue of such son living at the death of the
last survivor of the testator’s son, is to be held for the sons of such son and
the issue of his pre-deceased son per stripes for their life and if the son of
the teatator left no such son or issue, then for his widow and daughters. It
was held that as the title of the sons of the testator was oaly for their lives
and the bequest to the unborn beneficiaries did not cover the whole of the
remaining interest, section 113 of the Succession Act was violated. But
the Privy Council also pointed out that since it was not clear as to whether
all the widows would be living at the date of the death of the testator, sec-
tion 114 of the Succession Act might also come in the way.

22,61. Then, there is a Calcutta case dealing with the validity of some
Of the restrictions, In a Calcutta case,* the bequest was as follows :—

“When my grandsons may attain their age into five shares and give
away the same to their respective sons, that is to say, my grandsons.”

It was held that the distribution was to take place only after all thesé
sons who might be born to the sons of the testator should “have attained
their majority and that it was invalid having regard to sections 101 and 102
of the Succession Act (sections 114-115 of the Act of 1925).

The amendments recommended will meet such cases.

_ 22.62, Precedents—This is not a new concept, since, in England land,
section 163 of the law of Property Act, 1925 made a similar .

but it will | not be feasible to adopt it. The Proposed provision is not likely
to cause litigation. Of course, the contingency of age is not reduced if,
under the amendment already recommended,® the gift is saved even with
the age given in the document. The first Proposition is applied first, and
then the second proposition is applied if necessary.

1 See para 22.63.

2 Pultibat v. Sorabjt, ALR. 1923 P.C. 122, 126.

3 Rameshwar P. Singh v. Lachman P. Singh, EL.R. 31 Cal. 111.
4 P.V. 5. Pillai v. R. V. M. Pillai, 17 Calcutta Weekly Notes 488.
5 See In re Gilpin, (1953) 2 W.LR. 746, 749 (Chancery).

6 Proposition 1, supra.



172

22.63. Textual comment, on Proposition 2.—A few explanafery com-
ments on proposition 2 are appropriate. The words referring to any person
attaining or bil ing to attain majority may be explained. A common type
of gift is the following : A trust to pay the income to A for life, and then
to pay the Princip: al to such children of A as reach 25, but if none reach 25,
then to B. Under the amendment, the age contingency is cut down as fe-
gards both the remainder to A’s children and as regards the alternative
remainder to B. In other words, the use of the expression “any person” in
proposition 2 will ensure that whether the interest is of the person who has
to teach the age limit or interest of any ofher persons, the new provision
operates.

The words “as to all persons subject to the same age contingency” may
be explained. Where there is a gift to those members of a class who reach
25, and this is reduced to majority under the amendment, the reduction
applies to all other members of the class, even though some of them were
living at the testator’s death.

However, this part of the amendment must be applied in the light of
the other amendment! which declares that no gift shall be invalidated or
modified if it would have been valid before enactment of this amendment.
There can be cases in which an age contingency in excess of majority would
be valid as to some parts of a disposition and invalid as to other parts; in
such cases the age contingency is reduced only as to those parts of the dis-
position which would otherwise be void.

22.64. Proposition 3.—The next proposition to be inserted will save
the validity of, and operation of, limitations which are valid under the
present law. The third proposition, then, is :

Proposition 3 :

Propositions 1 and 2 shall not be construed as invalidating or modify-
ing the terms of any limitation which would have been valid under section
14 apart from those propositions.

Propositions 1 and 2 are intended to validate certain gifts that would
be invalid by reason of certain hardships arising from the present law. हैं,
however, a gift is valid under the present law, then propositions t and 2 are
not called into operation.

As regards the mention of the word “modify”, it may be stated that
Proposition 2, if it becomes operative. “modifies” a gift by altering the age
contingency to the age of majority. This modification is, however, not
intended to take effect as to any i interest which would have been valid in the

of this proposition. is is desirable by way of abundunt caution.

22.65. Proposition 4.—To avoid retrospective effect being given to
the changes suggested in propositions 1 and 2,—which are the principal
substantive amendments—the following proposition is suggested :
Proposition 4

Propositions 1 to 3 shall apply to—

(a) transfers taking effect on or after the date on which those pro-
positions become operative.

1 Proposition 3, infra.


173

(७) appointments made after that date in exercise of a power of

eppointment, including appointments made by an instrument
under a power created before that date.

By way of explanation of paragraph (b), it may be stated that when
a power has been created before the amended law becomes operative, and
the appointment is made after that date, the new law is intended to apply to
the interests created by the exercise of that power.

22.66. Summary.—It may be convenient to draw attention to some
salient features of the Jaw.

(1) The Test—Under the common law Rule the validity of an in-
terest depends upon whether it vests in time. Under some laws in the
US.A., the basic test of validity depends upon whether the absolute power
of alienation is suspended for too long.!-? “The absolute power of aliena-
tion is suspended, when there are no persons in being by whom an absolute
fee in possession can be conveyed. Every future estate shall be void in its
creation, which shall suspend the absolute power of alicnation, by any
limitation or condition whatever, for a longer period than” the specified time
which varies from state to state).

(2) The Period—Under the common law rule, the period of perpe-
tuities is “lives in being plus twenty-one years”. At present in India, it is
lives in being plus minority. Under the New York statute, it is “two lives
in being”. States in the U.S.A. that have followed the general form of the
New York statute have, more often than not, adopted a more ample statu-
tory period. Bu: the two-life period is onerously restrictive.

The type of corrective legislation that ix now being recommended leaves
the present provision unchanged as to (1) the test, which continues to be
“vesting”, and (2) the period, which, in its basic form, continues to be
“lives in being plus minority”. It seeks, however, to apply the Rule more
Tationally and to eliminate certain exceptions and extensions.

22.67. Presumption of fertility—-A few words about the aspect of
fertility are required to explain why no amendment is suggested on that
point. Proposition 1 will, to a large extent, take care of those cases where
the argument is made that at the time of the transfer taking effect the ques-
tion arises whether there is a chance, however small, that an event could
occur in future which may tie up the property for a time longer than the
period of perpetuities. The amendment in proposition 1 will enable the
Court to have regard to facts as they exist at the date of termination of
the life estate or life in being. If, therefore, the question is whether a
woman can have a child and the answer sought is in the affirmative in order
to vest 8 gift and that event (birth) has happened bv the time of termination
of the, Life interest, the question of fertility or infertility becomes academic.
Where, however, the question is whether looking from the point of view
even of the date of termination of the life interest, a woman may be regard-
ed as potentially fertile, there are two competing alternatives :—

(i) Will the question be determined on the basis cf the rigid
English rule of common law ?, or

“1 Big. N.Y. Real Property Law, section 42,

2, There are other statutory sections that prescribe other restrictions: but section 42
can be considered basic.



174
(ii) will the question be determined, like any question of fact, on
the normal rules of presumption and other evidentiary rules ?

Altemative (i) is the approach adopted in England where, at common
Jaw, there was a rigid position taken whereunder 2 woman was regarded
as fertile at any age. The position had to be modified by statute,—The
Perpetuities and Accumulations Act, 1964—to which we have already
Teferred. हर

According to the second alternative, the matter is not determined by
zeny unrealistic rule as at common law. It is legitimate to have regard to
the common course of natural events—in fact, section 114 of the Evidence
Act expressly so provides, If that is the correct legal position, no statutory
reform is needed on this point.

The further provision in England creating a Presumption of fertility
and a presumption of infertility (sterility) is not inserted in the Propositions
which we are recommending, partly because it would unnecessarily com-
Plicate the text of the amendments and partly because of our assumption
that the common law presumption applicable only in the field of law of
Perpetuities, (that a woman can have a child at any age), is not likely to be
followed in India, particularly because our codified law of evidence, in
section 114 of the Evidence Act, empowers the court to draw inferences
that are permissible having regard to the common course of natural events,
human conduct and the like. There being no conclusive presumption in the
codified law. the matter is likely to be determined on common sense
Principles,

22.68. Options and re-entry.—Elsewhere, we find (a) a provision ex-
empting from the Rule commercial options to purahase and placing upon
such options any time limitations which a study of the realities of commer-
cial dealings in 810 may show to be desirable;

(0) a provision from the Rule rights of entry for condition broken and
possibilites of reverter but declaring that such interests shall become void
after a specified period of years or at such earlier date as the condition
ceases to have any utility.

.___ These are not considered necessary having regard to the judicial deci-
sions confining the rule of interests Proper in property.

22.69. Clarification—By way of clarification, it may be stated that
the proposed amendments are confined to the provision in secion 14, and
are not intended to affect rules of law other than those concerned with
Temoteness of vesting as enacted in section 14,

22.70. Gifts to unborn persons,—For example, the proposition that a
gift in Hindu Law cannot be made to an unborn person ‘is, as we have
Stated above, well established.! In a Bombay case,’ the will contained a
provision for the future children of the testator’s daughter. She had no
children at her death. The provision was void. This tule of Hindu taw,—
and indeed, of general Indian law*—is not intended to be disturbed by sec-
tion 14. In fact, it postulates the existence of that tule. and provides or

1 Rai Bishan Chand ए. Asmodia Koer, TLR. 6 Ail, 560 (PC).

2 Bal Manu Bai v. Dossa Morarji, ¥.L.R. 21 Bom. 709 (P.C.). on appear from 1.1...
jom, 443

3. Compare section 112. Indian Succession Act, 1925.



175

rather assumes that the ultimate beneficiary may not be in existence at the
time of the transfer. But is the demand of the section that besides the Te-
quirement imposed by section 13 to the effect that the whole of the remain-
ing interest of the transferor in the काल transferred should be covered," it
is also necessary that the ultimate should be in existence at the
expiration of the period earlier mentioned and it is also necessary that the
thing transferred must belong to him not later than the attainment of majo-
ry. There are then three postulates and one prohibition in the section as
follows :--

(i) Vesting may be delayed;

(ii) The first stage of permissible delay is represented by the lifetime
of one or more persons. in existence at the time of the transfer—
it is not necessary that they must themselves be beneficiaries
under the transfer;

(ili) The second permissible stage of delay is the minority of some
Person to whom if he attains full age the thing trasferred is to
belong;

(iv) That person must, however, be in existence at the expiration of
the earlier periods.

22.71. Thus, there are two types of periods which may be conveniently
described as the right time period and the minority period. Between the
two, there must not be any interval, and in any case the vesting should not
be delayed beyond the end of minority period. Thus, while section 14 is
not concerned with commencement initially and allows an interval between
the transfer and the vesting, the intervals are represented by two periods
which must be continous and which must be at the specified time. In this
sense, the journey of the interest and its ultimate destination are both regu-
lated in point of time.

“{ Section 13 will however be deleted.



CHAPTER 23
TRANSFER TO A CLASS

SECTION 15

23.1. Section 15.—When a gift is made to only one person the simple
provisions in secions 13-14 apply. When the beneficiaries are a class, more
seen Provisions are required. Section 15 Provides as follows on the
Subject :

“15. If, on a transfer of Property, an interest therein is created
for the benefit of a class of persons with regard to some of whom such
interest fails by reason of any of the rules contained in sections 13 and
14, such interest fails in regard to those persons only and not in regard
to the whole class,”

23.2. Class gifts.—The section deals with class gifts. A class gift is a
gift o£ property to all who come within same description, the property being
devisible in shares according to the number of Persons in the class.

At common law, a class gift fails in toto if any beneficiary may enter
the 21855 outside the perpetuity period, for the size of the shares is not then
ascertained in time.

Under the English Act of 1964, persons entering the class within the
perpetuity period will take to the exclusion of persons who enter outside
the period.

23.3. Amendment of 1929.—in the great majority of cases where the
rule against perpetuities is successfully invoked, the offending provisions is a
gift to a class. In such a case at common law, gifts to Al, A2, A3, valid
in themselves, are rendered invalid by the fact that gift to A4, is invalid,
Leach has criticised this doctrine as “guilt by association”. Realising that a
gift which threatened to tie up 4 property for too long a period should not
be invalidated in toto, the legislature in India in 1929 amended section 15
by substituting a rule which was thus the reverse of the rule as contained in
the old section. Before the Amendment of 1929, section 15 incorporated
the rule of English law as enunciated in the leading case of Leake v Robin-
son’ holding that in the case of a gift to a class, any members of which may
have to be ascertained beyond the limits of perpetuity,—for example, a
gift to the unborn children of a living person who shall attain the age of
twenty five—the whole gift is void. In cases not governed by the Act at a
time when the Act did not apply to Hindus, there was judicial reluctance to
apply the English doctrine.? Notwithstanding the provisions in section 102

Succession Act, 1865, and section 15 of the Transfer of Property Act
as it then stood—provisions which were cited for invalidating the gift by
way of an analogy—it was held that even though a gift to unborn grand-sons
was invalid under Hindu law, that did not necessarily make the gift void so
{gr as it was in favour of a grand-son in existence. It was pointed out that
the English rule usually defeats the intention of the testator and that in any

the English rule was not a safe guide for the construction of Indian

a

1 Leake v. Robinson (1817) 2 Mer. 633.
2 Rai Bishan Chand v. Mst. Asvardia Koer. LL. 6 All, $60 (P.C.)
176


177

23.4. Hindus —When, however, the Transfer of Property Act was made
applicable to Hindus, naturally the position was reversed and, by virtue of
the unamended section, such gifta totally failed. It was in 1929 that the
section was amended to read as it now stands. The principle under the
amentled section is that if there is a gift to a class and the interest fails with
regard to some of the members of the class by virtue of the rules contained
in sections 13 and 14, such interest fails only in regard to those persons,
and not in regard to the whole class. If, therefore, the whole plan of a donor
of property cannot be carried into effect, the court will yet give effect to a
part of it rather than hold that it shall fail entirely. After the gift has vested
in all or some members, they will hold it as tenants in common, so long
as they take as members of the class unless a joint tenancy is created by
express words.

23.5. English Act—It may, as a matter of interest, be noted that the
English Act of 1964 has also now adopted the same approach by proving,’
im effect, that person who entered the class within the perpetuities period
wil take, while those who entered the class too late will be excluded. Wri-
ters on English law usually describe this reforming provision as ai amend-
ment providing a “class-splitting” rule.

Of course, before applying this “class-splitting” beneficial rule, one
has to apply the other beneficial rules enacted in the 1964 Act, namely, the
“wait an See rule’ and ‘rule for reduction of age”. ess take a gift &
my grand-children on their attaining the of twenty-five,” which maj
void under the common law rule if the eranichildren are unborn at the date
of the gift. It may, in the first place, be valid if all the grand-children have
reached the age of four on the death of the donor who made the will or on the
death of the previous holder of the life interest. This is by virtue of the wait
and see rule. Next. the age could be reduced under the statutory provi-
sion, for reduction. The gift may still be void (even if the age is reduced
to twenty-one) in the case of a grand-child born after the termination of
the previous life interest. Now the class-splitting rule must be applied,
with the resuit that any grand-child who satisfies the contingency in time—
the contingency of attaining the age of twenty-five years—will take to the
exclusion of grand-children who do not so satisfy the contingency.

23.6. Recommendation.—Since the substance of section 15, as amended
in 1929, is sound, the only amendment which we recommend is the deletion
of the reference to section 13. This is consequential on the recommended
deletion’ of section 13.

1 Sections 465), 4(4), and 4(5), Perpetuities and Accumulations Act, 1964.
2. See recommendation as to section 13.



CHAPTER 24
DEPENDENT TRANSFERS
SEcrion 16

24.1. Dependent transfers.—Secti¢n 15 having dealt with one situation
concerned with the effect of interests which become void—gifts to a class—
another situation concerned with an infectious vice is dealt with in section 16,
which is concerned with what are known as dependent transfers.

Where, by reason of any of the rules contained in sections 13 and 14,
an interest created for the benefit of a Person or of a class of persons fails
in regard to such person or the whole of such class any interest created in
the same transaction and intended to take effect after or upon failure of
such prior interest also fails,

24.2. Principle-—The rule in the section is primarily based yj the
Presumed intention of the transferor, The transaction being indivisib! ee once
3 person transfers property and his whole interest is transferred, the failure
of the Period interest leads to the failure of the whole transaction.’ As ob-
served by Lord St. Leonards? in respect of a gift over. which was void :

“Tt was void, not because it was not within the line of perpetuity,
but on the ground that the limitation Over was never intent

The rule in section 16 applics only when the two events cannot be
‘separated; if they can be separated, then the transfer is not void, only the
invalid limitation is disregarded,3

24.3. Scope of dependent transfer—The scope of “dependent transfer”
tay be illustrated from a case under the Hindu Wills Act. Though section
16 is now made independent of the Hindu law, still there does not appear
to have been any conflict between the rule of that law, at any rate the rule
applicable to those to whom the Hindu Wills Act‘ applied and the rule en-
acted in the section. Ina Calcutta case®, a bequest of the trust-fund was
made in these terms : “My gteat-grandsons ba , when they attain majo-
rity, receive the whole to their satisfaction, and they will divide and take
the same in accordance with the Hindu law. God forbid. it, but should I
have no great-grandsons in the male line, then my daughters’ sons, when
they are of age, shall take the said from the trust-fund and divide
it according to the Hindu Shastras in vogue.”

1. Gour.
2. Moneypenning v. Derring. 2 De G.M. & 6. 182.
3. (a) Evers v. Challis, 7 छ...0, 531. 534.

(b) Watson v. Young, 28 Ch. D. 436, 443;

(९) Jones v. Westcomb, 1 Eq. Ca. Ab. 245;

(व) In re Bence, Smith v. Bence, (1891) 3 Ch. 242,
4. Now sections 255—260, Indian Succession Act, 1925.
3. Brajanath v. Anandamavi. 8 BR. 208.

178



179

Here the bequest to the daughters’ son was dependent on, and not alter-
native to, the gift to the great-grandsons and was therefore void.

24.4, Alternative gifts.—But, if, on the other hand, the bequest is in
these terms: “If, at the time when my daughters’ sons come of age, the
gift to my great-grandsons has not taken effect for any reason; then my daugh-
ters’ sons shail take the property”. ‘Then, the gift, being in the alternative,
would take effect, since it can be Presumed that the grantor intended the
Subsequent gift to take effect in any event, The section being based on the
Presumed intention of the grantor, there is scope for applying a different rule
where the deed shows that the intention of the testator was different. This
aspect will be further illustrated बॉल,

24.5. -inalysis of section 16.—Let us now analyse the important require-
ments of the section. The first requisite is that the gift over must have been
created in the same transaction. The gift over, being based upon a contin-
gency which is bad, becomes itself invalid, the reason being that the persons
entitled under the subsequent limitation were not intended to take® unless
and until the prior limitation is exhausted; and, as the prior limitation is
void, the subsequent gift can never come into operation. It is impossible
to give effect to the intentions of the settior in favour of the beneficiaries under
the subsequent limitation.* But this limitation does not necessarily apply to
limitation in dafault of appointment, in which usually the intention is that
they should take effect unless displaced by a valid exercise of the preceding
power of appointment. Thus, where the donees of a limited power of ap-
pointment purported to exercise it by appointing trustees upon such trusts
as A, onc of the objects of the power should, with certain consent, appoint,
and in default of, and subject to, aay such appointment, upon certain trusts
which were within the power, it was held that, although the power of ap-
pointment purported to be conferred on A was void, the trusts in default of
appointment were valid.‘

24.6. Section restricted to dependent transfer—The second requisite of
the section is that it is restricted to dependent transfers. If the ae over is
dependent upon the happening of either of two events, of which one is valid
as ai condition and the other is void, and the former event happens, the suc-
ceeding interest will take effect even though the latter event may be void as
4 condition. 1 the conditions are divisible, the valid disposition would take
effect without reference to the invalid contin gency. Thus take a deed in
which a gift over of property is made in the event of there never being any
child of A or in the event of no child attaining twenty-one.

24.7. One of two events.—Again, if the gift over is dependent upon the
happening of either of two events, one of which is legal and the other void,
the succeeding interest will take effect if the former event in fact happens,
although the second event may offend against the rule. In such cases, the
whole question depends upon whether the clause for carrying the estate over

1 Para. 24.6, infra. a
2. Para, 24.2, supra.
3. (a) Robinson v. Haricastle. 2 RR. 241. 151;
(0) Routledge y. Dorrie, 2 Ves, 357;
(६) Beard ४. Westcott, 5 8. & A. 801;
3 Moneypenny v. Derring 2 De G.M. & G. 145, 181, 182,
(०) In re Abbott Peacock v. Frigout, (1893) 1 Ch. $4, 57.
4, Webb. v. Sadier, LR. 8 Ch. 419.



180

js divisible or not. If it is, the valid disposition would take effect without
Teference to the invalid contingency. hws, take a deed in which a gift over
is made of property in the event of there never being any child of A or in the
event of no child attaining, etc., twenty-one. Now, here the first contin-
gency is valid, but the second is too remote, but the gift over would none-
theless take effect on the happening of the former event! The question in
such cases is, whether the gift can be split into two. alternatives, ir which
case, if the alternative, which is within the iegai jimits, happens, ine gilt
over would take effect.’

24.8. English Act of 1964.--We now turn to the English law. At
common law, if a subsequent gift is limited on the same contingency as @
void gift, that subsequent gift also fails. At common law, any gift which is
dependent or expectant upon a prior void gift is invalid.

Under the Act of 1964, section 6, a subsequent gift must be viewed
on its own merits, and will not fail merely because of dependency. Section
6 of that Act reads—

“6. A disposition shall not be treated as void for remoteness by
reason only that the interest disposed of is ulterior to and dependent
upon an interest under a disposition which is so void, and the vesting
of an interest shall not be prevented from being accelerated on the
failure of a prior interest by reason only that the failure arises because
of remoteness.”

This provision would seem to place the ‘burden of proving that the
subsequent gift is void on the person who so affirms. Tt reverses the common
law rule based on? the presumed intention of the grantor in favour of the
opposite rule based on the policy of the law to validate gifts.

24:9. Need for revising section 16.—We have given some thought to
the matter and have come to the conclusion that there is need for revising
section 16 on the same lines as section 6 of the English Act of 1964.
Although it can be said in favour of the existing section that it is based upon
the presumed intention of the transferor, the samo argument can be address-
ed in sy of the opposite view, namely, that the transferor intended a
benefit (१९० the ultimate beneficiary also, and that he himself would have
desired that if the first gift is legally not recognisable, the subsequent sift
should take effect.

24.10. Recommendation to revise section 16.—In the light of the above
discussion, we recommend that section 16 should be revised as follows :

“16, Where, by reason of the rule contained in’... ... Section 14,
an interest created for the benefit of a person or of a class of persons
fails in regard to such person or the whole of such class, any interest
created in the same transaction and intended to take effect after or upon
failure of such prior interest shall not fail by reason only of failure of
the first mentioned interest,”

1, Watson v. Young, 28 Ch. D. 436, 443;
Evers v. Challis, 7 H.L.C. 531.
2. Evers v. Challis, 7 H.L.C. 531, 547.
3. Para 24.2, supra.
4, Para, 24.8, supra.
5. Mention of section 12 has to be omitted in any case, as that section is being
feted,



CHAPTER 25
DIRECTION FOR ACCUMULATION
SECTION 17

25.1. Gist of section 17—Restrictions on the alienation or a vesting of
the corpus have so far been dealt with. In order to encourage the free cir-
culation of property, the law also considers it necessary to provide restric-
tions on the accumulation of income. Income cannot unreasonably be ac-
cumulated for a long period. Though opinions may vaty as to what is and
what is not an unreasonably long period, yet the principle, broadly stated,
has been accepted in the common law and also in our statutory provisions.
That the opinion may vary from time to time and place to place is obvious
from the fact that the law on the subject has undergone a lengthy process of
evolution in England. It may be noted that in Hindu law, the rule was
more general than as stated in section 17. In Hindu law, a direction for
accumulation is not void unless it is found to be so unreasonable as to be
against public policy, or if it is given for the purpose of carrying out an
iMegal object or is, in its effect, inconsistent with Hindu law.’

We shalt revert to this aspect later. The section is in these terms :

“17. (1) Where the terms of a transfer of property direct that the
income arising from the property shall be accumulated either wholly or
in part during a period longer than—

(a) the life of the transfer, or

(b) a period of eighteen years from the date of the transfer,

such direction shail, save as hereinafter provided, be void to the
extent to which the period during which the accumulation is directed
exceeds the longer of the aforesaid periods, and at the end of such last-
mentioned period, the property and the income thereof shall be disposed.
of as if the period during which the accumulation has been directed to
be made had elapsed.”

There are exceptions to this general provision contained in sub-section
(2). It provides that this section shall not affect any direction for accumu-
lation for the purpose of—

(i) the payment of the debts of the transferor or any other persoa
taking any interest under the transfer, or y Pe
(ii) the provision of portions for children or remoter issue of the
transferor or of any other person taking any interest under the
transfer, or
(iii) the preservation or maintenance of the property transferred;
and such direction may be made accordingly.

25.2. The right to terminate accumulation—A beneficiary of full age
who has an absolute vested and indefeasible right to the capital and income
may terminate the accumulation by directing the trustees to pay the fand
to him.

1 Rajendra v. Raj Kumari, (1907) LLR. 34 Cal. 5.


182

In the case of Saunders,’ the iestator bequeathed his stock to trustees
on trust to accumulate the dividends until Vautier should attain the age of
twenty-five, and then to transfer the capital and the accuraulated divi
to Vautier. Vautier, having attained the age of twenty-one, contended that
he was entitled to stop the accumulations and to have the fund transferred to
him immediately. Counsel for Vautier argued that he now had a vested in-
terest in the stock, and that since accumulation was for his sole benefit, he
was entitled to waive, it and demand an immediate transfer.

Lord Langdale MLR. held :

“I think that principle has been repeatedly acted upon; and where

a legacy is directed to accumulate for a certain perio रत or where the

payment is postponed, the legatee, if he has an absolute indefeasible

interest in the legacy, is not bound to wait until the expiration of that
period but may require payment the moment he is competent to give

a valid discharge.”

25.3. History. Before 1929, the section was numbered as section 18,
and present section £8 was numbered as section 17. Also, the provision
was differently worded.”

25.4. History of English law. The English rule as to accumulations has
undergone a process of evolution for about two centuries. It was the out-
come of the decision in the case of Thelluson.* That case arose out of the
will of Peter Thelluson, who, in 1796 A.D., disposed of his vast property
by will and excluded his issue from enjoyment, directing accumulation of
income for the period of nine lives—all in being—at the date of his death.
‘At that time, there was no statute, prohibiting accumulation and the be-
quest had to be upheld, but the will led to the passing of the Accumulation
Act, 1800 (39—40 Geo. 3, s. 98), which was replaced by the Conveyanc-
ing Act, 1881, and which, in its turn, was replaced by sections 164---166 of
the Law of Property Act, 1925, slightly amended in 1964.

25.5. Pre-1929 Law in India—Before its amendment in 1929, the
law in India allowed accumulation for a period of one year only. But, in
cases decided independently of the statutory provision, it was held that if
there was nothing per se illegal in a direction to accumulate, and if such
a direction was not unreasonable or for carrying out an illegal object, it
should be’ upheld. However, the cases did not lay down any definite rule
which the lower courts could easily follow. In 1929, the law was amend-
ed as it now stands.

25.6, English law.—The Englis! he 617 शा several periods during
which accumulation can validity be di 4 viz.,—

(a) the life of the grantor or settlor; or

(b) a term of 21 years from the death of the grantor, settlor or
testator; or

(०) the duration of the minority or respective minorities only of
any person or persons living or en ventre sa mere at the death
of the grantor, settlor or testator; or

1. Saunders y. Vautier, (1841) 4 Beav. 115,

2, Para 25.5. infra.
३. Thelluson v. Woodford, 4 RR. 205, affirmed (1805) 8 RR. 104.

4. Section 164, Law of Property Act. 1925, as amended in 1964.



183

9) the duration of the minority or respective minorities only of any

@ person or persons, who under the limitations of the instrument
directing the accumulations would, for the time being, if of full
age, be entitled to the income directed to be accumulated; or

(०) a term of twenty-one years from the date of making of the dis-
position; or

f) duration of the minority or respective minorities of any person or

५ persons in being or en venire sa mere at that date,

Section 165 of the Law of Property Act, 1925 provides—

to be made by the last preceding sections, and accordingly an ex;
‘trust for accumulation for any other permitted period shall not be deem.
ed to have been invalidated or become invalid, by reason of accumu-
Jations also having been made as aforesaid during such minority.”
Section 166 of the Law of Property Act, 1925 provides—

“166. (1) No person may settle or dispose of any property in such
manner that the income thereof shall be wholly or partially accumulated
for the purchase of land only, for any longer period than the duration
of the minority or respective minorities of any person or persons who,
under the limitations of the instrument directing the accumulation, would
for the time being, if of full age, be entitled to the income so directed to
be accumulated.

“(2) This section does not, nor do the enactments which it re
places, apply to accumulations to be held as capital money for the pur-
pose of the Settled Land Act, 1925, or the enactments replaced by that
Act, whether or not the accumulations are primarily liable to be laid
out in the purchase of land.”

‘ Section 12 (2) of the Perpetuities and Accumulations Act, 1964, pro-
vides—
“12, (2) It is hereby declared that the restrictions imposed by
५१० section 164 ( of the Law of Property Act, 1925) apply in rela~
tion to a power to accumulate income whether or not there is a duty
to exercise that power, and that Pose Bey ly whether or not the power
to accumulate extends to income proms by the investment of income
previously accumulated.”

Sub-section (2) deals with two Previously uncertain points: (i) whether
a ar, as opposed to a trust, to accumulate was caught by section
164. It was held in Re Robb" that the section applied to mere powers,
and that decision is now confirmed; (ii) whether section 164 applied to an
accumulation at simple interest, as opposed to compound interest. There
were decisions either way, but the Act now provides that section 164 shall
apply to such a case. Section 12(2), however, is not retrospective,

25.7. Comparison with the English law.—It may be noted that the
provision in England is more liberal than section 17, and permits accumu-
tion for the longer of several alternative periods mentioned in section 164

1 Re Robb, (2953) Ch. 459,
13—885 Mof L-w/77



184

of the Law of Property Act, 1925, slightly amended in 1964. In contrast,
under section 17 of the Transfer of Property Act, the period is reduced to 18
years or life of the transferor. In England, on the other hand, the period
18 more elastic. The question then arises whether there is need to revise
our law, or whether it should be kept as it is. It appears to us that some
of the provisions made in English law are worth adopting in our section
inasmuch as such liberalisation is not likely to create any practical difficul-
ties and, speaking theoretically also, the law should not object, as a matter
of policy, so tong as income is not tied up for an unduly long time. After
all, the fered of life of the transferor or the period of 18 years from the
date of the death of the transferor is not the only reasonable period, and
there could be cases where a direction expressed differently may yet be
reasonable. For example, a period of 18 years from the date of the death
of the transferor or a petiod expressed as expiring with the minority of a
living person or a person living at the date of the death of the transferor
would, prima facie, appear to be reasonable, °

25.8. We have taken note of the fact that the English law is more
than section 17, inasmuch as a term of twenty-one years from the

in the law. It also permits the alternative of expiry of minority. There
is also the fact that the English law has regard to persons in the womb.
With suitable adaptations, these alternative periods are worth adding to the
section.

25.9. Hindu law.—We may note that the Hindu law was not right. As
far back as 1855, no less an authority than Colville C.J., delivering the
judgment of the Supreme Court of Calcutta,® expressed the opinion that it
‘was competent to Hindu testator expressly to provide for the accumulations
of the surplus income of his estate within the limit allowed by law and to
make those accumulations subject to a limitation order as there described.

Thus, a direction to accumulate is not fundamentally bad; it is bad
only if it offends some independent rule of Hindu law. Thus, it may in-
fringe the rule against perpetuities or be fepugnant and void as an attempt
to deprive a person of the enioyment of that which has become his property.
In Watins v, Administrator-General Jenkins C.J., observed that, on prin-
ciple, an accumulation can be validly directed, for so long as at a time as
the absolute vesting of the entire interest can be withheld, or for so long a
time as that during which the corpus of the property ca can be rendered inalien-
able, or its course or is devolution can be di and controlled by a
testator.

This is an additional consideration for making the law liberal within
due limits.

25.10. Recommendation as to section 17(1) —Accordingly, we re-
commend that section 17(1), clauses (a) and (b), should be tevised to
read as under :

“(a)_ the life of the transferor, or

“Section 164, Law of Property Act, 1925, as amended in 1964077 164, Law of Property Act, 1925, as amended in 1964.
2. Smt. Sooryumoney Dossee v. Dinoobandoo Mullick, ( 1855) 1 Boulnois 223, cited
by'eonine ८४. ‘eo Watkins v, Administrator-General, (1914) LL.R. 407 Cal. 88,

3. Watkins v. Administrator-General, (1914) LLR. 47 Cal. 88, 93.


185

(0) a period of eighteen years from the date of the transfer, or

(०) @ period of eighteen years from the date of the death of the
transferor, or

(d) the minority of any person living or in the womb at the date
of the transfer or at the date of death of the transferor.”

25.11. Amendment of section 17(2).—As to sub-section (2) of section
17, we recommend the addition of a further exception in these terms—

“(iv) the accumulation of the produce of timber or wood.”

This has been suggested by the corresponding exception in England,*
which reads—

““(iii) respecting the accumulation of the produce of timber or wood.”
We believe that this amendment should not raise any controversy.

$$ AADAAhhwsjSJjp eee
1, Section 164(2) (iii), Law of Property Act, 1925.


CHAPTER 26
TRANSFERS FOR BENEFIT OF PUBLIC
Section 18
26.1. Gist—Transfers for the benefit of the public have been excluded
by section 18 from certain restrictions. The section is in these terms :—

“18. The restrictions in sections 14, 16 and 17 shall not apply
in the case of a transfer of pr for the benefit of the public in the
advancement of religion, kno’ , commerce, health, safety, or any
other object beneficial to mankind.”

Although the section does not use the word “charity” or “charitable
purposes”, there is hardly any doubt that it is meant for transfers in favour
of charities. The words “benefit of the public” and “object beneficial to
mankind” make this clear.

26.2. Gifts for charity—special position—Both in India and elsewhere,
gifts for charity have received social approval. They have also received
certain special privileges in a law, though the abuse—suspected or real—
of some of those privileges has sometimes led to a fluctuation of views as to
the propriety of conferring special benefits on charities. This has been
particularly so in the field of fiscal privileges. Confining ourselves, however,
to non-fiscal matters, and leaving aside the peculiar historical developments
in England which led to the Statutes of Mortmain, we may state that the
law has been tender towards transfers for charitable purposes in general and
it would be true to say that several types of provisions which would not
be normally permissible, become so where a charitable purpose is shown.
The section under discussion, to put the matter broadly, exempts charities
from the rule against perpetuities (section 14) and from two other provi-
sions—dependent transfers (section 16) and accumulation (section 17).

26.3. Charity in Vedic and post-Vedie texts—From the earliest times,
the merit of charity has been recognised in India. The Rig Veda contains
passages extolling the merits of charity. One of them is thus translated by

fax Mueller :1 “He who gives alms goes to the highest place in heaven.”

The Hindu concept of charity is not confined to religious purposes, even.
though the two often co-exist. rely secular objects were equal

wortl et The Vedic notions of hospitality are interesting, and it is well-

that in the Hindu household the guest is treated as a divinity hence the
social recognition of “guest houses” as a kind of charitable institution.

26.4. Impartible property-—Property dedicated for pious uses has béen
made impartible under Hindu law, as much from the fundamental idea of
its not being private property, as from a desire to maintain uninterrupted use
of the same for pious purposes.? This is one example of the special treat-
ment afforded to charities.

1 Rig Veda 1, 125. 5-6. cited in Max Mueller’s Chins from a German Worksbop,
‘Vo!. I, page 46; Hemadri, Danakhanda, Bib. Ind., page 5.
2. PN. Saraswati, Hindu Law of Endowments (1897 Ed.), Chapter 7.
186


187

We need not, for the present purpose, detain ourselves with a detailed
discussion of the expressions used in the texts to indicate what are now
described as “religious and charitable” Purposes;—expressions such as Ishta
and Purtta, Yoga Kshema. Nor are we concerned with the meaning of the
latter. But, at least according to the one construction of the passage in the
Mitakshara," dealing with property not liable to partition, where it speaks of
“Yoga Kshema”, the expression is taken in this sense—Yoga means a fund
for the performance of religious ceremonies and. Kshemam signifies a
reservoir of water or the like constructed for public benefit?

Of course, the mention of “reservoir of water” is merely to be taken as
an illustration. The dominant element is Public benefit—which, it may be
of interest to note, is also the most important element in the modern con-
cept of charities. The construction of reservoirs is unanimously classified
by the Hindu ages amongst purtta (roughly, charitable works). The
commonest enumeration of these reservoirs is “Vapi-Kupa-tarnagini”, an
enumeration occurring not only in later texts,? (Yama, Atri and Varsha
Purana), but also in Ashwalayana, But these were not the only instances
cf purtta works. Gifts for learning and gifts for hospitals form ‘an equally
important category of “purtta” works,4

26.5. Meaning of Ishta and Purtta—Ishta, in ancient texts, includes
Agnihotra, Vedic gifts, sacrifices, Pashubandh, Chaturmashya, Agnistoma,
offered to priests at sacrifies, religious austerity, ‘truth, studying in the Vedas,
Vaisvedeva sacrifice and Atithya.

Purtta works are gifts and charity, according to the Smarta and not
Vedic rites. A text of a Smriti cited by Hemadri says,—they are gifts made
outside the sacrificial ground. Purtta works inchade the following—eifts,
made during eclipses, and other days auspicious for such acts, tanks, groves,
Processions for the gods, wells, temples, rest-houses, giving of food and
Felief to the diseased. Gifts for educational purposes, though strictly not
coming within the definition of Purtta, have been extolled in the Smrities
and Puranas as of high merit. Tmparting learning and gifts of land and
cows are declared to be gifts of surpassing merit, in a text of an Upanishada
cited by Hemadri. Hemadri also declares, by citing many texté, that assis-
tance to stdudents in any shape in prosecuting their. studies is of great
merit.

26.6. History of charities in the West—So far as thé West is concerned,
it is highly probable that the rudiments of the law of charities were derived
from the Roman or Civil law. In Lord Chief Justice Wilmot’s notes of his
opinions (pp. 53, 54), it is said : “Donations for public purposes were
sustained in the civil law, and applied, when illegal, cy pres to other ‘Purposes,
one hundred years before christianity was the religion of the Empire.” And
for this cited Dig. Lib. tit. 2, De Usuet usufruc. Legatorum, pie 17.

1 Mitakshara. Chapter 1, section 4, clause 3, reproduced in Vira” Mitrodaya,
Chapter शा, Section 2

2 See Golap Chandra Sarkar’s Translation, quoted by P. N. Saraswati, Hindu Law
of Endowments (1897 Ed.) Chapter 7.

3 Ashwalavana. Grihva Parishishta. TV. 9. Bib. Ind., page 342. P. N. Saraswati,
Hindu Law of Endowments (1897 Ed.), Chapter 8.

4 PN Seraswati, Hindu Law of Endowments (1897 Ed.), page 27, para 24.

5 Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919), page 475, 1137,



188

One of the earliest fruits of the Emperor Constantine’s real or preten-
ded zeal for Christianity was a permission to his subjects to bequeath their
Property to the Church.! Of course, the Church was originally regarded
as the “bride” of God—whence the word “endowment” which has its asso-
ciation with dower.

The permission given by Constantine was soon abused to so great a
degree as to induce the Emperor Valentinian to enact a “mortmain law”, by
which it was restrained.”

But this restraint was gradually relaxed; and in the time of Justinian
it became a fixed maxim, of Roman jurisprudence, that legacies to pious uses
(which included all legacies destined for works of picty or charity, whether
they related to spiritual or to temporal concerns), were entitled to peculiar
favour, and to be deemed privileged testaments.?

Thus, for example, a legacy of ornaments for a church, a legacy for
the maintenance of a clergyman to instruct poor children, and a legacy for
their sustenance, were esteemed legacies to pious and charitable uses.

26.7. Public benefit in regard to religion—In general, a charitable
endowment is one which has for its object the benefit of the public or of
mankind. A religious endowment is one which has for its object the esta-
blishment, maintenance or worship of an idol, deity or other object or pur-
Pose subservient to religion. Every religious endowment, in the sense ex-
Plained above, is not charitable. “The following definition of “charitable
Purpose” occurs in the Charitable Endowments Act :!

“2. In this Act, ‘charitable purpose’ includes relief of the poor,
education, medical relief—and the advancement of any other object of
general public utility but does not include a purpose which relates ex-
clusively to religious teaching or worship.”

An endowment may be charitable without being religious, and it may
be religious without being charitable—particularly where the element of
public benefit is missing. This is true where an endowment is private in the
sense that the dedication is limited to a family god, meant for a family or
families or a small and certain body of individuals and the public has no
access to the idol. In general, any Property, movable and immovable, that
8 person can dispose of by gift or will may form the subject of endowment
by gift or will, as the case may be.

26.8. Hindu endowments—Hindu endowments are mostly intended for
the benefit of the public, but, by way of exception, private ownership may
be found. In general, the distinction between a publ ie and private endow-
ment depends upon its extensiveness.¢ The essential characteristic of a

charitable gift is that is must be for the benefit of the public or mankind.

1 Cod, Theodos, Lib, 16 Tit, 2, 1.4.
2 Cod. Theodos, Lib. 16, title 2, 1.20.
3 Domat, Civil Law, Vol. 2, B. 4,
4 Domat, Vol, 2, 8. 4, tit, 2, 6.
5 Section 2, Charitable Endowments Act, 1890.

6 Prakash Chandra v. Subhash Chandra, 1.L.R. 37 Cal. 67, 79.

2, 6.



Wholesale bequests of the estate to religious charity are not unknown."
In fact, where a gift is made not a 1 person but to an idol—a dedica-
tion—one cannot engraft upon it the ish Iaw of perpetuities.?

26.9. Statutory precedenis—Indian. statute law contains a number of

Provisions wherein the aspect of charity becomes important. While section

8 confers a benefit on charity, section 118 of the Succession Act contains a
restrictive provision for death-bed gifts to charity.

Section 118 of the Indian Succession Act is based on the Statute of
Mortmain (9 Geo. II c. 36). Although it was held in Mayor of Lyons v.
Eats India Co.,* that this statute has no application in India, the words used
in this section are “religious uses or charitable uses” and the illustrations
are adopted from the enumerations of objects mentioned in the Statute of

Elizabeth, and the provisions as to the execution of wills for a period of
six. months in the registry are also borrowed from the English law mentioned
above.

26.10. Income-tax Act—In section 4(3) of the Indian Income Tax
Act 1922, charitable purposes included relief of the poor education, medical
relief and advancement of any other object of general public utility. The
word “include indicates that the definition is merely enumerative.®

In the Charitable Endowments Act VI of 1890, charitable purposes
“include relief of the poor, education, medical relief and the advancement
of any other objects of general public utility but does not include a purpose
which relates exclusively to religious teaching or worship.” In section 92
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the words used are “public purposes
of a charitable or religious nature.”

In the Bombay Public Trusts Act,* a ‘public trust’ is defined as meaning
as express or constructive trust for either a public religious or charitable
Purpose or both; there is an inclusive portion which is not material for the
Present purpose. In the same Act,’ it is provided that for the purposes of
that Act, a charitable purpose includes—

(1) Relief of poverty or distress;

(2) Education;

(3) Medical relief;

(4) Provision for facilities for recreation or leisure-time occupations
(certain conditions are added which are not reproduced here);
anc

(5) The advancement of any other object of general public utility,

but not including a purpose which relates exclusive 5 to religious
teaching for worship.

1 Gour, Hindu Code (1938), page 804.

2 Markby J. Esamy ५. Krishna, 2 Benj Law Reports Original Cases 47;
2800, ५. Sona, LER. 33 Bom. पी 8 !

3 Paruck, Succession Act (1965),

4 Mayor of Lyons v. East India Co., 1. M.LA, 175. 1
5 Commissioner I. T. v, National Mutual Association, 1.L.R. $7 Bom. 519.

6 Section 2(13), Bombay Public Trusts Au, 1950.

7 Section 9, Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950.



190°

In the Income-tax Act, 1961, ‘charitable purposes’ are defined in an

inclusive manner. They are defined as including ling “relief of the poor, educa-

tion, medical relief and advancement of any object of general public
utility not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit.”

26.11. Moder decisions—It is now time to refer to the modem
doctrines as to charity found in judicial decisions. Without necessarily
implying that every rule of English law in this field will be valid in India
also, we would like to draw aes nm the rich material presenting a variety of
fact situations available in English decisions.

In order that a trust may be legally charitable, its purposes must, in
Engiand, fall within the spirit and intendment of the preamble to the Statute
43 Elizabeth I Chapter 4, often referred to as the Charitable Uses Act, 1601.
Though that statute was repealed by the Mortmain and Charitable Uses Act,
1881, its preamble was preserved by section 13(2) of that Act. Later, by
the Charities Act, 1960, the preamble was also repealed, but section 38(4:
of the Act of 1960 provides that any reference in any enactment or docu-
ment to a charity within the meaning, purview and interpretation of the
Charitable Uses Act, 1601, or of the preamble to it shall be construed as a
reference to a charity within the meaning which the word bears as a legal
term according to the law of England and Wales. The general understand-
ing is? that even now, in order for a trust to be legally charitable, its pur-
poses must fall within the spirit and intendment of the aforesaid preamble—a
Proposition which has been re-affirmed by the House of Lords. The same
opinion has been expressed in one of the annual reports of the Charity Com-
missioners in England.*

26.12. Statute of Elizabeth I—Every reported English case has been’
decided, or ought to have been decided, with the Picamble to the Statute of
Elizabeth I in mind. The objects enumerated in the preamble to the Statute
were :

“The relief of aged, important, and poor people; the maintenance
of sick and maimed soldiers and mariners, schools of learning, free
schools and scholars of universities; the repair of bridges, havens,
causeways, churches, sea banks and highways; the education and pre-
ferment of orphans; the relief, stock or maintenance of houses of correc-
tion; marriages of poor maids; supportation, aid and help of young
tradesmen, handicraftsmen and decayed; the relief or redemp-
tion of prisoners or captives, and the aid the aid or ease of any poor inhabitants
concerning payment of fifteens, setting out of soldiers and other taxes.”

26.13. Case-law based on the statute (Romilly)—Looking to the
reamble, and not behind it, the courts have built up a great body of case
. “Often it may appear illogical and even capricious. It could hardly
be otherwise when its guiding principle is so vaguely stated and is liable to
be so differently interpreted in different ages. For more than 200 years
after the enactment of the Statute of Elizabeth I, no attempt was made to

1 Section 2(15), Income-tax Act, 1961.

2 0. R. Marshall (1961), 24 Modern Law Review 444; Spencer Maurice in
(1960) 24 Conveyancer 390.

3 Scottish Br. etc. Society v, Glasgow City Corporation. (1967) 3 Ail. E.A. 215.
4 Report of the Charity Commissioners in 1966, Paragraph 31.

5 Tudor on Charities.

6 See Gilmour ९, Coats, (1949) A.C. 426, 443, (per Viscount Simonds).



191

classify the objects or purposes which shad Peon been held to be charitable as
being within the letter or the spirit and intendment of the preamble. How-
ever, in 1805, Sir Samuel Romilly (then Mr. Romilly), arguing in Morice v.
Bishop of Durham, put forward a classification under four heads. These
heads were—first, relief of indi; . second, advancement of learning, third,
the advancement of religion, earth “which is the most difficult”, the
advancement of objects of general public utility.

26.14. Pemsel’s case—Lord Macnaghten, in Income Tax Commis-
sioners ५, Pemsel,? substantially accepted Sir Samuel Romilly’s classification
Pith two significant variations. He classified charitable purposes under four

(1) The relief of poverty;

(2) The advancement of education;

(3) The advancement of religion;

(4) Other purposes beneficial to the community not falling under
any of the preceding heads.

A significant variation in contrast with Romally’s classification is the
substitution of the advancement of “education” for the advancement of
“earning”. In this respect, Lord Macnaghten’s language was more accurate
than the language used by Sir Samuel Romilly.

26.15. Genesis of section 18—It is well known that the enunciation in
Pemsel's case was based on the classification put forward by Sir Samuel
Romilly as counsel in the case of Morice.* Section 18 was inserted at a time
when the decision in Pemsel’s case had not been rendered, although the
arguments of Sir Samuel Romilly in the case of Morice were perhaps known
to the draftsman of our Act. It is not very clear whether the enumeration
in section 18 deliberately adds certain objects,—such as “commerce”—which
were not usually mentioned in the judicial formulations of charity in England.
It is, however, possible that the mention of “commerce” was suggested by
the enumeration, in the preamble to the Statute of Elizabeth, of certain
objects, such as the “repair of bridges, ports, havens, causeways...... sea
banks and highways and the supportation, aid and help of young tradesmen,
handicraftsmen....” Specific mention of “commerce”, in any case,
creates no anomaly, since the dominant requirement of the public object is
very much there.

26.16. Question of law—lIt is to be noted that whether or not a trust
is charitable is a question of law, and the same principle would apply to the
construction of words referable to public benefit even in a statutory formula-
tion. The question has to be decided led by the judge in the light of the circums-
tances in which the institution or trust came into existence and the sphere
in which it operates.‘ In arriving at his conclusion on this point, the judge
is completely unaffected by the opinion of the settlor or testator as to
whether the purpose which he has chosen is charitable or not. This has

1 Morice v. Bishop of Durham, (1805) 10 Ves 583.

2 Income Tax Commissioners v. Pemsel, (1891) A.C. 531, 583.

3 Morice ४, Bishop of Durham, (1805) 10 Ves. 522.

4 Tacorpovated Council of Law Reporting v. Attorney-General, (1971) 3 All. E.R.


192

been settled long ago in England, and is the law in India. It is equally well
settled that the opinion of the trustees in this Tespect is not binding.' It
was on this principle that in the oft-cited case of Hummeltenberg,? Russel J.
observed that trusts might be established in perpetuity for the promotion
of “all kinds of fantastic (though not unlawful) object, of which the training
of poodles to dance might be a mild “example.” Conversely, even if the
motive of the stipulation is not necessarily that of generosity, the कक Se
may still be regarded as charitable if it is char-table in the eye of the law.
In another case decided in the same year as Hummeltenberg, it was held® that
a bequest to provide for the erection of a stained glass window in a church
was Charitable even though the motive of the testatrix was to perpetuate her

memory and not to beautify the church or to benefit the parishianers,

26.17. Vagueness—The spirit and intendment of the Statute of
Elizabeth has received considerable attention in recent times. In a case
which arose in West Indies‘, a tax payer had covenanted to make an
annual payment to a “Citizens Advice and Aid Service”, and the issue
before the court was whether this was a charitable purpose. Lord Wilber-
force observed that the object of the service did not reveal any single domi-
nant purpose of a manifestly charitable character and held that the trust
was not charitable. This was primarily for the reason that the trust was
expressed in language that was vague as to permit the property to be used
for non-charitabie purposes. In order that a trust may be. valid under the
fourth head of the enumeration in C.LT. v. Pemsel, it must be for ihe धरा
pose sufficiently definite and specific to enable the court to control , it
necessary, administer its application in a manner recognised as charitable.

26.18. Public purpose——The aspect of benefit of the community was
given a wide construction in a fairly recent English case relating to Law
Reports,’ where it was held that the role which the Law Reports play in
the development and administration of judge made law was a purpose bene-
ficial to the community, since without them the administration and develop-
ment of the law would be difficult, if not impossible.

26.19. Recent cases—As to the word “charitable” or “charity”
appearing in a statute, after some vacillation, there has emerged a judicial
opinion that a strong presumption exists in favour of their interpretation
in & legal sense. In England, by this is meant the interpretation given by
the House of Lords in Income Tax Special Purposes Commissioners ४.
Pemsel®. It was there laid down that the words “for charitable purposes”
and “charity” have a clearly defined tegal meaning in English (and, since
that case, United Kingdom) laws, ie., a meaning which is to be derived
from that which the courts, including particularly the House of Lords in
Pemsel, placed upon that expression by reference to the “index or chart”
provided by the preamble to the Statute of Eliz. 1 (Charitable Uses Act,

1 Re Wooten’s Will Trust (1968) 2 All. E.R. 618,

2 Hammeltenberg, (1923) 1 Chancery 237, 242.

3 Re King, (1923) 1 Chancery 243.

4 D’Aguiar v. Commissioner of National Inland Revenue, (1970) 15 West Indies
Reports 198: (1970) Tax Reports 31; (1970) Current Law 178 (P.C.); see 85
Taxation 286.

5 Incorporated Council of Law Reporting etc. v. Attorney-General, (1971) 3 All.

6 Income Tax Special Purposes Commissioners v. Pemsel, (1891) A.C. $31,


193

We may now deal with a few important points concerning some of
the heads of charity.

26.20. Poverty—“Poverty” has been dealt with in some of the judicial
decisions : To quote Lord Evershed M.R*

“Poverty, of course, does not mean destitution. It is a word of
wide and some what indefinite import, and, perhaps, it is not unfairly
paraphrased for present purposes as meaning persons who have to
‘zo short’ in the ordinary acceptation of that term, due regard being
had to their status in life and so forth.”

As Lord Smonds observed,? “there may be a good charity for the
telief of persons who are not in grinding need or utter destitution... (but
relief connotes need of some sort, either need for a home, or for the means
to provide for some necessity or quasi-necessity, and not merely an amuse~
ment however healthy.”

26.21. Poverty and public benefit—Poverty is the major anomatous
head of charity for which the requirement of public benefit is not essential,
or is, at least, greatly modified. | The law of charity in relation to poverty
has followed its own line, and a series of cases beginning with Isaac v.
Defriez,s- has established the validity of trusts for “poor relations”, or
other groups of persons who are not normally regarded as forming for
this purpose a section of the community. Thus, a trust for the relief of
peverty was held to be charitable in Gibson v. South American Stores,
(Gath and Chayes, Ltd.)> where the beneficiaries were selected by the tie
of common employment, and in Re Young’s Will Trusts,> where there was
a gift to the trustees of the Savage Club “upon trust to be used by them as
they shall in their absolute discretion think fit for the assistance of may
fellow members by way of persons or grants who may fall on evil days.”
The existing cases on this matter were considered by the Court of Appeal
in Re Scarisbrick,’ where, following life interests to her children, a testat-
rix gave half her residue to such relations, 1.९., relations in any degree,
of her children as should be in needy circumstances. It was held that
the exceptional rule in relation to trusts for the relief of poverty applied
just as much to a trust for immediate distribution as to a per-
petual trust. It was pointed out, however, that it would be diffe-
rent where the trust was not for the relief of poverty, albeit among a class
not normally regarded as forming a section of the public, but an ordinary
gift to some particular individual or individuals, even though limited to the
amount required to relieve his or their necessities if in necessitous circum:
stances—such as gifts to named persons in needy circumstances, or to a

1 In Re Coulthurst's Will Trusts, (1951) 1 All, E.R. 774, 776 (1951) Ch, 661,
666 (C.A.) (Evershed M.R.).

21, R. Commrs. v. Saddeley, (1955) 1 All. E.R. $25, $29; (1985) A.C. 572, 585
H. L. (Lord Simonds).

3 Petit, Equity and Trusts.

4 a Isaac v, Defriez (1754) 2 Amb. 595;

AG, v, Price (1810) 17 Ves. 571.

5 Gibson v, South American Stores (Gath and Chaves, Lid.) (1949) 2 All. BR,
985; (1950) Ch 177, C.A.5 5 | £.] +
(951) 1५ a 0९ Re Coulthurst's Will Trusts, (1951) 1 All, E.R, 774;

5 re Young's Will Trusts, (1955) 3 All. E.R. 689.

८ Scarisbrick, (1951) 1 All. E.R. 3 | €
Re Cohen, (1973) 1 Au ER. a $22; (1951) Ch. 622



194

uarrow class of near relatives, for example, such of a testator’s statutory
next of kin as at his death should be in needy circumstances. Most of the
cases were reviewed by the House of Lords in Dingle v. Turner,’ where the
validity of the property exception was confirmed. Their Lordship agreed
that it was a natural development of the “poor relations” decisions to
hold as charitable trusts, for “poor employees” of an indvidual or com-
pany (the case before the House), or poor members of a club or society,
and they held that it would be illogical to draw a distinction between different
Kinds of poverty trusts.

26.22. Education—“Education” has furnished a useful ground for
controversy-—we are dealing with the cases relating to education though
the expression used in section 18 is “knowledge”.

Schools of learning, free schools and scholars in universities are
specifically mentioned in the Statute of Elizabeth, and many other edu-
cational purposes have been held to come within its spirit and intendment.

Education is not restricted to the narrow sense of a master teaching a
class, but includes the education of artistic taste,> the promotion or en-
couragement of those arts and graces of life which are, perhaps, the finest
anc best part of the human character”.*

Education includes the improvement of a useful branch of human
knowledge and its public dissemination.t As Farewell, 3. observed—‘a
tide on an elephant may be educational. At any rate it brings the reality
of the elephant and its uses to the “child’s mind, in lieu of leaving him to
mere book learning. It widens his mind, and in that broad sense is
educatonal.”

26.23. Knowledge—It has since been explained’ that education was
used here in a wide sense “certainly extending beyond teaching, and that
‘the requirement is that, in order to be charitable, research must either be
of educational value to the researcher or must be so directed as to lead to
something which will pass into the store of educational material, or so as
to improve the sum of communicable knowledge, in an area which education
may cover—education in this last context extending to the formation of
literary taste and appreciation.” It is not enough, however, that the object
should be educational in the sort of loose sense in which all experience
may be said to be educative.*

26.24. Religion—Advancement of religion is a Separate head of cha-
tity, and this obviously is not confined to any particular religion. Even
in England, it was not so confined. Romilly, MR. observed in Thornton’s
case :

“It is generally accepted that the Court of Chancery makes no
distinction between on réligion and another... Cistinction between _on religion and another.......... (or one sect and

1 Dingle v, Turner (1972) 1 Alt, E.R. 876; (1972) 610. HL.

2 Royal Choral Society ४. 1. R. Commrs., (1943) 2 All. E.R. 101, पु

3 Per Vaisey J. in Re Shaw's Will Trusis, (1952) 1 All. E.R. 49. 53; (1952) Ch.
163, 172 (the wife of G. Bernard Shaw).

4 Incorporated Council of Low Reporting for England and Wales v. A.G., (1971)
3 All. E.R. 1929, 1046; (1972) Ch. 73, 102 (C.A.) (ner Bucklay. LJ.).

5 Re Hop kins’ Will Trusts, (1964) 3 All. E.R. 46. 52; (1965) Ch. 669, 680, per
Wilberforce J. See (1965) 29 Con. 368 (M. Newark and A. Samuels).

61. R. Commrs, v. Beddelep, (1955) 1 All, E.R. 525, 529; (1955) A.C. 572, 585
(H. L. per Lord Simonds): .

7 Thornton ४. Howe, (1862) 31, Bear, 14, 19 (Romilly, M.R.) Gilmour v. Couts,
(1949) 1 All. E.R. 848;
(1949) A.C, 427 (HLL.); Re Watson, Hobbs v. Smith, (1973) 3 All E.R. 678.



195

another... | (unless) the tenets of a particular sect inculcate doctrines
adverse to the very foundations of all “religion acd .... subversive
of all morality. ... Ls the [tendency were not immoral and हज
this (१007 might consider the opinions sought to coli

os even devoid of foundation, the trust would nevertheless be charit-

Of course, though prima facie, there is a presumption that religious
एकल ore chantatle, in English law they are not regarded as so if they
lack the vital element of public benefit. Apart from the probably anoma-
lous case of relief of poverty, it is well settled in England that a trust wil)
not be legally charitable unless it is for the benefit of the community or
public or an appreciably important section of the community or public.

26.25. Other objects—Besides the objects specifically enumerated,
other objects of public benefit fail within charity, These cannot be ex-
haustively enumerated, but the most important ingredient is of public
benefit.

26.26 and 26.27. Public benefit—-The question that usually presents
some difficulty is one relating to the aspect of “public benefit”. As Lord
Gross pointed out in Dingle v. Turner’

“After all, either a part of the public is composed of individuals
and is susceptible of increase or decrease. No doubt, some classes
will be more naturally described as sections of the ‘public’ than as
private classes, while other classes are more naturally described as
private classes rather than a section of the public. For example,
the blind can naturally be described as 8 section of the public and
not as a private class. On the other hand, the descendants of
Mr. Gladstone might more reasonably be described as a private class.
It is when one turns to large companies employing thousands of men
and women, that difficulty arises. In Truth, then the question
whether or not the potential beneficiary of a rust can fairly be said
to constitute 2 section of the public is a question of degree.”

“Much must depend on the purpose of the trust. It may well
be that, on the one hand, a trust to promote some purpose, prima
face charitable, will constitute a charity even though the class of
potential beneficiaries might fairly be called a private class and that,
on the other hand, a trust to promote another purpose, also prima
facie charitable, will not constitute a charity even though the class of
potential beneficiaries might seem to some people fairly describable
as a section of the public. In -answering the question whether any
given trust is a chartiable trust, the courts—as I see it—cannot avoid
having regard to the fiscal privileges accorded to charities. As
Counsel for the Attorney-General remarked in the course of the
argument, the law of charity is bedevilled by the fact that charitable
trust enjoy two quite different sorts of privilege. On the one hand,
they enjoy immunity from the rules against perpetuity and uncertainty
and though “individual potential beneficiaries cannot sue to enforce
them the public interest arising under them is protected by the
Attorney-General. If this was all, there would be no reason for
the courts not to look favourably on the claim of any “purpose” trust

1 Dingle v, Turner, (1972) 2 Weekly Law Reports, 523, 535.



196

to be considered as a charity if it seemed calculated to confer some
real benefit on those intended to benefit by it whoever they might be
and if it would fail if not held to be a charity. But that is not all.
Charities automatically enjoy fiscal privileges which with the increased
burden of taxation have become more and more important and in
deciding that such and such a trust is a charitable trust the court is
endowing it with a substantial annual subsidy at the expense of the
taxpayer. Indeed, claims of trusts to rank as charities are just as
often challenged by the revenue as by those who would take the fund
if the trust was invaild. It 1s, of course, unfortunate that the recog-
nition of any trust as a valid charitable trust should automatically
attract fiscal privileges, for the question whether a trust. to further
some purpose is so little likely to beenfit the public that it ought to
be declared invalid and the question whether it is likely to confer such
great benefits on the public that it should enjoy fiscal immunity are
teally two quite different questions. The logical solution would be
to separate them and to say—as the Radcliffe Commission pro-
posed—that only some charities should enjoy fiscal privileges. But,
as things are, validity and fiscal immunity march hand in hand and

the decisions in the Compton (1945) Ch. 123 and Oppenheim (1951)

A.C. 297 cases were pretty “obviously influenced by the consi-

deration that if such trusts as were there in question were held valid,

they would enjoy an undeserved fiscal immunity.”

26.28. Public benefit—Benefit to the community is a very wide cate-
gory. Law reporting has been held to possess public benefit in the context
of charity.t

Tt must be agreed that law reporting could fall into the residual head
of charity. Barwick, C.J.’s broad ground for so holding is—“.... in
modern times without the availability of law reports in book form the law
could not be adequately administered ... .The production of law reports is
Deneficial to the whole community because of the universal importance of
maintaining the socially sustaining fabric of the law.”

26.29. Dharma—There has been considerable discussion about the
precise meaning of the word “dharma” which unfortunately, was miscon-
strued by the Privy Council’ Classical Sanskrit texts would seem to use
this word—so far as proprietary isposition for dharma are concerned—
as comprising both the types of cl y—ishta and poorta.. There are,
in fact, two verses of Manu® in support of this statement. One of these
verses‘ has been thus translated by Dr. Buhler :

“Let him always practise, according to his ability, with cheerful
heart, the duty to liberality (dandharma) both by sacrifice (ishta)
and aoe works (poorta) if he finds a worthy recipient (ot

‘Then, it was pointed out by Subramania Iyer, J. in his dissenting judge-
ment in a Madras case! that the principle of the injunction as 10. poorta
works is service to fellow-beings, though some of the forms in which each

fed Council of Law Reporting Queensland v. —Tinnporuied Council of Law Reporting Queensland v. Commissioner of Tova of Trxa-
1 Ton C97) 45 ee. 552, 380. ४ 2: J

2 Ranchoddas v. Parvati Bai, 26 Indian Appeals 71 (P.C.}.

3 Manu, Chapter 4, Verses 226 and 227.

4 Buhler, Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXV, page 164, verse 227.

5 LL. 30 Mad 340.


197

service is rendered are peculiar to this country—‘charity, like water,
taking its colouring from the soil through which it flows.”

26.30, Amendments needed—This brief survey was intended to bring
out certain aspects of the law. While no changes of substance are needed
in section 18, a few additions and modifications and amendments are
required. _ In the first place, it is appropriate that the subject of “relief of

poresty’ should find a specific mention in the section. Relief of poverty

, not only in Engia nd but also in India, always been regarded as one of

the paramount h of charity and even though there may be no contro-

versy on the subject, yet, having regard to the fact that all other heads are

ically mentioned in section 18, it is, in our view, necessary that this
की ject should find mention in section 18.

26.31. Recommendation to substitute “education for knowledge”——
As to the word “knowledge” which occurs in section 18, the word currently
in use in judicial parlance is “education”.1 The statutory precedents have
already been cit ted Education is obviously a much wider term than
“knowledge”; and instead of leaving it to be covered by the residuary
words in section 18 which embraces other objects beneficial to mankind, it
is appropriate that the expression currently in use should be inserted. It
could hardly be the intention of the legislature that education which is not
“knowledge” should be excluded from the ambit of the beneficial provision
in section 18. We recommend that “knowledge” should be replaced by
“actionable claim”.

Reasons restated—This recommendation’ is subject to reservation by
Shri Dhavan and Shri Sen-Verma. The recommendation is based on
several considerations based on the fact that (i) Indian legislative pre-
ecedents all use “education”; (ii) judcial decisions generally in the field of
the law of charity employ, or confirm the use of, the expression “education”;
(iii) “education” is not construed narrowly in the judicial decisions; (iv)
to use both the expressions “education” and “knowledge” would be in-
appropriate, because it would cast a doubt on the other statutory precedents;
(v) still, if any case is left out, the residuary words in section 18 will
cover it.

26.32. Recommendation to revise section 18—In the light of the
above discussion, we recommend that section 18 should be revised as
foilows :

Revised Section 18

The restrictions in sections 14, 16 and 17 shall not apply in the
case of a transfer of property for the benefit of the pub! in the
relief of poverty, the advancement of religion, education, commerce,
health, safety, or any other object beneficial to mankind.

1 Para 26.22 ani 26.23, supra.
2 Paras 26.7 and 26.10, supra,
3 Reservation of Shri Dhavan and Shri Sen-Varma, as to section 18.


CHAPTER 27
VESTED INTEREST
SECTIONS 19 AND 20

27.1. Vested interest—The provisions 80 far contained in the Act dealt
with certain fundamental matters conceming the question and commence-
ment of interests in property. Assuming a valid intesest is qreated,
it becomes necessary to consider the natufe of the intereat that is, by the
terms of the transfer, created. The most important question to be consix
dered is whether the interest is a present one, or whether it is future one.
In this connection, it may be recalled that in the scheme of the Act, a trans-
fer of property can be made in present oc in future. Since two alter-
Natives as to the time of taking effect of tlie transfer are expressly permitted,
suitable terminology had to be devised for dealing with the two situations
and it was also necessary that appropriate relea be available for determining
whether in a particular case the interest exeated is to be regarded as a
present interest or as a future interest,

As regards the terminology, the Act employs the expressions “vested”
and “contingent”. Vested interests themselves are divided into two
classes, which will be dealt with later.

First, as to vested interests, section 19 provides as follows :

“19. Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is
created in favour of a person without specifying the time when it is
to take effect, or in terms specifying that is to take effect forthwith or
on the happening of an event which must happen, such interest is
vested, unless a contrary intention appears from the terms of the
transfer.

A vested interest is not defeated by the death of the transferee
before he obtains possession.

Explanation.— An intention that an interest shall not be vested
js not to be inferred merely from a provision whereby the enjoyment
thereof is postponed, or whereby a prior interest in the same pro-
perty is given or reserved to some other person, or whereby income
arising from the property is directed to be accumulated until the time
of enjoyment arrives, or from a provision that if a particular event
shall, happen the interest shall pass to another person.”

21.2. Other provisions—This is a definition of “vested interest”. Sec-
tion 21 defines the correlative “contingent interest”. The term is used
in the same sense in the Indian Succession Act, where a legacy is said to be
vested in the interest when its payment or possession is postponed;! but
when its vesting depends upon a specified uncertain event, the interest of
the Tegatee is, until the condition has been fulfilled, “contingent”. It
would equally serve as a definition of the term as used in the Indian
Registration Act.’

1 Section 119, Succession Act.
2 Section 120 Succession Act.
3 Section 17, Registration Act;
486०० v. Goclam, J.L.R. 30 Bom. 304, 315, 316.
198



199

27.3 Principle~The difference between the two interests is that while
3 vested interest takes effect from the date of transfer and does not depend on
a period or event that is uncertain, a contingent interest is contingent poe
the happening of a contingency which may or may not take place—Whilst
the one is unconditional, the other is solely depen dent upon the fulfilment of
the condition which may or may not be ed. In the one, the trans-
fer itself is immediate, but, in the other, there is 70 immediate transfer.
The latter may develop into the former, but until it does so, it is uncertain.

The word “vested” is sometimes used as payable, as where the
charges of members of a class or directed to be vested at a particular time’,
there being a gift over to the other members of a class of the shares of those
dying before that time without issue. Thus, where A bequeaths to B 100
rupees, “to be paid” to him at the death of C, on A’s death the legacy be-
comes vested in interest in B, and if he dies before C, his representatives are
entitled to the legacy” But where an estate is bequeathed to A until he
shali marry, and after that event, to B, B’s interest in the bequest is contin-
gent until the condition shall be fulfilled by A’s warryi.* The law is
said to favour the vesting of estates,’ the effect of which principle seems
t be that property, which is the subject of any disposition, whether testa-
mentary or otherwise, will beolng to the object of the gift immediately on
the instrument taking effect, or afterwards ‘as such an object comes into
being or the terms thereof, will permit.*

27.4, Two kinds of vesting—Estates and interests may be (a) vested
in possession—as where there is a present right to the immediate posses-
sion or enjoyment; (b) vested in interest—where there is a present in-
defeasible right to the future possession or enjoyment. Therefore, an
interest may be vested, although there may not be a right to present posses-
sion, and it may be that the transferee may never enjoy possession or the
vested right may subsequently be divested. Thus, where there is a gift to
an infant with remainder over in the event of his dying under twenty-one,
the infant has a vested interest subject to be divested on his death under
age. A subscriber who relinguishes his right of complete control, has
still a vested interest in the money.?

27.5. Explanation to section 19—The Explanation to section 19
guards against an inference that may be made against the interest being
vested from—(i) a provision whereby the enjoyment is postponed, (iii)
or whereby a prior interest in the same property is given or preserved to

some other person,® (iii) or whereby income arising from the property is

Williams v. Haythrone, L-R, 6 Ch. 782.

Section 119, (i) Succession Act, 1925,
Section 120, iti, (vi) Succession Act, 1925.
Charlton ¥. Thonipson L.R. 1Sc. Ap. 232:
Taylor v. Graham, 3 App. Cas. 1287.

Maseyk v. Fergusson, LL.R. 4 Cal. 304.
O'Mahoney v. Burdett, LR. 7 HL. 388;

Masevk v. Fergusson, LR. 4 Col. 304:
Branstrom v. Wilkinson, 7 Ves, 421.

4. Das v. Secretary of Burma Oil, etc. efc., ALR, 1941 Rangoon 239.
8. Kally Nath ९, Chuder Nath, UL.R. 8 Cal. 878.
9, Kaly Nath v. Chunder Nath, LL.R. 8 Cal 878,
14—885Law/77

au APNE


200

directed to be accumulated, or (iv) from a provision that on the happening
of a particular event the interest shall pass to the another person.*

It will be seen that in no case mentioned above is the vesting contin-
gent upon the happening of an uncertain future event.5

27.6. Question of death—Since death is a certain event though the
time is not certain, it follows that an interest created in favour of a person
‘on the death of another is one created “in terms specifying that it is to
take effect on the happening of an event which must happen”.  Accor-
dingly, such interest is to be regarded as vested, unless a contrary inten-
tion appears from the terms of the transfer.

In contrast, the words in the section dealing with vested contingent
interest —-section 21—are “a specified uncertain event.” Where interest is
given to A for life and after his ‘death to B if B shall be then living, the
interest given to B is not vested, but only contingent.‘

27.7. Obscurity as to cases of contingency of death—This general
criterion appears to be simple enough, but it would appear that there is
some obscurity as to the precise position where the contingency is the death
of the holder of the prior life estate. The ordi rule would be that a
gift to A on the death of B after termination of the i ife interest of B creates
a vested interest in A even during the life time of B, because there is nothing
more certain than death.5 It is not always easy to decide whether a parti-
cular transfer discloses a contrary intention within the terms of section 19.
The judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Rajes Kanta Roy® in
a case which illustrate no contrary intention. On the other hand, a Patna
case? illustrates a contrary intention.

In the Patna case, a husband, by a taksimnama, provided as follows :
“The property shall devolve upon B or his legal heir shall become the
absolute owner of my property on the death of my wife.” During the
widow’s lifetime, B sold the widow’s property and B died during the life-
time of the widow. The reversioner of the widow brought a suit for
possession of the property. It was held that the case really came witbin
the principle of section 24 (interest conditional on survivorship) and not
section 19. and that the interest in favour of B was contingent and not
vested, and came to an end on his death during the life-time of the widow.
The sale made by him during the widow’s life time therefore would not
affect the reversioner’s right over the property after the death of the widow.
In coming to this conclusion the High Court relied primarily on the words
“B or his heirs”, holding that survivorship of B was a condition precedent
for vesting in B.

~ Cossain ९, Gossain, VLR. 13 Bom. 463.

. Barnes v. Allen, 1 Bro. 0. 0. 18: Basant Kumar v. Ramsankar Ray, LLR. 59.
(फ्री, 859: Lal Bahadur Singh v. Rajinder. ALR, 1934 00% 161.

. Gour,

Compare section 120, Indian Succession Act. 1925, illustration (iii).

. Mulla (1973), page 133.

Rajes Kant Roy v. Shanti Devi, (1957) SCR. 77; ALR. 1957 S.C. 255.

fom Chandra ९. Jagadeshwara Prasad, AYR. 1937 Patna 147 (Dhavle & Varma.

aanee pol


201

27.8. Recommendation to amend section 19—The correctness of this
judgement of the Patna High Court is, with Tespect open to doubt. We
think that it takes a view which might, in most cases, defeat the real in-
tention of the transferor. When the transferor uses the words “B or his
heirs” or words to that effect, the intention of the transferor, at least from
the point of view of the layman, would ordinarily be that the interest
should immediately vest in B— as a matter of “vesting of interest” as
distinct from vesting in possession. The mention of the heirs does not
indicate an intention that the survivorship is a condition precedent to the
vesting of the interest in the abstract. It merely states the obvious situ-
ation as regards possession if B does not survive. This is precisely what
happens at law in the case of vested interest—a gift vested in interest,
though not in possession. To reach a contrary conclusion on the basis
of an assumed different intention is hardly justifiable, since the assumption
does not appear to be correct. It may be that the layman is not familiar
with the distinction between vested and contigent interesis, but once the
distinction is introduced by the law, and the test of intention is made the
crucial one, then it is better to take the view that if the refined scheme of
the law had been before the transferor, he would, in cases of the nature under
consideration, rather have preferred that the interest should be regarded as
vested during the lifetime of the life estate holder. It is only when such
a view is taken that the heirs of the beneficiary would be able to take the
interest if the beneficiary dies during the continuance of the life interest.

We, therefore, recommend that the law should be laid down in terms
contrary to what was held by the Patna High Court. It is, therefore.
desirable to add a suitable Explanation to section 10,' providing that
where the transferor uses the word “............ or his heirs” or words
substantially to that effect, a contrary intention shall not be presumed,
for the purposes of the section, merely from these words.

27.9. Section 20—The subject of vesting of interests in relation to
persons not living at the date of the transfer is dealt with in section 20, in
ese terms :

“20. Where, on a transfer of Property, an interest therein is
created for the benefit of a person not then living," he acquires upon
his birth, unless a contrary intention appears from the term of the
transfer, a vested interest, although he may not be entitled to enjoy-
ment thereof immediately on his birth.”

The section is in harmony with the English law. There is na sec-
tion Serresponding to this in the Indian Succession Act. So far as the

Property Act is concerned, an alternative placing of the sec-
tion would have been after section 13 and 14, which deal with an interest
created in favour of unborn persons. However, the present placing is also
appropriate.*

27.10. Principle—Generally speaking, property cannot be transferred
nor an interest therein created in favour of a person not in existence; but
there are certain excevtions which the law allows in favour of unborn per-
sons. These are stated or assumed in sections 13 and 14 and 20. The

1 This is not a craft.
2. Contrast the formula “in existence” employed in some other sections,
3. Tewte v, Walters, 6 Rast 326° Goodright ४. Jones, 4M.
& Sel. 88: Poe v. Dacre, 8 TR. 112,
4. See below.



202

effect of these sections, then, is that an terest created in favour of an un-
born person will take effect upon hus birth, in the absence of @ contrary
intenuon, provided that st does not offend agaist the rule as to perpeuuties,
and—as the law now stands—the interest extends to the whole of the remain-
ing interest of the grantor.’

The only proposition this section is intended to enact, is that an
interest created in favour of an unborn person will take effect, as a vested
interests, even though the transferee may not have become entitled to an
immediate enjoyment.”

27.11. Need and significance—It is to be noted that section 20 is sub-
ject to a contrary intention appearing from the terms of the iransier. This
section is, in substance, based on the same principle as is the basis of section
19, namely, the policy of the law of favouring tne vesting of interests, The
general position as to transfers in favour of living persons is the subject-
matter of section 19, which obviously could not apply to unborn person
since, if that section is taken literarlly, the vesting takes place on the execution
of the transfer. Obviously, this would not be appropriate in the case of an
unborn person; hence the need for a specific provision as in section 20.

Of course, section 20 applies only where there is a “transfer”, Relin~
quishment of an interest in a joint Hindu family in favour of unborn persons
is not a “transfer of property on as it is only an extinction of the interest of
the person releasing it.?

27.12. Rights of unborn persons—The fact that a person is unborn at
the date of a transaction dealing with proprietary affairs which gives him no
interest in the property dealt with by that transaction does not, of course,
necessarily imply that the unborn person can claim no rights in the property.
‘The position depends on the system of law by which the parties are governed.
Consider, for example, the position regarding rights of sons born after parti-
tion in Hindu law. The favoured position* which a child in embryo thus
occupies under the Hindu law in respect of partition and succession is by no
means singular, for whatever may have been the law in early times, it is a
rule generally adopted in mature systems of jurisprudence that a child in
embryo is to be considered as born when it will be for its benefit so to be
considered, although the question is not free from metaphysical difficulties
whatever view we may adopt on the subject. In the Roman Law, existence
was, for certain purposes, assumed to begin before birth. Thus, although
upon the authority of Ulpian’ : “The fruit of the body before it is born is
part of the mother or the womb,” and natural capacity for rights begins with
the birth of men—that is, the complete separation of a living human being
from the mother—yet Paul points out the ways in which the embryo in the
mother’s womb is recognised by law: “Attention is bestowed upon. that
which is in the womb, just the same as if it had come to life, whenever a

uestion arises as to the embryo’s own privileges, although in no way bene-
fing another before it is born.”* “Our speaking of him whose birth is

1. Cadell v. Pater, 1 Cl. & Fin. 372.

2, Gour.

3. Anjaneyulu v. Ramayya, A.LR. 1965 A.P. 177, 183, para १7.
4. Kugum Kumari v. Dasarathi, AX.R. 1921 -Cal. 487, 488.

5 Dig 15, 4, 1, 1.

6 Dig. 1, 5, 7.


203

anticipated ed as though he were in existence, is correct when the question is
as to his own right.” “The ancients paid regard to the child in the womb in
such way that they maintained all rights in its favour intact until the time

of birth, as may be seen in the law of inheritance.”?-*

27.13. Unborn persons—In section 20 and subsequent sections, the
expressions referring to the person not in existence should, of course, be so
construed as to take into account of the legal doctrines relating to the posi-
tion of a child in embryo. While the general rule that the vsleing will take
place on birth certainly applies, an important consequence of the legal
doctrine is that, as Blackstone put it‘—

“An infant in ventre semere is supposed to be born for many pur-
poses; it is capable of having a legacy or a surrender of a copyhold
estate made to it; it may have an estate assigned to it and it is enabled to
have an estate limited to its use and to take afterwards by such limitation as
if it were then actually born.”

27.14. Impact of section 13—Reverting to section 20, a Mysore case
under section 20 illustrates how some misunderstanding exists as to the
precise meaning of section 13° and its impact on section 20. In that case
the donor, by a gift deed, transferred his property in favour of A, the then
living son of the donor’s daughter. In the same deed he directed that the
property was to be enjoyed not only by A, but also by other sons who might
be born by the donor’s daughter, before A attained majority. B, another
son, was born before A attained majority. A, however, alienated the entire
property by a sale deed, and B sued for recovery of the half share of the
property and mesne profits. The lower court rejected his claim on the
ground that section 13 was infringed. Under section 13, so far as is
material, where, on a transfer of property, an interest is created for the bene-
fit of an unborn person “subject to a prior interest created by the same
transfer”, the interest in the unborn person must extend to the whole of the
remaining interest in the property. The judgment was reversed on appeal.
The High Court had to point out that section 13 had no application to the
facts of the case. There was not a limited interest followed by the creation
of an interest in favour of an unborn person. The grantor in this case had
transferred property in favour of two persons in the first instance, one of
whom was unborn. Since, under section 20, an unborn person on birth
acquires a vested interest, he had a right to challenge the transfer. If our
recommendation to delete section 13 is accepted," such controversies will not
arise.

27.15. No change—The above discussion does not involve any amend-
moent in the section,

1, Dig. 50. 16, 231.

2. Dig. 5. 4, 3.

3. See, Markby's Jurisprudence 132; Holland’s Jurisprudence. page 83; Sohm's
Institutes (ledlie). Art. 20: Savignv System, Art. 62: Mackeldy’s Roman Law
(Dropsic) Art. 669; Salkowaki Roman Law (Whitefield), Art. 32; Goudemit
Pandects (Could) Art. 21.

4. Blackstone, Commentaries. Vol. 1, 130, cited Mookerjee, J., ii
Kumari © Dotarathis ATR. 1921" Cat’ 486. 4abes°Y MooKerie, J. in Kusure

5. Yasanthappa v. Channappa, A.1.R. 1962 Mys. 98, 99, 100,

6. See our recommendation as to section 13.



CHAPTER 28
CONTINGENT INTERESTS
SECTIONS 21 To 27

28.1. Introductory—In contrast with vested interests, which are dis-
posed of in two sections only, the subject of contingent interests and allied
Subjects occupy seven sections. Most of these sections contain rules for
determining in what cases an interest is to be regarded as contingent. They
are mostly—but not exclusively—based upon the intention imputed by the
law to the transferor.

28.2. Rationale—These rules for the construction of contingent
interests, contained in sections 21 to 27, are mostly based on the underlying
rationale that the law favours the vesting of estates and also that the law
favours the early vesting of estates.

28.3. Section 2i—Analysis—Under section 21, where, on a transfer
of property, an interest therein is created in favour of a person to take effect
only on the happening of a specified uncertain event or if a specified un-
certain event shall not happen, such person thereby acquires a contigent
jnterest in the property. This is the first proposition enacted in the section
and the contingent interest described in the section is to be contrasted with
the vested interest dealt with in section 19. The essence of a contingent
interest is a contingency which may or may not happen—this is indicated by
the word “uncertain” which occurs in section 21.

The second proposition enacted in section 21 is to the effect that such
(contingent) interest becomes a vested interest when the specified uncertain
event happens or when the specified uncertain event becomes impossible, as
the case may be.

28.4. Exception—However, on the principle that the law always
favours the vesting of estates, the section makes an exception concerned with
interests contingent on age. Where, under a transfer of property, a person
becomes entitled to an interest therein ए pon attaining a particular age and
the transferor also gives to him absolutely the income to arise from such
interest before he reaches that age or directs the income or so much thereof
as may be necessary to be applied for his benefit, then under the Exception
to section 19, such interest is not contingent. The Exception is based on
an English decision' where Page Wood V.C. held that where the principal
is given at a distant epoch and the income is given in the meantime, the
court, leaning in favour of vesting, has said that the whole thing is given.

28.5. Rule in England—In England, the rule is well established by
several decisions, of which we may mention only two,?-* that a gift apparent-
ly contingent must be held to be vested in interest where it is accom-
panied by a gift of the intermediate income or a direction for application of

1 Pearson v. Dolmont, Law Reports 3 Equity 321, discussed in Cosavi v. Rivert
Carnac, I.L.R. 13 Bom, 463.
2 (1801) 6 Vos, 239.
3 (1839) 5 My and Cr. 125.
204



207

weighted with Ramesam J. in a Madras case* in holding that a bequest,
by a testator leaving the estate to the grandson or grandsons who might
be born within 10 years after the testator’s death would be void uuader
Hindu law, as there would be an interval of 10 years after the testator’s
death during which the estate is not vested in any person.

So far as Hindu law, apart from statutory provisions, is concemed,
it is Mulla’s view, relying on the judgement of the Privy Council in
Gadadhar’s case,* that after the decision of the Privy Council, the Madras
view cannot be accepted as correct.

28.13. Section 23-consider—Let us now consider the text of section
23. 01 the one hand, the mandate in the last 22 words of the section
to the effect that the interest fails unless such event happens before or at
the same time as “the intermediate or precedent interest ceases to exist”,
has to be applied. On the other hand, it is not clear whether the ex-
pression “intermediate or precedent” covers the transferor’s interest also.
As a matter of construing the intention of the transferor, however, a con-
sayy view would appear to be arbitrary, since one can assert that “every
or testator intends the contingent remainder to take effect”—as

was observed by Jessel M. R.*

There is. therefore, something to be said for taking the same view as
Mulla has expressed.

28.14. Property without owner—tf the difficulty of the property remain-
ing without owner could be surmounted, there is much to be said for Mulla’s
view. It would appear that the difficulty could be surmounted by holding
that until the contingency happens, the property remains in the ownership
of the transferor,—we are taking a case where the very first gift is contingent
one. On this view, the text of the section, is also satisfied, because the “pre-
cedent” interest of the transferor has not yet come to an end.

28.15. No change needed—On the whole, we think that the language
of the section could, and should, be construed as not ruling out a contin-
gent interest dependent on an uncertain event not proceeded (by a “sup-
porting” gift) and the technica) rule of English law does not necessarily
apply. Of course, the relevant contingency like the contingency attached
to any other interest must fall within the perpetuity period and must
comply with such other provisions as may be applicable. But no amend-
ment is needed.

SECTION 22

28.16. Gisi—Contingent interests in favour of members of a class are
covered by section 22. Under section 22, where, on a transfer of pro-
एच, an interest therein is created in favour of such members only of
a class as shall attain a particular age, such interest does not vest in any
member of the class who has not attained that age.

4 This sections corresponds to section 121 of the Succession Act, which
teads—

1, Official Assignee of Madras v, Ved Vali, A.I.R. 1926 Mad. 966 (Ramesam, J.).
2, Gadadhar v. Official Trustee of Bengal, ALR. 1940 P.C. 45.

3. Qualiffe v. Brancker, 3 Ch. D. 393, 399,

4. Section 121, Indian Succession Act, 925.



208

“121, Where a bequest is made only to such members of a
class as shall have attained a particular age, a person who has not
attained that age cannot have a vested interest in the legacy.”

Illustration

A fund is bequeathed to such of the children of A as shall attain the
ago of 18, with a direction that, while any child of A shall be under the
age of 18, the income of the share to which it may be presumed he will be
eventually entitled, shall be applied for his maintenance and education.
No child of A under the age of 18 has a vested interest in the bequest. ©

28.17. Ratwnale—Section 22 deals with gifts to a contingent class.
and, therefore, it follows that, unless the condition of the transfer is ful-
filled, the wishes of the transferor cannot be carried out. As observed
by Rest, C.J.' unless the requisite age is attained, no child completely
answers the description of those who are to be transferees. So, in
England, a gift to children who shall have attained 21, or to such children
as shall have attained that age is contingent, and no child before attaining
that age can have a vested interest

28.17A. The rule in section 22 seems, in substance, to be an cxcep-
tion to the Exception’ to section 21. Under the Exception to section 21,
at least where there is a direction to apply the income for the benefit of a
Particular person until he attains a particular age on which the interest
is to belong io him, the interest is not contingent, while, under section 22,
in such a situation the interest is contingent. In a similar manner, sec-
tion 121 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 overrides the Indian Succes-
sion Act, section 120.

28.19. No Change—The section seems to need no change.

28.20. Section 23-——This takes us to section 23, which reads—.

“23. Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is to
accrue to a specified person if a specified uncertain event shall happen,
aod no time is mentioned for the occurrence of that event, the in-
terest fails unless such event happens before, or at the same time
as, the intermediate or precedent interest ceases to exist”.

28.21. Section 23—Section 23 Pre-supposes that there is a termi-
nable antecedent interest and a subsequent contingent interest! The
object of the rule enacted in the section is to prevent an estate from re-
maining without an owner, It is on this Principle that an artificial rule—
artificial in the sense to be explained esently—is laid down in the sec-

. Tt has often been thought® that the tule is a relic of the ancient rule
telating to the creation of a contingent remainder,

The ancient rule was usually expressed in the maxim that every contin-
gent remainder must have a particular estate of freehold to supoprt 10%

1. Duffield v. Duffield, 3 Bli, (U. 216, 333.
2. Bull v. Pritchard, 1 Russ, 213.
Leake v. Robinson, 2 Mer. 363.
Thomas ५४. Wilberforce, 31 Beav. 299,
Williams ९, Havthorne, UR. 6 Ch. 782.
3. Para 28.4, supra.
 Gour
i. Abbis v. Burney, 17 Chancery Div. 211, 229.
Gour,

ar


209

When there was a tenant for life with several contingent remainders, the
tenant for life might have, not only by death but by surrender or other
methods, determined or terminated his own life interest before the re-
mainder vested. in such cases, it became necessary to have trustees
appointed to preserve the contingent remainder. If, therefore, the estate
for life determined otherwise than by death, then for the residue of his
natural life, the trustees would take possession. To avoid such conse-
quences, the rule scems to have been evolved. This rule, however, pro-
duced arbitrary consequences, and was not much favoured in England
even af the time when the rule was inforce.

28.22. No need jor supporting interest—We have already’ staied that
the assumption that a contingent remainder cannot be created without a
supporting precedent interest does not appear to be true of India. One
must, therefore, read the words “if any” after the words “intermediate or
precedent”, in regard to cases where the very first gift is contingent. Where
no precedent interest is crated, and the case is one of the first gift, these
words do not come in the way. Nor does the section apply where a ume
is fixed

No change, of course, is recommended in section 23.

28.23. Section 24—Section 24 reads—

“24. Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is to
accrue to such of certain persons as shall be surviving at some
period, but the exact period is not specified, the interest shall go to
such of them as shail be alive when the intermediate or precedent
interest ceascs to exist, unless a contrary intention appears {rom the
terms of the transfer.

Hlustration

A transfers property to B for life, and after his death to C and 0,
equally to be divided between them, or the surviver of them. C dies
during the life of B. D survives B. At B’s death the property passes
to D”.

28.24. Analogous Law—This section corresponds to section 125 of —
the Indian Succession Act,? which runs as follows :—

“125. Where a bequest is made to such of certain persons as shall be
surviving at same period but the exact period is not specified, the legacy
shall go to such of them as shall be alive at the time of payment or distri-
bution, unfess a contrary intention appears by the will.

“Mlustrations

(i) Property is bequeathed to A and B, to be equally divided. between
them, or to tl the survivor of them. If A dies before the testator, and B
survives the testator, it goes to B.

(ii) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B and
C, to be equally divided between them, or to the survivor of them. B dies
during the life of A; C survives A. At A’s death the legacy goes to C.

(iii) Property is bequeathed to A for life and after his death to B and
C, or the survivor with a direction that of B should not survive the testator,

1. See discussion as to section 21, para 28.13 to 28.15 supra.
2. Section 125, Indian Succession Act, 1925.



210

his children are to stand in his place, C dies during the life of the testator;
B survives the testator, but dies in the lifetime of A. The legacy goes to
the representative of B.

(iv) Property is bequeathed to A for life, and after his death to B and
C, with a direction that, in case either of them dies in the lifetime of A, the
whole shall go to the survivor. B dies in the lifetime of A. The legacy
goes to the representative of C.”

28.25. Principle—Section 24 enacts a rule of construction and as
Mulla observes, in best explained by the following passage from the judg-
ment of Tumer, L. J., in White v. Baker :1 “Where there is a bequest to
A for life and after his death to B and C or the survivor of them, some
meaning must, of course, be attached to the words “the survivor”. They
may refer to any one of three events—to one of the persons named surviving
the other, ot to one of them only surviving the testator, or to one of them
only surviving the tenant for life, and in the absence of any indication to
the contrary, they are taken to refer to the latter event as being the more
Probable one to have been referred to”.

28.26. Evglisii law—The rule enacted in section 24 is generally in
accordance with the English law, but it may be noted that the words “unless
a contrary intention appears from the terms of the transfer” allow a wider
latitude for construction. It may also be noted that such an interest does
not vest before the occurrence of the event and therefore, the provision in
section 19 relating to a vested interest will not apply. The interest to which
section 24 refers is interest created to a contingent class which is to be as-
certained at the time when the intermediate or precedent interest ceases to
exist—the time which is described in the corresponding section in the Succes-
sion Act? as the time of payment or distribution.

28.27. Rule of construction—Section 24 is, to a large extent, a rule
which construes the expression relating to survivorship as used in the mstru-
ment of transfer. Thus, under the illustration to the section, property is
given to B for life and after his death to C and D equally to be divided
between them or the survivor of them. Here the instrument does not men-
tion the period with reference to which survivorship is to be ascertained.
‘The law creates the test of survivorship at the termination of the precedent
interest of B. Therefore, if D survives B, the property passes to D. There
is, of course, greater need for suck a rule of construction in the case of wills,
since one of the competing events in the case of a will is the date of death
of the testator. The significance of section 24 lies in filling up the date for
ascertaining survivorship, when it is not mentioned in the transfer. If the
date is mentioned, the case falls within the last 11 words of the section which
take notice of a contrary intention.

We have no further comments on the section.

28.28, Section 25—Principle—The import lance attached by the law
to the intention of the transferor as expr in the deed, granted the lega-
lity of the terms expressing that intention, basic. As far as possible the
law will not make a new transfer, for if he has expressed his intention not
in an unconditional transfer but in the creation of an interest subject to a
condition, the condition must be respected. There may sometimes be other
considerations—such as, that an estate once vested is not easily divested—

1. White'v. Baker, (1860) 2 De 6. F, & 1 55, 64.
2. Section 125, Indian Succession Act, 1925; supra.



211

which operate to balance the importance attached to the transfer, Bui,
the interest must first vest on tne terms stipulated by the transteror. It
therefore the condition cannot be upheld, the transfer subject to that condi-
tion cannot be upheld.

28.29. Section 25—-Gist—This is the principle underlying section 25.
Under section 25. an interest created on a transier of property, and depen-
dent upon a condition, fails if the fulfilment of the condition is impossible
or is forbidden by iaw or is of such a nature that if permitted, it would
defeat the provisions of any law or is fraudulent or involves or implies injury
to the person or property of another or the court regards it as immoral or
opposed to public policy. There are four illustrations to the section, which
take familiar and not difficult cases of impossibility or illegality of condi-
tions. The section carries out the policy incorporated in section 6(h) (ii)
under which no transfer can be made for an object or consideration which
is unfawful within the meaning of section 23 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872, It has been pointed out in the commentaries that the conditions
feterred to in the section are conditions which, as agreements, would be void
under sections 23, 26, 27 and 56 of the Indian Contract Act.!

where a condition precedent is void, the transfer does not take effect, while
where a condition subsequent is void, the transfer takes effect and the condi-
tion subsequent is to be disregarded.? A surprisingly unusual instance of
an impossible condition is furnished by a Calcutta case,’ in which the testator
left a legacy on condition that the legatee should excavate a tank, The
testator, however, himself excavated the tank before his death. The be-
quest, it was held, failed. In this case, performance of the condition was
tegarded as the “motive” of the bequest, so that impossibility barred the
claim of the legatce. The Engtish law as to illegal conditions also appears
to be substantially the same. If the condition precedent to a trans! er is
illegal, then the transfer is void. ~

Succession Act, illustrations (vi), (vii), (viii) and (ix). Accordingly,
section 25 should also be taken’ as a Species of contingent interest, We
recommend that in section 25, for the words “and dependent upon a condi-
tion's the words “and intended to take effect on a condition” should be
Substituted

“I Malla, (1973), page 148. Mulla, (1973), page 148.

2. Ram Sarup v. Bala, (1884) LL.R. 6 All, 313 (९.८.).
3. Rajinder Lal ५. Marnalinidasi, ALR. 1922 Cal. 116.


212

28.32. Civil law—It would apepar that the position in civil law is
different with respect to legacies of a personal estate. The rule of civil Jaw’
is, where a condition precedent is origmally impossible or is made so by the
act or default of the testator, or is illegal as involving mali prohibitum,
the bequest is absolute just as if the condition had been subsequent. But
where the performance of the condition is the sole motive of the bequest or
its impossibility was unknown to the testator or the condition has become
impossible by the act of God or where it is illegal as involving malum in se,
the civil law agrees with the common law in holding both the gift and the
condition void.

This rule of the civil law was applied in England in the case of Re
Elliott,? where the condition was not malum in se. The condition was
avoided and the gift took effect free from the condition.

28.33. Impossibility as known to the transferor—So far as impossibility
is concerned, it is quite likely that if the transferor had known of the im-
Possibility, he would still have maintained the transfer. Since, however,
all such questions are difficult to determine on facts, the law seems to have
treated all cases of impossibility on the same footing. In this conneetion.
attention may be drawn to the more restrictive language in the first para-~
graph of section 56 of the Indian Contract Act, under which an agreement
to do an act impossible in itself is void. As regards supervening impossi-
bility or illegality, that section (in its second paragraph) provides that the
contract becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful. The
leading case on the subject is still the case of Satyabrata.? a judgment of
B. K, Mukherjea J., as he then was. The law on the subject would appear
to be still “in the process of evolution”—a statement made by A. L, Corbin
Tong ago, but still substantially true.*

28.34. Recommendation—In the result, the only change needed is
a verbal one already mentioned.®

28.35, Section 26—That the law has regard to the substance of the
matter and not to its minutiae, is a Principle le often met with in judicial deci-
sions construing statutory provisions. is principle, in its application to
‘the vesting of property, finds express recognitton in section 26. Accordingly,
that section, in regard to conditions precedent, has regard to the substance
and not to the form.

This is what the section provides—

“26. Where the terms of a transfer of property impose a condi-
tion to be fulfilled before a person can take an interest in the property,
the condition shall be deemed to have been fulfilled if it has been sub:
stantially complied with.”

There are two illustrations to the section—

“(a) A transfers Rs. 5000 to B on condition that he shall marry with
the corsent of C, D and E. E dies. B marries with the consent of C and
D. B is deemed to have fulfilled the condition.¢

1. Jarman on Wills, 4th Edition. Volume 2, page 12, cited in Moor. (1888) 29
Chancery Division 116, 128.

2. Re Elliott, (1952) 1 All. EAR. 145, 148.

3. Satyabrata v. Muenee Ram, ALR. 1954 S.C. 44.

4. A. L. Corbin. “Recent Development in Contracts”, (1937) £0 Harvard Law.
Review 459, 465 466,

5. Para 28.31, supra.
6. This also illustrates partial supervening impossibility. Contrast section 25.



213

+ (b) A transfers Rs. 5,000 to B on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of C, D and E. B marries without the consent of C, D and E,
bat obtains their consent after the marriage. B has not fulfilled the condi-
tion.”

28.36. Analogous law—This section closely corresponds to section 128
of the Succession Act, which runs as follows :—

“128. Where a will imposes a condition 10 be fulfilled before the legates
can take a vested interest in the thing bequeathed, the condition shall be
considered to have been fulfilled if it has been substantially complied with.”

“[Mustrations

{i) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of B,C, D and E. A marries with the written consent of B,C
is present at the marriage. D sends a Present to A, previous to the marriage.
E has been personally informed by A of his intentions, and has made no
objections. A has fulfilled the condition.

(४) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of B,C andD. D dies. A marries with the consent of B and
C. A has fulfilled the condition.

(iii) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of 3, C and D. A marries in the lifetime of B, C and D, with
the consent of B and C only. A has not fulfilled the condition.

8, C and D to his marriage with E. Afterwards B, C and D capriciously
retract their consent. A marries E. A has fulfilled the condition,

(५) A legacy is bequeathed to A on condition that he shall marry with
the consent of 8, C and D. A matrices without the consent of B, C and D,
but obtains their consent after the marriage. A has not fulfilled the condi-
tion,

(vi) A makes his will, whereby he bequeathes a sum of money to
B, if B shall marry with the consent of A’s executors. B marries during
the lifetime of A, and A afterwards expresses his approbation of the marriage.
A dies, The bequest to B takes effect,

(vii) A legacy is bequeathed to A if he executes a certain document
within a time specified in the will. The document is executed by A within a
reasonable time, but not within the time ified in the will. A has not
performed the condition, and is not entitl ed to receive the legacy.”

28.37. No change—Both the sections are based on the Principle that
vesting is favoured, The above discussion discloses no need for amending
section 26,

28.38. Section 27—Section 27 provides as follows :--

“27. Where, on a transfer of Property, an interest therein is created in
favour of one person, and by the same transaction an ulterior disposition of
the same interest is made in favour of another. if the prior disposition under
the transfer shall fail, the ulterior disposition shall take effect upon the failure
of the prior disposition, although the failure may not have occurred in the
manner contemplated by the transferor.


214

But where the intention of the parties to the transaction is that the
ulterior disposition shall take effect only in the event of the pri ior disposition
failing in a particular manner, the ulterior disposition shall not take effect
unless the prior disposition fails in that manner,

Illustrations
(a) A transfers Rs. 500 to B On condition that he shall execute a

certain lease within three months after A’s death, and if he should neglect
to do so, to C, B dies in A’s life-time! The disposition in favour of C takes
offect.”

“(b) A transfers Property to his wife, but in case she should die in
his life-time, transfers to B that which he had transferred to her. A and his
wife perish together, under circumstances which make it impossible to prove
that she died before him. The disposition in favour of B does not take
effect.”

28.39. Premises—In the case of Jones v. Westcombe,® the testator
had bequeathed a term of years to his wife for life, reminder to the child
with whom she was believed to be Pregnant and if the child died under
fwentyone, a third part of the term was to belong to his wife: and the remain-
ing two-thirds to certain others. Although the wife was not Pregnant when the
will was made, it was held that the devise to her was good. Prima facie,
the testator is deemed to have intended that the second gift should take
effect upon failure in any manner of the Prior gift, though this can be dis-
Placed by proof of a contrary intention.

28.39A. Comment on illustration—Iustration (a) to section 27 is the
English case of Avelyn.* In the case put in the illustration, failure of the
interest sought to be created in favour of B is due to the death of B before
time had arrived for performance of the condition laid down to avoid
failure.

With this, one should contract the stricter approach adopted® in regard
to conditions precedent whose performance is impossible—in section 25.
If the condition in section 27, illustration (a), is a condition precedent, then
the question arises whether section 25 is confined to initial impossibility,

If section 27, illustration (a), is regarded as contemplating a condition
subsequent, then the section does not appropriately cover them; see the
word ‘failure’. Conditions subsequent are It with in later sections. It
would then appear that while performance of a condition inherently im-
possible is governed by section 25, performance of a condition which subse-
quently becomes impossible is covered by section 27.

Section 27, illustration (b) also is taken from an English case.* It
raises the interesting question of commorientes (persons SS RENNES question of commorientes (persons dying in a natura in a natural

1 This is also a situation of supervening impossibility. It illustrates the first para-
graph.

2. Ilustration (b) illustrates the second paragraph.

3. Tones v. Westcombe. (1711) Precedents 316.

4. Avelyn v. Ward, (1750) 1 Ves. 420.

5. Section 25

6. Underwood v. Wing (1885) 4 De. GM. & Y 633,



215

calamity or other disaster, making proof of survivorship impossibic). This
topic has been the subject-matter of interesting debate and legislative reform
in the law of evidence, and has also been considered in our Report on the
Evidence Act.!

28.40. Valid gift—Section 27 of the Act (and section 129, Succession
Act) seem to contemplate failure of a valid gift? otherwise the matter
would be governed by section 16 of the Act (section 116, Succession Act).

28.41. Intention—The rule laid down in this section will not apply if
the testator has expressed a contrary intention.* Section 130, Succession
Act, indicates an exception to this rile. In the Transfer of Property Act,
the rule ana the exception are both embodied in one section.

28.42. Section 27—Roper on Legacies,? contains the following state-
ment :

“Tt is a general rule of the common law, applicable to real estates,
that where an interest is so devised “as only to arise upon a preceding
condition, it cannot vest until that condition be performed, or the event
happen, upon which it is given. This rule has been acknowledged
and acted upon ever since the time of LORD COKE. The principle
is, that there is no devise until the happening of the event, of perfor-
mance of the terms upon which the disposition is made; a_ principle
which applies to every case, so that although the condition require the
performance of an impossible act, as for the devises to go io paris in
half an hour, or it require the devises to do an illegal act, as to kill
B, or to burn his house (conditions male in se); or whether it require a
woman to separate from her husband (a condition against the policy of
Jaw); or whether tho devise be made on condition that the legatee have
criminal connection with a particular person (a condition contra bonos
mores); the before s.ated principle authorises the conclusion, that, as
all such conditions are void, the dispositions to arise only upon their
performance are also veid. But the rule of the civil law is different. . . a

28.43. Principle—Where the intention of the Patties can b. clearly
ascertained, effect is given to it, but otherwise, to prevent lapse, it is sufficient
if their intention is substantially carried out. If the transferor provides
against failure, the ulterior dispcsition will take effect in case of failure,
although it may not have occurred in the manner contemplated by the par-
ties. But where fas in illustration (b)] the intention is that the ulterior dis-
position will take effect only in the event of the prior disposition failing in a
particular manner, the ulterior disposiiton does not take effect unless the
prior disposition fails in that manner. In such a case the failure of the prior
interest in a particular manner is @ condition Precedent to the transfer, and
must be fulfilled.

28.44, Prior bequest—The words “if the prior bequest shal! fail” are im-
portant, for they indicate that if the prior bequest is void ab initio under sec-
tion 113 of 114, the subsequent bequest will also fail under section 116.

h Prior bequest is valid but fails, the ultimate OE CREE ROSES INE prior Bequest is vatid but fails, the ultimate bequest

1. Report on , Section 108A,

2. Ismail Haji v. Umar Abdulla, A.LLR. 1942 Bom. 155, 158 (Chagla 3.)
3. Jones v. Westcombe, (1711) Prec. Ch. 316.

4. Roper, 4th ed. (1847), Vol. 1, p. 754.

15--885Law/77



216

is accelerated, e.g., in the English case of Jult v. Jacobs', there was a bequest
to A for life and then to his children, The bequest to A failed, as he had
attested the will. It was held that the bequest to the children took effect.

28.45, Recommendation—Incidentally, it may be noted that section
130, Indian Succession Act, 1925 is more precise, inasmuch as it repeats
the word “particular” at the end also. The section, omitting the illustration,
provides as follows :

“130. Where the will shows an intention that the second bequest shall
take effect only in the event of the nrst bequest failing in a particular manner,
the second bequest shall not take effect unless the prior bequest fails in that
patticular manner.”

It may be desirable to add the word “particular” towards the end of
section 27. This, of course, is a very minor change, which we recommend.

1. Juli v. Jacobs, 1976) 3 Ch. ७9. 703.


CHAPTER 29
CONDITIONS SUBSEQUENT

Sections 28—30

29.1. Introductory—Where a qualification is annexed od 40. an interest
which provides that the interest shall take effect if the qualification is ful-
filled, be case is one of a condition precedent which we have so far dis-
cussed. On the other hand, there may be created an interest to which a
qualification is annexed whereby it is provided that the interest shall be trans-
ferred if a certain event happens or does not happen. The former types of
conditions were dealt with in the last chapter and the latter type of condi-
tions are now to be dealt with. They can also be called conditions subse-
quent—that, in fact is the terminology used in England, even where the inte-
rest entirely ceases and is not transferred to another person’. Conditions
relating to events on the happening or non-happening of which the interest
already créated is directed to pass to another Person, contemplate a prior
dispositiov. and an ulterior disposition?, The imposition of such conditions
is permitted by the earlier half of section 28, subject to certain restrictions
which are indicated in the latter half of that section.

29.2. Section 28—The section reads—

“28. On a transfer of property, an interest therein may be created to
accrue to any person with the condition superadded that, in case a specified
Uncertain event shall happen, such interest shall pass to another person, or
that in case a specified uncertain event shall not happen such interest shail
Pass io agother person. In each case the dispositions are subject to the rules
contaitied in sections ten, twelve, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three,
twenty-four, twenty-five and twenty-seven.”

29.3. Section 283—Case of duress-—Section 28 contemplates a literal
transfer on the happening or non happening of a certain condition. Since
this is a condition of forfeiture, it appears that if the condition cannot be

or is violated on account of duress, the forfeiture is not incurred.
Thus, a testator by his will directed that if any 06 the female members of his
family, either from misunderstanding or any other reason, should five in a
place other than a holy place for more than three months except for i
grimage, they should forfeit the rights under the will. The plaintiff, a
widowed daughter-in-law of the testator and minor, was removed from the
house of the testator by her maternal relations and brother with the aid of
the police and had to eae for more than three aes with wer mother. Te
was at althou; police was properly and legally given, this
pes a plain case of duress at the time of leaving, and ought not to attract
lorfeiture.

29.4, Policy—Since the insertion of a condition subsequént hag a
divestiture effect, the law considers it desirable to Provide that the condition
maust be strictly fulfilled. This is another example of the anxiety of the law
to favour the vesting of estates and the preservation of estates alreddy
vested.

- हु Cheshire, Mier Law of Real Property (1972), pane 3a Secon To (1972), page 314, Section 1.

2 For these ions, see sections sa" हु है

3 Tin Cour ४ वि TLR 2 60, 14 a

217


218

29.4A. No change—No change is needed in the section.

29.5. Section 29.—While in the case of a condition precedent, sub-
stantial compliance is enough, the reverse is the position in the case of a
condition subsequent. It is on pis ernie + that section 29 provides that
an ulterior disposition of the kind ae by the last preceding section
cannot take e! Fect unless the condition is led.

In the illustration to the section, A transfers Rs. 500 to B, to be paid to
him on his attaining his majority or remarrying, with a proviso that, if B dies
3 minor or marries without C’s consent the Rs. 500 shall go to D. 8 marries
when only 17 years of age, without C’s consent. The transfer to D takes
effect.

29.54. Analogous law—This section and its illustration correspond to
the section and illustration (iii) of s. 132 of the Succession Act, wl ch ex-
tends the same rule to bequests. The illustration to section 29 is adapted
from the three illustrations to section 132. The English cases lay down an
identical rule and furnish apt illustrations of the doctrine here codified'.

29.6. Principle—This is in accordance with the English law where it
is held that a condition subsequent must be strictly fulfiled*. It will not
occasion forfeiture if the fulfilment of the condition becomes impossible’, if
it is reasonably fulfilled‘.

29.6A. No change in section 29-——No change is needed in the section.

29.7. Section 30—Cases may arise—these are taken care of by section
30—where the same transfer makes * की rior disposition which is valid and
an ulterior disposition which is not valid. In conformity with the policy of
the Iaw that what is vested ought not be divested or affected by collateral
factor unless there are weighty reasons, the provision in section 30 is to the
effect that if the ulterior disposition is not valid, the prior disposition is not
affected by it.

The illustration is as follows—

“A transfers a farm to B for her life, and if she does not desert her
husband to C, B is entitled to the farm during her life, as if no condition had
‘been inserted.”

This section and its illustration correspond to section 133 and illustra-
tion (ii) of the Succession Act, which run as follows :

“133, Original bequest not affected by invalidity of record—If, the ulte-
rior bequest be not valid, the original bequest is not affected by it.

Mlustrations

(i) An estate is bequeathed to A for his life, with a condition super-
added that, if he shall not, on 3. given day, walk 100 miles in an hour, the
estate shall go to B. The condition being void, A retains his estate as if no
condition had been inserted in the will.

So SS
1 Clavering ४. Ellison, 7 H.L.C. 707; Kiallmark v. Kiallr है, Te H
2 rarah ¥. Stanley, 4 Ch. 0. 272; referrd to in Gour, 77 7 0 1; Harvey
igsiaff v. Crossly, 2 Coll. 746; पु 5 g
Rages, Sack 2 YM GR Sander’s Trusts, 1 Bq. 675; Clavering v.
3 In re Brown's Will, 18 Ch. D. 61.

4 Astley १. Earl of Essex, LR. 18 84.

Wynne v. Fletcher, 24 Beav. 430. Fa 290;


219

(ii) An estate is bequeathed to A for her life, and if she do not desést
her husband, to B, A is entitled to the estate during her life, as if no condi-
tion had been inserted in the will

(iii) An estate is bequeathed to A for life, and, if he marries, to the
eldest son of B for life. B, at the date of the testator’s death, had not had
ason. The bequest over is void under section 105 and A is entitled to the
estate during his life.”

29.8. No change—No change is needed in the section.


CHAPTER 30
CONDITIONS OF DEFEASANCE
SEcTiIons 31-32

30.1. Introduction—As distinguished from conditions which terminate
an estate by transferring it from A to B, we have, in section 31, the situation
of a condition which merely provides that the interest shall cease to have
effect in case a specified uncertain event happens or does not happen. This,
as we have alrea oy pointed out, is known in Engiand as a condition subse-
quent. But, to distinguish it from those conditions which wansfer the inte-
rest to another person, we can describe such conditions as conditions of
defeasance, to bring out the narrower sense. They are dealt with in section
31, This is how the section reads :—

“31, Subject to the provisions of section twelve, on a transfer of pro-
perty, an interest therein may be created with the condition superadded that
it shall cease to exist in case a specified uncertain event shall happen, or in
case a specified uncertain event shall not happen.

Hlustrations

(a) A transfers a farm to B for his life with a proviso that, in case B
cuts down a certain wood, the transfer shall cease to have any effect, 8
cuts down the wood. He loses his life interest in the farm.

(b) A transfers a farm to B provided that, if B shall not go tol England
within three years after the date of the transfer, his interest in the farm shail
cease, B does not go to England within the term prescribed. His interest in
the farm ceases.”

30.2. English law—Theory of re-entry—-In England, the theory is that
in all cases of this type, there vests in the grantors, his heirs and assigns a
right of re-entry, the exercise of which determines the estate of the grantee.
Of course, an interest may terminate by the very nature of its tenure—tor
example, a life interest.

This is not a case of termination by “condition”; the very words which
create the estate denote its quantum, extent and duration, because the utmost
time for which the interest can continue is indicated. This is not concerned
with a condition which specifies some event which, if it takes place during
the time for which an estate continues, will defeat the estate. We are con-
cerned with terms which while creating an interest, define its duration.

The word “condition” in this context seems to have a heritage of about
400 years. In a case reported in 1596’, it was observed—

“And here is a condition, because there is not a new estate limited over,
but the estate to which it is annexed is destroyed”.

1 Cheshire, Modern Law of Real Property, (1972), p. 315.
2 Sergeant Rudhalls case, (1596) Savile 76 cited in Re < Hollis Hospital (1899) &
Chancery, 940, 549.
220



221

It is needless to say that a condition precedent creates a future interest,
while a condition subsequent is concerned with a present interest subject to
determination.

30.3. Duration—It is not always easy to decide whether a particular
term in the transfer imposes a condition subsequent, or whether it defines
the duration of the estate. ‘This seems to have created an interesting debate
in England. For example, Williams’ states : A devise to a school in fee
simple ‘until it ceases to publish its accounts” creates a determinable fee
{duration of the interest), whereas a devise to the school in fee simple “or
condition that the accounts are published annually” creates a fee simple
defeasible by a condition subsequent. In the first case, the determination,
js automatic, while in the second case, according to the theory of the English
law, a sight of re-entry is given, The distinction is subtle; and, according to
some writers, it is 2 mere matter of words. It may assume importance in

ractice only if the condition subsequent is void. A condition subsequent
in the strict sense, when void, is disregarded, and the transfer takes effect
as if the condition had not been imposed. On the other hand, a determin-
able interest fails altogether if the possibility of revertor is invalidated. To
take a hypothetical though not very realistic situation to illustrate this dis-
tinction, a property is given to a girl “until she ceases to carry on prostitu~
tion” (an obviously immoral stipulation). If the condition is not regarded
as a condition subsequent in the strict sense but as a limitation of the. tenure
defining its duration, then, it would seem that the transfer itself is void, at
least according to the English law.*

30.4. Principle—The condition here mentioned is a condition subse-
, and must, it appears, be construed subject to the provisions of sec-
14 and 23. It must not be invalid as laid down in section 32.

A git to ¢ person on condition that if he marries under the age of
twenty-five without the consent of a person named, the estate shall cease to
belong to him is valid under the section; and the donce will forfeit the estate
if he breaks the condition‘. A proviso that, if the donee becomes a nut
she shall forfeit the estate, is similarly enforced*. Similarly, a clause in &
gift deed executed by one V who was sentenced to transportation for life in
favour of $ on the eve of V's departure for Port Blair (the place for trans-
portation), providing that in the event of V’s return, all the properties gifted
to $ shovld revert to V, was held to be legal and enforceabie.®

30.5. Conditions repugnant—The difference between a repugnant
clause which is invalid and a clause of defeasance to which the Court will
give effect, has also been pointed out often. We cannot do better than
quote the words of Chitty. J. In Govindaraja’s case’, where the court had

1 Williams, Real Property (1966), page 77.

2 Re : Da Costa, (1912) 1 Chancery 337,

3 Cheshire Modern Law of Real Property, (1972), page 318, (sub-paragraph (4)
The hypothetical illustration is not taken’ from Cheshire.

4 5. 134, ill. (७), Indian Succession Act, 1925.

5 Section 134, Indian Succession Act, 1925, ills. (4) and (e).

6 Venkatrama ४. Aiyaswami, 43 M.LJ. 340.

7 Govindaraja v. Mangalam Pillai, AIR. 1933 Mad. 80; 63 M.LJ. 911, 913


222

to construe a pre-nuptial settlement by a husband in favour of his wife in
the following terms :

“I have accordingly given you the undermentioned properties
valued at Rs. 1,000 and you shall yourself from this day hold and en-
joy the same with all rights. Should any issue be born to us, that
issue shall get the properties after our death. If there is no issue,
after your death, your brothers should take the properties”.

The wife pre-deceased the husband, teaving no issue. The Judge, in
giving effect to the claim of the brothers, observed :

“The distinction between a repugnant provision and a defeasance pro-
vision is sometimes subtle, but the general principle of law seems to be that
where the intention of the donor is to maintain the absolute estate conferred
on the donee but he simply adds some restrictions in derogation of the inci-
dents of such absolute ownership, such restrictive clauses would be repug-
nant to the absolute grant and therefore void; but where the grant of an
absolute €state is expressly or impliedly made subject to defeasance on the
happening of a contingency and where the effect of such defeasance would
not be a violation of any rule of law, the original estate is curtail€d and the
gift over must be taken to be valid and operative”.

30.6. Case law—-There have been many cases in which fhe Courts, in
construing a deed of gift or a will, have found that the earlier clauses of the
document if read by themselves and without reference to the rest of the docu-
ment would confer an absolute estate, but that subsequent clauses if, read
with the earlier clauses, indicate that the intention of the donor or testator,
as the case may be, was that the donee should have such a degree of power
of disposing of the estate as should not be inconsistent with the subsequent
enjoyment of the second donee on the happening of the specified uncertain
event. The earliest, of these cases was that of Bhoobun Mohini Debia',
where a Hindu granted a talook to his sister, K by a sanad in the following
terms :

“You are my sister; I accordingly grant you as a talook for your
support the three vilages H, P. and K. belonging to my zamindari,
with ail rights appertaining thereto at a jama of Rs. 361. Being in
possession of the lands and paying rent according to the tabutjama, do
you and the generations born of your womb successively enjoy the
same. No other heir of yours shall have right or interest.”

The opinion of the Privy Council, delivered by Sir Robert Collier, was
that these words, had they stood exclusive of the last sentence, would have
conferred an absolute estate upon K, but the last clause cut down this gift
so that in the event of failure of issue living at the time of her death, the
estate was to revert to the donor and his heirs, that there was nothing in the
condition repugnant to Hindu law, and, that as the uncertain event contem-
Plated had not occurred, K, the sister was able to dispose of the property

ry will,

1 Bhoobun Mohini Debia v. Hurrish Chunder, (1879) 4 Cal. 23; 5 1, A
537; 3 Sar 815 (P.C.) er > ‘A 1995 9 Suther



223

30,7. In Sreemutty Soorjeemoney Dossoy', a Hindu testator governed
‘by the Dayabhag law devised all his real and personal estate among his five
sons in equal shares. The will contained the following clauses :

“should any among my said five sons die, not leaving any son from his
Joins, nor any son’s son, in that event neither his widow nor his daughter
nor his daughter's son, nor any of them will get any share out of the share
that he has obtained of the immovables and moveables of my said estate. In
that event, of the said property, such of my sons and my son’s son as accord-
ing to their respective shares.”

On the construction of the will that the uncertain event was a failure
of male issue of any one of his sons at the time of the death of that son, it
‘was held that the gift over was not inconsistent with the general principles
of Hindu law, and therefore the gift over was valid. The precise terms of
the first gift are not described in detail in the report.

This case? was explained by the Privy Council in the subsequent case
of Kristoromoni Dasi*.

30.8. In stating the rule relating to the defeasance of a prior absolute
interest by a subsequent event, it is important to add, first, that the event
must happen, if at all, immediately on the close of a life in being at the time
-of the gift, and, secondly, that a defeasance by way of gift over must be in
favour of somebody in existence at the time of the gift.

30.9. No change—No changes are needed in the section.

30,10. Section 32—Invalid condition—Under section 32, in order that
a condition that an interest shall cease to exist may be valid, it is necessary
‘that the event to which it relates be one which could legally constitute fie
condition of the creation of an interest.

30.11. Principle—This section is the same as section 135 of the Suc-
cession Act. The section merely lays down that a condition must be valid
before it can operate. Section 25 enumerates the conditions that are valid.
An invalid condition precedent invalidates a transfer, though an invalid con-
dition subsequent does not.

30.11. No change—-The section needs no change.

SS

I Sreemutty Soorjeemoney Dossoy v. Denobundoo Mullick (1861—63) 9 MIYA 123,
I Sar 837 (P.C.}

2 Sreemutty Soorjeemoney Dossoy v. Denobundoo Mullick, (1861---63) 9 MIYA 123,
1 Sar 837 (PC).

3 Kristoromoni, Dasi v. Narendro Krishna Bahadur, (1889) 16 Cal. 383-16 IA
29-5 Sar 285 (PC).

4 Jotendromohan Tagore v. Gunendra Mohan Tazore (1872) IA Sup vol. 4--49
Beng LR 377-18WR 359-2 Suther 692-3 Sar 82 (PC).


CHAPTER 31
TIME FOR PERFORMANCE
SECTIONS 33-34

31.1. Introduction—Transfers of property are sometimes conditionaE
on the performance of an act by the transferee. The transfer may not specify
the time of performance, or it may specify such time. The first’ case is dealt
with by section 33, and the second, case by section 34. In the first case, the
condition may be a condition precedent or a condition subsequent. The case
of a condition subsequent is the case which section 33 has in mind, vide the
use of the words “condition is broken”, and the illustration to the corres-
ponding section 136 of the Succession Act. The case of a condition pre-
cedent is not dealt with by section 33, and must be left to be dealt with by
the general rule! as to contingent interest under which, until the condition
is performed, the interest wil! not vest.

The language of section 34 which deals with cases where time is speci-
fied, is, in contrast, wide enough to cover both the types of conditions.

३1.18. Section 33—Transfer conditional on performance of act, no
time being specified for performance—Section 33 provides that where, on 2
transfer of property, an interest therein is created subject to a condition that
the person taking it shall perform a certain act, but no time is specified for
the performance of the Act, the condition is broken when he senders im-
possible, permanently or for an indefinite period, the performance of the
Act.

31.2. Analogous law—This section corresponds to section 136 of the
Succession Act, and section 34 of the Contract Act?.

The two illustrations appended to section 136 of the Succession Act are

instances of cases (i) when the fulfilment of the condition is rendered im-

ible and (ii) when its fulfilment is indefinitely postponed*. These
illustrations run as follows :—

Illustrations

“(i) A bequest is made to A, with a proviso that unless he enters the
Army, the legacy shall go over to B. A takes Holy Orders, and thereby
renders it impossible that he should fulfil the condition. B is entitled to
receive the legacy.

Gi} A_ bequest is made to A, with a proviso thal it shall cease to
have any effect if he does not marry B’s daughter. A marries a stranger
and thereby indefinitely postpones the fulfilment of the condition. The
bequest ceases to have effect.”

31.2, Principle—The principle embodied in this section is the same
as discussed in the discussion under the preceding sections. In this.

1 Section 21, first two sentences.
2 Gour.
3 Gour.



225

section the contingency is only the act of the person on which the cransfer
depends, and the transfer fails on account of his own act.

31.3. English law—Illustration (ii) to section 36, Succession Act
quoted above,’ is not in consonance with the English law on the subj ject,
Thus, in a case? where a testator, after giving certain iegacies to J and M,
added—“If either of these girls shoyld marry into the families of G or R,
and have a son, I give all my estate to him for iife (with remainder over);
and if they shall not marry”, to other persons. Lord Thurlow held this to
be a condition precedent; and that nothing vested in the devisees over,
while the performance by J and M was possible, which was during their
whole lives; and that their having married into other families did not pre-
clude the possibility of their performing the condition, as they might
survive their first husbands.*

31.3A. No change—No change is needed in section 33.

३1.4, Section 34 Transfer Conditional on performance of act, ijime
being specified—-Where the time for performance of the act is specified,
the matter is dealt with by section 34, as under.

“34. Where an act is to be performed by a person either as a
condition to be fulfilled before an interest created on a transfer of
Property is enjoyed by him, or as a condition on the non-fulfitment
of which the interest is to pass from him to another person, and a
time is specified for the performance of the act, if such performance
within the specified time is prevented by the fraud of a person who
would be directly benefited है owe fslfienent of the condition, such
further time shall, as against be allowed for performing the act
as shall be requisite to make up for the delay caused by such fraud.
But if no time is specified for the performance of the act, then, if its
performance is by the fraud of a person interested in the non-fulfilment
of the condition rendered impossible or indefinitely postponed, the
condition shall, as against him, be deemed to have been fulfilled.”

31.5. Fraud—In order to constitute fraud, there must be some abuse”
of a confidential position, some intentional imposition or some deliberate
concealment of facts.‘ The term ‘fraud’ has been this defined in the:
Indian Contract Act’ —

17. “Fraud means and includes any of the following acts committed
by a party to a contract or with his connivance, or by his agent, with intent
to deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him to enter
into the contract :

(1) The suggestion, as to a fact, of that which is not true, by one.
who does not believe it to be true;

(2) The active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge
or belief of the fact;

(3) A promise made without any intention of performing it;

i. Para 31.1, supra.

2 Randall v. Payne. 1 B.C., C. 55,

3 2 Jarm 3; see also Lester v. Garland 15 Ves. 248.
4 Dean vy. Thwaite, 21 Beav. 621.

5 Section 17, Contract Act.


226

(4) Any other act fitted to deceive;
(5) Any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be
fraudulent.

“Explanation :—1 silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of
Bn e Mere to enter into a comvract is not fraud, unless
the circimstances of the case are such that, regard being
had to them, it is the duty of the person keeping silence
to speak, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to

speech”.

31.6. Width—This definition of fraud, however, is by no mieans ex-
‘haustive. Indeed, of fraud no definition is possible. It is infinite :
-erescit in orbe dolus.’ Fraud may be positive or constructive. In the
latter category, the term id used in its widest sense as embracing such
acts or contracts, as, though not originating in any actual evil design of
contrivance to perpetuate fraud or injury upon others, yet, by their ten-
dency to deceive or mislead, or to violate public or private confidence, or,
to injure the public interests, are equally reprehensible with positive fraud.
and therefore, equally prohibited?

31.7. Scope—Section 34 is general and would apply equally to a
condition whether precedent or subsequent

31.8. Principle—The justification for the rule is the broad principle
that no man can take advantage of his own fraud, or as Coke says:
“Fraud at dolus, nemini patrocinart debent.”* ही is contrary to natural
justice ‘that a person who prevents a thing from being done should avail
limself of the non-performance he has occasioned. The rule in the first
place goes only so far as to undo the mischief attempted, where that can
‘be done, and not to the extent of entirely dispensing with the observance
of the condition. but where this would entail indefinite delay or inconveni-
ence, equity regards it as done, what would have been done, but for the
fraud of the adversary who is thenceforward precluded from taking advan-
tage of it*

No man shall gain a right by his own wrong, this does not imply
that if he had a right independently of the fraud, he shall lose it, or the
power of exercising it, by a wrong done in connection with it. The tule,
again, is inapplicable where the right of a third party is to be affected. For
3. man cannot, by his wrongful act to another, deprive a third person of
this right, against another.*

31.9. No change—No change is needed in the section.

1 Gour.

2 Story Eq. Juris., 253.

3 Sidhee Nusur v. Ooioodhyaram, 10 MLA. 540; Edwards v. Aberayon Mutual वहन
surance Society, 1 Q.B.D. 563.

4 LE. “Fraud and deficit ought not to be benefit any person” 3 co. 78. The same
sense is conveyed by the maxim “Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua
Fropria”. {No one can take advantage of his own wrong.) So Ex dolo malo
hon oritur actio. (A right of action cannot arise out of fraud).

| Rooper vy. Lane 6 H.L.C. 443 (460, 461), In re : London Celluloid Co., 39 Ch. 9.
190 (206).

CE. C.t08, Indian Contract Act (IX of 1872).



CHAPTER 32
ELECTION
Section 35

32.1 Intreductory—Section 35 gives effect, though with a modification,
to the doctrine of election. Where by a transfer property which does not
belong to the transferor, is given to A and the same transfer gives another
property to A, A must elect.

32.8 Hypothetical case—The position in regard to wills is the same.
Suppose,’ therefore, that Edward makes a will leaving £ 5,000 to Frank,
and Frank’s car, worth £ 2,000 to Geraldine. In this case, there are three”
possibilities open to Frank :

{a) he may disclaim the legacy under the will? In this | case he
derives no benefit whatever from that gift and keeps his car;
(b) he may “take under the will”, namely, accept the legacy of
< 5,000 and transfer the car to Geraldine; or
(०) he may “take against the will”, namely, accept the legacy of
& 5,000 and retain the car, but pay to Geraldine & 2,000 to
compensate her for not receiving the car.

Jn both the second and third cases Frank is a net sum of £ 3,000 better
off, and Geraldine receives either the asset or cash to the value of £ 2,000.

32.3 Equity—In our introductory discussion in this Report, we had
referred to the fact that many of the provisions of the Transfer of Property
Act have their genesis in Equity in England which were evolved in the
Court of Chancery. Election furnishes an interesting example. This is
incorporated in section 35—a principle which has been described by Lord
Haldane? as “a principle which the courts applied in the exercise of an
equitable jurisdiction enabling them to secure a just distribution substantially
in accordance with the general scheme of the instrument”.

This quotation from Lord Haldane shows that the paramount object is
justice, and that literal compliance is replaced by substantial compliance in
the interest of justice, taking care at the time that such action is in con-
formity with the general scheme of the instrument. The intentions of the
testator or transferor are thus carried out and the expression thereof in the
terms of the transfer is now moulded so that justice is done. The doctrine
‘of election is rested usually on the rule that a person cannot accept and
reject the same instrument This is a statement of another aspect of the
rule which shows why the rule requires a person to elect.

32.4. History-—The doctrine of election owes its origin to the civil law®
By that law, a bequest of property which the testator knew to belong to
another was not void, the legatee was entitled to recover from the heir

1. Mlvstration taken from Mellows, Law of Succession (1973), 9. 485.
2 With the result that it is usually only predent to disclaim where the value of the
gift under the will does not exceed the value of the property to be given to the

3 Brown v, Greekson (1920) A.C. 860, 868.
4 Burmingham v, Kirwan, (1805) 2 Sch. & Lef. 444, 450.
5 Story, Equity Jurisprudence, (1919) page 451, 1018.

227


228

either the subject of the bequest or, if the owner was unwilling to part with
it for a reasonable price, its value. The beir, on his part, had the option of
renouncing a burdonsome inheritance, for the heir could not accept the
penefit offered by the will apart from its burden, nor, having accepted the
former, could not discharge the latter by merely indemmitying the dis-
appointed claimant, whom he was bound to satisfy to the extent provided in
the will, irrespective of the benefit he had himseif received.

32.48 Need for election~—Why does need for election arise ? The need,
it would appear, arises because, in the same instrument there is a duality of
gifts or purported gifts. The two gifts cannot be given effect literaily, and
“the law must evolve some just mode of giving them effect as far as possible.
Where there is a gift of the donor’s own property to E and also a gift of the
property of E to a third person, an intention is implied that the gift o E
shall take effect only if E elects to permit the gift to the third person also
to take effect.’ That the aspect of the presumed intention (and not the
expressed intention) is important, would be clear from the fact that if a
testator gives property subject to some express condition (for examy ple as 10

the donee must elect in the sense

abandoning a claim against the testator),

of choosing whether to comply with the condition or totally lose the gift.
This, however, is slightly difierent from the doctrine of election as it origi-
nated in equity. Again, if two gifts are made distinctly in the same instru-
ment of the property of the transferor and one gift is beneficial while the
other onerous, the doctrine of election (in the proper sense) does not compel
the donee to adopt a particular course of action. He can take both, or he
can accept the one which is beneficial and yet reject the onerous gift unless,
‘of course, the intention of the transferor is to make the acceptance of one,
“a condition for the acceptance of the other. Such a case is outside section
35, which applies only when the transferor professes to transfer property not

his own.

32.5 Scope of section 35—The case to which section 35 addresses itself
is a narrow one. Where a person insists on transferring a property which
be has no right to transfer and, as a part of the same transaction, confers
any benefit on the owner of the property, it”is then that the owner of the

- property professed to be transferred to a third person has to elect. The
election is between confirming the transfer and dissenting from it. If he

confirms the transfer, it takes effect in its entirely. If he dissents from the
transfer, then certain consequences ensue,—(i) compulsory relinquishment
of the benefit conferred (under the Indian law) subject to compensation by
transferor in some cases, or (ii) liability imposed on that person (usually
called the refractory donee) to compensate fl fe disappointed donee, that is
to say, the third person who does not get the very property which the trans-
क्षण essed to transfer under English law. By a suitable arrangement,
full ies is given, to a donation of that which is not the property of the

_ donor-—not in a literal manner spelling out the terms of the transfer, but
ih a substantial manner. The arrangement is still based on carrying out
in substance the intention of the transferor. The aspect of intention is

“Drought out by Story’: Story takes the case where a testatory devises an
estate belonging to his son to a third person, bequeating in the same will
to his son a legacy of one hundred thousand pounds. “It would manifest

- that the’ testator intended that the son should take both, to the exclusion

_-of the other devises and therefore he ought to be put to his election (as to)

1. Noys v. Mordaunr, (1706) 2 Vern, 581.
2. Story, Equity & Jurisprudence, (1919), page 450, paragraph 1076.



229

which he would take; that is, either to zelinquish his own estate, or to com-
pensate the party disappointed, or in the case of a testator his estate, out
ef the bequest under the will.” Story‘ further points out that every case of
election pre-supposes a plurality of gifts or Tights, with an intention of the
party who has a right to ‘control one or both, that one should have a sub-
Stitute for the other. The party has to make the choice—hence the word
election”-—but he cannot enjoy the benefit of both,

32.6 Choice—The last-mentioned proposition has been taken sub-
‘stantiay from Mr. Swanston’s note to one of the early English cases? The
aspect of choice becomes significant in giving rise to the rule that for a
binding election there must be a deliberate choice made with full knowledge
of the rufes relating to election and the relevant circumstances,* This is on
the principle that if we exclude a party on the basis of his own election, it is
necessary to show that he knew all the facts. 11 is for this reason that an
election made under a mistake of fact will not be binding.’

32.7 Section 35—In this background, we may now deal with the text
of section 35, quoted below :

“35. Where a person professes to transfer property which he
has no tight to transfer, and as part of the same transaction confers
any benefit on the owner of the property, such owner must elect either
to confirm such transfer or to dissent from it; and in the latter case,

he shall relinquish the benefit so conferred and the benefit so relin-
quished shall revert to the transferor or his representative as if it
had not been disposed of subject nevertheless, where the transfer is
gratuitous, and the transferor has, before the election, died or other-
wise become incapable of making a fresh transfer, and in all cases
where the transfer is for consideration, to the charge of making good
to the disappointed transferee, the amount or value of the property
attempted to be transferred to him.

Mlustrations

The farm of Suitanpur is the tty of C and worth Rs 800. A by
an instrument of gift professes to thancfe fer it to B, giving by the same instru-
Brent १ Re, 1,000 toC. C elects to retain the farm. He forfeits the gift of

In the same case, A died before election. His representative must, out
of the Rs 1,000, pay Rs 800 to B.

The rule in the first paragraph of this section applies whether the
fransferor does or does not believe that which he professes to transfer to be
is own.

A person taking no benefit directly under a transaction, but deriving
a benefit under it indirectly need not elect.

A person who, in his own capacity, takes a benefit under the transac-
tion, may in another dissent therefrom.

t Story, Equity & Jurisprudence, (1919), page 350, paragraph 1075.
2 Dillon v. Parker, (1883) 1 Swanston’s 394 Note (b); 1 Ci & F 303;
3 Wilson v. Thornbury, (1865) 10 Chancery Appeals 239.

& Pread vy. Norgan 11 Howse of Lords cases 588.

5 Kidney v. Comssmaker, (1806) 12 Vos. 136.



330

Exception to the last preceding four rules—Where a particular benefit
is expreesed to be conferred on the owner of the property which the transferor
professes to transfer, and such benefit is expressed to be in lieu of that

, if such owner claim the property, he must relinquish the particular
benefit but he is not bound to relinquish any other benefit conferred upon
him by the same transaction,

Acceptance of the benefit by the person on whom it is conferred con-
stitutes an eleclion by him to confirm the transfer, if he is aware of his duty
to elect and of those circumstances which would influence the judgment of
a reasonable man in making an election, or if he waives inquiry into the cit-
cumstances.

Such knowledge or waiver shall, in the absence of evidence to the con-
trary, be presumed, if the person on whom the benefit has been conferred
has enjoyed it for two years without doing any act to express dissent.

Such knowledge or waiver may be inferred from any act of his which
renders it impossible to place the persons interested in the property profes-
sed to be transferred in the same condition as if such act had not been done.

Hlustration

A transfers to B an estate to which C is entitled, and as part of the
same transaction gives C a coal-mine. C takes possession of the mine and
exhausts it. He has thereby confirmed the transfer of the estate to B.

If he does not, within one year after the date of the transfer, signify
to the transferor or his representatives his intention to confirm or to dissent
from the transfer, the transferor or his representatives may, upon the expirta-
tion of that period, require him to make his election; and if he does not
comply with such requisition within a reasonable time after he has received
it, he shall be deemed to have elected to confirm the transfer.

In the case of disability, the election shall be postponed until the dis-
ability ceases, or until the election is made by some competent authority.”

32.8 Compensation of forfeiture—tt is sometimes stated that the doc-
trine of election as incorporated in section 35 is based on forfeiture, unlike
the English law which is based upon compensation. This is true to a large
extent; but it must also be pointed out that even under section 35,—as is
apparent from the third and fourth paragraphs,—while forfeiture takes place
from the point of view of the refractory donee, yet the transferor or his heirs
must compensate the disappointed donee, in certain cases specified in the
section. The illustration to the fourth paragraph of the section makes this
amply clear. In fact, the situations in which compensation is compulsory

॥ the section cover most, if not all, of the situations in which justice
requires that compensation ought to be made.

The only difference is that the compensation is to be made by the
transferor or his representative and not by the refractory donee, unlike the
position in Engtish law and the liability is confined to the specified situations.

32.9 Declaration of intention—It is to be pointed out that the general
and presumed intention of the transferor may be repelled by a declaration
dn the instrument of a particular intention imconsistant with the presumed


23h

and general intention. This is the English law.' Though section 35 does
not provide for such a case, Mulla? has expressed the view that the cpera-
tion of the section can, in India, similarly be excluded by express words.*

One example of a provision giving effect to the contrary intention is
already found in the Exception appearing after the 4th paragcaph of the
section, which corresponds to a similar provision in section 156 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925. The illustration to section 186, Succession
Act, is as follows :

“Under A’s marriage-settlement his wife is entitled, if she sur-
vives him, to the enjoyment of the estate of Sultanpur during her Jife.
A by his will bequeaths to his wife an annuity of 200 rupees during
her Jife, in eu of her interest in the estate of Sultanpur, which estate
he bequeaths to his son. He also gives his wife a legacy of 1,000
rupees. The widow elects to take what she is entitled to under the
settlement. She is bound to relinquish the annuity, bar not the
legacy of 1,000 rupees”.

A somewhat similar situation was also present in ॥ Calcutla case.t

32.10 Ne change—indian case law on the section has
through and discloses no need for amending the scction.

1 In se. Vardon's Trusts (1885) 31 Ch. D. 275., 279.

2. Mulla (1973) Comment on section 35.

3 Shephard and Brown. Trunfser of Property Act. note on section 35, referred 10 by
Mulla. .

4 Pramad.s ६. Lokhi (18555 1.1... 12 Cal. 60

16--885Law/77


CHAPTER 33
APPORTIONMENT
SECTIONS 36-37

33.8 fntrod:.ciory-——The transfer of an interest in property sometimcs
raises problems, where the property carries income and the imcome is to be
received from a third person. Such problems may arise either because of
the creation of succes interests in property, or because of the co-existence
of concurrent inter in property arising by reason of severance. In the
first case, the chronological element becomes important. What are the
respective righis of the predecessor and the successor? In the second case,
the simuktancous co-existence of more than one beneficiary raises this ques-
tion-—What ave the respective rights of the co-shares ? The first topic,
conveniently described as “apportionment in point of time,” is dealt with in
section 36. The second topic, conveniently described as “apportionment in
Point of estate”, is reserved for section 37.

33.2 Section 36—Apportionment of periodical payments in point of
time, then, is the subject matter of section 36, which is condensed’ from
sections 2 to 4 of the (English) Apportionment Act, 1870.

Under the section, in the absence of a contract or local usage to the
contrary, all rents, annunities, pensions, dividends and other periodical pay-
ments in the shape of income shall, upon the transfer of the interest of the
person entitled 10 receive such payments, be deemed, as between the trans-
feror and the transferee, to accrue due from day to day and to be apportion-
able accordingly, but to be payable on the days appointed for the payment
thereof.

The section applies only where there is a transfer of property, thou et
it relegates the words “upon the transfer of the interest” somewhere in tl
iniddle. What is transferred is the transfer of the interest of a 90500 entitled
to receive the specified payments, namely, rent etc. On such a transfer, it
lays down the rule to be applied, as between the parties to the transfer.

33.3 Meaning of apportionment—Lord Coke remarked’ that the word
‘apportionment’ cometh of the word portio, quasi partio, which signifieth
a part of the whole, and “apportion” signifieth a division of a rent common,
etc, or a making of it into parts. The term® is used in two senses; (i) to
denote distribution of a common fund among the several claimants; and (ii)
sometimes, to denote the contribution made by several persons having distinct
tights to discharge a common burden. The words “rents, annuities, etc.”
here used, are nowhere defined in this Act or in the General Clauses Act.
They are, however, defined in section 5 of the English! Statute in the follow-
ing terms : “5. In the consiruction of this Act, the word ‘rents’ includes
rent service, rent charge; and rent seek; and also tithes and all periodical
payments or rendering in liew of, or in the nature of rent or tithe. The
word “annuities” includes salaries and pensions, The word ‘dividends’
includes (besides dividends strictly so-called) all payments made by the

1 Gour.
2 66, Lt. 147-b, cited in Gour.

3 Story’s Eq. Jur. (2nd Eng. Ed.) 305.
4 Apporticnment Act. 1870,

232


233

name of dividend, bonus, or otherwise, out of the revenue of trading or other
public companies, divisible between all or any of the members of such
respective companies, whether such payments shall be usually made or
declared at any fixed time or otherwise; but this does not include payments
in the nature of a return or reimbursement or capital.” It includes, how-
ever, occasional bonuses or surplus profits of the share-holders.’ The
phrase “as between the transferor and the transferee,” implies that a stranger
cannot apportion them, and the provisions expressed by “to accrue due from
day to day”, is only for the purpose of apportionment. Under the Bengal
Tenancy Act, rent is not ordinarily regarded as accruing from day to day,
but as falling due only at stated times according to the contract or tenancy
of the general law*.

33.4 No change—We have no changes to recommend in section 36.

33.5 Section 37—The subject matter dealt with in section 37 is
apportionment by estate, in contrast with apportionment by time which was
dealt with in section 36.

33.6 Analysis—The first proposition in section 37 lays down that when
in consequence of a transfer, a property is divided and held in several shares
and thereupon the benefit of any obligation relating to the property as a
whole passes from one to several owners of the property, the corresponding
duty shall, in the absence of a contract to the contrary amongst the owners,
be performed in favour of each of such owners in proportion to the value
of his share in the property. The second proposition makes the above rule
subject to the proviso which requires that the duty must be a duty which
can be severed and that the severance does not substantially increase the
burden of the obligation. If the duty cannot be so severed or if the severance
would substantially increase the burden of the obligation, the duty shall be

formed for the benefit of such one of the several owners as they shall
जाप designate for that purpose.

This is yet another proviso, under which no person on whom the burden
of the obligation lies shall be answerable for failure to discharge it in the
manner provided by this section unless and untit he has had reasonable notice
of the severance.

Finally, nothing in this section applies to leases for agricultural pur-
poses unless and until the State Government by notification in the of ictal
Gazette so directs.

33.7 Ulustration—There are two illustrations to the section. In illus-
teation (a), A sells to B, C and D a house situate in a village and leased
to E at an annua! rent of Rs 30 and delivery of one fat sheep, B having
provided half the purchase-money and C and D one-quarter-each. 15, having
notice of this, must pay Rs 15 to B, Rs. 74 to C, and Rs 73 to D, and must
deliver the sheep according to the jomt direction of 8, C and 9.

This illustration illustrates the principal proposition laid down in the
section as well as the first and the second provisoes. There is a duty in B
to render the obligation to the several persons by breaking up the amount,
but, so far as the sheep is concerned, the burden cannot be increased and it
is for the owners to jointly designate the person in whose favour the obliga-
tion is to be performed. The illustration provides for notice, thus comply-
ing with the second proviso.

1 Carr v. Griffith, 12 Ch. D. 655.
2. Per Banerjee, J., in Satyendra Nath v. Nitkantha VLR. 21 Cal 383, 385.



234

Illustration (b) to section 37 takes the case where each house in the
village being bound to provide 10 days’ labour in each year on a dyke to
prevent inundation, E had agreed as a term of his lease to perform this work
for A.B, C and D severaily require E to perform the ten days’ work due
on account of the house of each. E is not bound to do more than ten day's
work in all, according to such directions as B, C and D may join in giving.
This illustration lays emphasis on the fact that the burden is not to be
increased by severance. It is not stated in the illustration, but it is assumed,
that the ownership of the house of A was in consequence of a transfer,
divided and came to be held in several shares by B, C and D.

33.8 Easemenis—This section is similar to section 30 of the Indian
Easements Act, 1882 which refers to the effect of the partition of the domi-
nant heritage upon an easement annexed to the dominant heritage. To take
one of the illustrations to that section, A having in respect of a house an
easement of light, divides the house into three distinct heritages. Each of
these continues to have a right to have its windows unobstructed.

33.9 Death—Although section 37 does not deal with succession on
death, that is, succession to property by several cosharers, it may be of
interest to mention the position briefly. In India, on the death of the credi-
tor, his numerous heirs ate only jointly entitled to enforce the right which
the deceased creditor if alive, could have singly enforced, This also seems
to be the English law, under which the debtor is not liable to as many
claims as there ate heirs of the promisee. The theory of English law is that
the number of patceners constitute one heir and they are connected together
by unity of interest and unity of title—unless of course, one of the heirs
has received an authority from the other or others to enforce the share of
the assigning heir also.

33.10 English Law—Iin England, certain special provisions seem to
have been made in regard to leases where the reversion is severed? But
the generat rule is as above.

33.11 No change—tn this section also we have no changes to recom-
mend.

"T Kandhiva Lal v. Chander ILRUD Al 370 Boa Te RT
1 Kandhiya Lal v. Chander, 1.1... 7 Ail. 313, 324 (F.B.) followed in Ahimsa Bibi v.
Abdul Khadir, LL.R. 25 Mad. 26.

2, Section 140, Law of Property Act, 1925.



CHAPTER 34
TRANSFER BY LIMITED OWNERS
SECTION 38

34.1 Section 38—With section 38 begins a group of sections which is
concerned only with the teansfer of immovable property. Of these sections,
the first is section 38, dealing with transfer by a person authorised only
under certain circumstances to transfer. According to Molls,' the section
would appear to be based on the leading case of Hanooman Prasad, the
principle whereof, laid down in the specific situation of the manager for an
infant heir under Hindu law, has been regarded as applicable also to a
Hindu widow or other limited heir.? and to transactions in which a father
has made an alienation of an ancestral family estate.* The same principle
applies to alienations by a Mahant or Shebait of property. Though some
of the situations have lost their importance because of the reform of the
Hindu Law of succession, many of them have not, partly because the Hindu
law of co-parcenership has not yet been modified and partly because the
Hindu 189 of religious and charitable endowments has been fete untouched
by legislation so far as the limited nature of the power of Mahant or Shebait
is concerned.

34.2 Illustration—The Mustration to section 38 takes a familiar case,
now obsolete, of a Hindu widow whose husband has left ‘collateral heirs’-—
described in the text-books as reversioners—where the property held by her
as such widow is insufficient for her maintenance and she agrees for pur-
poses neither religious nor charitable to sell a field which is part of the
property to B. Sale for the purpose of maintenance, it may be stated, is
competent if there is a real necessity. The illustration further states that B
satisfies himself by reasonable enquiry that the income of the property is
insufficient for maintenance and the sale of the property is necessary. So
satisfying himself and acting in good faith B buys the field from the Hindu
widow. In such circumstances, as between the purchaser B and the widow
and the reversioners, a necessity for sale shall be deemed to have existed.

34.3 Crux—The crux of section 38 lies in the expression “authorised
only under circumstances in their nature variable to dispose of immovable
property”. This is the draftsman’s way of describing what the Judicial
Committee in Hanooman Prasad’s case described as a limited and qualified
power which can only be exercised rightly in the case of need or for the
benefit of the estate, what is a case of need or which transfer is for the
benefit of the estate must depend on circumstances which are in their nature
variable.

34.4 English law—In England, a somewhat similar prificiple seems to
have been followed in regard to transfer per stripes*. Ultimately, the
rationale of the provision favouring the beneficial purchaser for value with-
re नमन नननन-नवननननननन-ननन-नम---न--मनन---+ «न भननन-++ानआ 3०००

1 Mulla (1973), page 179.
2. Hanooman Prasad v. Mst. Bibee, (1856) 6 Moores Indian Appeals 393, 423.
३ Devi Prasad v. Gulal Bhagat, (1913) LL.R. 40 Cal. 721 (F.B.}.
4 Kameshwar Prasad v. Run Bahadur, (1881) Law Reports 8 Indian Appeals 8.
5 Niledri Sahu v. Mahantan Mahant Chaturbhuj Das, ALR. 1926 P.C, 112.
6 Societe General de Paris v. Walker, 11 AC. 20, 28.
235


236

out notice is protection against latent frauds perpetrated by the limited
ewner. This is not to say that any person can transfer the property of any
other person. The section pre-supposes at least some right to transfer ia
the transferor, though that right is dependent on circumstances in their
nature variable, The other conditions laid down in the section must also
be satisfied in order to bring the rule of equity into operation. But neither
good faith nor value nor reasonable enquiry will suffice to confer title where
the transfer is by a person who has not a semblance of interest of property.

34.5 No change—The above discussions discloses no need to change
the law. . हु


CHAPTER 35
MAINTENANCE AND OTHER RIGHTS
20 RECEIVE MONEY OUT OF PROFITS

SEcTION 39

35.1, Section 39—The enforceability of certain rights connected with
immovable property, though not directly amouating to an interest therein,
is a topic which may arise in a number of situations. Of these, two are
dealt with in the Act, namely, (i) right of maintenance and (ii) restrictive
covenants on the use of land or obligations annexed to ownership, not
amounting to interest or casement. These are contained in sections 39
and 40, respectively. They both speak of a “third person”, but the third
is not necessarily a person other than the transferor and the transferee.
He could well be the transferor himself, at least in a case falling under sec-
tion 40". In fact, even under secton 39, one can well imagine a case
where a person transferring property reserves the right to reccive mainte-
nance out of profits,

35.2. Coming to the text of section 39, it provides that where a
third person has a right to receive maintenance, or a right to provision for
advancement, or marriage, from the profits of immovable property, and
such property is transferred, the right (to receive maintenance or to such
advancement or provision for marriage) may be enforced against the
transferee, if he has notice thereof or if the transfer is gratuitous; but not
against the transferee for consideraton without notice of the right, nor
against such property in his hands,

35.3, Amendment of 1929—Section 39 has been radically altered by
the amendment of 1929. Under the old law, emphasis was laid upon the
intention of defeating the right of maintenance etc., while under the
present law, emphasis is laid on the element of notice. The mental element
of the parties is irrelevant, except that the person against whom the right is
sought to be enforced must have notice, or the transfer must be gratuitous.
Ta short, the amendment renders it unnecessary for the maintenance
कार है prove that the transfer was made with the intention of defeating
the right®.

There is a similar provision in the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance
Act, 1956, section 28 of which is modelled on section 39 of the Transfer
of Preperty 528.

35.4. Rights created by decree and rights amounting to charges—
Scope of the section—There appears to be some incompleteness in the
langunge of the section on two questions which are of considerable practical
importance, namely,—

{a) is it under the section, necessary that the right must be one
in the form of a change ?

1 Mulla (1973) p. 185, paragraph (2), third paragraph.

2 Ramamurthy v. Kanakarathnam, ALR. 1948 Mad, 205,

3 Ravari v, Parmeshwar, AR, 1971 Ker. 216, 217 paragraph 3.
237


238

(b) is the section applicable to a charge created by decree ?

On the second question, we do not see any reason why the provisions
legislature that the right should assume the form of a charge. _ In fact, it
is a correct view—as was taken in a Nagpur case’—hat section 39 is meant
for rights which fall short of a charge. This is for the reason that en-
forcement of charges is a matter specifically deait with in section 100.

On the second question, we do not see any reason why the provisions
of section 39 should not apply to a right created by a decree not amounting
itu a charge enforceable under section 100. It is true that the Act, in
general, does not apply to transfer by decree, but there are two weighty
reasons why, in this particular case, a different approach could be adopted.
In the first place, section 39 is not concerned with enforceability against a
teansferee by operation of law. The proposed amendment will not dis-
turb that position, but will merely bring within the fold of the section
rights of maintenance created by decree. Enforcement of the right will
stifl be limited to a transferee by act of parties and, of course, will be sub-
ject to the other requirements of the section. Secondly, as a matter of
policy, it is desirable that the beneficial provisions of this section should
be extended to a transfer of a right created by a decree even if, in general,
there may be any theoretical difficulty in extending a provision of the Act
to transfers by decree.

We may incidentally mention that the question how far section 100
applies to decre(al charges is one which we propose to examine? under
section 100.

For this reason, we recommend that the following Explanation should
be inserted below the section by way of making an amendment or clari-
fication on both the points raised above :—

“Explanation.— This section applies also to a right creaied by

a decree or order of a court, but not to a right enforceable as a charge

under section 100.”

1 कर Ram v. Kundan Lal, AIR. 1940 Nag. 163, 165 (Stone CJ. & Vivian Bose

2 To be considered under section 100.


CHAPTER 36
RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS AND OBLIGATIONS
ANNEXED TO OWNERSHIP OF LAND
Section 40

36.1. Introductory—Questions concerning the rights of third persons
may arise from covenants that are often entered into while transferring
Property. These covenants may impose a positive duty or a negative
duty. The primary object in inserting such covenants, when property is
transferred outright, is, in general, to preserve the saleable value of the
residental amenities of the property of the transferor—though there may
sometimes be other considerations not connected with the ownership or
enjoyment of any particular property. Whether such a covenant is
binding qua contract between the parties to the covenant personally is a
matter which depends on the law of contract and, to some extent, on the
provisions in the Transfer of Property Act relevant to the subject, of which
sections 10 to 12 have been already considered. The quesiion now to be
considered is whether such a covenant entered into by a person, while
transferring or accepting a transfer of property, can be enforced against a
future transferee. In legal language, this question is concerned with the
running of the burden of the convenant with the land. Conversely, when
the person in whose favour the convenant was entered into—briefly, the
beneficary—transfers the property—the question may arisc whether the
transferee can claim the benefit of the covenant. In legal language, the
question is concerned with the running of the benefit with the land.

36.2, Easemeni and teases—This has been one of the most difficult
matters in the law of transfer, In order to avoid discussion on matters
about which there is no controversy, it is desirable to leave out of the dis-
cussion rules relating to two spheres of the law, namely, casements and
covenants contained in leases. In general easements bind the  servient
heritage and permanently enure for the benefit of the dominant heritage,
irrespective of who is the owner thereof! As regards leases, again, normal
covenants in a lease will run with the land and with the reversion. It was
realised very early even by those who administered the common law that
covenants contained in a lease might have a wider operation than ordinary
contracts. They were, in a sense, regarded as being annexed to an estate
in the land so that they could be enforced by any one who 1vok that estate
in the land.* पं

36.3. Types of question arising—Leaving aside these two matters, the
possible queries that theoretically could be raised on the subject of trans-
fer cf the burden of a covenant could be fourfold :

(1) The transferee assigns his interests to A. Can A enforce the
covenants inserted in the transfer in favour of the original
transferee and binding on the original transferor ?

(2) The transferee assigns the interests to A. Can A be sued on
the covenant inserted in the transfer binding on the original
transferee.

1 Cheshire, Modern Law of Real Property. (1972), pp. 578. 579.

"2 Holdsworth, History of English Law, Vol. 3, page 158. See also Vol, 7, pages
287 to 292.

239


240

(3) The transferor assigns his interests to Z. Can Z enforce the
covenants inserted in the original teansfer and binding on the
original transferee.

(4) The transferor assigns his interests to Z. Can Z be sued wpon
the covenants contained in the original transfer and binding
on the original transferee.

There could, of course, be complex situations raising more questions
than one. For example, A having made B enter into a covenant for the
beneficial enjoyment of a property belonging to A, transfers the property
to C. B in his turn transfers the bucdened property to D. The questions
to be considered would be—and this is not necessarily an exhaustive
enemeration :—

(a) Can C enforce a covenant entered into for his predecessor’s
benefit ?

(b) Assuming that he can do so, can he do so against D who is
not the criginal covenantor but his successor ?

36.4. Act not contprehensive—Unfortunately, the Act does not deal, in
a@ comprehensive manner, with these questions in the manner set out
above. This is partly duc to the fact that the law on the subject was not
im such a condition that a codification could be easily and confidently
suggested. Partly, such an attempt was also, rendered unnecessary by
the fact that some of the covenants concerning the sale of ee ae
perty have been set out in section 55, and similar is the position regarding
mortgages, the intention being that these covenants would not be affected by
the transfer of the property, after the sale or mortage.

36.5. General rule privity—The general rule of the common law was
thet if there was privity of estate and not privity of contract, then only
covenants which concern the land are enforceable. This rule became
useful in relation to leases, mainly because py of estate means that here
is a tenure between the parties, that is, relationship of landlord and
tapant exists between them, though the contract was between the purchaser
and the lessor,

But if there is no privity of conteact, nor of estate, then at common
law, subject to two exceptions, no covenants are enforceable. The general
rale is that covenants concerning the land are not, in the absence of privity
of either type, enforceable. To this general rule, there were two important
exceptions, namely, (a) the benefit of a covenant could be
the land for the benefit of which it was made if the covenant was one which
touched and concerned the land, for example, the grantor’s covenant for
title concerning the land. The benefit ran with the land conveyed, so
that whoever is entitled to the land is entitled to the benefit of the covenant”
Equity want further in enforcement of assignments of the benefits of the
contracts generally, whether or not connected with land—a matter now

|, as to the procedure, by statute both in England and in India
Thus, the benefit of a contract became assignable. But the burden re-
mained anassignable at common law, except when there was privity of
estate.

1 Williams, Real Property, (1966), page 725, paragraph 2.
2 Williams, Real Property, (1966), page 726, paragraph 3.


241

36.6. Restrictive Covenants in equity—Equity added another दफा
tion. Jt allowed the assignment not only of the benefit (as stated above),
but also of the burden of restrictive covenants.’

36.7. Restrictive—A restrictive covenant is one imposing a negative
obligation (for example, a covenant not to build), as opposed to a positive
covenant (for example, a covenant to build); both the benefit and the
burden of the restrictive covenant can run in equity only if there is bots
land which is benefitted and Jand which is burdened. And even this is
subject to the qualification that a purchaser of a legal estate without notice
takes it free from the burden. This qualification was based on the general
principle? :—

“Legal rights are good against all the world; equitable rights arc
good against all persons except a bona fide purchaser of a legal estate
for value without notice ... ”

३6.78, Background of section 40.—It is in this background that sec-
tioa 40 was enacted. The doctrine of equity relating 10 restrictive
converant was laid down in the leading case of Tulk v. Moxhay* and the
provision in the first paragraph of section 40 is obviously based on that
decision. There was, however, in 1882 one misconception as to scope of
the rules as to enforcement of positive covenants, resulting from a mis-
understanding of the observations made in Tulk v. Moxhay. This mis-
conception was removed in later English cases, and in conformity with the
later trend, section 40, first paragraph was enacted in 1929, so as to remove
postive covenants from its scope. So, after 1929, the burden of a positive
covenant does not run against the transferee from the covenant or except
where a statutory provision governs the matter. This non-enforceability
of a positive covenant has, of course, nothing to do with the position as
between the original covenantor and covenantee. We have  discussed*
this aspect while considering section 11,

36.8 Section 40-—first paragraph—Coming to the details of section
40, first paragrapi, we may state that its gist can, in simple language, be
expressed thus. Where, on a transfer of property a restrictive covenant
(covenant to restrain the enjoyment of a piece of immovable property)
is entered into, such covenant can be enforced against a transferee of that
property with notice or without value, if intended for securing the beneficial
enjoyment of another piece of immovable property of the covenantor, It
may be noted that this proposition says nothing about personal covenants
which do not purport to benefit the covenantee in the enforcement of
immovable property whether such covenants are valid between the parties,
and if so, whether they are enforceable against third persons who take the
property from the covenantor are questions outside section 40. When they
arise, they are to be determined with reference to the law of contracts
and its rules relating to the legility of agreements and the assignments of
contractual burdens.

36.9. Section 40—second paragraph—Section 40, second para
graph, dealt with an entirely different matter. It is not concerned neces-
sarily with covenants entered into for the beneficial enjoyment of another

1 Williams, Real Property (1966), p. 726, paragraph 3.

2 Phill, Land Equity, 114, 115, referred to by Williams, Real Property. (1966), p.
119, ‘paragraph 3.

3 Tulk ४. Moxhay. (1848).

4 See discussion as to section 44,



242

piece of immovable property, reserved by the covenantee. Nor is it con-
find to covenants of a purely negative character. It devotes itself to
“obligatons annexed io the ownership of immovable property, arising out
of contract.” ‘These obligations do not, in postulates, amount to an in-
terest in the property or to an casement therein. Nevertheless, the
obligation can be enforced against the transferee of the property unless he
be @ transferee for value without notice. The word “obligation” em-
phasises the contractual element and is an apt word for another reason
also—its enforceability only against a limited class of persons,

The principai cxamples of such obligations are-—(a) the obligation
resulting from a contractual right of pre-emption, and (b) an obligation
undertaken by the owner of immovable property who has contyacted to sell
it’ This does not amount to an interest in property, but, can yet be en-
forced against 2 transferee with notice or without value,

36.10. True position under section 40—It would appear that the
position is fairly clear after the amendment of 1929, which is based on the
English law.2 There was some difficulty before the amendment by reason
of certain judicial decisions, holding that it was doubtful whether section 40
applied to affirmative covenants involving expenditure of money.’ On the
whole, the view prevailed that the first part of section 40 was not appli-
cable to affirmative convenants* In view of this position, a further amend-
ment of section 40 is not called for.

36.11. Other provisions—-It should, however, be noted that szction 40
does not deal with obligations which may be enforceable under some other
provisions. There may, for example, be a charge created on the pro-
perty, enforceability of which can be supported by reason of the specific
Provisions of section 100. even where section 40 does not apply.

36.12. Case of atiachmeni—As regards the second paragraph of sec-
tion 40, it was held in a Madras case‘ that the private salc of property
pending attachment under a contract entered into prior to attachement con-
ters good title even though the sale actually takes placc after the attach-
ment. This was on a construction of the term “transferee” in section 40
as including an execution purchaser. The matter, however, really pertains
to the realm of procedure,® and need not be discussed in the present con-
text

36.13. Multistoreyed buildings—We have dealt with the implications
and limitation of section 40, as it now stands, At this stage, it should be
mentioned that need for legislaticn has often been felt in regard to multi-
storeyed residential or office accommodation which is now coming up in
whan areas on an increasing scale. As was noted in the introductory
discussion, many countries have enacted elaborate laws for regulating pro-
perty rights in such cases. A fairly well-known example is the Convey-
ancing strata Titles Act, 1961, New South Wales. Legislation similar to
it is in force in some other States of Australia and in Canada, Ceylon,

1 Section 54.

2. Smith ५. Colboural, (1914) 2 Ch, 533,

3 A.LR, 1925 Bom. 183, 185.

4 ALR. 1927 Cal. 41.

5 ALR. 1917 Mad. 4.

6 See section 64 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.



243

Jamaica, Singapore and the U.S.A. To mention a few of the imporiant
provisons normaliy to be found in such legislation, a developer may adopt
the device of registering a plan with the approval of the local authority—
thereupon, Uie proprietors collectively become a corporate body which
can sue and be sued, employ servant etc. and has powers for the manage-
meat of the whole unit. Common property, such as, stair-cases, car-
drivers and gardens, is held by the proprietors as tenants in common and
they have easements of shelter, water supply and other services with rights
of entry to do repairs in case of need, Such a scheme provides a more
convenient range of proprietary rights and duties than the ordinary law
of property. Where such a scheme recognised or regulated by statute is
in operation the need for express comments practically disappears, and such
limitations of the common law as are concerned with the enforceability of

the burden of a covenant against assignees of the land are also modified to
that extent.!

36.14. However, for obvious reasons, it is impracticable to introduce
such detailed provsions in the general law of property which is codified in
the Act, L.cgal difficulties in imposing obligations on future owners to keep
@ proper standards of repair, or to contribute to the cost of common ser-
vices and amenities and so forth will, in the nature of things, have to be
dealt with by special Jegislation,

Benefit and burden—We may also point out that apart from statutory
developments, it is recognised even at common law that the person who
takes a benefit under a deed must also accept its obligations. Upjohn J.
in the case of Halsail,* in substance, hold that a long-standing obligation
to contribute to the cost of maintaining roadways and other common
amenities on a developed estate could be enforced against future purchasers.
This decision was followed in a later case’, arid is based on the maxim
that a person who wishes to take advantage of a service or facility must
comply with any corresponding obligation to contribute to the cost of

providing or maintaining it. In Latin, the maxim is gui sentil commodum
Sentire debet et onus.

36.15A. Perpetuities—Finally, we may state here that covenants, at
feast in Indian law, are not subject to the rule against perpetuities and they
do not amount to an interest in land‘,

36.16. No change—In the result, no change is needed in section 40.

I DF Hayton, “Restrictive Covenants us Property Interests” (1971) 87 L.Q.R.

2 For commient see Megarty (1957) 73 LQ.R. 154.
3 है. R. lyer Iuvestment Lid. ४. High (1967) 1 All, E.R. 504.
बे R. Kempraj v. Burton Son & Co., A..R. 1970 S.C. 1872, 1875, para 8.


CHAPTER 37
TRANSFER BY OSTENSIBLE OWNER
SEcTION 41

37.1. Introduction—-To the general rule that cnly a person “com-
petent to transfer” and “entitled” to transfer property can transfer pro-
perty, the Act ¢reates another exception in section 41. A transfer
by a person who is not the real owner but only an ostensible owner of im-
movable property would, under the strict general rule of law, be ineffective.
But, where the person concerned is an ostensible owner with the consent
of the real owner, and the transfer is for consideration, a conflict of
interests arises between the real owner and the transferee for consideration.
Now, if the transferee for consideration further proves good faith and
reasonable enquiry, the conflixt becomes more acute. Strict law would
support the real owner, while equity would operate in favour of the trans-
cree.

In the above circumstances, there are ethical considerations in his
favour which override the purely legal considerations that could be urged
in favour of the real owner. It is axiomatic that the business of the law
is to provide for the resolution of conflicts.

Section 41 reflects the decision of the law to adopt one particular
approach for resolving the conflict, Where, of two persons, one must suffer,
he who is less innocent must suffer, because the equities arc against him
though strict Jaw is in his favour. On this principle, section 41 favours
the om fide transfcree for value without notice—not in every case but
where the transferor is the ostensible owner with the consent of the true
owner.

37.2. Section 41.—To quote the section—

“41. Where, with the consent, express or implied, of the persons
jnterested in immovable property, a person is the ostensible owner of
such property and transfers the same for consideration, the transfer
shall not be voidable on the ground that the transferor was not autho-
tised to make it; provided that the transferee, after taking reasonable
care to ascertain that the transferor had power to make the transfer,
has acted in gocd faith.”

37.3. English law—This section harmonizes with the English Law,
which similarly lays down that, if a person having a right to an estate, per-
mits or encourages a purchaser to buy it of another, the purchaser shall
hold it against the person who has the right, although covert or under age’.
Even at law, as regards chattels, if a party negligently or culpably stands by,
and allows another to contract in the understanding of a fact which he can
contradict, he cannot afterwards dispute that fact in an action against the
person whom he has himself assisted in deceiving.

1 In re Morgan, Pilgrem v. Pilgrem, 18 Ch. D. 93;
Carrit v. Real and Personal Advance Ce. 42 (8.0. 263.
244


245

37.4, Estoppel—This ruie is hardly discussed in this form in moders
English text books on the law of real property. It is regarded as belong~
ing properly to the domain of estoppel. It is also true that with the in-
creasing use of registration of land titles, occasions for using this doctrine
are not so frequent in modern times as before. in India, also, such
occasions would have been rare, since the person who purchases or becomes
a mortgagee of land would be expected to investigate the title of his
immediate transferor, and it is, in most cases, necessary that the title to
the land must ultimately find its source in an instrument registered and com-
pulsorily registrable, thereby fixing the ultimate purchaser with notice.
But a peculiar feature of Indian society—the Practice of holding Jand
benami—teads to the position that even the registered owner is not the
teal owner. So a person investigating title even on the basis of registered
documents still remains unaware of the title of the real owner. — If, in
Such circumstances, he can satisfy also the other conditions laid down in
section 41, the section could come into play. We do not, of course,
impiy that benami ownership is the only case of ostensible ownership.

37.5. Transfer need not be with consent—There seems to be some
tuisconception on the question whether the transfer must be with the con-
sent of the real owner in order that the section may apply. While it is
necessary that the ostensible ownership must have been permitted or
created by the real owner, it is not necessary that he must have consented to
the actual transfer which is now sought to be validated under the section.
Thus, the view that the words “with the consent, express or implicd”
govern the word’ “transfer” scems to be erroneous, and is opposed fo the
current of authority.?-?

37.6. Recommendation, to amend section 41—To express the posi-
tion with greater clarity in this regard and to avoid misunderstanding, we
recommend that the opening words of the section should be revised so as
to read—

“Where, a person is the ostensible owner of immovable property
with the consent, express or implied, of the persons interested in such
Property and transfers the same for consideration ........ ”

The object is to separate the phrase “consent express or implied” from
the word “transfers”.

37.7, Subsequent transfers—tt stands to reason that the operation of
the section should not be fimited to the immediate purchaser from the
ostensible owner, but should extend to subsequent purchaser also, sub-
ject to certain conditions. Here, however, a question of detail arises. Is
it necessary that the subsequent transferee. must satisfy the other require-
ments prescribed in the section—such as, consideration, reasonable care
and good faith ? Or, is it enough if the immediate purchaser had satis-
fied these requirements? Or, is it necessary that both the immediate
purcheser and the swbseguent transferee must satisfy these re-
quirements? Yet another alternative would be to take the view that
either the immediate purchaser or the ultimate purchaser satisfies _ the
requirements. The last mentioned view seems to be the view judicially

1 Shafiquilah v, Samiullah, ATR. 1929 All. 923,
2. Faral Hussein vy. Mohd, Kasim, ALR. 1934 All, 193,
3. Fakhruddin Sahib v. Ram Sethi, AUR. 1944 Mad. 299,



246

taken.-* There is much to be said in favour of each of these views. In
support of proposition that it is necessary and sufficient that the
immediate purchaser satisfies the requirements laid down in the section,
we can state that it is only if he gets a title not challengable by virtue of
the section that he in his turn can pass on a good title.

On the other hand, in support of the proposition that it is enough if
the ultimated owner satisfies the requirements, it can be stated that since
the ultimate purchaser acted honestly and with care, he meets the desi-
deratum of equity and therefore, he is entitled to the protection irrespec-
tive of the non-fulfilment of the statutory requirements by the first pur-
chaser. Then, in support of the view that it is enough if either of then
satisfies the requirements, it can be urged that such a view would combine
the good features of the first and the second views.

37.8. No Change—Having considered all aspects of the matter, we
think that although theoretically there is much to be said for the first view,
yet, having regard to the fact that courts have taken a different view, it
may not be expedient to disturb the judical construction which seems to
adopt the last view. We do not, however, think that there is need tur
putting in the section what has been held by the courts.

37.9. Mortgagcs—It remains now to deal with the questions of appli-
cability of the section to mortgages. There are two aspects of the matter,
That the expression “transfer” in the section is nct limited to an outright
sale, is fairly apparent from the judicial decisions on the subject! relating
to mortgages by the ostensible owner, and needs no clarification. The
other aspect of the matter is concerned with the question whether an
ostensible mortgagee could be treated as an ostensible owner. In this con-
nection, it is to be pointed out that he is the ostensible owner of ‘immovable
property’—using the expression ‘immovable property’ as wide enough to
cover an interest in such property. On this view, we agree with Mulla’s
view that an ostensible mortgagee is the ostensible owner of the mortgagee’s
interest. This point was the subject-matter of a difference of opinion in a
Calcutta case>, and has been discussed in a Madras case’. In our view,
the section applics to an interest in immovable property as much as it
upplies to full-ownership of the property, there being no reason for taking
a different view, and we do not consider any amendment to be necessary
on this point.

1 Cholam Saddique v. Jogindernath, A.1.R. 1926 Cal. 916.
2, Pormindernath vy. Dhanmal, A.LLR. 1940 Cal. 565.

3 See also Mulla (1973), page 206.

4 See case law cited in Mulla (1973), page 198.

5 Jogendra v. Solaman, A.1.R. 1930, Cal. 92.

5 Parvati Amal v. Angamutu, A.1.R. 1942 Mad, 730.



CHAPTER 38

TRANSFER AFTER REVOCABLE TRANSFER
SECTION 42

38.1. Introductory——Doubts or defects regarding title may atise from
various causes. The defect may be of a fundamental nature—no title—
section 41—or non-existence of the property or right in the property—
section 43. But it could be a defect of a different nature, arising from the
fact that certain powers which could have been, and ought. to have been,
exercised by the transferor have not been exercised by . In other
words, the property is in existence and the transferor has also, in the abs-
tract, power to transfer it, but this power is subject to the fulfilment of a
certain condition. The law then, in & interests of justice, takes a
position as to the performance of the cénditions.

Ir particular, there may arise a competition between two transferees
of the same property, claiming under a transfer executed by the same trans-
feror. Such a situation justifies the application of certain equitable doctrines,

‘The first transfer is in favour of A, but is revocable. The same property
is then transferred to B, but the transferor has not exercised the power of
revocation. The transferor, by the second transfer, creates a conflict of
interest, which now must be resolved. The approach of equity in such
cases is that though the power of revocation has not been exercised expressly,
it should be deemed to have been exercised by the transferor, This is analo-
gous to the implied repeal of a statute.

38.2. Maxim—This is similar to the maxim of equity that equity
regards that as done which ought to be done, or that equity imputes an
intention to perform an obligation. —_It is this principle which is enacted in
legislative language in section 42. This section is fundamentally linked
with equity. Its connection with the earlier sections which are themselves
based on equilabie considerations is also not difficult to perceive, because the
object of the section is to protect the subsequent transferee against the
fraud, mistake as well as in ditterence of the transferor. This protection,
of course, is subject to the qualification that if the equities are in favour
of any other person deserving of a better protection, then the section does
not apply.

In equity, where a man covenants to do an act and he does some other
act which may be regarded as a completion of the covenant, equity pre-
sumes that the fatter act was intended to be in performace of the covenant.
Thus, in Sowden v. Sowden,’ a husband on marriage, covenanted to pay
the trustees the sum of £ 2,000 to be laid’ out by them in fand in the county
of D to the uses of the marriage settlement. The husband did not pay
the money, but himself purchased lands in the county of D and died intes-
tate. It was held that the lands must be deemed to have been purchased
by the husband in pursuance of his covenant and so subject to the trusts of
the settlement.

1 Sowden v. Sowden, (1785) 1 Cox, Eq. Cas. 165, 29 E.R, 1111.
247

17- -885Law/77


248

The doctrine of performance proceeds upom the ground that a person
is to be presumed to 80 that which he is bound to do and, if he has done
anything, that he has done it in pursuance of his obligations.* Section 42
reflects a similar though not identical, principle. According to section
42, where a person transfers any immovable property, reserving power to
revoke the transfer, and subsequently transfers the property for considera-
tion to another transferee, such transfer operates in favour of such trans-
feree (subject to any condition attached to the exercise of the power) as a
revocation of the former transfer to the extent of the power.

The illustration to the section is a case of lease. A lets a house to
B, and reserves power to revoke the lease if, in the opinion of a specified
surveyor, B should make a use of it detrimental to its value. Afterwards
A, thinking that such a use has been made, lets the house to C, This
operates as a revocation of B’s lease, subject to the opinion of the sur-
veyor as to B’s use of the house having been detrimental to its value.

38.3. Two transfers—This section contemplates the case of two trans-
fers, one conditional and the other absolute. It lays down that where the
transferor reserves to himself power to revoke the first conveyance, and,
subsequently transfers the same Property to another, the latter transfer
operates as a cancellation of the fst transfer, subject only to fulfilment of
the condition upon which revocation was dependent. The object of this
section is to validate such transfers and to declare that in such a case the
subsequent transfer has the effect of cancelling the former, for, the subse-
quent transfer being only possible when it is made to take effect in defea-
sance of the prior transfer, the transfer is deemed to have been thereby
revoked by necessary implication?.

In construing the section, the intent of the statute “is to be expounded
against fraud and to suppress fraud and to maintain just dealing®.

38.4. History of section 42—-The provisions of the section ultimately
owe their origin to an English statute passed in 1584—section 5, 27
Elliz. Ch. 4—later repealed by the statute law Revision Act, 18634. It
may be of interest to note that a power to revoke a transfer can, in certain
circumstances, be reserved by the transferor, though not in the case of a
gift.

38.5, First transfer—It would that the first transfer referred
to in section 42 could be a transfer a al consideration. In fact, if the
first transfer is a gift and is revocable at the will of the donor, then the
gift is void under section 126. This has been pointed out by Mulla®. It
may also be stated that the illustration to the section itself takes the case of
Yease, which is for consideration.

38.6. Recommendation for verbal amendment—While no changes of
substance are needed in section 42, it seems to be desirable to improve the

1 (a) Tubbs v. Broadwood, (1831) 2 Russ & M. 487; 39 BR. 479;
$3 Lechmere v. Lechmere (Lady), (1735) Cas. Temp. Talb. 80; 25 E.R.

. Gour.

. Bullock v. Thorne, F. Moo. 615, 1.P.A. 63.
|. Gour.

}. Section 126.

५ Mulla (1973), 9. 207.

कर ७ >+ ० ७


249

drafting of the latter half of the section. At present, the language em-
ployed is—‘“such transfer operates in favour of such transferee. .....- ”
1६ would be better if the words “such transfer” and ‘such transferee” are
replaced by the words “the subsequent transfer” and “the subsequent teans-
teree” respectively.

This would bring this part of the section in harmony with the earlier
portion, where the expression “subsequently transfers” is used. It would
also indicate that we are speaking of the subsequent transfer, in contrast
with “the former transfer” mentioned towards the end of the section.
Accordingly, we recommend that section 42 should be revised as under :—~

“42. Where a person transfers any immovable property, reserv-
ing power to revoke the transfer, and subsequently, transfers the pro-
perty for consideration to another transferee, the subsequent transfer
operates in favour of the subsequent transferee (subject to any con-
dition attached to the exercise of the power) as a revocation of the
former transfer to the extent of the power.”


CHAPTER 39

TRANSFER BY UNAUTHORISED PERSON SUBSEQUENTLY
ACQUIRED INTEREST
Section 43

39.1. Infreductory—An important situation involving a consideration
of more than one provision of the Act and requiring a discussion of certain
important doctrines is dealt with in section 43. What happens when &
person professes to transfer property which he is not, at the time of transfer,
entitled to iransfer, but which be becomes competent to transfer by reasom
of subsequent events ? Should the law take a strict view and take into
account only the facts as they stood at the time of transfer 2 Or should
it also have regard to later developments ?

99.2. Section 43—Equity’s choice was for the latter alternative, in
the Act, the rule on the subject is to be found in section 43.

“Where a person fraudulently or erroneously represents that he is
authorised to transfer certain immovable property and professes te
transfer such property for consideration, such transfer shall, at the
option of the transferee, operate on any interest which the transferor
may acquire in such property at any time during which the contract
of transfer subsists. .

Nothing in this section shall impair the right of transferees in
good faith for consideration without notice of the existence of the
said option.”

ILLUSTRATIONS

A, a Hindu, who has separated from his father B, sells to C three
fields, X, Y and Z yepresenting that A is authorised to transfer the same,
Of these fields, Z, does not belong to A, in having been retained by B
on the partition; but on B's dying, A as heir obtains (the field) Z, C, not
having rescinded the contract of sale, may require A to deliver Z to him.

39.3. Amendment—The words “fraudulently ot” added by the
Amending Act, 1929, were intended to improve the sense of the section;
since a fraudulent representation cannot fail to be erroneous, and it was so
held even before the amendment.

The use of these two expressions points to the fact that it is the
position of the innocent transferee that the section has in mind. This
brings us to the relevant doctrine of equity.

39.4. Halroyd v. Marshall—In equity, the famous rule in Halroyd v.
Marshall! lays down that the mortgage of ‘non-existent property, though
inoperative as a present transfer, operates as an executory agreement which
attaches to the property the moment it is acquired, and which, in equity,
transfers the beneficial interests to the mortgages when any new act is done
by the mortgagor to confirm the mortgage. This subject was closely con-
pected with the evolution of rules of equity relating to assigament. At
common law, an assignment of property to be acquired in the future was

1 Halroyd v. Marshall, (1862) 10 House of Lords Cases, 191.
250


251

void, but, in equity, such an assignment was treated as an enforceable con-
tract, if made for valuable consideration." In fact, in equity, even the
mere expectancy of the heir-at-law of succeeding to the estate of his ances-
tors or the next of the kin succeeding to the personality of a living person
was treated as assignable and this included an interest which a person might
take under the will of a living testator? There is an interesting English
case® in which copyright in songs yet to be written was held to be assign-
able. The principle was long ago stated by Story* in these words =

“Courts of equity give effect to assignments of interest held गा
trust; and whether the interests are contingent or exccutory including
50 remote an interest as a spes successions, whether they are in real
or in personal estate, as well as to assignments of choses in action.”

Thus, while at law, to make an assignment valid, the thing which is
subject of it must have actual or potential existence at the time of grant or
assignment, courts of equality recognised assignment of things which have no
present or potential existence. In equity, such an assignment was consi-
dered as amounting to a declaration of trust and to permit the assignee to
make use of the assignors name in order to recover the debt or to reduce
the property into possession. This seems to be the explanation of the
fact that section 43 makes an exception in regard to intermediate transfers
of value without notice.

39.4A. English law—Under section 43, the right is declared to exist
only as against the transferor and persons claiming under him, ¢.g., the
heie’, Thus, where he is deprived of the property in an execution sale, it
has been held that the transferee cannot follow up the property in the hards
of his auction purchasers®.

39.5. Meaning of transfer—lIt is to be noticed with reference to section
43 that the expression used is “transfer” and this is wide enough to cover
not only a sale but also a mortgage, lease or exchange. Since the section
is a kind of ‘Estoppel’, there is no need why the operations should be confined
to sale, and the section does not contain any such restrictive language.

39.6. Evidence Act—In the Evidence Act, section 115, the words
used are “declaration, act or omission”, while in section 43, the words used
are “fraudulently or erroneously represents”. However, it is generally
understood that representation, within the meaning of section 43, would
include not only an express declaration, but also an act or omission which
amounts to an implied representation. In fact, the section is belicved to
be nothing but a branch of the law of estoppel.

39.7. Obscurity—There seems to be a certain amount of obscurity as
1o the application of section 43 to cases of after acquired property. ‘The
controversy becomes acute where the property is not yet in existence. The
correct position would seem to be that the section should operate, unless, of
course, the transfer of a particular property is prohibited by law on the
ground of fundamental public policy.

1 Warmatrey vy. Tanfiend, (1628) 1 Reports of Chancery 191.

2 Snell, Equity (1966), pages 91. 92.

3 Performing Right Society v. London Theatre of Waristics, (1924) A.C. 1
4 Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919), page 432, paragraph 1040.

5 Radhey Lal v. Mahesh Prasad, 1.L.R. 7 All. 864,

6 Alukmonee v. ance Madhub, VLR. 4 Cal. 677,


252

An important question to be considered in this context is—where 8
person has only a hope of succeeding—section 6(a)—should section 43
apply ? The proper view would seem to be that section 43 should apply
if what is professed to be transferred is present property; this does not
nullify section 6(a). Section 6(a) deals with certain Kinds of expectations
and prohibits a transfer simpliciter of such expectations. On the othe er hand,
section 43 deals with representations as to title or right to transfer, made by
a transferor who had no such title or right at the time of the transfer. Sec-
tion 6(a) enacts a rule of substantive law, while section 43 enacts a rule
of estoppel. The two provisions operate in different maner. Where thé
transferee knows as a fact that the transferor does not possess the title which
he professess to transfer, then, of course, he cannot be said to have acted
on_it when taking a transfer. But there is a distinction between a transfer
which is professcdly one of a mere hope (reversion or expectancy) and a
transfer of specific property which. the transferor erroneously represents, he
is authorised to transfer though actually he has only the interest of a revér-
sioner therein. The former transfer falls under section 6(a) and hence is
void, but there is no reason why the latter transfer should not be given the
benelit of section 43.3

The correct view is that section 43 applies even to cases of heirs if
they profess to transfer the property itself and not only the right of succes-
sion. Where professedly there is a transfer of a mere hope of succeeding,
section 6{a) would apply, but, where an erroneous represcutation is made
by the transferor to the transferee that he is a full owner of the property
and the property purporting to be transferred is not a mere chance of suc-
cession, and the transferee acts upon such erroneous representation, then,
if the transferor subsequently happens to acquire an interest while the con-
tract is stilt subsisting, the previous transfer can, at the option of the trans-
feree, operate on the subsequently acquired interest according to the Allaha-
bad view.2 To some extent. support for such construction can also be
drawn from the illustration (a) to section 43.

Case law-—The earlier case law on the subject was discussed in &
case decided by the Madras High Court? and need not be discussed in this
Report.

39.8. Supreme Court Case—It has been decided by the Supreme Court*
that where a person transfers property, representing that he has a present
interest therein while in fact he has only a spes successionis, the transferee
is entitled to the benefit of section 43. “If he has taken the transfer on the
faith of the representation and for consideration. This judgment of
the Supreme Court settles the position. In view of the fac tthat a cursory
reading of section 6(a) may give a different impression it seems to be desit-
able to state the true position in section 43 so that the section may be made
self-contained. We shall make a recommendation on that point in due
course.

Although the section is confined to immovable Property, the principle
should apply to movable property. The statement of the law in the leading

1 Shyam Narain v. Mangal Prasad, AIR. 1935 All. 244, 246 (Sulaiman C.J. and
Rachhpal Singh J.).

2 Shyam Narain v. Mangal Prasad, A.LR. 1935 All. 247.

3 Jamma Masjid v. K, Devich, AIR. 1953 Mad. 637.

4 Jamma Masjib v. K. Deviah, ALR. 1962 $.C. 847, 853 Paragraph 18.



253

case of Halroyd v. Marshall is not confined to real property. This is what
Lord Westbury observed in that case—

“Ht a vender or mortgagor agrees to sell or morigage property
real or personal, of which he is not Possessed at the time and he
zeceives the consideration for the contract and afterwards becomes
Possessed of property answering to the description in the contract,
there is no doubt that the contract would in equity transfer the
beneficial interest to the mortgagee or purchaser immediately on the
Property being acquired.

39.9. Section 43—Recommendation—For the reasons stated above, it
seems to be desirable to add a provision in section 43 clarifying the position
as regards the non-applicability of section 6(a). The best course would
be to insert a sub-section as follows :—

“(2) Where the case falls under this section, it shall not be

@ defence tat the interest which the transferor had at the time of

the transfer was of the nature referred to in clause (a) of section
”

We recommend that the section should be so revised.

39.10. Acting on the representation—Recommendation 10 add—
There is one important ingredient of estoppel, which does not find an ex-
press imention in the section. The section does not provide that the trans-
feree seeking the protection of the section must have acted en the represen-
tation—whether fraudulent or erroneous—made by the transferor, If the
transferee knows the truth and is in no way misled by the transferor’s re-
presentation, what are his equities ? On the one hand, it can be contended
that the section operates on the interest acquired subsequently independently
of the transferee’s having acted on the representation, since the section con-
tains no such restriction. On the other hand, there can, in general, be
no estoppel by a false or erroneous statement when the truth as to the matter
State dis known to both parties. If so, one should read into the section
such a condition to be satisfied by the transferee. Although the point
was not in issue before the Supreme Court in the Jama Masjid case,? the
observations in the judgment support the narrower view, namely, that the
transferee must have acted on the representation.

In a sense this position is implicit in the expression “représents”,
because it connotes a corresponding action on the part of the person to
whom it was made. if the representation has not had any effect. It
should have no significance. That, indeed, comes to be the rationale,
underlying those judicial decisions which held that the expression of a
non-committal opinion does not bring the equity into being. It_appears
to be desirable to state the position clearly in the section by adding after
the words “for consideration”, the words “and the transferee acts on the
representation”. We recommend accordingly.

1 Holroyd y. Marshall, (1862) 10 HL. 191. ~s
2 Jama Masjid v. K, Deviah, ALR. 1962 S.C. 847,



CHAPTER 40
TRANSFERS BY CO-OWNERS
SECTION 44

40.1. Introductory—Cases of transfers by a person who is not the
real owner having been discussed in the preceding section, the Act now
proceeds to deal with transfer by a person who, though he has an interest
in the property, is only a co-owner. in such a case it becomes necessary
to work out the rights of the other co-owners Who ‘are not parties to the
transfer and also of the transferee who would ly have an interest in
implementing his transfer and exercising the rights of the co-owner which
are transferred to him, in so far as such exercise is practicable. We shall
tefer later to the background of the section and its utility in the field of
Hindu law, but it will be appropriate to mention that the section is not
confined to an alienation by one of the co-parceners in an undivided Hindu
family. At least the first paragraph of the section is wide enough to cover
every case of co-ownership. An undivided Hindu family or coparcenary
is not the only case governed by the section.

40.2. Aspect of Partial interest—Section 44, with the three following
sections (45 to 47) sets out the law relating to the transfer of property
where the transferor or transferee possesses or obtains only a partial interest’
therein. As the transferee acquires all the right, title, and interest of the
transferor conveyed to him, it follows that he may claim joint possession
like his predecessor-in-title, but since the presence of a stranger might lead
to serious breaches of peace, these sections confer on certain parties, the
fight to partition. The second paragraph has been inserted in accordance
with the judgment of Westropp, C.J., who observed?

“We also deem it a far safer practice, and less likely to lead to
serious breaches of peace, to leave a purchaser to a suit for partition,
than to place him by force in joint possession with members of a Hindu
family, which may be not only of different caste from his own, but
also different in race and religion.”

40.3. Right of purchaser—A purchaser of a co-parcener’s undivided
interest in joint Hindu family property is not entitled to separate possession
of what he has purchased. His only right is to sue for partition of the
Property and to ask for allotment to him of that which on partition, might
be found to fall to the share of the co-parcener whose share he has pur-
chased. His right to possession would date from the period when a speci-
fic allotment was made in his favour. The purchaser is not entitled to
Possession of the interest purchased by him till the Partition has been made’,

40.4. Section 44—This principle is put in legal lan ९ ii i पु
It read Princip! pu legal language in section 44.

“44, Where one of two or more co-owners of immovable pro-
perty legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such pro-
erty or any interest therein, the transferee a IRS therein, the transferee acquires, as to such sh as to such share

1 Gour.

2 Balaji v. Ganesh, (1880), 1.L.R. 5 Bom. 504.
3 Sheo Nath y. Krishna Kumari ATR. 1993. ‘ail 496,
254


255

or interest, and so far as is necessary to give effect to the transfer, the
transferor’s right to joint possession or other common or part enjoym
of the property, and to enforce a partition of the same, but subject
to the conditions and liabilities affecting, at the date of the transfer,
the share or interest so transferred. |

Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling-house belonging
to an undivided family is not member of the family nothing in this
section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other
common or part enjoyment of the house”.

40.5. Second paragraph—The second paragraph to the section did not
find place in the Bill of 1879, but was subsequently added by the Select
Committee with a view' to preventing a stranger from claiming joint posses-
sion of a family dwelling house. In cases determined before the Act, it
was held that according to the law as administered in Bengal, the purchaser
at a Court-sale of the rights of one member, may be entitled to be put into
physical possession even of a part of the family house, which could only be
obviated by purchase of the right by the other members at the sale, or by a
suit for partition.2 The inconvenience and in inequity of permitting a
stranger to intrude himself upon the privacy of a joint Hindu or Mohamedan
family residence was manifest, and the second paragraph was accordingly
considered necessary.

40.6. Scope of discussion—Having regard to the fact that the section
deals with a matter affecting the mode of living of almost every inhabitant
of the country, we propose to deal with it at length. After considering a
few general propositions as to its significance and scope, we shall discuss
the connected provision in section 4 of the Partition Act, 1893. We shall
then revert to a more detailed treatment of certain specific questions arising
out of a few important ingredients of section 44 and recommend amend-
ments that will be intended mainly to make the section self-contained in its
expression and more helpful to lawyers as well as to laymen.

40.7. Significance—The section provides for partition as a means of
making the possessory right available. This is its significance.

40.8. Scope—The section. applies to all kinds of transferees includ-
ing mortgages and lessees. This shows its wide scope.

40.9. The principle of the section can be applied to involuntary sales
as a rule of equity, justice and good conscience®.

Hence, a suit by an auction-purchaser for joint possession against the
other co-parceners in the family dwelling house would not lie.

40.10. Hindu law—Pre-1929 position not affected—Thé Act—and
therefore section 44—now applies to Hindus. Of course, the fact that by
the amendment of 1929, the section.is made applicable to Hindus and
Buddhists does not mean that the right of an alienee to institute a suit for
Partition to work out his purchase is enlarged, or that the principles pre-

1 Gour.

2 Ramionoo v, Gobindo, (1857) $,D.A, 1585; Koonwar Bijoy ९. Shu
2 WAR. 30048) FB; Eshan Chunder v. Nand Cooman's WR. 29 ched ‘i

3 Jagatbandhu x. Ishwar Chandra, A..R. 1948 Cal. 61.


256

z volved by the courts in this context are effected." The section
15 व हल मय “he provisions of Hindu jaw.? At the same time, it is
to be noted that in regard to those areas where a right of alienation by 2
co-parcener was recognised, the section is substantially in conformity wit
the previous law.

40.11. Evolution cf Hindu law—Long before the Act was passed,
courts in India had laid down that in certain parts of India, du law
recognised the rights of a co-parcener even where he was not the father or
manager, to alienate his interest in the joint family property, at least by
way of sale or mortgage.

As early as 1813, the right was recognised by Sir Thomas Strange.’
The right to partition at the instance of the alienee began slowly to be
Tecognised and was settled by 1863, both in Madrast and in Bombay.*
In this connection, the form of decree granted by the Privy Council (Sir
James Colville) in Deen Dyal® is of interest. Though it was a case. of the
rights of an execution purchaser, it was expressly observed that judicial
decisions had affirmed the general right of one member of a joint family to
dispose of his share in his joint estate by voluntary conveyance without the
concurrence of his co-parceners—the reference was to the Madras and
Bombay cases. A declaration was granted to the purchaser at the execu-
tion sale that he had acquired the share and interest of the judgment-
debtor in the property and that he was entitled to take such proceedings as
he shall be advised to have that share and interest ascertained by partition.

One cannot fail to notice the substantial similiarity between this declara-
tion and the provisions of section 44,

40.12. Landmark case in Bombay—The year 1874 saw a landmark
in the law—a decision of West and Nanabhai Haridas JJ.’ This was a
case of mortgage by two members of an undivided Hindu family. In
execution of the mortgage decree, the property was purchased by the
Plaintiff, who then instituted a suit against the third member of the undivid-
ed family for possession of the extent which he had purchased in the
court sale. It was held that the right of the purchaser was to sue for parti-
tion and not for recovery of possession. But it was also observed that
while, in an undivided family, the share of a person in the estate as a
whole e could be ascertained only by taking a general account and making
a distribution in accordance with its results, yet, in making that distribution
it would only be equitable that the share Purchased by the auction pur-
chasers be so made up as to embrace wholly or so far as possible, what the
tuction purchaser has purchased as his. Similar principles were lai
by the Privy Council A 18798, Principles were laid down

1 Pernakayam v. Shiv Ram, A.LR. 1952 Mad. 419, 434, para. 28.

2 Laxminarasamma १, Rangaviangakamina, ALR. 1964, Orissa 43, 45.

3 Ramaswami v. Sehsadiri, (1827) Strangers Notes of Cases, Vol. 2, 234.

4 Veeraswamy v. Aayaswamy, (1863) 1 Madras High Court Reports 471.

5 Damodar Vithal ९, Damodar Hari, (1363) 1 Bombay High Court Reports 182.
6 Deen Dyal v. Jagdip Narain Singh, (1876-1877) LL.R. 3 Cal, 198 (C.B.),
7 Pandurang v. Bhaskar, (1874) 11 Bombay High Court Reports 72.

8 Suraj Bansi v. Shiv Prasad, (1879) TLR. 5 Cal. 148 (P.C.).



257

40.12. Madras view—The subject received an illuminating treatment
in a judgment of Bhashyam Ayyangar J. in Madras." It was there stated
to be settled law that the purchaser can enforce the sale by a partition of
the entire family property and if, in such a partition, the property sold
can, with due regard to the interests of the other shares and to the debts
due by the family and to an equitable allotment of the various items of
family property, be wholly allotted to the vendors, the purchaser will nie’
entitled to the whole property which the vendor professed to convey to him.
Of course, it would not be strictly accurate to describe the interest of a
co-parcener in an undivided family as his “share”. But this expression is
ordinarily used as meaning the inferest of a co-parcener in the undivided
property.”

40.13. Position in England before 1926—In England, before 1926, it
was possible to hold land under four types of “co-ownership”, namely,

(8) joint tenancy;
(b) tenancy in common;
(९) co-parcenary;
(d) tenancy by entireties,
The terms “co-ownership” or “concurrent interest” would each be
used to include all the four forms of co-ownership.*

40.14. Joint tenancy in England—As regards joint tenancies, joint
tenants, as between themselves, can have separate tights, but as against
everyone else, they have no separte 18117,

The right of survivorship and the “four unities”—unity of possession,
unity of interest, unity of title and unity of time—along with survivorship,
were the principal features of a joint tenancy.

In a tenancy in common, the tenant's interests could arithmetically be
separate, though the property has not yet been divided among them. Then,
there is no right of survivorship and of the four unities predicated of a
joint tenancy, only the unity of possession is essential in a common tenancy®.

40.15. Co-parcenary in England—Co-patcenary, in England, arose
mainly when there was the death of a person interstate before 1926, and
his real property descended to two or more persons who were not males.
They took the Iand as “parceners” or “co-parceners”. For example,
where two or more females inherited the land of an interstate, co-parcenary
would arise, 40 the theory of law, they constituted a single heir®. Hach
co-parcener held a distinct but undivided share, which might be equal or
unequal to the size of the share of others. The co-parcenary could come
to an end, user alia, by partition or by alienation. Where the co-parcener
alienated his share, it was forthwith held under a tenancy in common, the
other tenants remaining co-parceners inter-se. At commion law, the remain-
ing co-parceners could enforce a partition, but the purchaser, being a
tenant in common, could not.

1 Salgiri Ramaiya vy. Venkataramaiya, (1902) 1.LR. 25 Mad. 650 (FB).
2 Peranakayam'y. Sheo Ram, A.LR. 1952 Mad. 419, 432, para, 25,

3 Magarry and Wade, Real Property (1966), page 408.

4 Megary and Wade Real Property (1966), page 408.

5 Megary and Wade Real Property (1966) page 408.

6 Megary and Wade, Real Property (1966), page 441.

7 Megary and Wade, Real Property (1966), page 443, and footnote 79,


258

40.16. Position in England after 1925—After 1925, by reason of the
Law of Property Act, lands which would have previously been held in
co-parcenary or tenancy in common or joint .@., every Case of
undivided share—would now be held subject to a statutory trust for sale!.
The legislation of 1925 further enacted that an undivided share in land
shall not be created except behind a trust for sale. It also abolished ten-
ancy by entirety, previously existing in regard to husband and wife.

Of course, the “statutory trustees” are not necessarily bound to sell
the property because, instead of selling it, they can partition the land
among the beneficiarics entitled’. Disputes as to the appropriate date of
sale are to referred to the court which hears the application’. It is only
with the consent of all the trustees that the sale can be postponed.

40.17. Section 44, second paragraph—principle—To severt lo section
44, the principle of the second paragraph can be deduced from the judg-
ment of Westropp C.J. in a Bombay case‘.

“We deem it a far safe practice and less likely to lead to serious
breaches. of peace. to leave a purchaser to a suit for partition, than
to place him by force in joint possession with the members of a Hindu
family, who may be not only of a different caste from his own, but
also different in race and religion.”

40.18. Second paragraph—principle—The principle of the second
paragraph is that a stranger purchaser cannot have joint possession of the
family dwelling-house. While this paragraph takes away the right of a
stranger purchaser of a share of a dwelling-house belonging to an undivided
family to ask for joint possession along with other co-owners, but, at the
same time, it does create a right in favour of the other co-owners of the
dwelling house who are affected by the sale, to ask for an injunction res-
training the stranger purchaser from exercising any act of joint possession
with them in respect of the joint family residence. The stranger purchaser
has certainly a title to the share of the dwelling-house purchased by him;
but his remedy lies in a suit for partition and he can possess his own share
by instituting a suit for partition unless, of course, he is pre-empted under
section 4 of the Partition Act®.

40.19. “Co-owner”—meaning of-_Rewerting to the section, the ex-
pression “co-owner” in section 44 is not defined, but it is wide enough to
cover almost every case where more than one person is interested in the
ownership and the interests are of a concurrent nature and of a similar
nature, even if not arithmetically equal. The principle of the section is
that of substitution, but on certain conditions. The transferee steps into
the shoes of the transferor who is a co-owner, but with certain restric-
ms.

40.20. Dwelling house—Some of the important expressions may no
be dealt with. The word “dwelling house” does not ‘nean a dwelling

I aictions 1a" sections 34—36, Law of Property Act, 1924. rea dwith Schedule

2 Section 37. Law of Property Act, 1925.

3 Section 30, Law of Property Act. 1925.

4 Balaji v. Ganesh, (1881) 1.L.R. 5 om. 499, 504 (Westropp C.J.).
5 Alekha v. Jagabandhu, AIR. 1971 Orissa 127.


259

house occupied by the undivided family which owns it; the words “belong-
ing to an undivided family” do not mean that the house must be occupied
temporarily or permanently by the undivided family or that they be joint
in mess'.

40.21. Undivided family—In section 44, “undivided” family incindes
a group of persons related in blood who live in one house or under one
head or management. This is the interpretation placed on the word
“family” by Ashutosh Mookerjee. J. with reference to section 4 of the
Partition Act, and it should apply to section 44 also.

40.22. Belonging to undvidide family—it is also well established that
the expression “undivided family” merely means a family which is not
divided qua the dwelling house? It is not-confined to a Hindu joint family
or a joint family The essence of the matter is that the house itself should
be undivided amongst the members of the family who are its owners.*

Chakravarti C. J.’s observations are of interest.°—

“But assuming that the house concerned must be a residential
house of the members of the family owning it, I am altogether un-
able to agree that any suspension of occupation or, for the matter of
that, the absence of the owners of the house therefrom or an occupa-
tion or terminable occupation by tenants, can have the effect of
making the house cease to be a dwelling-house. As is well known,
the object of both section 4(1), Partition Act and section 44, Trans-
fer of Property Act, is to keep off strangers who may purchase the
undivided share of some co-owner of an immovable property and so far
as dwelling houses are concerned, to make it possible for the co-sharer,
who has not sold his share, to buy up the stranger purchaser. The
whole object therefore is to provide for peaceable privacy. The need
for making such provision cannot possibly come to an end, if, by
reason of special circumstance the owners of the house find it neces-
sary to let it out to tenants for a time or to allow it to be occupied
by a licensee. It has already been held in cases, too numerous to mea-
tion, that in order that an application under section 4(1}, Partition
Act, may lie, it is not necessary that the co-sharer owners should be
in_ constant residence at the house. From that position to the position
where the house has been let out to tenants, is but a short step
forward.”

40.23. Undivided family—An undivided family means simply a
family not divided qua the dwelling-house—in other words, a family which
owns a dwelling-house and has not divided it. It does not mean a Hindu
joint family or even joint family. The members need not be joint in mess,
The essenca of the matter is that the house itself should be undivided
amongst the members who are its owners.*

TY Subramanya v. Sh. Ghanau, AUR, 1935 Mad. 638,

2 Khirode Chandra v. Saroda Prasad, (1910) 7 Indian Cases 436, cited in Pal;
Devi v. Rathi Mallick, ATR. 1968 Orise 11" ceed की Palund

3 Bhim Singh v. Ratnakar, ALR. 1971 Orissa 198.

4 Boto Krishna ९. Akhoy Kumar, A.LR, 1950 Cal, 111,

हे Dulal Chandra v. Gosthabehari Mitra, ALR. 1953 Cal. 259, 260, para 6 (Chakea-
vari Cl. and G. N. Das, 1.).

6 Bheim Singh v. Ratnakar, ALR. 1971 Orissa 198 (R. N. Mista).



260

40.24, Section 4 analogous to section 44, Transfer of Property Act—
Section 4 of the Partition Act, 1893, is also based on the same principle as
forms the basis of section 44, Transfer of Property Act. As the two pro-
visions are supplementary to each other, courts have always tried to ensure
that they are construed in harmony with each other.’

40.25. Section 4, Partition Act—Section 4 of the partition Act, 1893,
has been described as a logical sequel or corollary to section 44 and makes
certain provisions relevant to the topic under consideration. The relevant
portion of section 4(1) is quoted below :

“4. (1) Where a share of a dwelling-house belonging to an un-
divided family has been transferred to a person who is not a member of
such family, and such transferee sues for partition, the court shall, if
any member of the family being a share-holder shall undertake to buy
the share of such transferee, make a valuation of such share in such
manner as it thinks fit, and direct the sale of such share to such share-
holder and may give all necessary and proper directions in that behalf.”

40.26. Section 4, Partition Act, 1893—Section 44 having provided. that
the stranger purchaser is not entitled to joint possession or other common
or part enjoyment, section 4 of the Partition Act takes the next step, and
enables the members of the family to buy out the outsider. It can, there-
fore, be said, that section 4 takes up the law from the point at which section
44 of the Transfer of Property Act has left it.

40.27. Section 4-Contitutional validity of—The constitutional validity
of section 4 has been upheld in 2 Madras case,? where the court seems to
have rejected the argument that it was “illegal discrimination” to enable the
member of the family to buy out the transferee, while denying that right to
the transferee.

40.28. Section 4—Interpretation of—The various expressions used m
section 4, such as “dwelling house”, “undivided family”, and “member of
such family”, have come up for interpretation in several decisions of the
various High Courts and the courts have placed a wide and liberal construc-
tion on these expressions, keeping in view the object underlying section 4,
namely, to provide for peaceable enjoyment of the property and to secure
privacy.> oor example, it has been held, that a “dwelling house” does not
cease to be so merely because of a temporary suspension of occupation or
absence of the co-sharers, provided the members are likely to return to its
occupation. Constant residence of the members is not necessary.® The

1 Cf. Boto Krishna vy, Akhoy Kumar, AIR. 1950 Cal. 111 113, para 11 (R. Py
Mookerjee and 7, N. Mitra, IJ.).

2 Krishna Pillai v. Perukutty Ammal, A..R. 1952 Mad. 33, 34, para 6 (pancha-
pakesa Ayyar J.).

3 Dulal Chandra v. Gosthabehari, ALR. 1953 Cal. 259 (Chakravarti C.J. and
0. N. Das, }.).

4 Kalipada v. Tulsidas, A..R. 1960 Cal. 467.

5 fustita vy. J. B. Baral, ALR. 1956 Orissa 56 (Case of Christians) (reviews case-
w).



aur

term “house” has also been liberally interpreted, so as to include the appurte-
nant lands or premises which are necessary for its proper occupation enjoy-
ment.’ The word “family” has also been given a liberal interpretation.

40.29. Undivided family—As regards the requirement connected by
the word “undivided” in section 4, it has been held,®-5 that it does not mean
a joint Hindu family, or even any joint family, but simply connotes that
there is a family the members whereof have not divided the property. The
emphasis is on the undivided character of the house.* Accordingly, a Muslim
widow who, though re-married long ago, continued to live with the second
husband in the family house, has been held entitled to the benefit of the
section. The fact that all other property has been partitioned, would aiso
not take away the operation of the section, if the family is still undivided in
reJation to the dwelling house.

The term “family” has also been widely construed, so as to cover cases
of Hindu sisters® or Muslim sisters’? living together.

40.30. Summary of position concerning section 4, Partition Act—A
good summary of the effect of the various decisions regarding section 4 is
contained in a Calcutta decision as follows

“These decisions lay down that the word “family” as used in the
section ought to be given a liberal and comprehensive meaning and it
includes a group of persons related in blood, who live in one house
under one head or management; that is “not restricted to a body of

fsons who can trace their descent from a common ancestor; but it
is not necessary, for the members to constitute an undivided family,
that they should constantly reside in the dwelling house, nor is it neces-
sary that they should be joint in mess; that it is sufficient if the members
of the dwelling house which they own; that it is the ownership of the
dwelling house and not its actual occupation which brings the operation
of the section into play : and that the object of the section is to prevent
a transferee of a member of a family who is an outsider from forcing
his way into a dwelling house in which other members of his transferor’s
family have a right to live.”

40.31. Injunction—To revert to section 44 of the Transfer of Property
Act, there seems to be some misconception on the question whether a
person who is a stranger who purchases a share in a joint property with
teference to section 44, 2nd paragraph, can be restrained by injunction

1 Nilkamal v. Kamakshy Charan, A.1.R. 1928 Cal. 539, 542.

2 Khirode Chandra ५. Saroda Prasad, (1910) 12 Cal. L.J. 525; 7 1.0. 436 (Mooker-
jee, J.).

3 Babulal v. Hulla Mollah, AI.R. 1938 Pat. 13.

4 Bai Fatima v. Gulamnabi, A.1.R. 1936 Bom. 197.

5 Mt, Gansi v. Atma Ram, A.1.R. 1936 Lah. 291.

6 Sultan Begum ९. Debi Prasad, (1908) 1.L.R. 30 All. 324 (F.B.).

7 Boto Krishna v. Akhoy Kumar, A.1.R. 1950 Cal. 111,

8 Shafian Beoum v. Mt. Kifiata, A.I.R. 1939 All. 640 (Collister J.).

9 Krishna Pillai v. Parukutty, AY.R. 1952 Mad, 33.

0 Ailey qigsson vy. Toorab Hussain, A.I.R. 1958 Pat. 232 (Ramaswami C.J. and

‘asa
11 Nilkamal v. Kamakshya Charan, A.I.R. 1928 Cal. 539, 541 (M. N, Mukherji, J.)


262

from taking ssion. There is a Calcutta decision’ to the effect that
since the provisions of section 44 are of a प्रथा ive nature, no positive right
is created in favour of the members of the ly and such a threat by tho
stranger purchaser is not in the nature of a tort. On the other hand, it has
been held by the Orissa High Court’ to the effect that the strange purchasers
in such circumstances are liable to be restrained from claiming possession
and even a decree for ejectment is sustainable. With great respect to the
judgment of the Calcutta High Court, it ars to us that the section,
by framing the provision in negative terms, not necessarily imply that
the rights of the stranger purchaser are enlarged in other respects. Since
the object of the section is to keep off so far as dwelling houses
ace concerned, it is a reasonable view to take t e that the injunction of the
Nature quoted above could be so issued provided the case is otherwise a fit
one for the grant of injunction. In fact, we find another judgment of the
same High Court taking a different view.*

40.32. Recommendation to revise section 44—-Having considered the
scope of the important expressions as used in section 44 of the Act and
section 4 of the Partition Act, 1893, it appears to us that it is desirable to
codify in the section the important propositions faid down judicially, This
is desirable in view of the practical importance of the section and in order
to avoid future controversies as far as possible, as well as to make the sec-
tion self-contained. It is not, of course. necessary to encumber the section
with every small point that has been decided in the courts, but the follow-
ing appear to be worthy of codification

(a) meaning of the expression “undivided family” in the second
paragraph,®

(b) meaning of the words “belonging to”’—there is no Tequirement
that the house must be occupied,®

(९) meaning of “house” as including grounds and structures appur-
tenant thereto,?

(d) permissibility of remedy of injunction—express provision* on
the subject.

We recommend that the law on the above points should be codified on
the basis of the position as discussed above in the relevant paragraphs.®

1 Jogendra Nath पर. Adhar Chandra, 81.९, 1951 Cal. 412, 413 para 14 (R. P.
Mookerjec, J.).

2 Bhim Singh v. Ratnakar Singh, A.LR. 1971 Orissa, 198, 202, para 23 (RLN

ta, J.).

3 Dulal Chandra Chatterjee v. Gosthabeharit Mitra, A.LR. 1953 Cal. 259.

4 Lal Behari v. Gourhari, ALR. 1958 Cal, 253 (Lahiri, 1.).

5 Para 40,21, supra.

6 Para 40.22, supra.

7 Para 40.28, supra.

8 Para 40.31, supra.

9 See the preceding footnotes.



CHAPTER 41

IRANSFERS TO MORE THAN ONE PERSON
SECTION 45

41.1. Introductory—The arithmetical adjustment of interests in pro-
perty becomes necessary where property is transferred to two or more eer
sons and there is nothing in the contract betwecn the Pattics to indicate
what is the numerical extent of the share of each transferce in the property.
Not the entire topic, but a few segments of it, are dealt with in section 45.
The section is so framed that at the first sight, the situations dealt with in
the section are not very clear. However, by way of introduction, it may
be stated that where there is a joint transfer for consideration—joint in
the sense that there is more than one transferee—the section determines the
arithmetical share of each transferee by having regard to the consideration
paid by each. Such consideration might have been paid out of a common
fund, or it may have been paid out of separate funds belonging to the
various transferees. The bread principle in those cases is that the amount
of consideration paid by each measures the interest of each in the property
bought.’ If the consideration is paid from a common fund, then their
interests are measured, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, with
reference to the interests to which they were respectively entitled in the
fund. If the consideration is paid out of separate funds belonging to them
respectively, then, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, their interests.
are measured with reference to or in proportion to the shares of the consi-
deration which they respectively advance. In other words, the fraction of
the total amount of the consideration, as borne by each represents the
fraction showing his interest in the property purchase therewith. In this
sense, the section adopts the principle of substitution.

Cases may, however, arise where evidence as to the consideration paid
by them is absent. For this situation the rule enacted in the section is that
such persons—that is, the transferees—are presumed to be equally interested
in the property. As every student of equity knows, equity leans towards
equality and the rule in question is in consonance with this doctrine of
equity, apart from the fact that it is the only just and practicable solution
which can be adopted where the cirmeustances mule out evidence.

41.2. Scope for improvement by way of addition and structural
changes—One can hardly quarrel with the substance of the section so far
as it goes. But reported cases show that there are a few points on which
we can usefully add to the section. It would also appear that there is a
structural defect in the framework of the section, in so far as it does not
deat with the two situations in distinct paragraphs, so that the reader does
Not at the first sight easily get the sense of the section. We shall make
our recommendations on both these aspects in due course,

41.3. Section 45—This is the text of the Present section—

“45. Where immovable Property is transferred for considerati
to two or more persons, and such consideration is paid out of a fund be.
longing to them in common, they are, in the absence of a contract to the

1 Arakal ४. Domungoinas, (1911) हो. 8. 34 Mad. 80.
263

18-—885Law/77



264

contrary, respectively entitled to interests in such property identical, as
nearly as may be, with the interests to which they are respectively entitled
in the fund and where such consideration is paid out of separate funds be
longing to them fTespectively, they are, in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, respectively entitled to interests in such property in proportion to
the shares of the consideration which they respectively advance.

“In the absence of evidence as to the interests in the fund to
which they were respectively entitled, or as to the shares which they
Tespectively advance, such persons shail be presumed to be equally
interested in the property.”

41.4. Scope—A similar rule prevails for determining partners, mutual
relations. The principle of section 45 applies to involuntary sales also.

41.4A. Nomenclature—The section, it has been stated,’ does weil in
sailing clear of the corresponding English nomenclature, and thus avoiding
the technical and sometimes embarrassing distinctions drawn in that law
between a joint tenant and a tenant in common. In India, where pro-~
prietary rights to property are recognised, to designate a co-owner as 8
joint-tenant, would have been singularly inapt and inaccurate, and yet
such terms of English feudalism are often used in discussions on Indian law
as if they had been part and parcel of Indian jurisprudence.

41.5. Position in England and India—The incidents of the law of joint
tenancy have but limited application to the Indian co-sharer. In England,
a joint contract for purchase by two persons with equal payments, creates 2
joint tenancy, which therefore carries with it the right of sutvivorship.4 But
it is by na means necessarily so in India Even in England, a tenancy-in-
common is presumed if there are circumstances showing that the right of

41.6. Rights of co-owners—As to the tights and liabilities of co-owners,
it may be generally Presumed that as regards the Possession and enjoy-

a lease, or an abatement of incumbrances charged on che property,® or a
secret bonus from the vendor for effecting the sale® enures to the benefit
of the others. On the other hand, one co-owner cannot infringe the right
1 Reazaddi v. Yakub, ALR. 1941 Cal. 416.
2 Gour.
3 Aveling v. Knipe, 19 Ves. 441; Lake v. Gibson, a a 3 Ris
चिट % Reine, 1 २. Gibson, 1 Eq. Ca. Ab. 291; Rigden v.
4 CH. Jogeswar v. Ramchandra, LLR. 23 Cal. 670 (PLC.).

3 Harrison vy, Barton, ¥ John & H. 287;
Bigden v. Valliar, 2 Ves. 258.

6 Somerville v. Mackay, 16 Ves. 382.

? Dean v. McDowell, 8 Ch. D, 345, 351,

8 Featherstonchough v. Febwick 17 Ves. 298;
Clegg v. Fishwick. 1M. & 6. 294.

9 Carter vy. Horne, 1 Eq. Ca. Ab. 7 Dart, p. 1051
10 Beck v. Kantorowick, 3 K. & 3. 230.



265

of the other by cither taking exclusive possession of the property or alter-
ing its condition maieriaily, without his permission.' He cannot exclude
the other co-shares from equal enjoyment’ In any of these cases he
can be 1estraincd by an injunction,’ or the aggrieved party may obtain
redress by a suit for partition,’ or for m.'* Relief by way of
an injunction being discret.onary, the Privy Council’ has held that where
no specific rule exists, the courts are to act according to justice, equity,
and good conscience, and if, in a case of shareholders holding lands in com-
mon, it should be found that one shareholder is in the act of cultivating
a portion of the lands which is not being actually used by another, it would
scarcely be consistent with the rule above indicated to restraint him from
proceeding with his work, or to allow any shareholder to appropriate to
himself the fruits of the other’s labour and capital.

41.7, Second paragraph—The second paragraph of section 45 is 8
tule of construction based upon the principle that in the absence of evid-
ence to the contrary, which the party alleging inequality must adduce,® all
co-sharers are to be deemed to be equally interested in the property jointly
acquired by them. otherwise, their shares will be proportionate to the
consideration paid by each, or in the case of the consideration being paid
out of a joint fund, to the interests to which the co-sharers were respectively
entitled. The section does not declare that in such a case, the co-
sharers would become joint-tenants or only tenants-in-common without the
right of survivorship. ‘The section defines only the quantum, and not the
quality, of the interest of joint-transferees.®

41.8, Nature of interest not dealt with—Section 45 thus deals only
with the quantum of interest, and not with the mode of enjoyment or
nature of interest. Whether the transferees take as “tenants-in-common”
or “joint tenants”, is not a point specifically dealt with in the section. Our
use of these expressions should not be taken as implying that the use of
ese expressions should be pervetuated. They have come into vogue as
convenient starting, points for discussion—pegs on which to hang the
bases of classification. The point to be made is that if, in theory, the
mode of enjoyment and other rights of co-owenrs could be of more than
one species, then the section is non-committed about that. Since the
section is silent, controversy arose in the past as to whether the transferees
should be reearded as foint tenants or an tenants-in-common. We need
not elaborate asain the meanino of these two expressions—a matter which
we have dealt with while considering section 44.”

Fala Bishambhar Tal v. Rajaram, TR. A

Nocury Lat v. Bindabun, TLR 8 Cale Joe” (APP) 7
Shadi vy. Anup Sinch, VLR. 12 All. 436 (FB).

Raiendrolal y. Shama Charan, U.L.R., 5 Cal. 188;
Holloway v. Wahid Ali, 12 BLR. 191,

Paracram भर, Sheriit, 1. 1२, 9 AN 661:

Shadi २. Anup Singh. UL.R. 12 A" 436.

Worson & Co, ५. Ramchand. ULR. 18 Cal. 10 (P.C.).
overruling Ramchand v. Watson & Co. LLR. 15 Cal. 15 Cal. 214.
Caglaw taken from (007,

Watson & Co. v. Ramchand, UL.R. 18 Cal. 10. 22

है. Tedabram v. Bulloram Dev. ¥.L.R. 26 Cal. 281. 282.
9 Gobind Prasad v, Inavat Khan, 1.L.R. 27 Ali, 310

10 See Chapter 40, supra.

MA wa wD


266

But it is necessary to state here that notwithstanding repeated pro-
nouncements from the highest Court, this obscurity does persist.
reported cases—some of them not very old—show this. Our law does.
not, us a rule, favour joint-tenancy.” In this position, it is hardly proper
that such important points should be left to implication. There may be
cases—e.g, transfers to members of a joint Hindu family—where there may
be room for application of some of the incidents of joint-tenancy. But,
by and large, there is no room for the application of the technical concept
of joint-tenancy in India. We shall make an appropriate recommen
tion on this point in due course. At this stage, a few theoretical matters
relevant to the concept may be usefully dealt with.

41.9. Joint-tenancy not favoured in equity——Unlike the common law,
equity did not favour joint tenancy,® for equity often did no: follow the law
where it was merely feudal in character. and equity in this case was more
concemed to achieve fairness than to simplify the tasks of conveyancers.
Equity therefore preferred the certainty and equality of a tenancy in coni-
mon to the chance of “all or nothing” which arose from the right of sur-
vivorship.t “Equity leans against joint tenancy”. This maxim meant that
a tenancy in common would exist in equity not only in those cases where
it would have existed at law, but also in certain other cases where an inten-
tion to create a tenancy in common ought to be presumed. There were
three such special cases, in all of which persons who were joint tenants at
Jaw were compelled by equity to hold the legal estate upon trust for them-
seleves as equitable tenants in common. We are concerned with one of
them—purchase money provided in unequal shares.

41.10. Purchase-money provided in unequal shares—If two or more
Persons together purchased property and provided the money in unequal
shares, the purchasers were presumed to take beneficially as tenants in
common in shares proportionate to the sums advanced.5 “This, if A found
one-third and B two-thirds of the price. they were presumed to be equitable
tenants in common as to one-third and two thirds respectively. If, on the
other hand, the purchasers provided the money in equal shares, they were pre-
sumed joint tenants. This distinction has been criticised, but it has long,
been accepted as sound? The presumptions could be rebutted by evi-
dence of circumstances showing that those providing the purchase-money
equally intended to fake as tenants in common or vice versa® .

1 ९.8. (a) Mahomed Jusab y. Fatimabai. AXLR. 1948 Bom. 53,
(b) Venkayva v. Subbarao, ALR. 1957 AP. 619,

2 Venkatakriskna v. Satvavathi, AJ.R. 1968 S.C, 751.

3 Gould v. Kemp, (1834), 2 My. & K. 304, 309,

4 “Survivorshin is looked unon as odious in equity”;
R. ४. Williams, (1735) Bunb. 342, 343, per cur;
and see Re Woolley. (1903) 2 Ch. 206, 211,

5 Take v. Gibson, 6720) ॥ कैब, = Abr. 290, 291;

‘obinson ५४. ) 4K. पा 1

Bull ५. Bull, (1955) 1 0.8. 234. & 7. 505, 510

6 Jackson v. Jackson, (1804) 9 Ves. 591, 6049.

7 See Lewin 131,

8 (a) Edwards v, Fashion, (1712) Prec. Ch. 332;
(७) Ayeling v. Knipe, (1815) 19 Ves. 441, 444;

9 Harris v. Fergusson. (1848) 16 Sim, 308, as explained in Robi
(1858) 4 K. & J. 505, S16 (initial joint tendency held to vei eop nite een

held to extend to additic
fade 17 Purchase-money provided unequally); Garrick 9५, Payton 10 2



267

Further, the principle of proportionate division does not ६ always. apply
as between husband and wife’ (as distinct from a man cohabiting with his
mistress),’ for, in such cases, not only statute gives the court a wide dis-
cretion® but also courts have adopted a different approach.*

41.11. Quantum of interest “Gifts’—To revert to section 45, the
section as it stands at present, is confined to transfers for consideration,
and does not lay down any rule for determining the quantum of interest
in cases where there is a gift of property. The question then requires to
be considered is, whether such a provision should be inserted. While the
first paragraph of the section obviously cannot be extended to gifts—since
it is based on consideration,—the provision in the second paragraph which
is based on the well-known maxim of equity, appears to be of great prac-
tical utility.

41.12. Where property is giftéd to A and B without specifying the
shares which they are to hold, that is to say, without delimiting the quan-
tum. of their interest, the question naturally arises how such quantum is to
be determined.

41.13. Sections 106-107, Succession Act—In the Indian Succession
Act,® certain rules are laid down on the subject and it is sometimes taken
for granted that these Rules lean in favour of joint tenancy. Sections 106-
107, Succession Act, are in these terms :—

“106. If a legacy is given to two persons jointly, and one of them
dies before the testator, the other legatee takes the whole.”

ILLUSTRATION

The legacy is simply to A and B, A dies before the testator. B takes
the legacy.

(This section applies also to Hindus etc.)

Section 106 deals with a bequest to persons as joint-tenants; section
107 deals with a bequest to persons as tenants-in-common.
Section 107 reads—

“107. If a legacy is given to le *galees in words which show that
the testator intended to give them distinct shares of it, then if any
legatee dies before the testator, so much of the legacy as was intended
for him chal fall into the residue of the testator’s property.

Hlustration

A sum of money is bequeathed to A, B and C, to be equally divided
among them. A dies before the testator. B and 0 will only take so much
as they would have and if A had survived the testator.”

1 Rimmer v. Rimmer, (1953) 1 Q. B. 63;
Appleton v. Appleton, (1965) 1 WLR.’ 25,

2 Diwell ४. Farnes, (1959) 1 W.LR. 624.

3 Married Women’s Property Act, 1882, Section 17.

4 Para 41.17, infra.

5 Sections 106 and 107, Indian Succession Act, 1925, infra.



268

This section also applies to Hindus etc.

The principle is that as equity Jeans against joint tenancy and favours
a tenancy in-common, any words which in the slightest degree indicate the
testator’s intention to give distinct shares will create a tenancy-in-common.

41.14, Extension of section 106, Succession Act—It has been held by

the Andhra High Court that even where section 106 is, in terms, inappli-
cable, e.g., where one of the joint donees dies after the testator, the, rule
underlying it coud be made use of in construing wills in proper cases. But
unless there is an intention expressed to the contrary, the sons, taking the
self-acquired property of their Hindu father under a will or iit by him,
take it as tenants-in-common, and not as joint tenants,?, according to the

Paina High Court.

41.15. View that sections lean in favour of joint tenancy criticised-—We
are not sure if the view sometimes taken that these sections lean in favour
of joint tenancy,® is entirely accurate. It should be noted that section 106
uses the word “jointly”, which makes all the difference. We are concern-
ed with a deed of gift where the quantum of interest of each donee is not
specified. It stands to reason that in such cases there should be a pre-
sumption that the intention was to benefit both the donees equally.

Since we are concerned with transfers without consideration, the test
adopted in the first paragraph of section 45, namely, the source of the
purchase money, would be of no use, and in the general run of cases,
there would not be available any other test indicating the positive inten~
tion. Therefore, if some rule, constituting 2 provision in the nature of a
presumption to start with, could be inserted, its practical utility can hardly

be contested.

41.16. Equality is equity—In equity, a maxim of general use is, that
equality is equity; or, as it is sometimes expressed, “equity delighteth in
equality”. This maxim is variously applied; as, for example, to cases of
abatement of legacies, where there is a deficiency of assets; to cases of
apportionment of moneys due on incumbrances among different purchasers
and claimants of different parcels of the land; and especially to cases of
the marshalling and the distribution of equitable assets, which were applied
in payment of debts proportionally, without reference to their dignity, or
priority of right at law, except as regards Crown debts.* _

_ 41.17. Husband and wife—In this connection it may not be inappro-
priate to refer to a few English decisions relating to husband and wife
where the doctrine of equity that “equity delighteth in equality” was, in
substance, ‘applied. Some of these cases were cases of purchases and
not of gifts, but what is relevant to our purpose is the judicial attitude
favouring the application of the doctrine of equality where the facts, as
a whole, permit of its application. >

1 Surareddy y. Venkata Subbareddi, ALR, 1960 AP, 368,

2 Srimati Tewary v, Ramsurat Devi, ALR. 1959 Pat. 116.

3 Arakal Joseph v. Domingo Imas, (1910) LLR. 34 Mad. 80 (Case on old Act).
4 Story, Equity Jurisprudence (1919).



269

Thus, in Rimmer v. Rimmer} where it was uot possible © fairly to
assess the separate beneficial interest of the husband and e by a
reference to the contributions which they had made towards the purchase
of the house, and where in all the circumstances the proper and equitable
course was to divide the proceeds of sale between them in equai shares,
Evershed M. R. and Denning and Romer L.JJ. applied this doctrine.
Even though the husband and wife contributed to the cost of the house
in varying amounts, Romer L.J. observed that cases beiwcen husband
wife ought not to be governed by the same strict considerations as are
commonly applied to the ascertainment of the respective rights of strang-
ers, when each of them contributes to the purchase price of the property.

41.18. Need for tentative provision—Of course,, we are not concerned
with the precise situation in issue in Rimmer v. Rimmer, but the point to
be made is that where there is absolutely no evidence of a contrary inten-
tion, the law should have a tentative provision at least in the case of
gifts, whether such gifts be in favour of a mactied couple or otherwise.
The case of married couple and disputes between the parties to the mar-
Tiage may in the future social conditions even in this country be more fre-
quent. Not only can such disputes arise when the marriage comes to
end, but also they may arise where one of the parties dies and the question
arises of the respective rights of the survivor and the heir of the deceased.

41,19. Property rights-husband and wife—Questions often arise bet-
ween husband and wife as to the ownership of property. Property rights,
of course, have to be ascertained as at the time of purchase of transfer;
the rights so ascertained will not be altered by subsequent events, unless
there is an agreement to alter it.’ In the first place, the beneficial owner-
ship of the property in question must depend on the agreement of the par-
ties determined at the time of acquisition? If the property in question is
land, ordinarily there must be some lease or conveyance w! shows how
it was acquired—“conveyance” is used here in a wide sense as to include
all transfers of ownership of immovable property. If the document dec-
Jares not merely in whom the legal title is to vest, but also in whom the
beneficial title 1 to vest, it necessarily includes the question as to tiile as
between the spouses for all time, subject to variation by a subsequent agree-
ment where permissible*+ But if the document is silent as to the benefi-
cial title or as to the arithmetical shares of each spouse and if there is no
available ev.itence on that point, then what are called, the presumptions
come into play.

41.20, Presumptions—What, then, are the presumptions? In
England, it used to be considered previously that there was a presumption
of advancement in the case of husband and wife, but it appears that the
streneth of this presumption has much diminished in the changing condi-
tions of society.5 Jn India, the presumption of advancement was long ago
discarded by the Privy Council, at least so far as the majority of the in-
habitants are concerned.*

1 Rimmer vy. Rimmer, (1952) 2 All E.R, 683 (Court of Appeal).
2 Pettit ४, Pettit, (1969) 2 Ril. E.R. 385, 397 (HLL.).

3 Pettit v. Persit, (1969) 2 All. E.R, 385, 405 (HLL.).

4 Article in (1966) Vol. 30 Conveyancer, 354, 428.

5 Pettit, Equity and the Law of Trusts, (1974). page 107.

6 Gossain v. Gossain, (1863) 6 MILA. 53 (P.C.).



270

41.21. Section 82, Trusts Act—The Indian Trust Act! deals with the
case of transfer of one person for consideration paid by another in these

terms :
“82. Where property is transferred to one person for a consider-
ation paid or provided by another person and it appears that such other
person did not intend to pay or provide such consideration for the bene-
fit of the transferee, the transferee must hold the property for the benefit
of the person paying or providing the consideration.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the Code of Civil
Procedure, section 317, or Act No. XI of 1859 (to improve the law relat-
ing to sales of land for arrears of revenue in the Lower Provinces under
the Bengal Presidency), section 36.”

We are, however, concerned at the moment,’ with a different situa-
tion, namely, where there is a transfer fo two or more persons, without
consideration. In such cases, the most equitable and convenient provi-
sion to be inserted, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, would be
to provide for equal shares for cach transferee.

41.22. Joint account of husband and wife—It would, appear that, in
England even in cases where there was a certain consideration given by the
husband, the Courts applied the doctrine of equality. In Jones v. May-
nard,® the facts were interesting. In 1941, a husband, about to go over-
seas, authorised his wife to draw on his bank account, which was there-
after operated as a joint account. Both the husband and the wife drew
upon the account and both paid their earnings into it. The husband with-
drew money to pay for investments made in his name from time to time
In 1948, they were divorced. The former wife now brought an action
against the former husband, claiming the balance of the account and half
the investments. The claim was upheld. Vaisey, J., in his judgment held
that where there is a joint account between husband and wife, and a
common pool into which they put all their resources, it is not equitable
that it should be subsequently picked apart to establish the proportionate
shares of each. the husband being ercdited with his earnings and the wife
with hers. This would be quite inconsistent with the original fundamental
purpose of a joint purse or common pool—

“That being my view,” he continued, “it follows that invest-
ments paid for out of the joint account although made in the name
of the husband, “were in fact made by him in his own name as a trustee
as to a moiety for his wife. If the investments out of the joint ac-
count had been made in the name of the wife alone, there is no doubt
that the ordinary presumption of law would have applied and she
would have been entitled to the investments; but as they were made
in the name of the husband, it seems to me that the assumption of
half and half is the one which I ought to apply.”

41.23. Judicial attitude—We need not go into the troublesome and
thorny area of joint accounts in bank payable to “either or survivor”. The
above case is cited here for an entirely different purpose—judicial attitude
favouring equality. In conformity with that attitude, the case of ‘gifts
should be covered and the principle of equality introduced.

1 Section 82. Indian Trusts Act. 1582.

2 See para 41,11. supra.
3 Joner v. Maynard, (1951) 1 Ch. 572 (Vaisey, 1.).


271

41.24 Recommendation—In the light of the above discussion, our
recommendations to section 45 are as follows :—

(a) the section should be split up to indicate distinctly the various
situations with which it concerns itself;

(b) the case of gifts should be added to the section besides the
doctrine of equality. A provision per (d) below be also in-
serted:

(c) if the transfer is for consideration, it should be made clear that
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the nature of their
interests' in the property will be identical with the nature of
their interests in the consideration:

(d) if the transfer is not for consideration, the transferees should,
in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be taken to be
common owners of their interests in the property. The ex-
pression ‘common owner’ is one which we choose to rule out
‘joint tenancy’ in the absence of evidence to the contrary.

41.25, Revised section 45—Revised section 45 should be somewhat on
the following lines :—

“45, (1) Where immovable property is transferred for consideration
to two or more persons, the following provisions shall apply in the absence
of a contract to the contrary—

{a) the nature of their interests in the property shall be identical, as
nearly as may be, with the nature of their interests in the consi-
deration, subject to clauses (b) end (c) of this sub-section;

(b) where such consideration paid out of a fund belonging to
them in common, they are, as regards the quantum of their
interests respectively entitled to interests in such property identi-
cal, as nearly as may be, with the interests 10 which they arc
respectively entitled in the fund;

(०) where such consideration is paid out of separate funds belonging
to them respectively, they are, as regards the quantum of their
interests respectively entitled to interests in such property in pro-
portion to tl he shares of the consideration which they respectively
advanced;

(d) in the absence of evidence as to the interests in the fund to which
they were respectively entitled, or as to the shares which they
respectively advanced, such persons shall be presumed to be
equally interested in the property.”

(2) Where immovable property is transferred otherwise than for con-
sideration to two or more persons, the following provisions shall apply in the
absence of evidence to the contrary—

“{a) the transferees shail be common owners? of the property which
is the subject matter of the transfer;

(0) they shali be presumed to be equally intcrested in the property.”

1 This is different from quantum, already dealt with in the section.
2 The expression “common owners” is tentatively used to rule out joint tenancies.


CHAPTER 42

TRANSFERS BY PERSONS HAVING DISTINCT INTERESTS
SECTIONS 46-47

42.1 Inftroductory—The case dealt wth in section 45 was one in which
several persons are transferees. The case where several persons are frans-
ferors is dealt with in section 46, which is the converse of section 45. The
problem in section 45 is—What is the share of each transferee in the
property trausierred ? The problem in section 46 is—What छ the share of
each transferor in the consideration seceived for the property transferred ?
In this manner, section 46 is the converse of section 45. The principle
adopted is, in substance, the same—the principle of substitution, in the
abseace of a contract to the contrary.

42.2 Sectwn 4¢—Accordingly, section 46 provides as follows :

“46. Where immovable property is transferred for consideration by
persons having distinct interests therein, the transferors are, in the absence
of a contract to the contrary, entitled to share in the consideration equally,
where their interests in the property were of equal value, and, where such

interests were of unequal value, proportionately to the value of their respec-
tive interests.”

There are two illustrations to the section in these terms—

(a) A, owing a moiety, and B and C, each a quarter share, of mouza
Sultanpur, exchange an eighth share of that mouza for a quarter share of
mouza Lalpura. There being no agreement to the contrary, A is entitled

to an eighth shere in Lalpura and B and C each to a sixteenth share in that
mouza.

This is, of course, simple arithmetic. In illustration (b), A, being
entifled to a life-interest in mcuza Atrali, and B and C to the reversion, self
the mouza for Rs. 1,000. A’s life-interest is ascertained to be worth Rs. 600,
the reversion Rs. 400. A is entitled to receive Rs. 600 out of the purchase
money, B and C are entitled to receive Rs. 400.

This illustration takes the case of interests which, though concurrent,
are not of identical character. One is a fife interest, the other a reversion.
This shows that “interests” in section 46 is not identical with share.

43.3 Principle—it has been laid down’-? that the proper mode of
apportioning the prices of a life-estate and reversion, when sold together for
a lump sum, is to value both interests separately, and not to put a value on
one and deduct that from the total price.

“Tin re Cooper and Allen's Contracts, 4 Cb. D. 802:
Rede v. Oakes, 32 Beav. 555: Cavendish ४. Vavendish. 4 LR. 10 Ch. 319;
Morris v, Debenham, 2 Ch. D. 54.
2 Gour.

42723


273

42.4 Distinct interest—As illustration (b) shows, the principle is
applicable where the interests, though concurrent, are of different nature.
The owner of a lease has a distinct interest from that of a reversioner.» So
also has the owner of an undivided fourth part of an estate, joining with the
owners of the rest, in selling the whole for a lump sum?

42.5 No change—The above discussion dees not disclose any need for
amending the section. 7

42.7 Section 47—A slightly different and more complicated situation
is dealt with in section 47. When the property transferred is not immovable
property in the entire, but a share therein, two situations are possible. A
co-owner may transfer his specific share therein. In such a case, the trans-
feree is not concerned with the interests of the other co-owners, since the
other co-owners do not participate in the transfer. Of course, the transferee
has to satisty himself that the co-owner is competent to transfer his share.
‘This is a matte: which may affect the validity of the transfer, but if the
transfer is valid, then this aspect has no relevance to the quantum of interest
and its ascertainment. But there could be a slightly different situation, All
the co-owners join, but what is transferred is neither (i) the entire property,
nor (ti) the share of one co-owner, but (iii) 8 notional share in the property
not corresponding to a particular share. This share is just a mathematical
abstration, How is such a transfer to be worked out ?

Section 47 provides the answer as follows :

“47. Where several co-owners of immovable property transfer a share
therein without specifying that the transfer is to take effect on any particular
share or shires of the transferors, the transfer, as among such transferors,
takes effect on such shares equally where the shares were equal, and where
they were unequal, proportionately to the extent of such shares.”

The illustration to the section takes these facts—

A, the owner cf an eight-anna share, and B and C, each the owner of a
four-anna share, in mouza Sultanpur, transfer a two-anna share in the mouza
to D, without specifying from which of their several shares the transfer is
made, To give effect to the transfer, one-anna share is taken from the share
of A and half-anna share from cach of the shares of B and C.

42.7 Principle—It is to be observed, that here the transfer takes effect
according to the extent of the shares of each co-owner, and not according
to the quantum of consideration received by each. Probably, this rule was
enacted to guard against the complications which the latter course would have
entailed. For, the value of two shares, otherwise equal, may considerably
vary, and if inquiry had to be made as to the value of each share, much un-
necessary inconvenience and delay would have been inevitable*.

42.8 Construction—Of course, a general agreement to sell property
implies sole of the proprietary rights therein, and a transfer of a limited
interest cannot be inferred from the smallness of the price’. The section does

“1 in re Conner and Allen's Contracts, 4 Ch, D. 802; _
Clark ४. Seymour, 7 Sim. 67.

2 Powlett ९. Hood, LR. 5 Ea. 115.

3 Gour

4 Hughes v. Parker, 8 M. & W. 244.


274

not apply merely because a person’s ownership is found to be deficient,
Where a person conveys property, a portion of which he has no right to
convey, the purchaser is entiled to treat the whole contract as broken, and
to sue for damages; and the vendor cannot be heard to say, that he would
make an allowance pre tanto, for the purchaser may reply that it is not the
interest which 16 had agreed to purchase!, But, in such a case, the purchaser
may elect to take the interest which the smaller has, with compensation.
In certain cases where the deficiency is negligible, it seems that the purchaser
may even be compelled to take it at a proportionate price*, But, if there be
2 material discrepancy between the property sold and the property offered,
the court, so far from interfering in ihe vendor’s favour, will assist the pur-
chaser in recovering his deposit®.

In such cases, if the other co-owners can be made to join in the transfer
and the entire property is not transferred, the section could apply.

42.9. No change—No changes appear to be needed in the scction.

1. Farrer v. Nightingale, 2 Esp. 639.
2. Guest v. Houtfray, 5 Ves. 838; Hauger v. Eyles, 2 Eq. Cas. Abr. 639.
3. Long vy. Fletcher, 2 Eq, Ca. Abr. 5.



CHAPTER 43

PRIORITY OF RIGHTS CREATED BY TRANSFER
SECTION 48

43.1 increductory--Where the same transfcror creates or purports 10:
create by transfer rights in or over the same immovable property, it obviously
becomes necessary to determine whose right shall prevail. Such a situation
may arise by mistake, accident or design. Whatever be the circumstances
leading thereto, 2 conilict arises and requires to be resolved.

43.2 the priory of rights created by transfer—The general rule for
resolving the conffict on the subject is contained in section 48, which reads—

“48. Where a person purports to create by transfer at different
times rights in or over the same immovable property, and such rights
cannot all exist or be exercised to their full extent together, each later
created right shall, in the absence of a special contract or reservation

binding the earlier transferees, be subject to the rights previously
created.”

We propose to examine first the principle of the section then its scope
and operation and then certain supposed and real limitations and exceptions.

43.3 Principle~The section is a statement of the English equitable
maxim “gui prior est tempore, potior est jure” a relic of the primitive law
to which the right of ownership in property may be ultimately traced, The
section is, however, subject to the exceptions comprised in cases falling under
sections 78 and 79. ‘The rule, again, does not affect the specific provisions.
of section 50 of the Indian Registration Act?, under which registered docu-
ments relating to land, of which registration is optional, were for the first
time declared to take effect against unregistered documents relating to the
same property, not being a decree or order, whether such unregistered docu-
ment be of the same nature as the registered document or not. As regards
property generally, whether movable or immovable, a registered instrument
relating to property is, by another section (section 48—Registration Act),
declared to take effect against any oral agreement or declaration relating to
such property, except where the agreement or declaration has been accom-
panied or followed by delivery of possession.

Section 48 of the Transfer of Property Act states the mule applicable
in general to resolve conflicts arising by successive transfers of the same
interest.

43.4 Natural justice—It is a principle of natural justice that if rights
are created in favour of two persons at different times, the one who has the
advangtage in time should also have the advantage in law. This rule, how-
ever, applies only to cases where the conflicting equities are otherwise
equal. In a contest between persons having only equitable interests.
priority of time is the ground of preference last resorted to, i.¢., a court of

1 “He who is first in time is better in law”. Co, List. 148, Broom’s Legal Maxims

(6th Ed.), 335. :

2 Indian Registration Act, 1908.

275


276

equity will not prefer one to the other on the mere ground of priority of time,
unt it finds, on an examination of their relative merits, that there is no other
sufficient ground for preference between them. But the rule, in general, is
as stated above.

____ This approach of the law could be justified on certain deeper considera-
tions. The law favours security of title, and is hesitant to interfere with
the status already established except for. special reasons. If a person has
acquired an interest in property, he who comes later on the scene must show
an overriding consideration for superseding the state of things already exis\-
ing—or, to put it in legal language—to disturb a right already created. It
should not be forgotten that if the law creates a right, there is, in general, an
ethical justification for the creation of that very right. A right is, in the
language of jurisprudence, a claim recognised or enforceable in law. But it
has roots in the implicit ethical notion that the law recognises or enforces
the claim because it is just to do so, The German word “Recht” indicates
this link more expressly. Such a right having been created over a property,
the legal system would be failing in consistancy if another “right” in the same
property is recognised or enforced. There would be chaos and it would be
impossible to maintain any certainty or order in the application of the law.
Priority in point of time thus becomes, in general, an imperative necessity of
the legal system of a civilised society, once that system has decided to recog-
nise or enforce a claim and a claim of that nature has already been created
by the parties. relying on the legal system. Exceptional circumstauces may
necessitate a different approach, but those exceptional circumstances them-
selves are illustrations of situations where ethical considerations of a wider
import are present—e.g. claims in salvage—or the demands of greater cer-
tainty constitute the basis of a different rule—e.g. registration.

43.5 Doctrine of priority in Hindu law—The doctrine of priority was
not unknown to Hindu Law. It is given by Yajnavalkya as follows :—

“In the case of a pledge, a gift and a sale, however, evidence in
support of the prior claim pre-ponderates,”!

Jimultavahana, commenting upon this verse, provides the exception that
if possession is given to the second transferee, who retains it for 20 years,
he will get preference over the first transferee. So he says :?

“If a person after a gift, or mortgage to him allows the property to
remain with the seller, donor or mortgagor, who subsequently transfers it to
another with possession and the latter holds it for 20 years then the first
dealing, thougl FP prior is, of no avail”.

Scope—To revert to the section, let us say a few words about its scope.

43.6 Need for the section—Modes of transfer—If there had been only
one legal mode of transfer, namely, by delivery or possession, there would
be no ereat need for a provision regulating priority. But the law does not

rovide transfer of possession as the only mode of transferring an interest
fr proverty. And. further, certain kinds of transfer e.g. certain species of
morteaves—do not contemplate a transfer of possession at all. There is
scone for conflict between two transfers, because the law leaves scope for &
vatiety of modes of transfer.
1 Vai. गा. 2312).
2 Vimmta~shana—Vyavaharamatrika, pages 348-349. Lingat Classical Law of 19612
page 162. ™


277

The modes of tcansfer allowed by law vary—in some cases, there can
be an oral transfer; in some cases there may be transfer by an instrument
in writing without registration; and, in some cases, there may be a require
ment of writing coupled with registration. Where the transferor employs
such a mode of transfer (that is, a transfer otherwise than by delivery of
possession), difficulty could arise if the oral transfer is made or the transfer
in writing is executed at different times in favour of different Persons. For
example, a writing may be in favour of transferee A, in regard to an interest
in immovable property and after a few days (or, may be, at a later time
on the same day): the same transferor executes a transfer in favour of B
in regard to the same interest. So long as physical delivery of possession
is not the only legal mode of transfer, theoretically the possibility of such a
conflict always remains.

43.7 Conditions for application of the section-—The section postulates
that the cights so created cannot co-exist or be concurrently exercised.
The words “cannot exist together”, indicate that the two interests cannot be
beneficially enjoyed without prejudicing each other. Equitably, the prior
transferee has the preference. unless there is a contract or reservation by
which he is bound or where through his fraud, tmisrepresentation or cross
neglect, another person has been induced to advance money. In the latter

case, the prior transferee, being estopped, is postponed to the subsequent
transferee?,

43.8 Separate rights—There can be no need for priority where separate
rights created in favour of different persons can all be exercised to their full
extent without encroaching on each other. In that case they may be treated
as relating to different entities. This section does not apply to two substituted
security rights. The case of priority arises only where the same property is
successively mortgaged. A case for priority arises not because the persons
are different, but because the interest cannot all be fully exercised. Such
interests may coalesce by merger, or one interest may be waived or aban-
doned and priority may be conferred by contract and forfeited by negligence,

43.9 Scope for priority—The principle of the section cannot, therefore,
apply where the two interests do not conflict. Thus, in a case where the
Property is mortgaged to one and subsequently sold to another, this section
will not apply, for the purchaser has obtained only the equity of redemption,
an interest which can exist side by side with the morteage.t So there is no
conflict between a completed sale and a contract for sale, as the latter
confers no right on the property®. An ‘unregistered sale-deed, where Tegis-
tration is compulsory, would confer also no tights upon the vendee, and he
cannot, therefore, claim as against the registered transferee.*-7

4 (1. para 43.12, infra.
2 Section 78,
8, Krishnaveni Ammal v. Subramaniam Chetty, A.LR. 1938, Mad. $47,
4. Ramachandra v. Krishna 1.18, 9 Mad. 495.
5. Section 54, last paragraph.
6. Waman v. Dhondiba, UL.R. 4 Bom. 127;
Chundernath vy. Bhovrub, ULR. 10 Cal. 250;
Ram Autar v, Dhanauri. VLR. 8 All. 540.
7. Mustrative cases taken mostly from Gour.



278

If A mortgages or sells property to 8, and afterwards C purchases at a
court-sale the then existing right, title, and interest of A, C buys in the first
case (mortgage), the equity of redemption, and in the second case (sale),
nothing at all, In such a case segistration cannot help C for, on the very
fact of his certificate of sale, the property comprised therein is not the
property previously conveyed to B, but only the residue of A’s estate after
such conveyance.’

43.10 Time of taking effect—For the determination of the question
as to the priority of rights created by transfer, it is, in the first place, essen-
tial to inquire as to the exact time from which a transfer begins to operate—
a question which, in its turn, depends upon the mode and nature of the
transfer. A sale? or a mortgage’, except a mortgage by deposit of title
deeds, or an cxchange' of immovable property of a vaiue of less than Rs. 100
may be made either by a registered instrument or by delivery of the property.
A lease of immovable property for morc than one year can only be made
by a registered instrument’, and a gift. of whatever value must needs be
registered",

43.11 In cases where a transfer may be validly made ty Jebivecy of
possession, it will take effect only when possession is transferred, but in
other cases where registration is resorted to, the transfer is deemed to take
effect not from the date of the registration, but from the date of the execu-
tion of the cunveyance’.

Now, since a document may be presented for registration at any time
within four months*, and in special cases within eight months®, it is con-
ceivable that by merely antedating a deed one transferee may obtain priority
over another, and thereby defeat its Purpose. Other things being equal, a
deed takes effect from the moment of its execution, even though its registra-
tion is delayed.

43.12 Tine of execution—On a question arising! as ty the effect of
two deeds relating to the same subject-matter, both executed on the same day,
it must be proved which was, in fact, executed first; but if there is anything
in the deeds themselves to show an intention that they shali take effect
pari passu, then the Court will presume that the deeds were executed in such
order as to give effect to that intention,

43.13 Treusfers by operation of law--As regards traasfcrs by opera-
tion of law, it is provided by the Code of Civil Procedure that “when a sale
has become absolute, the property shall be deemed to have vested in the
purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the time

पू Sobhagchand vy. Bhaichand, 11... 6 Bom. 193 (F.B.) followed in Bamaraja v.
Arunachala, LR, 7 Mad, 248.

2. Section 54.

3. Section 59.

4. Section 118.

5. Section 407.

6. Section 123.

पे, Section 47, Indian Registration Act, 1908.
8. Section 23, Indian Registration Act, 1908.

9. Section 24, Indian Registration Act, 1908.
10. Gartside v. Silkstone and Co. 21 Ch 0. 76)


379

when the sale becomes absolute." This was an alteration of the law as laid
down in section 316 of the old Code of 1882, by which the title of the pur-
chaser dated only from the date of confirmation of the sale.*

43.14 Competing auction-purchasers—As between the competing
auction-purchasers, the principles which govern preference are the same as
those which regulate the claims of priority among mortgagees. Independently
of any preference secured by reason of registration or possession, the pur-
chaser must redeem all charges created before the sale. He must be held
to have made his bid with full knowledge that the property was burdened
with debts, and he can only claim possession by paying off those debts. His
certificate of sale confers on him ro right to require the later mortgagees
(or those pai:chasing under them as auction-purchasers) to return buck the
money he paid cither personally or out of the property®. Th> plea of pur-
chase without notice, though it may be a good defence against an equitable
claim, is no acfence against a legal claim‘. . पु

A person purchasing property with notice of prior contract in favour
of another is bound to hold the property for his benefit to the extent neces-
sary io give effect to that contract’. Where the subsequent transferee has
taken a conveyance, the person in whose favour the rricr contract subs’sts
suing for possession will get a decree declaring that the subsequent transferee
holds the property for the benefit of the plaintiff to the extent necessary to
give effect to Ais contract, and that he do execute to the pk intiff a proper
conveyance, and a decree for possession, Where the prior transferee 5018
hie vendor for specific performance of his contract knows cf the subsequent
interest he should also implead him in the same suit. But where. he is igno-
rant of the subsequently created right a separate su‘t would then be

necessary.

43.15 Notice—It is to be pointed out that section 48 dces not cperate
on the basis of notice. A subsequent transferee cannot, therefore, get higher
rights on the ground that he had no notice of the pricr transfer, except in
cases which are specifically dealt with by a distinct provision of the law which
recognises the relevance of notice.”

43.16 Registration—We may state that registration has no relevance,
so that even if a document is registered later, yet if it is exectted earlier, the
registration has retrospective effect. Conversely, it is not in every case that
prior registration of a subsequently executed document secessarily confers
priority. The answer depends on the terms of the provisions in the Registra-
tion Act and the circumstances of the case. Under section 50 of the Regis-
tration Act, a deed registered subsequently gets pricrity over a prior un-

1 Section 65, C.P.C. 7

2 Mohima Chander v. Nobin Chunder (1805) LUR. 23 Cal. 43, 51. (Petheram
CJ. & Baverlay 1.0.

3 Baijnath v. Bhimappa, 3 Bom. LR. 92.

4 Gaffur v. Bhikait 1.L.R. 26 Bom, 159.
Section 91, Indian Trusts Act (2 of 1882).

5 Gaffur v. Bhukaji, VLR. 26 Bom. 159,

6 Gaffur y. Bhikaji, LL.R. 26 Bom. 159, 162.
H. 6. Section 40.

19—885Law/77



280

Tegistered deed of which registration is optional. But this execution is
subject to the doctrine of notice.’

An instrument operates from the date of its execution and even if it is
Tegistered, it will operate from the date of execution.” Therefore, while re-
gistration may be necessary to confer validity on an instrument where the
Registration Act or any other law so provides, it does not except the operation
of section 48 as such.

AZ.E7 Registration and interests whose co-existence is cumpatiste-—
Where there is a competition between two registered documents in respect
ef the same property, the document executed first has priority, cven though
the document executed subsequent was registered first*.

It has already been pointed out that section 48 has no relevance where
the two interests created by successive transfers can co-exist. For example,
the purchaser of immovable property cannot evict from possession a tenant
for cultivation admitted into the property by the mortgagee in possession’.

43.18 Limitations—The limitations of the section ought also to be
noted. ‘Transfer’ in this section means a complete transfer, and does not
include a mere contract for sale, or an incomplete sale by an unregistered
sale-deed where registcation is compulsory.

Where one of the documents is only an agreement to transfer and the
later document is a transfer in the completed sense, then again section 48
has no relevance’. This is for the reason that an agreement to transfer im-
movable property not only does not create an interest in land in general,
but also is not a ‘transfer’ within the terms of section 48. Of course, there
could be other provisions which may bind the subsequent transferee with the
obligation created earlier by the transferor in the form of a contract to
transfer. Such is section 40, but in such cases notice and certain other ingre-
dients will have to be fulfilled.

43.19 Charges—Difficult questions arise in regard to charges and
equitable mortgages. In determining such questions, we must have strict
regard to the scheme of the Act and to the concept of ‘equitable mortgage’
and the concept of ‘charge’ as spelt out in section 100. A charge does not
create an interest in property; it creates rather a right to property, but this
does not mean that it is entirely disregarded. How far a charge binds persons
subsequently dealing with the property charged. depends upon how far the
case falls within section 100, of which the most important ingredient is the
requirement of notice.

As regards equitable mortgages, it is to be remembered that an equitable
tmortgaee—in those cases where it is permitted—is as much a mortgage as
any other type of mortgage. Section 58 does not create any distinction as

1 Amir Chandre ए. Sobi Bhushan, (1904) TLR. 31 Cal, 305.

2 Section 47. Indian Registration Act. 1908. For earlier law. see Santava Manzar-
sava v. Naravan. VLR. 8 Bom. 182.

3. Arunachalam: ४. Sivan, AAR. 1970 Mad. 226.
4. Thaku Singh v. Karam Singh, AER, 1925 Lah. 165.
5. ALR. 1938 Bom. 357.



281

between the various kinds of mortgages enumerated in that section inter se.
In fact, the expression ‘equitable mortgage’ is one used in practice for ihe
sake of convenience, but the Jegal name in section 58(f) is ‘mortgage by
deposit of title deeds’. A mortgage by deposit of title deeds does not require
writing.’ If a writing is executed and it incorporates the mortgage, it requires
registration, but, if the mortgage is complete without the writing, a mere
memorandum of the mortgage does not require to be registered. Subject
10 these observations, there is no superiority conferred by the law on any
other kind of mortgage in contrast with equitable mortgages.

42.20 Priority for Government debts—While the Government posses-
ses. ३0 a certain extent, a priority in regard to debts, this does not appear to
extend to conferring a priority in regard to secured debts.

The result is that such priority as the Government possesses, does not
affect the provisions of section 48. Therefore, the area of operation of the
Government priority in respect of debts does not embrace the priority of
transfers. This is for the reason that generally the priority is understood as
extending only to unsecured debts, in the absence of specific statutory pro-
visions to the contrary.

43.21 Exception-Section 78—Some of the exceptions to section 48
may now be considered. One exception to the rule enacted in section 48 is
enacted by section 78, under which a prior mortgagee is postponed to a snb-
Sequent mortgagee, where, through the fraud, misrepresentation or gross
neglect of the prior mortgagee, another person has been induced to advance
money on the security of the mortgaged property. The postponement of the
prior mortgagee in such cases is really a species of estoppel, which enables
the creation of the subsequent mortgage. While the prior mortgagee need
not go out of his way to give notice of his security when he fears that the
mortgagor is dealing with the property, the situation is different where there
is fraud’. पु

43.22 An exception to the rule “qui prior est tempore” is also to be
found in the salvage charges created om account of advances made (0 save
the encumbered property from Joss or destruction?, Such advances are
payable in priority to all other charges of easlier date. and, amongst them-
selves, have precedence in the inverse order of their respective dates. On the
same principle, where the Court authorizes the Recciver to borrow money on
a mortgage, directing that it should constitute a first charge on the property,
it will take priority over any other mortgage though of an earlier date*. But,
in order to confer such priority, the loan must have been raised for the pur-
pose of preserving the property. If. in such a case. the court even improperly
confers priority, of which the mortgages affected thereby have notice, the
order may hold good against them unless it is set aside.

43.23 Estuppel—the rule in section 48 also yields to the equitable
principle of estoppel. So clso where the registered purchaser was present

1 Jeevan Das ७. Fram
Jurisdiction. ).
2. Mulla (1973) page 541.
3, Fisher, Mortgase, 958, cited in Gour.
4. Giridharilal v. Dhirendra VLR. 34 Cal. 427. 443, 442. ;

High Court Repo:ts 45 (Original Civil



282

when possession was made over to the unre; gistered purchaser, the former
was, on thal account, postponed to the latier,’ when he raised no objection-

43.23. Registration—An instrument operates from the date of its exe~

cution,” and it immaterial that it is compulsorily registrable, for in that case
too, it will operate from the same date.

43.24. No change—The above discussion, which was intended to draw
attention to a few salient features of the section, does not disclose any need
for amendment of the section.

1 Somnathdas ९. Sindhu, 5 C.P.L.R. 97, cited by Gour.
2. Section 47, Indian Registration Act, 1908.


CHAPTER 44

TRANSFEREE’S RIGHT UNDER POLICY
SECTION 49

44.1. Introductory—As between the transferor and the transferee of
immovable property, a number of situations arise where the adjustment of
claims becomes necessary in regard to immovable property. Many such
problems are sought to be dealt with in sections 54-55—the latter section,
incorporating a large number of provisions which constitute a Code for re-
gulating the relations between the seller and the purchaser of tangible im-
movable property. Similarly, in sections 108 to 112, there is given, in
relation to fe: an eloborate set of provisions regulating the inter-relation-
ship of lessor and lessee. Certain matters of a general nature were considered
appropriate for being deaith with in the present Chapter by way of working
out the mutual rights of the transferor and the transferee. Section 49
addresses itself to one specific problem, namely, what happens to rights under
a pollcy of insurance against loss or damage by fire in regard to immovable
property which is transferred for consideration 2 The section deliberately
avoids any provisions for gifts,—probably on the assumption that since the
principal property itself is transferred for jove and affection or on other non-
mercenary considerations, the rights under a policy of insurance would also
‘be expressly provided for if necessity arises.

44.2. Section 49—Section 49 reads—

“49, Where immovable property is transferred for consideration,
and such property or any past thereof is, at the date of the transfer,
insured against loss or damage by fire, the transferee, in case of such
loss or damage, may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary,
require any money which the transferor actually receives under the
policy, or so much thereof as may be necessary, to be applied in rein-
Stating the property.”

44.3, Period to which section 49 applicable—first view-—There seems
to be considerable misconception as to the setting in which section 49 is to
operate. Does it deal with the period between the contract for transfer and
the actual transfer ? Or, does it deal with the situation after the completed
transfer? The first view seems to have been taken in a Rangoon case,’ and
it is sometimes stated that the section is based upon the dissenting judgment
of James, L.J., in Rayner vy. Preston. The English case was, however,
concerned with the sale of property where damage by fire occurs after the
contract but before the completion of the sale. The majority of the judges
of the Court of Appeal in that case, with James, L.J. dissenting, held that
the putchaser was not entitled to the benefit of insurance money. James,
L.I., in his dissenting indzment, took the view that though the seller in a
contract of sale was net technically a trustee, yet, once a
contract is completed by an actual conveyance, then that relates back to

PAIR. 1923 Rong. 6.8,
2 Rayner v. Preson, (1881) 18 Ch. D. 1,
283


284

the contract and then it is ascertained that the relation was of trustee and
beneficiary, The legal estate, it is now ascertained, was in the vendor, but
the beneficial interest was in the purchaser. “This being the relation between
the parties”, James, L.J. continued, “I hold it to be a universal rule of equity
that any right which is vested in a trustee—the benefit of which accrues to
a trustee, from whatever source or under whatever situation of legal owner-
ship of the property—that right and that benefit he takes as trustee for the
beneficial owner.” We shall revert to the merits of this point later, but, at
Present, it is enough to say that the English case was not concerned with post
transfer position.

44.4. Period to which section applicable—second view—The second.
view of section 49 is that the section deais with completed transfers. This
view gets support from the words “is transferred” which occur in the section,
However, a query then could naturally arise—why would the transferor get
it insured after he has already dealt with the property ? The answer would
be that where the transfer is by mortgage or lease, the mortgagor or the
lessor would have an insurable interest. He would recover the amount from
the insurer on the basis that he has suffered a loss. If so, he should transfer
it to the transferee. Also, it can be suggested that if the policy has not been
transferred as such, and the transferor, even by way of sale, recovers the
amount, he should be made to apply it as provided in the section. It is to
be noted that under section 55(5) (०), the purchaser is to bear the loss occur-
ting to the property after purchase. Section 49 does not exciude sales of
immovable property, which is an aspect which might require consideration.

44.5. Need for amendment to guard against non-receipt—After trans-
fer, the purchaser is liable to bear the loss arising from destruction or deterio-
ration of the property, not caused by the seller’. In England, the purchaser
becomes, in equity, the owner of the property by mege force of the contract,
but in India, this doctrine of the Court of Chancery has been expressly
departed from’. Now, while it is clear that the transferor may be compelled
to apply the insurance money which he actually receives under the policy in
teinstating the property, what is to happe mn if he declines to receive it from
the insurer ? Having once completed the sale of the property and received
the purchase-money, the vendor may well decline to enforce payment of the
insurance money, and the insurer may equally decline to make payment; for
the contract being one of indemnity the insurer is not bound to pay when
the assured has already recovered full value of the property’. Of course,
if the vendor’s right under the policy has been assigned over to the purchaser,
there is no difficulty. But, if no such assignment has been made, the solution
of the problem is only possible by describing the position of the vendor and
purchaser as that of trustee and cestui que trust, as long as the contract is
in fiedi and therefore. “any benefit which accrues to a irustee from whatever
source or under whatever circumstances, by reason of his legal ownership
of the property, that right and that benefit he takes as trustee for the bene-
ticial owner”’. In this view, the vendor is both (a) bound to recover the
amount due under the policy and (b) to pay it over to the purchaser, or, as is

1 Section 5505) (०).

2 Section 54.

3 Gour.

4 Castellain v, Preston, 11 Q.B.D. 380: West of Englan! & Co. v. Isscacs, (1986)
2 QB. 377, 383, ०.७. (1897) 1 Q.B. 226.

5 Rayner, v. Preston, 18 Ch. D. 1, 13, 14 (James, LJ.).


285

enacted in the section, to apply it towards re-instating the property. The
balance, if any, may have to be repaid to the insurer. On the other hand,
the purchaser may compel the insurer to pay and the vendor to receive the
money, if necessary, though he cannot recover it himself,

44.6, Rule not in conformity with English rule—The section states a
rule departing from the decided cases in England’, where the contract for
fire-insurance is held to be a contract for mere personal indemnity*. Apply-
ing the same principle, it is further settled in England that where a vendor
receives his purchase-money without any abatement on account of damage
by fire pending completion, the insurance company is entitled to recover
from the vendor, out of the purchase-money, a sum of equal to the insur-
ance money upon the principle of subrogation.’ But, in English conveyanc-
ing practice, ii was usual, even before 1925, to insert a clause providing
for reinstatement, in case of destruction, and such a condition was then, of
ceurse, enforced.$

The position has been further modified by the Law of Property Act,
1925. section 47, to be mentioned later.

44.7, Passing of risk—In England, since in equity, the property at
once belongs to the purchaser, the risk also Passes to him at once.? Thus,
if a house has been sold and is, without fault of the vendor, destroyed by
fire before completion, the purchaser must nevertheless pay the full purchase-
money and take the land as it is. It is important for a purchaser of buildings
to insure at once in his own name, since he undertakes the risk of accidents
before he takes the property itself. He cannot take the benefit of any
insurance maintained by the vendor in the vendor’s name alone; for insurance
is normally only a personal indemnity against loss. and since the vendor is
entitled to the whole purchase-money and so loses nothing, he can recover
nothing under this policy’. If the vender does, in fact, obtain payment of
the insurance money, the insurers can recover it®. Even if they do not,
equity does not require the vendor to pay the money to the purchaser, for
his qualified trusteeship extends only to the land, and not to the proceeds
of a personal contract of insurance’?,

44.8. Section 47. Law of Property Act, 1925—It is, therefore. essential
for the purchaser, if he wishes to insure buildings, to take out insurance on
his own account. A common practice is to afrange, with the consent of
the insurers, for the vendor's existing insurance to be extended to cover the
purchaser. Before 1926 it was usual to stipulate that this should be done

1 Chetty v. Motor Union Insurance Co., ALR. 1923 Rang 6

2 The North of England & Co. v. The Archangel & Co. LR. 10 08, 249, fol-
towing Pawls v. Innes, 11M. & W. 10; Poole v. Adams, 12 W.R. (Eng.) 683;
Colingridee v. Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation, 3 Q.BD. 173,

3 Darrel v. Tibbitts. 5 Q.B.D. 560.

4 See Gour.

5 Castellain v. Preston, 11 O.B.D, 380.

6 a. Garde ~. Ingram. 23 LJ. Ch. 478:
b. Less v. Whiteley, LR. 2 Eq. 143.

7 Megarry & Wade, Real Property (1966), pages 584—586.

8 See Casrelluin v. Perston, (1883) 11 Q.B.D. 380.

9 Casteltain v, Preston, (1883) 11 Q.B.D. 380.

10 Rayner v. Preston, (1881) 18 Ch. D. 1 (Majority view).



286

and that the purchaser should pay the premium as from the date of the con-
uacti. It is now provided by the Law of Property Act® that any insurance
money which becomes payable under the vendor’s policy in respect of damage
to the property after the date of the contract shall be paid by the vendor to
the purchaser af compieticn, subject to (a) the terms of the contract, (b)
any requisite consonts of the insurers, and (०) the payment by the purchaser
of his share cf the premium. Where, therefore, the insurers consent to
include the purchsser in the insurance, it is now unnecessary to make further
terms about the surance money or premium. Where the insuraisce is left

the vendor's narae only, section 47 wilt not normally apply at all: for if
endor cu prove no personal loss, no insurance meney will ever become
payable under the Policy®.

Elect of ass ent oor serable
Sen in the law of insurance is this, Where
miary act cf the assured. in the case of a
ct the policy depends uoon whether the assured,
ins his insurable interest in the subject-matter.

in &

An absolvie conveyance of the subject-matter from the assured to a
purchaser, accompanied by the receipt of the agreed price. divests the
assured of his interest in the subject-matter®, He cannot, therefore, in the
event of its subsequent destruction, e.g., by fire, recover upon any policy
by which i¢ may have been insured. since he has suffered no 1055. ani there
is consequently nothing to which the right of indemnity can afiach®,

44.10. Effect of contract on vatidity of insurance—The validity of a
policy is not affected by the mere fact that the assured has entered into a
contract to convey the subject-matter of insurance", even though, as between
the assured and the purchaser. the risk has been passed to the purchaser’.

The existence of the contract does not, in itself. divest the assured of
his insurable interest, which continues by reason of his legal ownership of
ct-matter; and he acquires a further interest arising out of the pos-
sibility cf the purchaser refusing to carry out the centract, and thereby

i 1055 on him’.

ms. Vendor & Purchaser, 88, 89.

2 Section 47, Law of Property Act, 1925.

Property (1966). page 586,

pies of Insurance Law (1966)

ridge y. Royal Exeense Assurance Corp. 8
L - where the fire took [1-7४ bef

Roval Fxchanee Astur

HB. 173 ¢ fire insur-
fore the oonvevences

It

that the
my Wwer

2208)

© Cavteltain vy. Preston, (1883) 11 0.8,0, 380 (C.A.) (fire insurance) per Brett,
1... at pape 385.


287

44.11. Fire before completion—In the case of a fire policy, where the
fire takes place before the szle is completed by the execution of the convey-
ance and the receipt of the price, the assured is entitled to recover to the full
extent of his loss within the limits of the pelicy. The existence of the con-
tract and even the certainty tiiat the assured will finally suffer no 1055 at all
because of the purchaser's intention to complete, and his uadoubted solvency,
canncl be taker into accent as diminishing the amount recoverebie!.

44.12. Effect of coin, n—Where, however, the sale is afterwards
completed, and the price paid, the assured has, iit events that have hap-
pened, suffered no 10557, He cannot, therefore, eithcr enforce the policy, or,
if 62 hao ¢ the proceeds and
the price for his own bene!

A conveyance of the subject-matter, uns
the price, does not, apparently affect the va
iakes place before the assure? has छाले wth e
७५ the conveyance divests him of his legal ownership, nevertheless
tetains, by virtue of his lien, an insurable interest sufficient to keep the policy
alive, and it is immaterial that it is reduced from a legal interest to a mere
equitable one. He, therefore, is entitle3, as in the previous case, to enforce
his policy, so long as such interest remains. If, however, he parts with his
lien before he has received his price, his insurab!s interest nnder the policy is
extinguished, inasmuch as his relationship to the subiect-matter of insurance
has ceasect to exist. He has no longer a rizht to look at the subject-matter
as securing payment of the price: hi sole righ! 5 1 personal right as an
ordinary creditor against the purchaser himself.

44.13. Payment of price—If the price has been paid, but the convey-
ance of the subject-matter has not been completed, the assured retains an
insurable interest by virtue of his legal ownership*. The policy therefore
remains i force, notwithstanding such paymeat?., But, in the event of a
loss before completion, the assured, not being indemnified by the loss, will not
be entitled to enforce it against the insurers for his own benefit, although if
the conditions of the Law of Property Act. 1925. section 47 are fulfilled, he
may enforce it for the benefit of the purchaser. Where. however, the assured
has contracted with the purchaser to be responsible for the safety of the
subject-matter, the position will be different; and, unless the language of the
policy is prohibitive, the value of the subject-matter will be recoverable by
the assured®.

44.14. The contract under which the ossignment of the subject-matter
takes place may contain a provision that the assured is to keep alive an

॥ Collingridae y. Royal Exchange Assurance Corp: t (supra) (fire insurance),
2 Tvamy. General Principles of Insurance Law (1969). pace 257.

3 Castellain ५. Preston, (supra) (fire insurance).

4 Cf. Sale of Goods Act, 1893. section 41.

5 Cf. Sale of Goods Act, 1893, section 43.

6 Ivamy. General Principles of insurance Law (1986). page 256.

7 Castellain v. Preston, (supra\ (fire insurance).

8 Martineau vy, Kitching, (1872) 7 OR. 426 per Blackburn, J., at page 458.



288

existing policy for the benefit of the purchaser.* Where,—as is usually the
case,—the consent of the insurers is obtained to what is to all intents and
purposes, an assignment oj the policy? no difficulty can arise,

44,15. Recommendation to remove difficulties arising from the present
section—It appears to us that the section, taken literally, is of very limited
application and in any case its full implications are not set out. Moreover,
there is the problem arisin: from the rule of insurance law—that after title
passes, the vendor has no insurable interest. Lastly, the vendor is not, at
present, compellable to sue the insurer. All these difficulties should be re-
moved by a suitable amendnient which we recommend,

44.16. Propositions—tThe true position can be stated as follows, with
Teference to the various stages at wi Fich the loss or damage occurs—

(a) Where the loss cr c2mage by fire occurs before the contract, the
transferee is not concerned with the matter, since at that time he
had no intere:t ‘1 the property. Moreover, when he offered
the price or cther consideration, he would, at least in the vast
majority of ve fixed it on the basis of the property as.
already damaged.

(b

Where the loss or damage by fire occurs after the contract but
hefore the transfer, the transferee, though he has not yet ac-
quired an interest in the property in the legal sense, is concerned
in so far as the value of the 9 roperty diminishes after the price
or other consideration is fixed. The price or other consideration
may have been fixed on the basis of the state of the property as.
existing previously, that is to say, in the “undamaged” condition.
If so, the benefit of the policy—i.e,, the amount received by the
transferor under the policy on account of that loss or damage—
should go to the transferee. All that can be said in favour of
the transferor is that the transferor should be entitled to the pro-
portionate premium attributable to the period in question. This
situation is not covered by section 49 as it stands at present.
It should be added in the Act to complete the statement of the
Taw.

(c) Where the 1055 cr damage by fire cecurs after the transfer, the
transferee ts definitely interested in the property and should be
reimbursed as already provided by section 49. In case of a
sale, the Act in section 55(5)(c) expressly provides that the
purchaser has to bear the risk. That merely means that he
cannot rescind the sale on the ground of such loss or damage.
Tt does not :ffect the justice of the provision in section 49.

1 Doed Pearson v. Ries.
Poole v. Adams, (1864) 3:
North Brit'sh on! Meceant'l: Incurance Co. ७ Moflat’, (1871) LR. 7 CP, 25;
Martineau ९. Kitchin, (1872) T.R. 7 0.8. 436.

2 Garden ९, Inzram. (1852) 23 LJ. Ch. 478, where the insurers were willing to
pay the purchaser:

Darrell 5. Tibbitts, (1880) 5 Q.B.D. 560 (C.A.) where it was purchaser. who
had received payment under the poticy.



289

(d) In the case mentioned in (०) above, there is need for adding a.
further provision that the transferee may cail upon the transferor
to take effective steps for realising the amount and if he fails
to do so, he may himseif take such steps, making the transferor
a party in any legal proceedings that may have to be instituted.
Also it should be provided that the insurer shalt not be entitled
to object on ground of transfer. Also the seller may retain the
right to enforce the unpaid vendor's lien.

Ta the result, amendments as per propositions (b) and (d) above
should be made, by revising section 49.

44.17, In this context, we may make it clear that the amendments which
ace being recommended would not conflict with any specific provisions of
the Act regarding the passing of risk or with any provisions of the general
law of insurance. What is being suggested is कि an adjusunent of the
mutual rights of the transferor and tausferee, in relation to the benefit of an
insurance policy against fire. In particular, in regard to proposition (b)
above, it may be made clear that such a clarification or amendment will
advance the cause of justice and will, in general, be equitable. Of course,
if there is a contract to the contrary, that will prevail.

It has not been possible to ascertain the business practice in this regard,
but we believe that the section as proposed to be amended does not introduce
any such rigidity as would interfere with the practice of businessmen or
owners of property.

44.18. Movable property—Incidentally, it might also be stated that the
action is not concerned with movable property, and if a question of a
similar nature arises on the transfer of a movable property,—say, a motor
car or jewellery or other costly articles—the matter would have to be deter-
mined on general principles of law; but a comprehensive and self-contained
section—which section 49 would become after the recommended amendment
——might well serve as a model as illustrating the principle that can be applied
on the grounds of justice, equity and good conscience. We have devoted
some lengih to a discussion of this topic in view of its practical importance
and in view of the fact that to the layman the general principles of insurance
149 and their application in this particular field are matters of cbscurity.



CHAPTER 45

RENT BONA FIDE PAID TO HOLDER UNDER
DEFECTIVE TITLE

Section 50
45.1, Introductory—The transfer of immovable preperty
questions which affect the position of third parties, of whi:
situaticn which is a frequently recurring one, is the position cf
holds property “of ansther 7, mm regard to rents or profiis

muy raise
articular
son who
of the

son”.
property. Dhfficulties may arise where a perscn, having pai
profits of property to A, is faced with the objection by B that
ferred the property to B and that the rents and profits should be px
In such a case, if the person paying the rents or profits is made to pay
over, there would be hardship. Instead of compelling the perse it
bear the hardship where he has acted in good faith in all resp: the law
adopis 8 different approach; it protects him, leaving the transferor and the
transferee-—A and B in the above illustration—to fitigate against cach other,

if they 59 choose. The determination of the relevant question in that jitiga-
tion will, of course, in general, depend on specific statutory p ons—for

example, section 55(4) (a) and 55(6)(a) of the Act cr a contract between
the parties. But so far as the person paying the rents or profits is concerned,
he receives protection. Of course, our mentioning the situation cf a transfer
of immovable properiy should not be taken as implying that the section which
we are going to discuss is confined to that situation.

45,2. Section 50—The section reads—

“50. No person shall be chargeable with any rents or profits of
any immovable property, which he has in good faith paid or delivered
to any person of whom he in good faith held such property. notwith-
‘standing it may afterwards appe ar that the person to whom such pay-
ment or delivery was made had no right to receive such rents or profits.”

The illustration to the section takes the case of lease of a field. A
lets the field to B at a rent of Rs. 50 and then transfers the field to C, 8,
having no aotice of the transfer, in geod fa’th pays the rent ts A. Bis not
chargeable with the rent so paid.

Incidentally, this illustration omits to mention one impor
of the section, namely, that B should have accepted the le:
or should be holding the property in good fait
good faith is required in two aspects in the secti

nt tigredient
good faith

The section does not deal with rights to rent as bel
transferee. In regard to sale,’ this aspect is separately clea!

45.3. Scetions 109 cad 130-—Thi's section (६
109 and section 130) is an application of the gene
a party fulfils an obligation without notice ए the
obligation is discharged. The section is a general pi
cases where property is held by one person under ansth
proviso, applies onty to leases fer non-agricultural purpes

¥ Sections 55(4}(a) and SS(6}ia).
290


291

The section covers several classes of cases :

(1) Where a person who has a right to a land or other property lets
it to X and then transfers the property. Thereafter X, without
notice of the transfer, in good faith, pays the rent to the trans-

लिए, This is the case referred to in the illustration to the
section.

(2) Where a person who has no title to a property lets it to X, who
takes it in good faith and pays the rent to the lessor in good faith,
In this case there is no ‘transfer’ to any person during the tenancy
of X. But the lessor has no title to let it to X. Even ia such
a case, X cannot be charged by the real owner with r-nts and

profits of the property. The remedy of the latter is only to
proceed cgainst the lessor.

(3) The lessor has a defective title and the person having superior
title comes on the scene. He cannot demand the rent again.

45.4. Lis pendens—This section is subject to the doctrine of Es pendens
contained in section 52. If, therefore, the tenant takes the lease and makes
any payment to the mortgagor during the pendency of the suit to enforce
the mortgage by the mortgagee, the tenant does so at his own tisk and he
cannot claim protection under this section!,

45.5. Genesis—Section 50 is, almost word by word, the same as an
earlier Indian Act? which was applicable only to cases’ governed by the
English law under section 3 thereof. That section was, in turn, based on

earlier English statutes, and its ancestry could be traced to the Statute of
Anne®.

The principle cf the section represents a general rule of jurisprudence
that if & person enters into a contract without notice of any assignment and
fulfils the contract to the person with whom he has made that contract, he is
discharged from his obligation. A tenant is not bound to canvass his land-
lord’s title more than is necessary लि his purpose. Indeed, any attempt by
him to probe into the secret flaws in the landlord’s title might have the effect
of terminating his own tenancy in many cases.>

45.6. Cases other than transfer—Of course, the section is not confined
to cases of transfer or to cases of landlord and tenant. Any payment of rent
or delivery of profits in regard to immovable property, made bona fide, is
protected. This is illustrated by a Bombay case®. A took possession of certain
property as a mortgagee and created 2 lease for 12 years. A died and his
interest as mortgagee survived to his brother B. After B’s death, A’s widow
took possession of the property and managed the same and got her name
recorded in the revenue papers. The person really entitled to the property
was, however, B’s sister. B’s sister sued the tenant for rent, but the tenant
pleaded payment bona fide to A’s widow. By reason of section 50, the tenant
was held to have been protected.

“Girdharlal v. Liladhar. ALR. 1931 Bom. 539.
Mesne Profits and Improvements Act. 1855 (11 of 1855).

4 Anne Chonter 16, secticas 9 and 10.
Atimiddin «. Hira Lal, (1896) T.L.R. 23 Cal. 7 (F.B.).
Gor.

AW 9 ००२

Kaveriamma v, Lingappa, UL

. 33 Bom. 96 (Scott 25, and Chandavarkar, J.)


292

45.7. Scope of section 50— We have already pointed out! that section
150 is not confined to cases of transfer. Not only is it applicable to cases of
:suecession, but also it applies when there is neither succession nor trans-
mission of interest. Thus, a person paying rent to A in good faith after
taking a lease from A in good faith, is not required to pay rent to B, even
though it is ultimately held by a court that A had no title or had a defective
title to the property. In this sense, it would be correct to say that the person
paying rent to the ostensible owner or de facto owner is protected if the
other requirements of the section are satisfied.

45.8. Ingredients—What, then, are the ingredients of the section? In
the first place, the person making the payment must have done so in good
faith. In the second place, he must have held the property of the person to
whom he makes the payment in good faith. If these two ingredients are
satisfied, it is immaterial that the person to whom such payment was made
had no right to receive it. (For brevity, we are not speciiically mentioning
the case of delivery other than payment, but the principle is the same).

45.9. Good faith—Two aspects-—In order that X who has paid or
delivered the rents and profits of immovabie property to Y may be protected
under this section from the demands of Z,—the person who is really entitled
‘to such rents and profits,—it is necessary for X to show that-—

(1) he held the property in good faith from Y and
(2) he paid the rents or delivered the profits to Y in good faith,

If he did not hold the property in good faith from ४, a payment c¢ rents
and profits to the latter cannot obviously be in good faith. X is, therefore,
not protected under this section. The mere fact, however, that he holds
the property in good faith from Y, does not necessarily mean that payment of
delivery of the rents and profits to Y is in good faith. 146 may hold the
property from Y in good faith, but at the time of payment he might have
become aware of the fact that Z and not Y was entitled to such rents and
profits.

45.10, Good faith—Proper construction of the expression—-Having
regard to the importance of the requirement of good faith, it is obvious that
its scope and meaning ought not to be subject to serious obscurity. It is
well known that Indian statutory law contains two parallel definitions of the
expression “good faith”—the one in the General Clauses Act, section 3(22),
and the other in section 52 of the Indian Penal Code. According to the
General Clauses Act, an act is said to be done in good faith i? it is done
honestly, whether or not it is done negligently. According to the Penal
Code, nothing is said to be done in good faith unless it is done with due care
and attention. Thus, the General Clauses Act does not require due care and
attention. Of course, want of due care and attention may be cvidence in some
cases of want of bona fides. But, as a matter of theory, the definition in the
Penal Code is more stringent than the definition in the General Clauses Act.
In this position. two questions arise for consideration. namely, (a) which
definition is applicable to section 50. and (b) if the definition in the General
Clauses Act is the one applicable, which definition ought to be favoured as a
matter of legislative policy ? On the first question. the answ-r «vould appeat
to be simple. The definition in the Penal Code is meant only for the pur-
poses ef that Code, having been enacted in stringent terms by reason of the

1 Para 45.6 supra.


293

fact that the sections in which the definition occurs exempt a person from
criminal liability or reduce the gravity of the offence. It would, however,
appear that there have been judicial’ decisions’, which regard the tenant’s
failure to make an inquiry as a grossly negligent act and as one taking away
the protection of section 50 on the ground of want of good faith. We are
not, with respect, convinced that this is a correct approach. Whatever may
be the aspect of evidence, the concept of honesty of purpose and the concept
of due care and caution are two different concepts. In the absence of
express statutory provision, we do not think that it would be a proper cons-
truction to read due care and attention as an ingredient of good faith,

45.11. The Patna judgment® expressly holds that by reason of want of
proper enquiry, the payment falls outside section 50, even though the person
paying honestly believed that the person receiving was entitled to receive the
rent. With this construction, we do not find ourselves able to agree.

45.12. This, however, disposes of only part (a) of the query raised
above. It still remains to consider query ‘(b), namely, what ought to be
the law ? This is 6 difficult question to decide, since the monetary rights of
the real owner are involved. At the same time, it should not be overlooked
that the real owner is not entirely without remedy, because he can recover
the rents and profits from the person who received them from the innocent
payer. On the whole, therefore, it would appear that it would not be unjust
‘to provide that good faith need not require due care and attention,

45.13, The second aspect of good faith relates to good faith as holdi
the property “of another person”. The section raises the question of goo
faith on the part of the payer twice; good faith has to be proved not only
with regard to the payment, but also with regard to the title of the person
from whom the property is held. Here again, good faith should be so defined
‘as to exclude need for due care and caution. We recommend that the section
should be suitably amended.

45.14, Rent payable in advance—Some obscurity exists on the point of
rent payable in advance. One comes across judicial decisions taking the
view that the rent must not be paid in advance, as rent paid in advance would
‘become a mere loan’, as was held in Rajasthan. However, it is obvious
that where it is a part of the contract, that the lessee should pay the rent in
advance, he does so in fulfilment of an obligation under the contract and
section 50 ought to apply.

45,15. The Rajasthan case’ was one of loan, Rent paid in advance
before the rent became due was treated as substantially a loan. It was held
that if rents and profits are paid to the former landlord before they became
due, it is a simple loan and cannot be taken as a discharge for the rent becom-
ing due after notice of transfer to the tenant.

It is not vary clear from the facts as given in the judgment whether
there was a specific obligation to pay the rent in advance. But there is a

vindram, ALR. 1939 Patna 540, 544

CS. and

3 Katha Rhatr ९. Chokvlal, AR. 1960 Raj. 19, 20, para. 6.
4 Mani Ram v. Satpal, AJR. 1972 J, & K. 37.
5 ALR. 1960 Raj. 19. Para 45.14, supra.


294

review of the case law. To avoid, doubts in the matter, it is, in our view,
desirable to provide that the section applies to rents or profits payable in
advance of the period to which they relate, where the person paying them
is under a legal obligation to do so. “The definition of “lease” is wide enough
(० cover a lease accompanied with payment of advance rent!.

45.16. Reconimendation—In the light of the above discussion, we re~
commend the inserticn cf the following Explanations at the end of section
50 :--

“Explanation

Ai thing is said to be done in good fe ith if it is in
fact done honestly, + a

er co! it से done ess

“Explanation 2.—This section applies also be rents or Profits paid
or delivered by a person in advance of the period to which such pay-~
ment or delivery relates, if such payment or delivery is made or done
in good faith in the discharge of an obligction to make faynient or
delivery as the case may be, in advances.”

1 Lachman Das ¥. Zumb:rmai, (49:72) 75 Bom. LR. 678, 680 (Vaidya 1).
2 See para. 45.21 cad para. 45.13 suse.
3 See para. 45.13. :us-1



CHAPTER 46
IMPROVEMENTS MADE IN GOOD FAITH
SECTION 51

46.1. Introduction—The golden thread of good faith which is woven
into section 50, and which runs through some of the earlier sections, appears
again in the next section, where good faith has even a positive role to play.
If, section 50 merely gives protection from liability for a payaicnt made 17
good faith, section 51 goes further and confers positive rights in regard to
improvements made by a person on immovable property who, owing to de-
fective title, is ultimately evicted. If he can show good faith, he is entitled
to compensation, The legal defect in his title is not allowed to override his
claim based on equitable considerations. This is yet another example of the
genesis of some of the important provisions of the Act in equity and gives
the lie to the charge sometimes made that the law is based on technicalities.
Justice in the wider sense. justice with an all-embracing eye, is the dominant
spirit underlying section 51.

46.2. Not besed on estoppel——Although an cquitable claim for compen-
sation for improvements can arise on the basis of estoppel also, that is not
the factual situation contemplated by section 51. The section reads :

“51, When the transferee of immovable property makes any im-
provement on the property, believing in good faith that he is absolutely
entitled thereto, and he is subsequently evicted therefrom by any person
having a better title, the transferee has a right to require the person
causing the eviction either to have the value of improvement estimated
and paid or secured or the transferee, or to sell his interest in the pro-
perty to the transferee as the then market value thereof irrespective of
the value of such improvement,

Uhe amount to be paid or secured in respect of such improvement
shall be the estimated value thereof at the time of the eviction.

When, usder the circumstances aforesaid, the traneeree has

planted or sown on the property crops which are crowing when he is

evicted thereof, he is entitled to such crops and to free ingress and

९१९६९ 10. ga’ and carry them.” -

The situation which the section is concerned with is one mainly of
eviction. joe being a remedy of a specific nature, equity would compel
the persons seekine that remedv to have regard to the position of the yersan
evicted, where imerovements have been made by that person bena fide and
in the betic “hat be ahechitely entitled to the sroperty. There are
certain conditions to be satisfied in this regard. bnt of this stare it is sufficient
to point ot thet the ervx cf the protection giver by the section is “cood
Guth”. The rest are matters of detail, while good faith constitutes the heart
of the matter,

This section is. to same extent, founded vnon the nrincinle that he
who will have eanitv must do cavity. As observed by Snell ; “A construc-
tive trust 170 olso arise where a person, who is only part-owner. actine bona

व For a detnited discussion of the English law. see “Quickicd
sclo (1963) 218 L.T. 143. se “Qwickied 7

20-—885Law/77

solo credit

295


296

fide, permanently benefits as estate by repairs or improvements; for 2 lien
or trust may afise in his favour in respect of the sum he has expended in
such repairs or improvements.

46.3. Hindu law and Muslim law—Somewhat similar principles are
recognised in Hindu law and Muslim law. Narada says—?

“I£ a man has built a bouse on the ground of a steanger and lives
in it, paying rent for it, he may take with him, when he leaves the house,
the thatch, the timber, the bricks and the other building material; but
if he has been residing on the ground of a stranger, without paying rent
and against that man’s wish, he shall, by no means, take with him, on
leaving it, the thatch and the timber.”

Under the Muslim Jaw, according to the ‘Hedaya’ :

“A person usurping land and planting trees in it, or er
building upon it, must be directed to remove the trees and clear the land
and restore the same to the proprietor. If the removal is injurious
to the land, the proprietor of the land has the option of paying to the
Proprietor of the trees or of the buildings, a compensation equal to the
value and thus possessing himself of them?.”

46.4. Civil law—The section deals with only one aspect of a wider
principle which allows similar relief. It declares only what has been the
pre-existing law on the subject‘. Embodying as it does a rule of equity, it
is applicable alike to both Hindus and Mahomedans’. The Civil law
carried its doctrine 10 cases of this sort much further, and allowed® the एच-
chaser or other person making improvements innocently and under the
belief that he was the true owner, compensation for the benefit actually con-
ferred upon the property7. (described as “meliorations”)® Domat lays dowa
as a general doctrine that those who have spent money on improvements of
‘an estate, have, by the civil law, a privilege upon those improvements, as
‘upon a purchase with their own money.

46.5. English law—The rule here enacted is much wider than that
deducible from the English cases, according to which it is necessary that
the real owner must have had knowledge not only of the expenditure incur-
red®, but also of his own rights in the property'®, But this is by no means

1 Lake ४. Gibson, 1 Bq. Ca. Ab. 290.

2 Sacred Books of the East, 1889 Edn., Vol. 33, pages 114, 145. Ganganath Sha,
Hindu Law in its Sources (1930 Edn.) Vol. 1. page 302, Narada, Vol. VI-20,
31, cited in Mofiz v. Rasik Lal, (1910) LR. 37, Cat. 815, 820.

3 (a) Hedaya : (Hamitton’s Translations), Vol. 3; cited in Pannalal v. Gobardhan

Das, ALR. 1949 All, 757, 759, 760.

40) (1902) 26 Bom. 1, १5, 16, 28 Ind App 121 (P.C.) (Case from Zanzibar
where Muhammadan law applied—the above passage was held to contain
the rule applicable}.

4 Gour.

5 Section 2(d); Durgosi ५. Fakeer Sahib, LLR. 30 Mad. 197.

6 See Pannalal v. Govarchian Das, ALR. 1949 All. 757, 759.

7 Dig. Book 50, tit, 17, 1 206 “Tune nature cequm est, reminem cum alleries detri«
mento et injuria fieri 4 :uptetiorem.

8 A creditor was allowed lien for meliorations (Dig. Bk. 121, tit, 1, I, 25; 1 Domat.
Bk 3, tit 1. 5 arts, # 7).

9 Ramsden v. Dyson, Ls. 1 WL. 129, 141,

10 Wilmott y, Barber, 13 a, 0. 36, 0.9., 17, Ch. D. 772.



287

necessary under the section, which ires only that the person making । im-
provements must have acted in the fide belief that he was absolutely
entitled to the property. Where he fails to prove this, he cannot claim pro-
tection’. Provision for compensation for improvements under varying and
various conditions is also made in the several Provincial Acts which provide
for compensation to tenants and persons occuping land.’-*

46.6. Other situations—A claim for compensation for improvements
may be made successfully or unsuccessfully in several situations. Some of
the important ones are the following* :

(a) When improvements are made by a person who believes himself
in good faith to be absolutely entitled to the property. This is
the situation in section 51. Relief under that section has nothing
to do with the conduct of the real owner.

(0) Where the owner has encouraged another person to make im-
provements by his declaration, act or omission. Relief in this
case is based on estoppel which bars ejectment without com-
pensation.

(c) Where improvements are made by a co-owner without the con-
currence of the other co-owners, In such a situation the other
co-owner may obtain relief without proof of material injury®.
The case would be decided purely on proprictory rights.”

(9) Where improvements ate made by holders of a limited interest.
In such a case, compensation is admissible only when the im-
provements can be traced to some encouragement by the full
owner. Such a claim may be made by the tenant against the
Jandlord’-* or by a mortgagee against the mortgagor.

(०) Where improvements are made by a pure trespasser without the
consent of, or encouragement by, the owner, In such a case,
compensation is not allowed.

As to situation (b) above, it may be stated that where the owner en-
courages improvements to be made, equitable estoppel may arise by reason
of the conduct of the real owner.

Moti Chand v. Hr, India Corp. Co. Ltd., LLR. (1932) All. 210.
Section 69(1). Puniab ‘Tenancy Act (XVI of 1887). The Central Provinces
Tenancy Act (XT of 1898). Bengal Tenancy Act (VII of 1885), Malabar
Compensation for Tenants Improvements Act (Madras Act 1 of 1900).
3 Gour.
4 Gour,
5 Ramsden y. Dyson, LR. 1 HL. 129, 168.
6 (9) Paras Ram ४. Sherjit, LLR. 9 All. 661, 664;
(b) Nocury La! v. Bindabun. 11.8, 8 Cal. 708:
(c) Joy Chundor ९. Bipproo, UL.R. 14 Cal. 236;
(0) Madan Mohun v, Rajab Ali. LLR. 28 Cal. 223;
fe) Sashi Bhushan v. Ganesh Chunder, LLR. 29 Cat, 500;
(f) Fazilatunnessa v, Liaz Hassan, LL. 30 Cal, 901,
7 Section 108(m), (9). (q).
8 (a) Beni Ram v. Kundan Lal, LLR. 21 All, 496 (P.C.).
(b) Raja of Venkatagiri ए. Mukku, 7 LC. 202, 208.
9 Section 63.
10 Maddanappa v. Chandramma, ALR. 1965 S.C. 1812, 1816, para 14,

ve



298

After discussing these theoretical aspects, we proceed to a consideration
of some concrete questions,

46.7, Food faith and inquiry—We have already stated’ that good faith
is the crux of the section. Its content is therefore a matter of some
importance.

46.8. Inquiry-—On the question whether good faith in section 51 also
requires proof of proper inquiry, there is some obscurity. In a Madras
case,? the grantee of land under an order of the Tehsildar spent money on
improvements without knowledge of an appeal which had beca filed against
the order and which had resulted in cancellation of the grant. The section
was regarded as applicable. Probably in this case proper inquiry would
have disclosed the proceedings by way of appeal. In an ier case of
the same High Court,? however, the claim of a purchaser from Hindu
widow for compexsation for improvements was repelled on the ground
of want of good faith. The purchaser in that case did nct make any
inquiries as to necessity for the sale and the sale was sct aside at the
instance of the reversioner. It was held that since the purchaser could
not, in the citcumstances, have believed that he was absolutely entitled,
there could be no valid claim under section 51.

‘ There are some decisions of the other High Courts taking the same
view.*

+

©

With respect, we are not convinced that this is a correct view of the
section as it now stands. The question is whether or not that honest belief
is preceded by proper inquiry. To say in such circumstances that the
purchaser could net have believed that he was absclutely entitled, is to
equate good faith with the element of careful inquiry, which is not the
ordinary understanding of the expression “good faith”. Theoretically, one
cannot overlook the distinction between what is the belief of the person
and what is the reascnable belief of that person. While actual knowledge
of a defect in one’s t'tle may bar the application of section 51 for want of
good faith, it does not appear to be a correct view to take that nesticence
as such would preclude good faith. We would acree rather with those
decisions.5 which take the view that honesty of purpose suffices. So far
as the section under consideration is concerned, it shuld be provided that
what is done honestly is done in good faith, whether or rot it is done nesti-
gently.?

46.9. Invalid instruments—There is a difference of op’nion as to
wheth i 18 favour an instrument is excerted which is
invalid for want of resistration is a “transferee” within the meaning of
section 51, According to the Hich Court of Madras? he is a transferee.
According to the High Cour's of Allahabad® and Rangoon, he is not.

2 Naravanmurth? v. Secretary of State, 48 M.L.J. 682, A-LR. 1925 Mad. 63.
3 Naneappa v. P. Goundan, VLR. 32 Mad. 530.

4 Bimo!l Chandra v. Mammetha Nath, A.LR. 1954 Cal. 345, 347.

5 Mohammad Ali Khan v. Kanulal, ATR. 1935 Cal. 625.

6 Cf. discussion as to section 50, supra.

7 Ramanathan +. Rangencthen, ALR, 1919 Mad. 1083, 1090, (F.B.).

8 Ram Prasad v. Chajja, ALR. 1964 All. 300, 302.

9 Medan Gopal v. Sundaran, AIR. 1940 Rang. 172, 174.



299

46.10. Qualified owner—Then, there is a controversy as to whether
the section applies to a case where the transfer is from a qualified owner.
Zt is the view of the Allahabad High Court’ that section 51 is applicable
only to defective transfers and not to defensible transfers. The Madras
and Nagpur view is to be contrary’. Gne is reminded in this context of
the phrase used in section 43—power of a person to transfer property “in
circumstances which are in their nature variable.” We are of the opinion
that the wider view—the Madras view—should be adopted, having regard
to the beneficial object of the section.

The answer to such questions depends partly on the meaning which
one attaches to the expression “transferee” and partly on the emphasis to
be placed on the words “believing himself to be absolutely entitled in good
faith.” We see every reason why the wider view should be adopted. The
emphasis should be on the honest belief of the person making the improve~
ments that he is a transferee and not on the validity of his title. Once good
faith is established, the equities in his favour should not be disregarded.

46.11. Compensation—whose option—Although the language of sec-
tion 51 might suggest that the choice of mode of compensation is of the
person evicted, that is not the intention* The choice is of the person
evicting.*-"’, This seems to be a point requiring clarification by express
amendment in the section.

46.12, Amount—As to the amount of compensation, it has been
decided by the Privy Council® that the amount of expenditure has occa-
sionally very little to do with the real issue, and that the real issue is to
what extent enhancement of the subject matter has been brought about. In
other words, the real question 15: Has the property as a marketable subject
enhanced in value or not? In that case a temple built on the land did not
enhance its marketable value and was not regarded as falling within
section 51.

46.12A. Removal—This brings uS to a connected question, namely, is
‘the evicted person entitled to remove the materials which constitute the

improvements ? The answer could appear to be in the affirmative’-” pro-
vided the land is not injured.

46.13. Estoppel—We must make a distinction between those improve-
ments which involve an equitable estoppel and those which do not. Equita-
ble estoppel goes far beyond the rule in section 51, because while section 51
merely puts the party on terms to pay compensation, estoppel may compel
him to make good his representation. In the well-known case of Forhes v.
Ralli Brothers," the defendant lessee raised a pucca guilding on a leasehold.

1 Lachimi Prased v. Lachini Narain, ALR. 1928 All. 41—42, (Ashworth, J.).
2 Nangappa v. P. Coundaw, LR. 32 Mad. 530.

3 Vithal v. Narayan, ALR, 1931 Nag. 69 (acksoa, AJ.C.).

4 Famaiya vy. Narayvanaswamy, 51 M.LJ. 313.

5 Narayan v. Ganesh, AIR. 1926 Bom. 599, 600.

6 See decree in A.LR. 1956 S.C. 727. 729, Narayan Rao Basavarayappa.
7 Nagaratuamna y. Ramayya, ALR. 1963 A.P. 177, 184, para 18.

8 Kedar Nath v. Muthumal, LLR. 48 Cat. 555 (PC).

9 Hans Rej v. Somi, LLR. 44 All. 655,

10 Krishna Prased v. Adyanath Ghatak, ALR. 1944 Pat, 77.

11 Forbes v. Ra'li Brothers, AIR. 1925 P.C. 146,



300

He purported to do so on the strength of the permission of the Jandlord,
given by a letter which stated that the lease was a permanent one and gave
to the lessee the right to erect buildings.

It was held that though the lessee was not entitled to hold the land
at a fixed rate of rent and that the rent was liable to be enhanced after
proper legal notice, yet a suit by the landlord for ejectment on the ground
of construction of the pucca building was not maintainable by reason of
estoppel arising on the letter written by the landlord.

46.14, Meaning of transferee—How does section 51 apply to a teans-
feree from a transferee? A decision of a single judge of the Calcutta High
Court! is to the effect that a claim for improvements under section 51 cat
be made only by the first transferee, and not by his representative in
interest.

In the Calcutta case, these observations were made with regard to the
argument relating to section 51:—

“L had best state my construction of that section at once. | it
was intended to provide for rights higher and wider than those that
I shall now state, in my view, the section should be re-drafted. 1 will
paraphrase it as follows: X has a right to compensation provided that
he is (1) a transferee, (2) he has made such improvement, (3)
he has made such improvement believing in good faith that he was
absolutely entitled, and (4) he was evicted. In my view, the sec-
tion does not provide for these various capacities or qualifications being
filled or fulfilled. by different persons. It appears to me that it was
intended to provide for a right to compensation to an individual who
fulfils all the conditions laid down.”

It is held in the Calcutta decision that such a right is neither heritable
nor transferable and apart from section 51, there are no equitable principles
under which the evictee can claim compensation. The actual decision in
that can be supported on the ground that the defendant who claimed com-
pensation was the purchaser of the property at a court sale so. that he
cannot claim to be a transferee within meaning of section 51 of the Transfer
of Property Act.

But the reasoning goes beyond that, and would deny the benefit of
section 51 to any transferee. The judgment gives a very mild hint of a
need for reform of the law.

A different view was expressed in a Madras case,’ holding that section
51 applies to the subsequent transferee also. The Madras case dissents
from the Calcutta case.

There are at least two Privy Council decisions*-* in which compensa-
tion seems to have been awarded to the transferee’s representative in
interest. The first case was one in which a transferee from a Hindu widow
without legal necessity effected permanent improvements. His successor-in-
interest was allowed to claim compensation for the improvements made by

1 Nagendrabala v. Panchanan, A..R. 1934 Cal. 290,

2 Md. Basiruddin v, Govindroy, AIR. 1971 Mad. 44,

3 Bhagwat Dayal v. Ram Ratan, ALR. 1922 P.C. 91, 93.
4 Narayanan v. Rama Iyer, ALR. 1930 ९.८, 297, 300,


303

his predecessor. In the second case, the transferee who had effected im-
provements in good faith was succeeded by his heir and it was the heir who
was awarded compensation for the improvements effected by his predeces-
sor. Having regard to this position, it is desirable to take the opportunity
of making it clear that the expression “transferee” in this section includes
his successors in interests.

46.15. Recommendation—Amendments summed up—~As a result of the
above discussion, we recommend that the following propositions’ should
be inserted in section 51:—

(a) “Good faith” in the section requires only honesty of purpose,
and not proof of absence of negligence.

(b) Invalid transfers, including invalid transfers by qualified owners,
are covered.*

(०) The choice between the two modes of compensation is of the
person evicting, and not of the person evicted.

(d) The expression ‘transferee’ includes successors in interest.>

46.16. Recommendation—In the light of the above discussion, we
recommend the addition of the following Explanations to section 51 :—

“Explanation 1.—In this section, “transferee’ includes a person
claiming under or through a transferee,

“Explanation 2.—In this section, the expression ‘good faith’ has
the same meaning as in section 50.

Explanation 3.—A_ person who purports to derive title under
a transfer which is not valid in law is a transferee within the meaning
of this section.*

“Explanation 4.—A person causing the eviction has the option of
deciding whether the transferee should be entitled to have the value
of the improvements estimated and paid for, or whether the transferee
shall be entitled to require that person to sell his interest in the
property to the transferee, as provided in this section.

1 Por draft amendment, see para 46.16, infra.

2 Para 46.8, supra.

3 Para 46.9 and 46.10. supra.

4 Para 46.11, supra.

5 Para 46.14, supra.

6 Of course the other conditions of the section, including belief in good faith,
गा


CHAPTER 47

TRANSFER PENDING LITIGATION
Section 52

47.1, Itvoductory—Certain provisions of the Act are aimed not at
giving effect to any specific doctrines of equity, but at effectively carrying
out certain requirements of public policy. In the field of the law of
procedure, we are familiar with the principle that there should be an end
to litigation. The policy of the law to avoid unnecessary litigation and to
avoid same matier being litigated again is well Known. A similar
policy fiads manifestation in the principle that fit'gation conducted with-
out collusion and in a competent court, must be effective and the energy
and money spent thereon must not be rendered futile by one party trans-
ferring the property in issue in the litigation.

47.2. Principle—Section 52 is an expression of the principle under-
lying the maxim pendente lite nihit innovetur (pending a Migation nothing
new should be introduced). The section is intended to protect the parties,
but there is a deeper consideration of public policy, namely, the act of
Court mus not be thwarted by private act.

47.3. Section 52—This is how the section reads-—

“52. During the pendency in any court having authority within the
limits of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir or established
veyond such limits, by the Central Government, of any suit or proceeding
which js not collusive and in which any right to immovable property is
directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred of
otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect
the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or order which may
be made therein, except under the authority of the court and on such
terms as it may impose.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the pendency of a suit
or proceeding shall be deemed to commence from the date of the presen-
tation of the plaint or the institution of the proceeding in a court of com-
petent jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or proceeding has béén
disposed of by a final decree or order, and complete satisfaction or dis-
charge of such decree or order bas been obtained, or has become un-
obtainable by reason of the expiration of any period of limitation pres-
cribed for the execution thereof by any law for the time being in force.”

ATA, History—Lis pendens is a doctrine known to English law at
least since the 17th century.* There was, however, some obscurity as to
its rationale, since some persons thoucht that the doctrine rested on’ notice.
In the leading case on the subject—Bellamy y. Sabine’—decided in the latter

1 (a) Self v. Madox, (1687) 23 E.R. 585;
(b) Sorrell v. Carpenter, (1788) 24 E.R, 325.
2 Bellamy 5, Sabine, (1857) 44 E.R. 842.
302


303

half of the 19th century, the Lord Chancellor (Lord Cranworth), observed :

“{t is scarcely correct to speak of lis pendens as affecting
a purchaser through the doctrine of notice, though undoubtedly
the language of the courts often so describes its operation. It
affects him not because it amounts to notice, but because the
law does not allow litigant parties to give to others, pending the
litigation, rights to the property in dispute, so as to prejudice
the opposite party”.

“where a litigation is pending between a Plaintiff and a Defendant as
to the right to a particular estate, the necessities of mankind require that
the decision of the court in the suit shall be binding, not only on. the liti-
gant parties, but also on those who derive title under them by alievations
made pending the suit, whether such aliences had or had not notice of the
pending proceedings. If this were rot so, there would be no certainty that
the litigation would ever come to an end.”

Basis-—After referring to certain cases which were to the effect that lis
pendens was “implied notice” to all the world, Lord Cranworth  conti-

nued :

“The language of the court in these cases. as well as in Worsely v.
The Earl of Scarborough, certainly is to the effect that lis pendens is im-
plied notice to all the world. I confess, I think that is not a perfectly
correct mode of stating the doctrine. What ought to be said is that pea-
dente lite, neither party to the litigation can alienate the property in dis-
pute so as to affect his epponent. The doctrine is not peculiar to courts

of Equity.”

Turner, LJ. in the same case observed that the doctrine rested not
on any peculiar tenets as to implied or constructive notice, but upon this
foundation that it would be plainly impossible that any action or suit
could be brought to a successful termination if alienations pendente Tite

were permitted to prevail.

47.5. Analysis—The section was analysed by R. B. Pal, }., of the
Calcutta High Court as follows* :

“The requirements of the section are: (1) the pendency of a suit,
(2) non-collusive character of the suit, (3) any right to immovable pro-
perty being in question in that suit, being in question directly and specifi-
cally, (4) the other party (other than the party making the transfer
pendente lite) having some right under the decree in, that suit. The con-
sequence of the doctrine is that the transaction pendente lite shall not be
allowed to affect the right under the decree.”

The first and the third ingredients have been the most fruitful source
of controversy. Some of the important points will be dealt with in due
course.

1 Worsely v. The Earl of Scarboroush, (1746) 26 FR. 1025, 1026.

2 Haranya Bhushan v. Goura Dull, ALR. 1943 Cal. 227, 230 (Judgmer
by the Privy Council in ALR! 1948. P.C.). हु (ladement approved



304

47.6. Principle—We have already stated’ that the section intended to
ensure that a private party does not defeat the authority of the court.
The status quo is maintained unaffected by the act of a party to the litiga-
tion. In other words, the section takes away the subject of transfer of
property pending litigation from the realm of volition of the parties, and
places it in the domain of the court, so that successive alienations of pro-

erty in dispute may not render nugatory judicial verdict on that dispute.
it is for this reason that the emphasis is not on notice of pendency, but
on pendency itself. It is sometimes stated that the law of lis pendens is
an extension of the law of res judicata, This is true, if it is understood
in the sense that res judicata is on the basis of parties whose names appear
‘on record of the proceedings, and lis pendens binds all persons who pur-
rt to be transferees of the property in the suit. If he was a party, then
fe would be bound by reason of res judicata. If he was not a party, he
would be bound by lis pendens. In this sense, lis pendens supplements

res judicata.

47.7, Decretal charge—A pretty large number of judicial decisions
‘on section 52 relate to the question of charge. Controversy used to arise
in the past on the question whether the doctrine of lis pendens applies to
claims for maintenance resulting in a charge. The correct position as now
settled seems to be that if the claimant for maintenance has made a prayer
for charge and the charge is ultimately incorporated in the decree, then the
doctrine applies, so that, as the section says, “the property cannot be
transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit so as to affect
the rights of any other party to the suit under any decree which may be
made therein’.2 Of course, there should be a prayer for a charge on 2
specific immovable property mentioned in the plaint and the decree must
have been passed creating a charge on such property. We shall deal
18008 with a right which is created by the decree though not prayed for
in the pleadings.

47.8, Limony—The emergence of matrimonial legislation and the in-
creasing number of suits in that jurisdiction 198 lent new importance to
the question of application of the doctrine of lis pendens to prayers for
alimony and for a charge on specific immovable property. In one of the
very early American cases,‘ the following observations were made :—

“In many cases where, in divorce proceedings the application is for
alimony proper, that is, an allowance to be paid at regular periods for the
wife’s support, it was held that the rule of lis pendens does not apply where
the suit is in personam, and did not relate to any specific part of the per-
sonal or real estate of the husband. If. however. the wife in her com-
plaint specifically describes property which she asks the court to decrée
to her for her support, there seems to be no well founded reason why the
tule of tis pendens should not apply...... In such a case, a purchaser
pendente lite, with notice of the suit and its objects. knows that the vro-
perty described may be decreed to the wife, and that one of the objects

1 Para 47.4. supra.

2 Bose Chinamma Dhutia y. Krishua. (1906) LL.R. 29 Mad. 508.

3 Para 47.9, infra.

4 Powell v. Campell, 19 Am. St. Rep. 350 cited in Seetharamanuja Ch ¥
Venkatarbbamma, “ATR 1930 Med, 624, 3a," Seemaramanla Cheryale


305

ry

of the suit is to obtain decree a1 warding such property to her; see section
284 of Hukam Chand’s law of Res tes Fudicata, pages 722 and 724, and
Benndt on Lis Pendens, page 267, ion 219”.

This position is substantially true in India and elsewhere, today
also.

47.9. Charge created by decree but not prayed for in the pleading—
One situation arising out of the charges does not appear to have been
dealt with in section 52. What happens if the charge is not prayed for
in the छ taint, but is granted by the decree and the transfer (now sought to
be challenged) is made after the decree but before the decree is completely
satisfied 2? Taking literally the language of the section, the matter is not
covered in the main part, because when the suit was instituted, there was
no right to immovable property directly and specifically ‘in question’, In.
such a case, is it not just and fair that the doctrine of lis pendens should
be extended ? We are not, this time, concerned with the case where theré
is in the plaint itself a prayer for a charge. In such a case the lis involv-
ing immovable property commences from the date of the plaint. We are
concered with the question whether there could be a case where the lis,
though not commencing from the date of the plaint, commencés from the
date of the decree, If the decree directs the sale of a certain property,
and then, after the decree and before the sale, a private transfer is effect-
ed, should it be allowed to defeat the rights under the decree? As the
Jaw now stands, until the actual order is passed for the sale of the pro-
perty, no priority is created, in such a situation. Take another situation.
An injunction is not prayed for in the plaint, but is ultimately granted by
the decree—a rare but no an inconceivable case. After the injunction is
granted, but before it is executed, property is transferred. Should the
injunction not be executable against the transferee ?

We are of the view that the section should be amplified in this regard,
“and we recommend accordingly.

47.10. Charge created by decree—It would appear that when a charge is
created by a decree, the doctrine of lis pendens still applies,—uwnless the
decree is merely declaratory.* If a person purchases property from a
party after an order creating 2 charge is passed in an inter-pleader suit,
the transfer is governed by lis pendens, according to some cases.? The
Explanation to section 52, however, where it relates to the starting point,
may give a different impression. This should be remedied, As to the
point of substance, it is to be noted that while a charge, as such, can be
enforced oaly against a person who purchases with notice or for value, the
doctrine of lis pendens makes no exception in favour of a bona fide trans-

1 feree for value without notice.

47.11. Notice of suit—Registration of—An amendment made by the
erstwhile State of Bombay‘ has provided for the registration of notices of
suit with reference to the Registration Act and has consequentially amend-
ed section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act so as to limit its operation

I Bepin Krishna v. Byamdesh Deb, AIR. 1925 Cal, 395 (2).

2 Maheth Prasad v. Mt. Mundar, ALR, 1951 All. 141, 151, 153 (F.B.).
3 Kulanadaivelu vy. Sowbagvammal, ALR. 1945 Mad. 350, 351.

4 Bombay Act. 57 of 1959.



306
e

io cases where notice of the pendency of the suit or procecding is regis-
tered under the Registration Act as amended in that State. We have con
sidered the question whether such an amendment should be extended to
the rest of India, but are not inclined to do so. Apart from the fact that
it may involve an amendment of the Registration Act, and apart from the
fact that such an ameadment in that Act was not favoured by the Law
Commission in its Report on thai Aci’, we बार not certaia_ whether | the
amended procedure would be appropriate for all the territorivs to whic!
the Transfer of Property Act extends.

47,12. Meaning of Court—Questions arise as to whether 4 particu-
lar authority is a “court” or not for the purpose of the section, Gexerally,
a wide view is taken. We need not quote the case law.

47.13. Competence of the Court—An important ingredient which is
usually read into the main paragraph of section 52 is not mestioned ex-
pressly in the section, namely, that the Court before which the procve:!
ing is pending must be a court of competent jurisdiction. The words
“having authority’ which appear in the main para. sre intended
mainly to emphasise the fact that the Court must be a ian Court, But
it is not meant to indicaie that, as amongst Indian Courts iter se, the
court must be a compeient court having regard to all the law that soverns
the jurisdiction of courts dealing with civil allied proceed'ngs. This fur-
ther requirement should find a place in the main paragraph. The idea is
indirectly brought out by its mention in the definition of perdency of a
suit as given in the Explanation. But it is important enough to deserve
mention in the main section.

47.14. That the cours must be competent is an aspect which may bs-
come material either where the suit was going on in a court which has no
jurisdiction so that the plaint is ultimately rejected or the suit dismissed,
or where the plaint was returned by the incompztent court for pressnta-
tion to the competent court. In fact, the words “court of competent juris-
diction” in the Explanation which was inserted in 1929 make it clear that
the court must be competent. The only Point which is now seyght to
be emphasised is that this important Tequirement may usefully find a
place in the main paragraph of the section.

हे Where. the Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit, a transfer pend-
ing such suit cannot operate as lis pendens, and cannot affect any decrees
or orders in such suit“ In an early Calcutta case, it was held that 9 suit
filed on the equity side of the Supreme Court of Calcutta did not operate
as lis pendens so as to affect a transfer of immovable property in the
mofussil, inasmuch as the Supreme Court has no Jurisdiction over property
in the mofussil. The present High Courts have, under their Letters
Patents, power to try suits relating to land partly within their jurisdiction
and partly without it, provided the leave of the Court is obtained for do-
ing so. When the High Covurt so acquires jurisdiction to determine the
Suit, the suit will operate as lis pendens.#

1 Law Comumission’s 34th Report on the Registration Act.
2 Devassya v. Thommani, ALR. 1953 Trav-Co, 573, 574,
3 (1869) 41 Suth W. R. 554, 555 (DB).

4 Kiermanda v. Beni Madhab, AJR. 1931 Cal. 763, 167,


307

47.15. Kecommendation—It may be desirable to bring out the above.
aspect in the main paragraph and we recommend accordingly.

47.16. Scope as to movable property—Because of the setting in
which the section appears, section 52 does not apply to movable property.
Further, because the Act does not extend to certain territories, the section
does not apply to those territories. Nevertheless, the principle of the sec-
tion must also extend to the tetritories to which, strictly speaking, the
Act does not apply. The same reasoning applies to execution sales. Al-
though “transfer” ‘and “dealing” are not expressions appropriaic for exe-
cution sales, yet it is well established that the principle applies to execu-
tion sales 2s well'.

AT17. Weaning oj “otherwise dealt with’-—The section is not con-
fined to “transfers”. The words “otherwise dealt with” will include the
several other transactions which we need not enumerate.

of the above

47.18. Reconunenzations for amendment—As a
discussion, w2 recommend two amendments in the sectio

(i) i fon of the requirement of competence of the Court in
the first paragraph;

(ii) amplification as regards a right?—particularly, a charge—
created by a decree, though such right or charge was not
prayed for in the plaint. Of course, in such a case the lis

from the date of the decree and sot from the date
the expression “right it

४. may requ:re to be ainplificd,

_ AT AS. Mlustracive sitcations—In elucidiation of the sccond prozosi-
tion, it rey be stated that a suit or proceeding, in which, at its inception,
no avestion to tcht io any property is directly cr specifically rai:
sicge thereof, become a suit or pr: 1
fi Thus, a suit for mai
any property is not, at its incept?
mmovabie property is in question. But, if the decree
perticular property, the Ftieot'on thereafter be-
fet is in aucstion ard a | fraasler of
Tis pendens*, Sim farly,
ant furnishes security o
ay be decreed in the
‘ity is given, one in whic
A transfer. there%arc.

movable prope!
after the sate 0
pendens*. In

there was a suit by
fcr recovery of moner
2 Para 47.19, supra.
% Jagennatin vy. Ran Chander, ALR, 1935 Mad. 589, $92.

4 Subramenc: v, Esckti Madan. ALR, 1953 Trav-Co. 364, 365.

5 eines ae Dosti Chan®, (1879) LLR. 4 Cal. 402, 420; 5 Ind. App.



308

from out of the assets. A decree was passed directing the defendants to
account for the property. A transferee who took the property after the
decree, was held affected by lis pendens.

A contrary view has, however, been taken by the Nagpur High
Court!, namely, that the doctrine of lis pendens will not apply unless from
the very beginning of the suit or proceeding the right to the property was
in question, and that, where in a suit for money, a charge is dectared by
the decree on certain property, a transfer of the property subsequent to
the decree, is not affected by lis pendens. Reliance was placed upon the
decision of the High Court of Patna in the undermentioned case. In
that case the plaintiff sued for the recovery of money and also claimed
that certain properties should be charged for the amount that may be
decreed, but the Court granted merely a money decree without giving any
charge on any property. It was held that a transfer of the property pend-
ing the suit was not aifected by lis pendens for two reasons, first, that the
actual decree did not affect in any way the property transferred, and
secondly, that the suit, even though asking for a charge in the plaint, was
not one in which any right to immovable property was in question. We
are, with respect, of the opinion that the Nagpur view is not correct.

1 Badri Das v. Raja Pratpgir, AIR, 1940 Nag. 8, 13 (D.B.).
2 Bhagwan Das v, Akbar Hussain Khao, A.LR. 1936 Pat. 571, 572,


CHAPTER 48

FRAUDULENT TRANSFERS
SECTION 53

48.1. Introduction—Ordinarily, the law does not, in determining
questions of civil liability, take account of the motives of person. An
act which is lawful does not, in general, become actionable merely because
the motive is improper. But there are exceptions to this general rule. One
such exception is created by section 53 in the interests of creditors of the
transferor and subsequent transferee of the same property. It constitutes
a qualification of the general rule that a person may do what he likes with
his own property. The exception is created on the basis of the paramount
policy of the law to check fraud. No one is permitted to effect a trans-
fer with the object of defrauding his creditors or with the object of defraud-
ing a subsequent transferee.

48.2. Section 53.—Section 53 reads—

“53. (1) Every transfer of immovable property made with intent to
defeat or delay the creditors of the transferor shall be voidable at the
option of any creditor so defeated or delayed.

Nothing in this sub-section shall impair the rights of a transferee in
good faith and for consideration.

Nothing in this sub-section shall affect any Jaw for the time being in
force relating to insolvency.

A suit instituted by a creditor (which term includes a decree-holder
whether he has or has not applied for execution of his decree) to avoid
@ transfer on the ground that it bas been made with intent to defeat or
delay the creditors of the transferor, shall be instituted on behalf of, or for
the benefit of, all the creditors,

. (2) Every transfer of immovable property made without considera-
tion with intent to defraud a subsequent transferee shall be voidable at
the option of such transferee.

_, For the purposes of this sub-section, no transfer made without con-
sideration shall be deemed to have been made with intent to defraud by
season only that a subsequent transfer for consideration was made.”

48.3, History—The ancestry of the section is usual: fra te
statutes of Elizabethan times. By 13 Eliz.. Chan. 5 it was शक tat
convevances of any kind of oroverty. whether land or gonds, with intent
to defraud creditors were voidable at the instance of the person thereby
Prejudiced, except where the transferee had taken the property fer eood
consideration and without notice of the intent to defraud. By 27 Biiz,
Chap. 4, it was provided that convevances of lands (not goods) with
tent to trad subsequent purchasers were void against such nurchaser8

76. excent where the nriog transfe
good consideration and bons fa feree had taken the Property for
309


310

Before the 1882 Act was passed these two statutes were applicable
to the Presidency Towns of India. The principles underlying them were
also applied in the mofussil, as being in conformity with justice, equity
and good conscience. In section 53 of this Act, the Legislature introduced
with some modifications the above-mentioned provisions of the two statutes

and thus codified what had been recognised as the law in this country.
The two statutes were repealed by this Act. It was held in a Bombay
caset that the above statutes may be accepted as guides to the law before

the Act.

3 England, the iaw was altered by the
3893. That Act, ard the earlier statutes,
172-173, Law of Property Act, 1925. In
5 amended in the light of the English statute

48.4, Law in England.
Voluntary Conveyances Ac
are now replaced by s
India, in 1929, section 53 ४
of 1925.

first sub-section, deals with transfers
in fraud of creditors. in 5 tion (2) it deals with transfers in fraud
sub-sections deats with a

of subsequent transferees
transfer giving one ered preference over the other. That is a matter

dealt with by the Insolveacy Jaw under “Fraudulent preference.”

Seci'o: 53.

‘ence of tntention—We shail now consider
sub-section (1). The section as it
ent contains no presumption as to intent.
mt even though the transfer is for considera-
y be without consideration and yet there
pal object of the first sub-section 18 to en-
debtor is applied in payment of the demands
h is no intention to defeat or delay them.
Creditors may be pre’ t only by a transfer without consideration,
but also b nsfer wit> considerction whereuwder the deb‘ar reserves
antial benefit for Diraself. Conversely, a transfer even without con-
io? may be fide —for example, a transfer to a charity in per-
ndertaken in goo.) faith at a Ume when
ly comfortable circumstanc:s.

48.6, Sub-section (1)---
a few points of detail coac
stands after the 1929 ai
There may be a fraudulet i
tion, Conversely, the tr.
may be bona fide:
sure that the property
of the creditors and

the trars

rovided that a
intent if

Before 1929, the section
have been made with a

its effect w: tors and it was m: usly of
for a gro: The provision, however, created
doubts td to a transfer for adequate

y cr fraudvleat intent could not be made. The
paragraph hus now been deletea. This does not_of course, mean that as
a matter of policy a ¢ view wes taken. The Court is stl free to
bat it must have recard to thr whole of | the
2 that every man cusht to be just before ke
i the go-bye. But it has to be applied on a
umsiances. Regard will, therefore, have to

consider

consideration ef थी the cir

1 Bhagwant v. Kedar. (1991) E1.R. 25 Bom. 200, 208. 209.
2 See para. 48.12, infra.
3 Freeman v. Popa. (1870) 5 Ch. D. 538


31)

be had to the extent of his indebtedness, on the one hand, and the circum-
stances leading to the voluntary transfer on the other hand. Thus when
the transferor has no debts and is not in embarrassed circumstances, the
execution of a voluntary transfer cannot be held in itself to be in fraud
of subsequent creditors'. Even if he is under a debt, a transfer cannot be
considered to be fraudulent only on that account, as otherwise a person of
means, indebted in a trifling sum of money, may be prevented from mak-
ing a transfer—tlet us say,—a mortgage of property to secure future ad-
vances for bona fide investments in a lawful business. Thus. in an Allaha-
bad case’, a mortgagor who had executed a mortgage, gifted non-mort-
gaged property. The gift was challenged as voidable under this sect‘oi.
Tt was, however, found that the mortgaged property was sulficient to
satisfy the mortgage debt. It was held that the gift could not be said fo
be with a view to defeating the mortgagee. In centrast®, where the mort-
gaged property is not sufficient. to satisfy the mortgage debt, a transfer by
the mortgagor of his other property can indicate a fraudulent intention. It
is therefore legitimate to consider the value of the property sold and its
proportion to the extent of the demands of the creditors at that time, Tn
recommending the deletion of the relevant paragraph of section 53, fhe
Special Committee of 1927 stated that its object was “to Jeave the determi-
nation of the question of intent 10 be determined by the ordinary rules
of evidence!

48.8. Transjer voidable under sub-section(1)—It is obvious from
the language of the section that the transfer hit by sub-section (1) is not
absolutely void, It is voidable at the instance of the creditors, and the
suit to set it aside must be a representative suit. This does not. of course.
mean that there must necessarily be numerous creditors in every case.
There may be only one creditor at the time of the wansfer. Tf the inten-
tion of the transferor was to defraud that creditor who was the only ere-
ditor at that time, the section would be attracted. Of course. if, by the
time, a suit is instituted. other debts also come into existence. the suit
must be for the benefit of all.

48.9. Suit not the only remedy—If a suit is filed for a declaration
that the transfer does not bind the body of creditors. then all creditors
must be the bencficiaries. But this does not mean that a suit must be
filed for the purpose of expressing a creditor’s repudiation of the transfer.
Judicial decisions* established the proposition that any act of the creditor
showing an unequivocal repudiation of the transfer is enough.

48.10, Benami transactions—There appears to be a misconception
as to the relationship between benami and fraudulent transactions. A
benami transaction may or may not be fraudulent, and a fraudulent trans-
action may or may not be benami, This does not, of course, mean that
against a benami transaction a creditor has no remedy. Rather, the
opposite is the position in general. As a rule, a creditor of A can always
prove that property standing in the name of B is held benami and that .
the real owner is A. If the creditor succeeds in pr: ‘ing it. the property
becomes available to the creditor, not under section 53 but because of the

2 ALR. 1928 All. 476, 479.
3 Raj Kuer v. Ra‘endia Bahadur, AR. 1951 443, 447,
4 Report of the Special Committee (1927), discussion on section 53,
5 Bg, ALR. 1963 S.C. 1150, 1160.
21—885Law/77



312

position that the creditor of A has always available the property of A,
whoever be the ostensible owner. This is subject, of course, to any tran-
sactions already entered into by the ostensible owner that are recognised
by special rules of law.’

48.11. Good faith—Even where the other ingredients are satisfied,
protection is given only to a teansferee in good faith for consideration. This
practically means that the transferee must have been party to the fraud if
the section is to apply,—although the burden of proving good faith is on
the transferee. There is a difference between good faith and proper in-
quiry, as we have pointed out under sections 50-51. The mere fact that
the transferee has some reason to suspect’ that there may be cther creditors,
or even his knowledge® that the transferor is in financial embarrassment,
does not necessarily prove absence of good faith.

48.12. Fraudulent preference--The law of insolvency invalidates
fraudulent preferences* in certain circumstances, The principles applicable
for the operation of such provision are, however, different from those on.
which section 53 rests. The object of the prohibition in the Insolvency
law is to secure rateable distribution of the assets amongst the creditors
and to prevent discrimination infer se. ‘The object of section 53, on the
other hand, is to protect all creditors. The lis is between the body of
creditors on the one hand and the transferee on the other. In the case of
a fraudulent preference, the fis is between creditors inter se. That provi-
sion incidentally is applicable only to a transfer within two years before
insolvency. The provision in the Transfer of Property Act, on the ofher
hand, is applicable at all times.

48.13. Subsequent transferees—Position under sub-sectlon (1)—
Two further propositions are worth pointing out regarding sub-section (1)
of section 53— ,

(9) Where the first transferee is a bona fide transferee for considera~
tion, he gets a good title, and a subsequent transferee from
that transferee, even if not bona fide, is protected’.

(0) A bona fide transferee from a fraudulent transferee would atso
be protected®,

48.14. Sub-section (2)—Transfer in fraud of subsequent transferee—
This disposes of sub-section (1) of section 53. Under sub-section (2),
a transfer can be set aside, if in fraud of subsequent transferee, but only if
without consideration. Fraud must be proved. The last paragraph pto-
vides, in effect, that a transfer made without consideration shall not be
deemed to have been made with intent to defraud by reason only that a
subsequent transfer for consideration was made.

48.15. No change—The above discussion discloses no need to change
the section.

1 8.8. section 41,

2 Razina Khalun v. Abida Khalun, ALR. 1937 All. 39, 41.

3 Rajbari Bank v. Harshamukhi Sinha, AR. 1947 Cal. 154,

4 Section 54, Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920; Secti
Insolvency Act, 1909. ny + Section 56,

5 Brandlyn v. Ord., (1738) 26 E.R. 359.

6 (a) Firm Man Singh ४. B. N, Sinha, ALR. 1940 Lah. 198, 199;
(b) Kunhu Pothu v. Raru Nair, ALR. 1923 Mad. 556. 360; °
(c) Parthasarathy v. Subbaraya, ALR. 1924 Mad. 67.

Presidency Towns



CHAPTER 49
PART PERFORMANCE AS A DEFENCE
SECTION 53-A

49,1. Introductory—The conflict between strict law and equity
assumes a new form when the strict law is in the form of a statutory provi-
sion prescribing a particular formality for the transfer of property. Wher
a situation presents itself where that formality has not been undergone but
the intention to transfer bas been implemented in fact, and the transteree,
acting in performance of the contract, has taken possession and performed
his part, the conflict becomes apparent. Is it, then, equitable that the
transferor should be permitted to repudiate the transfer on the ground of
a mere technicality? In some form or other, such conflict between strict
Taw and equity arises daily. But the peculiarity this time is that there is ६
specific legislative mandate before the Court, and the Court has to decide
the delicate question whether it should disregard the statute and if so, to
what extent. In a situation not governed by statute, the solution would
not be too difficult, because the Court has the whole jurisprudence of estop-
pel for its guidance. A person is not allowed to assert his legal rights where
to do so would be to allow him to repudiate his own representation which
has led a third party to act on it, to his prejudice.

Estoppel having evolved its own set of rules and propositions familiar
to lawyers and founded on non-controversial moral postulates, Courts would,
in general, find no difficulty in solving a problem by resorting to that doc-
trine where there is no possibility of a conflict with a specific legislative
provision.

49.2. Statutory provision—Whete, however, there is a statutory provi-
sion, the matter creates problems. Difficulty arises because the resort to
estoppel is ordinarily not regarded as permissible where 2 statutory provi=
sion has to be complied with. How far can estoppel override a statute is
the fundamental question to be considered. In answering this question, the
Court must necessarily embark upon an investigation of the object of the
particular statutory provision in question. This is the general pattern of
the judicial process. In the context of statutory provisions requiring (i)
registration of the instrument of transfer, or (1) execution of an instrament
of transfer (as distinguished from the contract). the specific question to be
considered is—What is the object of such requirements ?

49.3. French—English Courts, when faced with the problei, assumed
that such requirements are primarily intended to prevent fraitd, They
started giving relief where strict enforcement of those provisions would it-
self effectuate a fraud. The Enelish doctrine of part performance was
evolved to counter the strict provisions of the Statute of Frauds. 11 may be

+ that statutory language to some extent left scope for such benevolent con-
struction. But that is not an essential aspect. As Lord Cranworth L.C
observed’—

“Though Courts of Equity have held thémselves bound by this
_ last énactment (the Statute of Frauds), they have yet in many casés,

1 Caton v, Caton, (1883) 8 App. Cas. 467, 475, 476. ~
313



314

felt themselves at Hberty to disregard it where to insist on it would be
to make it the means of effecting........ fraud.”

49.4. Equity—It would be observed later that the other party is pre-
vented from sctting up the legal invalidity of the contract on the faith ot
which he intended or allowed the person contracting with him to act. This
was a victory of equity over statute. At times, it was described as the
result of a process of construction of statutes so as to limit its scope to avoid
fraud. Bui, in subsisnce, it amounted to clipping the wings of the statutory
provisions prescribing technicalities. Such a victory is not achieved easily,
since parallel sources of law are in competition. The history of the
recognition of this doctrine—which we shall deal with later—shows
how tiresome the process could be. In fact, in India, the long-
drawn process culminated in a specific stautory provision in 1929 im
the shape of section 53A, so that the movement has now turned a full
circle. What began with a construction of statutory provisions has itself
ended in another specific statutory provision.

49.5. Estoppel—Estoppet is the chief moral justification for the doc-
trine of part-performance. The Court 6f Equity felt themselves at liberty
to receive parol evidence as to the terms of the contract and to grant relief
to the parties on the basis of such contract, such as, by decreeing specific

erformance of the contract’ or by granting an injunction preventing a party
rom acting in breach of the contract, because there was, in substance, ac-
tion in reliance on a promise, In Caton v. Caton, Lord Cranworth, LC,
emphasised the aspect of preventive fraud. He observed :

“This is the ground on which they decree specific performance
of parol contracts for the sale or purchase of land, when the contract
has been in part performed. The right to relief in such cases rests,
not merely on the contract, but on “what has been done in pursuance
of the contract. .... The ground on which the Court holds that
part performance takes a contract out of the purview of the Statute
of Frauds, is, that when one of the two contracting parties has been
induced or allowed by the other® to alter his position on the faith of
the contract; as, for instance, by taking possession of land, expanding
money in building, or by other like acts; there, it would be fraud in
the other party to set up the legal invalidity of the contract, on the
faith of which he induced or allowed the person contracting with him
to act,

49.6, Section 534—To come to the section proper, section 53A
Teads—

“353A. Where any person contracts to transfer for consideration
any immovable property by writing signed by him or on his behalf
from which the terms necessary to constitute the transfer can be as-
certained with reasonable certainty,

1 Lawson v, Laude, (1761) 21 E.R. 303; 1 Dick 346;
Gunter v. Halsey, (1739) 27 E.R. 381; Amb. 586.
Lockey v. Lockey, (1719) 24 ER. 232; Pre Oh. 518.

2 Caton v. Caton, (1866) 35 LJ. Ch. 292, 395.

3 Emphasis supplied.


ais

and the transferee has, in part performance of the contract,
taken possession of the property or any part thereof, or the transferee,
being already in possession, continues in possession in paft perform-
ance of the contract and has done some act in furtherance of the con-
tract,

and the transferee has performed or is willing to perform his pact
of the contract,

then, notwithstanding that the contract, though required to be
registered, has not been registered or, where there is an instrument of
transfer, that the transfer has not been completed in the manner pres-
cribed therefor by the law for the time being in force, the transferor
or any person claiming under him shall be debarred from enforcing
against the transferee and persons claiming under him any right in
respect of the property of which the transferee has taken or continued
in possession. other than a right expressly provided by the terms of
the contract : पु

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the rights of a
transferee for consideration who has no notice of the contract or of
the part performance thereof.”

49.7, History in India—The history of the doztrinc of part perform-
ance in India is a history of fluctuation of views in the courts. Incidén=
tally, it shows that where the law on a particular subject is codified incom-
pletely, controversies are likely to arise on those topics which are left out
of codification. It would be tedious to discuss here all the judicial deci-
sions on the subject preceding the introduction of section 53A. It will
suffice to refer to a few important judgments, representing the following
stages—

(a) Before the passing of the Act, the doctrine of part performance
was, speaking broadly, regarded as applicable in India, as would appear
from cases decided before the Act* or cases decided after the Act relating
to pre-Act transactions.’

(b) After the passing of the Act but before the insertion of section
53A in 1929, the position remained fluid, The applicability of the doc-
trine was recognised in a judgment of the Privy Council? of 1901, though
on the facts, no valid contract was held to be established.

(०) There arose a conflict of views amongst the High Courts on the
subject; the main reason for the conflict being the difference of approach
on the basic question whether the express provisions of a statute can be
overridden by equitable considerations. The doctrine was applied in
Mahomed Musa v. Aghora Kumar Ganguli* by the Privy Council to a
compromise by which certain mortgage debts were to be extinguished and
certain property divided in specific shares. No conveyance was executed,
but Possession of their respective shares was taken by the parties who en-
joyed them in accordance therewith. The observations of the Privy Coun-
cil were, however, ambiguous, The same doctrine was applied’ in 1916,

1 (1861) 9 MILA, 43, 65.
2 (1901) LLR. 28 Cal, 693, 705 (P.C.),

3 Immudipatran Thiruganga v. Periya Doraisami, “LR. fa
385 Pe gange "riya mi, (1901) LL.R. 24 Mad. 377,

4 Mahomed Musa v. Aghore Kumar Ganguli, ALR. 1914 P.C, 27, 30.
5 Venkayyamma v. Appa Rao, ALR, 1916 PC. 9, 13,



316

(9) Conflict of decisions arose as to the exact scope of the doctrine
in some of its aspects, namely, whether it was confined to usa as a ground
‘of defence, effect on limitation and so on.

(e) More serious doubt was thrown by a decision of the Privy Council
on an appeal from Ceylon’. The relevant Ceylon Ordinance required
that a contract for the transfer of immovable propesty should be made in
writing and attested by a notary. In the absence of compliance with those

formalities, the contract was “of no force or avail in law”. On this statu-

tory provision, the Privy Council held that the doctrine of part performance
could not be invoked.

(£) In 1929, section 53A was introduced in the Indian Act, placing
the law on a Statutory footing. We need not refer to the controversy that
arose as to its retrospective operation. But questions that have arisen with
reference to some of the ingredients of the section will be discussed in due
course-

49.8. Ingredients—It will be useful to draw attention to the important
ingredients of the section. We are deliberately stating them below in
Janguage which does not purport to adhere necessarily to the actual word-
ing of the section—

(1) There should be a contract for the transfer of immovable
property. .

(2) The contract should be in writing signed by the party sought
to be charged therewith and from it the terms should be as-
certainable with reasonable certainty.

(3) The transferee should, in part performance of the contract,

(a) take possession, or
(b) continue in possession and do some act in furtherance ot
the contract.

(4) The transferee should perform, or be willing to perform, his
part of the bargain as contained in the writing.

(5) The application of the doctrine should not affect the right of
a transferee for consideration without notice of the contract or
of the part performance thereof.

. Subject to these conditions and reservations, the effect of the section
is that notwithstanding that the transaction has not been completed accord-
ing to law, all rights and liabilities under the contract should arise and be
enforceable as between the parties to the contract and persons claiming
under them.

49.9. Title—The transferee, however, does not get a good title unless
the transfer is completed according to law. Non-registration means that
the title has not passed. Part performance means that certain. equities have
arisen, which the courts recognise. Such recognition of the equities, how-
ever, does. not convert the contract into a conveyance. In order that the
law of registration is not evaded, the section takes care to ensure that the
bien Goes not ge a perfect title which he could have obtained by a

nsfer, is it ensures i
degistered transfer. कक by protecting subsequent bona fide

1 John H. Arseculeratue v. Pereira, ALR. 1928 P.C. 273, 275.


317

49.10. English law—There are certain important differences between
the English law and section 53A, which may be usefully noted at this
stage—

(8) In England, the contract could be oral’, in India, it must be
in writing.

(b) In England, the doctrine can be used as a shield and also as
a sword, inasmuch as both the parties can claim that the con-
tract be carried into execution and each can resort to a suit
claiming rights in violation of the contract? In India, the
section can be said to be ambiguous as some judicial deci-
sions’ seem to have taken a wider view in this regard. The
section, as it now stands, is non-commital as to any positive
rights arising in favour, of the transferee.

(c) In England, the doctrine is uncodified in its content, though
referred to in statute.‘ In India, it is codified.

49.11, Position in England—{a England, the Statute of 1677 was
intended to prevent fraud and perjury which is possible where a contract for
transfer of the land could be alleged by the mere oral testimony. But this
Statute opened a new and different avcnue of fraud, namely, a person who
had made a genuine contract might repudiate it on the ground that there was
no proper memorandum as required by statute. _In certain cases, the part
performance was applied to check such fraud. This doctrine is not to be
viewed in isolation, but only as one instance of the relief granted by equity
against fraud. “In cases of fraud, equity should relieve even against the
words of a statute.” So observed Lord Parker, Lord Chancellor in 17205.

49.12. Evolution~The doctrine first appeared in England in 1686, and
was established by a decision of the House of Lords in 1701%. Its found
mental postulate is that a party performing a part of the contract on his
side, in reliance cn the promise which is made by the defendant, has a right
to require the defendant to keep his promise’. The use of the expression
“plaintiff or defendant” in some of thc English cases incidentally shows that
in England this doctrine is available to the plaintiff also. We shall revert
to this aspect later.

It may be noted that section 40(2) of the Law of Property Act, 1925
has given statutory recognition to the doctrine.  Sub-section (1) of that
section requires writing, by providing that no action may be brought upon
any contract for the sale or other denosition of land or any interest in Jand
unless the agreement upon which such action is brought or some memoran-
dum or note thereof is in writing and signed by the parties or by some other
person lawfully authorised. Sub-section (2) provides that the section shall
not affect the law relating to part performance. In England, the effect of

1 Caton v. Caton, (1866) 35 L¥. Ch. 292, 295.

2 AIR. 1938 Cal. 97, 103.

3 See infra.

4 Section 40, Law of Property Act, 1925.

5 Countess Mountacuta v. Crossweil, (1720) 1 Williams 618, 620.
6 Lester है. Foxcroft, (1701) Colles P.C. 108.

7 Mundy v. Joliffe, (1839) 5 My & Cr. 167, 177.


318

the doctrine of part performance is to remove the barrier set up by statute
and to open the door to parol evidence of the whole agreement for the grafit
of equitable relief.

But a long line of decisions has laid down certain ingredients and the
following important conditions must be satisfied! :--

(1) Clear evidence of the contract is required.

(2) The plaintiff should establish a case for specific performance of
the contract.

(3) The act of part performance must have been done by the plain~
tiff or on his behalf.

(4) Such act of part performanc: must be unequivocally referable
to some such agreement as is alleged.

49.13. Possession—Taking possessicn on the land with the vendor’s
consent is an “act of part performance par excellence"”. Continuing in
possession, where such act is referable to the contract, is also good part
perforamnce. But there may be other instances, for example, the making
of expenses on alterations in the property, when carried out by someone
who has no right of possession to the alleged property*.

49.14. Basis—It is to be noted that the basis of the doctrine of part
formance is, in general, specific Performance, Of course, like all reme-
acquires an equity against the defendant*.

he remedy of the person who' has satisfied the condition of part-per-
formance is. in general, specific performance. Of course, like reme-
dies of equity, this is discretionary, so that, if in a particular circumstance,
the Court does not grant it, then he is without remed: y. The plaintilf must
adduce proof for his act of part performance. ‘The plaintiff is also allowed
by equity 10 give parol evidence of an agreement that would otherwise require
a wsitten evidence. If he satisfies the Court in these two aspects— proof of
part petformance and evidence of agreement though not in writing—he is
entitled to a decree ordering the other party to execute a formal transfor
to include the terms which have been agreed upon’.

49.15, Contracts to transfer and instrument of transfer-—-A document
of transter which is not registered or not completed in the manner prescribed
‘by law, may operate as a contract to transfer. Consequently, the section
applies not only to contracts to transfer as such, but also to instruments of
transfer. This is made clear by the words “or where there is an instrument
of transfer” in the first paragraph of the section.

49.16, Invalidity on other grounds—-The section has no application
where the contract to transfer or the instrument of transfer is invalid on
any ground other than that it was not completed in the manner prescribed
by the law for the time being in force. Where the fiaw in the transferee’s
position is not a defect of form or the absence of some formality, normally

1 Megarry and Wade, Real Property (1966). pages 571—573,
2 Williams, Statute of Frauds, page 256.

3 Biouten v. Snook (1928) Ch. 505.

4 Cheshire, Real Property (1972), page 382,

5 Cheshire, Real Property (1972), page 380.


319

necessary, but is one which, apart from form, renders the transaction uner-
forceable-—e.g. minority,—the equitable doctrine of part performance is not
applicabic.

49,16A. Rights provided by the Act—Yhe words “other than a right
expressly provided by the terms of the contract” show that the transferor:
is not debarred from enforcing rights expressly provided by the terms of
the contract! Thus, the transferor can, where the transfer is by way of a
lease, sue for damages for breach of an agreement as provided by the terms
of the lease,’ or sue for the rent due,’ or enforce the terms of the lease लाती:
ing him to re-enter if there is default in payment of rent.4 A contrary view
has been held in some cases.5 In those cases the transferor was held debar-
ted from suing to enforce merely rights given by the contract of transfer.
The expression “other than a right expressly provided by ihe terms of
the contract” has not been adverted to in those said decisions. It is sub-
Taitted that this view is not correct.

49.17, Third person—The section has no operation against third per-
sons. In S. N. Banerji v, Kuchwar Lime & Stone Co. Lid.* A leased. pro-
perty to B with the condition that if B transferred his interest, the lease would

. be forfeited. B transferred his interest to C, but without 3 registered instru-
ment and gave him possession of the properties. Thereupon, 9 purported
to forfeit the lease to B and granted a fresh lease to D who sued C for eject-
ment. It was held that the transfer by B to C was invalid for want of
registered instrument, that the lease to B therefore subsisted, that D could
not invoke the aid of section 53A and claim that by reason of that section
B’s transfer to C was valid and that he was entitled to claim possession from.
C, The Privy Council observed as follows :

“The section does not operate to create a form of transfer of pro-
perty which is exempt from registration. It creates no real right. It
merely creates rights of estoppel between the proposed transferee and
transferor, which have no operation against third persons not claiming
under those persons.”

49.18. Judgment creditor—It has been held? in Madias that a judg-
ment—creditor, who has attached the property of his judgment—debtor in
execution cf his decree, is a person “claiming under” the judgment-~debtor,
within the meaning of this section. A contrary view has been taken by the
High Court of Orissa.*

"Phe Bombay High Court® has held that an auction purchaser is not a
person claiming under the judgment debtor.

We think that it is just and fair that effect should be given to the Mad-
ras view, and we recommend accordingly.

i Lal Behari v. Kanak Kanti, ALR. 1962 Cal. 502, 503.
2 ALR. 1950 Cot. 23, 28.
3 ALR, 1942 Qudh 231, 236.
4 ALR, 1953 Cal. 349, 352.
5 (a) Ramarao v. Purnand, ALR. 1954 Mad. 702, 704.
(0) fn the matier of Jambad Coal Syndicate Lid. ALR. 1940 Bom, 281, 282.
6 S. N. Banerji v. Kuchwar Lime & Stone Co. Lid, ALR, 1941 P.C. 128, 130,
7 Audinarayuda ¥. Mangamma, ALR. 1943 Mad. 706, 707.
8 Padmalabha v. Appalanarasamma, ALR. 19$2 Orista 143, 149.
9 Maruti v, Krishna, ALR. 1967 Bom, 34, 38, 39 (Naik J.) (reviews cases).



320

49.184. Onus—The onus under the proviso is on the person claiming
part performance to show that the transferee had notice of the contractor
of the part performance thereof. The Court would expect that those who
allege thai the subsequent transferee had notice of the prior contract or
of possession thereunder, would make it out, not by evidence of any casual
conversation but by proof that the mind of the subsequent transferee had im
some way been brought to an intelligent apprehension of the nature of the
transaction in respect of the property so that a reasonable man, or an ordi-
nary man of business, would act upon the information and would regulate his
conduct by it. Explanation 11 to section 3 provides that possession of a
person is nvtice of the title of the person in adverse possession, The High
Court of Patna has held that althouzh section 53A does not confer full title
to the property. it is nevertheless an interest sufficient to attract the provisions
of Explanation II to section 3. The subsequent transferee will therefore be
deemed to have notice of the title of the prior transferee and consequently it
will be the duty of the subsequent transferee to make diligent enquiries re-
garding the nature of the equitable interest of the prior transferee in posses-
sion'. On this view with respect it is somewhat difficult to see what cases
are contemplated by the proviso. For the applicability of the proviso it
must be assumed that the title referred to in the said Explanation does not
include the right of the transferee under a contract which has been partly
perforined.

49.19. Title whether passes——At this stage it may be convenient to dis-
cuss the qucstion whether title passes under contract. In ordinary legal
and juristic discussion, the word “title” is understood as meaning the source
of a legal right, but the matter is not so simple in the con‘ex! of <ection
53A, because section 54 (So far as sale of tangible immovable property of
the value of rupees one hundred aad upwards is concerned), provides ex-
pressly that the transfer can be made only by a registered instrument. Tf
any other mode of transfer is not recognised, can it transfer an interest in
the proper. ? And if not, can it pass title ?_ In general, if an unregister-
ed deed of sale is executed where registration is required, there is no trans-
fer and the property does not pass.

49.20. The true position is that a contract does not pass any right in
rem. A contract for the sale of such property is merely a document which
creates a right to obtain another document... That, indeed, is the basis why
it is not regarded for the purposes of the Registration Act, as creating dec-
laring, assigning etc. any right in immovable property. The Patna judg-
ment® under section 53A read with section 3, after noting the arguinent of
counsel that title refers to a completed title and not a mere equitable in-
terest rejected the argument on two grounds :—

(i) Counsel could not cite any authority in support of his conten-
tion;

ii) in an English case,4 it has been held that possession of a fenant
is a notice to a purchaser of the actual interest which he may

have either as tenant or, farther by an agreement to purchase
the premises.

1 Rama Krishna v. Mahadevi, ALR. 1965 Pat. 467, 469.

-1 Mulla (1973), page 306.

2 Ram Krishna v. Mahadevi, ALR. 1965 Pat, 467 (Narasimhan, C.J. and G. N.
Prasad, J.).

3 Daniel v. Davison, (1808) 33 English Reports 978.



321

With great respect, to Court, this judgment misses one important as-
pect, namely that an agreement for the sale of land does not, in India, create
any interest in Iand; this is expressly provided by section 54 as already point-
ed out.

49.21. Salmond’s analysis—Salmond' says that every right involves a
tite or source from which it is derived, title being the de facto antecedent
of which the right is the de jure consequent, He adds that the titles are
of two kinds : original and derivative. Original title is something which
creates a right de-novo—the catching of fish is an original title of the right
of fishing. A derivative title transfers an already existing right toa new
owner—the purchase of fish is an illustration of a derivative title.

49.22. Position in England—tn England, a contract for the sale of
immovable property makes the promise the owner in equity of the estate.?-*
But, in India, this is not the possition. Section 54 makes it very clear
that the contract does not create any interest in the property. Even in the
case of a decree for specific performance, it has been held? that the _ title
passes with the execution and registration of a sale deed, and does not
immediately flow from the decree.

49.23. Perpetuities—Again, it is for this reason that the rule against
perpetuities docs not affect a contract for the sale of property. Even for
‘the purposes of section 24 of the Bombay Agriculturist Debtor's Relief Act,
an agreement to sell does not create any “interest”, in the land.5

49.24. Interest and titlk—Under section 55(2), there is an implied
convenant that the interest which the seller professes to transfer subsists, and
that he has power to transfer the same. ‘This shows the connection between.
the concept of title and the concept of interest.

49.25. Title deeds—Again, section $8(f), which empowers the crea~
tion of a mortgage by deposit of “title deeds”, obviously does not mean that
@ person can create a mortgage of this nature by merely depositing a con-
tract for sale in his favour.

In general, in the Law of Real Property," a document of title is a
document which describes a land sufficiently | ly to identify it, which shows a
disposition of the whole legal interest and which contains nothing to throw
any doubt on the title.

In India, a contract for sale of land, would hardly satisfy the last two
conditions.

According 10 Cheshire? the usual way in which the vendor proves his
title is to produce the deed or other document by which the land has been
disposed of, in order to show that the interest which he has agreed to sell
devolved upon him. In England, if the contract for sale is capable of
specific performance, an immediate equitable interest in the land passes to

1 Salmond, “Surisprudence (1966), page 431.

2 ALR. 1916 PC, 193.

3 ALR. 1967 S.C. 744, 748.

4 Mrs, Christine y. Ugappa, A.LR. 1966 Mys. 299, 303.

5 Gurappa v. Basawanappa, A.LR. 1957 Bom. 31, 32 (Shah, 3.).
6 Megarry and Wade, Real Property (1966), page 586.

7 Cheshire, Real Property (1972), page 73.


322

the purchaser and the legal estate remains in the vendor until the conveyance
hag been executed. Specific performance of a contract for the sale of
laad is ordmarily available to a purchaser.’ But, until specific performance
is. granted and a conveyance executed (thereunder, title does not pass. Evea
in England, the position regarding completion of the contract is? that after
the purchaser has investigated the abstract of title, it is his duty either to
accept or to reject the title offered to him. Again, completion means that
the purchaser should prepare deed for conveyance which is to vest the
interest in the purchaser, and which contains the usual convenaats by the
vendor.

49.26. As to the judicial decisions on section 3, definition of ‘notice’,
Exp fanation J, the whole question depends on the meaning of the word
‘tile’, Reference has been already made to the Patna casc. In an Orissa
case, it was held that assuming that mere occupation of property as a tenant
would be notice of an agreement not connected with its occupation, the
doctrine cannot be extended to cases where the tenant has also a contract
to purchase in his favour,

It is to be noted that a contract for the sale of immovable property does
not. (in the scheme of the Act) confer any interest in the property, This
is expressly enacted in section 54 of the Act. In the circumstances, it is
difficult to see how the word “‘title” could apply to the equities recognised
by section 53.4,

49.27. Position summed up as to passing of title under cuntract—The
above discussion as to the passing of title under contract may be thus sum-
med up—

(i) No interest in the property passes under a contract. Section 54
is a specific on this point.

(ii) Since no interest passes, no ‘derivative’ title is created to borrow
the phrascology used by Salmond. And the present is un-
doutedly not a case of original title,

(iii) That no interest passes, is a position further substantiated by
the fact that the rule against perpetuity does not apply to a
contract for sale,

(iv) English cases on equitable interest are inapplicable.

(v) A contract of sale cannot be appropriately described as a title
deed.

(vi) Estoppel creates a bar and confers no title.

(vii) Where the law prescribes a mode of transfer, derivative _ title
can be created only if that mode 15 followed.

(viti) This position remains unaffected by section 53A. It confers.
no title, though it creates certain bars between the parties and
their successors in interest.

(ix) Such rights as are created, rest on estoppel.  Eestoppel passes
no titlek—See proposition (vi} above.

1 Cheshire, Real Property (1972), page 75.
2 Cheshire, Real Property (1972), page 740,
3 ALR. 1962 Orissa 86. 89.



323

(x) That section 53A is available also against transferees with
notice of part performance does not mean that the right amounts
10 title within section 3, definition of notice, Explanation 2,
That Explanation invests possession with uotice of “title”,

If, on general principles as discussed above, no title is created, availa-
bility against transferees cannot modify the position.

49.28. In view of the above position we do not recommend any change
in the law.

49.29. Gifts—We shall now consider the question whether gifts fall
within the doctrine of part-performance. At a time when the law on the
subject was not codified, it was held that the doctrine was applicable even
to gifts. This was the Nagpur view.!

In a Rangoon case,? it was assumed that where a donee of property is
in bona fide possession of it, the donor cannot evict the donee even thou;
the gift had not been made by a registered instrument, but it was also a
that the protection is not available to 4 subsequent donee from the donge
whose deed of gift is not registered. In some cases before the amendment,
however, it was held that the doctrine did not apply to gifts.

So far as the present section is concerned, the case is clearly outside
the section, because the section contemplates the existence of a ‘contract for
e transfer of property. ‘That part of the section which speaks of “an in-

strument of transfer” refers to an insteumeat executed in pursuance of the
contract. In fact, the opening words “contract; to transfer for consideratton”
put the matter beyond doubt.

49.30. Need for amendment of the law—The question now to he consi-
dered is whether this position requires to be altered as a matter of justice.
Although it cam be argued that there are no equities in favour of the donee,
one must not overlook the fact that where the donee has taken ssession,
the posicion is different. On this basis, there is sufficient justi cation for
extending the law to gifts with suitable amendments in the section’ We
shall recommend the imsertion of a suitable provision on the subject in the
chapter on gifts.5

49.31. Defendant—We may now consider the nature of the tight. The
tight conferred by this section is a right on the part of the transferee to take
a plea that the transferor is debarred from en-forcing any right in respeet
of the property transferred.* Whether this means that the right is available

क ALR. 1927 Rangoon 128 U. Sayainda v, Mngala
2 ALR. 1927 Rangoon 128 U. Sayainda v. Mngala.
3 Maung Hla Maung v. Manny PO Hai.

a. ALR. 1929 Rangoon 316, 317;

8. ALR. 1928 All, 699, 703.

4 This recommendation is subject to reservation by Shri Dhawan aad Shri Sen-
Verma.

5 Chapter on gifts infra.
6 ALR, 1954, Mad. 702, 703.


324

only to a person who appears on the record as defendant is a difficult ques-
tion."

49.32 Section 53.4 us a basis of suit—Although it is often taken for
granted that section 53A cannot he used as a basis of a suit by the plaintiff,
the pesition requires to be considersd at some length. | Whether the trans-
feree who claims part performance is a plaintiff or a defendant should be
immaterial so long as he does not claim that he has a title to the property and
so Jong as his enly object is to prevent the transferor irom “enforcing”
against him any rights other than these flowing from the contrast. The
law on the subject, however, is not in a very satisfactory condition. This
will be apparent from a few judicial decisions on the High Courts to which
we refer below, before coming to a decision of the Supreme Court which
professes to leave the matter opea.

49.33. High Court cases—First. we take the cases holding that the
person claiming un the basis of part performance can, in appropirate cases
be in the position of a plaintiff. This view is represented by a decision
of the Allahabad High Cout,? 2 Bombay case, by a judgment of the Oudh
Chief Court*, and a judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court®. The
judgment in the Andhra Pradesh’s case was delivercd by Subba Rao, C.J},
and the pertinent observations are as follows :

“Whether the transferee occupies the position of a@ plaintiff or a
defendant," he can resist the transferor’s claim against the property.
Conversely, whether the transferor is the plaintiff or the defendant, he
cannot enforce his rights in respect of the property against the tran-
sferee. The utility of the section or the rights conferred thereunder
shouid not be made to depend on the manoeuvring for positions in a
court of law. otherwise a powerful transferor can always defeat the
salutary provisions of the section by dispossessing the transferee by
force and compelling him to go to a court as plaintiff. Dubtless, the
right conveyed under the section can be relied upon only as a shield
and not as a sword but the protection is available to the transferee both
as a plaintiff and as a defendant so long as he uses it as a shield”.

49.34. Suppose a transferee under a contract of transfer takes posses-
sion of the property in part performance of the contract. The property
is sought to be taken in execution of a decree for ejectment previously ob-
tained by the transferor against a third person. The transferee raises ob-
jections in the execution proceedings, but does not succeed, and is deprived
of possession. Then, he sues under Order 21, Rule 103, Civil Procedure
Code, for getting sid of the order in execution proceedings and for recover-
ing back possession of the property. Is he entitled to succeed, relying on
the provisions of this section 2 Tt was held by the Chief Court of Oudh

1 (a) See ATR. 1959 . 568, 570.
(७) ALR. 1959 Mad, 354. 355.
(c) ALR. 1956 Puni. 181. 185.
(4) ALR. 1950 Cal. 23, 27.

(९) ALR. 1966 Mys. 86. 89 and
(£) Cases in para 49.33 to 49.40 infra.
2 Ram Chander v, Meharaja Kunwar, AIR, 1939 All, 611.

3 See infra.
4 Ewaz Ali v, Firdouz Jehan, ALR. 1944 Oudh, 212, 319.

5 Achayya v. Venkatasubbarao, ALR, 1957 AP. 854.
6 Emphasis applied.


325

in the undermentioned case! that the transferee can rely on this section in:
such a case, because he is only defending his possession, The: decision
proceeds on the ground that the words of the section do not warrant a
conclusion that the plaintiff as such is necessarily debarred from the benefit
of the rule. It was observed :

“Where by the nature of the case, as disclosed by the pleadings
or otherwise, it is apparent that the transferee comes to court to defend
his possession against the invasion of it by the transferer he is entitled
to invoke the equitable doctrine therein embodied. The present suit
under 0. 21, R. 103, Civil Procedure Code, is of that nature, being,
का oue opinion, practically a continuation of the proceedings before the
execution court, wherein the transferor and his representative succeeded
in ejecting Mt. Firdaus Jahan from possession which she had originally
taken in pursuance of the contract of purchase”,

49.335. Acts of aggression—The trend of remarks in’ the judgment of
the Oudh Chief Court referred to above seems to imply that a transferee may
come to Court to defend his possession against acts of aggression on the
part of the transferor or his representative, whatever form such aggression
may take. “In Ram Chandra y. Mahraj Kunwar,? the transferor’s acts of
aggression were not in the form of any legal proceedings. The transferor
was trying to disturb the transferee’: possession otherwise than in due course
of law, and the transferee brought a suit for an injunction restraining him
from interfering with his possession. It was held that the suit was but a
form of detence by the transferee to the invasion of his rights by the
transferor, and as such, was competent under this section.

49.36. The Oudh and Allahabad view has been followed in the fol-
lowing cases,* but has been dissented from in the undecmentioned
decisions.*

49.37. Mulla’s view—Mulla, in his commentary on the Act, has com-
mented that the true position was explained by Subba Kao, CJ, in the
observations which we have also quoted above.

49.38, Bombay case—In the Bombay case, the questions considered
were whether (i) section 534 can be used by the plaintiff, and (ii) whether
the transferee in possession of property in part performance of the contract
for the sale of property can maintain a suit under Order 21, Rule 103 of
the Civil Procedure Code against the auction purchaser of the same property.
The first question was answered in the affirmative. However, on the basis
that the auction purchaser was not “claiming under the transferor’, the
second question was answered in the negative. On the major question,
viz., whether section 53A can be used as a ground of attack in this parti-
cular case, the High Court took the view that in a suit under Order 21, Rule

1 1944 Qudh 212, 218, 219 (Affirming ALR. 1940 Ondh 1).
2 Ram Chander v. Maharaj Kunwar, ALR. 1939 All. 611, 613,
3 ALR. 1967 Bom. 34, 37; LLR. (1966) Bom, 291.

ELR, (1960) 2 All, 77. 90 (DB..).

ALR, 1957 AP, 859, 861.

ALR. 1956 Cal. 350, 351,

ALR. 1954 Mad. 702, 703.
4 ALR. 1964 Raj. 11. 13

ALR. 1952 Orissa 143, 145.
5 Mulla (1973), page 293
6 Maruti v. Krishna, ALR. 1967 Bom. 34, (Naik J.).



326

103, the plaintiff does not claim title but only a right to present possession.
“In essence, such a suit is defensive in character.” Therefore, it agreed eed
with the decisions in Oudh. Allahabad and Andhra Pradesh alrea ly re-
ferred to.

49.39. Madras view—In Madras also, the view has been taken that in
a suit under Order 21, Rule 63 or Ruie 103, Civil Procedure Code, the
plaintiff can rely on part performance since he is not using it as a weapon
of offence.’

49.40. Supreme Court judgment—We come now to the judgment of the
Supreme Court. In Delhi Motor Company’s case,* it was held that the
section is available only as a defence to a lessee, and not as conferring
a right on the basis of which the lessee can claim possession or other rights
on an unregistered lease. It observed that the section is available only as
2 {defence to a lessee. In the Supreme Court case, the facts were as
follows :

There was an unregistered sub-lease, purporting to have been executed
by the respondents in favour of the appellants. Possession of the premises
had been given to the appellants. A! Her this, they were forcibly disposses-
sed by the respondents.

The first appellant, the Delhi Motor Company, was a partnership firm,
of which the other four appellants were partners. The main respondent,
the New Garage Ltd., was a private Limited company of which one of the
respondents was the managing director and the others were members of
the board of directors. According to the appellants, an agreement to sub-
lease and an actual sub-lease in pursuance thereof was evidenced by three
unregistered Gocuments exhibited in the case. Appellant K. 5, Bhatnag
on behalf of the Delhi Motors entered in correspondence for lease with U-A.
Basrurkar, the Managing Director of the New Garage Ltd. They arrived
at an agreement on February 22, 1950. The Managing Director had at
that time no power to enter into such an agreement on behalf of the com-
pany, and so on March 22, 1950 a resolution was passed by the board of
directors authorising the managing director to enter into the transaction.
Thereafter, the first appellant came into possession of two portions only,
out of the three actually sub-leased and commenced its business there with
effect from April 1, 1950. | Further, it was alleged that when Messrs
Kanwar Brothers Ltd., vacated the other portion of the premises which was
also included in the sub-lease, the respondents did not give possession of
it to the appellants. On the contrary, they began to obstruct the appellants
in their use of the two portions actually delivered to them and finally a stage
came when they were completely dispossessed from them. The principal
prayer in the suit was for delivery of possession in respect of all the three
portions included in the sub-lease. The suit was decided in favour of
the plaintiffs.

In appeal, the High Court of Punjab held that the three documents
constituted either an agreement to sub-lease or a sub-lease falling within
the provisions of section 2(7) of the Indian Registration Act, and since

“TE. P. Uma, v. K. Kelandan, ATR. 1934 Mad, 702, 703 (Ramaswami, 1).
2 Dethi Motor Company v. Basrurkar (Skah, Ramaswami and Bhargava, 31.)
‘Gudgment by Bhargava, J.).


327

the documents were unregistered, the plaintiffs were not entitled to a decree.
The firny came in appeal to the Supreme Court by special leave.

The Supreme Court held that the suit was one for decree for possession.
on the basis of the unregistered leasz, and such a suit did not fall within sec-
ticn 534,

49.41. Reasons given by to Supreme Court—in the Supreme Court,
the judgment of the Allahabad High Court! was referred to, but the Supreme
Court did not express any opinion as to the correctness of the view taken
by the High Court, since in the case before the Supreme Court, the firm
was seeking to “enforce rights” under the unregistered case and to seek a
decree for possession against the lessor. Unfortunately, the attention of
the Supreme Court was not drawn to the Andhra and other cases, One
may also be permitted to observe, with great respect, the Allahabad judg-
ment is clearly based on the proposition that although, in form, the person
before the Court was the plaintiff, in fact, he was merely secking to debar
the defendants from asserting certain rights, namely, he was seeking to debar
them from interfering with the possession into’ | which the plaintiff had
entered with the consent of his transferor after the execution of a transfer
in his favour.

49.42, Need for clarification-—In the circumstances, the question re-
mains to be considered whether a clarification on the subject under discus-
sion would not be desirable. There hardly appears to be any reason why
the beaeficiat object of preventing fraud—whick was the main considera-
tion which gave rise to the doctrine of part-performanco—should be Jaid
aside and the matter left to be determined by consideration of the
accidents of Litigation. So long as the person claiming part-performance
does not claim title against third parties but merely seeks to compel the trans-
feror (or his successors in interest) to adhere to the contract, the equities
should be in his favour,

49.43. Question whether possession should exist on the date Of suit.
So far as the factual situation that was in issue before the Supreme Court is
concerned, the essential question of Jaw that arises is whether the section
requires, or ought to require, that the transferee who obtains Possession in
part-performance must also be in possession at the time when he seeks re-
lief, While the section speaks of 8 transferee who has obtained possession
or has continued in possession, it does not make any commitment as to
whether it should also be proved that the transferee was in possession at the
time of the suit. One would have thought that once the transferee has
obtained possession, his subsequent dispnssession should not come in the way
of claiming cquities on the basis of part-performance, because he has done
all that he could under the contract, and has acted on the representation
made by the transferor. After all, there is no magic as such in the require-
ment that the transferee must have obtained possession, ‘This requirement
has been inserted only to show unequivocally that part-performance of the
contract, so far as the transferee’s side is concerned, has taken Place.
Change in the possession is an act of part-performance both of the person
who gives and of the person who takes possession. In Morphett v. Jones,?
Sir Thomas Plumber said—

1 ALR. 1939 AN, 611.
2 Morphett v. Jones (1818) 1 Swans. 172, 182,
22—885MofLaw/77



328

. “The acknowledged possession of a stranger in the land of another
is rot explicable except on the supposition of an agreement and has,
therefore, constantly been received as evidence of an antecedent con~
tract, and as sufficient to authorise an inquiry into the terms; the court
regarding what has been done as a consequence of contract or tenure.”

Where the transferee has taken possession, this requirement is satis-
fied, and the fact that subsequently the transferor illegally dispossesses the
Iransferee ought not to make a difference to the application of the doctrine.
On a proper consideration of section 53A even as it now stands, it stands to
reason that a transferee, who otherwise satisfies the section, cannot be debar-
red from claiming that possession, at least from the transferor or the person
claiming under him, excluding of course, the case already stated by the
proviso namely, the right of a transferee for consideration who has not
notice of the contract or of the patt-performance. There are no practical
considerations which compel the insertion of a rigid requirement that the
transferee must be in possession at the time of seeking relief. And consi-
derations of justice seem to be in favour of the transferee, because On any
other view a transferor can, by his unilateral act, defraud the transferee of
2 valuable protection given to him by the law on weighty considerations of

justice.

49.44. Privy Council Case—There is a Privy Council case’ in which
there are dicta to the effect that section 53A is meant for defendant. The
observation in that judgment, however, must be read with the facts of
the case. It does not say that a person cannot claim part-performance
otherwise than as a defendant in any case.

49.48. Recommendation for change--Tt is, therefore, proper to incor-
portate the liberal view on the subject. Such a wide view would not defeat
the law of registration. The transferee claiming part-performance would
still not be able to defeat the rights of bona fide transferees.

Tt is. therefore. proper to incor
by adding an ixplanation some~

49.45, Reconmmendcatios: sv ch
view would be to amend section 5
what on the following lines :—
“Explanation.-For the purposes of this sectior
whether the transferee or a person claiming under fh
or a defendant.”

it is immaterial
n is a plaintif®

The words “the transferor or anw pers: claiming under him shall be
debarred from enforcing against the transferee and persons claiming under
him” may also be revised as follows (in the fourth para of the section) :-~

“The transferor or आए person claiming under him shall be debar-
red from enforcing or maintaining against the transferee and persons

claiming under him ......-..-..- .

It should also be provided that a person who obtains or continues in
possession, but is dispossessed otherwise than in due course of law, can

claim the benefit of the section.
Amendment should also be made regarding the judgment creditor.*
AIR. 19480 PC

1 Probodh Kumar Das v. Ganimeri Tea Compa
2 Para 49.18, supra.



CHAPTER 50
SALE OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY : THE CONCEPT

50.1, fntroductory—Having dealt with the generat principles applicable
to the transfer of property, the Act is now concerned with rules relating to
specific kinds of transfers of immovable property. An interest in immovable
property can be transferred by a variety of modes. Sale, mortgages, lease
and gift are more particularly dealt with in the Act, though the Chapter on
gifts is not confined to immovable property. The present Chapter is con-
cerned with sale.

50.2. Section 54 defines “Sale” as follows :—

“54, ‘Sale’ is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid
or promised or part-paid and part-promised.”

This definition, incidentally, does not, in terms, mention immovable
property. The rest of the section does. The section proceeds to fay down
the mode of transfer as follows :—

“Such transfer, in the case of tangibl: immovable property of the
value of one hundred rupees and upwards, or in the case of a reversion
or other intangible thing, can be mad only by a registered instrument.”

“In the case of tan; gible immovable property of a value less than
one hundred rupees, such transfer may be made either by a registered
instrument or by delivery of the property.

Delivery of tangible immovable property takes place when the
seller places the buyer, or such person as he directs. in possession of
the property.”

Lastly, the section deals with the contract for sale :

ule of immovable property is a contract that
shall take place on terms settled between the

“& contract for the

a sale of such property

parties.

It does not, of itself. create any interest in or charge on such
property.”

50.3. Statutory mode »f transfer-—It is a general principle that where
the law prescribes a mode of transfer, compliance with that mode is necessary
before property can pass so as to confer title against third persons. Where,
therefore, this section requires a registered instrument, title cannot pass by
mere admission or by mere agreement of pasties. There can. in other
words, be no such thing in law as a tide by estoppel, even though estoppel
may create many precious rights.

A transfer under a decree or order of Court is outside the operation of
section 54. The reason is. first. that such a transfer cannot be considered
to be a transfer by act of parties and is, therefore, not a “transfer of property”
at all: and secondly, section 2, clause (d), provides that nothing in this
Act shall be deemed to affect any transfer by operation of law or by, or in
. 1928 All. 67, 68.

YT Poras Ram vz. Mebsat, A



330

execution of, a decree or order of a Court of competent jurisdiction. Such
a transfer need not, therefore, be made by a registered instrument as is
required by this section. Thus, a sale in execution of a decree need not
fulfil the conditions of this section and need not be registered.' Similarly,
the assignment of a security bond by the Court in favour of a party is not
a sale within the Act. Nor is a transfer effected by a compromise decree, a
sale, though such a compromise transfers property from one party to another
fer “price”?,

50.4, Insolvency—There is a difference of opinion on the question
whether a sale by the Official Receiver in insolvency with the sanction of the
Court is a transfer by operation of law, or by or in execution of, a decree or
order of Court. According to a Full Bench decision of the Madras High
Court,’ it is not. The same view has been held by the High Courts of
Calcutta* and Allahabad.® A contrary view has been expressed by the Chief
Court of 0090 in a case decided by a single Judge, on the ground that it is
in the nature of a Court sale and that its validity really depended on the order
of the Insolvency Court vesting the property in the Official Receiver. But a
later Division Bench of the same Court? has dissented from this view and bas
followed the view taken by the High Courts of Calcutta and Madras, Where
no Receiver in insolvency is appointed and the Court, by virtue of the
powers conferred on it by section 58 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920,
sells the property, the sale can be made by a registered instrument.

It appears to us that the Madras view is the correct one, since the Official
Receiver, though functioning under statute, is really acting as a successor
in interest of the insolvent. We do not think that the state of the case law
necessitates any express amendment of the section.

50.5. Transfer of ownership—tin order to constitute a sale there must
be a transfer of ownership from one person to another. A “transfer of
ownership” by a person means a transfer by such person of his tights and
interests in the property in full and permanently. A transfer of a part only
of such interests or for a particular period reserving the rest for the transferor
himself is not a transfer of ownership. But it is not necessary that the
transferor Should be a full proprietor. He may be the owner of a partial
interest in the property such as that of a mortgage or an occupancy tenant.

Where there is no transfer of ownership, the transaction, though in form
a sale, cannot be considered to be a sale. Thus, a sham transaction, not
intended to pass any title, is not a sale. A bona fide settlement of a disputed
claim which is a mere recognition of each other’s antecedent title is not a
sale.

The question whether there has been a transfer of ownership in any
particular case will depend upon the intention of the parties. This again,
must be ascertained from the facts and circumstances of the particular case.

1. Prem Nath v, Sundaranath, ATR. 1960 Punj. 630, 632,
2. Bindraban v. Rajpal Singh, AIR. 1931 All. 389. 390 (FB.).
3. Sankara पे. Narasimhulu, ALR. 1927 Mad. 1, 3; LLR. 50 Mad. 135 (FB)
4. AER. 1919 Cal. 193; LLR. 46 Cal, 887 (0.8.).
(Per Full Bench; Krishnan. J., dissenting).
. ALR. 1942 All. 39, 41.
. Waziray v. Mathura Prasad, ALR. 1939 Ovdh 55, 56.
. ALR. 1942 Oudh 424, 425.

Naw


331

50.6, Price—It is an essential requisite of sale that the transfer of
ownership must be for a consideration which is known in legal language as
‘price’. Price is thus an essential ingredient in all sales, in the absence
whereof the transfer is not a sale.

What, then, is the meaning of the expression ‘price’? It has been held
by the Supreme Court! that this expression in section 54 must be construed
in the same sense in which it is used in section 4, read with section 2(10)
of the Sale of Goods Act. The substantial result of this position is that
price means money only. Payment may not be immediate—section 54 ex-
Pressly so provides. Payment need not even be in cash or current coin; it
could be in any mode which represents money, such as a cheque or bank
draft, But the transfer of ownership must bring, in return therefor, some-
thing which constitutes money or represents money according to legal con-
cepts.

Difficult questions arise where the transfer is in lieu of a debt due to
the purchaser from the seller. In general, such a transaction would be
regarded as a sale? and not as an exchange or as any kind of residuary trans-
action, provided the amount of the debt can be definitely ascertained.®

This would appear to be the general position. The question assumes
practical importance in the case of Muslim husbands who execute instruments
of transfer in consideration of dower. Either the transfer is made expressly
in substitution for the monetary dower, or the document might provide that
as a result of the transfer the claim to the dower debt is relinquished. It
would appear that in both cases the transaction should, in general, be regard-
ed as a sale.*

Although there are a few judicial decisions taking the view that, where
the husband is released from a dower debt, the transaction is not a sale,5-6
we do not, with respect. agree with such construction. A determination of
the matter depends on whether the consideration in such case is “price”
within the meaning of section 54 or whether it is a “thing” within the mean-
ing of section 118. We think that, in general, release of a debt should be
treated as a price and not as a “thing”.

50.7, Pavment of price—tIt follows from the definition of “sale” that
to constitute a sale the parties must intend to transfer the ownership of the
property and that they must also intend that the price should be paid, whether
in present or in future. Where there is no intention to pass the ownership,
the transaction is a colourable one.

This does not, of course, mean that the non-payment of the price will
necessarily prevent title from passing to the buyer. This depends on the
terms of the bargain. If the conveyance has been executed, the mere fact
that the price has not been paid will not prevent title from passing to the
buyer unless the conveyance so provides.

LLT.C. ५. M & G Stores, AIR. 1968 S.C. 200, 202.
2 ALR. 1951 All. 86. 89, 90.
3 ALR. 1935 P.C. 73, 78.
4 AIR. 1917 Pat. 18, 24;
AER. 1915 Lah. 251, 253.
5 Bashir Ahmad v. Mt. Zobadia, ALR. 1926 0070 186, 189.
6 Talib Ali v. Kaniz Fatima, ALR. 1927 Oudh 204, 206,



332

This is for the reason that full payment of the price is not an essential
requisite of sale as defined in section 54, and if the intention is that the sale
deed should operate as a transfer, then it is immaterial whether the whole or
part of the consideration remains unpaid.?

50.8. Seiler’s right on non-payment—Once the title has passed, the
seller cannot, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary,—

(a) claim to retain possession as against the buyer of the property

solid? or
(0) set aside the sale on the ground of non-payment of price. His
remedy is—
(i) to sue the purchaser for the recovery of the purchase
money, or

{ii) to enforce the seller’s charge for the unpaid purchase
money against the property sold and in the hands of the
purchaser,>

The fact that price has not been paid may, show that the transaction
was the result of undue influence, or that the transaction was a colourable
one. But these are questions of evidence depending on the facts of the case,
the burden of proof of which, in the ordinary run of cases, would lie upon
the person alleging such special facts.

Conversely, once the execution of the instrument of sale is proved and
it is found that the instrument contained a recital of payment of consideration,
such a recital is prima facie proof of payment against the executant or person
claiming under him.‘

50.9. Inadequacy of price—Inadequacy of consideration does not, by
itself, render a sale invalid Thus, the mere fact that the purchaser gets
the property for one fourth of its market value cannot render the sale invalid,
although, in an appropriate case, it must constitute evidence of one of the
ingredients of the concept of undue influence. In the absence of proof of
undue influence, however, such a transaction is regarded as one in which
the doctrine of “lucky purchasers”,® js applied.

On the same reasoning, the coverse is also true, viz., the fact that the
Price, as stated in the sale deed, is an inflated one has no effect on the validity
of the sale if it is otherwise valid. Such devices are frequently adopted to
defeat the right of pre-emption which is available to a third person under
the ordinary law in some situations. On realising that the price is very high,
the third person might feel disinclined to assert the right of pre-emption;
that is the psychological reason operating in the minds of the parties in over-
stating the price in the sale deed. Of course, as between the parties, evidence
is always admissible to show that the ‘price’ was not really the amount 16-
presenting the consideration for the sale, but a security for a pre-existing

1 Bhomi Lal v. Vincent, A.I.R. 1922 Pat. 619, 641 (F.B.).

2 Dhuri v, Kishun Prasad, A1.R. 1965 Pat. 29, 30.

3 Section 55(4) (७).

4 Ramaswami vy. Jagannadha Rao, ALR. 1962 A.P. 94—97,

5 ALR. 1957 Mad. 630, 631.

6 ALR. 1957 Mad. 630. 631,

7 ALR, 1324 All. 938, 939. .



333

debt. And even third persons can show that what is stated in the deed was
not its Price agreed upon. But these aspects do not affect the validity of the
deed of sale.

50.10. Meaning of reversion-Recommendation—So much as regards
the first paragraph of section 54. There occur, in the second paragraph,
the werds “in the case of a reversion or other intangible thing”. The section
provides that such a transfer, i.e., a transfer by way of sale, can be made
only by way of a registered instrument. Obviously, the expression “rever-
sion” here is wide enough to apply to immovable property in the possession
of a tenant.’ Consequently, such transfer must be made only by a regis-
tered instrument, irrespective of the value® There are, however, decisions
of the Oudh Chief Court and the Nagpur High Court® holding that property
in the possession of a tenant is tangible property and is not included in the
expression “reversion or intangible thing”. We ase, with respect, of the
opinion that this view is not correct. “Reversion” in ordinary parlance is un-
dersood certainly as covering such a situation, whatever else it may or may
fot cover.

In order to avoid controversy on this point, we recommend that an
Explanation may be added to the effect that where immovable property is
in the possession of person other than the transferor, the transfer of that
property is a transfer of the reversion, if the person in possession has an
interest in the property by way of lease.*

50.11. Intangible thing—The expression “intangible thing” is, in the
context, to be taken as confined to immovable property, and not as covering
movable property.*-° It is for this reason that a licence to sell electricity.”
@ permission to plant trees on land and to enter the land to gather the fruits,*
a copyright in books, a money decree or a decree for possession of immov-
able property,'® is not an “intangible thing” within section 54.

On the other hand, a right to rents and profits that may accrue in im-
movable property, or an interest under a deed of settlement by which a
person is granted as income in future rents and profits in immovable Property
and also a share in the proceeds of the sale of the property in future, would
be within the section." since they relate to immovable property.

50.12. Recommendation as to second paragraph—It is proper to make
it clear that in the second paragraph, when it speaks of reversion or other
intangible thi: is confined to immovable property as is shown by the

1 ALR. 1938 Lah. 304, 305;

AER. 1916 Bom. 223.

2 ALR. 1938 Mad. 100. 101.

3 (1899) 2 Oudh Cases 754, 757;
ALR. 1954 Nag. 109, 113.

4 This is not a draft.

S ALR. 1939 All. 305. 307:
ALR. 1935 Pat. 492. 493.

6 ALR. 1935 Pat. 492, 493

7 ALR. 1940 All. 458, 460. «

8 ALR. 1952 Nag. 321, 322.

9 ALR. 1939 All. 305, 307.

10 A.LR. 1935 Pat. 492.

11 (a) ALR, 1935 Pat. 492. 493;

(b) ALR. 1936 P.C. 230, 233, 234.



334

decisions just now referred to.’ We recommend that the second paragraph
should be suitably amended to bring this out.

50,13. Section 54, third mode, tangible and intangible property—This
takes us to the third paragraph of section 54. Under the thied paragraph,
different modes of delivery on the sale of immovable property are prescribed.
The modes prescribed consist of two alternatives, In the case of tangible
immovable property of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards or in
the case of a reversion or other intangible thing (irrespective of value),
such transfer can be made only by a registered instrument. The word
‘only’ here indicate that delivery is ruled out as a mode of transfer. In con-
trast, in the case of tangible immovable property of a value of less than one
hundred rupees, such transfer may be made either by a registered instrument
or by delivery of the property. It follows, therefore, that the law is more
restrictive in the case of (i) tangible immovable property exceeding the
specified value and (ii) reversion or other intangible. thing, since only a
registered instrument is permissible. We may state that this dichotomy
between tangible and intangible immovable property becomes of basic im-
portance where the mode of transfer adopted is ‘not by 8 registered
instrument, but by delivery. The question that arises in such case is
whether delivery is sufficient as a mode of transfer. The answer would be in
the negative if the case falls in the rst category which, as already stated, is
governed by a restrictive provision. The answer would be in the affirmative
in the second situation.

50.14. Controversy caused where delivery is the mode adopted—Since
the second situation (tangible immovable property of less than one hundred
tupees)? depends upon it being established that the property is tangible,
controversies have arisen in particular cases where delivery was the only
mode adopted. The adoption of a registered instrument raises no problems,
since that mode is valid in both the cases. but the adoption of delivery
raises problems, since it.is permissible only in the sccond case.2 Those who
would like to challenge the transfer would naturally argue that the mode of
transfer adopted—delivery—was not permissible, and that the property was
not tangible immovable property. It is to be remembered that in the case
of an “intangible thing”, there is no question of value. minimum or maximum,
Irrespective of value, the transfer can be made only by a registered instru-
ment and net by delivery. Usually, this controversy? arises where the mort-
gagor sells the property to the mortgagee for less than rupees one hundred
by delivery and the court is then called upon to consider the question whether
what is transferred is tangible property or intangible property. The mean-
ing of “tangible” thus becomes crucial.

50.14A. Meaning of “tangible—Grammatically, the word “tangible”
means something that can be appreciated by the senses, that is to say, a
material object. Strictly speaking, all rights are intangible things, since what
one owns is not a thing, but a bundle of rights in a thing.

50.14B. Meaning of “property and interes ”—Statutory language as
employed in the Transfer of Property Act, however, does not go by this

strict doctrine. Sometimes, it employs the expression “immovable property”

1 Para 50.11. sepra.

2 Parra 50.13, supra,
3 Para 50.13, supra.

4 See para 50.16, infra.


335

as covering the bundle of rights which one can have in that property and in
this context, the Act seems to have in mind the expression ‘immovable
property” as applicable to the object as Pe sri in the external world, as
well as the legal concept of the totality Ss.

But occasionally the Act speaks of “interest in immovable property”,
which would seem to show that it is possible to conceive of two different
categories,—“immovable property”, being the wider and generic one, and
“interest” in immovable property being the narrower and specific one. Thus,
a person who has a lease in his favour has an interest, but he does not own
the “property”. Of course, section 6 uses the expression “property” in a wide
sense, because it says “property of any kind may be transferred”, but it
cannot be denied that in ordinary language—and sometimes in the Act also
where the totality of rights is intended to be connoted, the expression
“immovable property” is more often employed while where not the totality
but a specific right is intended, the expression “interest” is more often
employed.

50.15. Privy Council case—In Moolla Sons v. Official Assignee,
Rangoon,' the Privy Council observed :

“....for the reason that in the absence of registered instrument,
delivery is to be required as a formality necessary to the completion of
the transaction. section 54 “divides its provisions as to immovable pro-
perty according as the immovable property is ‘tangible or intangibl fe.

50.16. Equity of redemption whether intangible thing—There is no
definition or explanation of the expression “tangible” and intangible”. This
has created certain problems. For example. there is a conflict of decisions
on the question whether an equity of redemption vested in the mortgagor is
or is not an “intangible thing”.

(a) One view on the subject is that the equity of re ‘cmpticn vested
in the mortgagor is “tangible immovable property”. whatever
may be the nature of the morlgage—simiphe- er usutructuary.?

(b) The second view is that in all cases the equity of redemption is
an intangible thing.*

(९०) The third view makes a distinction between various types of
mortgages.®

50.17. Juristic views exantine¢d—A few juristic writings referred to ia
the Allahabad judgment may be referred to. Holland in his “Elements of
Jurisprudence”, says :°

1 Mools Sons v. Official Assignee, Rangoon, A. 1936 P.C. 230, 232,

2 Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lal. A.1.R. 1928 All. 726, 728, 729 {Majority view).

3 Sohon Lal vy. Mohan Lut, A.1.R. 1928 All. 726, 728. 729 (F.B.)
Suraj Prasad v. Aguia Devi, AJR. 1959 Pat. 153, 155,
Venkatasubbamma v, Subbayya, ALR. 1964 A.P. 21, 22, 23 (Chandra Reddy
CJ. & Chandra Sekhar 3.).
Tukaram vy. Atmaram, A.1.R. 1939 Bom. 31, 33 (Broomfield & Macklin, 3J.).

4 (a) Sakharam v. Ramachandra. AIR, 1917 Bom. 287 (Scott, C.J. & Shab J.);
(0) Lachman Prasad v. Fida Husain, A1.R. 1915 Oudh 149, 150.

5 Para 50.21, infra.

6 Holland, Elements of Jurisprudence (1924 Ed.).
in Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lal, ALR. 1928 All.

pages 209, 223, 233, cited
26.



336

“It (ownership) may ...... continue to subsist although stripped
of almost every attribute which makes it valuable............ ”
Later he says :

“One or more of the subordinate elements of ownership, such as
a right of possession or user, may be granted out while the residuary
right or ownership ...... remains unimpaired.”

The same author, further, talking of pledge, says :

“Probably the rudest method is that which involves an actual
transfer of ownership in the thing from the debtor to. the
creditor ...... and such is the English mortgage of lands or goods
except in so far as its theory has been modified by the determination
of the “Court of Chancery and of the legislature to continue, as long as
possible, to regard the mortgagor as the owner of the property.”

Similarly, Salmond in his Jurisprudence says! :

“fhe right of the owner of a thing may be ail but eaten up by
ihe dominant rights of lessees, mortgagees and other encumbrances.
His ownership may be reduced to a mere name rather than a Teality,
Yet, he nonetheless remains the owner of the thing, while all others
own nothing mote than ‘rights’ over it, .... He, then, is the owner of a
material object, who owns 3 right to the general or residuary uses of it,
after the deduction of all special and limited rights of use vested by way
of encumbrance in other persons.”

Poolock says?

“We must not suppose that all the powers of an owner need be
exercisable at once or immediately; he may remain owner though he
has parted with some of them for a time. He may for a time even
part with his whole powers of use and enjoyment and suspend his power
of disposal, provided that he reserves for himself or his successors, the
right of ultimately reclaiming the thing and being restored to his power.”

These passages were relied upon by the majority judgment in the
Allahabad case? in support of the proposition that mortgagor's right, even
in a possessory mortgage, is tangible property.

50.18. The opinions of these distinguished jurists are, however, hardly
of any relevance to the question under discussion. They merely deal with
“ownership”, and not with what is tangible property.

50.19 Case law as to equity of redemption.—Let us now examine a
few cases as to equity of redemption. In a Madras case, Bhashyam
Ayyanagar, J., made the fol!owing observations :

“The equity of redemption in a usufructuary mortgage is only an
intangible thing like a reversion which immediately precedes the expression
‘or other intangible thing’ (vide Williams on ‘Real Property’, 18th Edition,

1 Salmond, Jurisprudence (1924), page 280, cited in Sohan Lal v. Mohan fal,
ALR. 1928 All. 726.

2 Poolock, First Book of Jurisprudence (1923), pages 179, 180; cited in Sehan
Lal v. Mohan Lal, AI.R. 1928 All. 728.

3 Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lal, A.1.R. 1928 All, 728, 729 (Majority view).

4 Ramaswamy v. Chinna Asavi, (1901) LL.R. 24 Mad. 449, 463.


337

pages 30, 31, and it can be transferred by sale only by 2 re istered instru-
ment and not by delivery of the property. Equity of redemption in 3
simple mortgage may be tangible immovable property, and its sale can be
effected, if tts value be below Rs. 100/-, without registered instrument by
mere delivery of the property. The right of a Simple mortgagee in the pro-
perty mortgaged is in my opinion only an intangible think like a charge on
immovable property within the meaning of section 54........ ”

ta a Pata case,' it was held that the mortgagor, though not remaining
in possession, yct transfers the tangible property when he sells it, because
what passes to the mortgagee is not ownership and therefore the mortgagor
remains the owner, The mortgagee, even though in possession, cannot
transfer the property itself. He can only transfer the interest which he
has acquired in the property. Whether the mortgagee is or is not in pos-
session cannot according to this view make a distinction for the purpose
of determining whether the property is tangible or intangible.

50.20 In a Bombay Full Bench decision,? Chagla, C.J., who delivered
the judgment of the Court, was inclined to hold that a sale by mortgagor
of immovable property in the possession of a mortgagee is a sale of tangi-
ble immovable property, but he left the question open and decided the case
on another ground.

50.21. Third view—We have referred to two views on the subject
under discussion. There is yet a third view. The third view is that (i)
where tke property is subject to a simple mortgage, the equity of redemp-
tion is tangible immovable property, but (ii) where the mortgage is a
usuftuctuary जार, the mortgagor's interest is an “intangible thing” within
the meaning of this scction.%-1.5.6 This view is based on the ground that
“tangible property” means property capable of present possession, while
“intangible propcrty” would connote a right apart from a right to imme-
diate possession.?

5९.22. Correct view—iIn our opinion, the last-mentioned view is to
be preferred. As pointed out by Sulainvan, Ag. C.J. in Sohan Lal ए, Mohal
Lal (dissenting judgment) $ :—

“According to its literal meaning, ‘tangible’ property would be one
which is capable of being touched, and therefore capable of being possessed.
It must accordingly be property which is capable of delivery of possession
from one person to another. A mortgaged property itself is undoubtedly
‘tangible’, but the interest of the mortgagor in the property, when the mort-
gage is usufructuary, is not identical with the property itself, as some
interest has already passed to the mortgagee, including the right to remain
in possession and appropriate the profits. ‘The interest which the mortgagor

1 Suraj Prasad v. Agita Devi. ALR. (959 Pat. 153.
'V. Ramaswamy, C.J., R. K. Chowdhury & K. Sahai, JJ.).

2 Bhikhabhat ९, Chiman Lal, ALR. 1953 Bom. 437. 439.

3 Ramasami v. Chinnal Ansari (1901) LL.R. 24 Mad, 449, 463 (D.B.).

4 Dhoreshwar vy. Laktradhar, A.LR. 1950 Assam 107, 113 (per Ram Labheya.
3.) (review),

कई ALR, 1936 Bom. 175.

6 ALR, 1921 Oudh 124,

7 Kushwat v, Jamif, ALR, 1919 Cal, 325, 326,

8 Sohan Lak v, Mohan Lal. A.LR. 1928 All, 726, 733 (P.B.) (dissenting judg-
ment of Sulaiman, Ag. C.J.).



338

possesses is not itself capable of being touched, nor is it such that an actual
delivery of its possession can be effected by the mortgagor to the mortgagee.
It seems difficult to conceive of a thing as being tangible, when it is not
capable of actuai delivery of possession. Although, therefore, the mort-
gagor is the Jegal owner of the usufructuarily mortgaged property, whatever
rights he possesses, so long as the mortgage subsists, cannot be treated as
‘tangible’. The subject matter of ownership is ‘tangible’, but the interest

which the mortgagor can transfer is intangible’.
We find this reasoning logically convincing.

50.23. Recommendation to add Explanation as to usufructuary
morigage-—-To avoid further controversy on the subject, we recommend
that the third view,’, which appears 10 be a logical view", should be codified
by inserting a suitable Explanation® in section 54. namely, the mortgagor's
interest in a usutructuary mortgage is an intangible thing.

50.24. Mortgagee’s right—This is as regards the interest of the
mortgagor. As to the right of the mortgagee, where the mortgage is simple
one, his tight would be “intangible property”,* and the right of a usufruc-
tuary mortgagee would be “tangible immovable” property.

‘The contrary view has, However, been expressed by the High Court of
Allahabad in Sohan Lal's case,* namely that it is “intangible property” in
the case of a usufructuary mortgage. We think that the amendmem which
we propose regarding the mortgagor® will indirectly settle the position re-
garding the mortgagee: also.

50.25. Delivery how effected in case of sale b\ mortgagor to mort-
gagee.—Even if the mortgagor's interest is tangible property, some difficulty
has been created on the tion whether the ‘delivery cortemplated by
section 54 is real delivery, or whether it can be constructive
delivery. This question has normally arisen whefe a mort
gagor sells the mortgaged property to a mortgagee in possession. Since the
mortgagee is in Possession, no real delivery can be given to him. Is sym-
bolical delivery permissible then? Or, is it correct to say that the only
way of obtaining transfer of ownership by the mortgagee in possession who
purchases the property is by registered instrument? It would appear that
on this point a conflict of views prevails. The case law on the subject is
conveniently discussed in a Patna judgment.? There are, what may be
called, two views—the narrower view and the wider view.

According to the narrower view, a registered instrument is the only
mode of transfer and delivery is not possible, because the mortgagee being
already in possession, no further possession can be given to him.* He must

1 Para 50.21, supra.

2 Para 50.22, supra.

3 For suggested re-draft, see para 50.37, infra,

4 (a) Moola Sons v. O. 4. Rangoon, ALR. 1935 P.C. 236, 232;
(b) ALR. 1941 Nag. 5. 6.

(९) ALR. 1934 Nag. 13, 15.
(6) ALR, 1924 Rang. 267, 268.

5 Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lal, AR. 1928 All. 726, 733 (Usufructuary Morigage)

6 Para 50.23, supra.

7 Suraj Prasad v. Aguta Devi, AIR. 1959 Patna 153, 157, paragraphs 14 to 21.
a Bhika Bhai v. Chiman Lal, ALR, 1953 Bom. 437, 439 and 440, paragraphs 4


339

to deliver the property to the mortgagor and then obtain possession again,
if delivery is the mode adopted. According to the wider view,’ there is
no reason why the mortgagee should be requited to re-deliver the property
‘and then to take back possession.

50.26. Where the vendee is a usufructuary mortgagee of the property
sold and is in possession as such, the sale can only be of the equity of re-
demption. If, in such cases, it is regarded as intangible property, no ques-
tion of a sale by delivery of such property can arise, whatever may be the
value of property. Similarly, where the vendee is a lessee of the vendor,
what is sold wouid only be a xeversion which is also an intangible thing,
and no question of a sale by delivery can arise in such cases.

But if it is regarded as tangible, there is, as already stated, a conflict
of opinion among the High Courts on the question whether a sale in such
cases should be only by a registered instrument or whether it might be by
delivery of the property. This difficulty arises because of the word
‘delivery’. What is transferred by the vendor may be tangible immovable
Property. According to the contrary view (which also proceeds on the
assumption that what is transferred is tangible immovable property), the
delivery of possession contemplated in such delivery as the nature of the
Property admits of, and where the vendor, by appropriate acts or declara-
tions, converts the vendee’s possession into that of an owner. it is sufficient
delivery of property within the meaning of this section.

50.27. Meaning of ‘delivery—Privy Council case.—In Mathura
Prasad vy. Chandra Narain,’ it was held by the Privy Council that for the
Purposes of this section there must be a real and not a constructive delivery
of property. In that case the question was whether the delivery to vendee
of an unregisicred instrument of transfer was a delivery of the property for
the purposes of this section. The Privy Council observed as follows :

“Theic Lordships cannot accept the suggestion made on behalf
of the applicants that for the purposes of section 54 some sort of
constructive possession resulting from the delivery of the alleged instru-
ment of transfer might be sufficient For this purpose, their must be
a teal delivery of property.” These observations were not made to
Tule out symbolical delivery. But they have created that impression
in some courts.

50.28. Other cases.—The same view has been expressed in the under-
mentioned cases.3

50.29. Scope of the problem—t£ our recommendation‘ to treat the
mortgagor's right in a usufructuary mortgage as intangible property is carzied
out, the problem will not survive in this form, for that situation. But in
regard to other situations, the practical question will still remain though
their number will be limited.

1 Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lal, ALR. 1928 All. 726 (Majority view),
2 Mathura Prasad v. Chandra Narain, A. I. R. 1921 PAC. 8, 9. 10.
LR. 1956 Hyd. 170, 171.
1953 Bom. 437, 438, LLR. (1953) Bom. 1071 (F-B.).

(c} ALR. 1938 All. 726, 728;
(4) ALR. 1933 Cal. 544, 545:

Sohan Lal v. Mohan Lat हु
4 Para 50.23 supra. . हे



50.30. Difficulty how can be removed.—it appears that the difficulty
would disappear if the distinction between two kinds of possession—a dis-
tinction which is recognised by the Legislature in the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, m relation to execution proceedings—is borne in mind. To
guote Mr. Justice Aikman,'—“if a person is wrongfully ousted from posses-
sion, he is entitled to a decree replacing him in such possession as he had,
when his cause of action arose. If, at that time, he had a right to immediate
or what is called in country khas possession, then he is entitled to a decree
replacing him in such possession. If, on the other hand, his possession
was only derived from the enjoyment of the rents and profits, then the
possession to which he is entitled is that provided for by secion 264 of the
Code (corresponding to present Order 21, Rule 35).”

50.31. Symbolical delivery —We could introduce, on the analogy of
Order 21, Rule 36, Code of Civil Procedure (symbolical possession), a
provision to the effect that any formality which gives notice to ail concerned
that the interest has been transferred will suffice where the transferor is not
in possession.

50.32. Recommendation as to delivery—In out opinion the best
course would be to define ‘delivery’ as above,? i.e. to cover both the modes
of delivery—reat and symbolical. We recommend that such an amend-

ment be made.?

50.33 Sale of possession. Mortgagor’s interest to mortgagee in pos-
session.—As to the mortgagor's interest, it appears to us that, theoretically
speaking. as already stated, there is much to be said in favour of the view
that after the possession has been transferred to the mortgagee, the interest
has already passed to the mortgagee, including the right to remain in posses-
sion and to appropriate the profits. Although the interest of the mortgagor
survives and ii would not be inaccurate to say that he remains to be the
“owner”—a proposition whick caunot be disputed—that interest is not
tangible property. We remains the owrer without possession. As Sulai-
man, C.J., in his disseating judgment. in the Aliahabad case.* observed,
tangible property, according to its literal meaning, would be one which is
ciipable of being touched and therefore capable of being possessed.

“le must, accordingly, be property which is capable of delivery of pes-
session from one person to another”. A mortgaged property itself is
tangible, but the interest of the mortgagor is not. because that interest 15
not identical with the property itself. The mortgagor's interest is not cap-
able of being touched: and. ‘therefore, it is not capable cf being delivered
‘by actual delivery.

50.34. Possible solution —How, then, is a transfer to be effected
when the mortgagor sells the property to the mortgagee already in posses-
sion? 16 the mortgagor's tight to redeem is not tangible property. ‘delivery’
is, in the scheme of section S4. as it now stands, out of question. A regis-
tered instrument is, at present, the only way of effecting the transfer. if
the property is to be regarded as intangible. What happens in practice is

. 18 AN. 440, 453 (FB.

t Sita Ram.
2 Para 50.31, Sie

3 For suggested redrati.
4 Sohan Lal x, Mohen fe

ea 50.37. हित,
ABR. 1928 ALR, 1928 All. 725. 733.



341

that parties regard registration as an irksome and inconvenient formality
in such cases. They try to effect the transfer by delivery, where the amount
is small. Then difficulty arises. The remedy for this is not in an attifiical
construction of the expression “tangible property”, but in an amendment
in the law as incorporated in section 54 as to the mode of transfer.

One possible way of dealing with this would be to provide for an
additional mode of transfer, i.e., apart from registered instrument, we have
to conceive of some other procedure where the sale is to a person in actual
possession of the property.

50.35. Recommendation as to sale to a person in possession.—~
Having regard to practical considerations, we recommended* that in the
case of sale to a person in possession, any act effective to make it known
that the vendee has acquired the vendor's interest by purchase should be
@ permissible mode, in addition to registered instrument (which is already
provided for) if the consideration does not exceed Rs. 100.

50.36. Summary of recommendations—tIt will be convenient to
‘summarise our recommendations for the amendment of section 54—

(i) It should be made clear? that where immovable property is in
the possession of a person (other than the transferor) who
has an interest by way of lease, transfer of that property is a
transfer of the reversion.

(ii) It should be made clear* that the words “reversion or other
intangible thing” occurring in the second paragraph are con-
fined to irxmovable property.

(iii) In the case of a usufructuary mortgage, the mortgagor’s
interest is an intangible thing.*

Tt should be made clear that in the limited number of cases
where property is in the possession of a person who has no
intercst therein, so that the property so far as the owner is con-
cerned, still remains tangible immovable property, symbolical
delivery is permissible.*
(५) Where a person in possession of immovable property purchases
that property, any act effective to mcke it known that the pur-
chaser has acquired the vendor's interest should be a permissi-
ble mode of transfer (in addition to registered instrument
which is already provided for).* where the consideration does
sot exceed one hundred rupees.

=

50.37. Re-drajft—The following is a suggested re-draft of section
54 to implement the amendments recommended ahove:——

_, 14.01) ‘Sale’ is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price
paid or promised or part-paid and part-promise

1 For sugecsted redraft, see para $0.37, infra.
2 Para 50.10. sepra.
3 Para 50.12. supra.
4 Pora 50.23, supra.
5 Para 50.32, supra,
6 Para $0.35, supra.


342

(2) Such transfer,—

(a) in the case of tangible immovable property of the value
of one hundred rupees and upwards, can be made only
by a registered instrument;

(b) in the case of tangible immovable property of the value
of less than one hundred rupees, may be made either by
a registered instrument or by delivery of the property.

(3) Such transfer in the case of a reversion in immovable Pro-
perty of any other intangible thing constituting immovable con be
made only by a registered instrument :

Provided that where immovable property is transferred to a per-
Son in possession thereof, who has transfer of the property by its owner
to that person may be effected—
(a) either by a registered instrument as provided in this sub-
section, or
(b) if the consideration for the transfer does not exceed one
hundred rupees, by any act effective to make it known that the
ownership has been so transferred.

(4) Delivery of tangible immovable property takes place when
the seller places the buyer, or such person as he directs, in possession
of the property.

(5) and (6)—(Fifth and sixth paragraph as at present).

Explanation 1—Where immovable property is in the possession
of व person other than the transferor, being a person who has an
interest therein by way of lease, transfer of that property is a transfer
of a reversion for the purposes of this section.

Explanation 1.—Where immovable Property is in tle possession
of @ mortgagee under an usufructuary mortgage as defined in section
358, the interest of the mortgagor is an intangible thing for the Purposes
of this section. .

Explanation 3.—Where immovable bropcrty is in the possession
of @ persen who has no interest therein—

(a) the transfer of the property by its owner is a transfer of tangi-
ble immevable property, for the purposes of this section.

(0) delivery thereof for the Purposes of such transfer may be
effected by any act intimating to the person in possession that
its ownership has been transferred to the person specified in
the intimation.”