LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT

ON

THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT, 1955—
IRRETRIEVABLE BREAKDOWN OF
MARRIAGE AS A GROUND OF
DIVORCE

April, 1978


CHAIRMAN

LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
April 7, 1978.

My dear Minister,

J forward herewith the Seventy-first Report of the Law
Commission of India concerning amendment of the Hindu
Marriage Act. 1958 whereby  irretrievable breakdown of
marriage is sought to be made a ground of divorce.

The first Chapter ef the Report scts out the circumstances
in which the matter was taken up for consideration by the Law
Commission. After taking up the matter, the Commission issued
a questionnaire inviting views of interested parties and bodies
on the salient points arising for consideration.

On receipt of the replies to the questionnaire, a draft Report

was prepared and discussed at length before being put into the
final shape.

1 place on record my appreciation of the valuable assistance
received from Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Com-
mission in the preparation of the Report.

With regards,

‘Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(HL R. Khanna)

Hon'ble Shri Shanti Bhushan
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Dethi-110001


CONTENTS

Pace
Crarrer 1. Introductory न पु पु न पु - . 1
Cuaprer 2 Present law and current theories of divorce - . पु 5
Cuasrter 3. Irretrievable breakdown : the theory . . . 1
CuaPren 4 Merits and demerits of the theory of irretrievable breakdown 14
Cuapter 5. Retention of other grounds of divorce . 2h
Cuapter @ The requirement of livingapatt.. 0. 24
Cuaprer? Safeguards . 2. wee 30
Cuapter 8 Recommended amendments . पु + पु . 40

APPENDIX

Aprenpix Questionnaire issued by the Law Commissioa of india on
the subject of irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a
Bround of divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act.


INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report deals with an important question concern- Introductory
ing the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, namely, should the irre-

trievable breakdown of marriage be made a ground for divorce

under that Act and if so, to what extent and subject to what
ceaditions ? The matter has been taken up by the Law Com-

mission as a result of a refcrence made by the Government of

India in the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs‘.

4.2, Arretrievable breakdown of marriage is now considered, Iretrievable
in the laws of a number of countries, a good ground of dissol- bre#kdown.
ving the marriage by granting a decree of divorce. The Delhi

High Court in a Full Bench decision in Ram Kali v. Gopal Das*,

took note of the modern trend not to insist on the maintenance

of a union which has utterly broken down, and observed :

“It would not be ptactical and realistic approach,
indeed it would be unreascnable and inhumane, to com-
pel the partics to keep up the facade of marriage even
though the rift between them is complete and there are
no prospects of their ever living together as husband and
wife.”

To the case of Blunt v. Blunt®, Viscount Simon, L-C., while
specifying the considerations which should prevail in matri-
montal matters, observed :

“To these four considerations I would add a fifth
of a more general character, which must indeed be re-
garded as of primary importance, viz. the interest of the
community at large, to be judged by maintaining a true
balance between respect for the binding sanctity of
marriage and the social considerations which make it
‘contrary to public policy to insist on the maintenance of
“a union which has utterly broken down. It is noteworthy

4 Note of the Minister for Law, Justice and Company Affairs dated 3rd
November, 1977 recorded in Legislative Department File No. 5, 14(4)/68-
Leg. If, Vol. X11, page 27,

» Ram Kali. ९. Gopal Das, (1971) 1.1... 1 Dethi 10 (FB).

J) Blant ५. Blane, (1943) 2 All, E.R. 76, 78 (HLL).



Suggestion
analysed,

2

that in recent years this last consideration has operated
to induce the Courts to exercise a favourable discretion
in many instances where in an earlier time a decree would
certainly have been refused.”

The British Parliament has since then enacted the Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1973 {which replaces the Divorce Reform
Act, 1969}. According to section 1 of that Act, a petition for
divorce may be presented on the ground that the marriage has
broken down irretrievably.

1.3. A suggestion has been made by a distinguished jurist to
the effect that the following ground of divorce should be added
to section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 :~

“That the marriage has irretrievably broken down
and that the parties had been living apart for a peried,
not less than five (or ten) years, immediately preceding
the presentation of the petition.”

It has been stated in support of this suggestion that the
Hindu Marriage Act of 1955 has proved to be inadequate to
deal with the question where the marriage has proved to be a
complete failure, and that a social reform is imperative in the
field. Proof of such a breakdown would be that the hushand
and wife have separated and have been living apart for, say,
a period of five or ten years and it has become impossible to
resurrect the marriage or to re-unite the parties. It is stated
that once it is known that there are 40 prospects of the success
of the marriage, to drag the legal tie acts as a cruelty to the
spouse and gives rise to crime and even abuse of religion to ob-
tain annulment of marriage. It is further pointed out that the
Muslim, Christian and Parsce marriage laws allow divorce more
easily than the Hindu law and it is only the Hindus who are
put under severe restrictions and have to resort to conversion
in several cases. This social discrimination in personal life
ought to be removed, particularly in view of the fact that many
Hindu marriages are brought about at an carly age without
the consent of the parties and, in consequence, break down at
a later stage. Finally, it is stated that the Hindu law of divorce
should be liberalised and brought in conformity with the modern
trends in Europe and elsewhere, as well as with the law appli-
cable to the other communities in the country. The suggestion
sums up the essence of the proposal in these terms :—

“The essence of the proposal is that the Hindu
martiage should be allowed to be dissolved if the husband


3

and wife have lived apart for a period of say 5/10 years
and the marriage is irretrievably broken due to incom-
patibility, clash of personality or similar other reasons,
as is permissible under many systems of law of advanced
countries.”
14. The suggestion has raised an important question con- Fundamental
ceming section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, The Act Grestion not
came up for consideration before the Law Commission a few past Report.
years ago’, but the question of introducing breakdown of mar-
riage as a ground of divorce was not before the Commission.
Such reference to, or reliance जार, the breakdown principle as
occurred in the Report was only incidental.

No doubt, the consideration that it is impossible to con-
tinue the martiage relationship underlies many of the specific
grounds of divorce provided in the present Act. But, in itself.
it is not a ground of divorce under the Act. In this sense, the
suggested provision raises an important question.

1.5. The relevant provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act re- Hindy
garding divorce are contained in sections 13, 13A and 138. 1 Marriage
may be mentioned that section 13B provides for a decree of di- “"
vorce by mutual consent, and was inserted in 1976.

A petition for divorce on the ground of irretrievable
breakdown of marriage as visualised by us would not make it
necessary for the court to go into the question as to which party
was at fault before granting a decree of divorce, and it would be
enough to prove that the relations between husband and wife
have reached such a breaking point that there is no possibility
of reconciliation, This would obviate the necessity of producing
evidence of acrimony and other incidents during the married
life, some of which the parties may not like to reveal.

1.6, Before taking any further action on the suggestion that Question-
irretricvable breakdown of marriage should be made a ground "Te
for divorce, we considered it appropriate to invite views on the

matter by issuing a brief Questionnaire’. We are grateful to all

those who have expressed their views in response to our
Questionnaire.

२ Soth Report of the Law Commission (Hindu Marriage Aci. 1955 and
Special Marriave Act, 1954), (March, 1994), < and

* 5900 Report of the Law Commission (Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
Special Marriage Act, 1954), page 12, para 1-30; page 22, para 2.18 and pace
66, para 7.5.

* See Appendix



‘Scheme of
discussion,

4

1.7. The scheme of our discussion will be as follows :—-

We shall first cxamine the preseat grounds for divorce
under the Hindu Marriage Act. We shail then deal with the
theory of irretrievable breakdown and consider the merits and
demerits of the theory. In case the theory of irretrievable break-
down is to be adopted, the question would fall to be considered
whether the other grounds of divorce should be retained, or
whether merely the broad and exclusive category of irretrievable
breakdown should be substituted as absorbing the grounds al-
ready provided in the law. We shall deal with that question
in due course.

If the principle of irretrievable breakdown is adopted,
the next question will be how exactly to incorporate it into the
Act.

We will also examine the question whether the introduc-
{ion of such a ground should be coupled with any safeguards.


CHAPTER 2

PRESENT LAW UNDER THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT

2.1. The present statutory law relating (0 grounds of divorce
as applicable to Hindus is contained in sections 13, 134 and
13B of the Hindu Marriage Aci, 1955. in section 1341}? and
13(1A)*, certain grounds are mentioned in which either the
husband or the wife can seek dissotution of the marriage. In sub-
section (2) of section 13. certain additional grounds® are laid
down in this behalf which can be made use of by the wife only.
Section [3B is a special provision inserted recently* to provide
for divorce by consent after living apart for one year. In this
case, the law requires a joint petition by both the parties

The grounds for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act
reflect, in the main, three categories of grounds. The first is the
traditional theory cf matrimonial fault, The second is the
theory of frustration by reason of specified circumstances.
The third is the theory of consent. There is. however, na
theory of breakdown of the marriage—~except to a very fimited
extent as will he mentioned in due coutse.5

2.2. Tt may be convenient to set out very briefly the present
grouuds of divorce under the Act. Section 13( 1) of that Act—
to state the gist—z'lows divorce on a petition presented by
either spouse on the ground that the other party—

(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage,
had voluntary sexual intercourse with auy petson other
than his or her spouse; or

(ii) has, after such solemnization. treated the peti-
toner with crucliy; or

‘Nine grounds in section [3(1}. See paragraph 2.2, infra.
7 Two grounds in section 13(1A). See paragraph 2.3, aie.
* Four grounds in section (3. See paragranls 2.4, dag.
+ Sec paragtach 2,5, infea.

* Paragraphs 2.3 and 2.5, आय.

Present law
under the
Hindu
Merciuge
Act.

Present
Position
under the
Hiada
Marriage
Act, 1955—
section
131).


Section
330A)

6

Citi) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous
period of not less than two years immediately preceding
the presentation of the petition; or

(iv) has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to
another religion; or

(प) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has
been suffering continuously or intermittently from mental
disorder of such a kind and to such an cxtent that the
petitioner cannot teasonably be expected to live with
the respondent; or

(vi) has been suffering from a virulent and incur-
able form of leprosy: or

(vii) has been suffering from veneral disease in
a communicable form; or

(viti) has renounced the world by entering any
religious order; or

(ix) has not been heard of as being alive for a
period of seven years or more by those persons who
would naturally have heard of it, had that party been
alive.

There are two Explanations, explaining the meaning of
the expressions “mental disorder” and “desertion”, which are
not material for the present purpose,

2.3. A petition for dissolution of marriage by a decree of
divorce can also be presented by either party under section
13(1A) of the same Act on the ground—

i) that there has been no resumption, of cohabita-
tion as between the parties to the marriage for a period
of one year or upwards after the passing of a decree for
judicial separation in a proceeding to which they were
parties; or

(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal
tights as between the parties to the marriage for a period
of ene year or upwards after the passing of a decree
for restitution of conjugal rights in a proceeding to which
they were parties.


7

24. Besides this, under section 13(2} the wife may also
present a petition for dissolution of her marriage on the ground
that the marriage was solemnized before the commencement of
the Act and that, the husband had married again before such
commencement, or that the husband had, since the solemniza-
tion of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality,
or that there has been passed a decree or order for maintenance
against the husband notwithstanding that the wife was living
apart and that since the passing of the decree or order, cohabi-
tation between the parties has not been resumed for one year
or upwards, or that her marriage (whether consummated or
not) was solemnized before she attained the age of fifteen
years and she had repudiated the marriage after attaining that
age (15 years), but before attaining the age of eighteen years.

2.5. It may be noted that although traces of the concept of
breakdown of marriage could be found in the special provi-
sion for dissolution of marriage by decree of divorce at the
instance of either party under section 13{1A) summarised
above,' i¢ is an essential condition of the application of that
sub-section that the proceedings for divorce must have been
preceded by either a decree for judicial separation or a decree
for restitution of conjugal rights. A decree for judicial sepa-
ration, in its turn, could not have been passed? unless circum-
stances which prove whal may be called marital offence or
marital disability were established. In this sense, a petition for
divorce under section 13(1A) indirectly brings in a considera-
tion of fault or disability.

Similarly, a decree for the restitution of conjugal rights
could not have been passed unless it has been proved that the
respondent had “without reasonable excuse” withdrawn from
the society of the other. Thus, a petition under section, 13(1A)},
in so far as it is based on a prior decree of restitution, also in-
volves consideration of fault.

Section 13B provides for divorce by mutual consent by
bringing in the concept of divorce de hors any fault of a party.
All that is necessary in such cases is that there should be 2 peti-
tion for dissolution of marriage to be presented together by both
the parties to a marriage, on the ground that they have been

* Para 2.3, sapra.
3 Section 10, Hindu Marciage Act, 1955.
* Section 9 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955,

Section
1322),

How far
concept of
breakdown
adopted in
section
33(1A).


Various
theories of
divarea

8

living separately for a period of one year or more, that they
have not been able to live together and that they have mutually
agreed that the marriage should be dissolved. After the pre-
sentation of the petition, on a motion of both the parties mace
not earlier than six months and not falter than eighteen months
after the date of the presentation of the pelilion, if the petition
is net withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being
satisfied after hearing the parties and after making such = m-
quiries as it thinks fit about the correctness of the averments
in the petition, pass a deerce of divorce,

The legislature in India has not, as yet, adopted any
provision directly and specifically granting divorce on the
ground of irreirievable breakdown of the marriage.

2.6. On a broad conspectus of the grounds of divarce im
wariows countries. it would appear that divorce has been grant-
ed on several theories. There is, in the first place, the theory
of divorce on the ground of fault. which is one of the principal
theories adapted in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. hustra-
tions of this theory in thaf Act are the legally recognised
grounds of adultery. cruelty, and desertion’ and fon a wife’s
petition) bigamy. certain sexua) offences and failure to pay
meintenance.’

Neat, there is the theory of divorce on the basis of
what may be broadly described as frustration of the marital
relationship by supervening circumstances of a specific nature.
They may arise circumstances which, though mot con-
slitting fault on the part of any party, render dissolution
of the marriage necessary since, by reason of these superver-
ing circumstances which do not amount to matrimonial fault.
a material change is introduced,

Exaniples of this theory are furnished by the grant of
divorce in the Hindu marriage Act on the ground of —

(3) conversion of the other spouse,”
tb) insanity,*
६0) disease,”

3 Section 14110), (9) and (ib), Hindu Mfarsiage Act, 1955.
4 Section 13(2)), (i) and Gif. Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
3 Section 12¢1)(i), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

* Section 11011). Hindu Mariage Act, 1955.

5 Section 13(N)Gv) & (४), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.


9

(9) renunciation of the world by the other
spouse,t !
(९) absence of the other spouse for a Tong period.?

Tt may be added that divorce is also granted on the
basis of what may be called “securing conformity with the legal
system”. Where a marriage does not, in certain respects, com-
ply with the requirements laid down by the law, the legislature,
in its wisdom may allow the grant of divorce, instead of a
provision for nullifying the marriage. An example of it is fur-
nished by the grant of divorce (at the instance of the wife) on
the ground that the age of the wife was below the statutory
minimum at the time of the marriage? a ground introduced in
the Bindy Marriage Act by a recent amendment.

Neat, in some legal systems diverce is granted on de-
mand, the theoretical assumption being that consent given to
the marital relationship 19 revocable and can be revoked without

the necessity of showing fault or other supervening circum-
stances.

Marriage is viewed in a number of countries as a con-
tractual relationship between freely consenting individuals.’

A modified version of the basis of consent is to be
found in the theory of divorce by mutual consent.*

The basis in this case is also consent, but the revova-
tion of the relationship itself must be consensual. as was the
original formation of the relationship. The Hindu Marriage
Act, as amended in 1976, recognises this theary in section
13B

None of these theories is based on the breakdown of

the relationship, in the sense in which it is understood in
* Section [3(1)(vil, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

* Section HIM viid. Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

* Section 12019), Hindu Marriage Act, 1935,

$ Seo eg, New York Domestic Relations Law (McKinney 1964}, section
10, which provides that marriage “'so far as its validity in law is concerned,
continues to be a civil contract. 10 which the consent of partics capeble of
making a contract is essential.” See note, “Patterns of Divorce Reform”
(1971-72) $7 Cornell Law Review, 649 fn.” 1,

649 Note, “Patterns of Divorce Reform" (1971-72) 57 Comell Law Review

* Section 138, Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.


Contract
with the
theory of
breakdown,

10

modern times, even where it can be said that these theories and
the breakdown theory have certain common elements.

2.7. In contrast with all these theories, the distinctive feature
of the theory of breakdown of marriage, as visualised by us for
providing a basis of divorce, is that, irrespective of the fault or
other circumstances relevant to the conduct ot position of the
parties, divorce is to be granted if the marriage has actually
broken down, Whether the substantive requirement of break-
down is accompanied by certain evidentiary requirements is a
matter of detail, as is the actual legislative formulation in which
this ground may be couched.


CHAPTER 3

IRRETRIEVABLE BREAKDOWN : THE THEORY

3.1. It would now be convenient to deal briefly with the
theory of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. During the last
twenty years or so, in many countries of the world, a very im~-
portant question has engaged the attention of lawyers, social
scientists and men of affairs, namely, should the grant of divorce
be based on the fault of the party, or should it be based on the
breakdown of the marriage? The former is known as the matri-
monial offence theory or faul: theory. The Jatter has come to
be Lnown as the breakdown theory.

The germ of the breekdown theory, sa far as Common-
wealth countries are concerned, may be found in the legislative
and judicial developments during a much earlier period. For
example, the (New Zealand) Divorce and Matrimonial Causes
Amendment Act, 1920, included for the first time the provi-
sion that a separation agreement? for three years or more was a
ground for making a petition to the court for divorce and the
court was given a discretion (without guidelines} whether to
grant the divorce or not. The discretion conferred by thix
statu'e was exercised in a case in New Zealand reported in 1921,
Salmond J., in a passage which has now become classic, enuncia-
ted the breakdown principle in these word? :—

“The Legislature must, 1 think, be taken to have
intended that separation for three years is :o be accepted
by this court, as prima facie a good ground for divorce,
When the matrimonial relation has for that period ceased
10 exisi de facto, it should, unless there arc special rea-
sons to the contrary, ccase to exist de jure also. In
general, it is mot in the interests of the parties or in the
interest of the public that a man and woman should

1 Patricia M. Webb, “Recent Changes in U.K. and New Zealand Divarce
Law" (1965) 14 LOL.Q. 194, 195

मै Ladder ७. Lotter, 11921) New Zealand Law Reporis 876 quoted in
Jeffries, “Mitrimaaial Fault—ts it aw relevant” (1972) New Zesland Law
Journal $13, 515.

11
21M of Lew/78—2,

Germ of
the theory,


2
remain bound together as husband and wife in Jaw when
for a lengthy period they have ceased to be such in fact.
Ta the case of such 4 separation the essential purposes
of marriage have been frustrated, and its further conti-
nuance is in general got merely useless but mischievous.”

Theoretical 3.2. The theorctical basis for introducing irretrievable

iaretriwable breakdown as a ground of divorce is one with which, by now,

teeakdows Jawyers and others have become familiar. Restricting the
ground of divorce to a particular offence or matrimonial dis-
ability, it is urged, causes injustice in those cases where
the situation is such that although none of the patties is
at fault, or the fault is of such a nature that the parties to the
marriage do not want to divulge it, yet there has arisen a situa-
tion in which the marriage cannot be worked. The marriage
hag ail the external appearances of marriage, but none of the
reality. As is often put pithily, the martiage is merely a shell
out of which the subsiance is gone. In such circumstances,
it is stated, there is hardly any utility in maintaining the marri-
age ६६४ a facade, when the emotional and other bounds which are
of the essence of marriage have disappeared.

Aer the marriage has ceased to exist in substance and
in reality, there is no reason for denying divorce. The parties
alone can decide whether their mutual relationship provides the
fulfilment which they seek. Divorce should be seen as a solution
and an escape route out of a difficult situation. Such divorce
is unconcerned with the wrongs of the past, but is concerned
with bringing the parties and the children to terms with the new
situation asd developments by working out the most satisfactory
basis upon which they may regulate their relationship in the
changed circumstances.

Defects of 3.3. The defects of the “matrimonial fault” theory have been

matrimonial described more often than once. On May 22, 1969, the General

fault theory. Assembly of the Church of Scotland accepted the Report of

their Moral and Social Welfare Board, which suggested the suba-

fitution of breakdown in place of matrimonial offences. It

would be of interest to quote what they said in their basic
Proposals'—

“Matrimonial offences are often the outcome rather

than the cause of the deteriorating marriage. An acce-

1, These proposals were referred to by the Lord Chancellor in Hruse of
Lords Debates dated 300 June, 1969, Col, 319.


13

satorial principle of divorce tends to encourage matri-
monial offences, increase bitterness and widen the rift
that is already there. Separation for a continuous
period of at least two years consequent upon a decision
of at least one of the parties not to live with the
other should act as the sole evidence of marriage
breakdown.”

Once the parties have separated and the separation has
continued for a sufficient length of time and one of them has
presented a petition for divorce, it can well be presumed that
the marriage has broken down. The court, no doubt, should
endeavour to reconcile the parties; yet, if it is found that the
breakdown 15 irreparable, then divorce should not be withheld.
The consequences of preservation in law of the unworkable
marriage which has long ceased to be effective are bound to be
ब source of misery for the parties,

These, in brief, are the main postulates of the theory
of irretrievable breakdown as a ground of divorce.


Question 1.

Reasons in.
support.

CHAPTER 4

MERITS AND DEMERITS OF THE THEORY OF
IRRETRIEVABLE BREAKDOWN

4.1. Question 1 of our Questionnaire invited views on the
peincipal question and was as follows':—

“Q. 1. Do you agree with the suggestion that the
Hindu Marriage Act be amended with a view to mak-
ing irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a good
ground for grant of ४ decree of divorce ?”

4.2. In seeking answer to this question we have to bear. in
mind the changing nature of tie family. The family is becom-
ing more democratic, and more egalitarian. Both the busband
and wife share not only ‘the family house ; in some cases they
also share the eacmings of cach other. Because of the rising
rate of female activity, the family unit is more of a coalition.
It is, therefore, necessary that if the coalition cannot be worked,
the legal sanction for it must be withdrawn.

In answer to the objection that the ground of irretrieva-
ble breakdown of marrivge is vague, ii may be stated that the
petitioner has to satisfy the court of a conerete fact—living
apart for a sufficient length of time. Judges have thus ta ad-
judicate on facts (mot on some vague concepts) the question
whether or not, on the evidence before them, the parties have
been living apart for the specified period.

A law of divorce based mainly on fault is inadequate
to deal with a broken marriage. Under the fault theory, guilt
has to be proved ; divorce courts are presented concrete ins-
tances of human behaviour as bring the institution of marriage
into disrepute. Because of the doctrine of matrimonial offence,
judges and lawyers are semetinies reduced ta the role of sca-
vengers. The lawycrs have to look for and exposc, and the
Judges are confronted with, the worst obscentics within a mar-
ted life. It is, therefore, not surprising that with the present

3. Question.

4


15

adversary sysiem all types of allegations are Freely hurled कला
the courtroom.

We need not stand on an old divorce law which demands
that men and women must be found innocent or guilty. It ia
desirable to get rid of the public washing of dirty linen which
takes place in long drawn-out cructly cases or in cases based
on fault. if divorce is allowed to go through on the ground
of marriage breakdown, such an unhappy spectacle will be
avoided.

One cannot say that it is an enhancement of the res-
pect for marriage if there are tens of thousands of men and
women desparately anxious to regularise their position in the
community and they ace unable to do so. People should be
able to marry again where they can obtain a death ccrtificate
mm respect of a marriage already long since dead.

43. The objection that imetricvable breakdown as 4 ground
st divorce is vague has been already dealt with! Other ob-
jections to it may be dealt with.

(a) Irretrievable breakdown allows the spouses,
67 even ane spouse, to terminate the marriage at will,
thus transforming marriage from a union for Jife into ane
which can be ended at pleasure.

{b) ॥ is contrary to the basic prineyple thar ne
man should be allowed to take advantage of his own
wrong ; a spouse who was responsible for the break-
down of marriage should not be able to rely on such
breakdown in order 1o obtain a divorce against his or
her partner's will, By authorising one spouse to di-
vorce the other against the Jatter’s will aficr separation
for a specific petiod. the Iaw will have given Statutory
Tecognition for the first time to the principle that a
Person may take advantage of his or ber own wrong.

These objections, advanced at one time or other against
the-grant of divorce on the ground of jrretrievable breakdown
of marriage, cannot, in our opinion, succeed in their enlirety.
They can result only in the insertion in the relevant legislation
of cevtain safeguards, intended to meet some of the objections
and २० allay some of the apprehensions.

» Para 4.2. डकार,

Objections


Principic of
not taking
advantage
of one’s
own wrong
already
modified

Recommen-
dation as to
breakdown,

16

4.4 The theory that one cannct take advantage of one’s
own wrong has not been adhered to in the Hindu Marriage
Act in the past. We may, in this context, refer to clause (ii)
of sub-section (1A) of section 13 of the Act. According to
that clause, cither party to a marriage, whether solemnized be-
fore or after the commencement of this Act, may present a
petition for the dissolution of the marriage by a decree of di-
vorce on the ground that there has becn no restitution of con-
jugal rights as between the parties to the marriage for a period
of one year or afterwards after the passing of a decree for the
restitution of conjugal rights in proceedings to which they were
parties. This provision clearly contemplates that even the
party which has been in the wrong in so fat as it has failed
10 comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal cghis can
also apply for a dectee of divorce on the ground that there
has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the par-
ties to the marriage for a period of onc year or upwards after
the passing of the decree for restitution of conjugal rights in
a proceeding to which they were parties. Such a party, though
at fault, would thus be taken advantage of its own fault. के
cannot, therefore, be said that under the provisions of the Hindu
Marriage Act. as they stand at present. no person can be alto-
wed to take advantage of his own wrong,

4.5. On a consideration of the merits and demerits of the
theory of irrctrievable breakdown of marriage, we have come
to the conclusion that such a breakdown of marriage should be
a good ground for the grant of a decree of divorce under the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. if proved by the parties living apart
for the specificd period,' and subject to the safeguards which
we are recommending later in this Report.”

We need noi repeat the various arguments in support
of introducing such a ground. to which we have already made
a reference in the preceeding discussion. In reaching our con-
clusion, we have been principally impressed by the considera-
tion that once the marriage has broken down beyond repair.
it would be unrealistic for the law not to take notice of that fact,
and it would be harmful to society and injurious to the interests
of the partics if the legal bond is sought to be maintained not-
withstanding the disappearance of the emotional substratum.

1 As to the specified period. sce Chepler 6. infre
+ As to safeguards see Chapter 7 anfre



17

Such 2 course would encourage continuous bickering, perpetual
bitterness, and may offen lead to immorality. Where there has
been a long period of continuous separation, it may faitly be
surmised that the matrimonial bond is beyond repair, The
tartiage becomes a fiction, though supported by a legal tie.
By refusing to sever thal tic the law in such cases do not serve
the sanctity of marriage ; on the contrary, it shows scant regard
for the feelings and emotions of the parties.

Public interest demands not only that the married status
should, as far as possible, as long as possible, and whenever
possible, be maintained, but also that the court should be em-
powered to declare defunct de jure what is already defunct de
facto. Where a marriage has been wrecked beyond the hope
of salvage, public interest lies in the recognition of that fact.
To keep the sham is obviously conducive to immorality and
potentially more prejudicial to the public interest than a disso
lution of the marriage bond.

Since there is a0 acceptable way in which a spouse can
be compelled to resume life with the consort, nothing is gained
by trying to keep the parties tied for ever to a marriage that
in fact has ceased to exist. Marriage is life-long cohabitation
in the home. When the prospect of continuing cohabitation has
ceased, the legal tic should be dissolved.

46. We may state that majority of the replies received
to our Questionnaire have favoured the introduction of this
ground of divorce in the Hindu Marriage Act.

Tt has been stated in a ceply received from a lady Ad-
Yocate? that it is only case where relief (of divorce) ought to
be granted and canno; be granted by reason of certain difficul-
ties, that we should now provide for. While recognising the
desirability of reducing the necessary of unwilling partners being
forced to live together, the reply emphasises thay at the same
time divorce should not be made absolutely easy, because it
will 1080 to tremendous insecurity for women. The reply
states that to arrive at a conclusion that the Marriage has bro-
ken down irretrievably, there should be some evidence in the
form of a commission of Tatrimonial offence ; at the same time,
the reply states that we should obviate the necessity of

* S.No. 19,

Replies to
the Ques.

tionnaire.


Objection

af one High

18

apportionment of the guilt. Our approach, however; as already
stated, is to make provision for divorce in, cases of irretrievable
breakdown of marriage, irrespective of the fact as to whether
any party is or is not at fault.

4.7, A High Court Judge? has expressed disagreement with
the suggestion that the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 should be
amended with a view to making irretrievable breakdown of
marriage as a good ground for grant of a decree of divorce.
His comment is :

“In my opinion, such an amendment would put
human ingenuity at a premium and throw wide open
the doors to litigation, and will create more problems
than (are) sought to be solved.”

We are, however, inclined, for reasons mentioned else-
where,? to agree with the majority view that breakdown of marri-
age is a good ground for the grant of a decree of divorce.

4.8. We may note that the Judges of one High Court* have
expressed themselves against the introduction of imctrievable
breakdown as a ground of divorce. One of the points made in
the reply of the High Court is that it is extermely difficult (0 say
that the husband and wife would never live together merely be-
cause there has been a rift between them and for the time being
it appears that there may not be any prospect of their living 10-
gether. We agree that the mere fact that there has been a rift
between the parties or that they are for the time living apart does
not mean that the marriage has come to an end. But we may,
with respect, point out that our proposal contemplates not me-
rely a breakdown of the marriage, but a breakdown which is
irretrievable. Of course, it is possible that what may appear
to one person fo be irretrizvable may appear to another as not
yet beyond repair. But such a state of things cannot be allow-
ed to continue indefinitely, and there must arrive a point’ of
time when one of the parties should be permitted to seek the
judgment of the court as to whether there is or there is not a
possibility of the marriage being retrieved. Human life has‘a

3 5. No. 25.
2 Para 4,5, supra.
AS No. 30.


19

short span and situations causing misery cannot be allowed io
continue indefinitely. A halt has to be called at some stage. Law
cannot tum a blind eye to such situations, nor decline 10 give
adequate response to the felt necessities arising therefrom.

It seems to us that the social interest and balance of
justice lic in favour of giving due weight to the fact that where
the parties have lived apart for the specified period, they should
be taken to be married only in name. It may be very unfortu-
nate that such a situation has come about ; but once it has
come about, wisdom lics in accepting it as an established fact
and in proceeding to consider how best to deal with the situation,
rather than in turning a blind eye to realities, The Gujarat
Government,! while supporting the suggestion that irretrievable
breakdown of marriage should be made a ground of divorce,
has observed that it would be advisable that the spouses should
be allowed to re-construct the marriage where the first was
“wrecked beyond the possibility of reconciliation”. We find con-
siderable force in this view.

49. The Government of India, Ministry of Education, De-
partment of Social Welfare, has expressed the review" that “mak-
ing irretrievable breakdown of marriage” a ground for grant of a
decree of divorce is redundant in the light of the ‘act that
sufficient grounds covering ‘irrctrievable breakdown of marri-
age’ exist in’ the Hindu Marriage Act and the Marriage Laws
Amendment Act, 1976, for the purpose of seeking divorced”

We have given careful consideration to this view, but
are unable to subscribe to it. As pointed out earlier,’ the
grounds contained in the Hindu Marriage Act, even after its
amendment in 1976, do not specifically deal with irretrievuble
breakdown of marriage. Some of the amendments made in the
Hindu Marriage Act in 1976 no doubt take into account, by
necessary implication, irretrievable breakdown of marriage as
a televant factor. There is, however, no ground in the Act,
even after the amendments of 1976, which expressly provides
for divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marri-
age. As indicated earlier,‘ the purpose of the amendment
suggested by us is to provide for divorce on the growod of

S.No. 3h
3 5. ०, 33.
3 Paragraphs 2,210 2.7, supra.
4 Paragraph 2.5 , supra.


20

irretrievable breakdown of marriage even if one of the spouses
does not join together in the filing of the petition, or even op-
poses, such a petition. Our amendment further suggests that
the living apart of the husband and wife for a sufficient length
of time would be presumptive proof of breakdown of marriage.
‘There is no provision in the existing Jaw to meet such an even-
tuality. It may also be reiterated that the change in law re-
commended by us would obviate the necessity of washing dirty
jinen of marital life in public."


CHAPTER 5
RETENTION OF OTHER GROUNDS OF DIVORCE

5 One of the questions which has posed itself for decision
is whether the introduction of irtetrievable breakdown of marti-
age as oa ground = of divorce under the Hindy Marri-
age Act should result in eliminalion of the other grounds of
divorce, which already exist in the Act, eg. adultery, cruelty
er desertion, or whether those other grounds should also be
retained, Some foreign writers have expressed the view that
after the introduction of the ground of irretrievabie breakdown
of marriage the other grounds might mot be retained. We are.
however, unable to subscribe to the above view as, in our opi-
nion, the introduction of irretrievable breakdown of marriage
a8 a ground for divorce does mot render the other grounds for
divoree which already exist on the statute book as superfluous.
There is no inherent contradiction or fallacy in having both the
new and ihe old grounds

Section 1 of the English Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973,
is the oaly section in that Act which deals with a decree for
divorce. According te that section’, a petition for divorec may
be presenicd to the court by cither pasty lo a Marriage on the
ground that the marriage has broken down irretrievably,  Sub-
section (2) of that section enumerates the circumstances from
which the court may infer that marriage has broken down irre-
trievably. Those cireumstances are :---

(a) that the tespancten: has committed adultery and
the petitioner finds it intolerable to live with the res-
pondent;

(0) that the respondent has behaved in such a
way that the petitioner cannot reasonably be expected
to live with the respondent;

* Section 1, Matrimonial Causes Act, t973

Question of
retention of
other
grounds.


Reteation
favoured.

Existing
grounds
divorce.

22

(c) that the respondent has deserted the petitioner
for a continuous period of at least two years immedia~
tely preceding the presentation of the petition;

(d) that the parties to the marriage shave lived
apart for a continuous period of at least two years immme-
diately preceding the presentation of the petition and the
respondent consents to a decree being granted ;

(e) that the parties to the marriage have lived apart
for a continuous period of at least five years immediately
preceeding the presentation of the petition.

It would appear from the above that according to the
law in England, an inference of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage can be drawn from a variety of circumstances, AS
against that, according to the amendment suggested by us',
irretrievable breakdown of marriage can be inferred from ;the
fact that the parties io the marriage have been continuously
living apart for 8 period of more than three years. The English
law on the subject of irretrievable breakdown of marriage, un-
like the amendment suggested by us, is much more comprehen-
sive and brings within its ambit such circumstances as adultery,
cfuelty or desertion. As we are not bringing in, for proof of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage, considerations like adul-
tery, cruelty or desertion, it is essential that the express pro-
visions which we have already got in the Hindu Marriage Act
relating to allegations of adultery, cruelty or desertion against
one of the spouses should stand. We arc, therefore, of the
opinion that the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage
for obtaining decree of divorce shall be in addition to the
grounds as arc already there in the existing provisions of the
Hindu Marriage Act.

5.2 Notwithstanding the theoretical attractiveness of the
contrary view, we think that there are certain practical considera-
tions which cannot be brushed aside.

5.3 Take, for example, some of the grounds of divorce
provided in the Hindu Marriage Act?. The Act provides for
divorce on various grounds like adultery or cruelty. Such
grounds should, in our opinion, be sufficient for the grant of
divorce.

3 Section 13(1), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.


23

It would not be proper in such cases to require the addi-
tional ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage because
of the said misconduct of the spouse in committing acts of
adultery or cruelty. To do sc would have the effect of making
the present provision much more stringent. It may be that
such misconduct of a spouse may also result in a large number
of cases in irretrievable breakdown of marriage. The question
to’be considered, however, is whether in the event of such mis-
conduct, it should be necessary to ask for further proof of
inetrievable breakdown of the marriage. Our answer to this
question is in the negative. The various grounds of divorce
pfovided in the Hindu Marriage Act should, therefore, be re-
tained. It may be that there will sometimes be overlapping
where the specific ground of divorce (¢.g- cruelty} has also led
to the parties living apart and breakdown of the marriage.
However, that in itself is not a conclusive consideration for
abolishing the present grounds of divorce.

We do not, therefore, favour the omission of the exist-
ing grounds of divorce as an essential consequence of the adop-
tion of trretricvable breakdown as a ground of divorce.

We may note that a High Court Judge has, in ber ri-
ply’, specifically stated as follows :-—

“This ground should be in addition ta the grounds
already specified under the Hindu Marriage Aci, as
amended.”

3 3, No, 34 (under 0. 2).


CHAPTER 6
THE REQUIREMENT OF LIVING APART

Living apart. 6.1 We may now deal with the yardstick to be applicd by
the courts in drawing an inference of an irretrievable breakdown
of marriage. The yardstick would have to be factual and tangi-
ble, and not abstract or one pertaining purely to a state of mind.

Accordingly, in most countries it has usually been con-
sidered desirable to give some guidance to the court as 10 how
irretrievable breakdown is to be evidenced. For this purpose,
the legislative provision allowing divorce on the ground of irre~
trievable breakdown of marriage is usually made subject, inter
alia, to the condition that there must be proof that the parties
have lived apart for a specified period.

Questions 2 62 Taking note of this aspect of the matter, our questionnaire
invited views as to the circumstances that would constitute suffi-
cient proof of breakdown.

The question was in these terms :'

“Q. 2. If the reply to the question No. 1 be in the
affirmative, what circumstances, in your opinion, should
be considered to be sufficient to prove irretrievable break-
down of marriage ?”,

In regard to the period of living apart as evidencing break-
down, question 3 of our questionnaire was as follows :*

“Q. 3. How long should the parties have lived se-
parately before the court can come to the conclusion that
there has been an irretrievable break down of marriage ?”

Points made 6.3 We give below the important points made in regard to
Question 2. We shall deal Jater* with the replies to question 3.

t
Question 2.
4 Question 2.
3 Question 3.
3 See para 6.7, infra.

fi



25

Some of the points made are :--
“Agreement by the two married people should be

enough.”

“Nor co-habiting” should be sufficient proof of irretrieva-
ble breakdown of marriage.*

“Separate living of (the) spouses for more than five years”
should be sufficient to prove irretrievable breakdown of
marziage.®

“Continuous separate Lving of the spouses in the
prime period of youth, and desire of not coming together in the
mind of one is sufficient to prove the irretrievable breakdown of
marriage.*

न) After a contmuous separation arising out of the rift
and no petition of conjugal right from either side (party) is filed
during the period of one year, “separation” should be deemed to
be conducive ground for irjetrievable breakdown of marriage.

or

Gi) Continuous separation for more than ome year,
coupled with suspicion of misconduct from cither side, mental
or physical cruelty arising out of admission. Discovery of either
of spouse. regarding adultery covering pre-marital illicit relations
tendering their living together impossible”.5

“Continuous separate living of the spouses for long time”
should be sufficient proof of itretrievable breakdown.*

The circumstances sufficient to prove irretrievable break-
down, according to some others, are ना

(a) proof that “both the spouses are living separately
for not less than one year on account of internal disputes
and have no willingness to comply with conjugal rights . ”;

(b) if a case for judicial separation or divorce or
restitution of conjugal rights is pending for three years,
and “no attempts to settle the dispute or to compromise
are made by either party”.

8. No. 1.
3. No. 2.
5.
5.


26

(0) “in some cases, it is even enough to take into
account a simple submission of the spouse that he or she
cannot live together . wee

Other circumstances mentioned in some of the replies are
as under :—

“Present grounds of divorce (Gin the Hindu Marriage Act)
should be sufficient to prove irretrievable breakdown of
marriage”.+

“Separation of the spouses, for whatever reasons, for a
sufficiently reasonable time, should be considered sufficient to
prove irretrievable breakdown of marriage.”?

The citcumstances sufficient to prove breakdown may
be “somewhat like” those given below, but “they are by no means
exhaustive” ;°

“(a) where the thinking df husband and wife on some
vital aspects of life are so divergent that there is no pos-
sibility of reconciliation and co-ordination between
them... .:

“(b) absence of sex appeal in either spouse qua cach
other ;

“(c) aversion to sex on the part of eithcr spouse and
their lack of warmth for each other ५

“(d) emotional disintegration between the two
spouses”.

The court should be satisfied that the other party “has
been living away from the petitioner without cohabitation for a
continuous period of not less than three years”.+

“The suggestion (in Question 1)* can be accepted only if
the law would also provide new facts which would result in
breakdown.”*

3 5. No, 15.
7 8. No. 17.
3 5, No. 19.
+ 5. No. 19,
* Question 1 was as follows +

“Do you agree with che suggestion that the Hindu Marviage Act be
amended with a view to making irretrievable breakdown of marriage as
a good ground for eran. of a decice of divorce 27

4 8. No. 19.



27

According to another reply, “breakdown of marriage is a
matler of fact for the court to decide, after satisfaction that all
possible means of reconciliation have been tried out and have
failed”.

6.4, After giving our carnest consideration to the matter we
would express the view that irretrievable breakdown may be
presumed from the fact that the husband and wife have been liv-
ing apart for a continwously long time. How much long that
period should be, will be dealt with subsequently.*

6.5. We would add that living apart for the specified petiod
should be the only proof of irretrievable breakdown. In formu-
jating a conclusion on this question, several considerations have
to be borne in mind.

It is, in our opinion, not enough for a party to aver that
there has been an irretrievable breakdown of marriage. Such an
avernment must be substantiated. What better material can there
be to substantiate that averment than the fact the husband
and wife, despite their marital relationship, have been living apart
for a long period ? The fact that the parties to the marriage
have not lived together for a number of years can reasonably be
taken to be a tangible presumptive proof of the breakdown of
marriage.

Moreover, the essence of marriage is a sharing of common life,
2 sharing of all the happiness that life has to offer and all the
misery that has to be faced in life, an experience of the joy that
comes from enjoying, in common, things of the matter and of
the spirit and from showering love and affection on one’s off-
spring. Living together is a symbol of such sharing in all its as-
pects, Living apart is a symbol indicating the negation of such
sharing. It is indicative of a disruption of the essence of marriage
—“breakdown”—~and if it continues for a fairly tong period, it
would indicate destruction of the essence of marriage—irretric-
vable breakdown”.

Recommen-
dation as to
0. 2—living
apart as
proof of
breakdown,

6.6. As to Question 3, which deals with the period of living period not to
apart, the only consideration that should be borne in mind is b¢ too long

that the period should not be so long as to prove intolerable and
be tantamount to a denial of relief, nor should it be too short as
to amount to an encouragement to the seeking of divorce in haste

2 8, No. 198.

* See infta,

* Para 6.2, supra.
21M of Law/78—3

or too short,


Replies to
Question 3.

28

without considering the possibility of working the marriage in
future notwithstanding its temporary failure in the past. Notwith- -
standing such temporary failure and loosening of the bond that
is expected to bind the parties together, there still may be hope
of saving the marriage. ‘There may have been a disruption of
the essence of marriage, but not its destruction. The line bet-
ween disruption and destruction may be a fine one, but is never-
theless one which no wise legislator should be ready to disregard.
On this reasoning, it is our view that a period of living apart for
three years should be required before the breaking-down may
be said to be irretrievable.

6.7 We may note that the replies received to Question 3 of
our Questionnaire suggest periods ranging from six months to ten
years. The period of six months has been suggested by one lady
Advocate,’ while the period of ten years has been suggested by a
retired Judge of the High Court.?

In between the two extremes (six months and ten years},
there is a wide range. Thus several replies to the Questionnaire
favour a period of one year.? One of them,* however, states that
the marriage itself must have subsisted for at least three ycar.

The period of two years has been suggested in one of ihe
teplies.5

The period of three years has been suggested by a High
Court Judge.®

A State Government suggests a period of four years.?
A woman lawyer suggests three or five years.*

Preference for a period of five years has been expressed
in several replies,® including that of a High Court Judge.t°

One reply suggests a period of seven years."

. No. 19.
No. 17.

No. 1, 7, 11, 13 and (94.
No. 198.

No. 15

No. 25.

No. 11

No. 19

. No. 5, 6, 10 and 19 (3 ता 5 years).
३० 8. No. 34.

मे हु. No. 2,

फीफा फ एफ एफ एफ


29

6.8. On a carefu) consideration of the matier, we have come Recommen-
10 the conclusion that a period of three years’ continuous living (वी 3
apart would be just and fa. We note that the period in ihe Peridd of
English Act’ is five years. But we should point out that matrimo- हि कक्षा
nial proceedings in India take a considerable time for their dis-

posal. By the dime ihe decree & passed, the period of conti-

nuous Living apart would, in practice, exceed even five years in

the majority of cases. We ure. therefore. of the view that a

period of three years’ continuous living apare immediately before

the presentation of the petition should be enough. While, on the

one hand, it would leave adequate time for reflection and would

not be inconsistent with the stability of marriage, on the other

hand, it would not be imaterably long so as io promote immora-

lity cr further bitterness.

6.9 We may state that according to the English Act,? in con- Calculation
sidering the length of period for which the husband and wife of continuows
have been living apart, no eccount is taken cf any one or more
periods, not exceeding six months in all. during which the parties
resumed living with eaca ober. Such resumption of living to-
gcther is resorted to sometimes with a view to finding out as to
whether the partics can still get reconciled despite living apart
for a long time on account of rift in marriage. We do not want
to discourage such resumption of living with each other. Such
living with each other can also sometimes become necessary be-
cause of situations like death in the family or the illness of a
child. In case, however, the law were to require that the period
of living apart would have to be calculated afresh from resump-
tion of living with each ther, the spouses would be averse to
resuming living with each other. We would, therefore not take
into account tempcrary resumption of living with each - other.
The otal period of such resumed living with each other.
in our view, should be three months. We are applying this cut
in the period of resumed living with each other in the period of
six months mentioned in the English law, as we have also
applied* a corresponding cut in the period of five years prescribeil
by the English law.

3 Section 1(2e), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973.
3 Section 2(5), Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973
+ Paragraph 6.8, supra.


CHAPTER 7

SAFEGUARDS

Introduction 7.1. In’ most countries, certain safeguards have been provided in
legislation permitting divorce on the ground of breakdown of the
marriage. These safeguards proceed on two important considera-
tions. First, a marriage that is worth preserving ought to be pre-
served, and secondly, where dissolution of the marriage becomes
unavoidable, care should be taken to ensure that the interests of
those who are likely to suffer as a result of divorce are taken
care of.

The safeguards that are usually provided by legislation in
other countries are the following :—

I. Provision for the welfare of children.

TI. Provision permitting the court to refuse divorce
in case of hardship to the respondent.

वा. Provision restricting divorce within a certain
period after the marriage.

‘This safeguard is built-in in the amendment recommend-
ed by एड, as a petition for divorce on the ground of irre-
trievable breakdown of marriage can, in the very nature
of things, be filed only afier more than 3 years from the
date of the marriage.

IV, Provision for reconciliation.

Provision for this purpose already exists in the Hindu
marriage Act.?

While dealing with cases of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage, it may be stated that current thinking is that compul-
sory counselling is likely to prove a waste both of time and of
resources as most couples will not, in any event, be reconciled
and that resources should be concentrated on those parties who

2 Para 6.8, supra.
4 Section 232), Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

30


31

show a positive interest in their marriage.’ It has been suggested
that? counselling is unrealistic whcre the spouses do not show a
positive interest in the future of their marriage and do not seek
counselling voluntarily. It may, however, be appropriate 10
mention that section 23(2) of the Act imposes a duty on the
court to make every endeavour to bring about recancifiation
“where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and
circumstances of the case”.

Where conciliation within the terms of section 23(2) of
the Act is possible, it would sometimes be desirable to utilise
the services not only of qualified persons but also of members
of the family, in effecting reconciliation, In this context we may
refer to Order 32A of the Cade of Civil Procedure, 1908, in-
serted in 1976.8 The Order applics to suits and proceedings re-
lating to matters concerning the family. Rule 3 of the Order
imposes a duty to make efforts for settlement in such suits and
proceedings.

Rule 4 of the Order reads as follaws :—

“4. In every suit or proceedings to which this Order
applies, it shall be open to the court ta secure the services
of such person “(preferably a woman where available),
whether related 10 the parties or not, including a person
professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the
family as the Court may think fit. for the purpose of
assisting the Court in discharging the functions imposed
by rule 3 of this Order.

Matrimonial Courts can resort to this rule whenever
suitable occasion arises.

V. Restrictions arising out of the financial position of the
respondent.

1 Max Rheinsiein, “The Law of Divorce and the Problem of Murriage
Stability” (1956) 9 Vanderbilt Law Review 633. referred to by Frank Bates,
“The Enforcement of Marriage Revisited” (July-September, 1977) Vol. 6,

No. 3, Anglo-American Law Review, ISL.

3 Seildson. “Systema
Cases : Some Refleciiens on
bility” (1967) 36 George Washi
Bates, “The Enforcement of Ma
Vol. 6, No. 3. Anglo-American

3 Order 32A, Rules 3-4, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
21M of Law/78—4

६ Marriaze Investigation and Counselling in Divorce
s Coasttunonal propriety and general desita-
on Law Review 60, 20, referred to by Frank
ly-September. 1977),

Assistanioe
of Welfare
expert.


32.
1, WELFARE OF CHILDREN

Welfare of 7-2. Concern has been expressed about the adverse effecis of

children divorce on children. ‘The view has been put forth that while, in
some cases, divorce may alleviate the siress caused by constant
conflict between the parents, yet the rise in divorces means that
we are creating a new society with “multiple” parents, and in that
situation the children may be found to be the sufferers. Adults
who divorce and re-marry are scarching consciously a better way
of being happy, but children are being carried along these pro-
cesses without choice.*

Provision as 7.3 शा this context, the English Act contains an important

in the restriction on the grant of a decree absolute for divorce.? Section

English Act. 41 of the Act is quoted below :—

“41. (1) The Court shall not make absohue 2
decree of divorce or of nullity of marriage, or grant a
decree of judicial separation, unless the court, by order,
has declared that it is satisfied: —

(a) that for the purposes of this section there
are no children cf the family to whom tht: ection
applies; or

(b) that the only children who are or may be
children of the family to whom this section applies are
the children named in the order and that-—

(i) arrangements for the welfare of every child
so named have been made and are satisfactory or
ate the best that can be devised in the circum-
stances; or

Gi) it is impracticable for the party or par-
ties appearing before the court to make any such
arrangements; or

(०) that there are circumstances making it desir-
able that the decree should be made absolute or
should be granted, as the case may be, without delay
notwithsanding that there arc or may be children cf
the family to whom this section applies and that the
court is unable to make a declaration in accordance
with paragraph (की) abe >

ब Interview with Salvador Minuchin, Director, Philadelphia Child Guid-
ance Clinic, as quoted in U.S. News of the World Report (13 January, 1975).
| pages 44, 46.
4 Section 41, Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973.


33

(2) The court shall not make an order declaring

that it is satisfied as mentioned in sub-section (1)(c}

above unless it has obtained a satisfactory undertaking

from either or both of the partics to bring the question

of the arrangements for the children named in the order
.- before, the court. within a specified time.

(3) If the court makes absolute a decree of divorce
or of nullity of marriage, or grants a decree of judicial
separation, without having made an order under  sub-
section (1) above the decree shall be void but, if such
an order was made. no percon shall be entitled to chal-
Tenge the validity of the decree on the ground that the
conditions prescribed by sub-sertions (1) and (2) above
were not fulfilled.

(4) If the court refuses 10 make an order under
sub-section (1) above in any proceedings for divorce.
nullity of marriage or judicial separation it shall, on an
application by either party to the proceedings, make an
order declaring that it is not satisfied as mentioned m
that sub-section.

(5) This section apphes to the following children
of the family. that is to say—

{a} any minor child of the family who at the
date. of the order under sub-section (1) above is—

{i} under the age of sixteen, or

(i) receiving instruction at an educational
establishment or undergoing training for a trade.
Profession or vocation, whether or not he is also
m gainful employment; and

(b) any other child of the family to whom the
court by an order under that sub-section directs that
this section shall apply; and the court may give such
a direction if it is of opinion that there are special
circumstances which make it desirable in the interest
of the child that this section should apply to him.

(6) In this section ‘welfare’, in relation to a child,
includes the custody and education of the child and
financial provision for him.”


34

Provision in 7.4, The Hindu Marriage Act has a limited provision as to

Macao the testriction on the grant’ of divorce in the interests of child-

Act, ten, Under section 14(1), the court may, upon application
made to it in accordance with such rules as may be made by
the High Court in that behalf, allow a petition to be presented
before one year has elapsed since the date of the marriage on
the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship to the
petitioner or of exccptional depravity on the part of the tes-
pondent.

Section 14(2) provides—

“In disposing of any application under this section
for leave to present a petition for divorce befote the
expiration of one year from the date of the marriage,
the court shali have regard to the interests of any child-
ten of the marriage and to the question whether there
is a reasonable probability of a reconciliation between
the parties before the expiration of the said one year.”

Question 4 4 7.5, As to the presence of children, Question 4 of our Ques-
naireand = (ionnaire was as follows” +

thereto, *Q. 4. Should the presence of children operate as a
bar to the grant of a decree a” divorce on the ground of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage? If so. should the
bar be absolute or partial ?”

We may state that the replies received on this Question.
by and large, do not consider it neecssary to regard the evislence
of children as a total bar. One reply, however. regar:ls that
fact as constituting a partial bar if the child or children be under
the age of ten years and are attached to bo:h the spouses in an
exceptionally affectionate manmer.*

Recommen- 7.6. We do not think that the presence of children should
dation as operate as a total bar to the grant of a decree of divorce. How-
ever, we are of the view that where divorce on the ground of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage is sought, the court should
take into account the interests of children. Where financial pro-
yision needs to be made for the maintenance, support and edu-
cation of children, there cxist provisions on the subject in the
Act. The fact that there are children is obviously 8 matter that
lends emphasis to the need for making appropriate orders under
these provisions.

U Section [व Hindu Marriage Ach 1955.
® Question 4.
3 §, No. 17. &


35

Accordingly, we are recommending! the insertion of a
provision on the subject.

The principal objective sought to be achieved by the pro-
vision relating to children of the marriage may be stated at
this stage.

The Court shall not pass a decree of divorce under the
new provision relating to irretrievable breakdown unless the
Court is satisfied that adequate provision for the maintenance of
children, born out of marirage, referred to below has been made
consistently with the financial capacity of the parties to the
marriage.

This provision will apply to--~
(a) minor children;

(b) unmarried or widowed daughters who have not
the financial resources to support themselves; and

(c) children who, because of special condition of
their physical or mental health, need looking after and
have not the financial resources to support themselves.

वा. HARDSHIP

7.7, Then there is the question of hardship that may be caused Hardship
to the respondent by the grant of divorce. The English Act?

enables ihe respondent to a petition for divorce based on five

years’ separation as constituting breakdown to oppose the peti-

tion on the ground that “the dissolution of the marriage will

tesult in grave financial or other hardship to him and that it

would in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage”,

The following is the text of the cntire section :

Refusal of decrec in five year separation cases on grounds of
grave hardship to respondent,

5. (4) The respondent to a petition for divorce in which the
petitioner alleges five “years” separation may oppose the grant of
a decree on the ground that the dissolution of the marriage wil
result in grave financial or other hardship to him and that it
would in ail the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the martiage.
3 See Chapter 8, infra.
3 Section 5, Matrimonial Causes Avi, 1973.


Case law
as to
“hardship”

Question 3,

36

(2) Where the grant of a decree is opposed by virtue of
this section. then—

(a) if the court finds that the petitioner is entitled
to rely in support of his petition on the fact of five
years’ scparation and makes oo such finding as to any
other fact mentioned in section 1(2) above, and

(b) if apart from this section the court would grant
a deeree on the petition.

the court shall consider cil the circumstances, including the con-
duct of the parties to the marriage and the interests of those
partics and of any chiliren or other persons concerned, and if
of opinion that the dissolution of the -marriage will result in
grave financia! or other hardship to. the respondent and that it
would in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage
it shall dismiss the petition.

“(3) For the purposes of this section hardship shall
include the foss of the chance of acquiring any benefit
which the respondent might acquire if the marriage were
not dissolved.”

7.8. This defence. therefore, requires proof of two distinct
elements. First, grave financial or other grave hardship to the
Tespondent if the marriage is dissolved and, secondly, facts and
matters which in the opinion of the court, would in all the cir-
cumstances make it wrong tc dissolve the marriage. In consi-
dering both these elements, the court is expressly directed to
“consider all the circumstances, including the conduct of the
Parties to the marriage and the interesis of these parties and of
any children or other persons concerued.”

7.9, By question 5 of our Questionnaire, we solicited views on
the question whether the decree should be refused on the ground
of special circumstances’,

“Q. 5. Are there any special circumstances in which,

in your opinion, a decree for divorce should not be granted

. even if irretrievable breakdown of the marriage is
established ? Tf so, please specify the circumstances.”

We may stale that while many of the replies on this

question are in the negative, one of lhe replies® suggesis that if it is
¥ Question 5
5. No. 19.


37

felt that the introduction of the proposed ground may cause hard-
ship or prejudice to women, then the right (0 seek divorce on
the proposed ground may be limited to the wife.

The reply of a High Court Judge is more specific. She
says! ;

“When the parties to a matriage have lived apart
for a continuous period of at least 5 years immediately
Preceding the presentation of the petition, that fact
should be considered as a prima facie proof that the marri-
age has irrcirievably broken down, In no case should
a decree for divorce be passed on the ground that the
marriage has irretrievably broken down unless the parties
to the marriage have lived apart for a continuous period
Of at least 5 years immediately preceding, the presenta-
tion of the petition. The Court should be further satis-
fied in cach such case that the dissolution o! marriage
will not result in grave financial or other hardship to
the respondent. Payment of a suitable lump sum ali-
mony ta the wife when the respondent is the wife should
be a condition precedent to the grant of such a divorcee.
The amount should be determined by the Court. In the
alternative the Court may grant a monthly amount as
maintenance to the wife if the Court is satisfied that
such future monthly payments are adequately secured.

Either party should be able to present such a peti-
tion, and the consent of the other party should net be ne-
cessary for presenting such a petition.”

7.10. We are of the view that there is something to be said for
conferring a discretion on the Court to refuse divorce on the
ground of irrctrievable breakdown of marriage where a divorce
would cause grave financial hardship to the respondent and it
would be wrong in al! the circumstances to dissolve the marriage.
At the first sight. it may appear that once it is established that
the marriage has broken down irretrievably, it would be illogical
to allow a party to oppose the divorce on the ground of hard-
ship. It is, however, to be remembered that the grant of diverce—
or, for that matter, any other matrimonial telief—on a particular
statutory ground és not necessarily mandatory on the proof of
facts constituting ‘the statutory ground. There would be nothing

1 8, No. 34 finder 0.

Recommen-
dation as to
hardship

to the wife,


38

theoretically wrong in vesting a discretion in the court to refuse
relief if the special circumstances of the case require that the
relief should be refused. Such a course would be adopted: only
in exceptional circumstances, but the vesting of a statutory dis-
cretion would be intended to promote the interests of justice,
and is therefore supportable on that ground.

At the same time, we do not consider it just to give such
a discretion to the court in every case—as is the position in
England.1 We do not think that there is any need for conferring
such a diserction on the court in cases where the petition is by
the wife. The fact that a woman has commerced proceedings
would, in Indian conditions, imply in most cases that she finds
conjugal life intolerable. We do not think that is such citcum-
stances it would be iust or fair to leave any scope for refusal
of relief on the ground of hardship to the respondent husband.
Where the wife is the petitioner and the husband is the respon-
dent, there could bardly arise any situation in which the hard-
ship likely to be caused to the husband (respondent) by the
grant of a decree of divorce would be more grave thun the hard-
ship that would be caused to the wife (petitioner) if the divorce
is not granted. The situaticn may not be inconceivable, but
would not be very frequent.

7.11. It may be mentioned that unlike the English Act, which
grants discretion to the court to refuse decree of divorce in cases
of both grave financial and other hardship, we have confined in
the proposed amendment the discretion to refuse relief only in
tases of grave financial hardship when the court considers that
it would, in all circumstances, be wrong to dissolve the marriage.
We have omitted cases of “other hardship” as, in our opinion,
the words “other hardship” would open the way for all kinds
of pleas which might render the proposed provision contained
in section 13C, in case of petition by the husband, to be more or
less illusory in a large number of cases.

Recommen- 7-12. We, thercfore, recommend that where the wife is the res-

dation as fo pondent to a petition for divorce on the ground of irretrievable
on the basis breakdown of marriage, the court should have a discretion to

to the wife.

hi? refuse divorce where it is satisfied that the grant of divorce might
cause grave financial hardship 10 the respondent, and that in all
the circumstances it would be wrong to dissolve the marriage.

3, Section 5, Act of 1973, paragraph 7.7. supra.


39

7.13, It is desirable to explain another departure which we are Definition of

making from the English Act. Section 5(3) of the English Act
Provides that for the purposes of the section “hardship” shail
include the 1055 of the chance of acquiring any benefit which the
respondent might acquire if the marriage Were not dissolved,
We are of the view that such a provision should not be included
fm the Act. It seems to cover mere chances, possibiliiies and
expectancies and could be stretched to cover even the loss of
the expectancy that the wife might survive the husband and
might then inherit his estate by way of intestate successicn. We
do not, therefore, propose to insert the definition of “hardship”
as contained in the English Act.

“hardship”
in the

English Act
गण inserted


Insertion of

8.1

CHAPTER 8
RECOMMENDED AMENDMENTS

The following is a rough draft of the new sections to be

(0, 13D inserted in the Hindu Marriage Aci, 1955, in order to implement
our recommendaticas? or the several matters of a substantive
nature? dealt with in ihis Report so far :

130.

Divorce on
the groand
of urretricv-
able

breakdowa
of marriage.

Compas
section 161),
English

1973.
Compare

(९), English
Act, 1973,

Compare
Section

14),
English Act,
39:

Compare
section 2(5),
English Act,
1973.

1 Paragrach 4.

aul

“13C. (1) A petition for the dissoludion of a mattiage
by a deerce of diverce may be presented to the court by
either party 10 a marriage on the ground that the marriage.
has broken down irretrievably.

(2) The court hearing such a petition shall not hold
the marriage to have broken down irretrievably unless it
is satislied that the parties to the marriage have lived
apart for a continuous period of at leasi three years imme-
diately preceding the presentation of the petition.

(3) If the court is satisfied, on the evidence, as to
the fact mentioned in sub-section (2), then unless it is
satisfied on all the evidence that the marriage has not
broken down irretrievably, it shall, subject to the provi-
sions of this Act, grant a decree of divorce.

(4) In considering for the purpose of sub-section (2)
whether the period for which the parties to a marriage
have lived apart has been continuous. no account shail
be taken of any one period (not exceeding three months
in al!) during which the parties resureed living with cach
other, but ro peciad during which the pacties Lved with
each other shall count 2s part of the pertad for which the
pettics to the marriage lived apazt

5 a ground of divorce.
Paragraph 6.4 apart as proof af divorce,
Paragraph 6.8 Perio of living apart.
Paragraph 6.9 Cortinuity of the eriod.
Paragraph 7.6 Provision relating 10 children.
Paragraphs 7.10 to 7.12 Question ef hardship.
2 Far progsdvral apd consequential amendments, sce paragraphs 8.2
8.3, infea, which dea! with sections 21 and 2111),

40


4

(5) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (4),
a husband and wife shail be treated as living apart unless
they are living with each other in the same household, and
references in this section to the parties to a marriage living
with each other shall be construed as references to their
living with each other in the same househord.”

“13D. (1) Where the wife is the respondent to a peti-
tion for the dissolution of a marriage by a decree of
divotce under section 13C, she may oppose the grant of
a decree on the ground that the dissolution of the marriage
will result in grave financial hardship to her and that it
would in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the
marriage.

(2) Where the grant of & decree is oppased by
virtue of this section, thea—

१2) if the court finds that the petitioner is entitled
to rely on the grouad set out in section 13C, and

(b) if apart from this section the court would
grant a decres on the petition.

this court shall consider aff the circumstances, including
the corduct of the partics to the marriage and. the interests
of those parties and of any children or other persons con-
cecned, and if the cour, is of opinion that the dissolution
of the marriage will result in grave financial hardship to
the respondent and thai it would in ail the circumstances
be wrong to dissolve the martiage it shall dismiss the
petition, or in an appropriate case stay the proceedings
ual) arrangements have becn made io its satisfaction ta
eliminate the hardship.”

“138, (1) The Court shall not pass a deccee of divorce
under section 13C unless the court is saticfied that ade-
quate provision for the maintenance of children born out
of the marriage referred to in sub-scction (2) has been
made consistently with the financial capacity of the parties
to the marriage.

(2) This section shall apply ro—
(a) minor children :

(b) unmartied or widowed daugttecs who have
not the financial resources to support themselves ; and

Compare
section 2(6),
English Act,
1973

‘Wife's right
to oppose
tbe petition
om 1]
ground of
hardship.
Ceaipare
section 5,
English Act,
wD,

Resisiction
‘on degree
for divorce
affecting
children,


42

(०) children who, because of special condition of
their physical or mental health, need Jooking after and
have not the financial resources to support themselves.”

Amendment 8.2. In view of the proposed insertion of a new ¢cction, it will

2 also be necessary to make consequential changes in section
21A(1), clauses (a) and (b).

Power to Section 21A, sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) read

the :

petition in 88 follows :--

रखा पा “

canes. 21A. (1) Where—

(a) a petition under this Act has been presented,
to a district court having jurisdiction by a party to a
marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation
under scction 10 or for a decree of divorce under
section 13, and

(b) another petition under this Act has been pre-
sented thercafter by the other party to the marriage
praying for a decree for judicial separation under sec-
tion 10 or for a decree of divorce under section 13 on
any ground, whether in the same district court or ma
different disteict court, in the same State or in a
different State.

the petitions shall be dealt with as specified in sub-section
(2).
(2) Ina case where sub-section (1) applies,—

(a) If the petitions are presented to the same
district court, both the petitions shall be tried and
heard together by that district court ;

(b) if the petitions are presented to different dis.
trict courts, the petition presented later shall be trans-
ferred to the district court in which the cartier petition
was presented and both the petitions shall be heard
and disposed of together by the district court, in which
the earlier petition was presented.”

To sub-section (1), clause (a) and clause (b), newly added
section 13C should find a mention. In clause (a), aftcr the word
and figure “section 13”, the words, figure and letter “or section
13C” should be inserted. In clause (b), after the word and
figure-“section 13", the words, figure and Jetter “or section 13C”
should be inserted.


43

, i Amendment
8.3. Attention may also be drawn to section 23(1) (3) of the Amendmen

Hindu Marriage Act which relates to decree in the proceedings. 2301)8)-
Section 23(1) (a), in so far as it is material. reads as follows :—

“93. (1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether
defended or not, if the court is satisfied that—

(a) any of the grounds for granting relief cxists
and the petitioner [except in cases where the relief is
sought by him on the ground specified in sub-clause
(a), sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c) of clause (ii) of
section 5] is not in any way taking advantage of his or
her own wrong or disability for the purpose of such
relief, and.......-

then and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall
decree such relief accordingly.”

In cur opinion, it is desirable that the petition under the
new section 13C would be excluded from the scope of section
23(1)(a). Once divorce is decided to be granted on the basis
of irretrievable breakdown of the marriage, amy allegation that
the fault of a party contributed to the conditions leading to the
breakdown should be regarded as irrelevant. To allow section
23(1)(a) to operate in all its severity in such cases might defeat
the object of the recommended amendment. The general and
categorical prohibition contained in section 23(1)(a) would thus
be inappropriate in a case of irretrievable breakdown.

Accordingly, we recommend that in section 23(1) (a), after
the word and figure “section 57, the words, figure and letter “and
except in cases where the petition is presented under section 13C”
Should be inserted. The added matter will, of course, appear
before the closing rectangular bracket in section 23(1) (a)

Sd. (H. R. Khanna)
Chairman
Sd. (7, ७, Bakshi)
.Member-Secretary
New Delhi, the 7th April, 1978


APPENDIX

LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

QUESTIONNAIRE
ON

HINDU MARRIAGE ACT : DIVORCE ON THE GROUND
OF IRRETRIEVABLE BREAKDOWN OF MARRIAGE

Trretrievable breakdown of marriage is now considered, in
the laws of a numbcr of countries. a good ground of dissolving
the marriage by granting a decree of divorce. The Delhi High
Court, in a Full Bench decision in Ram Kati v. Gopal Das,’ took
note of the modern trend not to insist on the maintenance of a
union which has utterly braken down, and observed :

“It would not be practical and realistic approach,
indeed it would be unreasonable and inhuman. to compel
the parties to keep up the facade of marriage even though
the rift between them is complete and there are no pros-
pects of their cver living together as husband and wife.”

In the case of Blunt vy. मजा, Viscount Simon, L.C.,
hile specifying the considerations which should prevail in matrt-
monial maticrs. akse

“To these four considerations I would add a fifth
of a more general character, which must indeed be re-
garded as of primary importance, viz., the interest of the
community at large, to be judged by maintaining a true
balance between respect for the binding sanctity of marriage
and the social considerations which make it contrary to
public policy to insist on the maintenance of a union
which has utterly broken down. 16 is notcworthy that in
recent years this last consideration has operated to induce

1 Ram Kali v. Gopel Dav (1971) LL. 1 Delhi 10 (F.B.).
3 Blunt v. Bune (4943) 2 AW E.R, 76, 78 (ELL

44


45

the Courts to exercise a favourable discretion in many
instances where in an earlier time a decree would certainly
have been refused.”

The British Parliament since then has enacted the Matri-
monial Causes Act, 1973 (which replaces the Divorce Reform
Act, 1969), According to section 1 of that Act, a petition for
divorce may be presented on the ground that the marriage has
broken down irretrievably. Sections 1, 2 and 3 of the aforesaid
Act have been reproduced in an Annexure to this Questionnaire.

A distinguished jurist has suggested that irretrievable’
breakdown of marriage may also be made a ground of divorce by
making the necessary amendment in the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955. The relevant provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act regard-
ing divorce are comtained in sections 13, 13A and 13B which are
also reproduced in the Annexure to this Questionnaire? It may
be mentioned that section 13B provides for a decree of divorce
by mutual consent.

A petition for divorce on the ground of irretrievable break-
down of marriage in a majority of cases would not make it neces-
sary for the court to go into the question as to which party was
बा fauh before granting a decree of divorce and it would be encugh
to prove that the relations between husband and wife have reached
such a breaking point that there is no possibility of reconciliation.
This would obviate the necessity of producing evidence of acri-
mony and other incidents during the married life, some of which
the parties may not like to zeveal.

Before taking any further action on the suggestion that
irretrievable breakdown of marriage should be made a ground for
divorce, it has been considered appropriate to invite views on
the matter by issuing a bricf Questionnaire. It is requested that
if there be no objection, a considered reply may be sent to the

undersigned within six weeks of the date of receipt of this Ques-
tionnaire.

Q. 1. Do you agree with the suggestion that the Hindy Marriage
Act be amended with a view to making irretrievable breakdown
of marriage as a good ground for grant of a decree of diverce ?

3 The Anncxures to the Questionnaire have not been reproduced here.
3 The Annexures to the Questionnaire are not reproduced hera,


46

0. 2. If the reply to the question No. 1 be in the affirmative,
what circumstances, in your opinion, should be considered to be
sufficient to prove irretrievable breakdown of marriage ?

Q. 3. How long should the parties have lived separately before
the court can come to the conclusion that there has been an irre-
trievable breakdown of marriage ?

Q. 4. Should the presence of children operate as a bar to the
grant of a decree of divorce on the ground’ of irrgtrievable break-
down of marriage ? Tf so, should the bar be absolute or partial ?

(0. 5. Are there any special circumstances in which, in your
opinion, a decree for divorce should not be granted even if irre-
trievable breakdown of the marriage is established ? If so, please
specify the circumstances.

MGIPRRND—21 M of Law/?78—Sec. Il (N)—23-1-79—400