LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT

ON

RESTRICTION ON PRACTICE AFTER BEING A
PERMANENT JUDGE

Article 220 of the Constitution


CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
April 10, 1978

My deas Minister,
T forward herewith the seventy-second report of the Law
Commission of India concerning the question whether article 220
of the Constitution should he amended so as to permit retired

High Court Judges ‘o practise गा their own State after lapse of
certain period.

As mentioned in the first paragraph of the report, the subject
was taken up for considcration by the Law Commission at the
jnstance of the Government, The Law Commission does not
favour any such amendment fer reasons set out in the report.

The report. :t may be stated, deals only with one =pecific
point and as such i; mor cor less in the nature of a note. As
bowever the matter ॥ of considerable importance, we thought it
better to put it despite its brevity in the form of 9. repon,

With hind regards,

‘Yours sincerely,
Sdf-
dH. R. Khanna)
Hon’bie Shri Shanti Bhushan
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
New Delhi-1100D1

|


CONTENTS:

1, Ganosis of (hz Rigas, wad Con ssiod's view

2. Debates in the Constituent Assembly. 2
3. Dr. Sapru’s view + + . 3
4, Amendment of Anicle 220 in 1956 3
5, Present provision salutary. 4
6. Independence of the judiciary 4
7. Position in England . a
8. View expressed in che Fourteenth Report of the Law
Commission - fee 3
9. Cenchision . . . 3
APPENDICES:
Appendix 1 Gist of 04०४ in the Constituent Assembly rele-
yanl Lo Article 220 of the Constitution 6
Appendix 2 —Gist of debates in the Lok Sabba relevant to the
amendment of article 220 by the Constitution
(Seventh Areendment) Act, 1956 . पु पु 8

iid


1, The Minister for Law, Tamil Nadu, in a communication Gers oot

to the Minister for Law, Justice and Company Affairs has re-and  Com-
ferred to lectures delivered by Justice ९, B. Mukbarji, the then की हस्क
Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court, in the course of which

the Iearned Chief Justice had. stated*:

“A more serious threat to the judiciary in India is the
confiscation of the Judge’s right to practise in his own High
Court, a professional right for which he has qualified in his
life. Today the price of a seat on the Bench is the con-
fiscation of that professional right to practise in the High
Court of his home, in the High Court where he was enrolled
and where he practised before being elevated to the Bench.”

1६ was further observed in the course. of the lectures :

“This constitutional bar and restriction of Judges pre-
venting them from coming down from the Bench to practise
at the Bar strikes at the very root of the independence of
the judiciary.”

The Tami! Nadu Minister for Law has accordingly suggested
that the following proviso be added to Article 220 of the Cons-
titution :

“Provided that the restriction on a person who has
held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court to plead
or act in the same High Court or before any authority in
India shall not operate in the following cases, namely :—

(i) if the person has, at his option or otherwise,
been transferred as a Judge to any other High Court
and held office in that High Court for a period of not
less than three years immediately before the date of his
fetirement ; or

(ii) if a total period of four years has expired
From the date of his retirement; and accordingly
every such person shall be entitled to plead or act in
any High Court or before any authority in India and
in the Supreme Court.”

EPR, Mukbarji, Critical Problems of the Indian Constitution (1967),
pages 113-115


2

The Minister for 189, Justice and Company Affairs in a
note has directed that the Law Commission might be consulted’
regarding the proposed amendment in article 220.

The Law Commission is not in favour of making the
amendment in article 220 of the Constitution as suggested by the
Minister for Law, State of Tamil Nadu.

Debates in 2. The question as to whether a person who has held oflice
the Consti as a Judge of the High Court should, after ceasing to hold that
bly. office, be entitled to practise in any court was the subject of
considerable controversy at the time the Constitution was drafted.
Draft Article 196 (which ultimately took the shape of Article

220), as drafted by the Drafting Committee, was as follows? :—
“196. No person who has held office—
(a) asa judge of a High Court, or

(0) as an additional judge or temporary judge of
a High Court on having been recruited from
the Bar,

shall plead or act in any Court or before any authority
within the territory of India.”

After discussion, the draft Article 196 was amended accord-
ing to the amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar. The Acticle
as adopted was as follows*:—

Prohibition. “196, No person who has held office as a judge of a

of practising High Court after the commencement of this Constitution
before any shall plead or act in any Court or before any authority
authority by within the territory of India.”

a person who.

held office as

a Judge of a

High Court.

1 Note of the Minister for Law, Justice and Company Affairs, dated
the 23rd March, 1978, Department of Legal Affairs U.O. No. 1507/78,
Advice A Section, dated 23rd March, 1978.

® Shiva Rao, the Framing of India’s Constitution (1967), Vol. 3.
page 591, Draft Article 196 (Draft Constitution prepared by the Draft-
ing Committee, 21st February, 1948).

4 (4. Debates. Vol. 8. page 685 (7th June, 1949).


3

The Constituent Assembly rejected an amendment moved
by Mr. Hukam Singh', according to which the ban on practice
would have operated only within the jurisdiction of that High
Court in which the person concerned has held the office of Tudge.

3. <A factor which weighed with the Drafting Commitice in
putting a ban upon practice was the view expressed by Dr. Tej
Bahadur Sapru, the doyen of the legal profession in India. Accord-
ing to Dr, Sapru, once a maa accepted a judicial position he
should on no account revert to the Bar. He referred, in this
connection, to the English practice of never allowing a man to
go back to the Bar once he had accepted a judicial appointmeni+.
Dr. Sapru accordingly observed :

“I think the rule in future should be that any barrister
or advocate, who accepts a seat on the Bench, shall be pro-
hibited from resuming practice anywhere on retirement... .
I am also of the opinion that temporary or acting Judges
do greater harm than permanent Judges, when after thcir
seat’ on the Bench for a short period they revert to the Bar.
A seat on the Bench gives them a pre-eminence over their
colleagues and embarrasses the subordinate Judges who were
at one time under their control. and thus instead of their
helping justice they act as a hindrance to free justice... .

I; is however said that the true remedy lies in increasing the
pension of the Judges and allowing the Judges to secure
some pension after short periods of office. I agree that
this would be a very good ground for not permitting chem to
tesume practice, but pension or no pension there is a long
standing convention in England to the effect that no mem-
ber of the Bar should do anything which gives rise to the
impression that he has a pull over his opponent by reason
of having held a judicial post.”

4. Article 220 was amended by section 13 of the Constitution

(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956. Instead of the old article.

the new article came to read :

“220. No person who, after the commencement of this
Constitution, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High
Court shall plead or act in any Court or before any authority

1 CA. Debates, Vol. 8, page 680 (7th June, 1949).

पट वीक Rao. The Framing of India's Constitution (1967), Vol. 4, pages

* The word as quoted in Shiva Rao, Main Volume, page 502 is “term”.

Dr. Sapru’s
view.

Amendment
of article

> 220 in 1956,


4

in India except the Supreme Court and the other High
Courts.

Explanation—In this Article, the expression ‘High
court’ does not include a High Court for a State specified
in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment}
Act, 1956.7

Present pro*5. The position, as it emerges in the light of the new article,

Yaion salu- js chat 8 person who, after the commencement of the Constitution,
has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court is debarred
from pracusing in any court or before any authority in India
except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts. The
provision as it stands, in our opinion, is of 8 salutary nature.
There is no bar to a person practising in the Supreme Court and
the other High Courts after having held the office of a permanent
Judge of a High Court, To allow a person after he has been a
permanent Judge of a High Court to practise in that very court
or in a court subordinate to that court is bound to result in
embarrassing and undesirable situations. There are immense
potentialities of abuse and also, possibly. of mischief in per-
mitting such a course. It is also bound to detract from the dig-
nity which attaches to the office of Judgeship. The imposition
of a time lag between the date on which a person ceases to hold
office of High Court Judge and the date on which he resumes
praciice would not confer propriety on a course which is inherently
undesirable.

Indepen- 6. The Commission is unable to subscribe to the view that
Pree the Article 220 as it stands in any way affects the independence of
the judiciary. On the contrary, in the view of the Commission,

the ban on practice in a High Court by a person who has been

a permanent Judge of that very High Court is a step towards

securing the independence of the judiciary. Independence of

the judiciary can be threatened not only by external pressures;

it can equally be jeopardised by inner pressures. It cannot be

disputed that the prospect of starting or resuming practice in a

court of which one has been a Judge can sometimes generate

mental pressures and colour one’s approach even unconsciously.


5
appointment goes back to the Bar. Reference in this context
may be made to The Machinery of Justice in England by R. M.
Jackson!, wherein it is stated :

“A judgeship means the end of a career at the Bar
or in politics, there is no recent instance of a Judge resign-
ing and going back to practice or to politics, although it
can hardly be said that he may not do 50.7

8. The Law Commission presided over by Mr. M. C. Setalvad view ex:
in its Fourteenth Report* expressed its view against permitting pressed in
retired Judges to start practice. The Commission also expressed teenth

its unhappiness even on the change made in Article 220 as a rere ey of
result of which the Judges of the High Court were granted a Commission
limited right to practise. In the opinion of the Commission, such

practice greatly detracted from the dignity of the courts and the

administration of justice generally.

9. The Law Commission is, therefore, opposed to the mica of Conclusion
making any amendment in Article 220, as suggested.

Sd/-
H. R. Khanna Chairman
$0/-
13, 3:14 न Mombor-Sec -vlary
New Delhi,

Dated the 10th April, 1978.

RLM. Jackson, The Machinery of Justice in England (6th Ed ition
page 378

* Law Commission of India. 14th Report (Reform of Judicial Adminise
६ ration), Vol. 1, page 88, para 50.



APPENDIX 1

Gist of debates in the Constituent Assembly relevant to article
220 of the Constitution.

The debate on draft article 196, which took shape ulti-
mately as article 220 of the Constitution, took place in the
Constituent Assembly on the 7th June, 19491. Dr. Ambedkar
moved an amendment to draft article 196, proposing that tor
that article, the following article should be substituted :-—

“196, No person who has held office as a judge of a
High Court after the commencement of this Constitution
shall plead or act in any couft or before apy authority
within the territory of India.”

He described it merely as a rewording of the draft article.

Sardar Hukam Singh moved that in draft article 196, for
the words “within the territory of India”, the words “within the
jurisdiction of that High Co > should be substituted. He said
that it was not necessary for him to make a speech, as the amend-
ment was self-explanatory.

झा H. ए. Kamath was inclined to support the amendment
of Sardar Hukam Singh, as he felt that the sweeping constitu-
tional prohibition, as proposed in the draft article, was unwarran-
ted and, “may I say, undemocratic”.

Professor Shibban Lal Saksena referred to the English prac-
tice and was of the view that everybody who has been a Judge
should be debarred from practising. He would extend the bar
even to those who had been judges before the commencement
of the Constitution.

Shri Mahavir Tyagi said that if lawyers were appointed as
judges and, after retirement, they were also permitted to carry
on their legal practice in courts, the result would be that they
would stultify the great office of ‘justice’; “they would use these

~Pahatesy Val. pages 680 to कोर तक Tune, 1949).

6


offices as spring-boards or ladders to build much more lucrative
practice after retirement”.

Shri B. M. Gupte was of the view that a retired High Court
judge should not be barred from practising in the Supreme
Court or in other High Courts.

After some discussion, Article 196, as amended, was atlded
to the Constitution according te the amendment moved by
Dr. Ambedkar. The article as adopted was as follows! :—

“196, No petson who bas held office as a judge of a
High Court after the commencement of this Constitution
shall plead or act in any court or before any authority
within the territory of India.”

To complete this discussion it may be mentioned that in the
debate on draft Article 193 relating to the age of retirement of
Judges?, Shri K. M. Munshi, while defending the view that the
age of retirement ought to be 60 years in the case of High
Court Judges, also observed* ;

“The judges are not alowed to practise after retire-
ment; otherwise during the last years of his tenure there
may be temptation to so behave as to attract practice after
retirement.”

GA. Debates, Vol. 8 page 685 (7th June, 19%),
३ CA. Debates, Vol. 8, pages 468 to 675 (7th June, 19495,
३ CA, Debates. Vol. है, page 670 (7th June, 1949),

Prohibition
of practising
in courts or
before any
authority by
2 person
whe held
office as a
judge of a
High Court.


APPENDIX. 2

Gist of debates in the Lok Sabha relevant to the amendment
of article 220 by Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.

Original The Constitution as originally enacted provided as
article. follows! -—

“220. No person who has heid office as a Judge of a
High Court after the commencement of this Constitution
shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within
the territory of India.”

Amendment The question whether judges should be allowed to practise

Ou an nd after retirement came up for consideration before Parliament

Reasons. when the Constitution (Ninth Amendment} Bil], 1956, which was
ultimately passed as the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, came up for consideration. The Statement of Objecis and
Reasons annexed to the Bill explained the object underlying
clause 12 as follows? -—

“Clause 12.—An important factor affecting the selection
of High Court judges from the bar is the total Prohibition
contained in article 220 on practice after their retirement
from the bench. It is proposed to revise the article so as
10 relax this complete ban and permit a retired judge to
practise in the Supreme Court and in any High Cour other
than the one in which he was a permanent judge.”

It may be noted thar clause 12 of the bill was in these
terms* (--

“12. For article 220 of the Constitution, the following
article shall he substituted, namely :—

“220. No person who, after the commencement
this Constitution, has held office as a permanent

of
Shiva Rao. Select Documents, Vol. 4, page 826, Revised draft. Consti-
tution, clause 220,
_.* Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment)
Bill, 1956, Vol, 1. page 19. (14th April, 1956).
* Parliameniary Proceedings on the Constitution «Ninth Amendment)
Bill, 1956, Vol. 1, page 7.



y

Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court
or before any authority in India cxcept the Supreme
Court and the other High Courts.”

The Minister of Home Affairs (the late Pandit 6, B. Pant)
moved for a reference of the Bill to a Joint Committce of the
Houses?, and in the debate on this motion a number of poinis
were raised. The Joint Committee? did aot suggest any change
in the relevant clause of the Bill. When the Report of the Joint
Committee was taken up for discussion alongwith the Bill, further
points were raised in the debates*.

Some of the important points made by the leading speakers
may be briefly mentioned.

Shri Tek Chand, after emphasising the importance of the
consideration that it is very necessary that the High Court
Judge's conduct should conform to the “proverbial standards of
Caesar’s wife”, expressed doubts with reference to the proposed
amendment of article 220. in these terms‘

“But, it does not add to the dignity of a particular
Judge and we think it does not add to the dignity of the
institution, when a Judge who adorned the bench of a High
Court stands at the bar of another High Court as a coun-
sellor, making his petitions and prayers on behalf of a
particular litigant.”

Shri P. N. Sapru* agreed that it is not right that a Judge
should practise in a court of which he has been a member; how-
ever, he failed to see what advantage can a Judge of a High
Court get if he were to practise in any other State. He suppor-
ted the proposed amendment.

1, Parliamentay Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendmeat
Bill, 1956, Vol. I, page 39, left-hand column,

Report of the Joint Cammit nthe Constitution (Ninth Amendment}
Bill, 1956; Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment}
Bill, 1956, Vol, 1, pages 161, 173, 179 (15th July. £956).

3 Parliamentary Proceedings on the Consti!ulion (Ninth Amendment} Bill
1956, Vol. 1, page 215, left-hand column (4th September, 1956),

__,¢ Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment)
Bill, 1956, Vol. t, page 80, right-hand column (27th April, 1956).

है Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment!
U, 1956, Vol. 1, page 114, right-hand column (4th September, 1956),

Joint
committee.

Shri 9.1४.

Sapru_ and
Shti B.K.
Ray.


Shri C.c.
Shah.

Shri N.
Chatterjee,

10

Shri B. K. Ray' from Cuttak, supporting the proposed
amendment, referred to the speeches made in the Constituent
Assembly. In his view, a retired High Court Judge should be
debarred from practising in that High Court only and courts
subordinate thercto.

Shri C. C. Shah? from Bombay opposed the proposed
amendment, stating that the ban had been put in the Constitution
though it was not in the Government of India Act “after great
controversy and great deliberation”. He further added that if
the kan was at all to be relaxed, the relaxation should be limited
to practice in the Supreme Court.

500 N. C. Chatterjee", supporting the proposed amendment,
stated that from his personal experience he could say that a
High Court Judge would not be influenced by another retired
High Court Judge appearing before him. He further wanted the
ban to be relaxed in respect of practice before other tribunals.
According to the amendment! moved by him, article 220 would
have read as follows :—

“No person who after the commencement of this
tifution, has held office as a permanent judge of the High
Court shall plead or act in that High Court and the courts
subordinate thereto or shall hold any office other than a
judicial or quasi judicial appointment.”

He also emphasised the need for increasing the age of re-
tirement of High Court Judges to 65 and giving them a decent
pension*, If that is mot done, he would favour the removal of
the “embargo”.

fogs or the Cosctution एफ
244-245. (4th Seatember, 1956,

ath Amengment)

1 Pv
Bill, 1954,

Praca

* Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment)

Bill, 1956, ४७, 1, pages 320-32) (th September, 1956).

4 Parliamentary Procecdings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment
Bilt, 1955, 1. 1. pages 394-396. (Sth Sepember. 1956).

4 Paras wiry Proceedings on the Constitusen (Ninth Amendment)
Bill, i854. Vol, 1. page 322, right-hand column. (th September. 1956)

® Parkamentary Pre.
Bill, 1956, Vol. f, page

edi on the Constiiutios (Ninth Amendmeot)

h:-hand column. (Sih September. 1956).



il

Opposing the amendment, Shri Frank Anthony said’ : कण
“There is another reason and it is a greater risk. I
say that, if you are going to invest your judiciary with the
necessary reputation and respect, you must maintain your
Judges on a pedestal and you will not maintain them on a
pedestal it you allow them to come down, after they have
retired, and take part in the hurly-burly of ordinary prac-
tice. In this tremendous competition which we have at the
bar, the ex-Judges are sometimes compelled “to fall from
their high standards. You may say that such cases may
be exceptions but, they dre ex-Judges and there may be
one or two exceptions which will bring them to contempt
and which will bring the whole judiciary into contempt.
That is my greatest objection. Even if one ex-Tudge or two
ex-Judges have, after retirement, to enter the hurly-burly of
practice, and begin to resort 10 devious and dubious practices
under the compulsions of this excessive competition in the
bar, they bring the whole judiciary into contempt. Once you
do that, you expose your judiciary to criticism and attacks.”

Shri H. N. Mukherjee said?:
Shri Hiren
Mukherjee

“{ wish also to point out thal it is better that Judges
do not become advocates at all. In the provision in the
Bill before us. Judges who have retired or have resigned
like my friend Shri Chatterjee did, are precluded only from
practising in the courts where they have functioned us
Judges. But I feel those who have been Judges should not
in the latter phase of their career work as advocates at all.
As I told you earlier, Shi “Chatterjee in my own habeas
corpus application behaved in a manner which would make
me beholden to him, which I am in various ways personally
speaking, but on the other hand—and I think many of my
friends in this House will agree—Shri Chatterjee, for example
(1 speak with very great respect) rejoices and delights in
advocacy. lt ig very necessary that we have people who
delight in advocacy, and because they delight in the art of

* Parliamentary Proceedings un the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, page 337, right-hand column, page 338, left-hand column (4th
Septembe: 6).

* Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Seventh Amendment}
Act, 1956, page 349. (Sth September, 195


12
advocacy, they can advocate their case with effect, but at
the same time perhaps for judicial determination it is ne-
cessary that we have a set of people who do not take sides
in the way in which many people do, Shri Chatterjee quoted
a book by Sir ivor Jennings on the Constitution of this
country. 1 also happened to look at it because it was lying
on the table so very near me, and I find that Sir Ivor Jennings
makes a remark in one place. He says in India perhaps
the Jawyer-politician has played a larger role in public
affairs than the lawyer-politician in any part of the world.
He says : “As a lawyer I ought to be happy about it, but my
experience is that as a rule lawyer-politicians are neither
good lawyers nor good politicians’.

“IT do not want lawyer-Judges to be there all the time.
I want a Judge who at an early stage of bis career when
he made good as a lawyer is appointed as a Judge because
he made good as a lawyer. After that he should begin to
cultivate a judicial temper. That is why for posts like the
Election Commissioner or the Comptroller and Auditor-
General 1 want people with a judicial temper. And Judges,
once they are Judges, should decide that they are not going
10 be advocating cases before one tribunal or the other. And
that is why 1 support the amendmen: of my friend Shri K. हू,
Basu which says that Judges after retirement should not be
allowed to practise and also that they should not accept
any other job but judicial or qu jal jobs to which
appointments are made only by ihe Chief Justice of India
or by the Chief Justice of the relevant High Courts. Apart
ftom that. the other kinds of jobs should not be the kinds
of jobs which would be looked forward to by our judiciary.”

Shri 8. N. Datar, Minister of State in the Ministry of Home
Affairs, speaking in reply to the Debate! on the Bill as reported
by the Joint Committee made a reference to the fact that the
rigid provision in article 220 (as it then stood) had “created a
certain amount of disinclination or reluctance on the part of
leading or senior advocates to accept the office of High Court
Judges”. He referred to the high professional income of law-
yers, and added that “in order to satisfy a human desire. namely,
the desire to practise, if any, afler retirement, from service,

जा Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment)
» Bill. 1986, Voi. 1. pages 351, 482.


3

that is after the age of 60.....We have to make some excep-
tions” and “we had to make some concession to what I might
call this understandable human weakness, That is the reason why
we have made a change only so far as the High Court Judges
are concerned, and not so far as the Supreme Court Judges are
concerned”, He referred to the two “extremes of opinion” that
had been expressed on the subject—that there ought to be an
absolute ban and, at the other extreme, that retired Judges ought
to be allowed to practise before other tribunals as well.

Explaining the point of view adopted in the Bill, Shri
Datar said! :

“We do not desire that our retired High Court Judges
should go and practise before a “District or Session Judge
or even a first-class Magistrate. It is quite likely that in
some cases a tendency may be there to do it. But we
have confined their practice only to the other High Courts
and the Supreme Court. Therefore, I would submit that
so far as the question of practice is concerned. some con-
cessions had to be made and we have made this concession.
If after 60 years. a man desires to practise, then he should
not work in the sphere of influence in which he had offi-
ciated as a High Court Judge and must have officiated as
a District Judge and oust also have practised. Therefore,
he is taken to other and safer limits and he is allowed, if
he can take advantage of it, the right to practice in other
High Courts, and if be thinks it proper or available, even
in the Supreme Court. This is for the purpose of apprecia-
ting the best amongst the advocates.”

The relevant clause of the Bill was ultimately passed as
reported by the Joint Committee,

= Parliamentary Proceedings on the Constitution (Ninth Amendment)
Rill, 1956, Vol. 1, page 353,

3 Parliamentary Proceedings on the C*))
Bilt, 1956, Vol. 1. page 358,

MGIPRRND—Sec—IV (N}—22 M of 1.0७/78---23-1-7'