LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT

ON

Criminal liability for tailure by

husband to pay maintenance

or permanent alimony granted

to the wife by the court under

certain enactments or rules of
‘law

15% May, 1978


9.0. No. F. 2(3)/78-L.C.

CHAIRMAN हि
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

May 15, 1978

My dear Minister,

J forward herewith the Seventy-third Report of the Law Commission of
India concerning criminal liability for failure by husband to pay maintenance
er permanent alimony granted to the wife by the court under certain
enactments or rules of law.

As mentioned in the first paragraph of the Report, the subject was
taken up for consideration by the Law Commission at the instance of the
Government. The Report, while not favouring the proposal to make such
failure punishable as a contempt of court, suggests the amendments to be
made in the substantive law of crimes and the procedural jaw.

I place on record my appreciation of the valuable assistance received
from Shri है, M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in the
preparation of the Report.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(H. R. KHANNA)

Hon'ble Shri Shanti Bhushaii
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs

New Deihi-110001.
79-L{J(N)SSMofLI &CA—2


Gwapter 1.
CHAPTER 2.

CHAPTER 3.

APPENDIX 1

APPENDIX 2

APPENDIX 3.

CONTENTS

The Substantive Law and Amendments
Recommended therein oe

.Amendments Recommended in the Code of

Criminal Procedure, 1973

Amendments Recommended in the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908

APPENDICES

Extracts of Sections 24-25, Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955

Extracts from Section 198, Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 पु

Extracts from the California Penal Code ..

tii~iv

PAGES

16
7-12

13--15

16

wy
18


CHAPTER 1
Tur SuBSTANTIVE LAW AND AMENDMENTS RECOMMENDED THEREIN

1.1. Genesis of the Report—The following suggestion from the President of
the League for Social Justice, Pune, sent to the Minister of Law, Justice
and Company Affairs has been referred’ to the Law Commission for the
expression of its views:

“Maintenance and Guardianship Act, 1956.

“In various matrimonial disputes where the ceurt sanctions payment
of alimony or maintenance to the wife, it is found in practice that the
husband unilaterally stops such payments after sometime and to seck
redress the wife has to go through various legal actions to remedy
such stoppage of payments. It is recommended that the existing law
should be so amended that the husband cannot stop the payment of
alimony or maintenance to the wife without prior permission of the
competent court. Failure to obtain prior permission of the court before
stoppage of “payment of maintenance/alimony should be treated as
contempt of court punishable with imprisonment. Such amendment of
law, as suggested above, will grant 16 fief to the suffering women who
are deprived of getting maintenance from their husbands.”

1.2. Disobedience to decree or order for maintenance or alimony to be made
punishable—The Commission has given consideration to the above sugges-
tion and is not in favour of treating failure to obtain prior permission of
the court before stoppase of payment of maintenance or alimony as con-
tempt of court punishable with imprisonment. At the same time, the Com-
mission is not unaware of the tendency on the part of the husbands to stop
payment of alimony or maintenance even though a decree or an order for
this purpose has been made in favour of their wives’. To prevent such a
course, the Commission would recommend that if a decree or order for
the payment of mainicnance or permanent alimony is made against the
husband in favour of his wife by a court of justice and the husband. having
sufficient means to comply with such decree or order, contumaciously dis-
obeys such order, he shall, except in the cases hereafter mentioned, *be liable
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period which may extend to six
months and shall also be liable to pay fine up to twice the amount of
arrears of maintenance or permanent alimony, and in no case Jess than the
amount of arrears of maintenance or permanent alimony.

The punishment for such an offence ought to be rigorous ison=
ment, so that the added provision may act as a deterrent. In addition, the
offence should be compulsorily punishable with fine. Out of the fine, the

3, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affuirs, Legislative Department, Lez. 11 Sect’on
Dia . 2692/77-Leg. 12-12-1977.
“alimony”, see marginal aate to section 26, Hindn Marriaze Act,

3, At to the expression

8, 866 paragraph 1—6, infra.


2

wife should be awarded the arrears of maintenance or permanent alimony.
The reasons for such a change in the substantive law will be presently
set out’.-*,

1.3.Need for amendment of the law—In gencral, non-compliance with a
decree or order of court is regarded as a matter that can be suitably dealt
with in the appropriate procedural law. But it appears to the Commission
that in regard to decrees and orders of the nature under consideration, it is
legitimate to adopt a different approach, since non-compliance with’ such
decrees and orders may seriously affect the well-being of married women.
Contumacious failure to pay maintenance may have the effect of putting
a number of women in a state of being without any means of subsistence.
Apart from that, such failure is, in most cases, likely to lead ultimately
either to a life of vagrancy or to a life of destitution. If social justice is to
be given a practical content and is not merely to remain enshrined in pious
S, attention ought to be devoted to the devising of all reasonably
practicable measures that would help in checking mal-practices which
impede the effective implementation of the law on this important subject.

Ey
=

The suggestion has een made with reference to legislation applicable
only to Hindus. But having regard to the beneficial object of the amend-
ment under consideration, we see every reason for covering members of
all communitics, and no justification for excluding, from the scope of the
amendment, parties who are not Hindus.

1.4. Provisions relating to right of maintenance—There are several provi-
sions or rules of law under which a right to maintenance or alimony may
arise in favour of a wife—

(i) In the first place, the right may arise by substantive law, codified,
or not codified. Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956 is an example of codified law on the subject. Under sub-section (1)
of that section, subject to the provisions of the section, a Hindu wife,
whether marricd before or after the commencement of the Act, shall be
entitled to be maintained by her husband during her lifetime. The rules
of personal law applicable to persons who are not Hindus furnish examples
of uncodified law recognising the wife’s right to be maintained.

As regards Muslims, Mulla states the law on the subject thus

“277. Hushand's duty to maintain his wife—The husband is bound
to maintain his wife (unless she 1६ too young for matrimonial inter-
course), so long us she is faithful “to him and obeys his reasonable
orders, But he is not bound to maintain a wife who refuses herself
to him. or is otherwise disobedient, unless the refusal or disobedience
is justified by non-payment of prompt dower, or she leaves the hus-
band’s house on account of his cruelty,”

© Paragraph 1.4, (तक,

* For procedural amendments, see Chapter 2.3, infra,

% Maul Principles of Mohamedan Law (1977), page 300, paragraphs 277, 278


“278. Order for maintenance—If the husband neglects or refuses to
maintain his wife without any lawful cause, the wife may sue him for
maintenance, but she is not entitled to a decree for past maintenance,
unless the claim is based on a specified agreement. Or, she may apply
for an order of maintenance under the provisions of the Code of
Criminat Procedure, 1898 (sic), section 488 (sic) in which case the
court may order the husband to make a monthly allowance in the whole
for her maintenance not exceeding five hundred rupees”.

A christian wife can also sue her husband for maintenance’. The
right is based on justice, equity and good conscience’.

To quote from a Madras case® on the subject—

“Section 16 of the Madras Civil Courts Act enacts that wherever 2
question regarding succession, inheritance, marriage ctc., were to arise,
the court will have to decide the question, in cases where no specific
rule exists, according to justice, equity and good conscience. There-
fore, the question whether a Christian husband would he liable to
maintain his wife, and, if so, what form of procedure the latter should
adopt for enforcing such a right, will have to be decided not so mach
on the technical notions or procedure followed by the English law.
but on principles of equity and justice and by adopting the procedure
obtaining in this country”.

Gi) Apart from this substantive right enforceable by suit, maintenance
or alimony may be ordered by the court as a relief ancillary to the grant
of a decree for matrimonial retief on conclusion of proceedings for such
relief, Section 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is an example! of a
provision conferring such a right; there are analogous provisions in other®
enactments dealing with the grant of matrimonial relief in cases not govern-
ed by the Hindu Marriage Act.

(iii) There are statutory provisions empowering the court to grant
maintenance or alimony during the pendency of proceedings for matrimo-
nial relief. Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is an example’ of
such a provision; there are analogous provisions’ in other enactmenis deal-
ing with the grant of matrimonial relief in cases not governed by the Hindu

Marriage Act.

{iv) Finally, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 125,
provides for the grant of maintenance to wives and children by
in certain cases, .

28, para 19.

Ratwam, AYR. 1966 Mad, 2:

3, Stella Pukkian V. Rajiah Ratiwm A. 1. 1, 1986 Mads

4, See Appendix 1.

5, Section 37, Special Marriage Act, 1954, section 40, Pacti Marriage and Divocoe Actr
1936 section 37, Indian Divorce Act, 1869.

5, Appendix 1.

3, Section 36, Special Marriage Act, 1954. ete.

25, 228, para 39.



4

Section 125 is not confined to persons belonging to particular com-
munities, and constitutes a self-contained scheme with its own set of provi-
sions for the enforcement of magisterial orders passed thereunder. We quote
below the material portion of section 125(3) of the Code:—

“(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to
comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of
the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner
provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the
whole or any part of each month’s allowance remaining unpaid after
the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month or until payment if sooner made: .

Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of
any amount due under this section unless application be made to the
Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date
on which it becomes due:

Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on
condition of -her living with him, and she refuses to live with him,
such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and
may make an orf’-r “under this section notwithstanding such offer,
if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing.

Explanation:—If a husband has contracted marriage with another
woman or keeps a mistress it shall be considered to be just ground
for his wife’s refusal to live with him.”

1.5 Need for criminal sanctions—In contrast with the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, there are no criminal sanctions attached to disobedience
by the husband to a decree or order for maintenance or alimony under the
other enactments or rules to which he have referred’. In our opinion, there
is need to cover maintenance or permanent alimony granted under the other
enactments or rules exccpt in the cases to be hereafter mentioned.

1.6 Certain orders for maintenance to be excluded—From the scope of
the proposed offence, we would exclude maintenance granted by the court
under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or its pre-
decessor (section 488), since the Code contains adequate provisions, includ-
ing criminal sanctions’, for enforcement. We would also exclude orders for
maintenance or alimony pendente lite from the scope of the proposed offence.
Orders pendente lite arc temporary orders, and their enforcement can be
left to be dealt with under such powers as the courts already possess.

1.7. Scope of the proposed section summarised—To recapitualate, the pro-
posed section should be so drawn that it will apply to—

(a) maintenance granted by the Court to the wife

(i) under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance
Act, 1956, or

(ii) by virtue of a substantive right recognised by uncodified per-
sonal law’;

1, Paragraph 1.4, supra.
4, Section 125 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973: see paragraph 1.4 (iv), supra
3, Paragraph 1.4 (i), supra.


5

(b) maintenance or permanent alimony granted by the Court to the
wife under section 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 on the
Conclusion of proceedings for matrimonial relief or under any
other corresponding statutory provision’.

The proposed section should not, however, apply to—

(c) maintenance or alimony pendente lite granted under section 24 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, or under any other correspond-
ing statutory provision*.

(9) maintenance granted* under section 125 of the Code of Cri
Procedure, 1973, or under section 488 of the Code of Cri
Procedure, 1898 (now repealed).

1.8. Amendment to extend to Persons of all communities—Although the
suggestion has been made with reference to legislation applicable to Hindus,
any amendment that may be made in the law should, as already stated, ‘cover
persons of all communities.

1.9. Placing of the new provision—As to the placing of the new provision,
it can be appropriately“-serted in Chapter 20 of the Indian Penal Code
(of offences relating to marriage), since, in substance, the proposed offence
is constituted: by an act amounting to violation of a marital obligation.

1.10. Comparative Position—Although we have not been able to trace
exactly parallel provisions in the legislation of other countries, certain sec-
tions from the California Penal Code which impose criminal liability for
failure to pay maintenance would be of interest in this connection. These
are reproduced in an Appendix to this Report’.

1.11. Recommendation for amending the Indian Penal Code—In the light
of the above discussion, we recommend that a new section, to be numbered
as section 498A, incorporating the points made above, should be added
in the Indian Penal Code immediately after section 498, which appears at
the end of the Chapter on offences relating to marriage (Chapter XX), as-
follows: —

“498A. Failure by husband to pay permanent alimony or maintenance

to wife when ordered by court to do so—(1) Whoever, being a person

against whom a decree or order for the payment of maintenance or

permanent alimony to his wife has been made by a court of justic’,

having sufficient means to comply “with such decree or order, contu-
i maciously disobeys such decree or order, shall, except in the cases
specified in sub-section (3), be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may
i extend to twice the amount of arrears of maintenance or permanent
. alimony, and which shall in no case be less than such amount.

15 Paragraph 1.4 (ii), supra.
* Paragraph 1.4 (iii), supra,

3. Paragraph 1.4 (iv), supra.

“ Paragraph 1.3, supra.

+ Appendix 3 to this Report.

See defini: tion of “court of justice” in section 20, Indian Penal Code


6

(2) When a person is convicted of an offence under this section,
the court shall also direct payment to the wife, out of the fine so
ordered to be paid, of the amount referred to in sub-section (1).

(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to disobedience to—

(a) an order passed under section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or an order passed before the commence-
ment of that Code under section 488 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898, or

(b) an order for the payment of maintenance or alimony ‘pendente
lite.”
Certain amendments will be required in the procedural: law to deal

with several matters arising out of the above amendment. We proceed to
deal with them’, पु

3, Chapters 2-3 infra,


- CHAPTER 2

-AMENDMENTS RECOMMENDED IN THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE,

2.1. Procedure—complaint by the wife to be a requisite—In regard to
procedure, we shall first deal with the mode of initiation of procecdings. In
,OUr ०] pinion, it would be appropriate if a complaint of the wife is required
for taking cognizance of the offence which is proposed to be created, ‘since
the offence .is to be regarded as one primarily affecting the interests of the
“Tt wife, and pertains to her marital status. There is already a provision in
section 198(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973*, imposing ceriain’
restrictions subject to which cognizance of the specified offences pur
under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code—offences relating to mar-
tiage—can be taken. Section 198 provides that no court shall take cogni-
zance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code
except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence.

24, We are of the view that the same rule should apply to the new offence;
the court shall not take cognizance of the offence in question except upon
complaint made by the wife’.

2.3. Applicability of section 198 (1) of the Code—Once the new offence is
included‘ in Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code, the main provision in
section 198(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, will apply io it,
‘without any textual amendment for that purpose. section 198(1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—to quote only the portion creating a
bar against taking cognizance—provides as follows:—

“198. (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable

under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code except upon a complaint
made by some person aggrieved by the offence”.

2.4. Recommendation for amendment of section 198, Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973—It will, however be. necessary to provide for cases
where the wife cannot make a complaint because of certain unavoidable
circumstances. In this context, reference may again be made to section 198
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. In that section, sub-section (1),
proviso, clause (a), provides that in cases where the wife is under the age
of 18 years or is an idiot or a lunatic or is suffering from sickness or infir-
mity and unable to make a complaint or is a woman who, according to
the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in
public, some other person may, with the leave of the court, make a comp-
laint on her behalf.

The same should be the position in regard to a complaint for the
proposed offence,

4. Chapter 1, supra

2, Seo Appendix 2

3, Chapter 1, supra.

4. Para 2.] and 2.2, supra

3, Seo Appendix 2 for the text of relevant portion of section 198 of the Code
7


8 -

2.5. Notice of intention te make coimpiain‘s—secticn 198(1), proviso (है) te
be inserted—Certain other provisions in regard to procedure are also re-
quired. In our opinion, before the wile makes a complaint, the husband
should be given an opportunity of complying with the decree or order.
We recommend that no wife shall be entitled to make a complaint under
the proposed new penal provision unless written notice of her intention to
do so has been delivered, or sent by registered post, to the husband, and
unless a period of at Jeast one month, has elapsed. Such notice must state
the amount of arrears in regard to which such complaint is to be made’.

We have devoted some thought to the question whether, in a case
where notice is given by registered post, the period of one month should
be counted from the date on which the notice was posted by the wife, or
whether it should be counted from the date on which the notice reached
the husband or would, when correctly addressed, have reached him in the
ordinary course of post. It seems to us that in this case it would be just
and fair to compute the period from the latter date.

2.5A. Timt-Jimit for prosecution—We now turn to the question of the
time limit within which a prosecution can be instituted under the proposed
new penal provision’. In order to avoid harassment to the husband, it is, in
our view, desirable that criminal proceedings under the proposed section
should not be taken after the expiry of one year from the date of the

default.

By way of ai analogous provision, we may refer to section 125(3),
proviso, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, which enacts that a
warrant cannot be issued for the recovery of any amount due under that
section unless an application is made to the court to levy such amount
within a period of one year from the date on which it became due.

It may be mentioned that as regards offences under the Penal Code,
the matter seems to be covered by the provisions relating to limitation in
the Code of Criminal Procedure.

Under section 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, there is a
bar to taking cognizance of certain offences after lapse of the period of
limitation. The section is quoted below:—

“468. (1) Fxcept as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code, no
Court shall take coynizance of an offence of the category specified in
sub-section (2). after the expiry of the period of limitation.

(2) The period of limitation shall be—

(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;

(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for
a term not exceeding one year:

(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment
for “a term exceeding one year but not exceeding three years”

1, To be put as section 198(1), proviso (व), Code of Crimina iProcedure, 1973.
3, Para 1.11 supra.
3, For the commencement of the prin, see sections 469 --472, Cate of Criminal Procedure
1973.


9

Section 469 deals with the commencement of the period of limitation
in these terms:—-

“469. (1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, shall
commence— ,
(a) on the date of the offence; or
(0७) where the commission of the offence was not known to the
person aggrieved by the offence or to any police officer, the first
day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of such
person or to any police officer, whichever is earlier; or
" (c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed,
the first day on which the identity of the offender is known to the
person aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer making
investigation into the offence, whichever is earlier.

“(2) In computing the said period, the day-from which such period
is to be computed shall be excluded.”

We are of the view that for the purposes of the application of section
469 in relation to an offence under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code,
the date of default in making the payment under the decree or order should
be deemed to be the date of the offence.

2.58. Recommendation to amend. section 198, Code of Criminal Proce-
dure—In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that in section
198(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, proviso (d) should be
inserted as follows:—
“(d) no wife shall be entitled to make a complaint for an offence
under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code against the husband
unless a notice in writing stating the amount of arrears in regard
to which she intends to make such complaint, and intimating
her intention to do so, has been delivered to the husband or sent
to him by registered post, and unless a period of at least one
month has expired since the date on which the notice was “so
delivered or the date on which, when correctly addressed, it
would have reached the husband in the ordinary course of post,
as the case may be.”

2.5C. Amendment of section 469, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973—
We also recommend that in section 469(1), Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, an Explanation may be inserted as follows:—

“Explanation:—For the purposes of the application of this section in

relation to an offence under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code,
the date of default in making the payment under the decree or order
* shall be deemed to be the date of the offence.” -

2.6. Acquittal on deposit—section 257A to be inserted in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973—Having regard to the nature of the offence,
some provision for stopping criminal proceedings on payment by the hus-
band would appear to be appropriate. We recommend that if, at the first
hearing or within such further time not exceeding one month as the court
may allow, the husband pays to the wife in court, or deposits with the court,
the amount, with interest at such rate, if any, as might have been fixed by
the decree or order, or, in the absence thereof, at the rate of twelve per
gent per annum since the date of default, and such costs, if any, as the


10

court may deem fit to allow, then the court shall stop all further proceed-
ings in the matter and shall acquit’ the accused. This concession, however,

जीबी) be available only subject to certain limitations’; the precise conteat of
such limitations will be apparent from the draft section whica we are re-
commending on the subject. Further, the procedure of payment to the wife
jn court under the proposed provision must be permissible only in cases
where she is herself the complainant. In other cases the amount will bave
10 be deposited in court, and should not be paid to any person who might
have filed a complaint on her behalf under proviso (a) to section 198(1),
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

In order to implement the above proposition, we recommend that
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a new section, to be numbered
as section 257A, should be inserted in the Chapter dealing with the trial
of summons cases, in the following terms:—

“257A. If in any prosecution for an offence under section 498A of
the Indian Penal Code, the accused, at the first hearing or within
such further time not exceeding one month as the court may allow,
pays to the wife in court, or deposits with the court,—

(a) the amount to which the criminal proceedings relate,

(b) interest at such rate, if any, as might have been fixed by the
decree or order, or in the absence thereof, at the rate of twelve
- per cent per annum since the date of default, and

(c) such costs, if any, as the court may deem fit to allow,

then the court shall stop all further proceedings in the matter and
shall acquit the accused:

Provided that the provisions of this section, in so far as
they relate to payment to the wife in court, shall not apply where
the complaint has been made by any other person on behalf of
the wife under proviso (a) to sub-section (1) of section 198 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:

Provided further that where the decee or order is for the perio-
dical payment of maintenance or permanent alimony, no accused
shall be entitled to the benefit of this section if, having obtained
such benefit once in respect of any amount due under a decree
or order, he again makes a default in the payment of an amount
falling due under that decree or order. for three months or three
other periods, as the case may be, whether consecutive or not.”

2.7. Recommendation as to compounding section 320, Cr. P.C.—Having
regard to the nature of the new offence, we recommend that it should be
compoundable without the permission of the court.

3, This can be conveniently put as section 257A, Code or Criminal Procedure, 1973,
® Compare sections 14 (2), 15 (3) aud 15 (6), Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.


181

The provision relating to compounding is to be found in section 320

of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The material portions read
thus: —
a”

“320. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian
Penal Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next
following may be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third
column of that Table. : .

TABLE

Offence Section of the 1.P.C. Porsons by whony offence:

applicable may he evmpounded
Adultery ANT ‘The husband of the woman
Enticing or taking away ur detaining
with criminal
Intent a married woman 408 Ditto
Defamation 500 ‘The person defamed

“(3) When any offence is compoundable under this section, the
abetment of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence (when
such attempt is itself an offence) may be compounded in like manner.

(4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to
compound an offence under this section is under the age of eighteen
years or is an idiot or a lunatic, any per8on competent to contract on
his behalf may, with the permission of the Court, compound such
offence.

(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to
compound an offence under this section is dead, the legal represen-
tative, as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, of such person
may, with the consent of the Court, compound such offence.

xe क्र कक eee

(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have
the effect of an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has
been compounded”. .

In regard to compounding, the new offence should be dealt with by

adding, in the Table below section 320(1) of the Code of Criminal Proce-
dure, 1973, after the entry relating to the offence under section 498 of
the Indian Penal Code, a suitable entry so as to provide that the proposed
new offence shall be compoundable without the permission of the Court,
at the instance of the wife,


12

After the proposed amendment, the material part of section 320 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, will read as under:—

“320. (1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian
Penal Code specified in the first two columns of the Table next follow-
ing may be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column
of that Table.

TABLE
Offence Soction of the I.P.C. Possomby whom
applicable offence miay be
compounded
Adultery 497 The husband
of the woman
Katieing or taking
away or detaining
with nal intent:
aw married woman. 493, Do.
Failure by Iusband
to pay petmvenent
alimony or mainten.
ance to wife when
ordered by court to do
50. 498A The wife.
Defamation. 500 ‘Phe person

dofamed.””

9
2.8. Amendment to the First Schedule—In the First Schedule to the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, a suitable entry relating to the proposed new
offence! should be added. The offence should be non-cognizable, bailable
and triable by any Magistrate. We recommend that the First Schedule
should be amended accordingly.

1, Section 498A, Indian Penal Code; see para 1,11 supra.


| 10 the matter under consideration’

CHAPTER 3

AMENDMENTS RECOMMENDED IN THE CODE OF CiviL PROCEDURE, 1908

3.1. Amendatents in Code of Civil Procedure, 1908—Right to execute—
Certain amendments are also required in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
in view of the creation of the proposed new offence. We propose to provide
that where a decree or order for maintenance or permanent alimony is dis-
obeyed by the husband, the right of the wife to make a complaint for the
proposed offence shall not, in any manner, affect her right to apply for
execution of the decree or order. This is, however, subject to the following
qualifications: —
(3) During the pendency of the criminal proceedings, the wife shall not
be entitled to make any application for execution;
(b) If such an application is already pending, the execution proceed-
ings shall remain suspended for the duration of the criminal preceed-
ings, but not so as to affect any attachment of the property of the
judgment debtor (husband) that might be subsisting immediately before
the date on which the criminal proceedings were instituted;

(c) Any amount paid to the wife out of the fine recovered in the
criminal proceedings shall amount to satisfaction of the decree or order
in full or part, as the case may be.

3.2. Time spent on pendency to be excluded—In consequence of our re-
commendation’ for the insertion of a prohibition against the making of an
application for execution by the wife during the pendency of the criminal
proceedings, it is necessary to provide that in computing the period of limita-
tion for such application, the time spent on such pendency shall be excluded.

The period of limitation is prescribed by article 136 of the Limitation
Act, 1963, which reads: ?

“136, For the execution of any ‘Twelve years, When the decree or enter
deere (other than a de. becomes enforceable or whore
creo granting a mandatory the decree or any subsequent,
injunction or order of any order direct! any” payment of
Civil Court.

money or the delivery of eny
property to be made,

“at a certain date or at recurring periods, when default in making
the payment or delivery in respect of which execution is sought, takes
place:

Provided that an application for the enforcement or execution of
a decree granting a perpetual injunction shall not be subject to any
period of limitation.”

3.3. Existing Provisions in the Limitation Act not enongh—As to excludl-
in he time taken in the criminal proceedings in question, the existing provi-
sions in the Limitation Act, 1963—sections 14 and 15( 1) which are nearest

n i do not appear to cover the situation
under consideration. Section 14 provides for the exclusion of time taken in
a proceeding prosecuted in good faith in a court which, from a defect of

2, Pera 3-1, Supra.
4, Sections 14-15 limitation Act, 1963.
ia


14

jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable to entertain it. The
present is not a case falling within that category. Then, section 15(1) pro-
vides as follows:— —

“15(1) In’ computing the period of limitation for any suit or applica-
tion for the “execution of a decree, the institution or execution of which
has been stayed by injunction or order, the time of the continuance of
the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and
the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded.”

This provision is confined to stay resulting from an “injunction or
order”. View can be taken that the expression “injunction or order” does
not cover legislative provisions or executive orders which bar the institution
of suits or applications. The general view scems to be that contained in
Rowland 118. observations':—

“J do not think that it is necessary or that it would be good law
to invoke a theory of suspension of limitation in any case in which
suspension is not expressly provided for either in the Limitation Act
‘or in some special Act.”

This view is supported by the principle which has found recognition
in section 9 of the Limitation Act, 1963, namely, “’where once time has
begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to institute a suit or
make an application stops it’.

Some doubt may also be expressed on the question whether section

15(1) of the Limitation Act, 1963 applies to the execution of orders
(as distinguished from the execution of decrees).

In this position, an express provision for excluding the time spent on
the criminal proceedings in question in the trial court, when computing the
period of limitation for an application for execution by the wife, would

appear to be needed.

3.4. Amendment in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908—Inserti
R. 294-- the light of the preceding paragraphs’, we rec
jin the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, First Schedule, Order 21, a new
tule, to be numbered as Rule 29A, should be inserted as follows: —

“29A, (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3), where
a decree or order for maintenance or permanent alimony has been
made against a husband in favour of the wife and the husband is guilty
of disobedience to the decree or order, the right of the wife to make
a complaint for an offence under section 498A of the Indian Penal
Code shall not in any manner affect her right to apply for execution
of the decree or order.

1, Mahavir Prasad v. Bhupal Ram, ALR. 1929 Pat. 604, 700 (7,8.),
3, Section 9, Limitation Act, 1963.
3, Para 3.1 to 9.3 supra.


15

(2) During the pendency in the trial court of criminal proceedings
instituted in respect of any such complaint,—

“(a) the wife shall not be entitled to make any application for
execution of the decree or order;

(b) if, on any application for execution of the decree or order
made by the wife prior to the institution of such criminal pro-
ceedings, procecdings are pending in any court, those proceed-
ings shall remain suspended for the duration of the criminal pro-
ceedings, but not so as to affect any attachment of the property
of the judgment-debtor that might be subsisting immediately
before the date on which the criminal proceedings were instituted.
(3) Where any amount is paid to the wife out of the fine r red
in such criminal proceedings, such payment shall amount to satisfaction
of the decree or order in full or in part, as the case may be.

(4) In computing the period of limitation for any application for
the execution of a decree or order, the making of which is barred by
the provisions of clause (a) of sub-rule (2), the time during which
the criminal “proceedings referred to in that sub-rule were pending
in the trial court shall be excluded.

Explanation—For the purposes of this rule, in computing the time
during which a criminal proceeding was pending in the trial court,
the day on which that proceeding was instituted and the day on which
it ended in the trial court shall both be counted.”

Sd/-
(H. R. KHANNA)
Chairman
Sd/-
(S. N. SHANKAR)
Member
Sd/-
(P. M. BAKSHT)
Member-Secretary
Dated, NEw DELut,
the 15th May, 1978.


APPENDIX 1

EXTRACTS OF SECTIONS 24-25, HINDU MARRIAGE AcT, 1955

24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings—Where in any
proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife or
the husband, as the case may be, has no independent income suflicient for
her or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may,
on the application of the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay
to the petitioner the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the
procceding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner's own income and
the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.

25. Permanent alimony and maintenance—(1) Any court exercising juris-
diction under this Act may, at the time of passing any decree or at any
time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the purpose by
either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respon-
dent shall pay to the applicant, for her or his maintenance and support
such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum for a term not exce
the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent’s own
and other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant,
the conduct of the parties, and other circumstances of the case, it may seem
to the court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if necessary,
by a charge on the immovable property of the respondent.

(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances
of either party at any time after it has made an order under sub-section
(1), it may at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind any
such order in such manner as the court may deem just.

(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order
has been made under this section has re-married or, if such party is the
wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the husband
that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock, it may
at the instance of the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order
in such manner as the court may deem just.

16


APPENDIX 2

EXTRACTS FROM SECTION 198, Copz oF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973

198. Prosecution for offences against marriage—(1) No Court shall take
cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal
Code except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the
offence:

Provided that—

(a) where such person is under the age of cighicen years, or
is an idiot or a lunatic, or suffering from sickness or infirmity and
unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the
local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in
public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a
complaint on his or her behalf;

RRR ee OK Oe

(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under
section 494 of the Indian Penal Code is the wife, complaint 119) be
made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, son or
daughter or by her father’s brother or sister.

ee OK ek kOe

(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-
section (1), the complaint is sought to be made on behalf of a person under
the age of eighteen vears or ‘of a lunatic by a person who has not been
appointed or declared’ by a competent authority to be the guardian of the
person of the minor or lunatic, and the Court is satisfied that there isa
guardian so appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the
application for leave, cause notice to be given to such guardian and give
him a reasonable opportunity of being heard,

tA #ू koe & ox के
kom eR के xk के
eo OF Boe मे हू कक

(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt
to commit, an offence as they apply to the offence.

uv


18

APPENDIX 3

EXTRACTS FROM THE CALIFORNIA PENAL Cope"

“270. Omitting to provide child with necessaries Misdemeanor—A father of
either legitimate or illegitimate minor child who wilfully omits without
lawful excuse to furnish necessary clothing, food, shelter or medical atten-
dance or other remedial care for his child is guilty of a misdemeanor
and punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars (£1,000) or
by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year or by both such
fine and imprisonment. If the father, during such violation, remains out of
the state for 30 days or if he fails or refuses to comply with the order of a
court of competent jurisdiction requiring him to make ‘any provision for the
maintenance, support, medical treatment or other remedial care of such
minor child and remains out of the state for 10 days without doing so,
he is guilty of a felony.” (Rest of the section is not material).

“270a. Non support of wife—Every husband who has sufficient ability to
provide for his wife’s support, or who is able to earn the means of such
wife’s support, who wilfully abandons and leaves his wife in a destitute
condition, or who refuses or neglects to provide such wife with necessary
food, clothing, shelter or medical attendance, unless by her misconduct he
was justified in abandoning her, is guilty of a misdemeanor.—Stats. 1957,
Chap. 1855”.

1, Sections 270 and 270a California Penal Code.

4y5(N)56M of LJ&GA~11-11-78—G IBS