LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA

SEVENTY- FOURTH REPORT

ON

PROPOSAL TO AMEND THE INDIAN EVIDENCE
ACT, 1872 SO AS TO RENDER ADMISSIBLE CERTAIN
STATEMENTS MADE BY WITNESSES
BEFORE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY AND
OTHER STATUTORY AUTHORITIES

AUGUST 1978


Justice H. R. Khanna
D.O. No, F. 1(14)/78-L.C.
CHAIRMAN
LAW COMMISSION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Shastri Bhavan,
Ith Floor, ‘A’ Wing,
New Delhi-110 001.
August 8, 1978.
My Dear Minister,

I forward herewith the Seventy-fourth Report of the Law
Commission of India relating to the proposal to amend the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 so as to render admissible certain
statements made by witnesses before Commissions of Inquiry and
other statutory authorities. The opening paragraph of the Re-

port will explain the circumstances under which the Commis-
sion took up this subject for consideration,

With kind regards.
Yours sincerely,

(Sd)
(प्र. R. KHANNA)

Hon’ble Shri Shanti Bhushan,
Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs,
New Delhi-110 001.


1, The opinion of the Law Commission has been Sought Subject mat-
on the question as to whether a statement made by a Berson inter of the
proceedings before a Commission appointed under'the Commis. Report.
sions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (Act No. 60 of 1952) should be made
aduassible by an amendment of the Indian Evidence Act in any
Subsequent civil or criminal Proceedings if the said person (here-
inafter referred to for Sake of clariiy as witness) is dead at the

the Commissions of Inquiry लेट and any comteniplated civi or
01085

2, Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act and sections है, Reievant stae

8B and 8C of the Couimissions of inquiry Act which have rele-tutory Prov.
. Slons in ie

vance read as under: Bvidenee
_Section 33 (af the Iadiaa Evideuce Act)—Bvidenve given oo पक
by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person of inquiry
authorised by jaw to take it, 18 relevant for the purpose of Act.
Proving, in a supsequent judicial Broveeding or in a later
stage cf the same judicial Proceeding, the truth of ihe facts
which it states, when the Wituéss is dead oc cannot be found,
or is inzapeble of giving evidence, or is kept our of the way
by the adverse patty, or if his presence cannot be obiained
without an amount’ of delay or expense which, under the
circumstances of the Case, the Court considers unreasonable :

Provided—

that the Proceeding was between the same parties or
their representatives in interest 1

that the adverse party in the fest Proceeding bad the
right aad opportunity ‘to cross-examine ;

that the questioas in issue were substantially the same
in the first as in the Second proceeding,

Explanation—A ctiminal trial or inguiry shall be deemed
to be a proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused
within the meaning of this section.”

“Section 6 (of the Commissions of Inquiry jeo—No st state-
before the Commissicn shatt subject him to, or be used

against him in aay civil of criminal Proceeding except a
Prosecution for giving talse evidence by such Statement:
Provided that the statement—

19) is made in reply to a question which he ig required
by the Commission to answer, ot

{b) is relevam to the subject matter of the inquiry”,

i


2

“Section 8B {oi the Commissions of Inquiry Act)—If, at
any stage of the inquiry, the Commission,—

(a) considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct
of any person; or

(b) is of opinion that the reputation of any person is
likely to be prejudicially affected by the inquiry,
the Commission shall give to that person a reasonable op-
portunity of being heard in the inquiry and to produce evid-
ence in his defence:

Provided ihar nothing in this section shall apply where the
credit of a witness is being impeached.”

“Section 8C (of the Commissions of Tnquiry Act),—The ap-
propriate Government, every person referred to in section
8B and, with the permission of the Cominission, any other
Person whose evidence is recorded by the Commission,—

(a) may cross-examine a witness other than a witness
produced by it or him;

(b) may address the Commission ; and

(0) may be represented before the Commission by a
legal practitioner or, with the permission of the Commis-
sion, by any other person.”

3. Section 6 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, reptoduc-

Effect of

section 6, ed above, relates to the use of a stalement against the very per-

Commis- gon who made that statement. This section obviously has no

Inquire application 10 the use of a statement made by a deceased person

Act. 7 in civil or criminal proceedings against another person.

Section 32 4. Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act makes statements

. Evidence ’ by a deceased person relevant and admissible in subsequent

Act. court proceedings, The statements mentioned in the section,
however, are of special nature, like those relating to the cause
of death of a person making the statement. The statements of
deceased persons with which we are concerned do noi belong
te that category or nature,

Section 33, 5. Section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act makes evidence

Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person

Act—Condi- authorised by law to lake it, relevant in a subsequent judiciat

tions for aj
plicability.

proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding,
to prove ihe truth of facts which it states when the witness is
dead and in certain other contingencies with which we are not
concerned. “ Before, however, the provisions of section 33 can
be invoked, it has to be shown that the case falls within the am-
bit of the proviso to section 33, according to which it is essen-
tial that the earlier proceeding in which the statement was given
by the witness was between the same parties or their representa-
tives in interest, that the adverse party in the first proceeding
had the right and Opportunity to cross-examine the witness and
that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the
first as well as the second proceeding.


3

6. No individuals are arrayed as formal parties in proceed. Section 33
ings before a Commission appointed under the Commissions of ow fa x
Tnguiry Act and no findings recorded by a Commission can belure of
enforced proprio vigore. As the law stands at present, COMNSE- proceedings
quently a statement made by a deceased witness in Proceedings before Com-
under the Commissions of Inquiry Act cannot be used againstmissions of
another person in subsequent civil or criminal proceedings. The !*4viry-
question which needs consideration is as to whether as a result
of amendment such a statement can be made admissible.

On general principles the Law Commission is against the
use of such a statement inthe course of subsequent civil or cri-
minal proceedings, except in one limited contingency. In case
a Commission appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act
has proceeded under section 8B of that Act because it considered
it necessary to inquire into the conduct of a Person or because
it was of the opinion that the reputation of that person was
likely to be prejudicially affected by that inquiry and if, further,
that person has had the right and has been afforded all reason-
able opportunity to cross-examine the deceased witness as con-
templated by section 8C and, further also, if the questions in
issue before the Commission were substantially the same as ac
the subsequent civil or criminal proceedings, in such an event
there appears to be no objection 10 making suitable amendment
in law to make the statement of the deceased witness relevant
and admissible at the subsequent civil or criminal proceedings *
against that person. Apart from this limited contingency, the
Commission is not in favour of any proposal for making such a
statement admissible by amendmen of law.

7, We may now set out the reasons in support of our view, Reasons for
One of the cardinal rules of the system of jurisprudence follow-the view
ed by us is that a witness who deposes against a party must be taken.
brought face to face with that party, so that that party may be in
@ position to cross-examine that witness, The safeguard is des-
cribed by Bentham’ as “confrontation”, The main and essential
purpose of confrontation is to secure for the opponent the
Opportunity of cross-examination. The opponent demands con-
frontation not for the idle purpose of gazing upon the witness or
of being gazed upon by him, but for the purpose of cross-
examination which cannot be had except by direct and personal
putting of questions and obtaining of immediate answers, There
is also a secondary advantage to be obtained by 4 personal
appearance of the witness. The judge is enabled to watch the
demeanour of the witness. The principle underlying section 33
of the Indian Evidence Act is that when a statement has already
been subjected to cross-examinalion and is hence admitied, it
comes in because the rule is satisfied and not because an excep-
tion to the rule is allowed. The statement may have been made
before the subsequent trial, but it has already been subjected to
Ptoper cross-examination. he principie underlying section 33

'Bentham’s Rationale of Judicial Evidence, Book Ill, Ch. XIX, cited
by Woodrofie & Ameer Ali, Law of Evidence, 12th Edition (1968) Vol. 4
page 775,


4

988 00०0 summed up by Woodroffe and Ameer Ali! and the same
reads as under:—

“Tife rule contained in this section is an administrative
expedient for doing justice between litigants in a particular
situation as a rational compromise between two weil-known
canons of judicial administration, A presiding judge will
Tequire that a party furnish evidence of the primary grade,
if it is within bis power to do so. So long, theretore, as the
Proponent can reasonably be required to cause a witness to
Tepeat to a tribunal his evidence régarding admissible tacts
given on 4 former occasion, the presiding Judge will insist
that the witness himself be produced. In other words, pri-
mary evidence will be insisted on until a satistaciory foreiisic
necessity for offering secondary evidence is brought to the
attention of the tribunal. At this point, a second adminis-
trative canon, yet non-fundamental comes into operation. It
is the administrative duty of the court to proiect the sub-
slantive right of the party to prove his contention, so far,
at least. as is reasonably Within his power. When the pro-
pouent's necessity for producing a secondary grade of
evidence is established, the right to submit it will be recog-

aised by the court, The general rule is that the best evig-
ence must be given: no evidence will be received which
is merely substitutionary in ils nature so long as the onginai
evidence is attainable. Thus, depositions are in general
admissible only after proof that the parties who made them
cannot themselves be produced. The present section slates
the circumstances under which secondary evidence of oral
testimony may be givea, Under these circumstances, the
Production of primary evidence is either wholly (us if the
witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable, or is
kept away) or partially (as in the case of delay or expense},
out of the party’s power.”
The reasons which led to the enactment of section 33 of the
Indian Evidence Act, in our opinion, would bold equally good,
in the one limited contingency referred to above,
Same prin- _ 8. What we have said above would also hold Bood in case
ciple appli- Of inquiries on oath under other statutory provisions, where-
cable ‘to under a right of cross-examination of the nature and in the
other sta- circumstances mentioned above is conferred.

right to

cross

exagu-

Baton. Re- 9. J; may, incidentally, be mentioned here that while the

ports of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 and the Indian Evidence Act,

Law, Com-1872 have both been reviewed by carlier Law Commission? te

mission. the point now under consideration has not been raised so far,
aad the Law Commission has not therefore had any occasion to

:

consider it.

‘Woodroffe aud Ameer Ali, Law of Evidence, 12th Edition (1968),
Vol. 4, page 776,

4th Report of the Law Commission of India (Commissions of
loquiry Act, 1952).

eat Revert ‘ot tho Law Commission of India (Indian Evidence Act


(Sd) (H.R KHANNA)

H. R. KHanna Chairman
(Sd.)

S. N. SHANKAR Member
(sd)

T. S. KrisnnaMoortuy Tver Member
(Sd.}

P.M. Baksat Member-Secretary

New Deru,
Dated the 8th August, 1978

GIPN—-S 2—247 L.A.D./(ND}/78—29-1-79-—2008