LAW COMMISSION
OF INDIA

SEVENTY - FIFTH REPORT
ON

DISCIPLINARY JURISDICTION

UNDER THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961

October, 1978

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW


DO. No, F.2(17)/78-L.G

New Dethi, the 30th October, 1978

My dear,

I forward herewith the Seventy-fifth Repo rt of the Law Commission of India
relating to disciplinary jurisdiction under the Advocates Act, 1961.

As mentioned in the first paragraph of the Report, the subject was taken up for
consideration by the Law Commission at the instance of the Government.

I place on record my appreciation of the valuable assislance received from Shri
P. M. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in the preparation of
the Report.

With kind regards,

Yours

H.R, KHANNA

Hon'ble Shri Shanti Bhushan,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi-110001.


ParacraPH

12.
13.

14.

13.

18.
19.
20.

APPENDIX I.
AppENDIx 2.

CONTENTS

Torre

I. INTRODUCTORY

Scope and genesis ‘
History as showing that the Act was evolved after mature reflection
व. THE PRESENT LAW

Present law—State Bar Councils .
Bar Council of India. . . . : . . . . .

IH. HISTORY
History—Act of 1879 . . पु पु . पु पु पु
Act of 1926 . पु पु पु : : : . पु न पु
जी वात Bar Committee. पु पु + + + पु -
Law Commission’s view in the 14th Report.
Advocates Act, 1961

IV. AMENDMENT NOT NECESSARY
Restoration of High Court’s jurisdiction not favoured .
Association of judges with disciplinary proceedings not favoured ,

¥V. POSITION IN ENGLAND

Position in England. पु + पु . . . . . +

Solicitors in England . ‘ . पु . . . . .
VI. ANALOGOUS LAWS IN INDIA

Position under analogous laws relating to other professions in India. .
Bombay Medical Act, 1912
VII. CONCLUSION

Conclusion re-iterated .
Importance of maintaining high professional standards . . . .

Bacon’s view . पु पु पु + . . . . .
APPENDICES

Disciplinary jurisdiction in England over members of the bar

Certain statutory precedents as to disciplinary jurisdiction over members of the
earned professions. पु पु पु . पु पु पु . ‘

78—-L/PCD) lal MofLIeca—1

Page

Bw Ww pe

An


1. INTRODUCTORY

1. This Report deals with the question whether any amendments scope and Ganesis,
are necessary in regard to disciplinary jurisdiction over abvocates

under the Advocates Act, 1961, The subject has been taken up on 2

reference received from the Government of India, Ministry of Law,

Justice and Company Affairs, Department of Legal Affairs. Prom

the letier’ addressed by the Secretary to the Department of Legal

Affairs to the Member-Secretary of the Commission in this behalf,

the material portion is quoted below:—

“Disciplinary jurisdiction over Advocates was, as you are
aware, transferred by the Advocates Act from the High Courts
to the Bar Councils. Suggestions have been made fram time to
time that this jurisdiction is not being properly exercised and
that the Bar Councils are taking too lenient a view and that
it would be more appropriate if the jurisdiction of the High
Courts is “restored” or alternatively, that the Judges have a
greater suy in the matter of disciplining erring Advocates.

a8 +e ee we ae

T shall, therefore, be grateful if the Commission cun go
into this question and fevour the Government with the benetit
of its advice.”

2. Before proceeding to consider whether a change in the law is History कह showing
needed, we would like to state at the outset that the present statutory thot sche Ast ™
provisions on the subject were evolved after mature refivction, as will tyre reflection.

be evident from the history of the provisions” Strong, if not compell-

ing, reasons should exist for recommending a change therein.

वा. THE PRESENT LAW

3. The present law is contained in the Advocates Act. 1961, Chap- Precent law—State
ter 5, which deals with the conduct of advocates, including discipli- कं Cops
nary proceedings for misconduct. Briefly, the scheme is as follows.

Where, on receipt of a complaint or otherwise, a State Bar Council

has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll has been guilly

of professional or other misconduct, it shall refer the case for dis-

posal to its disciplinary Committee" The Disciplinary Committee of

a State Bar Council, after giving the advocate concerned and the
Advocate-General an opportunity of being heard, may make any of

the following orders, namely*:—

{a) dismiss the complaint or, where the proceedings were initi-
ated at the instance of the State Bar Council, direct that
the proceedings be filed;

(b) reprimand the advocate;

{c) suspend the advocate from practice for such period as it
may deem fil;

(d) remove the name of the advocate from the State roll of
advocates.

1 D.ONo. F., 8 (12) 170 -1.C., dated the एक October, 1978 addressed by tho Seeretary, D-pattment of Legal Affairs to the
Member: Secretary, Law Commission of India.

Pera 7-11, infra

4, Sections 35—44, Advocates Act, 1081,

4, Section 33 (1).

5, Begtion 3518) (a) to (१).

78—LjP(D) 121 Moll JaCA—2


Bar Coanoil of

Bistory—Act of
1879.

2

4. In the case of an advocate whose name is not entered on any
State roll, the Bar Council of India, on receipt’ of a complaint or
otherwise, if it has reason to believe that the advocate has been guilty
of professional or other misconduct, shall refer the case for disposal
to its disciplinary committee.’ The disciplinary committee of the Bar
Council of India has also power to withdraw for inquiry before it-
self and dispose of any proceedings for disciplinary action pending
against any advocate before the Disciplinary Committee of any State
Bar Council? The powers and procedure of the Disciplinary Com-
mittee of the Bar Council of India in an inquiry are the same as
those of the Bar Council of a State.’

5. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Disciplinary Committce
of the State Bar Council may prefer an appeal fo the Bar Council
of India and a similar right is given to the Advocate-Gencral of the
State by an amendment made in 1973.‘ Such appeal is heard by the
Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India, which may, on
such appeal, pass such or including an order varying the punish-
ment awarded by the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Coun-
cil as it deems fit’ But this is subject to the proviso that the order of
the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council shall not be
varied so as to prejudicially allect the person aggrieved, without
giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard®

6 Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Disciplinary
Committee of the Bar Council of India may appeal to the Supreme
Court. A similar right is given to the Attorney General of India or the
Advocate-General of the State concerned, as the case may be, by
an amendment made in 1973.7 On such appeal the Supreme Court
May pass such order, including an order varying the — punishment
awarded by the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India.
as it deems fit, but no order of the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar
Council of India shall be varied so as to prejudicially affect the
person aggrieved, withoul giving him a reasonable opportunity af
being heard.* The rest of the provisions in the chapter are not material
for the present purpose.

गा. HISTORY

7. So much as regards the present law. Before the passing of the
Advocates Act, 1961, the law on the subject was to be found princi-
pally in two enactments. The Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 empowet-
ed a High Court? to make miles governing the admission and discipline
of pleaders who practised in the courts subordinate to it and befere
revenue officers and tribunals within its territorial jurisdiction.

Under that Act, the High Court could suspend or dismiss a plea-
der for taking instructions from a party, or the servant, friend or
relative of a party who had not retained him, or for attempting to
secure employment through a tout or other person remunerated tor
the service, or for offcring part of his fee as a reward for having

1, Seetion 36 (1).

3, Beotion 36 (2)

3, Section 86 (3), and 36 (4)

4, Section 87 (1).

4, Section 87 (2), main paragcaph.
3, Section 37 (2), proviso.

7, Section 38 (1), main paragtaph— earlier hat”.

4, Section 38, main Paragraph, latter half and proviso.

3, fleotions 6 and 7, Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (18 of 1879).


3

procured employment, प्य lor fraudulent or grossly improper profes-
sional conduct," or on conviction ef a criminal offence implying such
a’ defect of character as to render him unfit for pleadership.*

The inquiry could be initiated by the subordinate court’ in rela-
tion 10 whose proceedings misconduct was alleged to have been
committed, and the district court or the Collector could suspend the
pleader during his investigiiion. but the final order was to be passed
by the High Court.

® The Act of 1879 sas converncd with pleaders. The indian Bar dct of W926.
Councils Act, 1926 gave io Advocates, who were entitled as of right
. to practise in 21 High Court. a measucd of aulonomy nor enjoyed by
pleaders. The Bar Cuuncil constituted under the Act was a body
cowporate' composed of the Advocate-General of the State four
members nominzied by the High Court and ten members electe
by the advocates Irom among themsclyes,

Under the Act of 1926, a complaint of misconduct against an
auveeate, if preseated io a High Court, could be heard, after consul-
jution with the Bar Council, by a district judge: alternatively, the
Chief Justice could appoint a tribunal of from three to five members
of the council, The finding had to be reported to the High Court, which,
after giving the Advocate-Gencral and the advocate concerned the
opportunity io be heard. would pass final orders. If the complaint
was not disinissed. the advacaute might be reprimanded, suspended or
struck off the roll of advocates maintained by the Bar Council.‘

9%. Soon alter independeuce, a distinguished Committee was entrust- all India
ed with the work of reporting on the need for an All India Bar. The Committee.
Committee gave ils Report in 1953. ft recommended, inter alfa, the

grant of complete autonomy to the bar.

The observations of that Committee as to the need for autonomy
are as follows:

“The medival men buve their General Medical Council
under the Indian Meclical Councils Act, 1933 {Act XXVII of
$933).:So have the Chartered Accountants under the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949 (Act XXXVID of 1949). It is a truism
ibility “thrown upon a person stimulates his sense

Tesentative elected by the Members of the Bar the
estiblishment al un Alt India Bar will be meaningless. Tf it is
cesirable, its ihe Committee thinks it is, that the national Bar of
India shemkl be a strong and independent body capable of in-

fluencii ddeeding public opinion there should be some
competent anthority ceiving its jurisdiction and power from
Mie Bar issef ॥ not subservient to any external authority

howsoever high und eminent that might be. The risk of the Bar
Councils being swayed by external influence or unworthy consi-
deralions is upt, bdsever. as anprovided far as is apprehended.”

10.
Bar (

ving out the recommendation of the All India पाए
siresscul Pt these words ता the नी Report of 7 ४0 14:

Report.

1. Section 13, Legal Prachitiowers Act, 1874,

2, Seotion 12, Legal Praotitiuners Act, 1879.

+, Beotion 14, Legal Practitioners Act, )S79.

‘, Section 3 (2), Tadian Bar Councila Act (58 of 19:
Hection 4 (1), Tadian Bar Ceued

ction 10, Tudiaa Ber Cotnvil

2, All India Bar Committee Rot
73 —LjP(DjLALMotLJ&GA 3



4

the Law Commission of India in its Report on the Reform of Judiciak
Administration forwarded in 1958';—

“47, The All India Bar Committee considered exhaustively
the questions of the constitution and powers of the State Bur
Councils and the All India Bar Council and made detailed re-
commendations. In framing its recommendations the Committee
accepted the principle that the Bar should be autonomous in
matters relating to the profession. {ts recommendations in regard
to the constitution of the Bar Councils are based on the accept-
ance of this principle. While recommending that the Siatc Bar
Council and the All India Bar Council shall inter alia consist of
two Judges of the High Court or two Judges of the Supreme
Court nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court or the
Chief Justice of India respectively, care was talon fo ensure that
the two Judges so nominated would be persens who had been
advocates. so that, notwithstanding Judges being members, the
Councils still retained their domestic- character and were com-
posed exclusively of advocates.”

“48. We wish to emphasize the principle of autonomy thus
sought to be given ellect to by the Committee. Our considered
opinion is definitely against Judges who have ucver been “‘udvo-
cates being brought into these autonomaus bodies that should
consist wholiy of members of the profession. In this connection
it may be noticed that section 4 of the Bar Councils Act, which
Prescribes the composition of the Bar Council provides for four
persons to be nominated by the High Court, of whom net more
than two may be Judges of that Court. The recommendation of
ihe Committee that the Judges nominated should have been per-
sons who had been advocates was, it appears, made deliberately
with a view to prevent Judges who had not been advocates from
becoming members of the Council. It may be pointed out that,
notwithstanding the provision jn section 4(J)(b) of the Bar
Councils Act, in some of the States, the High Court has not
chosen to nominate Judges as members of the Bar Counci's. In-
spite of the absence of Tudges on these eonncils, 50 far as we arc
aware, there has been no complaint about the satisfactory
functioning of these Bar Councils.

“Lt would, therefore, appear that the time has arrived for
making these professional bodies entirely antonomous. If. how-
ever, Judges have to form part of thé composition of these
bodies, they should be Advocate-Judges,”

tare’ Ac a1. In 1961, the recommendations of the All India Bar Commitice

were given legislative effect” by the Advocates Act, 1961, which
contains the present law on the subject. We have already summarised
its material provisions.*

IV. AMENDMENT NOT NECESSARY
Peesiecit arte 12. The brie! historical survey given above* shows that the tend
not favoured. of legislation in India has been gradually towards greater autonomy
in the field of disciplinary Proceedings against members of the legal
profession. Prima facie, it would be a retrograde step if this tread
is reversed and disciplinary jurisdiction is sought to be restores! to

the High Courts.

1. Idth Report Vel. 1, page 576 Chapter 86, par
4, Sections M42 Advocates Act, 1961,

+ Para 3~6 eupin.

Para 7—I1. supra.


5

If there have been a few isolated lita es in which the ageriey-
ed parties are dissatisfied with the acfign taken by the disciplinary
body, that should not be regarded as ait jtuting adequate justifica-
tion for a change in the law. Such! dis tion, assuming that it is
justified on the merits of the case, necessarily disclose a
defect in the machinery of adjudi mn. However perfect a daw,

occasions are bound to arise from tiftie to, time where the parti
concerned may not be totally satisfied with the exercise of powers
vested thereunder. The Advocates tigen has provided machinery
for taking the matter to higher authorities in appropriate cases,’ ans
obvious cases of injustice could be adequately remedied under the
present scheme. The right of final appeal | the Supreme Court en-
sures that the Supreme Court is not ied of all powers for ensur-
ing high standards of professional integrity. The Supreme Court can,
in appropriate cases, pass such order as may be called for. In the
absence of cogent reasons supported by adequate factual material,
necessitating a modification in the present scheme, we do not consider
it proper to disturb it. पु
13. Reversion to the previous position is therefore out of en sug: day
‘As an altemative to restoration of the ofd position, it has been sug- with indy ।
gested* that while retaining the present system, judges should be proceedings
associated in some form or other with the disciplinary council. We
have not been impressed by this alternative either. If the complaint
is that the tribunals as constituted at present sometimes take an
unduly lenient view, this possibility could not be totally eliminated
even if the other alternative is accepted. The fact that the Attorney
General or the Advacate General concerned has becn authorised to
file appeal in appropriate cases to the Supreme Court should also
obviaie the supposed apprehension. Apéirt Eom that, however, such
a change in the present system would, in effect, amount to dilution
of the autonomy of the bar and a reversal of the progressive trend of
legistation to which we have made a referenge.*
The Judges of the High Court would «generally be reluctant to
be associated with the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar
Council, because appeal against te orders of the State Disciplinary
Committee would le to the Disciplinary 7 Committee of the Bar
Council of India. The question of association of Judges of the Supre-
xeme Court with the Disciplinary Committge of the Bar Council of
India does not arise, because appeal from the order of that Discipli-
- nary Committee lies to the Suprenpe (कप... :
५. POSITION IN ENGLAND
14. Tt may be of interest to kqow that in England, disciplinary Position in Megisn दे.
jurisdiction over members of the bar % Ee by an autonomous
body. Benchers of the Inns of ope 1 have retained throughout their
history’ the exclusive right of “ mentees ing” ‘stuflents to the bar and of
“disbarring” those of their 4४. wi they find guilty of profes-
sional misconduct.’ * ne हु
३5. The discipline of solicitors in E; gino Fis in the hands of the Solicitors in Hug-
Gisciplins inary committee formed by the of the Rolls from the 4०१.
members of the council of the, society. ‘The. committe has the power
to. sttike off a solicitor from the rolls, suspead him from . practice or
impose a fine upto 500 pounds. There is an mppeal to the High Court?
1 Pate 8:6, का seotion 38, AdvocatesAch Iolo
3, Para 1, expes,
*, Pats 12, supra.
*. Bedolitf and Cross, The #nglich Lega System (1971), Page 392.
*, Por details, soe Appendix 1.
5. Solicitors Act, 1957, sections 46 and 48. -
3. Wilson, Cases and Materials from the English Legal system (1973) page 141.



6 :

V1. ANALAGOUS LAWS, क्र §NDIA

Position underana- 16. We may state that we have also sone throush several Indian
डक laws reliting statutory precedents relating to disciplingay jyrisdiction over mem-
in Indi. bers of other Jearned professions. Most of these provisions vest such
jurisdiction in autonomous bodies fonsisting ba members of the
profession, We give in an Appendi gist of relevant provisions in
some of the "Acts prepared Tr ithe form af:a chart for convenience of
comparison.
* Medical 17, In this context, we may also refer to local legislation as to the
14. medical profession which illustrates the aceéptahce by the Legislature
of the principle of autonomy. Registration. of qualified practitioners
in western medicine began in the erst-while State of Bombay with
the enactment of the Bombay Medical Act, 1912.

Other Provinces had similar legislation on the same subject. The
Bombay Act as now in force provide: for a mddical council, consist-
ing of five nominees of the State Government, three persons elected
by members of the Faculties of Medicine of the Universities in the
State and the governing body of the College of Physicians and Sur-
geons, Hombay, and six elected by registered medical practitioners?

The Bombay Medical Council constituted under the Act can
remove @ practitioner’s name from ‘the rdgister, afler inquiry. for

misconduct." °

pears

VII. CONCLUSION

‘Conclusion 18, Having regard to the position discussed above we re-iterate our
ted. reltere- conclusion‘ that a change in the law is uncalled for. .

Importance of main: 19. We believe that we have taken into accqunt all considerations
‘taining high profes relevant’ io the question referred to ws. ‘What'we have said is not
sonal intended to detract from the importance: रॉ maintaining high ethical
standards in the legal profession—or, for-that‘matter, in any other
learned Frotession. Indian tradition expectsimen and women to dis-
charge duty to the best of their abilityiin the field of life which
they-have. chosen for themselves. In the Mababharata, a lofty ethical
passion flavours the definition of ‘dharma’ given by the merchant
Tuladhaga to the ascetic Jajali*:— :
-'Sarvesam yah suhrt nityam sarvésmm’ ca hite ratah;
Karmana manosa vaca sa dharmnam vede Jajale—
‘He knows dharma, O Jajali, who ‘ts altjays: the friend of all, and
who, through his actions, thought and speech, is absorbed in
(ensaring) the welfare of al’. ~ हे
Bacon's view. 20. In‘the West, similar sing alighdy पाक expressed by Bacon in
* teen which, while appearing slight aly infamijfiar to us because of
passage of centuriés, bears quotitidn
In fine Elizabethan language, Francis: Bacon begins his preface
to his Maxims of the Law'—
- “E hold every man a debtor to his profession ; from
which, as men of course do seek to ‘rective countenance and’

२, Bee Appendix 3.
3, Seatinn 3 (2). Bombay Medical Act, 1912, (6 of 1 1912).

२, Bection 9, Boinbey Medical Act, 1912 (6 of 1912).

4, Pare 12-28 supra. - हि 3 एप wa
4, Mahsbharata, Senti Patva, 254-9 (Bhandarkar Oriental Resear: Insktiage Edition), quoted by Sw:

‘Fsernel Valuesin a Changing Society (1971), page 537. 7 Swami Ranganadhananc,

3, Bacon, Preface to Maxims of the law, quoted by Sir Owen Dixou. “Professional Conduct” ley,

+ मद ofthe University of Melboume in 1083). ‘The Jesting, Pilate, 140184. Gnaugural Lecture to the Lay,


7

profit, so ought they of duty to endeavour themselve8, by way
of amends, to be a help and ornament thereunto. This is performed
in some degree by the honest and liberal practice of a “profes-
sion, when men shall carry a res; not to descend into any
course that is corrupt and unwortl fst theteof, and preserve them-
selves free from the abuses wherewith the same profedsion is
noted to be infected; but much more in this performed if a man
be able to visit and strengthen the roots and foundation of the
science itself; thereby not only gracing it in reputation and dig-
nity but also amplifying it in perfection and substance.”

BR. Khanna te es Chairman
$, N. Shankar ae Member
T. S. Krishnamoorthy Iyer ere Member
P. M. Bakshi «+... Member-Secretary

Dated, New Delhi,
the 30th October, 1978.


APPENDIX 1

DISCIPLINARY JURISDICTION IN ENGLAND OVER MEM-
BERS OF THE BAR.

Disc! linary function In England, admission of a person as a student (of law) and,
of Inos of Courtwhen he is qualificd, as a barrister, is still the responsibility of the

and Senate,

3, Wilson, Cases and Materiala [rc the TE:

Inns of Court. The Inns of Court are also responsible for the mainte-
nance of discipline and for the observance by the barristers of the
rules of professional conduct and etiquette. The Inns have delegated
the exercise of a number of their powers. For example, their res-
ponsibilities in regard to the education and the examination of bar
students have been delegated to a council of legal education. In 1967,
the Inns delegated their disciplinary power to a “Senate” of the four
Tnns, which also has wide administrative responsibilities in relation
to the bar. Topo tas

Halsbury states the position as to disciplinary jurisdiction in
detail’ as follows:—

“The disciplinary powers of the four Inns of Court, other than
those relating to the domestic affairs of the Inns, have been delegated
by the benches to the Senate of the Four Inns of Court!’ Complaints
of professional misconduct or of conduct unbecoming a_ barrister
which may be made against a barrister are received by the Senate
from the Bar Council or other bodies or individuals, and are consi-
dered by the Complaints Committee of the Senate.’”

“In respect of any complaint the committee may decide that no
disciplinary action be taken or that the complaint be reported to the
treasurer of the Inn of the barrister concerned. or that it shall form
the subject matter either of a charge or charges before the Senate
Disciplinary Committee,’ which may include a judge of the Supreme
Court but otherwise consists of practising barristers who are mem-
bers of the Senate.” When sitting as a tribunal, the Disciplinary
Committee consists of not more than seven members and not less
than five members,*"

eee

Where any case is reported to the Disciplinary Committee, the Com-
plaints Committee is responsible, with the concurrence of the
barrister’s Inn, for the appointment of counsel to formulate the charge
or charges and to present the case before the Disciplinary Committee,

oak em per +e
“The sentences which may be imposed by the Disciplinary Com-

mittee are disbarment, suspension, cither conditionally or otherwise,
an order to repay or forego fees, or a reprimand’. The sentence, if

h legal gystem (1973), page 18.

3, Seo Re. 8, (a barrister) (1969), | AU E.R. 919, where the jutiadiction is fully set ont.
3, Holsbuty, 4th Edition, Vol. 3, pages 616, 616, para 1134.

4, Regulations of the Senate of the Pour Inns of Court (1970-71) reg. 18.

हम. Standing ordere of the Senate Gomplaints Comittee (1867) ard. 4.

5, Standing Orders of the Senate Complaints Committec (1987), ord, 6.

7, Regulations of the Senate of the Fonr Thns of Curt (1970-71) reg. 18 (0): Annual, Statement of the General Counoil of

‘Bor (1966), page 42.
3, Standing Ordars of the Disciplinary Committer of the Senate (1971), ord, 1.
*, Standing orders of the Disciplinary Committee of the Sonate Ord, 10.

the


9

any, must be notified by the president of the Senate to the treasurer
of the Inn of the barrister concerned and the Inn must give effect to
it in accordance with such direction, if any, as may be given by the
Senate, In those cases where a sentence of disbarment or suspension
is ordered, the charges, finding and sentence are published by the
barrister’s Inn. In other cases, publication is made if the barrister
concerned so requests or if the president of the senate so recommends.
Where the charge or charges are dismissed, the charges and. findings
are not published unless the barrister so requests."

“The decision of the Disciplinary Committee is subject to an
appeal to the Lord Chancellor and the judges of the High Court of
Jutice sitting as a domestic tribunal.’ The judges when sitting in this
capacity ace described as ‘visitors’.”
a
1, Regulations af the Senate af the Pun Tuts of Court (L960). ree, 1.
2, Standing Orders of tho Disciplinary Committee nf the Senate (1071), ord. TI.
2, Annual Statement of the Senate (1966-07), page 7-


APPENDIX 2

CERTAIN STATUTORY PRECEDENTS AS TO DISCIPLINARY

Eye ISDICTION OVER MEMBERS OF THE LEARNED
PROFESSIONS,
‘Name of Act Section Disciplinary body Power te impose Appeal
punishment
The Dentists 41 The State By the State Appeal tu the
Act, 1948 Couneit, ‘Cuuncil, Stata Government,
The 36 Executive Order made by Appeal from
Pharmacy Comittee. Executive Council order of State
Act, 1948, is subject to confir- Council to State
mation by Government. which
the Stute Concil. shallbe final.
‘The Chartered 21 (4) (a) Cuunei) of the (7) Beprimand of = Appeal ta the
Accountants and 224, Institute of Char- the member. ‘High Court.
Act, 1919 tered — Accoun-
tants,
थ1 (4) (9) (2) Removal ufname Appeal to the High
and 22 4. from Register fora Curt.
period not exceed-
ing five year
21 (4), Provieo, Council of ghe Hfremoval iato be for Appeal to the High
and 21 (6). | Institute of 5 years or perwanent, Court.
Chartered the case to be forwar-
Aocountante. ded to the High
Coart.
Indien Medical 24 (1) Medical Council Removal ofa persun’s Apprailies to Central
Council Act, 1956. of India. name from tho Indian Government from
Medical Regis ister rerjoval from the
can be ordered by State Medicul Register
Medics] Council of on ground of profes-
India, iflisname has sionat misoonduet-
eon removed from a section 24 (2),
Stato Medical Register
under the State ew
for registration of
medical practitioners.
Notaries Act, 1982, 10 (१) The Government. Removal for profes- No uppeal,
sional or other mis-
conduct after pres-
evibed inquiry.
Oost and Works 20, 21, Counci of the ‘Substantially the Substantially
accountants Act, Institute. seme asin the the tame ag in the
1969; case of Chartered case of Chartored
Accountants. Aceountants.
Indian Medicine 26,27. Ceutral Council of To témove name Appeal lies ty the
Contral Council Indian Medicine. from register by the atta) Government
Act, 1970. Central Council, IS. 27 (2)] where any
person’s name bse
‘been removed from
a state Re; egistor F on
any ground. than
that he is not posse:
ased of the Tequisite
medical quaifications.
‘The Architects 29 Counoil. By the Council No provisions a8 to
40 1972. appeal.

99. LgP (D) 121 MofLI&CA—2,000—81-10.79—GIPS 10