LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA
SEVENTY : SIXTH REPORT
ON
ARBITRATION ACT, 1940

November, 1978


D.O. No. F. 2(8)/77-L.C.
(CHAIRMAN
Law Commission
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,
New DELHI-110001

Dated the 9th November, 1978.

My dear Minister,

1 forward herewith the Seventy-Sixth Report of the Law Commission
of India relating to Arbitration Act, 1940.

As mentioned in the first paragraph of the Report, the subject was

taken up for consideration by the Law Commission at the instance of the
Government.

I place on record my appreciation of the valuable assistance received
from Shri P. M. Bakshi, Member Secretary of the Commission in the pre-
paration of the Report.

With kind regards,

Yours sincerely,
Sd.
(मत. R. KHANNA)

Hon’ble Shri Shanti Bhushan,
Minister of Law, Justice & Company Affairs,
New Delhi-110001

MGIPCBE—S1—7 M of LI&CA /ND/78—S-2-80—2,000 Bks.


Chapter Subjects

1 हे . . + Introductory.

2 Definitions.

3° . . . + Arbitration without intervention of a Court

4s . . . + Powers of the arbitrator.

5+ + + + + Proceedings in the Court on an award.

6°: . . . + Arbitration with intervention of the Court

7 . . . + Arbitration in suits.

8 + + + + + Provisions applicable to an arbitrator.

9 + + + + + Appeals : section 39.

to - . . . Miscellaneous.

moe हे . . * Procedural Provisions

12+ + + + २1 Power of the Court.

3+ . . . + Summary of recommendations.
APPENDIX

Appendix . + Letter dated 27th July, 1977 from the Secretary, Depart-

ment of Legal Affairs.


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTORY

1.1. This Report deals with revision of the Arbitration Act, 1940, form-
ing an important part of adjective law. The Commission has received a
reference from the Government of India requesting it to undertake revision
of the Act’. Besides this, a number of subjects dealing with adjective law
have already been dealt with by the Law Commission,—subjects covering
civil and criminal procedure, evidence and limitation. To complete revision
of the major portion of the adjective law, the Commission has reviewed in
this Report the entire Act.

1.2. The law of arbitration is integrally connected with the question
how far parties should choose their own forum rather than that consituted
by the law. It is not urcemmon for parties to choose a tribunal that is
intended to resolve disputes between them. The tribunal might be stipulated
in the contract itself or in a collateral agreement, or the tribunal might
be agreed upon after the contract has been made and a dispute has arisen.
It is the concern of the law of arbitration to decide how far such agreements
should operate, and to what extent they should be supplemented by pro-
visions designed to meet points on which the agreement may be silent.

1.3. Practical experience of the working of the Act has shown that
though, by and large, the scheme of the Act is sound, some provisions have
in actual working caused difficulties and have resulted in delay and needless
expense. Although we have come across criticism of the Act in one or
two judicial pronouncements,’ we do not think that the Act suffers from
any radical defect or that on that score it should be thrown out lock, stock
and barrel.

1.4. The Commission on a study of the various materials and. case law
on the subject is of the view that there is need to improve certain provisions
of the Act that cause delay or hardship to the parties, or unnecessarily
introduced clogs which hinder, the smooth course of the proceedings. Al-
though we had an initial inclination to re-number some of the sections?
because of our feeling that the subjects dealt with in those sections could
be more appropriately dealt with at a different place, we realised the impor-
tance of adhering to the present numbering. A change in the numbering
would have caused inconvenience to lawyers and businessmen who have
become familiar with it and would, to a certain extent, have caused con-
fusion.

In the formulation of a law on arbitration two conflicting considerations
present themselves; on the one hand due weight has to be given to the
arrangement made by the parties themselves relating to the personnel and
machinery for the settlement of their dispute; on the other hand, unfair or
impracticable arrangements have to be modified in the interests of justice.

The desirability of maintaining a certain amount of uniformity of
interpretation of the law has also to be borne in mind. In making our re-
commendations on the subject, we have been mindful of these considerations.

Before we proceed to make our recommendations on each section, we
would like to deal in brief with the history of arbitration in general and
history of the statutory law in India on the subject in particular.

1. D.O. No. F. 8(15)/76-—L.C., dated 27th July, 1977 of the Secretary, Department
of Legal Affairs addressed to the Member-Secretary, Law Commission (see
Apperdix).

2. ९.8. Saha & Co. v Ishar Singh, A.IR. 1956 Cal. 321, 341.

3. e.g. section 30, which was proposed to be transferred earlier, in the group sec
tions 15-17.

Reasons for
taking up the
subject.

Essence of the
law of arbitration.

Delay and
expense.

Approach


2

Roman law.

Common law

policy against
ouster of juris-
diction,

1.5. In the Western world, arbitration has been known for centuries.
An ancient authority on arbitration stated’ :

“It is commendable at the outset of a trial to inquire of the
litigants whether they desire adjudication according to law or settle-
ment by arbitration. If they prefer arbitration, their will is granted.
A court that always resorts to arbitration is praiseworthy, concerning
such a court. it is said, ‘Execute the justice of peace in your gates’
{zech. 8:16).”

“What is the kind of justice that carries peace with it? Undoubted-
ly, it is arbitration: So too, with David, it is said, “And David executed
justice and charity unto all his people” शा Sam, 8:15). What is the
kind of justice which carries charity with it? Undoubtedly, it is
arbitration, i.e, compromise (thus), even if the judge has already heard
the arguments of the litigants and knows in whose favour the verdict
will be, it is commendable to effect an arbitration.. The (moral)
power of arbitration is greater than that of adjudication.”

In the Western world, some form of aribtration has been in existence for
a long period: but two rival trends have clamoured for supremacy in this
field in the course of history—the supremacy of the Courts and the supre-
macy of private tribunals. In Roman law, there was no struggle to esta-
blish the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts as against rival tribunals. Ac-
cordingly, contracts for the submission of disputes to the decision of persons
were recognised, and there were rules as to their effect and enforcement.
This was further developed in the civil law, and in Continental Codes
of Civil Procedure.”

Arbitration, called “compromise (compromissum)”, was a mode of
terminating controversies much favoured in the civil law.*

Amongst the Greeks, international arbitration was a recognised prac-
tice. It is mentioned as such by Herodotus and Thucydides.‘ The Roman
Senate, and later the Roman emperor, arbitrated between subject peoples.

In the city-states in Greece back in the sixth, fifth and fourth cen-
turies B.C., disputes were settled by arbitration. The nature of the disputes
included “boundary delimitation, ownership of colonies, ownership of parti-
cular pieces of territory, assessment of damages suffered through a hostile
invasion, (and) in recovery of money owned by one state to another, and
in all sorts of religious matters.*

1.6. This approach of the ancient world and Roman law. may be
contrasted with the common law. At common law, there was said to be a
policy against agreements ousting the courts jurisdiction. In the beginning’
it was necessary to establish the jurisdiction of the courts of politically orga-
nised society to replace the instituions of kin-organised society, self-help
and the help of one’s kinsmen, self-redress, and private war. In the Middle
Ages, there was a contest for jurisdiction between the courts of the king
and the courts of the Church. In England, after the Conquest, the King’s
courts acquired jurisdiction at the expense of the old customary and feudal
local tribunals. The common law grew up in the King’s courts in and after
the thirteenth century. Not unnaturally, the common Jaw courts Iooked
jealously at agreements to submit private disputes to extra-judicial deter-
mination instead of to the appointed tribunals of politically organised
society.’ A doctrine that a contract to arbitrate on existing dispute or such

1. The Book of Judges—Code of Maimonides (1949), 66, quoted in Tiewul and Tsegah,
“Arbitration and settlement of commercial disputes” (July 1975) 24 I.C.L.Q. 93,
394,

2. Pound. Jurisprudence (1959), Vol. 5, page 360.

3. Story, Equity Jurisprudence, 2nd Edn.. page 1001, cited in Chandabassappa
Baslingayava, A.A.R. 1927 Bom. 565, 567.

4, International Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences, Vol. 1, page 50.
5. Wehringer, Arbitration ; Precepts and Principles (1969), page 5.
6. Pound, Jurisprudence (1959), Vol. 5, pages 357, 358.

7. Pound, Jurisprudence (1959), Vol. 5, page 358.



disputes as might thereafter arise, cither generally or under a particular
transaction, was void as against public policy, was taken to be well settled.

But the exigencies of business brought about an increasing demand for
commercial arbitration. In 1856, the House of Lords limited the common-
law bars on arbitration agreements, by distinguishing an arbitration clause
which made a condition precedent in a contract, so that there could be no
claim to enforce judicially until after performance of the condition, from
a contrast to submit an existing claim to arbitration.’

1.7. Though arbitration was recognised by the common law in England. History of con-

from the very nature of an arbitration, some degree of control by the trol by courts.
King’s courts has been inevitable from Stuart times onwards. The growth
of British overseas trade, and the expansion of the Empire from the time of the
Treaty of Paris (1763), enlarged greatly the work of merchants and traders.
Consequently, matters in dispute between such persons became increasingly
frequent, and of major importance in the mercantile affairs of the realm.
At first, these disputes were, in practice, decided under the common law, and
related originally to chattels personal, or torts to the person. In more
recent times, disputes were referred to arbitration in questions on real pro-
perty, and more frequently, questions in the law of contract.’

Thus, from the passing of the Arbitration Act 1897, the legislature in
England became aware of the necessity of provisions which would aid
the common law. A number of enactments were added to the Statute Book,
culminating in the Common Law Procedure Act, 1854. The advent of
railways, tramways and other mechanical means of transport led to an
enormous increase of cases held in arbitrations in the second half of the
nineteenth century, and as a result, Parliament passed the Arbitration Act
of 1889. This statute has been the bedrock of statutory arbitration ever
since, and codified the general law as it then stood.’

The English Act of 1889 was mainly declaratory of previous legisla-
tion, or of commercial and conveyancing practice. Many substantial changes
in the previous law were made by the Arbitration Act, 1934. On September
1, 1950, there came into force the Arbitration Act, 1950, which purports to
consolidate without amendment all the earlier Acts on Arbitration. We
shall have occasion to refer to its various provisions when we discuss the
corresponding provisions of our law.

1.8. In the United States, arbitration began in 1887 when the Chamber U.S.A.
of Commerce of the State of New York set up the first privately administered
tribunal of businessmen and became the first administrator of a, bitrations.'
Arbitration in the U.S.A. generally followed the pattern of the English
common law until 1920, when New York adopted the first modern arbitra-
tion statute. Previously, agreements to refer to arbitration disputes that
might arise in the future could be revoked at any time prior to an actual
settlement Such agreements were held unenforceable, although not illegal, on
the theory that they would deprive the courts of jurisdiction.’ Following the
adoption of the New York statute, the federal government (in 1925) and 15
states enacted similar statutes relating to arbitration. The federal Act does
not prescribe the rule of decision for all cases in the federal courts, but is
confined to subjects within federal legislative control, namely, maritime
transactions and those involving interstate commerce. In other cases that
may be litigated in the federal courts,—e.g., in suits between citizens of
different states,—the law of the state in which the federal court sits either
provides the controlling law on arbitration or points to the law of the
appropriate state.”

. Scott # Avery, (1856) 5 H.L.C. 811.
Gill, Law of Arbitration (1975), page 1.

५. Gill, Law of Arbitration (1975), page 2.

Wehringer, Arbitration : Precepts and Principles (1969), page 5.
Eneycl. Britannica, Vol. 2, page 214.

. Eneycl. Britannica, Vol. 2, page 214.

. Encyel. Britannica, Vol. 2, page 214.

RaVaynNo


Institutional

arbitration in
the U.S.A.

History in India
-~Regulation,

Yajnavalkya
and Narada

A Uniform Arbitration Law was adopted by the National Conference"

ob gine Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in 1955, and amended in
6.

In the early 1960s, all states in the U.S.A. (with the exception of Okla-
homa and South Dakota) had some statutory provisions for arbitration.*
Not all, however, provided for enforcing an agreement to arbitrate future
disputes; many followed the rule that none but existing controversies could
be made the subject of an agreement for arbitration. In contrast, the Uniform
Arbitration Act recognises agreements regarding both existing and future
disputes.

1.9, Although individuals frequently agree, either by contract or after
a dispute has arisen, that a dispute will be arbitrated by some specific
procedures, the majority of arbitrations in the U.S.A. are held under the
auspices of organisations that have procedures for arbitration as an explicit
part of their trading rules, bylaws or constitutions.

Such “institutional arbitration” has a long history in the U.S.A. The
New York Chamber of Commerce had arbitration facilities from the year
1761 to 1920, and the New York Stock Exchange provided for arbitration
of member’s disputes in its 1817 constitution. Trade associations frequently
provide the machinery for settling disputes among members, and occasion-
ally such facilities are avai'able to non-members as well. In some instances
an association has joined several others to provide joint arbitration mach-
inery. Additional facilities for handling disputes by arbitration were made
available through the auspices of the American Arbitration Association, a
non-profit making organisation that maintained a panel of arbitrators and
provided administrative services for judging both labour and commercial
disputes.

1.10. India has a long tradition of arbitration. The settlement of differ-
ences by tribunals chosen by the parties themselves, whose decision is to
be accepted as final and conclusive between themselves,—which is the basic
idea of arbitration——was well known to Hindus in ancient India. There
were in fact, different grades of arbitrators with provisions for appeals in
certain cases from the award of a lower grade of arbitrators to arbitrators
of the higher grade. The practice seems to have been in vogue immediately
before the advent of the British. Sircar® refers to an interesting article on
the subject’ published in 1828.

Apart from the courts statutorily established by the king, where the
king or the chief justice appointed by him presided, other tribunals were
recognised in the ancient smritis (legal texts) and digests.*

1.11. Yajnavalkya’ refers to three types of popular courts (Puga, Sreni,
Kula), and Narada’ states that law-suits may be decided by village councils
(Kulani), corporations (sreni), assemblies (puga in Yag., gana in Nar.

It is remarkab'e that, having recognised the relevance and validity
of arbitration proceedings before judges not statutorily appointed who were
almost in the position of arbitrators, appeals were provided against the deci-
sions of these arbitration courts to the courts of judges appointed by the

. Wehringer. Arbitration ; Precepts and Principles (1969), page 5.

|

2. Encycl. Britannica, Vol. 2, page 214.

3. Sircar on Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 5.

4. Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Socicty (1828), Vol. 2.

5. Dr. P.B. Gajendregadkar, Address to the Fifth International Arbitration Congress,
Procecdings of the Fifth International Arbitration Congress (7-10 Jan. 1975,
New Delhi), pages BI-3 to BI-4.

6. Yajnavalkya IT, 30.

7. Jolly, S.B.E. 33 (Narada), page 6.

8. Kane, History of Dharamsastra (1946), Vol. 3, page 280, cited by Dr. P.B. Ganjend-

ragadkar in his address to the Fifth International Arbitration Congress, Proceed-
ings. of me Fifth [International Arbitration Congress (7-10 January, 1975), pages
I-3 to BI-4.


King and ultimately to the King himself. As Dr. Kane observes,’ the three
courts mentioned by Yajnavalkya and Narada were practically arbitration
tribunals like the modern panchayats. Thus, it is clear that ancient Hindu
Jurisprudence recognised two methods by which disputes between citizens
could be decided; one was by judicial process in the courts established by
the King, and the other by the different categories of arbitration institutions,

_ 1.12. We have it on the authority of a well-known writer on historical Villages in
jurisprudence, that the villagers had a judicial system of their own, which India.

was familiar and respected by them: the various traders and guilds has a
similar system.

The puga courts were comprised of persons dwelling in the same place,
wrespective of their caste or employment, and were competent to decide
cases in which the local public were interested?

The srenis (guilds) were associations of persons engaged in similar pur-
suits, of which the merchant’s guilds were the most important. They were
competent to decide matters relating to their special calling for traders.

Social matters concerning the members of a particular community
could be investigated and decided at the level of the kulas’

The three arbitration courts (Kula, Sreni and Puga or Gana), were
private tribunals, in the sense that they were not constituted by a royal
authority and they resembled arbitrators to that extent.’ According to Sir
Henry Maine:

“In those parts of India, in which village community was most
perfect, the authority, exercised elsewhere by the headman, was lodged
with what was called the village council or the panchayat.

It was always considered a representative body and whatever was its
real number, it always bore the name which recalled its constitution of
five persons or ‘Panchayat’. Traces of this method of setling disputes can
still be found in certain communities in the country.”

1.13, The great Hindu jurist, Priyanath Sen, thinks that “the three Dr. P. N. Sen's
arbitration courts could only decide disputes which came within their special “¥-
province, being disputes relating to matters which, from their very nature,
fell within their special knowledge, for instance, disputes regarding trade
and other local concerns. These local courts had a sort of delegated autho-
rity within their limited spheres, but their decisions were subject to appeal
in the following order; a case having been decided by a family, an appeal
lay to the corporation, by a corporation to the community, and by a com-
munity to the officers appointed by the King, or in other words, to the court
properly constituted to try all disputes: According to Narada, a decision

arrived at by the king's court from which the king is absent is appealable
to the king himself.”*

1. Kane, History of Dharmasastra (1946), Vol. 3, page 230.

. forical Jurisprudence, page 141, cited by M.K.Sharan, Court Procedure
in Ancient India (1978), pages 24, 25.

3. MLK. Sharan, Court Procedure in Ancient India (1978), page 26.
4. M.K. Sharan, Courts Procedure in Ancient India, (1978), page 26.
5.

6.

. M.K. Sharan, Court Procedure in Ancient India (1978), page 27.

. $.Varadachariar. The Hindu Judicial System (Radha Kumud Mookharjee Endow-
ment Lectures), (1945). page 98.

7. Maine, Ancient Village Communities, quoted in Indian Council of Arbitration,
“Law of Arbitration in India” issued by the Indian Council of Arbitration (August
1972), pages 1-2.

8. Dr. Priyanath Sen's Tagore Law Lectures, 1909 on “The General Principles of
Hindu Jurisprudence”, page 363, cited by Dr. P.B. Gajendragadkar in his address
to the Fifth International Arbitration Congress, Proceedings of the Fifth Interna-
tional Arbitration Congress (7-10- January, 1975), pages BI-3 to BI-4,

2~7 M of LI & CAyND/78


6

British period—
The Regulations.

Regulations in
Bengal and
Madras,

Bombay Regula-
tions.

Act of 1859
and later Acts.

1.14. In the British period, the initial Bengal Regulations did not try
to abolish the system of panchayats.' The Bengal Regulations of 1772,
1780 and 1781 were designed to encourage arbitration.’ We find in a Bengal
Regulation of 1781 an interesting provision recommending .arbitration, and
also another interesting provision to the effect! that no award of any arbi-
trator or arbitrators shall be set aside, except upon full proof, made by the
oath of two credible witnesses, that the arbitrators had been guilty of gross
corruption or partiality, in the cause in which they had made their award.

The Regulations made by Lord Cornwallis in 1787 included a provi-
sion for arbitration with the consent of parties, but, there were no provi-
sions for the consequences of the award not being made in time, nor for the
situation, when arbitrators differed in their opinions.’

1.15. Much more comprehensive was the set of provisions in Bengal
Regulation 16 of 1793, which, inter alia,’ provided for the reference by the
court to arbitration with the consent of the parties in suits for accounts,
partnership debts, breach of contract, where the valuation exceeded 200
sicca rupees and the like. Procedural provisions this time were very elabo-
tate, and, after the extension of this Regulation by subsequent Regulation
in 1803 to Banaras and to the ceded Provinces, the territorial application
of the Bengal Regulation of 1793 covered a pretty large portion of so much
of Northern and Eastern India as had, by the time, come under the British
Rule. Regulation 6 of 1813 extended the. Regulation of 1793 to disputes
relating to land.

In the meantime, Madras Regulation 4 of 1816 gave certain powers
for calling in Panchayats for settling disputes: Madras Regulation 5 of 1816
was intended to encourage awards by village panchayats and provided mach-
inery for working out the scheme. The scheme contemplated awards by vill-
age panchayats with compulsory service for a villager on a panchayat and
was administered through the village Munsiff—later by the District Munsif.

1.16. In Bombay, the famous Regulation 4 of 1827 and Regulation 7
of 1827 provided for arbitration.

Bombay Regulation 7 of 1827 (repealed by Act 1 of 1861) in its pre-
amble expressly provided for arbitration through the intervention of the
court.’ Section 1 of the Regulation gave express power to resort to arbitra-
tion notwithstanding a pending suit. Section 9, clause 1 of the Regulation
provided that awards (when filed under the Regulation) have the force of
decreases. Section 9, clause 2, of the Regulation provided that “arbitra-
tion awards or other adjustments not so filed shall not be entitled to any
other consideration in a court other than as evidence, or agreements, to be
adduced or proceeded on by ordinary course of law.”?

1.17. (ay This position continued in substance till 1859, when Act 8 of
1859 which codified the procedure of Civil Courts (except those established
by Royal Charter) provided for arbitration. Arbitration in the course of a
suit was dealt with in sections 312 to 325 of that Act.

(0) In 1862, when the Supreme Courts and the courts of Sudder
Diwany Adalat in the Presidency towns were abolished, the Act was extend-
ed to courts in the Presidency towns.

(c) Act 8 of 1859 was followed by later Codes relating to Civil Pro-
cedure, viz., Act 10 of 1877 and Act 14 of 1882, but no notable change
relating to the law of Arbitration was introduced by these two later codes
of Civil Procedure. The two Codes were confined to arbitration in the
course of a suit.

1. Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 6.
2. Chanabassappa v. Baslingayyaya, A.I.R, 1927 Bom. 565, 568,


1.18. The next step was the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899. The Act
did not apply to disputes which were the subject-matter of suits! The
Act appli in cases where, if the subject-matter submitted to arbitration
were the subject of a suit, the suit could, whether with leave or otherwise,
be instituted in a Presidency town. By section 23 of the Act, a similar pro-
vision was made for Rangoon. The Local Government was given power
by the provisions of section 2 to extend the Act to other areas, but this
power was never exercised.

1.19. The Indian Act of [899 thus dealt with arbitration by zgree-
ment without the interveniion of the court, and was limited to Presidency
towns and to such other areas 10 which it may be applied by local Govern-
ment notification." The Second Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, extended to all places to waich the Act of 1899 did not extend, and
contained (i) provisions for arbitration in respect of the subject-matter of
suits’, and (ii) provisions whereunder parties to a dispute might file their
arbitration agreements before the court, which would then refer the matter
to arbitration,’ and (iii) provisions tor arbitration without the intervention
of court.’ The main provisions on arbitration in the Code of Civil Pro-
cedure, 1908, were section 89 and the Second Schedule.

1.20. Before the Code of 1908, the provisions relating to arbitration
were, as already stated,’ contained in the Civil Procedure Code, 1882, sec-
tions 506 to 526. The Special Committee* which was presided over by Sir
Erle Richards recorded in 1907 its opinion that in due course the provi-
sions regarding arbitration should find a place in a new and comprehensive
Arbitration Act; but since there were difficulties in doing so at that time,
they decided to leave the arbitration provisions in the Code, placing them,
however, in a Schedule in the hope that they would be transferred to a
comprehensive Act.

1.21. It was in this background that the Code of 1908 was enacted.

Act of 1899

Act of 1899
and Code of
1908.

Code of 1908
Genesis.

Code of 1908.

1,22, In the twenties of the present century, the Civil Justice Committee Civil Justice
was appointed to report on the machinery of Civil Justice. The Report Committee.

of the Committee contains, inter alia, suggestions for modification of the
law of arbitration. Some time passed before action could be taken on the
recommendations of the Civil Justice Committee. This was primarily
due to the fact that the Government proposed to wait till the expected
new English Act was placed on the Statute book after consideration of
the Mackinnon Committee on the law of arbitration. That Committee
made 15 report in 1927, whick was iollowed by the English Act of 1934,
and thereafter the way was cleared for action in India. In 1938, the
Government of India appointed Shri Ratan Mohan Chatterjee, Attorney-
at-Law, as a special officer, for revision of the Law of arbitration, and the
revised Act was passed in 1940.

1.23. Thus, before the passing of the arbitration Act of 1940, the
law on the subject of arbitration in India was contained in two separate

enactments—the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899 and the Second Schedule to !

the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The two have been consolidated in
the Act of 1940.

Position imme-
diately before
940,

1.24. The framers of the Act, while re-enacting the provisions of the Act of 1940.

‘Act of 1899, or of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relevant to arbitration,
took the opportunity of drawing upon the (English) Arbitration Act of

. Amar Chand ९ Banwari Lall, U.L.R. 49 Cal. 608.

Section 2. Indian Arbitration Act (10 of 1899).

. Section 2, Act of 1899, para 1-18, supra.

Second Schedule, Code of 1908, para 1-16.

Second Schedule, Code of 1908, paras 17-19.

. Second Schedule, Code of 1908, paras 20-21.

Para 1:17, supra. .

. Quoted in Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 208, Chapter 13, para-
graph 1.

ex ayaene



Scheme,

Basic concept-
Arbitration
agreement.

Working of the
agreement.

Award and
its filling and
confirmation,

Arbitration with
intervention of
court or in suit.

General
provisions.

1934. The Act of 1940 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law
relating to arbitration. It is, therefore, primarily intended to be a complete
code of the law.

1.25, The scheme of the Act is, to deal first with arbitration without
intervention of a Court (Chapter II) then to deal with arbitration with
intervention of a court where there 1s no suit pending (Chapter IID), and
then to cover arbitration in suits (Chapter IV). Provisions which are
common to all the three kinds of arbitration constitute the remaining por-
tion of the Act (Chapters V to शा and the Schedules).

1.26. The basic concept at the root of arbitration under the Act is
an “arbitration agreement”. As defined in section 2(a), it means a “written
agreement to submit present or future differences to arbitration, whether
an arbitrator is named therein or not”. Such an agreement is thus the
foundation of every proceeding under the Act, and where there is no such
agreement, or no differences between the parties, an arbitration cannot
arise.

1.27. An arbitration agreement is primarily an agreement and, there-
fore, to be construed as any other agreement. But, by virtue of section 3,
certain provisions are deemed to be included in the agreement (if the agree-
ment is silent on these points). These provisions are of a practical and
detailed nature, intended to ensure the smooth working of the agreement.
Further, sometimes the machinery for appointment of an arbitrator, as
provided by the agreement, may not be complete, and the law, therefore,
steps in by making suitable provisions to ensure that the agreement does
not fail by reason of a lacuna on this subject (sections 4 to 10). Again,
in order that the arbitration may not fail by reason of want of diligence or
misconduct on the part of the arbitrators or umpire, the Act gives certain
powers to the court for removal and appointment of arbitrators etc. (Sec-*
tions 11 and 12). And, to facilitate the effective discharge by the arbitrators
of their functions, the Act confers certain powers on them (section 13).

1.28. When the arbitrators or umpire have made their award, it is
filed in court (section 14), and the action to be taken by the court (thereon
is dealt with in detail in a group of sections (sections 16 to 19 and 30),
which may be said’ to constitute perhaps the most important part of the
Act. Under the scheme of the Act, an award itself cannot be enforced;
the parties must obtain the stamp of approval of the court, by securing
a judgment in terms thereof. The court may pass such judgment, or
modify the award, or remit the award, or set aside the award, on the
grounds stated in the respective sections.

1.29. These provisions’ primarily apply to arbitration without inter-
vention of the court. Section 20 then deals with arbitration with such inter-
vention where there is no suit pending; and (after making certain detailed
provisions as to the form and manner of making the application to the
court for filing the agreement and as to an order of reference to the arbi-
trator appointed by the parties etc.) the section provides that the arbitra-
tion shall proceed in accordance with the other provisions of the Act, so
far as they can be made applicable.

Where a suit is actually pending in a court, all the parties interested
may agree to refer any matter in dispute to arbitration under section 21.
Detailed provisions as to the appointment of the arbitrator and the order
of reference in such a case are contained in sections 22 to 24. Under
section 25, the provisions of the other Chapters shall, so far as they may
be made applicable, apply to such arbitrations also.

1.30. General provisions applicable to all arbitrations then follow
(sections 26 to 38). These also include a group of sections (sections 31
te 33) which unmistakeably indicate the intention of the framers of the
Act that awards should not possess any sanctity by themselves, that they

1. Section 30, is however, a general section.


must be approved by the court by obtaining a judgment in terms thereof,
and that the validity, effect or existence of the award of arbitration agree-
ment between the parties to the agreement or persons claiming under them
must be decided in the court in which the award has been filed for cbtain-
ing such judgment. It is only that court which is seized of all questions
connected with the conduct of arbitration proceedings or otherwise arising
out of such proceedings. In other words, both the forum and the manner
of asserting or denying the benefits of arbitration are emphatically sought
to be regulated by these sections. The Legislature thus “intended to make
only one court as the venue for ail matters connected with arbitration

agreement or award and also to make applications (not suits) as the
vehicle to approach the court”.!

1.31, This, in brief. is the scheme of the Act of 1940. In respect
of arbitration agreements entered into outside India and foreign awards,
there is a special law, the Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 19372
It mainly relates to matters considered as commercial under the law in force
in India." The operation of the Act is based on reciprocal arrangements.‘
The Act mainly concerns itself with the procedure for filing foreign awards
and their enforcement, and the conditions of such enforcement.!

Detailed matters in respect of proceedings under the Act are left to be
governed by the rules of the High Court.*

In 1961, a special Act for the enforcement of certain foreign awards
was passed.’

1.32. Apart from the Arbitration Act, 1940, there are provisions re-
garding arbitration in other Central enactments in force in India, listed
below :*

1, The Religious Endowments Act, Seciion 16 Reference to arbitration,
1863. (20 of 1863)
Section 17 Reference under se
312 of the Code of
Procedure, 1859.

vw

fon 42K). Two or more trustees if
they think fit may com-
promise, compound,
abandon. submit to ar-
bitration or otherwise
settle any debt, account
claim etc. relating to

~The Indian Trusts Act, 1882.2 of
1882)

the trust.
3. The Presidency Towns Insolvency Section 6810 The official assignee may
Act, 1909. refer any dispute to ar-
bitration.
4. The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 Section 52 Any matter directed to be
(9 of 1910). determined by arbitration

under this Act unless
otherwise provided, shall
be determined by persons
nominated by the State
Government and sub-
ject to provisions of the
Arbitration Act, 1940.

1. Nathu Lal v. Bahari Lal, A.1.R. 1952 Neg. 65, 67 (Hidayatulla and Kaushalendra
Rao JJ.)

2. The Act is still extant. Sec M/s. Franceso v. M/s. Gorakharana, A.I.R. 1960 Bom.
91.

Section 2 of the 1937 Act.

Section 2(b) of the 1937 Act.

Sections 2 to 8 of the 1937 Act.

Section 10 of the 1937 Act.

|. The Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act (45 of 1961).
. The list is not intended to be exhaustive.

DIAN RwW

Acts of 1937
and 1961.

Other provisions
in Central enact-
ments.


10

5. The Co-operative Societies Act,

2

Ra

1912 (2 of 1912).

The Aircraft Act, 1934. (as

amended in 1972).

'. The Damodar Valley Corpora-

tion Act, 1948 (14 of 1948).

The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948

(54 of 1948)

. The Viswa Bharati Act, 1951 (29

of 1951).

. The River Boards Act, 1956 (49

of 1956).

+ The Defence of India Act, 1971.

. The Defence of India Act, 1971.

. The Defence of India Act. 1971.
. The Emergency Risks (Underta-

ings) Insurance Act, 1971.

. The Delhi Road Transport Laws

(Amendment) Act, 1971.

. The Aircraft (Amendment) Act,
1972

. The Dethi Co-operative Societies

Act, 1972.

. The Delhi Co-operative Societies

Act, 1972.

|. The Antiquities and Art Trea-

sures Act, 1972.

Section 43(2\1)

Section 9B

Section 9D.

Section 49.

Section 76

Section 38

Section 22

Section 24

Section 31

Section 32

Section 11

Section 5

Sections 9B, 9C and 9D.
ofthe principal Act of
1934 as inserted in 1972.

Section 60

Section 61

Section 20

The State Government

may make rules to pro-
vide for any dispute to
be referred to the Regis-
trar, or if he so directs,
to arbitration and the
procedure for arbitra-
tion.

Where no agreement as
to compensation can be
reached, an arbitrator
may be appointed by the
Central Government,
who after hearing the
dispute, makes an award.

Arbitrator to have certain
Powers of civil courts.

Disputes between the Cor-
poration and the Govern-
ment under the Act are
to be referred to an ar-
bitrator, to_be appoi
ed by the Chief Justice
of India, Tae decision
of the arbitrator is to be
final.

All questions arising bet-
ween the State Govern-
ment or the Board and
a licensce or other per-
son shall be cetermined
byarbitration. The pro-
visions of the Arbitration
Act 1940 are to apply.

Every dispute arising out
of a contract between the
University and any of
its officers or teachers is
to be referred 16 a Tri-
bunal of Arbitration. and
the decision of the Tri-
bunal is final.

Section 22 provides that
the Arbitration Act, 1940
shall not apply to arbit-
rations under the Act.

Payment of compensation
for immovable property.

Compensation for acqui-
sition of requisitioned
property.

Power to make rules.

Determination of premi-
ums unpaid.

Payment of value of assets
and liabilities.

Payment of compensa-
tion. Arbitration to
have powers of civil
courts.

Disputes which may be
referred to arbitration.

Reference of disputes to
to arbitration.

Payment of compensaticn
for antiquities and art
treasures compulsorily ac-
quired under Section 19.


20. fa) The North-Eastern Hill Uni- Section 31 Procedure of appeal and
versity Act, 1973, arbitration in discipli-
nary cases against stu-
denis.
(b) The North Eastern Hill Uni- Section 30 Conditions of service of
versity Act, 1973. employees.
21. (3) The University of Hyderabad Section 30 Conditions of service of
Act. 1974, employees.
(9) University of Hyderabad Act, Section 31 Disciplinary cases against
1974, students.

22. The Betwa River Board Act, 1976 Section 18 Disputes between the
Board and the State Ge-
vernment.

23. The Delhi Agricultural Produce Section 31 Disputes regarding cons-

Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1976, truction of rules etc. to

be decided by the Con-
troller of Weights and

Measures.
24, Delhi Agricultural Produce Mar- Section 37 Provision for settlement
keting (Regulation) Act, 1976. of disputes.

1.33. It may be mentioned that provisions for arbitration are con-
tained in some local Acts also, e.g., the Co-operative Societies Acts of
several states, or in bye-laws framed under local Acts, e.g., bye-laws made
by the East India Cotton Association under the Bombay Cotton Contracts
Act.

In this connection, it is relevant to quote sections 46 and 47, which
are relevant in as much as they make the Act applicable to statutory arbi-
trations under other laws.

“46. The provisions of this Act except sub-section (1) of section
6 and sections 7, 12, 36 and 37, shall apply to every arbitration under
any other enactment for the time being in force, as if the arbitration
were pursuant to an arbitration agreement and as if that other enact-
ment were an arbitration agreement, except in so far as this Act is incon-
sistent with that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder.

47. Subject to the provisions of section 46, and save in so far as is
otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, the provi-
sions of this Act shall apply to all arbitrations and to all proceedings
thereunder :

Provided that an arbitration award otherwise obtained may with the
consent of all the parties interested be taken into consideration as a
compromise or adjustment of a suit by any court before which the
suit is pending.”

1.34. Before proceeding to discuss various sections of the Act, we
would like to state that the impact of legislation on the prompt, effective
and just disposal of arbitration proceedings is limited. Efforts should, no
doubt, be made to improve the procedure for the resolution of disputes,
but, in the ultimate analysis, there is much truth in the saying that “an
arbitration is as good as an arbitrator”.

1.35. After this general discussion, we now proceed to consider the
changes needed in the provisions of the Act.

1. See Serichand Rai V. Panno, A. 1. R. 1943 Bom. 197.
2. See Nanda Kishore V. Rallev etc. Society, A. 1. R. 1943 Cal. 255.

Wn

Local Acts.

Application of
Act to statutory
arbitration.

Act to apply
to all arbitrations,

Impacts of
amendments
limited.


Section 2(8)--
Arbitration
agreement.

Validity of oral
agreement—case
law ‘on the old
Act.

Doubt as to
position under
section 47,

History -of
section 47

CHAPTER 2

DEFINITIONS |

2.1. Section 2 contains certain definitions. We begin with the defini-

tion of “arbitration agreement” contained in section a). The definition
reads—

“2(a). ‘arbitration agreement’ means a written agreement to submit
present or future differences to arbitration whether an arbitrator is
named therein or not.”

The definition itself is simple and clear enough; but certain points
of detail need to be discussed.

2.2, The first question that arises is this. If parties do not enter into a
written agreement and there 1s an oral agreement of arbitration, is such
parole submission legally valid, and what is its effect? The position in
this respect under the old Act was not very certain. One view was? that
in such case there can be no valid submission, no valid award, no valid

agreement, while the other view was? that even an oral submission is
valid.'-5, हु

The case law in the latter category construed the definition of ‘sub-
mission’ in the 1899 Act (which defined a submission as a ‘submission in
writing’) narrowly, as not excluding an oral submission, on the ground that
the Act did not contain any express provision that a submission other
than in writing is invalid. According to these cases, an award passed on an
oral agreement would be enforceable by suit.

2.3. Tt is not, however, clear whether this position survives in India
after the enactment of section 47 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. Under that
section, subject to certain exceptions, the provisions of the Act shall apply
to “all arbitrations” and to all proceedings thereunder. This shows a
clear intention to make the Act exhaustive.’ If so, oral agreements do not
fall within the scheme of the Act. If the contrary is the position, and
if oral agreements are still regarded as permissible, the situation would not
be very satisfactory. In the first place, such agreements would not be
governed by the Act, and a parallel law for the operation of such agree-
ments and for the enforcement of awards passed thereon would co-exist
with the Act. Secondly, such a parallel Jaw cannot draw upon the various
provisions of the Act (like the filling of vacancies, powers of arbitrators,
powers of courts and so on), which are intended to fill up gaps left by
the parties. There will, therefore, arise many uncertainties. In the third
place, such a construction might defeat the object of the Act of ‘consolidat-
ing’ the law relating to ‘arbitration’.

2.4. It may be stated that section 47, as drafted in the original Bill.
rendered unenforceable an arbitration award obtained otherwise than under
the Act. The Select committee re-drafted it as it stands now, observing,
“This clause has been re-drafted in order to remove the dangers of the

1. Compare section 32, English Act of 1950.

2. Bukhan Bai v. Adamji, 1.L.R. 33 Bom. 69 (Beaman J.) (case under 1899 Act.)
3. Mathuradas v. Madantai, 1.L.R. 58 Bom. 369; A.I.R. 1934 Bom. 79 (case under

1899 Act.)

4. Ramautar Sah v. Langat Singh, ALR. 1931 Pat. 92 (case under which Act, not
efear).

5. Pannanma_y. Kottumma, A..R. 56 Mad. 85; A.1.R. 1932 Mad. 754 (case under
1899 Act),

6. Vithal Das v. Shrinath, T.L.R. (1948) All. 10.

12


provision that an arbitration award obtained otherwise than in accordance
with the provisions of the Bill should be unenforceable for any purpose. The
effect which this section, as re-drafted, is designed to produce is that arbi-
trations shall not be conducted in any way repugnant to the Act and
that any arbitration award may, with the consent of the parties, be used
for the purposes of rule 3 of Order 23 of the Code of Civil Procedure.”

The case law discussed above shows that the position cannot be
regarded as beyond doubt.’ A clarification seems to be required. The
object of the Act would be defeated if awards made in pursuance of oral
arbitration agreements are regarded as enforceable?

2.5. The object of requiring a matter to be in writing is, in general,
to prevent the parties from contradicting each other as to what was agreed

Object of re-
quirement of

13

and understood. As has been observed, the object in requiring “writing” “Titing—Madras

in section 4(b) of the Indian Act of 1899 was to “provide clear and unmis-
takable evidence of the submission to which the Parties agreed”. Consis-
tently with this object, oral agreement to refer differences to arbitration
should not now be recognised. Award on such agreements can be operative
if accepted by the parties as an agreement. But that is not the same thing
as recognising their validity as awards.

Dealing with the point discussed above, Viswanatha Sastri J. referred
to the case Jaw which had held that an award obtained on a parole sub-
mission was enforceable by suit, though not by the special procedure under
the Second Schedule. He offered his own coments in these words'—

“The question is whether the Arbitration Act of 1940 has superseded
the law as laid down in these cases. The answer is not free from
difficulty in view of the uncertain nature of the statutory provision”.

After discussing the various statutory provisions, he held the Act of 1940
to be exhaustive, and “an award passed on oral submission can neither
be filed and made a rule of court under the Act, nor enforced apart from
the Act.”

case on oral
submission,

2.6. In our view, it is necessary to save the Operation of the award Recommendation

to a limited extent, and we are recommending the insertion of a suitable
Proviso to section 47 to deal with the matter."

to amend
section 47.

2.7. At this stage, it may be convenient to deal with another question section 2(a) and
which arises out of that part of section 2(a) which tequires a “written rules of Associa-

agreement”. Very often, rules framed by mercantile associations contain
provisions for arbitration. Members of the Association are required to
sign an application form agreeing to abide by its Rules.

Now, the question arises whether the signature on such application
constitutes “a written agreement to submit” the differences to arbitration.
On one view, when both the plaintiff and the defendant are members of
the association and have signed the application form, it would amount to
a written agreement to submit differences to arbitration?-*.

According to another view,

“Application for membership and the acceptance thereof gave rise
to a contract between the applicant and the company. There is no
contract between members inter se by such application.”

1. ND. Besa. Arb

nn Act (1877), page 849, quoting the Report of the Select

Compriiice

2. See also the Mavis case, para 2-6. fafra.

3. Pars 3 3. कप:

4. John Bt Co. 0. Kunoolal. (L.R. 53 Cal. 65; A.LR. 1926 Cal. 938, 940, right hand
Page J.

5. Belli Gawder v. Joghi Gowder, A.L.R. 1951 Mad. 683, para 2.

6. Sce recommen is to section 47, Chapter 10, infra.

7. Mohan Lal v. Bissesar Lal, AAR. 1947 Bom, 268, 270 (Bhagwati J.)

8. Goridhan Das v. Natwar Lal, A.A.R. 1952 Bom. 349, 354 (Shah J.)

9. Hanutmal v. Khushi Ram. (L.R. (1949), 1 Cal. 199, 230, 231 (Das J.)

3-7 M of LJ & CA/ND/78

tion enjoining
arbitration by
members.


14

Recommendation
to insert an
Explanation
below section
2(a).

Section 2(a)
and arbitration
at the option
of party.

Section 2(a)—
Signatures not
necessary.

Whether fresh
consent required.

2.8. In our opinion, it would be advisable to clarify the position in
view of the conflict discussed above. Practical considerations require the
adoption of the first view.’ Of course, the initial agreement must, in any
case, be in writing, and not oral? In the light of what we have stated
above,’ we recommend the insertion of the following Explanation below
section 2(a):—~

“Explanation 1—Where the members of any association agree in writ-
ing to abide by the rules or by-laws of the association, and those rules
or by-laws contain a provision whereunder present or future differences
between the members inter se or between a member and the associa-
tion are required to be submitted to arbitration, they shall be deemed
to have entered into a written agreement with each other within the
meaning of this clause.”

2.9. The question has arisen whether an agreement whereunder arbi-
tration is to be resorted to at the option of a party would be valid. There
are observations'-* to the effect that such a provision would not constitute
a valid submission, but there are also decisions to the contrary.’ In
England, such an agreement seems to have been regarded as a valid sub-
mission.’ The matter is, in our opinion, of such a nature as can be left
to the courts rather than made the subject of express legislative provision.

2.10. As to signature, the Arbitration Act does not require that the
arbitration agreement must be signed by the parties. Only a writing is
required. It may be that one of the reasons why signature is not insisted
upon is that the arbitration clause may be found in commercial documents,
such as “bought and sold” notes.” or in the articles of private company,”-"
some of which are not signed by the parties who agree to be bound by
arbitration.

2.11. There is yet another question relating to section 2{a). The defi-
nition of “arbitration agreement” in this clause may be said to comprise
two branches :

(i) an agrement to submit present differences to arbitration, and
{ii) an agreement to submit future differences to arbitration

Thus, it covers both (i) an actual submission of a particular dispute
which has already arisen to the authority of a particular arbitrator, and
(ii) a arbitration clause by which the parties agree that if disputes of the
Specified nature arise, those disputes shall be referred to arbitration. In
both the cases, the arbitration is consensual, being based on an agreement
between the parties. Nevertheless, some controversy has arisen on the
question whether it is enough that there should be an arbitration clause
to refer future differences to arbitration, or whether, after the differences
have arisen, there must again be consent to the actual reference-—described
in the definition by the word “submit”—in the absence of which consent
the arbitration wou!d not be legally valid. The fundamental question to be
considered is this. Where, after the arbitration agreement as defined in
section 2(a) has been entered into, a dispute arises between the parties, is

Para 2,7, supra.
(Firm) Narain Das v. Bhagwan Das, A.I:R. 1951 All 860.
See para 2.7, supra.

Burjor v. Ellerman City Lines Ltd. 1.L.R. 49 Bom. 854; A.LR. 1925 Bom. 449.
+ Maritima laliana Steamship Co. v. Burjor 1.L.R. 54 Bom. 278, A.T.R. 1930, Bom.
185.

av ken

6. Brindaban Chandra v.Bisheshwar Lal .L.R. (1937) 1 Cal. 606; A.IR. 1938 Cal. 100-
7. Kedar Nath v. Kesho Ram Cotton Mills Ltd., ¥.L.R. (1950) 1 Cal. 553.

8. Woodall v. Pearl Insurance Co. (1919) 1 K.B. 593, (1918-19) All E.R.p. 544,

9. Ram Narain v. Lila Dhar (1906) I.L.R. 33 Cal. 1237.
10. Hickman v. Kent (1915) 1 Ch. 881.

11. A collection of some of the rules of association will be found in Paruck, Arbitra-
tion Act (1955), page 429 ef seq.


it necessary to obtain the consent of parties again to the reference to
arbitration, or is it legally permissible to rely only on the arbitration
agreement? Where the arbitration agreement combines an agreement for
resort to arbitration with a reference of the dispute to arbitration by that very
agreement, no particular difficulty arises. But where there is merely an
agreement that the disputes arising between the parties shall be decided by
arbitration—what may be called a “bare arbitration agreement”—is it neces-
sary that when a dispute actually arises, the consent of the various parties to
the reference should be again obtained? There exists a conflict of judicial
opinion on the subject.

In Thawardas Pherumal’s case,' it was observed by the Supreme Court
as follows :—

“A reference requires the assent of ‘both’ sides. If one side is vot
prepared to submit a given matter to arbitration जाला there is an
agreement between them that it should be referred, then recourse must
be had to the Court under section 20 of the Act and the recalcitrant
party can then be compelled to submit the matter under sub-section (4).

“In the absence of either agreement by ‘both’ sides about the terms

of reference or an order of the court under section 20(4) compelling a

reference, arbitrator is not vested with the necessary exclusive jurisdic-

tion”.

Controversy has arisen because High Courts have differed as to the
precise effect of these observations.

2.12. According to one view,’ consent of the parties to the actual Conflict of
reference cannot be given in advance. decisions,

2.13. According to another view,’ consent to the actual reference can
be given in advance.

2.14. Even in the same High Court, opinion has fluctuated‘-* on the
same subject.

2.15. At this stage, mention may also be made of the fact that the Foreign Award
Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 (45 of 1961) Act, 1961.
section 3, relating to stay of proceedings in respect of matters to be referred
to arbitration, makes a distinction between a ‘submission’ made in pursuance
of an agreement and the initial ‘agreement’. The Supreme Court has
pointed this out in a decision dealing with that Act.

2.16. In contrast with the Act of 1961 which, as mentioned above’ Contrast bet-
makes a dichotomy between “arbitration agreement” and “submission”, the ween 1961 Act
Act of 1940 makes no such dichotomy. and 1940 Act.

1, Thawardas Pherumal v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 468, 474, ,475; (1255) 2
S.C.R. 48, 58.

2. Union of India v. Hari Kishan Joshi, AR. 1972 P & H 207, 208, para 5-6- (D. K.
Mahajan J. ) following Punjab Province v. Lakshmi Das, A. 1. R. 1944 Lah. 140.

3. Mls. Vallabh Pitte v. Narsinghdas, A.I.R. 1963 Bom. 157, 161, paragraph 11 (Patel
& Palekar JJ.)

4, (a) Om Parkash v. Union of India, ALR. 1963 All 242, para 6 (B.Dayal & S.N.

Katju JJ.)

(0) Jagannath v. P.C. & I. Corporation, A.L.R. 1973 All 49, 51, para 5-6 (Gyanend-

ra Kumar J.)
(० Mangal Prasad v. Laxman Prasad, A.1.R. 1964 All. 108 (F.B.)

5. (a) Mls. Security & Finance Lid. v. Bachitar Singh A.1.R. 1973 Delhi 140 (Ansari J)
(1 May, 1972).
(0) Madhubala Private Lid. Naaz Cinema, AR. 1972 Delhi 263 Gagjit Singh &
Safer JJ.)
(० P.C. Aggarwal y. Banwari Lal Kotiya, ILL.R. (1972) 1 Delhi 279, 284 (F-B.) (10
November, 1971). :
(@ 7-८, Aggarwal y. K.N. Khosla, A.1.R. 1975 Delhi 54, 60, para 9 (Tatachari ond
Deshpande 17) (22 May, 1974).
6. Vo Tractor export v. Tarapore Co. A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1, para 21,

7. para 2°15, Supra.

4s


Later Supreme

Court Judgment.

Position in
other countries.

The judicial decisions on the Act of 1940 which seem to take the
view that a reference to arbitration could be made only through section
20 unless both the parties join in the reference, are traceable to the observa-
tions of the Supreme Court in Thawardas Pherumal vy. Union of India,!
already quoted.”

2.17. In this connection a subsequent decision of the Supreme Court*
is of interest. In that case, the Supreme Court was called upon to con-
strue, inter-alia, the following proviso in the Surcharge Order :-

“Provided further that no War Costs Surcharge shall be effective
upon the charges for the supply of energy under any contract entered
into after the Ist May, 1942, unless such contract provides for the
same charges for energy as have been contained in similar previous
contracts for similar supply by the licensee or sanction-holder concerned
(as to which, in the event of dispute by any party interested, the deci-
sion of the provincial Government shall be final) or unless and to
such extent as such application may be expressly ordered by the provin-
cial Government”.

The Supreme Court held—

“The second proviso to clause 5 of the Surcharge Order does not
require that the dispute has to be referred by both the parties’ Such a dis-
pute can be referred by one of the parties as is clear from the language of
the proviso which says ‘in the event of dispute by any party interested’
the decision of the provincial government shall be final.”

It further observed :

“Then Mr. Pathak said that under the Surcharge Order itself the
dispute had to be referred by both the parties and not by only one of
them. This contention is, however, untenable in view of the clear language
of the proviso which says: “In the event of dispute by any party interested”
the decision of the Provincial Government shall be final.

2.18. So much as regards the case law on the Indian Acts. There
are compelling reasons of logic why a fresh consent should not be required
at the time of actual submission of the dispute. Before making our recom-
mendation on the subject, however, it may be desirable to have a brief
comparative discussion. It would appear that some time ago" an enquiry
was made by the Indian Council of Arbitration, New Delhi from several
foreign experts as to the true position in their countries in regard to the
question whether, after an arbitration clause in a contract provides for
the settlement of future disputes arising under the contract by arbitration
either by an arbitral institution or by an arbitrator appointed ad hoc, it is
necessary that the consent of both the parties to the contract should be
obtained at the time of referring the dispute (after it has arisen) to the
named institution or arbitrator.

The following was the precise question formulated for opinion :—

“Whether under the arbitration legislation in your country, where
there is an arbitration clause in a contract between the parties providing
“for settlement of future disputes arising under the contract by arbi-
tration either by an arbitral institution or by an arbitrator appointed
ad hoc, the consent of both the parties to the contract is necessary
at the time of referring the dispute after it has arisen to the named
institution or arbitrator. In other words, could the aggrieved party

1. Thawardas Pherumal V. Union of India, (1955.) 2 S.C.R. 48, 58, A.LR. 1955 S.C.
468, 474-475.

2. See para 2-11, supra.

3. Bhusawal Borough Municipality v. Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. (1964) 5 $.C.R.
905, 906, A.ILR. 1966 5.८. 1654.

4, Emphasis added.
. Emphasis added.

. No. 14(37)/72-Legislative व, Vol. I, Serial No. 2, Annexure (File of the Legislative
Department).

aw


make a unilateral reference to the dispute to arbitration after the dis-
pute has arisen irrespective of the consent of the other party to the
contract at that time?”

2.19. The opinions received by the Indian Councii of Arbitration in
reply to the query mention above from the various countries--U K.,
U.S.A. France, West Germany, the Netherlands, German Democratic Repu-
blic and Poland—were all in substance, to the effect that once such clause
exists in the contract, further consent is not necessary at the time <f the
relerence and a unilateral reference is possible. In other words, an arbi-
tration agreement with a clause of the nature referred to above is sufficient,
and the parties can be compelled to submit the dispute to the arbitrators
{arbitral institution or ad hoc arbitrator). The existence of a valid arbi-
tration clause in the contract suffices for the plaintiff to institute the
arbitration proceedings.

The following is a reproduction of the replies received by the Indian
Council of Arbitration to its query referred to above.

FRANCE:

Reply negative. When in a business contract an arbitration clause
has been inserted at the time of the signature, the clause remcins in full
value as long as the contract develops its effects, regardless of the fact
that at the time the dispute has arisen, the parties disagree. They are
compelled to submit the dispute to the arbitrators (arbitral institution or
ad hoc arbitrators).

(Mr. Jean Robert, Paris)

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC:

The pre-requisite for the competence of the arbitration court or arbit-
rators is an agreement among the parties, either by way of a separate
contract or a clause as part of a contract. There are no rules on the time
at which such a contract is to be concluded nor any formal requirements.
Consequently an aggrieved Party may make a unilateral reference of the
dispute to the arbitrators. This reference must be juridically qualified as
an offer to the other party to conclude a contract on the competence of
the arbitration court or arbitrators. The other party is free to cccept the
offer explicitly or tacitly by implying a certain intention. Such a conduct
implying a certain intention is assumed when a meritorious attitude towards
the petition (statement of defence) is expressed, but the other farty may
also decline the offer, so that no contract ensues and consequently no
competence for the arbitration court or the arbitrators.

(Professor Strotibach, Berlin).

JAPAN:

For the purpose of invoking arbitration procedure, the arbitration agree-
ment (clause compromissoire) is sufficient. There is no need in Japan
that submission (compromise) is drawn up, once a dispute has arisen,
upon the basis of that arbitration agreement which was incorporated in
e.g., the contract of sale, whether the arbitral clause 1s prescribed within
the contract, or in the anticipation of eventual disputes. That is different
(in) kind from the French clause compromissoire.

(Professor T. Kitagawa, Japan).

NETHERLANDS:

Fortunately, we don’t have the system that, when the dispute has arisen,
again an ‘acte de compromis’ would be required and a new consent of
the parties would be recessary to submit the dispute to arbitrators. The
answer to your question therefore is plainly yes.

(Professor Pieter Sanders, Netherlands)

1. Para 2.18, supra.

7

tion in other
countries accord~
ing to replies
received by the
Indian Council
of Arbitration.


18

Amendment
needed.

Recommendation
to amend
Section 2(a)

Section 2—
other clauses.

Section 2—
Frustration of
the contract.

POLAND.

In the case of an arbitration clause in a contract, a subsequent “‘acte
de mission” of the dispute to arbitration after the dispute has arisen is
superfluous. The existence of a valid arbitration clause in a contract is
sufficient for the plaintiff to institute the arbitration proceedings.

(Mr. J. Jakubowski, Warszawa)

U.K.

If there is an arbitration clause providing for settlement of future
disputes there is no need for consent of both parties at the time of referring
the dispute. A unilateral reference is possible.

(Mr. Niel Pearson, Manchester)

U.S.A.
No consent is necessary at all.
(Professor Martin Domke, New York).

WEST GERMANY:

1 see the problem like Article V of the European Convention of 1961.
This disposition corresponds of our municipal legislation and practice.

(Professor A. Bulow, Bonn).

2.20 One would have thought that in India also, on a simple analysis
of the definition of arbitration agreement,’ the answer can be said to be
fairly clear and that the definition does not leave any serious room for
argument that in the case of an agreement providing for the submission
to the arbitration of future difference, consent should be again sought when
the differences actually arise.

2.21. However, an amendment of the law is necessary, since there is
a certain amount of conflict on the subject, as is revealed by case law.2 We
therefore, recommend the insertion of an Explanation below section 2(a),
on the following lines*:—

Explanation 2—Where an arbitration agreement provides for the sub
mission of future difference to arbitration, and a difference subse-
quently arises which it is proposed to refer to arbitration thereunder
it shall not be necessary that fresh consent of both the parties or all
the parties, as the case may be, to the reference should be obtained at
the time of referring the dispute to such arbitration.

2.22 This disposes of section 2(a), Section 2(b) provides that “award”
means an arbitration award, and needs no comments,

Section 2, clause (c), defines a ‘court’. There is a definition of the
expression ‘legal representative’ in clause (d), the definition being sub-
stantially the same as in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

Finally, clause (e) provides that “reference” means a reference to
arbitration.

These clauses need no change.

2.23. Before proceeding to deal with the next section, we would like
to deal with certain matters of a general nature. First is the question
of frustration.

1. Section (2a).
2. Para 2.12 to 2.18 supra.
3. For Explanation 1, see para 2.10 supra.


When a contract containing an arbitration clause is alleged to have
been frustrated by reason of change of circumstances or otherwise terminated,
two questions may arise; first whether the contract has become frustrated,
and secondly, whether the question of frustration or termination itself can
be adjudicated upon by the arbitrator.

2.24. It would appear’ that even where by frustiation the principal
contract is alleged to have come to an end, the contract could still be in
existence for certain purposes, such as the resolution of disputes arising
under or in connection with it. The question whether the contract becomes
impossible of performance and was discharged under the doctrine of frus-
tration would still have to be decided under the arbitration clause, which
Operates in respect of such purposes.

2.25. Recent Indian decisions on the subject present a contrast to the
earlier Privy Council ruling in Hirji Mulji’ case? A later case decided by
the House of Lords,’-—Heyman v. Darwins Ltd., also holds that widely
drawn arbitration clause could embrace a dispute as to whether a party is
discharged from future performance by frustration.

2.26. Later English cases‘-* take a similar wider view.

2.27. It would appear that English cases would definitely construe
the jurisdiction of the arbitrator in a much wider sense than the Privy
Council did. Since the matter might depend upon the wording of the arbi-
tration clause, an express provision in the Act would not be appropriate.

2.28. Generally, on the whole question of jurisdiction of the arbitra-

Privy Council
Case.

English cases
of 1953 and
1956.

Section 2—

Question of

tors in such cases, the exhaustive discussion by S.R. Das J., in the under- substitution of

mentioned ९85६९ may be seen.

2.29. Sometimes, a party refers the matters to the Judge himself as
arbitiator.’-" There are several Indian rulings dealing with the subject."-"*

The following are other rullings and authorities on the subject.¥-”

1. (@) Damodar Valley Corporation v. K.K.Kar, A.LR. 1974 S.C. 158.

(0) Naihati Jute Mills v. Khyab Ram, A.LR. 1963 5.0. 525, 528.

Hirji Mulfi v. Cheongyue Steemship_Co., (1926) A.C. 97 (P.C.).

Heyman, v. Darwins Ltd., (1942) A.C. 356; 1942 1 All E.R.337 (HLL,).

Kruse v. Questier & Co., (1953) 1 All E.R. 954 (Unexecuted contract) (Pilcher J.)
Government of Gibralter v. !Kenney,” (1956) 3. W-L.R. 466; (1956) 3 AI E.R. 22
(Sellers J.)

Rungta Sons v.J.T. Republike, A.LR. 1959 Cal. 423,

7. Astoparole submission to the Judge, see Russell on Arbitration (1970) page 47;
and Harrison v. Wright, (1845) 13 M & W 86.

8. Under section 6(b) of the Country Courts Act, 1959, a Judge cannot act 358 an
arbitrator for remuneration. Russell on Arbitration (1970) page 85. .

9. Russell on Arbitration (1970), page 84.

10. See discussion in Sankaranarayana v. Rama Swamiah, A.I.R. 1923 Mad. 444.

11... Arati Paul V. Registrar, A.1.R. 1965, Cal. 3 on appeal A.I-R. 1969.8.C. 1133.

12. Dalal v. Jamadar,#A. I. R. 1945 Bom. 478 (Divatia J.)

13, Mls Kapoor Nilokheri Co-operative Daily Farm Society Ltd. v. Union of India
A.LR. 1973 S.C. 1238.

14. Baij Nathv. Dhani Ram, ¥.L.R. 51 All. 903, A.LR. 1929 All. 747 (Mukeriee &
Niamatulla JJ.)

15, Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 329.

16. Baikuntha Nath Goswami y. Seets Nath Goswami, (1911) LL.R. 38 Cal. 421.

17. Bengal Silk Mills Co. v. Aishe Aref, A..R. 1947 Cal. 106, 109, Decided on 27-2-1946
(Gentle and Grmond JJ.) on appeal from A.LR 1949 Cal. 350, decided on 17th
January, 1945,(S.R. Das J.)

ya ey

9

agreement

Section 2—
Presiding Judge
as arbitrator.

19


20

English law.

Administration
of Justice Act,
1970 (Commer-
cial Court).

2.30. The law in England before 1970, as stated by Russell, in his
edition of 1963, was as follows:

“The subject-matter of an action may be referred to a Judge as
arbitrator. The Judge in such a case will, if such is the intention of
the parties, be merely an arbitrator and will have no special powers
by virtue of the fact that he is a Judge and his award will not be
subject to appeal”.

2.31. The position has now been laid down in statute. Under the
Administration of Justice Act, 1970, a Judge of the commercial court
may,’ if, in all the circumstances he thinks fit, accept appointment as sole
arbitrator or as umpire or by virtue of an arbitration agreement within the
meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1950, where the dispute appears to him
to be of a commercial character. Consent of the Lord Chief Justice is
required. The fees payable for the services of a judge as arbitrator or
umpire are to be taken in the High Court. The Third Schedule to the
Act of 1970 contains provisions modifying or replacing provisions of the
Arbitration Act, 1950, in relation to arbitration by judges. In particular,
any jurisdiction which is exercisable by the High Court in relation to arbi-
trators and umpires shall. in relation to a judge of the commercial court
appointed as arbitrator or umpire, be exercisable, instead, by the court of
appeal.

The commercial Court is created under section 3 of the Administration
of Justice Act, 1970, as a part of the Queen’s Bench Division of the
High Court to try such causes and matters as may, in accordance with
the rules of court, be entered in the Commercial list. Broadly speaking,
“commercial causes” are actions arising out of the ordinary transactions
of merchants and traders.

2.32. We have carefully considered the English scheme which,’ it should
be noted, is confined to the commercial court. We are not, however, con-
vinced that the English scheme would be suitable to India.

As no recent Indian cases have raised this problem, we do not consider
an amendment of the Act to be necessary.

1. Russell on Arbitration (1963), page 117, for the old law.

ion 4 and Taird Schedule, Administration of Justice Act, 1970 (Chapter 31).

ra 2.30 and 2.31, supra.


CHAPTER 3

ARBITRATION WITHOUT INTERVENTION
OF A COURT

3.1. Section 3 provides that an arbitration agreement. unless a different Section 3.
intention is expressed therein, shall be deemed to include the provisions
set out in the First Schedule in so far as they are applicable to the
reference.

The section needs no change.

3.2. Under section 4. the parties to an arbitration agreement may Section 4.
agree that any reference under the arbitration agreement shall be to an
arbitrator or arbitrators to be appointed by a person designated in the
agreement either by name or as a holder for the time being of any office
or appointment. There is no express provision in the English Act for such
an appointment, but it appears that, the law applicable in England is the
same.-

3.3. When arbitrators are to be appointed by an association, some Associations.
interesting questions may arise. Where the parties agree to a reference
to arbitrators to be appointed by 4 Chamber of Commerce, the contention
may be raised that the appointment must be made by an assembly of all
the members of the Chamber. This contention has been rejected? In
such an arbitration agreement, the rules of the Association concerned are
imported into the contract and bind the parties.

3.4. Another important question is, who may be an arbitrator. It Fo: ign Court
may be noted that the dispute may even be referred to a foreign court may be an
as the arbitrator.’ arbitrator.

3.5. The points discussed above do not necessitate any change in
section 4.

3.6. Section 5 provides that the authority of an appointed arbitrator section 5.

or umpire shall not be revocable except with the leave of the court,
unless a contrary intention is expressed in the arbitration agreement. While
on this section, it is relevant to refer to the question whether the authority
of the arbitrators comes to an end on the making of the award. The view
taken is that' if the award had been set aside, it means that there is no
award, and the authority of the arbitrator does not come to an end’ In
fact, as has been pointed out by Sircar,’ there may be cases where the
arbitrator can make successive awards’

3.7. The grounds on which leave to revoke the authority of an appointed Section 5—
arbitrator or umpire may be granted are not specified in section 5. They Discretion

were put under five heads in a judgment of the Supreme Court®:— how to be

(1) Excess or refusal of jurisdiction by the arbitrator.

1. Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 89.

. Ganges Manufacturing Co.V. Indrachandra, (1906) I.L.R. 33 Cal. 1169.

|. Austrian Lloyd Steeamship Co. v. Greskam Life Ins., (1903) 1 Kings Bench 249.
Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 98.

Rikhab v. Trivedi & Co., 1L-R. 51 All. 874.

. Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), pages 98, 241, 242 and 281.

|. See section 27.

पु Ms AmarchandV. Ambica Jute Mill, A.LR. 1966 S.C. 1036, 1042, para 13 (S.K. Das,

eI AKA WH

21
4—7 M of LJ CA/ND/78


22

Section 5—
Effect of
revocation of
authority~-Re-
commendations.

Section 6(1}—
Recommendation
to rectify
grammatical
inaccuracy.

Section 6(2)—

Recommendation.

Section 6(2)--

Recommendation.

(2) Misconduct of the arbitrator.
(3) Disqualification of the arbitrator.
(4) Fraud.

(5) Exceptional cases.

3.8. It remains now to refer to the position as to the effect of revoca-
tion of authority under section 5. Does such revocation put an end to
the reference?! If not, can fresh arbitrators be appointed in respect of
the same matter? In our view, revocation does not put an end to the
reference, and fresh arbitrators can be appointed in respect of the same
matter? Reference may also be made to a judgment of the Supreme Court*
holding that where the award is set aside, but the reference was not super-
seded by the court, fresh appointment could be made.

All that section 5 deals with, is the authority of the particular arbitrator
or umpire, and not the arbitration agreement as such.

Supersession* is governed by section 12(2)(b) which leaves the matter
to the discretion of the court. The revocation of the authority of an
appointed arbitrator or umpire does not in itself amount to a supersession
of the reference.

We do not consider an amendment on the point to be necessary.

3.9. Sub-section (1) of section 6 in terms provides that an arbitration
agreement shall not be discharged by the death of the party thereto,
either as respects the deceased, or (as respects) any other party, but shall,
in that event, be enforceable by or against the legal representative of the
deceased.’ A grammatical inaccuracy in the sub-section requires to be recti-
fied by revising the present phrase as “either as respects the deceased or
as respects any other party”. We recommend accordingly.

3.10. Sub-section (2) of section 6 provides that the authority of arbi-
trator shall not be revoked by the death of any party by whom he was
appointed.

A vital question relates to the words “by death of any party by whom
he was appointed”. The present phraseology would give the impression
that death of a party to the agreement is a matter on which the legislature
has to say nothing if that party is not one by whom the arbitrator was
appointed. At common law, the position was that the authority of an
arbitrator or umpire was terminated by the death of a party to the agree-
ment.’ This position needs to be modified for practical reasons.

3.11. In order to improve the language of the section on these points,
we recommend that section 6(2) should be revised as follows :--

“The authority of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death
of any party fo the agreement.”7

1. Para 3.48 to 3.50, infra.
2. Compare Arbu Hindustan Steel v. Appejay Pvt. Ltd., AIR. 1967 Cal. 291, 293, para
10(S. Datta J.)

. Juggital Kamlapat v. General Fire Dealers, A.X.R. 1962 S.C. 1123, 1127, 1128, para
10; (1962) Supp. 2 S.C.R. 101.

. As to supersession of the arbitration agreement, see section 12(2) (0).
. Compare section 2(1), English Act of 1950.

. Sircar (1942), page 100.

. Para 3°10, supra.

e

saab


3.11A. Sub-section (3) of section 6 provides that nothing in the section Section 6(3).
shall affect the operation of any law by vitue of which any “rig ie
is extinguished by the death of a person.’ The application of this sub-
section obviously requires a knowledge of the rules of law relating to
the survival of causes of action—a matter primarily dealt with in the
Succession Act.-? Comparable to section 6(3) is Order 22, Rule 1 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, under which death does not in itself
affect the life of a suit if the “right to sue” survives. No changes are
required in this sub-section.

3.12. The effect of insolvency on arbitration is dealt with in section 7. Section 7—
Sub-section (1) provides that where it is provided by a term in a contract P ase ot tn oh
to which an insolvent is a party that any difference arising thereof or in yency
connection therewith, shall be referred to arbitration, the said term shall,
if the Receiver adopts the contract, be enforceable by or against him (the
Receiver) so far as it relates to any such differences.

The common law rule was that insolvency did not itself cause a re-
vocation of the submission nor did it give the trustee in bankruptcy an
authority’ to revoke it. But insolvency was a ground to be taken into
consideration for granting leave to the other party for revocation of the
submission.’

3.13. Under sub-section (1) of section 7,° the matter depends on the Position under
adoption by the Receiver of the substantive agreement. The subject of adop- section 7.
tion of agreement by the Receiver properly pertains to insolvency law.’

Where the Receiver has not adopted the contract, the question how far
effect should be given to the arbitration clause is, in substance, left by sub-
section (2) of section 7 to the discretion of the court having jurisdiction
in the insolvency procécdings. Any other party aggrieved or the Receiver is
enabled by that sub-section to make an application for the purpose to the
insolvency court. Of course, where the matter to which the arbitration
agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or for
the purposes of, the insolvency proceedings, then only this procedure is
permissible.

Finally, sub-section (3) of section 7 provides that the expression
“Receiver” includes an official assignee. Need for such a definition arises by
reason of the fact that the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909, uses
the expression “official assignee” and not the expression “receiver” used
in the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920.

No changes are required in the section.

3.14. Section 8(1)(a) empowers a party to serve a notice on another Section 8(1)(8)
party etc. to concur in the appointment of an arbitrator etc., where the arbi- aGomparison
tration agreement provides that the reference shall be to one or more ro English
rbitrators to be appointed by consent of the parties, and the parties do not, ““"
after differences have arisen, concur in the appointment or appointments.

The section differs from the English Act in two respects; first, the
English section* is confined to the appointment of a single arbitrator while
the Indian Act provides for one or more arbitrators, Secondly, the English

1. See Dutta v. Khedu, (1911) LL.R. 33 All. 645.

2. Section 306, Indian Succession Act, 1925.

3. Compare sections 2 and 3, Arbitration Act, 1950 (Eng.)

4. Andrews y. Palmer, (1821) 4B & L 250; Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India
(1942), page 103.

5. Marsh ९. Wood, (1829) 9B & C 659.

6. Compare section 3, Arbitration Act, 1950 (Eng.), read with section 54(4), Bank-
ruptcy Act, 1914,

7. Sections 62 and 64, Presidency Towns Insolvency Act (Act 3 of 1909).
8. Section 10, English Act of 1950.


Difference bet-
ween English
and Indian Act

—Genesis.

Appointment
by consent.

Section 8(1}(a)
and three
arbitrators.

Section 8(1)(b).

Act is not confined to cases where the arbitrator is to be appointed by
consent of the parties, while the Indian section is so cofined.

3.15. It may not be out of place to explain how differences between
the two Acts arose. As regards the the first point,’ section &1) of the
Indian Act of 1899 was, by its terms, confined to the case of a single
arbitrator. Since clause (a) was so confined, consequentially clause (b),
applicable to a case of the arbitrator declining to proceed further, would
also be so confined. There was, however, a conflict of decisions on the
point, one view being that in a case of submission of dispute to three arbi-
tractors all of whom had, after acting, declined to proceed further, the
Court could not appoint new arbitrators, while the contrary view was
taken in some cases.’-*

The 1940 Act has now clarified the position! In the notes on clauses
to the Bill of 1939, the matter has been dealt with under clause 8 by
stating that it reproduces, with some verbal changes, section 8 of the 1899
Act.

3.16. It may be noted, that the court has no power to make an appoint-
ment in cases not falling within the section.

3.17. As regards the second point (appointment by consent), it may be
noted, that it is regarded as “inherent in every arbitration agreement”,® that
the appointment of the arbitrator or arbitrators must be by consent of all
parties (unless there is any provision to the contrary).

3.18. An arbitration agreement may contemplate three arbitrators. The
situation is dealt with in several sections of the Act.

(a) If the three arbitrators are to be appointed by consent of the parties.
section 8(1)(a) applies.

(b) If one arbitrator is to be appointed by each party and the third
by the two appointed arbitrators, then section 10(1) comes into
play, whereunder the agreement shall have effect as if it provided
for an umpire.

(०) Lastly, where a agreement provides for a reference to three arbi-
trators in any other manner, then, under secticn 10(2) the award
of the majority prevails (unless the agreement provides to the
contrary).

These provisions are somewhat different from, and wider than, section
7 and section 9 of the English Act, which do not separately deal with the
case of three arbitrators to be appointed by consent.

3.19. This takes us to the next clause of section 8(1). Under section
8(1Xb), if any appointed arbitrator or umpire etc. neglects or refuses to
act or is incapable of acting or dies, and the agreement does not show
that the vacancy is not to be supplied, and the parties etc. do not supply
the vacancy, then a notice may be served by any party on the other party
for concurring in supplying the vacancy. This provision differs from
section 100) of the English Act of 1950 in certain respects. First, the
word used in the indian Act is ‘any’, because in that Act, section 10a) is
confined to a single arbitrator in this context. Further, the Indian Act
specifically covers the case of ‘neglect’. This is not dealt with in section
100) of the English Act.

1. Para 3-14, supra.
2. Kuthiammal v. Sarangapani, A.L-R. 1931 Mad. 170.

3. RamjiV. Hari A.1.R, 1939 Sind 81 (case law discussed)!
4

. Notes on Clauses, published under notification dated 22-7-1939; Government of
India Gazette, Part V. 22-7-1939, page 129 er seq.

5. India Hosiery Works v. Bharat Woollen Mills, A.LLR. 1953 Cal. 488 (Chakravart

#


25

_. The case of an umpire refusing to act in similar situations is dealt
with in the English Act in section 10(d).

3.20. Where the arbitration agreement names a particular arbitrator Section 80100)
and the named arbitrator refuses to act or dies, etc., can another arbitrator and named
be substituted in accordance with the provisions of section 8? arbitrators

3.21. Sometimes doubts have been expressed as to whether section 8(1}(b) Judicial deci-
at all applies to a case where a named arbitrator, obviously chosen for the sions under sec-
possession of qualifications special to him, has become unavailable or refuses fon S erbitra-
to act. It would appear that however individual the choice may be, if the tors,
agreement contains sufficient indication that the parties, nevertheless, intended
that in default of their original nominee they would be prepared to fill up
the vacancy by choosing the other arbitrator, then the section would apply,
and a new appointment may be made either by the parties or by the
court, as the case may be.'

3.22. Cases under paragraphs 17 to 19 of the Second Schedule of the Cases under
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (to which section 20 now corresponds) may Second Schedule.
be mentioned. If a named arbitrator died or refused to act, the situation
would be one covered by the words “if there is no such provision and the
parties cannot agree” under paragraph 17(4).? But a contrary view had
been taken by some High Courts.*-*,

There was thus a conflict of views.'-”

3.23. It would appear from the trend of comparatively recent deci- Recent cases
sions,” that in the absence of a positive intention to the contrary, courts as io pamed
would be inclined to allow the vacancy to be filled up in accordance .
with the procedure provided by section 8, even in the case of a named arbi-

trator. This view is preferable from the practical point of view also.

3.24. Whether or not the section would apply in a particualr case Interpretation
must be determined by the test laid down in the section itself, namely, ° Section 8110)
that the arbitration agreement must not show that it was intended that the
vacancy should not be supplied.”

3.25. We do not think that the position discussed above discloses any No change.
need for amendment.

3.26. Section 8(1Xc) deals with the case where the parties or the arbi- Section 8(1Xc).
trators are required to appoint an Umpire and do not appoint him.

3.27. This clause needs no change.

3.28. Section 8(2) deals with the power of the Court to fill up the Section 82).
vacancy after notice under section 8(1). It is Jinked with section &(1), and
does not need independent discussion.

1. Compare Karam Chand v. M/s Sant Ram Tara Chand, A.1.R. 1958 Punjab 418, 419,
para 4 (Gurnam Singh J.)

2. Fazal Itlahi v. Prag Narain, 1.L.R. 44 All. $23; ALR. 1922 All. 133 (Walsh and
Ryves JJ.)

3. Rajani Kant v. Panchanan, A.1.R. 1937 Cal. 388.
Vishwas v. Bhalchandra, A.V.R. 4931 Bom. 529(2).

5. Satyanarayan Murthi v. Venkataramana Murthi, AR. 1948 Mad. 32 (Full
Bench).

6. The case law has been reviewed in Narayanappa v. Ramchandrappa, LL.R. 54 Mad.
469; ATR. 1913 Mad. 28.

1. Governor-General v. Associated Livestock Farm, A.J.R. 1948 Cal. 230, 232 (S.R.
Das J.)

8. Ladha Singh v. Jyoti Prasad, 1.L.R. (1935) 2 Cal, 181; A.LR. 1940 Cal. 105.

9. Tara Prasad v. Baij Nath, 1.L.R. 19 Pat. 927.

10. For example, Bharat Construction Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1954 Cal. 606,
611, paragraph 18.

11. Bharat Construction Co. Ltd. v. Unior: of India AUR. 1954 Cal. 606, 611, para-
graph 18.


26

Section 8A
\New)}—Death
of arbitrator
appointed by
court or inca-
Pacity ete.

Neglect by or
death of arbitra-
tor or umpire
appointed by
court.

Section 9.

Scetion_10(1)
and difference
between arbitra-
tors as to choice
of umpire.

Section 10(2).

Section 10(3).

Section 11.

3.29. When the court appoints an arbitrator under section 8, and the
arbitrator dies, there is no provision in the Act for the appointment of
another arbitrator by the court in his place. This has been described! as a
lacuna in the Act. Neither section 8(1)(0) nor section 9 nor section 12
would cover such a situation, and the court has no inherent power to ap-
point an arbitrator In our opinion, the position would improve if a clari-
fication is made on the subject. The cases of incapacity, neglect and refusal
to act should also be covered. We, therefore, recommend the insertion of a
new section as follows :—

“8A. Where the court has a power to appoint an arbitrator or umpire
under any provision of this Act or of any arbitration agreement, and
the arbitrator or umpire so appointed by the court neglects ‘or ve-
fuses to act, or is incapable of acting or dies, the court may supply
the vacancy.”

3.30. Section 9 deals with the case where the agreement provides for
two arbitrators, one to be appointed by each party, and makes certain pro-
visions regarding the appointment of a new arbitrator or sole arbitrator
in case of a vacancy or failure to appoint respectively. This section does
not apply where a different intention is expressed in tne agreement. How
a different intention can be expressed, may be ascertained by referring
to reported cases.3+

The section needs no change.

3.31. Section 10 contains provisions as to cases where the agreement
contemplates three or more arbitrators. Under sub-section (1j, where the
agreement provides that the reference shall be to three arbitrators, one to be
appointed by each party and the third by the two appointed arbitrators,
then, it shall have effect as if it provided for appointment of an umpire. If
the arbitrators fail to appoint an umpire, any party may evail himself
of the procedure allowed by section 8(1)(c) for filling up the vacancy. But
if the two arbitrators differ as to the person to be appointed as the third
arbitrator, the question may arise whether the court can appoint the third
arbitrator in exercise of the power conferred by section 81)०.. Apparently,
the matter is left uncovered, on the principle that the umpire will be accept-
able to the parties only if both the arbitrators concur in the appointment.

3.32. Sub-section (2) of section 10 deals with an agreement providing
for three arbitrators, to be appointed in any other manner.

3.33. Sub-section (3) of section 10 deals with the case of more than
three arbitrators. There is no such provision in the English Act, But
the provision is needed in India, as there have been a few cases’-? where
matters have been referred to the arbitration of more than three persons.’

3.34. Certain considerations of public policy do arise in the field of arbi-
tration. Even where a particular award has been made pursuant to the
agreed procedure, the question may yet arise whether as a matter of public
policy, the award should be enforceable. An award entitles the beneficiary
to call on the power of the State to enforce it, and it is the function of the
court to see that this power is not abused. Similar principles apply where
the stage of award has not yet been reached, but one of the parties has

1. Hindustan Flashlight Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Great American Insurance Co. Ltd.
A.LR. 1963 Cal. 149, 151, para 2(P.C. Mallick J.)

See also Bharat Construction Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, A.A.R.1954 Cal. 606.

5. Shaw Wallace & Co. v. Subbien & Sons. 1.L.R. 44 Mad. 406; A.1.R.1921 Mad. 58.
Sasoon & Co. ४. Ram Dutt. 49 1.2. 366; A.LR. 1922 P.C. 374 (P.C.) LL.R. 50 Cal.1.
Amar Nath v. Uggar Sain, AA.R. 1949 All. 399.

Raghubir v. Kuleswar,1.L.R. 23 Pat.719; A.LR. 1945 Pat. 140.

¥.L. Pauly. G.C. Joseph, A.1.R. 1948 Mad. 512.

- Sri Charan v. Makhan Lal, A.LR.1919 Cal. 42.

. See also discussion relating to section 8, supra.

Panay ren


a grievance that the arbitrator is guilty of a particular default. If the
grievance is genuine, the law ought not to fend its aid to the continuance
of the arbitration proceedings before the particular arbitrator, because that
would, in substance. mean that the power of the State is being resorted
to where, as a matter of public policy, it ought not to be utilised. This,
speaking broadly, is the rationale undeslying the provision in section 11,
under which the court can remove the arbitrator in cert:in circumstances.
The expression used--the expression of importance—is “misconduct”: this
expression has various shades of meaning, which, of course, need not be
dealt with in this introductory paragraph. The ultimate end of the statu-
tory provision in section I1.—as indeed, of all provisions of the Act,—is
to secure justice.

3.35. By section 11, the court is empowered to remove an arbitrator
or umpire in certain circumstances. Under sub-section (1), the court may,
on the application of any party to a reference, remove an arbitrator or
umpire who fails to use all reasonable despatch in entering on or proceed-
ing with the reference and making an award. Jurisdiction under this
sub-section——in contrast with the next sub-section—is exercisable only on
the application of any party to a reference. We do not think that this position
requires to be changed.

Yt is often stated that arbitrators unduly prolong the proceedings so
that the primary object of the law in providing for arbitration—-the quick
disposal of cases by a person chosen by the parties—-is frustrated. There
may be truth in this complaint, but it appears to us that the solution lies
in the increased use of section 11(1) by a party to the reference who is aggri-
eved by such delay. No doubt, the relief under sub-section (1) is discre-
tionary, but still it cannot be said that the law is, in substance, defective
in this regard. Therefore, sub-section (1) relating to this situation may
be left undisturbed.

3.36. We shall deal later’ with the position regarding time-limits for
giving awards. Our recommendations in that regard are intended to
expedite the disposal of arbitrations.

3.37. More comprehensive and fundamental is the power of the court
under sub-section (2) to remove an arbitrator or umpire for misconduct.
It is well-established that the scope of “misconduct” in this sub-section
extends far beyond what a layman would regard as immoral.’ By its very
nature, the expression “misconduct” as employed in this context cannot be
defined. Apart from breach of express provisions of the arbitration

27

Section 11—
Power of the
Court of remove
arbitrators,
umpires in cer-
tain circumstances,

Time limits.

Section 112)

agreement or the Arbitration Act, and apart from the all-embracing cate- -

gory of denial of natural justice, there will be other cases where misconduct
is constituted for the purposes of this sub-section. Authorities as to the
scope and meaning of the express “misconduct” are numerous. But it is
hardly of any use to tefer to them, since each case depends on its own facts,
and no more concrete propositions than have been laid down in the existing
sub-section can be deduced from them.

3.38. According to section 11(3), where an arbitrator or umpire is
removed under this section, he shall not be entitled to receive any remune-
ration in respect of his services. This sub-section does not need any
shange.

3.39, Sub-section (4) of section 11 provides that for the purposes of
this section the expression “proceeding with the reference” includes, in a
case where reference to the umpire becomes necessary, giving notice of that
fact to the parties and to the umpire. This sub-section is intended to
explain, in a limited area, the meaning of the expression “proceeding with
the reference” as used in sub-section (1).

1. See discussion as to First Schedule, paragraphs 3 and 5 (Chapter 11), infra.
2. Halsbury, 4th Edition (1973), Vol.2, para 622.

Section 11(3)

Section 11(4)
and the aspect
of notice.


28

Section 12.

Section {2(1)—
Controversy as
to case of single
arbitrator.

Recommendation
to amend
section 12(1),

Section 12(2).

Section 12(3).

3.40. Section 12, dealing with the powers of the court in cases where
an arbitrator is removed or his authority is revoked, divides itself into
two portions: sub-section (1) deals with the case where an umpire who has
not entered on the reference is removed or “one or more arbitrators (not
being all the arbitrators)” are removed: while sub-section (2) concerns it-
self with the case where the authority of an arbitrator or arbitrators or
umpire is revoked, or an umpire who has entered on the reference, is re-
moved or a sole arbitrator or ail the arbitrators are removed. In the former
case, the court can fill up the vancancy. In the latter case, it can either
fill up the vacarcy or order that the arbitration agreement shall cease to
have effect with respect to the dispute referred to. The section is subject
to certain modifications in the case of arbitrations in suits (section 25) and is
not applicable to statutory arbitrations (section 46).

3.41. In sub-section (1) of section 12, the portion consisting of the
words “one or more arbitrators (not being all the arbitrators)” creates
overlapping with sub-section (2) in regard to @ sole arbitrator. Such a case
should fall exclusively under sub-section (2). The problem does not arise
under the English Act.’ which uses the phrase “an arbitrator (not being
a sole arbitrator) or two or more arbitrators (not being all the arbitrators)”.

3.42. The case where a sole arbitrator is removed by the court is not
intended to fall within sub-section (1)—it falls within sub-section (2). On
this point, sub-section (2) is more specific, since it specifically mentions,
“sole arbitrator”. Symmetry between the two sub-sections, as far as possi-
ble, would, in our opinion, be desirable.

Accordingly, our recommendation is that section 12(1) should be
revised as under: —

“(1) Where the court removes an umpire who has not entered on the
reference or one or more arbitrators (not being a sole arbitrator and not
being all the arbitrators), the court may, on the application of any
party to the arbitration agreement, appoint persons to fill the vacancy.”

3.43. Under section 12(2), where the authority of an arbitrator or
arbitrators or an umpire is revoked by leave of the court or where the
court removes an umpire who has entered on the reference or a sole arbit-
rator or all the arbitrators, the court may , on the application of any party
to the arbitration agreement, either—

(a) appoint a person to act as sole arbitrator in the place of the person
or persons displaced, or

(b) order that the arbitration agreement shall cease to have effect with
respect to the difference referred.
No changes are required in this sub-section.

3.44. Section 12(3) provides that a person appointed under this section
as an arbitrator or umpire shall have the like power to act in the reference
to make an award as if he had been appointed in accordance with the
arbitration agreement.

It needs no comments.

1, Section 25(1}, Arbitration Act, 1950 (Eng.)


CHAPTER 4

POWERS OF THE ARBITRATOR
SECTIONS 13-14

4.1. The powers of the arbitrator or umpire are dealt with in section 13, Section 13(a)
which applies unless a different intention is expressed in the agreement, —Power to
Clause (a) confers on the arbitrator power to administer oath to the parties @dminister oath.
and witnesses,

4.2. Section 4 of the Oaths Act, 1969 requires oaths or affirmations to Section 13(a).

be made by all witnesses, that is to say, all persons lawfully examined or
required to give evidence, inter alia. by or before any person, having by
law or consent of parties authority to examine such persons or to receive
evidence. Section 6 of the Oaths Act read with the Schedule prescribed
certain forms of oaths. It would follow that oaths have to be in the pres-
cribed manner before the arbitrator. since he is, by consent of parties, au-
thorised to receive evidence.

4.3. The ordinary rule is that arbitrators must give due notice before Power to

i हि Proceed
proceeding ex parte. pros
. . . Recommendation
The power to proceed ex parte is recognised in England by case to insert
law." The same is the position in India. section 13(aa).

In our opinion, it would be desirable to put the matter on a Statutory
footing, so as to make the Act comprehensive. We, therefore, recommend
the insertion in section 13 of a new clause as follows:

“Section 13(aay

Proceed ex-parte against any party who, without sufficient cause
and after due notice, fails to attend personally or through agent’.

4.4. Under section 13(b), the arbitrators or umpire have a power to Section 13(b.
state a special case for the opinion of the court on any question of Jaw in-
volved, or state an award, wholly or in part, in the form of special case
for the opinion of the court. Being an important provision, this requires
some discussion.

4.5. This clause contemplates two kinds of “special cases”. The arbit- Section 13(b)
rators may state a speci! case.on any question of law involved, or they Rae ee
may state the award (wholly or in part) in the form of a special case. In —_
the former case, the arbitration does not come to an end, but is merely sus-
pended until the court pronounces its ‘opinion’. This opinion forms part
of the award, under section 14(3). In the latter case, i.e., where the ‘award’
is stated for the opinion of the court, the award is final.”

4.6. In view of the provision now made for interim award (section 27
of the Indian Act. and section 14 of the English Act of 1950), the distinc-
tion is somewhat blurred. If care is taken by the arbitrators (while making
their award or otherwise recording their decision) to make it clear whether
they are (i) making an interim award, or (ii) making a final award, but
stating a special case in respect of a question of law, or (iii) without intending

» Louis Drevfus & Co. v. Purshottum, UL.R.47 Cal. 29.

- Dipti Bikash Sen y. India Automobiles, 82 C.W.N. 838 (July 3, 1978).

| Prem Chand v. Fort Glouster, AJ.R. 1959 Cal, 620.

+ Juggi Lal v. General Five & Dealers, A.\.R. 1955, Cal. 354.

Russell (1970), pages 22, 23, citing Wood ९. Leake, (1806) 12 Ves. 412.

५. Cf. Rule 5, Uniform Arbitration Act; Wehringer, Arbitration, Principles and Per-
cepts (1961), pages 80.

7. The distinction is maintained in section 21 of the English Act of 1950.

29

AYRYN =

5—7 Mof LJ & CA/ND/78


30

Section 13(b)
and discretion of
arbitrator.

English law.

Section 13(b)—
Statement of case

English case
as to “special
case”,

Recommendation
of Civil Justice
Committee.

to conclude the proceedings, stating a special case in the course of the refe-
rence, no practical difficulties would arise. It is only when the exact pre-
vision under which they are acting is not indicated, that some uncertainty
may arise.

4.7. Under section 13(b), it is discretionary for the arbitrator to state a
special case for the opinion of the court on any question of law involved,
or to state the award in the form of a special case on such questions for the
opinion of the court.

4.8. The corresponding provision in the English Act of 1950 is diffe-
rent, because section 21(1) of that Act provides that an arbitrator or um pire
may, and shall, if so directed by the High Court, state such question of law
etc! This difference between the two Acts has been noticed more than once
in judicial decisions.?-

4.9. So far as is material, section 21 of the English Act of 1950 pro-
vides as follows :—

“An arbitrator or umpire may, and shall, if so directed by the High
Court, state—(a) any question of law arising in the course of the refe-
rence; or (b) any award or any part of an award, in the form of a
special case for the decision of the High Court.”

4.10. The well-known decision of the Court of Appeal—Czarinakow v.
Roth Schmidt & Co*.—contains classic passages on the importance of main-
taining the “special case machinery” as part of the English legal system.
Even though arbitrators in modern times ate more often Jawyers than in the
past, the utility of this provision empowering the courts to require the arbit-
rator to state the case for the opinion of the court has been-re-asserted in
later English cases.’ In one of his judgments’ Lord Denning M.R. dealt
with the matter at great length. He laid down that three requirements had
to be fulfilled; first, there had to be a real and substantial point of law
suitable for decision by the court, as distinct from a point dependent on the
special expertise of the arbitrator or umpire; secondly, the point had to be
clear-cut and capable of being accurately stated as a point of law; it must
not be merely a matter of fact disguised: and thirdly, the point must be
necessary for the. proper determination of the case. In other words, it must
not be a mere side issue. On the other hand, the fact that the question
was not of general application or was a question of construction or was a
question relating to implication or inference from proved facts did not bar a
reference.

In connection with an insurance policy the High Court of Australia
has held that a question of construction could be a question of law.

4.11. The question whether arbitrators should be. compellable to state a
case was considered by the Civil Justice Committee which observed:

“We are also against the suggestion that the arbitrators should be
compellable by the court to state a case, as this would, in India, be
sure to lead to wide and gross abuse.”

1. See para 4-9, supra.

Union of India y. Din Dayal, A.1.R. 1952 Punjab 368, 371, para 10(Kapur J.).
. Adami Lukmanji v. Lohis Dreyfus & A.LR. 1925 Sind 82, 85 (Lobo A.J.C.).
. Bombay Fire Insurance Co. v. Ahmed Bhai, 1.L.R. 34 Bom. 1 (Davar 3.).

५. Czarinakow v. Roth Schmidt & Co., (1920) 2 K-B. 478; (1922) All England Re-
port Reprint 45(C.A.).

6. Halfdan Greig v. Sterling Corporation, (1973) 2 AILE.R. 1073, 1080.

ven

7. New South Wales Rutile Mining Co. Proprietory Ltd. v. Hard Ford Fire Ins. Co.,
(1972) 46 Australian Law Journal Reports 391.

Civil Sustice Committee (1924-25) Report, page 216, para 17; N.D. Basu,Arbitration
Act (1977), page 951.

8.


31

Perhaps, the danger anticipated by the Civil Justice Committee may
not be unreal. The matter should, therelore, be left as it is,

4.12. Under section 13(c), the arbitrator can make an award conditional Section 13(b),
or in the alternative. Under section 13(d), the arbitrator may correct in an (©) (@) & (०.
award any clerical mistake or error arising from any accidental slip or
omission.

Under section 13(e), the arbitrator or umpire may administer to any
party to the arbitration such interrogatories as may, in the opinion of the
arbitrators or umpire, be necessary.

These clauses need no change.

4.13, The Arbitration Act is silent as to the power of the arbitrator Section 13A—
to award interest on a sum of money awarded by the arbitrator. There is, Mew Section fo.
in the Act, a section'—section 29—dealing with the power of the Court. But 4¢2!, with powel

५ डर है of the arbitrator
this section cannot be availed of by the arbitrator. to award interest.

4.14, In England, the first Arbitration Act of 1889 did not contain any History of the
provision for interest on awards.* In the (English) Arbitration Act, 1934, law in England.
section 11 was incorporated, providing for payment of interest on awards
“as from the date of the award”. The present provision on the subject is
section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1950, to which we shall refer later’,

4.15. For the first time, a provision as to interest on awards was made History of the
by enacting section 29 in the Arbitration Act, 1940. In the original Bill law in India.
clause 30, which dealt with interest on awards, had been drafted on the
lines similar to section 11 of the English Act of 1934, that is to say it
provided for interest on awards as from the date of the award. Section 11
of the English Act of 1934 read as follows:

“LL A sum directed to be paid by an award shall, unless the award
otherwise directs, carry interest, as from the date of the award and at
the same rate as judgement debt.”

But when the Bill was referred to the Select Committee, the Select Com-
mittee suggested a deliberate change and a departure from the English law.

The recommendation of the Select Committee on this aspect of the
matter runs as follows :—

“Clause 29 (clause 30 in the Bill as introduced).

Instead of fixing by the Act the rate of interest which an award
shall bear and enacting that interest shall run from the date of the
award, we have provided in accordance with the analogous provision in
the Code of Civil Procedure that the court may fix the rate of interest,
but we have made the date from which the interest shall run the date
oj the decree.”

The recommendation of the Select Committee was accepted. Accord-
ingly, section 29, as enacted, operates only from the date of the decree,

4.16. So much as regards the history of the provision. It is to be noted Four stages
that there are four separate chronological stages to be considered in con- Televant to

पु ५ j rela the award of
nection with the award of interest, as follows: inet
(i) the period before the institution of the proceedings;
1. Section 29.
2. Chandris v. Isbrandt Sen Moller Co., (1950) 2 AILE.R. 618 {C.A.). Also see Timber

Shipping Co. S.A. v. London Overseas Freighters Ltd., (1971) 2 W.L-R. 1360 ((ELL.)
holding that the arbitrator cannot alter the rate of interest prescribed for judgement
debts.

. See para 4-25, infra.
4. L.A. Bill No. 34 of 1939,

Py


32

Law applicable
to cach stage.

First
period,

Second period.

Third period~
High Court
decision.

i) the period between the institution of the proceedings and the date
of the award;

(iii) the period between the date of the award and the date of the decree;
and

(iv) the period after the date of the decree.

4.17. The first period is governed by the substantive law, including, in
particular, the Interest Act, 1839, The second period is governed by sec-
tion 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: and where the matter has been
referred to arbitration, the general understanding’ is that the arbitrator,
being a private tribunal substituted for the court under the authority of law,
can exercise this power of the court also, at least where the reference in-
cludes a claim for interest.

The third period,’ was the subject-matter of some controversy, but the
matter has now been settled by the Supreme Court.

‘The fourth period is expressly covered by section 29 of the Arbitration
Act.

We propose to discuss in detail the case law relevant to each period.

4.18. The first period, as already stated,’ is governed by the substantive
law, including the Interest Act, 1839. The arbitrators’ power to determine
the substantive question in dispute must inciude this power also. Of course,
section 29 of the Arbitration Act carries with it the negative import! that it
shall not be permissible for ihe court to award interest on the principal sum
adjudged by an award for any period prior to the date of the passing of the
decree. But the arbitrator's power is as staied above.

4.19. As to the second period (period of pendency of the arbitration
proceeding), there are several decisions of the High Courts, recognising such
a power?

Some doubt was created as to the power to award interest for this period
by certain observations of Bose J. in a decision of the Supreme Court.’ In
that decision, after holding that the conditions for the award of interest
under the Interest Act, 1839 were not satisfied in that case, the Supreme
Court also repelled the argument under section 34, Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, on the ground that the arbitrator is not a ‘court’ within the meaning
of that Code. In a later case,’ however, the Supreme Court itself expressed
a doubt whether these observations were intended to lay down a broad pro-
position that, का no case, the arbitrator can award interest. Power to award
interest on a sum certain is. in fact, a part of the power to decide differences?
between the parties.

4.20. As to the third period—interest between the award and the
decree—the principal question that has arisen is this. Can the arbitrator
award interest for the period after the date of the award and before the date
of the decree of the Court? It may be noted that this period is not governed
by section 29 of the Arbitration Act, nor by section 34 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. For this reason some uncertainty prevailed on the subject,
until the position was settled by a decision of the Supreme Court, to the
referred to in due course.”

1. Para 4-19, infra.

2. Para 4-20, infra.

3. Para 4-17, supra.

4. sSrikantia 8 Co. v. Union of India, AAR. 1967 Bom. 350. 351 para 6.7.9 (Tulzapur-
ar J.).

5. See Union of India v. Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Lid.. A.1.R. 1963 Cal. 70, 74, para 14
(reviews case law).

6. Thawardas v. Union of India, (1955) 2 $.C.R. 48; A.LR. 1955 S.C. 468.
J. Nachiappa v. Subramanian, A.1.R. 1960 S.C. 307, 320.

8. Union of India v. Salween Timber & Construction Co. (tnd (India) and another, ARAL
1964 Cai. 240, 241, para 6.

9, Para 4.32, infra.


4.20A. Amongst the High Courts, there arose a conflict as regards the
power to award interest for the period after the award. According to one
view.’ power to award interest for this period (date of award to date of
decreey can be derived [rom the arbitration agreement. It has been pointed
out that such a power was recognised before the passing of the Arbitration
Act, 1940 and arbitrators continue to reiain the power after the passing
of that Act, there being noising in section 29 which takes away this power.
It was also pointed out thai tne observations of the Supreme Court as to
the power to award interest made in the case’ repored in 1955 were limited
to the question of interest on unfiguidated damages, and the court did not
hold that the arbitrator bad no power or award interest on a debs for the
period from the award to the date of the decree.

4.21, It may be mentioned that power of the arbitrators to award inte-
rest on the principal sum awarded from the date of the award to the date
of the decree was recognised before the Act.*

4.22. However, in a Punjab case,' a different view was taken.

23. The Supreme Couri judgement’ in Union of India v, Bungo Steel
Furn recognised the power of the arbitrator to award interest for this
stage. The Court rejected the argument of the appellant that the arbitrator
had no authority to award interest from the date of the award, (dated Septem-
ber 2, 1959) to the date of the decree (granted by Mallick J., ie. August 2,
1960).

In support of this argument, counsel had relied upon the following ob-
servations of Bose J. in Tfhawardas Phermaj v. Union of Indic

“It was suggested that at least interest from the date of ‘suit’ could
be awarded on the analogy of section 34 of the Civil Procedure Code,
1908. But section 34 does not app'y because an arbitrator is not a
‘court’ within the meamng of the Code nor does the Code apply to
arbitrators, and, but fur section 34, even a court would not have the
power to give interest affer the suit. This was, therefore, also rightly
struck out from the award.”

Commenting on this passage, the Supreme Court observed :—

“This passage supports the argument of the appellant that interest
cannot be awarded by the arbitrator after the date of the award, but in
later cases it has been pointed oi by this court that the observations
of Bose J. in 1955; 2 S.C.R. 48 (A.1.R. 1955 S.C, 468), supra were not
intended to lay down such a broad and unqualified proposition. See
Nachiappa Chettiar v. Subramaniam Chettiar’ and Satinder Singh?

The Supreme Court also distinguished the earlier case of 1955 as
follows.

“In Thawardas (1955) 2 S.C.R. 48; ALR. 1955 S.C. 468, supra,
the material facts were that the Arbitrator had awarded interest on un-
liquidated damages for a period before the reference to arbitration and
1 Of India V. Bango Steel Furniture किक, Lid. © 4.R. 1963 Cal. 73, TH, para-
graph 12-14 (R.S. Bachwat and K.N. Laik JJ).
(b) Chidambaram v. Subramaniam, ALR. 1953 Ma", 492.
. Thawardas V. Union of India (1958) 2 S-C.R. 48; ALR. 1955 5.0. 468, para 4-23,
infra.
3. Bhowani Das Ram Govind y. Harsukh Das Bal Kishan Das, A.LLR. 1924 Cal. 534.
4. State of Punjab ५. Surinder Nath, AA.R. 1960 Punj. 623, 625.
5. Union of India ¥. Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt, Ltd.. A.1.R. 1967 5.0. 1032.
6.
1.

i

Union of India v. Bungo Steel Furniture Pyt. Ltd., ALR. 1967 S.C. 1032.

Thawardas Pherumat v. Union of India, (1955) 2 S.CS.C.R. 48, 65; A.LR. 1955 5.८.
468. 478.

8. Nachiappa Chettiar v. Subramaniam Chettiar, (1960) 2 8.C.R. 209, 238, A.LR. 1960
S.C. 207, 220.
9, Satinder Singh v. Umrao Singh, (1961) 3 S.C.R. 676; A.IR. 1961 S.C. 908, 916.

33

Position
under the Act.
Punjab view,

Supreme Court
Judgment of 1967.


34

Present position.

English law—
section 20 of
the Act, 1950.

Difference
between
English and
Indian law.

Fourth period.

Position.
summed up.

Recommendation
to insert new
section,

also for a period subsequent to the “reference. The High Court set
aside the award regarding interest on the ground that claim for interest
was not referred to”.

4.24, It can therefore be stated that the judgement of the Supreme Court
supports the view that the arbitrator can award interest for the period from
the date of award to the date of decree.

4.25. In England, section 20 of the Arbitration Act of 1950 provides
that'-"—“‘a sum directed to be paid by an award shall, unless the award
otherwise directs, carry interest as jrom the date of the award and at the
same rate as judgment debt”. Further, section 44 of the Administration of
Justice Act, 1970, enables the rate of interest on judgment-debts to be raised
from 4 per cent provided by the Judgments Act, 1838 (Chapter 110) by an
order of the Lord Chancellor in the form of a statutory instrument.

4.26. The difference between the English and Indian provisions lies
primarily in this, that there is no power in an arbitrator in India to direct
payment of interest for the post-decree period. This was laid down in two
Calcutta cases’", In the general scheme of Indian law, it could not be
otherwise, since, under section 29, the court takes charge of the matter as
from the stage of the decree.

4.27. The fourth period (period after the decree) falls within section 29
and raises no problems as to the arbitrator’s powers.

4.28. To revert to the present section, the case law discussed above
justifies a statement that the present position in India is as follows :~

{a) Period before the institution of legal proceedings is governed by
the substantive law of intrest? including the Interest Act, 1839. It
may be assumed that the reference of money claim to arbitration
includes a reference as to interest on the money claim.

(0) (i) Where a claim for interest during the pendency of the arbitration
is specifically referred to the arbitrator, he can award such interest
just as a court could do so under section 34 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 7908."

{ii) Where a claim for interest during such pendency is nor speci-
fically referred to the arbitrator, the arbitrator has no power to
award interest.’ Nor does the court have this power, since section
29 operates only from the date of the decree.

(९) As to the period after the date of the award and before the decree,
the arbitrator has such a power, if the question of interest for this
period has been referred to arbitration.

(d} The period after the date of the decree is governed by section 29,
empowering the Court to award interest.

4.29. So much as regards the present law. It appears to us that in the
cases (b) and (९) mentioned above? the arbirators should, ipso facto, have
a power to award interest unless the agreement provides to the contrary,

. Section 20, Arbitration Act, 1950.

1

2. See also section 44, Administration of Justice Act, 1970.

3. Pratima Swarup v. Diwan Chand, A.1.R. 1963 Cal. 583, 586.

4. Union of India v. Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd., AIR. 1963 Cal. 70.

5. Para 4-16, supra.

6. M.R. Mahajan v. Hukaohand Mills Ltd., (1967) 1 S.C.J. 472-474 (case of interest
pendente lite) and also para 4-18 supra.

7. Seth Thawar Das Pherumal v. Union of India, AAR. 1955 S.C. 468; (1955) 2 S.C.R.
48, 64. है

8. Para 4-20 supra.

Para 4-28


and there should be a specific provision on the subject. In the case (a)
mentioned above’, they should have this power if the terms of the reference so
warrant. As to the rate of interest, we would introduce certain guidelines,
which will be apparent from the draft that we give below.’

35

4.30. In the light of the above discussion,’ we recommend that in order Recommendation

to deal with the power of the arbitrator or umpire to ward interest for the to insert new

first three periods mentioned above, the following new section should be
inserted in the Act:—

+' 1३4, (1) Where and in so far as the award is jor the payment of
money, the arbitrators or umpire may. if the terms of the reference so
warrant, award interest on the principal sum adjudged, from the date
on which such sum has become due to the date of entering on the refe-
rence, at such rate not exceeding the rate agreed and, in the absence of
agreement, at such rate not exceeding twelve per cent per annuni, as
the arbitrators or umpire may consider proper.

“Explanation —Nothing in this sub-section shall empower the arbi-
trators or umpire to award interest for which no claim is made by a
party.

13A. (2) Where and in so far as the awerd is for the payment of
money, the arbitrators or umpire may, unless a different intention is
expressed in the arbitration agreement, award interest on the principal
sum adjudged from the date of entering on the reference to the date of
the award, at such rate not exceeding the rate agreed and, in the absence
of agreement, at such rate not exceeding twelve per cent annum, as
the arbitrators or umpire may consider proper.

“13A. (3) Where and in so fer as the award is for the payment of
money, the arbitrators or umpire may, unless a different intention is
expressed in the arbitration agreement, award interest on the prin-
cipal sum adjudged from the date of "the award to the date on which
the judgement is pronounced by the court according to the award. at
Such rate not exceeding the rate agreed and, in the absence of agree-
ment, at such rate not exceeding twelve per cent per annum, as ne
arbitrators or umpire may consider proper.”

4.31. Section 14(1) provides that when the arbitrators or umpire have
made their award, they shal} sign it and shal) give notice in writing to the
parties of the making and signing thereof and of the amount of fees and
charges payable in respect of the arbitration and award.

Section 14(2) deals with the filing of the award in court. The arbitra-
tors or umpire shall, on the request of any patty to the arbitration agree-
ment or any person claiming under them or, if so directed by the court and
upon payment of the fees and charges due in respect of the arbitration and
award of the costs and charges of filing the award, cause the award or
signed copy of it together with any depositions and documents which may
have been taken and proved before them to be filed in the court and the
court shall thereupon give notice to the parties of the filing of the award,

Section 143) provides that when the arbitrators and umpire state a
special case under section 13, clause (b), the court, after giving notice to
the parties and hearing them, shall pronounce its opinion thereon and such
opinion shall be added to and shall form part of the award.

A few points of detail may now be adverted to.

4.32. Section 141) speaks of an award being made by “arbitrators”
or by an “umpire”. Sometimes, rules of commercial associations provide
for an appeal to a Committee from the decision of the umpire appointed
in accordance with such rules.

It would appear that the award of the appellate committee could be
filed in court.

1, Para 4:28. supra.
2. Para 4-30, infra.
3, Para 4-29, supra.

4. HecraLal & Co. v. Joakim & Co.,1LR. 55 Cal. 180; A.LR. 1927 Cal. 677; 31 C.W .N.
730(C.C. Ghosh and Buckland JJ.) (reviews English cases)...

section as
section 13A,

Power to
award
interest,

Section 14.

Appeal.


36

Section 14(1)
and giving
of notice.

Section 14(1)
and registered
awards.

Fees.

Section 14(2)—
The requirement
of filing.

4.33. In several English cases, where the arbitration proceedings in-
volved a further consideration of the award of an arbitrator by the Ap-
peal Commitice of the particular commercial association, the Court held
that the final award contemplated by the parties was that of the Appel-
late authority. The validity of such a provision in the rules of an association
seems to have been assumed in India.’

4.34. The position seems to be this. If, from the substance of the con-
tract. it is clear that parties contemplate a fresh set of arbitrators to be the
final deciding authority, then such a Committee is to be regarded as a body
of arbitrators or an umpire.*

We shail revert to this point [ater

4.35. There are two kinds of notices contemplated by section 14, Sec-
tion 14(1) provides, that after signatures on the award, the arbitrators shall
give notice in writing to the parties of the making and signing thereof and
of the amount of fee etc. Sub-section (2) provides that after the award is
filed, the court shall give notice to the parties of filing of the award. These
provisions do not require any change.

4.36. A question has arisen how far an award relating to immovable
property requires registration before it can be filed before the court’ But
the question need not be considered under section 14, since non-registration
of an award does not come in the way of filing of an award; it only prohi-
bits its being taken in evidence, as held by the Supreme Court’-’.

4.37. More important is the question of fees, Ordinarily, the fees of
the arbitrator or umpire must be fixed by an agreement between the parties
and the arbitrator or umpire. There is, it has been held,’ nothing illegal in
the arbitrator or umpire demanding fees before the award, provided the
amount demanded is reasonable and not extravagant, and is demanded from
both parties equitably within the knowledge of both the parties.

Difficulties, however, arise where there is no agreement as to the amount
or no agreement as to the time of payment of the fees.

In order to settle the position in this regard, we consider it desirable’
to add certain provisions to section 38. The salient features of the proposed
provisions are—

{i) In the absence of agreement, any party or arbitrator or umpire
may apply to the Court (after entering on reference) to fix the fees.
It shall also be open to any party, arbitrator or umpire to apply
for variation of the fees so fixed, by showing proper cause.

(ii) where the fees have been fixed by agreement or by an order of
the court, the court may compel the party or parties concerned
to deposit fees.

4.38. Section 14(2) requires the arbitrator or umpire to cause the award
or signed copy of it to be ‘filed in court’, if certain conditions are satisfied.
The arbitrators need not personally file the award, and it is sufficient if
they cause the award to be filed." Sending by post is, therefore, enough.
The arbitrators can file the award," or they may be directed by the Court
to file it.”

> Suraj Multv. Chand Mull, A.1.R. 1927 Cal, 601.

. Fazil Ally v. Khimji, AAR. 1934 Bom. 476.

. आएगा, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 191.

See discussion as to First Schedule.

Mulla, Registration Act (1963) page 95.

. Champa Lal ९. Samrathpai, A.1.R. 1960 S.C. 629, 631 (Kapur J.).
. For earlier cases, see Anant Lal v. Keshar Deo, A.ILR. 1949 Cal. 549.
. Teja Singh v. Union of India, AA.R. 1955 All. 666.

. Section 38 to be amended. See para 8-59 infra.

|. Kumbha Mawjiv. Dominion of India, ALR. 1953 S.C. 313.

. Narayan v. Dewaji, ALR. 1945 Nag. 117°

. See section 14 (2), the words “if so directed by the court”,

Serr क प syne

po


37

4.39. Under section 14(2), an award has to be filed by the arbitrator Section 14(2)
or by the umpire. The case where the arbitrator or umpire dies without gnd case of
filing an award or without authorising any person to file it, is not covered srhitrator—
by the section. This was described as a “lacuna” in the Act in a Calcutta Pro;
case.' In that case, the court acted under its inherent jurisdiction under section 14(2A).
section 151, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and made an order for filing
the award within a month, from the date of judgment against the respon-
dent.

4.40. It was not disputed in that case that the umpire had made an
award; he, however, did not file the award or authorise anyone to do so,
and instead made it over to the respondent.

The appellant took out a notice of motion under section 14(2), but
before the date for the notice of motion arrived, the umpire died. Hence
the difficulty that arose.

4.41. It may be noted that this problem does not arise in England, as English law.
there is no section in the English Act dealing with filing of the award by
the arbitrator. The reason is, that under that Act, the award is enforceable
as a judgment* by leave of the High Court or any Judge thereof.

4.42. It appears to us that in the scheme of the Act, this question Recommendation
must be dealt with by a specific provision. The want of a specific provision as to section 14
—which is a lacuna’—-may sometimes create avoidable problems. The same & feath St the
applies to cases other than death, such as the arbitrator not being traceable Of, "eat of |
or neglect on his part to file the award. To make the section comprehensive without filing
on the subject, it is desirable to amend it in a suitable manner. The gist of the award and

our recommendation will be apparent from the following draft of the sub- similar

sections which, according to us, should be inserted in section 14:— Sub-sections
(2A) and (2B)
“Section 14(2A) to be inserted.

Jf, because of the death of the arbitrator or for any other reason,
the award is in the possession of a person other than the arbitrators or
umpire, as the case may be, any party to the arbitration agreement may
apply to the court for directing the said person to file the award along
with the depositions and documents referred to in sub-section (2) if also
in the possession of the Said person.”

“Section 14(2B)

The Court shall, on an application being made under sub-section
(24), after giving notice to the said person and to the parties, cause the
award together with the depositions and documents to be filed in court
and shail thereafter proceed to deal with the award in accordance with
the provisions of this Act.”

442A. Before leaving section 14, it is necessary to deal with one sug- Suggestion
gestion that has been made to the effect that an arbitrator must be required to require
to give reasons for the award. This suggestion was made by the Public Ac- arbitrator to
counts Committee (1977-78), Sixth Lok Sabha, Ninth Report, dealing with See the award.
the Forest Department, Andaman. The suggestion has been brought to our ‘~ awa
notice by the Ministry of Law.‘ The Committee, after expressing its unhap-
piness over the manner in which certain arbitration cases which formed the
subject-matter of the Report had been pursued, and after noting the delay
that took place in the disposal of cases, made the following observations :—

“In this distressing story, Government has repeatedly suffered loss. In
the first arbitration case, Government's claim for royalty on shortfall
1, Panchanan Dev v. Union of India, A.LR. 1959 Cal. 84, 87, para 14 (Chakravarty
C.J. and $.C. Lahiri J.)

2. Section 26, English Act of 1950.

3. Para 4-39 supra.

4, Public Accounts Committee, Ninth Report, Sixth Lok Sabha (September, 1 977),
(P.A.C. No. 548,) page 201, paragraph 3-272,

6—7M of Ly & CA/ND/78



38

Suggestion
not accepted.

Relevant
considerations—
Burden on the
arbitrator.

Laymen as
arbitrators.

of extraction was not upheld. As the arbitrator's award gave no rea-
sons, Government could not even find out why their claim
was rejected. It will be strange if Government really find
itself so helpless in such cases. The Committee would like
Government to make up its mind and amend the law in such a man-
ner that it would be obligatory on the arbitrator to give reasons for his
award. Meanwhile, it should be ascertained whether in an award which
sets out no reasons the aggrieved party have no remedy whatever.”

4,43. We have also been informed that the Public Accounts Committee
(1975-76), in its 210th Report, has observed as ‘follows :—

“Incidentally, the Committee also find that under the Arbitration Act,
the Arbitrator is not bound to give any reason for the award. The result is
that often it becomes difficult to challenge such non-speaking awards
on any particular ground. The Committee are of the view that it should
be made obligatory on arbitrators to give detailed reasons for their
awards so that they may, if necessary, stand the test of objective judi-
cial scrutiny. The Committee desire that this aspect should be examined
and the necessary provision brought soon on the statute book.”

4.44, We have given careful consideration to the suggestion that the
arbitrator should be required to give reasons. And we appreciate the em-
barrassment that must be caused to the Government by such awards in the
cases referred to by the Public Accounts Commitiee in its Report referred
to above. We are also not unmindful of the fact that the public interest might
sometimes suffer by awards which are not supported by reasons. But we
regret that we are unable to persuade ourselves to accept the suggestion
for amending the law. Our reasons for this conclusion will be set out pre-
sently. These reasons are, in our view, weighty enough to override other
considerations.

4.45. There are, it seems to us, several considerations that are rele-
vant in determining the question whether an arbitrator should be required
by law to give reasons for the award.

The scheme of the Arbitration Act is to provide a domestic forum
for speedy and substantial justice, untrammelled by legal technicalities, by
getting the dispute resolved by a person in whom the parties have full
faith and confidence. The award given by such a person under the scheme
of the Act can be assailed only on very limited ground like those men-
tioned in section 30 of the Act. The result is that most of the awards at
present are made rule of the court despite objections to their validity by the
party against whom those awards operate. To have a provision making it
obligatory for the arbitrator to give reasons for the award would be asking
for the introduction of an infirmity in the award which in most cases is
likely to prove fatal. Many honest awards would thus be set aside.

Once the arbitrators are compelled to give reasons in support of the
award, the inevitable effect of that would be that the validity of most of the
awards would be challenged on the ground that the reasons, or at least some
of them, are bad and not germane to the controversy. Sometimes, if four
Teasons are given in support of the award and one of the reasons is shown
to be not correct or not germane, the award would be challenged on the
ground that it is difficult to predicate as to how far the bad reason which is
not germane has influenced the decision of the arbitrator. Many awards
would not survive court scrutiny in such circumstances.

4.46. It is also noteworthy that in a large number of cases the arbitra-
tors would be laymen. Although their final award may be an honest and
conscientious adjudication of the controversy and dispute, they may not be
able to insert reasons in the award as may satisfy the legal requirements
and the scrutiny of the court. The arbitrators having been chosen by the
parties, it would, in our opinion, be not correct to put extra burden on

1. Public Accounts Committee (1975-76), 210th Report, page 136, para 5°17.


them of also giving reasons which are strictly rational and germane in the
eye of law in support of their award. Once the parties have voluntarily
chosen the arbitrators, presumably because they have faith in their impar-
tiality, the law should not insist upon the recording of reasons by them in
their award.

4.47. The previous experience, in fact, points out that it is awards in-
corporating reasons which have generally been quashed in court. The
awards not giving reasons have survived the attack on their validity, unless
the arbitrator is otherwise shown to have misconducted himself or his award
suffers from some other technical defect.

Once we have the compulsion for the incorporation of reasons in the
award given by the arbitrators, validity of most of the awards, in our opi-
nion, would not be able to survive in court. As such, the object of the Ar-
bitration Act would be substantially defeated.

4.48. Once Parliament provides that reasons shall be given, that must
clearly be read as meaning that proper, adequate, reasons must be given;
the reasons that are set out, whether they are right or wrong, must be rea-
sons which not only will be intelligible, but also can reasonably be said to
deal with the substantial points that have been raised. If the award in anv
way fails to comply with the statutory provisions, then it would be a ground
for saying that the award was bad on the face of it, as Parliament has re-
quired that reasons shall be incorporated.’

It is well established that where the arbitrator gives reasons for a con-
clusion of law, courts can go into those reasons.?-*,

4.49. It is sometimes stated that since an arbitrator is bound to apply
the law, there should be some means of ensuring that he applied the law
correctly. However, it is also to be remembered that parties resort to an
arbitration voluntarily and select or agree to a particular arbitrator, because,
inter alia,—

(i) they have faith in him, and

(ii) the proceedings will be more speedy and free from technicalities
than in the courts.

The object of achieving speed and informality is likely to be largely
frustrated if a statutory provision makes it compulsory to give reasons for
the award. The general rule is that the parties cannot object to the decision
given by their own judge, except in case of misconduct and the like.t This
general principle should not be departed from unless weighty reasons exist
for such departure.

No doubt, it is desirable that the award should be correct in law. But the
fundamental question is, how far should the finality of the award yield to
the desirability of legal correctness, and what procedural requirements should
be insisted upon to ensure that the award is sound in law? In this connec-
tion, reference may be made to the observations of Barwick C.J. (of the
High Court of Australia), made in 19725, He observed that “finality in ar-
bitration in the award of the lay arbitrator is more significant than legal
propriety in all his processes in reaching that award.”

1. Of Re Poyser & Mills Arbitration, (1964) 2 0.8. 467; (1963) 1 All E.R. 612, 616
(Megaw J.)

2. Champsey Bhars & Co., v. J.B. Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd., AAR. 1923 P.C. 66.
3. S. Dutt v. University of Delhi A.LR. 1958 S.C. 1050.

4. Government of Kelantan. Duff Development Co. Ltd., (1923) A.C. 395; Russell (1970),
pages 359, 360.

5. Tuta Products Pvt. Ltd., v. Hutcheson Bros. Pvt. Ltd., (1972) 127 C. LR 253, 258:
(1972) Australian Law Journal Reports 119 (Australia). .

Likeinood of
awards being
challenged.

Nature of
reasons.

Voluntary

character and
the cosidera-
tion of speed.


No change.

The importance which the law attaches to the finality of arbitration
goes against the suggestion now put forth for giving reasons for an award.
A requirement that the reasons for an award should be given would open too
wide a door for challenging the award, even if the grounds for setting aside
are, by statute, restricted in other respects.

4.50. For these reasons, we are not inclined to recommend @ provision
requiring the arbitrator to give reasons for the award.


CHAPTER 5

Proceedings in the Court on an Award
{Sections 15-19)

5.1. After an arbitrator has made his award, one of the parties must Sections 15 w
obtain a judgment in terms of the award. Indian law, as enacted in the 17 and 30---
Arbitration Act, does not allow a party to enforce the award as such. This Scheme.
position, therefore, necessarily raises the question—What are the possible
alternatives open to the court when its aid is sought for the purpose of
making a decree in terms of the award? The law on the subject is scattered
in several sections. Their inter-relationship would be better understood if
they are viewed as constituting a set of alternatives available to the court
01 an application made for the purpose mentioned above.

In the scheme of the Act, the court may—

(a) pass judgment in terms of the award (section 17), or
(b) modify or correct the award (section 15), or

(0) remit the award on any matter referred to arbitration for recon-
sideration by the arbitrator or umpire (section 16), or

(d) set aside the award (section 30).

Jn short, the court may totally accept the award, or totally Teject it,
or take the intermediate course of modifying it or remitting it with the
implication that the arbitrator may modify it. Whether these alternatives

are mutually exclusive is not a matter which needs to be considered at this
stage.

5.2. Coming to the power to modify an award—which is first dealt Section 15.

with,—section 15 confers that power in three situations. The first is where
it appears to the court that a part of an award is upon a matter not referred
to arbitration, and such part can be separated from the other part and does
not affect the decision on the matter referred. The second is where the
award is imperfect in form or contains any obvious error which can be
amended without affecting such decision. “The third applies where the
award contains a clerical mistake or an error arising from an accidental
slip or omission.

The first situation hardly needs any comment, because the authority of
an arbitrator cannot go beyond the matters referred to arbitration.

The second situation is equally unobjectionable, since the Power to
modify or correct the award is, in this case, linked up with an imperfection
of form or an obvious error, and can be exercised without affecting the
decision on the matter referred. The situation where an award contains
an obvious error is illustrated by a series of cases where the award was
erroneously passed against the President of India, while it should have been
passed against the Union of India.’

The third situation becomes necessary by reason of the fact that the
award, because of clerical mistake or accidental slip or omission, does not
reflect the true intention of the arbitrator.

The common link underlying the three situations is the legislative po-
licy of giving effect to the ‘substance of the arbitration and the award

1. (a) Union of India v. Salween Timber Construction Co., A.1.R. 1963 Cal. 307. 309,
para 9.

(0) Union of India v. Himatsingka Timber Co., A.I.R- 1964 Cal. 91, 92, 93 para 5 tog.

41


42

History and
Position in
England.

No change.

Section 16
and grounds
for remitting
the award.

Se

of
section 16.

History.
(1899 Act and
Code of Civil
Procedure).

5.3. It may be noted that section 15 corresponds to the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, Second Schedule, para 12. There was no such provision
in the Indian Act of 1899. Nor is there any such provision in the English
Act. Under the English Act, the court has no power to alter or amend an
award.’ It may be noted, that even in India, no such provision was con-
tained in the Code of 1882 in relation to arbitration: without intervention
of the court (Section 525 of the 1882 Code), and, therefore, the court had
no power to amend the award or remit it. It could either file the award
or reject the application.’ In the absence of such a provision, the court
had either to set aside the award or to remit it.2 Hence the need for a
provision conferring power to modify the award.

5.4. The present provision is a salutary one and we have no change
to recommend in section 15.

5.5. The grounds on which an award or any matter referred to arbi-
tration can be remitted to the arbitrator or umpire for re-consideration are
enumerated in section 16(1), clauses (a), (b) and (c). In the corresponding
section 22 of the English Act of 1950, there is nd such limitation, and the
High Court or a Judge thereof is authorised to remit the matters referred,
or any of them, “In all cases of reference to arbitration”.* Though, in Eng-
land, the power to remit is generally exercised on certain recogni: gro-
unds, those grounds are merely guides to the exercise of discretion, and are
not exhaustive.’ The usual grounds for remission in England are:—

(i) where the award is bad on the face of it;*

(ii) where there has been an admitted mistake and the arbitrator him-
self asks that the matter may be remitted;’

(iii) where there has been misconduct on the part of the arbitrator;?

(iv) where additional evidence has been discovered after the making of
the award.-”

But these are not exhaustive.”

5.6. In our Act, under section 16(1), the court may from time to time
remit the award or any matter referred to arbitration to the arbitrators or
umpire for reconsideration upon such terms as it thinks fit. The sub-section
applies in three situations. We shall come to the precise terms of the three
situations in which the section applies in due course, but it may be useful
to point out that the common thread linking the three situations is incom-
pleteness in point of quantity, intelligibility and legality.

5.7. It may be noted that in the Indian Arbitration Act of 1899, there
was no limitation of the grounds for remission."* Section 13(1) of that Act
was as follows:—

“The Court may. from time to time, remit the award to the reconside-
tation of the arbitrators or an umpire.”

1. Russell on Arbitration (1970), page 314, citing Hall ५. Alderson, (1825), 2 Bing 476
and Moore y. Buklin, (1837) 7 L.J. SB. 20.
2. See Mohammad Afzal vy. Abdul Hamid, A.1.R. 1925 Lah. 570.
3. Shyam Lal v. Purshotam Das, 1.L.R. 42 All. 277 (Case under the old Code).
4, Section 22, Arbitration Act, 1950.
5. Russell on Arbitration (1970), page 395 and illustrations at pages 396-398.
6. Russell (1970), page 357.
7. Russell (1970), page 370.
8. Russell (1970), page 376.
9, Russell (1970), page 392.
10. Montogomery Jones & Co. v. Liebenthal, (1898) 78 Law Times 406.
11. For examples of other grounds, see Russell (1970), page 344.
12. Seealso chart in para 5.12, infra.


5.8. Such a limitation was, however, contained in the Second Schedule
to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, paragraph 14 (now repealed). Under
that paragraph, the court could remit the award or any matter referred to
arbitration—

“(a} where the award has left undetermined any of the matters refer-
red to arbitration, or where it determines any matter not referred
to arbitration, unless such matter can be separated without affect-
ing the determination of the matters referred;

(b) where the award is so indefinite as to be incapable of execution;

(c) where an objection to the legality of the award is apparent upon
the face of it.”

5.9. It would thus appear, that the provision as to remission in the Present section
Civil Procedure Code was narrow as is the present section, while in the narrower than
Arbitration Act, 1899, the provision was wide as in the English Act2 The Enelish law.
notes to clause 16 to the Bill of 1939 merely state that clause 16 deals
with the court’s powers to remit an award for re-consideration, and sub-
clause (1) repeats (without change) paragraph 14 of the Second Schedule
to the Code, and the remaining sub-clauses reproduce the substance of the
first sentence of paragraph 15(1) of the Code. The notes do not contain
any discussion as to why the wider provision in the Indian Arbitration
Act of 1899 was not adopted. The difference between the Act of 1899 and
the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908, has been judicially noted.* Under
the wider provision in the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899, courts generally
exercised their discretion on the same grounds as in England.‘

5.10. As the section stands now, it is not possible for the courts to Remission on
remit an award on any ground not mentioned in the section.*-* A remission other Brounds
ordered in the absence of the specified would be invalid.” not permissible,

5.11. It is an important question for consideration whether the law on Question of
the subject should be altered by removing or modifying the restrictions as amendment
to remission. There may be cases where the situation does not fall under considered
section 16, and yet remission of the award would be desirable." Again, the law.
where legislation has been enacted subsequent to the making of the award
and changed the law, the award may require re-consideration on that score.

Such a situation arose in one case before the Patna High Court? After
an award was made with regard to the partition of certain properties, a
notification was issued under section 3 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act,
vesting the “milkiat interest” in the State of Bihar. The Court held, that
the award was not a nullity because of such vesting, and that the proper
course would be to refer the matter back to the arbitration under section 16
for making a fresh partition of the properties which are left to the members
after the vesting of the said interest.

5.12. Again, there may be cases where there is a mistake in the award. Cases of
Thus, if “Daniel” is referred to in the award as “David”, then on that mistake.
ground the award can be remitted. (Of course, there are other provisions
also regarding mistake).”

Para 5-8, supra.

Section 22, Arbitration Act, 1950 (Eng.).

Aboobaker v. Congress Reception Committee, A.1.R. 1937 Bom. 410, 416.

See U.M. Choudhary & Co. v. Jivan Krishna, 1.L.R. 49 Cal. 646; A.I-R. 1922 Cal. 447.

Sree Minakshee Mills Ltd. v. Patel Brothers, A.1.R. 1944 P.C. 76.

Vengu Ayyar v. Yegyam Ayyar, A.1:R. 1951 Mad. 414.

Sheo Karan v. Kanhaya, A.1.R. 1935 Lah, 113.

See cases cited in Russell on Arbitration (1970), page 392.

Shalingram Singh v. Sheo Sati Prasad, A.1.R. 1963 Pat. 168 (Ramaswami C.J. and Unt-
ia

ypreravarn>

See section 13(d) and 15(c), Indian Act, and section 17, English Act. -

=


44

_ Then, there may be cases where a Specific statutory provision consti-
tuting the substantive law applicable to the case has been overlooked by

the arbitrators.

There may be many other cases where remission would be appropriate.
Most of these cases would not fall under section 16, unless the language of
section 16(1)(c)}—“where an objection to the legality of the award is appa-
rent upon the face of it’—is stretched beyond its legitimate limits. It is
clear that remission can, at present, be ordered only on the specified grounds,’
The present provision follows the narrower one in the Civil Procedure Code,
Second Schedule, paragraph 14, instead of the wider one in section 13, Act
of 1899. The notes on clauses relating to the Bill which led to the Act of
1940 merely state that the clause follows the Second Schedule, clause 14.

No other reasons are given as already stated.’

The following chart will show the relevant provisions: —

(English) Indian C.P. Code, 198, (Indian)
Arbitration Arbitration Second Schedule Arbitration
Act 1889 Act, 1899 Act, 1940
Section 10 Section 13 Paragraph 14 Section 16°

(1) In all cases of ref- (1) The Court may, The court may remit The court may from
erence to arbitration from time to time, the award or any time to time remit
the Court ora Judge remit the award to matter referred to the award or any
may from time to time the reconsideration arbitration to the matter referred
remit the matters re- of the arbitrators, reconsideration of arbitration to
ferred, or any of them, or umpire. the same arbitrator arbitrators or umpire
to the reconsideration (2) Where an award or umpire, upon for reconsideration
of the arbitrator or is remitted under such terms as it upon such terms as
umpire. sub-section (1), the thinks fit— it thinks

arbitrators or um- (a),
(2) Where anaward is pire shail, unless the (b),
remitted, the arbitra- court otherwise dir- (a) Wherethe award ()

(ares «
inthe: 50

tors or umpire shall, ects, make a fresh has left undetermined Khe tie.
unless the order other- award within three any of the cr. Code).
(2) Where an award

wise directs, make months after the matters referred to

their award within date of the order arbitration, or whe- is remitted under sub-
three months after the remitting the award. re it determines any section (1), the Court

date of the order. matter not referred shall fix

to arbitration, un- within which
less such matter can arbitrator um
be separated with- pire shall submit his

out affecting the deci
determination of the Provided

matters referred; time so fixed may be
extended by subse-
(b) Wherethe award quent order of the

is so indefinite as to Court.
be incapable of exe-
cation

(० Where an object- (3) An award remit-
ion to the legality ted under sub-sec-
of the award is app- tion (1) shall become
arent on the face of void on the failure of
it. Paragraph 15(1) the arbitrator
An award remitted umpire to recon:
under paragraph 14 der it and submit
becomes yoid onthe his decision within
failure of the arbit- the time fixed.

rator or umpire to
re-consider it. But
noaward shall beset
aside except on one
of the following gr-

ounds, namely:

etc.
Recommendation 5.13. In our opinion, it is advisable to substitute in section 16 a more
to amplify ample provision. Necessary amendment is recommended.?
section a

1. See Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 201.
2. Para 5-9, supra,
3. See para 5-19, infra.


45

5.14. The re-consideration under section 16 may be of the whole award, Section 16(1}—
or it may be of a particular question only. If the whole award is remitted, and partial
the effective award is the second one; but if only some of the matters are हु
remitted, it becomes somewhat difficult to decide how far the first award
remains effective. The question was discussed in a Calcutta case. The
view was taken that unless the court gave a direction under section 16(1)
to the effect that the award of the arbitrator should be limited to the mat-
ters remitted to him, the arbitrator can, in his second award, confirm or
repeat what he had said in the first award.

5.15. This is, of course, a question of form, and not of much impor- Obscurity as to
tance. But what happens to the first award in the meantime? The position the Position of
on the subject is rather obscure. The view taken in England is that the the first award,
award is apparently suspended.’ It is stated, however, in Halsbury,* that
the first award remains valid and enforceable, but in the Calcutta case,*
this proposition was regarded as ‘too broad’. Since, in India, the award
has to be made rule of the Court, the obscurity of the position is not likely
to lead to any practical difficulties. No change is, therefore, recommended
on this point.

5.16. In England,’ the question whether, after an arbitrator dies, the Remission to
award can be remitted to a new arbitrator, has arisen. The view there new
taken seems to be, that if, by the agreement to refer, the court has power arbitrator.
to appoint an arbitrator in place of the one who had died, and the arbi-
trator dies after making an award, the award may be remitted to a new
arbitrator appointed by the court in accordance with the provisions in the
agreement, but not otherwise. The problem does not seem to have arisen
in India. In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, Second Schedule, para-
graph 14, the words used were “same arbitrator”, but the word “same” does
not occur in the 1940 Act, and did not occur in the 1899 Act.’ The matter
may be left as it is, as such a situation may not be frequent.

5.17. We may now revert to the need for widening the scope of sec- Section 16
tion 16—a matter which we have already discussed.’ / It is to be noted that Scope for
at present when an award which is defective in matters of substance is i™Provement.
teceived by a court, then the only alternatives open to the court are to
remit the award or to set it aside. Power to set aside the award (in contrast
with the power of remission).* is a drastic one, because the court may’ then
supersede the reference, and direct that the agreement ceases to have effect
with respect to the difference refered. Such a drastic action may not always
be in conformity with the intentions of the parties. It may lead to unneces-
sary litigation and, in some cases, to injustice. If this approach is correct,
the power to remit should be worded widely rather than narrowly. In fact,
this power in the earlier Act—Indian Arbitration Act, 1899, section 13—
was very wide, because section 13(1) of that Act provided that “the court
may, from time to time, remit the award to the reconsideration of the arbi-
trators or an umpire”. There was no further limitation as to the grounds
of remission. In the English Act also, the power is expressed as a power
“to remit the matters referred or any of them” without any restriction as
to grounds.

In illustration of the utility of a wide power of remission, it may be
useful to refer to the situation of such “misconduct” on the part of the
arbitrator as does not irresistibly lead to the conclusion that there has been
any act involving moral turpitude. In fact, under the Act of 1899, judicial

«Brahma Sarup v. Diwan Chand, A.1.R. 1963 Cal. 583, 586.

Johnson v. Latham, (1851) 20 L.J.Q.B. 236, 238 (Earl J.) (Observations).
Halsbury, 3rd Edition , Vol.2, page 57, para 122.

Brahma Sarup 7. Biwan Chand. A.1.R. 1963 Cal. 583.

See Russell on Arbitration (1963), page 306.

See Sircar (1952), page 207.

Para 5-10 to 5-13, supra.

Para 5-6, supra

. Section 19.

7—7 M of L} & CA/ND/78

yenavaene


46

Position in
England.

Recommendation
as to section 16.

Section 30.

Section 17.

decisions accepted the proposition that where there has been misconduct
on the part of the arbitrator, the court could remit the matter for re-consi-
deration.!

5.18. In England, the Courts have refused to limit the power of re-
mission to the specified grounds It may be stated® in broad terms that
where the award or any part thereof if grossly wrong, the award may be
remitted. As was observed in an Australian case,'—“Arbitrators are not

selected to act despotically or illegally if that can be reasonably preven-
ted”.

A well-known English case* may be referred to in the context of tech-
nical misconduct. In that case, an arbitrator with whom a letter book was
left, read letters other than those put in evidence and his award was mate-
tially influenced thereby. The award was remitted on that ground. If such
a situation arose in India under section 16, the power of remission would
not be exercisable and the only course left open would be to set aside the
award.

It would, then, appear that there is everything to be said for a wide
jurisdiction in regard to remission of the award. This would not strictly
be an innovation, because the Act of 1899 did provide for a wide jurisdic-
tion in this regard. Moreover, it would be consistent with justice and con-
venience. At the same time, care has to be taken that scope is not created
for unnecessary interference by the court.

5.19. In the light of the above discussion,’ we recommend that in sec-
tion 16(1), the following clause should be added at the end’:-—

“(@) where for any other reason the court considers that in the
interests of justice it should, instead of setting aside the award, order
such remission.”

5.20. At this stage, we should refer to section 30 which confers on the
court power to set aside an award. Section 30 represents a stage between
the submission by the arbitrator of the award under section 14 and the pro-
nouncement of judgment in terms of the award under section 17. Modifica-
tion of an award and its remission are dealt with in sections 15 and 16,
already. dealt with.

5.21. We now proceed to section 17. Under section 17, where the
court sees no cause to remit the award or any of the matters referred to
arbitration for reconsideration or to set aside the award, the court shall,
after the time for making an application to set aside the award has expired,
or such application having been made, after refusing it, proceed to pro-
nounce judgment according to the award and upon the judgment so pro-
nounced a decree shall follow and no appeal shall lie from such decree

except on the ground that it is in excess of, or not otherwise in accodance
with, the award.

That part of section 17 which bars an appeal except on the specified
grounds has led to a conflict of decisions which can be best understood in
the light of the historical evolution of the law.

5.22. The scheme of section 17, which provides that no appeal shall

lie from a dectee in accordance with the judgment based upon an award
1, U.M. Choudhury & Co. v.Jivan Krishna Ghose & Son,(1922)1.L.R. 49 Cal, 646.
2. Margulies Brothers Ltd. v. Dafins Thomaides &Co. Ltd. (1958) 1, W.L.R. 983 400, 401.
3. Russell (1970), pages 377, 378.
4. Carry. Wodomga' Shira, (1924) 34 C.L.R. 234.
5. Devenport v. Vickery, (1861) 9 W.R. 701; Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India
(1942), page 20,
6. Para 5:10 to 5-13 and 5-17, 5-18.
7.

In present clause (c) of section 16 (1), the word “or” should be added at the end, asa
consequential change.



except on the ground that the decree is in excess of, or not otherwise in
accordance with, the award is that the parties having themselves chosen the
arbitrator, the award given by such an arbitrator should constitute final
adjudication of the dispute and it should not be open to the court of appeal
to substitute its own opinion for that of the arbitrator, in the same way as
a trial court could not do so. The right of appeal is consequently confined
only to that part of the decree which is stated to be in excess of, or not
in accordance with, the award.

5.23. There is a conflict of views on the point as to whether, where a
court passes a decree in terms of the award, an appeal would be maintain-
able on the ground that there was no valid reference to arbitration. It is
not possible to reconcile the two conflicting views held in the matter. One
view is that the appeal is maintainable.

The other view is that the appeal is not maintainable2-!

To set this controversy at rest, we are recommending amendment in
section 30 of the Act. As a result of that amendment, an appeal would be
maintainable under section 39(1)(vi) against an order which also disposes
of the objection that the award is invalid because there was no valid refe-
Tence to arbitration. Such objection, according to the amendment suggested
by us’, would fall within the ambit of section 30.

5.24. This takes us to section 18, which deals with power of the court
to pass certain interim orders. The section needs no change,

5.25. Under section 19, where an award has become void under sub-
section (3) of section 16 or has been set aside, the court may, by order,
supersede the reference and shall thereupon order that the arbitration agree-
ment shall cease to have effect with respect to the difference referred. The
section needs no change.

1, Durga Charan v. Gnaga Dhar, AAR. 1931 Cal. 109.

2. Golnur Bibi ९, Sheikh Abdus Samad, A.1.R. 1931 Cal. 211.
3. (a) Mohammad v. Valli, A.1.R. 1924 Bom, 324 (Pratt and Faweett, JJ.).

(b)  Batcha Sahib v. Abdul Gunny, A.1.R. 1914 Mad. 675.
4. The case law on the subject is collected in U. Sein Win v. Central Plumbring Co., ALR.
1935 Rang, 94 and in Golnur Bibi v. Sheikg Abdus Samad, A.1.R. 1931 (७1. 211.
See discussion in Saha & Co. v. Ishar Singh, A.I.R. 1956 Cal. 321, page 323, para 24
(Chakravatti C.J.). page 33, para 43 (S.R. Das Gupts J.), page 342, para 86(P.B. Muk-
harji, J.) and page 347, pura 130 (Bachawat, J.).
6, Para 8-12, infra.

a

Conflict of
views and its
solution,

Section 18,

Section 19,

47


Section 20.

Section 20(2)
Recommendation.

Section 20(3)
and 20(4) and
section 2065), .

CHAPTER 6

ARBITRATION WITH INTERVENTION OF THE COURT

6.1, Where no suit is pending, arbitration with intervention of the court
can still be resorted to under section 20. Sub-section (1) provides that where
any persons have entered into an arbitration agreement before the institution
of any suit with respec t to the subject matter of the agreement, or any part
of it, and where a difference has arisen with respect to which the agreement
applies, they or any of them, instead of proceeding under Chapter II, may
apply to a court having jurisdiction in the matter to which the agreement
relates, that the agreement be filed in court.

6.2, Sub-section (2) of section 20 requires that the application shall
be in writing and shall be numbered and registered as a suit between one
or more of the parties interested or claiming to be interested as plaintiff or
plaintifis and the remainder as defendant or defendants, if the application
has been presented by all the parties, or, if, otherwise, between the applicant
as plaintiff and other parties as defendants.

It appears that the language of this sub-section is slightly involved,
though, of course, the intention is quite clear. In the latter half of the
sub-section there are really two situations intended to be dealt with and it
would be conducive to clarity if the two situations are dealt with separately.

Accordingly, we recommend that sub-section (2) of section 20 should
be revised as under:

“(2) The application shall be in writing and shall be numbered
and registered—

(a) if the application has been presented by all the parties, as a suit
between one or more of the parties interested or claiming to be interested
as plaintiff or plaintiffs and the rest of them as defendant or defendants,
or

“(b) if the application has not been presented by all the parties,
as a suit between the applicant as plaintiff and the other parties as de-
fendants.”

6.3. Under sub-section (3) of section 20, the court shall direct notice
of the application to be given to all parties to the agreement other than the
applicants, requiring them to show cause within the time specified in the
notice why the agreement should not be filed.

Sub-section (4) of section 20 provides that where no sufficient cause 15
shown, the court shall order the agreement to be filed, and shall make an
order of reference to the arbitrator appointed by the parties, whether under _
the agreement or otherwise, or, where the parties cannot agree upon an
arbitrator, to an arbitrator appointed by the court.

Where the agreement names the arbitrator, and the named arbitrator
refuses to act, the question may arise whether the court can appoint ano-
ther arbitrator. This question is discussed separately.’

Finally, sub-section (5) provides that thereafter the arbitration shall

proceed in accordance with and shall be governed by the other provisions
of the Act so far as they can be made applicable.

These sub-sections need no change.

1. See discussion relating to section 8(1) (b), supra.

48


CHAPTER 7

ARBITRATION IN SUITS

“Sieg (SECTION 21-25)

7.1. Arbitration in suits forms the subject-matter of five sections con-
tained in Chapter 1५ of the Act. Under section 21, where, in any suit, all
the parties interested agree that any matter in difference between them in
the suit shall be referred to arbitration, they may at any time before
judgment is pronounced, apply in writing to the court for an order of refe-
rence. The situation where only some of the parties apply is dealt with
later under section 24.

Difficulties sometimes arise where, without obtaining a formal order
of the court under this section, parties, for the settlement of their mutual
differences, appoint an arbitrator who makes an award. This question
really falls within section 47, and will be discussed thereunder.

7.2. Previously, there was some controversy as to the question whether
an appellate court could refer a matter under dispute to arbitration for deci-
sion. That has been settled by a decision of the Supreme Court,’ which
answers the question in the affirmative, and holds that “court” includes
an appellate court, and “suit” mcludes an appeal. We think that this
proposition should be codified and recommend that in sections 21 and 24
and in the heading of the Chapter, wherever the word “suit” occurs, the
words “or appeal” be added.

7.3 We, therefore, recommend that section 21 should be revised as
under

“21. Where in any suit or @ppeal pending in any court, all the parties
interested agree that any matter in difference between them in the suit
or appeal shall be referred to arbitration, they may, at any time before
judgment is pronounced, apply in writing 0 that Court for an order
of reference.”

7.4. Section 22 provides that the arbitrator (in an arbitration in a suit)
shall be appointed in such manner as may be agreed upon between the parties.
It follows, therefore, that the initial appointment must be by agreement,
though, as regards the filling up of the vacancies arising subsequently, the
provisions of sections 8, 10, 11 and 12 apply by virtue of section 25, subject
to the proviso to section 25. .

No further comments are required on this section.

7.5. Sub-section (1) of section 23 provides that the court shall, by
order, refer to the arbitrator the matter in difference which he is required
to determine and shall in the order specify such time as it thinks reasonable
for the making of the award.

Under sub-section (2), where a matter is referred to arbitration, the
court shall not, save in the manner and to the extent provided in this Act,
deal with such matter in the suit. This is really the crucial provision in this
Chapter, because it is by virtue of this sub-section that the result is esta-
blished that once the parties agree to refer a pending dispute to arbitration,
the jurisdiction of the court is barred except as expressly provided in the

ct.

No changes are needed in this section.

1. See discussion relating to section 47, Chapter 10.
2. Nachiappav. Subramaniam, A.1.R. 1960 S.C. 307, 317 para 36.

49

Section 21.

Section 21 and
Appellate Court.

Recommendation
as to section 21.

Section 22.

Section 23.


50

Section 24
Recommendation
to amend.

Section 25.

7.6. The situation where some only of the parties to the suit apply
to have the matters in difference between them referred to arbitration under
section 21, is dealt with in section 24.

To put the matter in broad terms, the criterion adopted is that of
separability. In the first place, the section provides that the court may, if
it thinks fit, so refer such matters to arbitration provided that the same
can be separated from the rest of the subject matter of the suit, in the
manner provided in section 21; but the suit shall continue so far as it
telates to the parties who have not joined in the said application and to
matters not contained in the said reference as if no such application had
been made, and an award made in pursuance of such a reference shal! be
binding only on the parties who have joined in the application.

The only change required in section 24 is the addition of the word
“appeal”.'. After such addition, the section will read as under: —

Revised section 24

“24. Where some only of the parties to a suit or appeal apply to have
the matters in difference between them referred to arbitration in ac-
cordance with, and in the manner provided by, section 21, the Court
may, if it thinks fit, so refer such matters to arbitration (provided that
the same can be separated from the rest of the subject matter of the
suit or appeal) in the manner provided in that section, but the suit
or appeal shall continue so far as it relates to the parties who have
not jointed in the said application and to matters not contained in the
said reference as if no such application had been made, and an award
made in pursuance of such a reference shall be binding only on the
parties who have joined in the application.”

7.7. Section 25 provides that the provisions of the other chapters
shall, so far as they can be made applicable, apply to arbitrations under
this chapter. Under the proviso to the section, the court may, in any of
the circumstances mentioned in sections 8, 10, [1 and 12, instead of filling
up the vacancy or making the appointments, make an order superseding
the arbitration and proceed with the suit and when the court makes
an order superseding the arbitration under section 19, it shall proceed with
the suit.

The language of this section appears to be clear enough. It is, there-
fore, surprising that attempts were made in the past to argue that section
14 would not apply to arbitrations in ordinary suits. None of the attempts
succeeded.

We have no changes to recommend in the section.

1, See discussion as to section 21, supra
2. Ram Bharosey v. Pearey Lal, A.UR. 1957 All. 265, para 4.
3, Ramkrishnamma v. Lakshmibavamma, A.1.R. 1958 A.P. 497, 501, para 5.


CHAPTER 8

PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ARBITRATIONS

8.1. With section 26 begins a group of provisions which are common
to all arbitrations. That section provides that save as otherwise provided in
this Act, the provisions of this Chapter (sections 26 to 38) shall apply to
all arbitrations. The section needs no change.

8.2. Section 27(1) provides that unless a different intention appears in
the arbitration agreement, the arbitrators or umpire may, if they think
fit, make an interim award, and sub-section (2) of the same section pro-
vides that references in the other provisions to an award include an interim
award,

No changes of substance are required in this section. But it may be
useful to elaborate several aspects of interim awards. Interim awards, as
understood in English case-law on the corresponding provision’ of the Arbi-
tration Act, 1950, have a wide scope. The award may be a direction analo-
gus to an interlocutory injunction which it to be’ operative during the
pendency of the arbitration proceedings,’ or the award may direct payment
which is to be adjusted in part satisfaction of a large claim—the larger
claim being left to be quantified by the final award!

Then, there is a third example of inferim award, a determination of
some matter in a suit, leaving other matters in issue to be determined by
a later ward. An example is furnished by an English case,‘ in which there
was a claim for damages for breach of two contractors, and the interim
award determined the claim in regard to the first contract only. The arbi-
trator in that case was empowered to make one or more awards at his
discretion.

8.3. Section 28 deals with extension of the time for making the
award. As the section stands at present, there is no restriction as to the
period of extension. In our view, it is necessary that indefinite extension
of the time for making the award should be guarded against. It is desir-
able to provide that no extension should be granted so as to allow the
making of the award more than one year after the arbitrator’s or umpire’s
entering on the reference, unless the court, for special and adequate reasons
to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that such extension is necessary.

Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the following proviso
below section 28:

“Provided that no extension shall be granted so as to allow the
making of the award more than one year after entering on the reference,
unless the court, for special and adequate reasons to be recorded in
writing, is satisfied that such extension is necessary.”

8.4. Under section 29, “where and in so far as an award is for the
payment of money the court may, in the decree, order interest, from the
date of the decree at such rate as the court deems seasonable to be paid

on the principal sum as adjudged by the award and confirmed by the
decree.”

The section needs no change.

‘Compara section 14, Arbitration Act, 1960 (English).
Wringtson v. Bywater, (1838) 150 English Reports 1114.
Woodrow v, Trawler (Whitesh and Crinsby) Ltd., (1930) K.B. 176.

Wrightson v. Bywater, (1838) 150 English Reports 1114, Halsbury, 4th Edition, Vol.2,
2, Page 609 footnote 6.

आओ

51

Section 26.

Section 27.

Section 28
Amendment
recommended.

Section 29.


52

Section 30.

Section 300.

Position
under the

Code of 1908,

Conflict
under
1940 Act.

We have already discussed the question of the arbitrators’ power to
award interest.’

8.5. We now proceed to a consideration of section 30, which reads—

“30. An award shall not be set aside except on one or more of
the following grounds, namely :—

(a) that an arbitrator or umpire has misconducted himself or the
proceedings;

(b) that an award has been made after the issue of an order
by the court superseding the arbitration or after arbitration
proceedings have become invalid under section 35;

(०) that an award has been improperly procured or is otherwise
invalid.”

Clauses (a) and (b) need no comments.

8.6. The question whether, in section 30(c), the words “that an award...
is otherwise invalid” are to be read ejusdem generis with what precedes
them, or whether they cover all grounds of invalidity of awards has come
up before the courts. The nature of the controversy cannot be fully under-
stood without a brief study of the history of the provision.

These words did not occur in the Act of 1899, section 14. Nor they
did occur in the Code of Civil Procedure of 1882, section 521. They were
added for the first time in the Code of Civil! Procedure, 1908, Second Sche-
dule, paragraph 15. The Privy Council had held? in 1902 that the legislature
intended to give finality to awards and to decrees passed in accordance
therewith. Since, under the Code of 1882, an award could be set aside
only on the grounds mentioned in section 521 of that Code, the grievance
arose that as its validity could not be contested on any other ground, it
became final.’ The addition of these words in the Code of 1908 was thus
intended to widen the scope of interference by the courts.

8.7. But the question arose whether the words “otherwise invalid” in
the Code of 1908 were or were not to be construed ejusdem generis with
the words occurring in the preceding portion of paragraph 15 of the second
Schedule to the Code.

On this point, there has been a conflict of judicial view.'-*

The undermentioned cases took the wide view,’ while a few decisions
took the narrower view’ with reference to the Code of 1908.

8.8. There has been a conftict of judicial view on the scope of the
words “is otherwise invalid” in section 30 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 also.

1. See section 13 A, supra

2. en Khan v. Muhammed Hasan, (1902) 20 Indian Appeals 51; I.L.R. 29 Cal. 167

3. See discussion in Lutawan Kubar v. Lachiva, A.1.R. 1914 All. 447, 449 (Banerjee J.)

4, Seereview of caselawin Dooly Chandy. Mamuji, A.1.R.1917.Cal481 (reviews cases).

5. Durga Charan v. Ganga Dhar, A.I.R. 1931 Cal. 108

6. Golnur Bibiv. Abdus Samad, A.I.R. 1931 Cal 211.

7. Mahomad v. Valli, A.1.R. 1924 Bom 324.

8. Suryanarayana y. Sarabhaiah, 21 Madras Law Journal 263, 278; Paruck, Arbitration
Act, 1955, page 241.

9. Mariam y. Amina, .L.R. (1937) All. 371, A.LR. 1937 All. 65, 59, 74 (Majority of the

Full Bench).

10, See case law reviewed in Kishan Chand v. Takhit Ram, A.1R. 1939 Sind 241 (F.B.)
(reviews case law)


53

One view which has been taken is that these words shouk! receive a
narrow construction and be taken ejusdem generis with the words occurring
in the preceding portion of the section.'-+

8.9 The other view is that these words are to be construed widely**
and not to be taken ejusdem generis with the preceding words in the
section.

In a case arising under paragraph 15 of the Second Schedule to the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, before the enactment of Arbitration Act of
1940, the Allahabad High Court’ by majority held that the above words
should not be construed ejusdem generis with the preceding words. Iqbal
Ahmed J. in his dissenting judgment, however, took the view that these
words should be construed ejusdem generis with the preceding words.

8.10. The Privy Council in a subsequent case® approved of the view Privy Council
of Iqbal Ahmed J. Iybal Ahmed J., in arriving at the conclusion that the view and the
words “otherwise invalid” should be construed. ejusdem generis with the altered of
preceding words, high-lighted the fact that the words “otherwise invalid” the 1946 Act.
were not contained in a separate clause. The Arbitration Act of 1940 to
some extent departed from the scheme of paragraph 15 of the Second
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, by putting the words “or is
otherwise invalid” along with the words “that an award has been impro-
perly pronounced” in a separate clause. A view can consequently be
taken’ that the reasoning which weighed with Iqbal Ahmed J. does not
hold good in the face of the provisions of section 30 of the Arbitration Act,

1940, wherein the words in question have been put im a separate clause.

8.11. The importance of the question as to whether the words “is Importance of

otherwise invalid” should be construed ejusdem generis has arisen in those the question.
cases wherein the validity of the award has been challenged on the ground
that there was no valid reference to arbitration. The consequences which
flowed from taking one view or the other were crucial, as they impinged
upon the right of appeal against an order dealing with the objections to
an award on the ground that there was no valid reference to arbitration.
One view was that such objections fell only within the ambit of section
33 and not that of section 30 and therefore there was no right of appeal
under section 39 of the Arbitration Act. The other view was that such
objections also fell under section 30, being covered by the expression “is
otherwise invalid” and, as such, an appeal against such an order would be
maintainable under section 39(1vi) of the Act.

8.12. To resolve this controversy and to put the matter beyond any Recommendation
pale of uncertainty, we are suggesting the insertion of an Explanation to as to section 30,
section 30. The Explanation would read:

“Explanation.—The expression ‘or is otherwise invalid’ includes
the ground that there was no valid arbitration agreement or no valid
reference to arbitration.”

8.13. At this stage, we would like to deal with the question how far Section 30A

an arbitrator can be compelled to give evidence. While there is, in general, {proposed)— ot
no legal bar to summoning an arbitrator as a witness,” it is also a dictum {0 be compelled
to disclose the
Basantalv. Surendra Parasad, A.1R. 1957 Pat, 417, 421, para 26, 37 and 45. reasons for the
Mangal Singh v. Nawab Singh, A.1.R. 1962 All, 219

Prem Sagar v. Security and Finance Ltd.. A.1.R. 1968 Delhi, 21, 24 para 4-5 (F.B.)

See case law reviewed in Saha & Co. v. Ishar Singh. A.J.R.1956 Ca! 321 (F.B.)
AR. Savkur vy. Amrital Kalidas, A.1.R. 1954 Bom 293.

Saha & Co. v. Ishar Singh Krispal Singh & Co., A.1.R. 1956 Cal 321.

Mariam ९. Amina, A.1.R. 1937 All. 65,74 (F.B.)

Chhaba Lal v. Kalu Mal, A.1.R. 1946 P.C. 72.

9. Compara Om prakash v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1963 All. 242
10. Amir Begum v. Badruddin, 1.L.R. 36 All. 336 (P.C.)

. 87M of LJ & CAJND/78

eAAreenn


Recommendation
to insert
section 30A.

Sections 31, 32
and 33—Scheme.

laid down by high authority that evidence admitted as relevani on a charge
of dishonesty or partiality is not to be used for a different purpose, namely,
to scrutinise the decision of the arbitrator on matters which are within his
jurisdiction and on which his decision is final.’

8.14. We find that the matter has been discussed in a recent judgment
of the Supreme Court: were it has been pointed out that on broad prin-
ciple and public policy, it is highly obnoxious to summon an arbitrator
to give evidence in vindication of his award. The following observations
made in the judgment are pertinent : —

“Tf arbitrators are summoned mindlessly whenever applications for
setting aside the award are inquired .into, there will be few to under-
take the job. The same principle holds good even if the prayer is for
modification or for remission of the award. The short point is that
the Court must realise that its process should be used sparingly and
after careful deliberation, if the arbitrator should be brought mto the
witness box. in no case can he be summoned merely to show how he
arrived at the conclusions he did’ In the present case, we have been
told that the arbitrator had gone wrong in his calculation end this
had to be extracted from his mouth by being examined or cross-exa-
mined. We do not think that every Munsif and every judge, every
Commissioner and every arbitrator has to undergo a cross-examination
before his judgment or award can be upheld by the appellate Court.
How vicious such an approach would be is apparent on the slightest
Teflection,”

The principle emphasised by the Supreme Court is that an arbitrator
cannot be compelled to disclose the reasons of bis award.

8.15. We have set out our reasons ealier‘ why it should not be obli-
gatory for an arbitrator to give reasons in support of his award. If an
arbitrator cannot, under the scheme of the Act, be compelled to give reasons
in support of his award, there appears to be no justification for compelling
him to disclose them by calling him as a witness in Court.

We are, therfore, of the view that it would be convenient if legisla-
tive effect is given to this principle which, of course, applies to umpires
also. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of a new section—section
30A—as follows in the Arbitration Act:—

“30A. No arbitrator or wnpire shall be compelled, whether in a@
proceeding before a Court or otherwise, to answer any question relat-
ing to the reasons of his award.

8.16. This takes us to the next group of sections—sections 31 to 33.
These sections are parts of an integrated scheme designed to expedite the
disposal of objections to arbitration agreements or awards. The provisions
inserted are both positive and negative. They are positive, in the sense
that a party desiring to challenge the existence or validity of an arbitra-
tion agreement or award or to have its effect determined must apply to the
court, which will decide the question on affidavits.’ Further, all questions
regarding the validity, effect or existence of the award or agreement shall
be decided by the court in which the award has been or may be filed’. Appli-
cations regarding the conduct of arbitration proceedings or otherwise arising
out of such proceedings should also be made to such court’

1. Buecluch v. Metropolitan Board, (1972) Law Reports 5 House of Lords 418.

2. Union of India v. Orient Engineering and Commercial Co, Ltd.,(1978.)2 Supreme Court
Journal 83 (Issue dated 15th July, 1978).

Emphasis added.
Chapter 4, supra.

Section 33.

Section 31(2), earlier half,
Section 31(3), earlier half,

मेजर


The provisions are negative, in the sense that oniy the court in which
the award has been or may be filed, can decide such questions and appli-
cations.' And, further, even if the competent courts are more than one,
once an application in any reference has been made in a competent court,
that court alone has jurisdiction over the arbitration proceedings and over
all subsequent applications arising out of that reference and the arbitra-
tion procedings.” Lastly, no suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever for a
decision upon the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement or award,
nor shall any arbitration agreement or award be set aside, amended, modi-
fied or in any way affected, otherwise than as provided in the Act.’

These provisions were inserted for the first time in 1940. Speaking
briefly, the main impact of these provisions is in (i) the prohibition of a
suit, (ii) the bringing of al! questions relating to awards and arbitration
agreement in one court, thereby avoiding conflicting adjudications,‘ and (iii)
the provision of a speedy remedy to a party objecting to a reference or
award, under section 33.

8.17. These sections were inserted as a result of the recommendations Civil Justice

made by the Civil Justice Committee.’ The Civil Justice Committee pointed Committee.
out, that under the Arbitration Act of 1899, if a question arose as to the
validity of the submission or jurisdiction of the arbitrators or as to regula-
Tity of the proceedings, the party objecting had various courses open. He
could obtain an injunction to prevent the arbitration proceedings from
taking place or from being brought into a conclusion. He could wait.
until the award was made, and apply to the court to have it set aside
or declared to be void. If he desired to defeat the reference, he could file
a suit for a dec'aration of some sort, about the matter in dispute, the
object being that by thus ‘bringing the matter in diflerence before the court
of law, the arbitration would become fruitless or would at least sesult in
delay. Again, he could wait until the award was put in execution, and
then launch a suit asking for an injunction to restrain its execution, or could
seek a declaration that the submission was obtained by fraud or that the
arbitrator had misconducted himself and that the award was not binding upon
him.

8.18. I¢ was in view of these delaying tactics that the Civil Justice Com-
mittee felt, that what seemed to be most required—“In the case of every
arbitration one court and one only should be the forum in which ail
questions re‘ating to the validity of the award should be finally determined”.

Further, after noting that suits were filed or could be filed at more
than one place in relation to the arbitration proceedings, the Committee
considered it necessary to require all persons, who desired to challenge
awards made by arbitrators in Presidency Towns and other commercial
centres, to bring their proceedings in the court of the town. The agreement
could contain a clause about the place where the proceedings could be
taken. When the arbitration had been held or was being held under such a
clause, the law should, in the opinion of the Committee, require all ques-
tions to be determined by the court of the town, whether the factum and
validity of the arbitration be challenged or not. ‘the Committee also
wanted a total prohibition of the practice of granting injunctions to res-
train arbitration proceedings. Finally, the Committee felt that an amend-
ment of the law would be beneficial to the trade unless a summary method
for disposing of objections to awards was provided, and a provision effec-
tive to prevent interference of any other court was made.

8.19. In short, the cbject of the legislature in introducing sections 31, Object of
32 and 33 was thus to entrust the decision of the relevant disputes to the sections 31—33

Section 31(2), latter half; and section 37(3), latter half.
Section 31(4).

Section 32.

See para 8-20 and 8-23, infra.

Civil Justice Committee (1924-25) Report, pages 210 to 216, paragraphs 5, 6, 13
and 18. N.D. Basu, Arbitration Act (1977), pages 948 to 950,

yaeRe


56

Section 31.

Section 31(1)
and jurisdiction
over a part of
subject matter.

Section 31(4)
and meaning
of “in any
reference”.

specified court, and to require the parties to bring that dispute in the form
of a petition, as has been explained by the Supreme Court.’

With these introductory observations, we proceed to an examination of
each section in this group.

8.20. Section 31(1) provides that subject to the provisions of the Act,
an award may be filed in any court having jurisdiction in the matter to
which the reference relates. The principal object of the section is to evoid
conflict’ between different forums in respect of arbitration proceedings after
the award," by defining the jurisdiction of the court.’.

Sub-section (2) of section 31 is equally mandatory: nctwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force and save
as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions regarding the validity,
effect or existence of an award or an arbitration agreement between the
parties to the agreement or persons claiming under them shall be decided
by the court in which the award under the agreement has been, or may be
filed, and by no other court. While sub-section (1) is primarily intended to
define which is a competent court, sub-section (2) is intended to exclude the
jurisdiction of the other courts.

Under section 31(3), all applications regarding the conduct of arbitra-
tion proceedings or otherwise arising out of such proceedings, shall be
made to the court where the award has been, or may be, filed and to no
other court. This sub-section assumes that applications regarding the con-
duct of arbitration proceedings can be made; such applications, it may
be noted, arise under several provisions of the Arbitration Act.

Section 31(4) is intended to deal with those situations where even after
compliance with three sub-sections of the section, there may be two
or more courts wherein proceedings under those sub-sections may be taken.
It lays down that notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act
or in any other law for the time being in force, where “in any 1¢ference”
any application under this Act has been made in a court competent to en-
tertain it, that court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitration pro-
ceedings and all subsequent applications arising out of that reference and
the arbitration proceedings shall be made in that court, and in no other
court.

The expression “in any reference”, has been construed as meaning “in
the matter of a reference to arbitration”*

8.21. The expression “court” in section 31(1) must be read with the
definition. The definition of “court” in section 2(c), so far as is material,
states that “court” means a civil court “having jurisdiction to decide the
questions forming the subject-matter of the reference if the same had been
the subject-matter of a suit”.

8.22. The expression “in any reference” in section 31(4) is significant.
Both sections 31 and 34 were enacted “to avoid conflict and scramble”:* but
the nature of the conflict and scramble intended to be avoided is different in
the two sections. Section 34 avoids conflict between the private tribunal and
the public tribunal. By the grant of stay under section 34, conflict is avoid-
ed. The conflict avoided by section 31 is, on the other hand, the conflict
between different courts in respect of arbitration proceedings, held pursuant
to the reference. Only one court will control such proceedings, and that is
why it is provided that the court in which the first application is made “in
the reference”, shall have control over the subject-matter.

1. Jawahar Lal Barman ९. Union of India, ALR. 1962 S.C. 378.

2. Harbans Singh v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1962 Cal. 659, 661, para 4.
3. See also para 8-23, infra.

4, Bengal Jute Mills v. Jewraj Hiralal, A.1.R. 1944 Cal, 304, 305.

5. Harbans Singh v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1961 Cal. 659.

6, Harbans Singh v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1961 Cal, 659, 661, para 4.


37

8.23. The theory of the Act is that in the case of every arbitration, one Correct position.

court, and only one, should be the forum in which all questions relating
to the validity of the award should be finally determined.

8.24. While conflicting judicial proceedings are solved by sections 31 and
34, the finality of arbitration agreements and awards is secured by section
32, which may be described as the pivotal section in the Act. It begins with
the words “Notwithstanding any law for the time being in force” and
provides that no suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever for a decision upon
the existence, effect or validity of an arbitration agreement or award nor
shall an arbitration agreement or award be enforced, set aside, amended,
modified or in any way affected otherwise than as provided in the Act.
This section must be read with the next section—section 33—under which
the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement or award can be
challenged or the effect of either determined by the court on an application.

It may incidentally be mentioned that in section 32, the prohibition
against enforcing an arbitration agreement or award was expressly inserted
by the Amendment Act of 1963! in view of the conflict of decisions on the
subject.”

8.25. The principle of section 32 is sound enough. But certain questions
of detail have arisen, which we shall deal with presently. Where a substan-
tive agreement contains an arbitration clause, and the validity of the
Substantive agreement itself is attacked, the question may arise whether the
suit is barred under section 32. In certain cases, section 33 may, of course,
be invoked and the procedure of application utilised. Thus, according to
one view,’ sections 32 and 33 do not apply to suit for a declaration that
there never was a contract or that the contract was void,’ and that such a
suit was maintainable, notwithstanding the ban in section 32.

According to another view,” the case falls under section 33.

We do not express any opinion as to which view is correct, because
neither view necessitates any amendment.

8.26. The bar imposed by section 32 on a “suit on an award” naturally
raises the question how far a defence on the basis of an award 1s barred.
Whether a party can set up an award by way of defence, when the award
has not been filed, is a question which has arisen in the courts. There seems
to be a conflict of decisions on the point." One view is that the prohibition
in section 32 is confined merely to व suit by which a decision upon the exis-
tence etc. of the agreement or award is sought, and does not extend’ to a
defence based on a private award.

A contrary view is that section 32 is wide enough to bar such a defence.’

Section 32.

ion 32

and validity
of substantive
agreements.

Section 32 and
use of award as
a defence.

8.27. The conflict of decisions on the subject was noted by the Supreme Judgment of

Court also in one of its judgments.” But the Court did not think it necessary
to express a considered opinion on that disputed question. It merely ob-
served, that the defendant in that case was not relying on the award as
such, but on the fact that after the award the parties had, by mutual agree-
ment, settled the dispute and a division of property had been effected.

1, Amendment Act 47 of 1963.
2. Dharma Ganda v. Ganapari Ganda, A.1.R. 1964 Orissa 21, 24 Paras 16 and 18 (reviews
case law).
3. State of Bombay v. Adamjee, 1.L.R. (1952) 2 Cal. 49; ALR. 1951 Cal 147.
4. See also Banwari Lal v. Board of Trustees, Hindu College, Delhi, ALR. 1948 E.P.
165, 174, paras 33&34 (commenting on Deokinandan ४. Basantlal, A.I.R. 1941 Cal 52).
5. Municipal Board v. Eastern U.P. Electric Supply Co. Ltd., A.1R. 1958 All. 506 .
6. The case law is discussed in detailin Srinivasa Rao v. Narasimha Rao, A.A.R. 1963 AP.
193, 197, para 12,and Mohamed Yusuf v. Mohamed Hussain, A.1.R. 1964 Mad. 1(F.B.).
7. Kedar Nath v. Ambika, ALR. 1974 All. 37.
8. Lachman v. Makar, A.1.R. 1954 Pat, 27.
9, Seonarain Lalv. Prabhu Chand, A.1.R, 1958 Pat. 252, 258.
10. Panamdass Suganram v. Hanikyam Pillai, A.1.R. 1960 A.P. 59 (F.B.).
11, Mohamad Yusufv. Mohamed Hussain, A.1R. 1964 Mad. 6, 7, Para 18, 20.
12. Kashinathsa v. Narsingasa, A.1.R. 1961 8.C. 1077, 1083, para 22.

‘Supreme Court.


58

Recommendation
10 prohibit
defence.

Section 32 and
challenge on.
award in defence

Recommendation
as to section 32.

Section 33,

However, the Supreme Court observed:

“It may be sufficient to observe that where an award made in
arbitration out of court is accepted by the parties and it is acted upon
voluntarily and a suit is thereafter sought to be filed by one of the
partics ignoring the acts done in pursuance of the acceptance of the
award, the defence that the suit is not maintainable is not founded on
the plea that there is an award which bars the suit but that the parties
have by mutual agreenient settled the dispute, and that the agreement
and the subsequent «<tings of the parties are binding.”

8.28. The question then arises whether a provision should be inserted
and, if so, in what form. Cases where an award has been followed by overt
acts of the pariies, may not present much difficulty in view of the observa-
tions of the Supreme Court;* but the position regarding other cases is un-
certain. In our opinion, it is desirable to clarify the position. We recom-
mend necessary amendment* by providing that an award shall not be plead-
ed as a defence, except in certain specified cases,

8.29. The question whether the validity of an award can be attacked
in defence is one which has been discussed in several cases. It has been
held that its validity cannot be so chatlenged.'

8.30. After giving the matter our careful consideration, we recommend
that section 32 should be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and, after
sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-sections should be
inserted:

(To be added in section 32%

“Q) An award shall not be pleaded in defence to any suit, on the
ground that the award has determined any matter in issue in the suit: but
nothing in this sub-section shall—

(ai affect any decree passed under section 17, or

(b) prejudice any right of a person to apply for a stay of the suit
On the ground that there has been made an award which dcter-
mines the matter in issue and that he proposes to obtain a judg-
ment under Section 17 in terms of the award.

“(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall preclude any person from plcad-
ing any award in defence—

(a) where the award has been accepted by the parties, so as to cons-
litule an agreement, or

(b) where the award has been acted upon, so as to constitute
estoppel.”

8.31. Section 33 constitutes a qualification of section 32. The general
rule in section 32 is that an arbitration agreement or award cannot be challen-
ged by a suit and it cannot, in any way, be affected otherwise than as
provided in the Act. The procedure for contesting the agreement or award
in certain circumstances is Jaid down in section 33. In its main paragraph,
that section provides that any party to an arbitration agreement or any
person claiming under him desiring to challenge the existence or validity of
an arbitration agreement or an award or to have the effect of either deter-
mined shall apply to the court and the court shall decide the question on
affidavits. There is, however, a proviso whereunder, where the court deems
it just and expedient, it may set down the application for hearing on other
evidence also, and it may pass such orders for discovery and particulars
as it may do in a suit.

1. See also Satish Kumar v. Surinder Kumar, A.1.R. 1970 5.0, 833, 837, para 8.
2. Para 8-27, supra.

3. See draft, para 8-30, infra.

4,

5.

Harda Municipality v. H, Electric Supply Co. A.I.R. 1964 M.P. 101, 104, para 7, 8,9.
Para 8.26 to 8.28, supra.


59

8.32. The words “any party to an arbitration agreement’, in section 33, Section 33 and

have raised some controversy as to whether they include a person who is
alleged to be a party to the agreement, but who denies its existence. It has
been held’ that these words include a person who is alleged to be a party
to the agreement.*

In a Supreme Court case.’ it had been held that a party affirming the
existence of a contract was entitled to file an application under the Act.

8.33. The various possible alternative courses which a party may adopt
when the factual existence of an agreement is denied, have been elaborated
in a Bombay case.‘

8.34. There is, however, a conflict of decisions on this point. Accord-
ing to one view, the word “existence” in section 33 connotes legal existence
and not factual existence, and section 33 is available only to a party to an
arbitration agreement and would apply only when the party admitted the
factual existence of the arbitration agreement, but challenged its legality.*-°
A contrary view has, however,’-* been expressed in another decision of the
same High Court.

The Madras High Court has taken the view’ that the expression “any
party” in section 33 must include a person who is put forward as being a
party to an arbitration agreement, but who does not admit its existence.

To set the controversy at rest and to clarify the position, we recom-
mend that in section 33, the words “including one alleged to be a party”
should be added after the words “Any party”.

8.35. To preserve a right to arbitration, it is essential that no step should
be taken in the suit before an application is made to stay it. Based on this
principle, section 34 confers on the court a power to stay legal proceedings
where there is an arbitration agreement. There are certain procedural
requisites in this regard and stay is to be granted only if the court is satisfi-
ed, as to the following two essential ingredients—"”

“(i) that there is no sufficient reason why the matter should not be
referred in accordance with the agreement, and

(ii) that the applicant was, at the time when the proceedings were
commenced, and still remains, ready and willing to do all things
necessary to the proper conduct of the arbitration.”

8.36. The first requirement obviously confers on the court a discretion
not to grant stay if there is sufficient reason why the matter should not be
referred to arbitration. The second requirement is based on the principle
that the applicant who invokes the arbitration clause and claims stay of
judicial proceedings on that account must show his readiness and willing-
ness at all material times for the proper conduct of the arbitration proceed-
ings.

1. Mls Vallabh Pitte v. Narsinghdas, A.1.R. 1963 Bom. 157, 161, 162.
2. For previous Bombay cases, see—
(i) Bhagwan y. Atma, A.I.R. 1945 Bom. 494;
(ii) Umadat v. Chandra, A.1.R. 1947 Bom 94.
3, Jawaharlal Barman v. Union of India, A.1.R. 1962 8.C. 378.
M|s Vallabh Pitte v. Narsinghdas, A.1.R. 1963 Bom 157.
Maniklal v. Shiv Jute Balling Co. Ltd., 52 C.W.N. 389 (Das J.) referred to in A.LR.

1951 Cal, 147, 148, para 16.

6. Baijnath v. Chhotu Lal, 52 C.W.N. 397 (Clough J.). referred to in A.L.R. 1951 Cal 147,
148, para 16.

7. Chatturbhuj ९. Bhiam Chand Choria and Sons, 53 C.W.N. 410 (Sinha J.), referred to
in A.LR, 1961 Cal, 147, 148, para 16.

8. The point was discussed in Bajrang v. Agarwal, A.1.R. 1950 Cal. 267, 268, paras 11-12
Crater). The point decided there was that a party affirming the award could not
apply.

9. Muthu Kutty v. Varee Kutty, A.1.R. 1950 Mad. 64.

10. The numerals indicating the two requirements do not appearin the text of the section
but have been added by us for facility of discussion.

ye

denial of factnal
existence of
agreement by
alleged party.

Various.
alternatives.

Conflict of
decision as

to the scope
of expression
“existence”
and recommen-
dation to
amend

section 33,

Section 34.


60

Expression
“Judicial
authority”.

Section 34 and
foreign awards,

The expression
“step in the
proceedings”.

Recommendation
to amend
section 34,

Amendment as to
suits brought
under summary
procedure,

Section 35
Effect of legal
proceedings on
arbitration.

8.37, The expression “judicial authority” was substituted (in section 19
of the Indian Arbitration Act of 1899) by Act 21 of 1933, because, before
that amendment, there was a conflict of decisions as to whether the expres-
sion “court” which was used in that section included a Court of Small
Causes. Since the expression now used is a “judicial authority”, a Court of
Small Causes can stay the suit under this section, if the suit is pending in
that Court.’

8.38. The section applies to foreign awards also, as has been held by
the Supreme Court.

8.39. The expression “steps in the proceedings” in section 34 has led
to considerable controversy as would appear from the case law. The
expression has been construed as including even a step in an interlocutory
proceeding.' Even an application for adjournment to file the written state-
ment has been regarded as a step in the proceeding.’-*

An oral application for extension of the time to file an affidavit in an
interlocutory application for injunction has been held to amount to taking a
step in the proceeding.’ It would thus appear that while the general
principle‘-’ that the step in proceeding should display an unequivocal inten-
tion to proceed with the suit is well established, its application in actual
practice leads to difficulties.

This position causes hardship, and unnecessarily deprives a party of
taking advantage of the arbitration clause.

8.40. We recommend that to avoid such difficulties, the words “or
taking other steps in the proceedings” should be deleted from section 34.
The result will be that an application can be made by the defendant under
the section before filling the written statement. This would not, however,
take away the discretion of the court so that if the defendant is guilty of
delay, the court can in its discretion, take note thereof.

8.41. To make the provisions of section 34 applicable to suits brought
under Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (summary procedure),
we recommend that the words “or in a suit instituted under Order XX XVII
of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 before filing an
application for leave to defend under sub-rule (5) of rule 3 of that Order”
should be substituted in place of the words to be deleted.”

8.42. Section 35 provides that a reference or award shall not become
invalid by reason only of the commencement of legal proceedings upon the
subject-matter of the reference; but after such legal proceedings have been
commenced between all the parties to the reference and a notice given to
the arbitrators or umpire, all further proceedings in a pending reference
shall (unless stay of the suit is granted under section 34) be invalid.

Previous to the enactment of this section, the law was in an unsatis-
factory condition. In the English case of Dofman." it was held, that an
award made in an arbitration proceeding after an action was brought (in
respect of the difference to which the arbitration clause applies) was bad,

1. Basant Cotton Mills v. Dhingra Bros., UALR. (15 v. Dhingra Bros., 1.L.R. (1950) 1 Cal. 546; A.1.R. Cal 1949 684 .
2. Machael Golodetzv. Serajuddin, A.1.R. 1963 S.C. 1044,

Duni Chand Sons and Company v. F.G. Industries Ltd., ALR. 1962 Cal 541 (reviews
history and case law).

Amrit Raj v. Dolichia Finnanshiah, A..R. 1966 Cal 315.
Radhakrishnav. State of Jammu & Kashmir, A.1.R.19643 &K 75,
Union of India v. Girish Chandra, A.1.R. 1953 All. 149.

Delux Film Distributors Ltd. v. Sukumar, A.1.R. 1960 Cal 206,
Nur-ud-din v. Abu Ahmed, A.1.R. 1951 Bom 357.

Subal Chandra v. Mohamed Ibrahim, A.1.R. 1943 Cal. 484.

Para 8-40, supra.

Doleman v. Ossett Corporation,(1912) 3 K.B. 257.

जड़ yenay के


Gi

where the defendant had not applied for stay. This decision had been
followed by most High Courts in India.’-'

8.43. The Civil Justice Committee noticed the difficulty caused by this Report of
decision, particularly in cases where the arbitration was going on at a place Ging tice
far distant from the court in which the suit was instituted. [t recommended हु
that the mere filing of a suit should not interrupt the arbitration proceedings.
Accordingly, in the Bill of 1939, the necessary clause was drafted. The Select
Committee made certain changes in the Bill, and the law now under section
35 is that it is only after notice is given that the arbitration proceedings
become invalid.’

8.44. In order that section 35 may apply, three conditions are requir- Section 35,

ed to be fulfilled, namely:— - 10000 the

(i) Notice must be given of the institution of the proceedings to the words “whole

4 + of the subject
arbitrators or umpire. matter” and

(ii) The Jegal proceedings must be upon the whole of the subject-matter “#!! Parties”.
of the reference.

(iii) The proceedings must be between all the parties to the reference.

Some difficulty has been pointed out’ as likely to be caused by the sec-
tion. We may, however, state that no reported decision has come to our
notice adverting to any difficulty in the actual operation of the section. In
our opinion, the section incorporates a wholesome principle, and needs no
modification.

8.45. Section 36 deals with the power of ihe Court where the arbitration Section 36.
agreement is ordered not to apply to a particular difference, to order that a
provision making an award a condition precedent to an action shall not apply
to such difference. The section needs no change.

+ 8.46, Section 37(1) provides that all the provisions of the Indian Limita- section 37(1) and
tion Act, 1908 shall apply to arbitrations as they apply to proceedings in section 37(2) _
court. In view of the passing of the new Limitation Act, 1963, necessary Recommendation
change wil halve to be made in this sub-section.* We have no comments ete (1),
on section 37(2). .

8.47, In section 37. in sub-section (3), reference to the Limitation Act, Section 37(3) and

i tion 37(4
1963, should be substituted. section 376 ))
oon to amend
We have no comments on section 37(4). section 37(3).
8.48, Section 37(5) reads: Section 37(5)
Limitation.

“(5) Where the Court orders that an award be set aside or orders,
after the commencement of an arbitration, that the arbitration agree-
ment shall cease to have effect with respect to the difference referred,
the period between the commencement of the arbitration and the date
of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time pres- .
cribed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, for the commencement of
the proceedings (including arbitration) with respect to the difference
referred.”

Ram Prosadv. Mohan Lal, 1.L.R.47 Cal. 752: ALR. 192t Cal 770

Appavu v. Seni, 1.1... 41 Mad, 115; A.1.R. 1918 Mad 719

Jowahar Singh v. Flemming Shaw, A..R. 1937 Lab. 851

. Jai Narain y, Narain Dass, 1.L.R.3 Lah, 296; ALR. 1922 Lah 369.
ivit Justice Committee Report (1924-25), page 213, para 9 and page 217, para 19

N.D, Basu (1977), pazes 950, हर

1. For the old law, see fa re All India Groundnut Syndicate, ALR. 1945 Bom. 497, 502°
503 (Blagden J).

2. Sircar, Law of Arbitration in British India (1942), page 332.

1. See infra.

फ्री जज

9-7 M of LJ & CA/ND/78


62

General principle
as to limitation.

Scope as to
infructuous
arbitration
effect on suits.

Effect on fresn
arbitration.

Whether
tion

Proceeding
case law on
section 14.

Comment in
Bombay case,

The relevance of this sub-section to the law of limitation is obvious.
for reasons which will become evident later,’ it is desirable to deal with this
aspect at some length.

8.49. Ordinarily, limitation runs from the earliest time at which a suit
could be brought, and once time has started running, its running is con-
tinuous. Arbitration would not, for example, stop it from running un-
less statute provides to the contrary. To this principle, section 37(5) con-
stitutes such an exception.

8.50. The difficulty, however, arises from the narrow scope of section
37(5). Section 37(5) allows relaxation of limitation only where the award is
set aside or the court orders that the arbitration agreement shall “cease to
have effect with respect to the difference referred.” Other cases of infruc-
tuous arbitration procedings® are not covered by it. A fresh cause of action
would not also arise on the termination of arbitration proceedings. Hence,
where an arbitration becomes infructuous by reason of circumstances not
mentioned in section 37(5), there is no extension of limitation for a suit on
the same cause of action.

8.51. Another important question that arises is whether the benefit of
relaxation of limitation is available for arbitration in such cases. Section 14
of the Limitation Act, 1963 (previously section 14 of the Indian Limitation
Act, 1908), so far as is relevant, provides,’ that in computing the period of
limitation prescribed for any suit, the time during which the plaintiff has
been prosecuting with due diligence another civil proceeding in a court
against the defendant shall be excluded where the proceeding relates to
the same cause of action and is prosecuted in good faith in a court which,
from defect of jurisdiction or other causes of a like nature, is unable to
entertain it.

8.52. Now, the question to be considered is, whether an arbitration is
a ‘civil proceeding’ in a ‘court’ within the meaning of section 14, Limita-
tion Act.

In some cases, it was held’-* that section 14 applies to the proceedings
previously taken before the arbitrator, as a contrary view would operate
very harshly on a litigant who has been guilty of no laches and has been
prosecuting his case with due diligence and in good faith before the arbitra-
tor. The court also considered the definition of ‘court’ as given in the
Evidence Act.

8.53. The decisions, however, relate to the period before the Arbitra-
tion Act of 1940 was enacted. After the enactment of section 37(1) and sec-
tion 37(5) of the Arbitration Act, 1940, no further question, it has been
held’, arises as to application of the principles of the Limitation Act merely
by analogy to procedings be/ore arbitrators. The court observed :

“It may seem rather curious, and it may also in certain cases result in
hard ship as 1० why the Legislature should not have excluded all time
taken up in good faith before an arbitrator just as the time taken up
in prosecuting a suit or an appeal in good faith is excluded. But ob-
viously the Legislature did not intend that parties should waste time
in infructuous proceedings before arbitrators.”

Para 8-49 to 8°57, infra.

As to orders of the court directing that the agreement shall ‘‘cease to~have effect”, see

section 12(2)(b) and section 19.

For example of other infructuous arbitration proceedings, see para 8-56, infra.

This point was not dealt with in the 3rd Report of the Law Commission (Limitation Act)

while discussing section 14 at pages 18 to 20, paragraphs 41 to 43.

5. Firm Behari Lal v. Punjab Sugar Mills, A.1.R. 1943 All. 162.

6. Fatehchand vy. Wasudeo, .L.R. (1947) Nag. 477; A.LR. 1948 Nag. 334.

१5 Barshontamdas v. Impex (India) Ltd., A.LR. 1954 Bom. 309, 311, para 7 (Chagla C.J. and
पं 3.).

8. Emphasis added.

La

ae


8.54. The notes on clauses to the Bill which led to the Act of 1940
merely state that clause 37 makes provisions as to limitation in arbitration
matters and follows closely section 16 of the (English) Arbitration Act, 1934.
Section 16(7) of the English Act of 1934 gave power fo the court to order
that the period between the commencement of the arbitration and the date
of the order of the court shall be excluded etc, (where the court ordered
that the award be set aside or that the arbitration agreement should cease
to have effect etc.).

The present section 27(5) of the (English) Limitation Act, 1939, is, in
substance, the same as section 16(7) of the Arbitration Act of 1934. The
Select Committee reporting on the Bill omitted the words that left the
power 10 the court, as it felt that a mere order of the court would not affect
the law of limitation. There is, however, no discussion as to why the ana-
logy of section 14, Limitation Act was not fully adopted.

63

No guidance
available in
Notes on clauses,

8.55. In a Privy Council case' decided under the old Act, the analogy Case law.

of section 14 was applied in determining the question whether time taken
in one arbitration proceeding could be excluded for the purpose of an-
other arbitration proceeding. But, as has been pointed out by the Bombay
High Court,’ the Legislature, having the decision of the Privy Council
before it, instead of leaving it to the Court to apply the provisions of the
Limitation Act by analogy, expressly by a statutory enactment applied the
provisions of section 37(1) and also dealt with the exclusion of time taken
up in arbitration by section 37(5). Therefore, it is no longer open to the
court to rely on section 14 as applicable, by analogy, to arbitration pro-
ceedings.

8.56. If this is the present position, we venture to suggest that it is
not very satisfactory. There may be cases where an arbitration becomes in-
fructuous by reason of an order not mentioned in section 37(5). For exam-
ple, an application challenging the validity of the agreement may be made
under section 31(2) read with section 33, and the application may succeed.
Whether this would be a case of the court “ordering that the arbitration
agreement shall cease to have effect” is doubtful, as those words are appro-
priate only for section 12(2)(b) or section 19. Conversely, the application
may fail, but some time is taken up in its prosecution.

In such cases, while a party is engaged bona fide in another proceed-
ing, We cannot expect him to have an eye at the same time on an ordinary
court also and file a suit. Such a course would lead to a half-hearted parti-
cipation in the other application, and defeat the very object of the law of
arbitration. Mere cases where a party remains supine and does
not go on diligently with the arbitration may not deserve sympathy. But
serious hardship is likely to be caused in cases of the nature illustrated
above. It would, therefore, be advisable to insert an express exemption, in
addition to that given by section 37(5). We are recommending the insertion
of two new sub-sections in section 37, for the purpose.’

8.57. In sub-section (5) of section 37, a reference to the Limitation
Act, 1963, should be substituted in place of the present reference to the old
Act.

8.58. In the light of the above discussion, the following amendments
commended in section 37:—

{a) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures “The Indian Limita-
tion Act, 1908”, the words and figures “The Limitation Act, 1963”
should be substituted;

(0) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “The Indian Limita-
tion Act, 1908”, the words and figures “The Limitation Act, 1963”
should be substituted;

1. Ramdutt y, E.D. Dasson & co., 56 1.A. 128; A.LR. 1929 P.C. 103,
2. Purshottamdas v. Impex (India) Ltd., A.LR. 1954 Bom. 309, 31 1, para 5-6.

3. See para 8-58, infra, suggested section 37(6) and 370).

Present. position
not satisfactory.
insertion of

new — sub-sections
(6) and (7)

+ recommended.

Section 3765).

Recommendaiton
as to section 37,



Section 38

(०) in sub-section (5), for the words and figures “The Indian Limitation
Act, 1908”, the words and figures “The Limitation Act, 1963”
should be substituted;

(d) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections should be inserted :?

“Section 3766) :

Where in a proceeding under section 33 the Court decides that no ar-
bitration agreement exist between the parties and that such an arbitration
agreement is invalid, the time during which the application under that
section remained pending, shall be excluded in computing the period of
limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963, for the commence-

ment of @ proceeding relating to a matter which was alleged to be the

subject-matter of the arbitration agreement.”

“Section 3777):

Where in a proceeding under section 33 the Court decides that an
arbitration agreement exists between the Parties and that such an arbi-
tration agreement is valid, the time during which the application under
that section remained pending, shall be excluded in computing the period
of limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963, for the commence-
ment of a proceeding for arbitration in pursuance of such arbitration
agreement.”

8.59. For reasons already stated,’ the scope of section 38 should be

Recommendation. extended to an earlier stage, so as to prevent disputes as to the rate of fees

of the arbitrator. Following new sub-sections in section 38 should be add-
ds

“38(4) If in any case an arbitrator or umpire refuses to proceed
with the arbitration except on payment of the fecs demanded by him,
the court may, on an application in this behalf, order that the arbitra-
tor or umpire shall proceed with the arbitration on payment into court
by the applicant of the fees demanded, and shull, after such inquiry, if
any, as it thinks fit, further order that out of the money so paid into
court there Shall, at the time Specified in sub-section (6), be paid to the
arbitrator or umpire by way of fees such sum as the court may consider
reasonable and that the balance of the money, if any, shall be refunded
to the applicant.

“38(5) An application under sub-section (4) may be made by any
party: to the reference unless the fees demanded have been fixed by
written agreement between him and the arbitrator or umpire, and the
arbitrator or umpire shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any
such application.

“38(6) Payment to the arbitrator or umpire of the sum specified in
sub-section (4) shall be made at such time as may be specified in the
arbitration agreement, or failing such specification, as may be decided
by the court:

“Provided that pending completion of the arbitration, the court
may direct interim payment of fees’ to the arbitrator or umpire.

“38(7) Where the court has, under sub-section (4), determined the
amount of fees, it may, for reasons to be recorded and after giving the
arbitrator or the umpire and the parties an opportunity of being heard,
revise such determination on completion of the arbitration.

“38(8) If the arbitrator or umpire refuses to accept the determina-

tion of the court under sub-section (4), the court may supersede the ar-

bitration agreement.”

Para 8-56, supra.

2. See discussion as to section 14, paragraph 4-37, supra.
3. As to the expression “interim”, compare section 27(2).


CHAPTER 9

APPEAL : SECTION 39

9.1, Section 39 allows an appeal against certain orders passed under the Section 39,
Act.

The orders are enumerated in sub-section (1), in these terms:

“39(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders passed under
this Act (and from no others) to the Court authorised by law to hear
appeals from original decrees of the court passing the order :—

An order—

(i) superseding an arbitration;

(ii) on an award stated in the form of a special case:

(iii) modifying or correcting an award;

(iv) filing or refusing to file an arbitration agreement;

(v) staying or refusing to stay legal proceedings where there is an
arbitration agreement;

“(vi) setting aside or refusing to set aside an award;

Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any
order passed by a Small Cause Court.”

Sub-section (2) provides that second appeal shall not lie from an order
passed under this section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take
away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

9.2. The list of orders given in the section appears to be fairly ade- No cha
quate. We have considered the question whether an appeal should be allow- required in
ed from an order refusing to modify or correct an award. At present, while section 391).
an order modifying an award is appealable, an order refusing to modify is
not. However, after careful consideration, we do not suggest a change in
this regard as we think that the present position is sound in principle.

9.3. We have no further comments on this section. No change.

65


Scope of the
Chapter.

Section 40,

Section 41.

Section 42,

Recommendation
as to section
42, clause (a).

CHAPTER 10

MISCELLANEOUS : SECTIONS 40-48

10.1, We now proceed to a consideration of the remaining sections of
the Act containing certain miscellaneous provisions.

_ , 10.2. Section 40 provides that a court of small causes shall have no
jurisdiction over any arbitration proceedings or over any application aris-
ing thereout, save on application made under section 21. This section does
not require any change.

10.3 The subject of procedure and powers of the court is dealt with
in section 41, Subject to the provisions of the Act and rules made there-
under,' the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall apply to
all proceedings before the court, and to all appeals under the Act. This is
provided in clause (a): Clause (b) provides that subject to the provisions of
the Act and all rules made thereunder, the court shall have, for the pur-
pose of, and in relation to arbitration proceedings, the same power of mak-
ing orders in respect of any of the matters set out in the second schedule as
it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings before the
court. Under the proviso, however, this clause shall not be taken to prejudice
any power which may be vested in an arbitrator or umpire for making or-
ders with respect to any of such matters.

11 has been represented to the Law Commission’ that the power of the
court under section 41 in the matter of grant of injunction in cases where
the amount claimed by the Government to be due to it under a contract with
a privaie party is still under adjudication, may be modified with a view to
safeguarding the government interests. We have given the matter our consi-
deration and are of the view that no amendment of the law in this respect is
called for, and no exception need be carved out in section 41 for cases aris-
ing out of contracts to which the Government is a party. The question of
issue or non-issue of injunction depends upon the facts of each case and it
is for the courts concerned to decide the matter in the light of those facts,
keeping in view the general principles for the grant of injunctions which are
fairly well-settled. The fact that the government is aggrieved by a particular
order is no ground for amendment of the law. The existing provisions, in our
opinion, are adequate to empower the courts to safeguard the interests of all
parties, including the government, in appropriate cases.

The section therefore needs no change.

10.4. Several provisions of the Act require the giving of a notice; the
procedure for giving a notice is laid down in section 42, which provides that
any notice required by the Act to be served otherwise than through the
court by a party to an arbitration agreement or by an arbitrator or umpire
shall be served in the manner provided in the arbitration agreement, or if
there is no such provision either by delivering it to the person on whom it
is to be served, or by sending it by post in a letter addressed to that person
or his usual or last known place of abode or business in India and register-
ed under Chapter VI of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898, section 9(b), sec-
tion 11(4) and section 14(1).

10.5. No changes of substance appear to be needed in section 42, but
it may be useful to provide in clause (a) that the notice could be delivered
to the agent of the person to be served who is empowered to accept service.
The reasons for making this amendment hardly need be elaborated. In
order to avoid abuse, we would confine the amendment to the Government,
local authorities and corporations,

1, For the power to make rules, see section 44,
2. Papers forwarded by the Ministry of Law, Department of Legal Affairs.

66


Accordingly, we recommend that in section 42(a), the words “in the case
of a Government, local authority or corporation, to a person duly empower-
ed to accept service on its behalf, or should be added at the end,

10.6. Section 43 confers powers on the court to issue processes for ap-
pearance before the arbitrator or umpire. The power is co-extensive with
the corresponding power of the court in suits tried before it. There are con-
sequential provisions in regard to persons who fail to attend, and there is a
definition of the expression “processes”. No amendment is required in the
section,

10.7. Section 44 provides that the High Court may make rules consis-
tent with the Act as to the various matters enumerated in the section. The
section needs no change.

10.8. Section 45 provides that the provisions of the Act shall be bind-
ing on the Government.

It needs no change.

10.9. Section 46 provides for the application of the Arbitration Act to
what may be conveniently called ‘statutory arbitrations’ (see the marginal
note to the section). With certain exceptions. the provisions of the Act are
declared to apply to every arbitration under any other enactment for the
time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration ag-
reement and (as) if that other enactment were an arbitration agreement, ex-
cept in so far as this Act is inconsistent with that other enactment or with
any rules made thereunder.

10.10. Certain sections of that Act have, however, been excluded from
the operation of section 46. These are—section 6(1), section 7, section 12,
section 36 and section 37.

10.11. The operation of section 46 is illustrated by judicial decisions

67

Section 43.

Section 44,

Section 45.

Section 46
Statutory
arbitrations,

Exceptions in
section 46.

Section 46

dealing with questions that have arisen in regard to arbitrations under the operation of.

Co-operative Societies Act, before the Supreme Court.’ It is also illustrated
by cases under that Act before the High Courts, in proccedings in the Punjab?
and the erstwhile State of Bombay.’ It may be of interest to note that the sec-
tion would apply to arbitrations under an Act relating to Universities.‘

Of course, the Arbitration Act will apply to a statutory arbitration only
in so far as the statute does not contain a provision on the particular subject!
which is inconsistent with the Act.

10.12. Section 47 provides that, subject to the provisions of section 46,
and save in so far as is otherwise provided by any law for the time being
in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to all arbitration and to all
proceedings thereunder. The proviso enacts that an arbitration award other-
wise obtained may, with the consent of all the parties interested, be taken
into consideration as a compromise or adjustment of a suit by any Court
before which the suit is pending.

10.13. In our discussion relating to section 2(a)!, we have already re-
commended an amendment regarding awards obtained without following the
procedure laid down in the Act. The recommendation should be carried out
by substituting the following proviso for the present proviso to section 47:

“Provided that where an award otherwise obtained has been agreed to
by the parties concerned, nothing in this section shall be construed as preven-
ting any party from relying upon it in a suit or other legal proceeding (whether
instituted by him or not) as an agreement or as compromise or adjustment
of the dispute.”

1. Mls. D. Gobindram v. Mis Shamji & Co., A.I.R. 1961 S.C, 1285, 1293, paras 24-25.
2. Harnam Singh vy. Man Singh, AAR. 161 Punjab 133.

3. Savitra Khandu v. A.S. & P. Co-operative Society Ltd., A.I.R. 1957 Bom. 178.
4. Brij Mohan v. Lucknow University, AW.R. 1961 Ah. 331, 332, 333 para 4.

5.

See discussion regarding section 2(a), supra (awards obtained on oral arbitration agree
ment),

Section 47.

Recommendation
as to section 47.


68

Section 47,
Arbitration
Act and Order
23, Rule 3.

Section 48.

10.14, The question whether an award made by an arbitrator (other-
wise than on a formal reference by the court) can be recorded as a ‘compro-
mise’ under Order 23, Rule 3, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, has been dis-
cussed in several cases'-*, and there appears to have arisen controversy on
the subject in the past. The controversy owed its origin to the application
of section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908; that section has since
been repealed. The matter now seems to have been settled by the proviso to
section 47 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. The old cases before 1940 are not,
therefore, of much importance now. The view subsequently taken is that
such award can be accepted as a compromise only if, subsequent to its
making'-*, the parties agree to abide by it.

10.15. Section 48 contains a saving for pending references, and does not
need any comment.

1, Dular Koeri v. Payag Koeri, A.ILR. 1942 All. 145, 147 (F.B.) (reviews case-law).
2. Chanbassappa ९. Basalingayya, A.LR. 1927 Bom. 585 (F.B.) (Award can be regarded

as compromise).

3. Jugaldas v. Pur otam, 1.L.R. (1955) 1 Cal. 12; A.LR. 1953 Cal. 690 (reviews case law).

Sitaramji v. Ramnath Singh, A.L.R. 1961 Pat. 448.

5. Abdul Rahman vy. Mohammad Siddiqui, ALR. 1953 Mad. 781 (F.B.)


CHAPTER 11

ROCEDURAL PROVISIONS : THE FIRST SCHEDULE

11.1. Certain provisions of a procedural nature intended to fill up the First Schedule,
gaps left advertently or inadvertently by the parties 1c contained in the Patagraph 1.
First Schedule.

The first paragraph of the Schedule provides that unless otherwise
expressly provided, the reference shall be to a sole arbitrator. The para-
graph needs no change.

11.2. Paragraph 2 of the First Schedule provides that if the reference First Schedule,
is to an even number of arbitrators, the arbitrators shall appoint an Paragraph 2.
umpire not later than one month from the latest date of their respective
appointment.

It needs no change.

11.3. The Arbitration Act does not contain any specific provision on First Schedule,
the question whether an umpire can act on the evidence recorded by the paragraph 2A
arbitraiors. The position, in Englisia law, it is well-settled, is that the umpire हि 1
has to hear the evidence de novo, if an application is made to him to do so evidence by
by either party, notwithstanding that the same evidence has already been the umpire.
adduced belore the arbitrators. The result .s that an ump're can make his
award on the evidence taken by the arbitrators 919 if no party objects.

It was observed by Littiedale J., agreeing with Denman C.J.2 that “the
general rule is thai an umpire to whom a case is referred by arbitrators must
hear the evidence over again.”

Indian case law on the subject is scanty; but it would appear that, in
general, an umpire is bound to re-hear the evidence if either party applies,
unless there are special provisions in the arbitration agreement permitting
him to do 50. This is on the principle that the umpire has the rights and
duties of an arbitrator. If he has not heard the evidence himself, he is
generally bound to re-hear it.

11.4. We are of the opinion that in the interest of expeditious disposal Recommendation.
of arbitration proceedings, this position requires modification to a certain
extent. It may be mentioned that under the Code of Civil Procedure}
where a judge is prevented by death, transfer or other cause from con-
cluding the trial of a suit, his successor may deal with any evidence or memo-
randum taken down or made under the rules contained in the Code as if
such evidence or memorandum had been taken down or made by him, and
may proceed with the suit from the stage at which his predecessor left it.
This statutory provision modifies the rule otherwise applicable’ that the
successor must hear the whole case afresh. In our opinion, there should
be no objection to permitting the umpire to act on the evidence recorded
by the arbitrators, leaving it to the discretion of the umpire to take such
additional evidence as he may think fit. The same principle should apply
to a change in arbitrators or umpire.

In re Jenkins, (1841) 11 L.J.Q.B. 71, 72; 61 Revised Reports 837 (Patterson J).
In re Salked and Slater, (1841) 12 A & E 767; 113 E.R. 1005, 1006, 1007.
856 also Halsbury, 4th Ejition, Vol. 2, page 307, paragraph 591.

Dhanna Singh v. Ram Chand , A.LR. 1924 516 27, 28, reversing in part E. Miller v. The
Firm of Dhanna Singh. A.I.R. 1921 Sind 27.

Order 18, rule 15, Code of C'vil Procedure, 1908.
R.S. Mahmood v. Syed Ahmed, A.I.R. 1963 A.P. 65.

PYeNS

ay

69

10—7 M of LJ & CA/ND!78

a


70

Compare 0.18,
1. 15, Code of
Civil’ Proce-
dure, 1908.

First Schedule,
Paragraph 3.

Effect of
failure to
make award
in time.

Importance of
paragraph 3,

We recommend insertion of the following new paragraph in the First
Schedule, on the subject discussed above :

First Schedule, paragraph 2A

“2A. (1) Where an arbitrator or umpire is prevented by any cause from
completing the proceedings, his successor may deal with any evi-
dence tuken down by his predecessor as if such evidence had teen
taken down by him, and may proceed with the arbitration from
the stage at which his predecessor left it.

(2

v

Where there are more than one arbitrator, and there is @ change
in the arbitrators, then, notwithstanding such change, the arbi-
trators may deal with any evidence taken down in the arbitration
belore such change as if such evidence had been taken down by
them, and may proceed with the arbitration Jrom the stage at
which it stood immediately before the change.

(G) Where, owing to a difference of opinion between the arbitrators, the
matter is referred 10 an umpire, the proceedings before the arbit-
rators shall be taken as proceedings before the umpire.

(4) Nothing in sub-paregraphs (1), (2) or (3) shall preciude the arbi-
trator or umpire from taking additional evidence, in case he con-
siders it necessary to do so.”

11.5. Paragraph 3 provides that the arbitrators shall make their award
within four months after “enlering on the reference” or after having been
called upon to act by a notice in writing from any party to the arbitration
agreement, or within such extended time as the court may allow. There
are thus, three methods of determining the period within which the award
must be made. First is the primary period of four months, counted from
“Entering on the reference”; the second is the period of four months, but
counted {rom the date on which the arbitrators are called upon to act by
a written notice of either party and the third is the extended time allowed
by the court. The extended tme may be allowed by the court before or
after the expiry of the original time.'’ This paragraph is mandatory’ and
imposes a duty on the arbitrators to make their award, within cne or the
other of the three alternative periods. Consent of any party to the arbi-
trator proceding with the reference, without an order of extension being
obtained from the court, cannot thus have the effect of giving the arbitrator
such jurisdiction®

11.6. A contravention of the time limit prescribed by rule 3 may not
only cast doubts on the validity of the award, if made; it has certain other
consequences, if the award is not made within the time limit. If the arbi-
trators do not make the award within the time limit, and the reference’ is
to an even number of arbitrators, the umpire can enter on the reference
under the First Schedule; paragraph 4. If the reference 1s to a sole arbi-
trator or to an odd number of arbitrators, the court can supersede the refe-
rence, if the reference was in a suit (section 25), or the parties may treat
the case as one of neglect or refusal etc. [Section 81Xb)], and have a
fresh arbitrator appointed. The parties can also move the court for remov-
ing the arbitrators for failure to “use all reasonable dispatch” in the reference
[Section 11(1)] and then have a fresh arbitrator appointed (section 12).

11.7. It has been very often found that the time limit in paragraph 3
is exceeded; and this is the most important problem which we have to
deal with. Apart from the fact that the pronouncement of an award after
the expiry of the time limit raises legal problems, an important matter of
which notice has to be taken is that the period of four months has been
found to be unrealistic, and is hardly observed in practice. We have before

1. Section 28.
2, Harishankar Lal v. Shambhu Lal, (1962) 2 S.C.R. 720; ALR. 1962 S.C. 78, 80, paragraph
३, Sowarn Singh v. Municipal Committee, Pathankot, A.1.R. 1963 Punjab 427, 429,


us the instance of the Andaman contracts, referred to by the Public Ac-
counts Committee. The following is an extract from the report cf the
Committee’: —

“3.271. The Committee are also unhappy over the manner in which
the arbitration cases have been pursued. it is listressing to see that
the proceedings in the first Arbitration started as far back as in July,
1961 in the case of the contracts with the North Andaman Licensee and
dragged on for over 5 years belore reaching anything hke finality,
in spite of the time limit of 4 months provided in law for the comple-
tion of arbitration. The other thiee arbitration cases still pending settle-
ment have taken as such as 6 years to 12 years, the Fifth Arbitration
case was disposed of after 4 years. The Committee fail to understand
the rationale behind the provision in the law of a limit of 4 months for
the completion of arbitration when the aciual time taken could be as
long as 12 years. The Committee would like the Ministry of Law
to examine this aspect thoroughly in consultation with other Ministries
who actually have to go in for arbitrations or have to face arbitration
proceedings in cases of agreements with private firms in crder to amend
the law suitably. The Committee repeat that the mere provision in
Jaw of something which cannot be enforced in practice Lardly
carries any meaning. This present case assumes importance because
although the agreement was cancelled in February 1968, the aisputes
which had already arisen appear paradoxically to ve capable of being
settled only by arbitration.”

11.8. At the same time, we have to guard against undue prolongation
of arbitration proceedings because of a longer time iimit. Already there is
a feeling that arbitrations are unduly delayed. It has, for example, been
stated by the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs, as follows?: —

“It is a fact that on quite a few occasions the public Accounts
Committee has commented adversely on the working cf the Arbitra-
tion Act. Their comments include, inter alia, the long delays that
take place in the completion of the arbitration proceedines, the number
of extensions that are obtained either by consent of the parties and
through the intervention of the court and the cnormous expenses in-
curred by way of “fees payable both to the arbitrators and the coursel.
In some cases the arbitration proceedings were pending for a number
of years—as long as 8 to 10 years.”

11.9. For dealing with the problem created by the present provisions,
there are two alternatives that could be considered. Tire first alternative
is total deletion of the time limit, that is to say. there should be no statutory
time limit. This is the position, in substance. in England. The second
alternative is an increase of the time limit (within reasonable boundaries).

11.10. The first alternative would avoid questions as to validity of
an award pronounced beyond the prescribed time limit. Jn support cf this
alternative, it could be stated that there is no reason why the parties should
suffer for the delay caused by action of the arbitrator. No doubt, where
the arbitrator does not use reasonable dispatch in the arbitration proceed-
ings, the court may, on the application of any party to a reference. remove
the arbitrator or umpire who fails to use all reasonable dispatch in entering
on and proceeding with the reference in making the award. Further, the
court may, when it removes the umpire who has entered on the reference
or a 506 arbitrator or all the arbitrators, on the application of any party
to the arbitration agreement, either appoint a person to act as sole arbi-
trator in place of the person or persons displaced, or order that the arbi-
tration shall cease to have effect with respect to the difference referred.

1. Public Accounts Committee (Sixth Lok Sabha, Ninth Report) (September 1977), pages
200-201, para 3.271.
._D.O. No. F. 8(15)/76-L.C. dated 27th July 1977 from the Secretary, Department of Legal
2 कक, Misty of Lavy Justice and Company Affairs, to the Member-Secretary, Law
Commission of India (see Appendix).

3. Section 11(1), read with section 12(2\(b).

7

Two alternatives.

Merits of the |
first alternative.


72

Merits of
the second
alternative.

Recommendation

to increase
the time
limit in
paragraph 3
to six
months.

Reasons for the
recommendation
as to time limit.

i
i

But, this is only a right of the party and if, for some reason, the party
does not pursue the remedy aflorded by the relevant provisions, then the
Proceedings might diag on.

At the same time, it can be argued against the first alternative that
the total deletion ot a time limit migat encourage lethargy and indifference
on the part of arbitrators and umpires.

11.11, The second alternative (increase of the time limit) has this
merit, namely, that it does not introduce a radical change in the structure of
the Act. At the same time. it takes note of the practical difficulties caused
by the present unrealisuc provision. It may appear to be a more satis-
factory solution.

“11.12 On a careful consideration of the various aspects of the matter,
we recommend that the time limit of four months should be replaced by
six monihs in the First Schedule, paragraph 3. In appropriate cases, the
power of ihe court to extend the limit could be exercised, as at present.
The extension snould not. however, be given beyond one year, except for
special and adequate reasons.

25 regards the period within which the award should be given, it may
be pointed out that the period should not be too short as to prove unreali-
stic; at the same time, it should not be too long as to lead to undue delay
or complacency on the part of arbitrators.

An unrealistic period—such as the present period of four months—
serves no purpose. Some increase therein is required. We are therefore
recommending that the period should be six months. subject to extension
by the court in accordance with section 28 as proposed to be amended.

11.13, In suggesting substitution of the period of six months instead
of the existing period of four months as the time during which arbitra-
tion proceedings should normally be completed.? we are influenced by two
cousiderations. We feel that the present period of four months is in’ most
cases unreilsiic, because it is not normally possible 16 complete arbitra-
tion proceedings w thin fovr months. At the same time, we do not want
to tix a much longer period, lest it should give rise to an atlitude of com-
placency on the part o: the arbitrators and the parties. The underlying
object of all arbitration proceedings is that such proceedings should be
completed as speedily and expeditiously as possible.

11.14, At the same time, we are conscious of the fact that there may
be quite a large number of cases in which it may not be possib’e to com-
plete the arbitration proceedings within a period of six months. For such
cases we have provided for the extension of the time for completing arbi-
tration proceedings upto one year by the court under section 28 of the Act.
A period of one vear, in our opinion. should normally be the cutside limit
within which arbitration proceedings should be completed in most of the
cases. The power of the court to grant extension of time in most of the
cases would thus be up to a neriod of one vear. There may, however, be
cases wherein voluminous evidence is required to be recorded. There may
also be some special and adequate reasons which may be brought to the
notice of the court, justifying the extension of time beyond a period of one
year. To have a rigid rule of allowing no extension of time beyond a
period of one year would be in such cases cause undue herdship to the
parties. For such exceptional cases we are empowering the court to cxtend
the time beyond a period of one year. The underlying object of section 28
of the Act and paragraphs 3 and 5 of the First Schedule is to ensure
due expedition and speed in the comp’etion of arbitration proceedings and,
at the same time. to ensure that the entire proceedings are not set at naught
in those cases wherein because ot voluminous evidence or cther special
and adequate reasons, the proceedings cannot be finished within the pres-
cribed time.

1, See recommendation as to section 28, para 8-3, supra.
2, Para 11.12 supra. न



73

11.15. The unusual delay in completing arbitration proceedings in some
cases referred to by the Public Accounts Committee’ can well be taken
care of by the changes suggested by us.

11.16. We must, however, state here that in the ultimate analysis, the Quality ot
expeditious disposal of proceedings in arbitration depends not so much Personnel
on legislative provisions as to time limit, as on the quality of the personnel '™Portant.
selected by the parties as arbitrators or umpires. This is a matter which
can hardly be dealt with by legislation.

11.17. The next point concerning this paragraph (paragraph 3) re- First Schedule,
lates to the words “entering on the reference”—words which have caused patagraph 3,

a lost of difficulty in their application2-* reptering on the

11.18. The counting of the period of time from “entering on the refe; English law.
rence” was the provision contained in the English Act of 1889. First Sche-
dule, paragraph 3(c). But the provision was altered in 1934. The present
law’ is contained in section 13 of the Act of 1950.

11.19. Under paragraph 3, the starting point is not necessarily “the Case law on
commencement of the arbitration” mentioned in section 37(3). It is always paragraph 3.
a question of fact, on what date the arbitrator or the umpire (as the case
may be), actually entered on the reference for the purpose of paragraph 3.

The determination of the date often turns out to be a difficult matter, and
one can discern from the case law considerable divergence of views.

11.20, Of the numerous tests adumbrated by the various High Courts Various tests.
in this regard, a few may be mentioned.

According to one view,’ “entering on the reference” means acceptance
of office by the arbitrators and communication with each other.

According to another view’—

“An arbitrator enters upon a reference when, after having accepted
the reference, he applies his mind and does something in furtherance and
execution of the work of arbitration. The exact date as to when an
arbitrator enters on a reference in a particular case, however, has to
be determined on the facts and circumstances of the case”.

Some other rulings suggest a still different test, e.g. date of entering
upon the hearing of a particular claim by the arbitrators!

11.21. The matter, in so far as it relates to the notice referred to in Supreme Court
paragraph 3 of the First Schedule has been considered in a Supreme Court case as to notice.
ruling.” However, interpretation of the expression is not dealt with in the
Supreme Court judgment.

1, Para 11-7 and 11-8, supra.

2. See the case law discussed in Ram Sahai v. Harish Chandra, A.LR. 1963 M.P. 143, 146,
147, paras 13-14.

3. See Pajrang Lal v. Ganesh Commerciai Co., A 1.२, 1951 Cal. 78, 82, para 31 to 34 (Harries

4. See Dr. B.V. Mehta v. P.P. Joshi, A.I.R. 1956 Bom. 146, 147, para 5.

5. For history of Enlgish law, see Bokaro & Ramgur Ltd. v. Prasun Kumar, A.1.R. 1968 Pat.
150, 155, para 13 (F.B.).

6. Bajrang Lal v. Ganesh Commercial Co., 8.1२, 1951 Cal. 78, 82, 83 and 85, para 34-35
and 52 (Harries C.J. & Chatterjee J.).

>  $eusyIel Thakur v. Lachhminarain Thakur, A.1.R. 1957 Pat. 395, 397, para 5.
8. (a) Sardar Mal v. Sheo Baksh, A.1.R. 1922 All 106.

(b) Ranganathan पर, Krishnayya, A.I.R. 1946 Mad. 504 (per Leach C.J.).

Hari tanker Lal v. Shambhu Nath, A.L.R. 1962 S.C. 78-82 (confirming A.LR. 1954

व1--7 M of LJ & CA/ND/78



74

Eroxision in _ 11.22. It would be of interest to note one statutory precedent which

(00910) 2५५६ strikes a departure from the general rule. The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948,

487 7) OS section 7032), contains the following provision applicable to arbitrations
thereunder : —

“(A) Where any question or matter is referred to the Authority
for arbitration under this section, the Authority shall be deemed to enter
on the reference for the purposes of paragraph 3 of the First Schedule
to the Arbitration Act, 1940, on the date on which the parties appear
before the Authority for the first time:

Provided that where the parties or any of them fail to appear
before the Authority on the date fixed for the first hearing of the
case and the Authority decides either on that date or any subsequent
date to proceed with the cuse in the absence of the parties or any of
them, as the case may be, the Authority shall be deemed to enter on
the reference on the date of such decision.”

{mendments to 14.23. On a consideration of all aspects of the matter, we have come
paragraph 3. to the conclusion that the arbitrators should be deemed to enter on the
° reference on the first date fixed by the arbitrators for the appearance of the

parties before them for the purposes of the arbitration. This would be a
realistic test, since it is only after fixing the date for appearance that con-
crete progress can be made in the arbitration. The proposed test would
also be a precise and fairly workable test.

Recommendation

as 10 paragraph 3. 11.24. Accordingly, we recommend that paragraph 3 should be revised
as under:

“3. The arbitrators shall make their award within six months’
after entering on the reference or after having been called upon to act
by notice in writing by any party to the arbitration agreement, or
within such extended time as the court may allow.

“Explanation—For the purposes of this paragraph, the arbitrators
shall be deemed “to enter on the reference on the first date fixed by
the arbitrators for the appearance of the parties before them for the

. purposes of the arbitration.”
Paragraph 4.

11.25. This takes us to paragraph 4 of the First Schedule, which deals
with the time at which the umpire should enter on the reference in lieu of
the arbitrators. This paragraph needs no change.

Paragraph 5. 11.26. Paragraph 5 provides that the umpire shall make his award
within two months of entering on the reference or within such extended
time as the court may allow.

Amendments fo 11.27. We have recommended certain amendments to the First Sche-

regard to dule, third paragraph,’ in regard to the time limits for awards by arbitra-

time limits tors. The reasons stated by us for those amendments apply to the time
for umpires. limit for awards by umpires also. In the case of umpires, we recommend

an increase of the period to four months from the present two months.
This will be subject to extension under section 28.

Recommendation 11.28. Accordingly, we recommend that the First Schedule, paragraph
para~ 0
5, should be revised as under: —

graph.

“5, The umpire shall make his award within four months after en-
tering on the reference or after having been called upto 10 act by
notice in writing by any party to the arbitration agreement, or within
such extended time as the court may allow.

Cf. section 76 (3A) “Explanation-—For the purposes of this paragraph, the umpire
arity at 1948 shall be deemed to enter on the reference on the first date fixed by
oa . him for the appearance of the parties before him for the purposes of

the arbitration.”

1, See para 11-12, supra.
2. See para 11°23, supra.
3. See para 11-24, supra.


11.29. Paragraph 6 deals with the examination of parties and produc-
tion of documents ctc. by the parties.

11.30. This paragraph needs no change of substance. The structure
should, however, be simplified, by revising it as under:—

6. The partics to the reference and all persons cleiming under
them shall, subject to the provisions of any law for the time being
in force.

(a) submit to be examined by the arbitrators or umpire on both or
affirmation in rejation to the matters in difference,

(b) produce before the arbitrators or umpire all books, deeds, papers,
accounts, writings and documents within their possession or power
respectively, which may be required or called for, and

(०) do all other things which, during the proceedings on the reference,
the arbitrators or umpire may require.”

75

First Schedule,
paragraph 6
Recommendation
to restructure.

Recommendation
to revise
Paragraph 6,

11.31. Paragraph 7 provides that the award shall be final and binding First Schedule

on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively. In one special
situation, the paragraph requires to be qualified, namely, wher either the
arbitration agreement, or the bye-laws of any association which are ex-
pressly on impliedly adopted by the arbitration agreement,’ provide for an
appeal from an arbitrator to a higher arbitrator. In such cases, the inten-
tion of the parties is that it is the award made by the appellate authority
(as contemplated by the agreement or the bye-laws) whose award is to
become the final award. It has specifically been held’ that a provision for
appeal in any bye-law is not ultra vires the provision of the First Schedule.
paragraph 7.

11.32. We consider it desirable to make the paragraph subject to a
provision to cover a situation of the nature mentioned above. We there-
fore recommend that the following Explanation should be inserted below
paragraph 7:—

“Explanation.—Where either the arbitration agreement, or the bye-
laws of any association which are expressly or impliedly adopted by the
arbitration agreement, provide for an appeal from the award of an arbi-
trator to another person or body, the award made by such appellate
authority shall, if the cppeel be filed in accordance with the agreement
or bye-laws, be the award for tie purposes of this paragraph.”

11.33. Paragraph 8 provides that the costs of the reference and the
award shall be in the discretion of the arbitrators or umpire. The para-
graph needs no change.

1. Heeralal & Co. v. Joakim & Co., A.L.R. 1927 Cal. 647, 649, 251.

2. M.A. & Sons ४. Madras Oil & Seeds Exchange Ltd., A.LR. 1965 Mad. 392, 394, paragraphs
8 to il.

paragraph 7

Recommendation.

Recommendation
to insert an
Explanation

below paragraph 7.

Paragraph 8.


CHAPTER 12
POWER OF THE COURT
THE SECOND SCHEDULE

The second schedule deals with powers of the court on various mis-
cellaneous matters, mostly of an interim character, and we have no comments
thereon.

76

bs


CHAPTER 13

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

The recommendations made in this Report for amendment of the
Arbitration Act, 1940, may be briefly summarised as follows : --

(1) In section 2(a), an Explanation should be inserted to the effect
that where the members of any association agree to abide by the
tules of the association which contain provisions for arbitration, the
members shall be deemed to agree with each other for arbitration.’

(2) Another Explanation may be added’ to the same clause to the effect
that where an arbitration agreement provides for the submission of
future differences to arbitration, fresh consent of the parties to the
arbitration should not be required when differences actually arise.

(3) Section 6, sub-section (1), should be revised by replacing the present
phrase “either as respects the deceased or any other party” with
the words “either as respects the deceased or as respects any other
party”*

(4) Section 6(2) should be revised as follows :—

“the authority of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the
death of any party to the agreement.”*

(5) A new section—section 8A—should be inserted to provide for the
power of the court to supply the vacancy in case of arbitrator or
umpire appointed by the court itself.

(6) Section 12(1) should be verbally amended, as recommended.®
(7) In section 13, a new clause should be inserted as follows’: —

“Section 13(aa)

proceed ex parte against any party who, without sufficient cause
and after due notice, fails to attend personally or through agent.”

(8) A new section 13A should be inserted to deal with the powers of
the arbitrators cr umpire to award interest, as recommended.’

(9) In section 14, two new sub-sections—section 14(2A) and 14(2B)—
should be inserted as recommended,’ to cover cases of death of the
arbitrator after making the award but before filing it and similar
situations.

(10) In section 16(1), a new clause (d) should be added as followes":-—

“(d) where for any other reason the court considers that in the
interests of justice it should, instead of setting aside the award,
order such remission.”

Para 2:8, supra.
Para 2-21, supra.
Para 3+9, supra.
Para 3-11, supra.
Para 3-29, supra.
Para 3-42, supra.
Para 4-3, supra.
Para 4-30, supra.

. Para 4-42, supra.
Para 5-19, supra.

Syesayvsens

7


78

(11) Section 20(2) should be revised as recommended,’ so that two
situations in regard to filing an application are dealt with separately.

(12) Section 21 and the Heading of the Chapter should be revised as
recommended, to include appeals within its scope.

(13) Section 24 should be revised as recommended’, by the addition of
the word “appeal”.

(14) In section 28, a proviso should be inserted‘ forbidding in respect
of the time for making the award an extension beyond one year, except for
special and adequate reasons to be recorded.

(15) In section 30, an Explanation should be inserted as recommended,
to provide that the expression “or is otherwise invalid” includes the ground
that there was no valid agreement or no valid reference to arbitration.

(16) New section 3043, should be inserted’ to provide that no arbitra-
tor or umpire can be compelled to give evidence as to the reasons for his
award,

(17) Section 32 should be re-numbered as sub-section (1), and there-
after sub-scctions (2) and (3) should be inserted as recommended,’ to pro-
vide that an award shall not be pleaded in defence except in certain speci-
fied cases.

(18) In section 33, after the words “any party”, the word “including
one alleged to be a party” should be added*

(19) From section 34, the words “or taking other steps in the proceed-
ings” should be deleted.’

(20) In section 34, an amendment should be made as to suits brought
under Order 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure, by substituting the word
recommended."

(21) In section 37(1), reference to the Limitation Act, 1963 should be
substituted."

(22) In section 37, sub-sections (3) and (5), reference to the Limita-
tion Act, 1963, should be substituted in place of the ofd Act." Further,
new sub-sections (6) and (7) should be inserted as recommended.”

(23) In section 38, new sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8) should be
inserted," so as to prevent disputes about the amount of fees of the arbi-
trator and as to the time of payment.

(24) Section 42(a) should be amended™ to provide for the delivery
of notice to duly empowered agent, in certain situations.

(25) In section 47, the proviso should be replaced as recommended,"
to deal with the effect of arbitrations entered into otherwise than under the

1. Para 6-2, supra.
2 Para 7-3, supra.

3. Para 7:6, supra.

4. Para 8-3, supra.

5. Para 5-23 and 8-12, supra

6. Para 8-15, supra.

7. Para 8-30, supra.

8. Para 8-34, supra.

9, Para 8 "40, supra.

10. Para 8-41, supra.

14. Para 8°47 supra.

12, Para 8°58, supra.

13. Para 8-59, supra. हि
14, Para 10-5, supra.

15, Para 2.6 and 10.13, supra.


(26) In the First Schedule, a new paragraph 2A should be added’ to
deal with the powers of arbitrators or umpire to act on evidence recorded
by their predecessors, and also to provide that proceedings held before
arbitrators shall be deemed to be proceedings before the umpire.

(27) In the First Schedule, paragraph 3, the period’ should be extended
to six months and an Explanation be added defining the expression “enter-
ing on reference”.

(28) In the First Schedule, paragraph 5, a similar amendment should
be made,’ defining the above expression and the period be increased to
four months.

(29) In the First Schedule, paragraph 6 should be recast as recom-
mended.‘

(30) In the First Schedule, paragraph 7 should be amended by adding
an Explanation’ to deal with cases where rules of an association provide
for appeal.

H.R. Khanna बता जन Chairman

SN. Shankar #ौ्धछधछ् न नर Member

T. S. Krishnamoorthy Lyer ..........७ अल हनन Member

P.M. Bakshi 0 बालन Member-Secretary
New DELHI,

Dated the 9th November, 1978.

Para 11-4, supra.
Para 11°24, supra.
Para 11-28, supra.
Para 11-30, supra.
Para 11°32. supra.

yen

79


APPENDIX

Copy of the letter received from the Secretary, Department of Legat
fairs.

P. G. GOKHALE
SECRETARY.
0.0. No. F. 8(15)/76-L.C.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,
MINISTRY OF Law, Justice & Co. AFFAIRS,
(Deptr. OF LEGAL AFFAIRS)

Dated 27th July, 1977.

My dear Sri Bakshi,

It is a fact that on quite a few occasions the public Accounts Committee
has commented adversely on the working of the Arbitration Act. Their
comments include, inter alia, the long delays that take place in the comple-
tion of the arbitration proceedings, the number of extensions that are
obtained either by consent of the parties or through the intervention of the
court and the enormous expenses incurred by way of fees payable both
to the arbitrators and the counsel. In some cases the arbitration proceed-
ings were pending for a number of years—as long as 8 to 10 years. The
amount spent on the arbitrator and the Counsel by way of fees exceeded
the amount of claim that was ultimately awarded in favour of the Gov-
ernment. The Government is therefore desirous to have a second look at
the provisions of the Arbitration Act with a view to see whether the
enormous delays occurring in the arbitration proceedings and the dispro-
portionate costs incurred therein could be avoided. It is also the Govern-
ment’s intention to see whether any more powers could be conferred on the
arbitrators to ensure effective, just and speedy conclusion of the proceedings.

2. In view of the facts stated abeve the Government has decided to
refer this question for examination by the Law Commission on a priority
basis. I shall be grateful if the matter is examined in detail by the Law
Commission and a report submitted to the Government as early as possible.
It appears that the present Commission may not have time to take up
the matter and complete it. This may therefore be placed before the new
Commission as may be reconstituted with effect from 1-9-77 so that it can
be taken up on a top priority basis.

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely,
SD/- P. 6. GOKHALE

Shri P. M. Bakshi,
Member-Secretary,

Law Commission,

New Delhi.

MGIPCBE—SI—7 M of LI&CA/ND/78—9-11-79—2,000 Bks.